(...) del. J. Vand.Gucht sculp



A SYSTEM OF MAGIC; OR, A HISTORY OF THE ^LACK ART.

BEING AN Historical Account of Mankind's most early Dealing with the Devil;
and how the Acquaintance on both Sides first begun.

Our Magic, Now, commands the Troops of Hell,
The Devil himself submits to Charm and Spell.
The Conj'rer in his Circles and his Rounds
Just whistles up his Spirits, as Men do Hounds.
The obsequious Devil obeys the Sorcerer's Skill,
The Mill turns round the Horse, that first turns round the Mill.
LONDON, Printed: And Sold by ANDREW MILLAR, at Buchanan's Head, against St.
Clement's Church in the Strand. MDCCXXVIII.

PREFACE.
TO remove a Difficulty in my Title, and that we may not stumble at the
Threshold, some Preface to this new Undertaking may be necessary, but it will
be very short.

If by A SYSTEM of this terrible thing called Magic, my Readers should expect
a Body of the Black Art as a Science, a Book of Rules for Instruction in the
Practice, or a Magical Grammar for Introduction to young Beginners, all I can
say to such is, that they will be mistaken.

The World has perhaps been imposed upon in nothing more than in their Notions
of this dark Practice, as well its ancient as its modern State. Most People,
when they read of the ancient Magicians, think they are reading of old
Necromancers and Conjurers, when really at first they were very honest Men; and
now, when they read of them in their modern Practice, they take them for honest
Fellows, when they are, generally speaking, mere Juglers, Cheats, Mountebanks,
and Posture masters; or else, real Wizards and downright Dealers with the Devil.

There is One Sort would fain be called Cunning Men, than which nothing can be
a grosser piece of Delusion; and it is not their Cunning, but their Clients want
of Cunning, that gives them the least Appearance of Common Sense in all their
Practice. It Is a strange Piece of Art where Fools cheat Fools, and the Blind
and the Ignorant, are imposed upon by the Blind and the Ignorant.

All the Discovery I can make by it is, to note what a visible Difference there
is between Cunning and Wit; between Slight of Hand, as I may call it, and
Understanding. It Is evident the Pretenders to Magic at this time are so far
from dealing with the Devil, that they must certainly be dealt with by the
Devil, that have any thing to do with them.

In the first Ages they were Wise Men; in the middle Age, Madmen; in these
latter Ages, Cunning Men: In the earliest Time they were Honest; in the middle
Time, Rogues; in these last Times, Fools: At first they dealt with Nature; then
with the Devil; and now not with the Devil, or with Nature either: In the first
Ages the Magicians were wiser than the People; in the second Age, wickeder than
the People; and in our Age, the People are both wiser and wickeder than the
Magicians.

I see no great Harm in our present Pretenders ^o Magic, if the poor People
could but keep their Money in their Pockets; and that they should have their
Pockets picked by such an ^performing, unmeaning, ignorant Crew as ^hese are,
is the only Magic that I can find ^n the whole Science.

The best Course that I can think of to cure ^he People of this Itch of their
Brain, the Tarantula of the present Age, in running to ^unning Men, as you call
them, and the most ^ikely to have Success, is this, of laughing at them: the
Satyr has reformed the Age of ^any a Folly, which the Solid and the Solemn
^ould never reach: Even general Vice, would the Men of Wit and Men of Quality
^oin in the Attempt, might be hissed out of ^he World, though all the Preaching
and all the Preachers should prove fruitless and exhausted: Men are to be
ridiculed imto good Manners, when they will not be cudgelled into it.

Your modern Harlequins, especially so exquisitely contrived, and so perfectly
well performed as those of late by Mr. Rich, (in which, n^ to flatter him, we
must acknowledge he has ou^ done all that was before him) have gone father to
expose and run down the Magic I a^ speaking of, and cure the World of the
Hypp^ and the Vapors, than the whole Stage could ^ before; nay, than all the
brightest Dramati^^ Performances of the last Age could pretend to

Never was the popular Frenzy better expose the Ignorance on one side, and the
Impudence ^^ the other, more accurately laid open; the M^mickry is mimick'd to
the Life; the Magician made a Fool, the Fool tickled into more Wit, an^ the
Devil himself laughed out of Countenance.

We leave the Remainder to be compleat^^ by the same Hand; the Success cannot
fail, while the Senses and the Passions are ^ be wrought upon by the Eyesight:
Our M^thod looks the same Way, only that we brin^ it up from its Original, and
pursue it to t^^ End of its Prospect. Mr. Rich shows yo^ what foolish things
you are just now doing we show you what your Ancestors did before you, and what
still worse things the Age to come are like to do after you.

Let no Man be disgusted at the good A^count we give of the Original and Wisdom
(...) the Magi, and then call them Magicians: if we will debauch the Word with
a degeneracy of Practice, the Fault is our own. Their Magic was truly Science,
whereas ours is neither Magic or Science, but a kind of Devilism, a Practice
carried on, by Men that would be wicked if they did not want Wit, and are no
otherwise Harmless, than as they happen to be Fools.

Even at its best, it is a Babel-like Confusion, that speaks several Languages,
and none to be understood; a complete Degeneracy of, or Deviation from, common
Sense; a Complication of Negatives, that how many soever you put together,
will not make up one Affirmative.

Now, to bring this Nothing from the Something it derived from, though it seems a
little Difficult, yet it is very Necessary, and this is the Reason why I call it
a History.

I have traced it as far back as Antiquity gives us any Clue to discover it by;
it seems to have its Beginning in the Ignorance and Curiosity of the darkest
Ages of the World, when Miracle, and something Wonderful, was expected to
confirm every advanced Notion; and when the wise Men, having racked their
Invention to the utmost, called in the Devil to their Assistance, for want of
better Help; and those that did not run into Satan's Measures, and give
themselves up to the Infernal, yet trod so near, and upon the very edge of
Hell, that it was hard to distinguish between the Magician and the Devil; and
there they have gone on ever since: so that almost all the Dispute between us
and the Magicians is, that they say they converse with good Spirits, and we say
if they deal with any Spirits it is with the Devil let the following Sheets
determine the Matter.

Hail! Dangerous Science, falsely called Sublime,
Which treads upon the very brink of Crime.
Hell's Mimick, Satan's Mountebank of State,
Deals with more Devils than Heaven did ever create.
The Infernal Juggling-box, by Hell designed,
To put the grand Parade upon Mankind.
The Devil's first Game, which he in Eden played,
When he harangu'd to Eve in Masquerade.
In the first Ages Men mistook thy Face,
Thy Conj'ring past for Wit, thy Gravity for Grace
By thee the Junior World in Witchcraft grew,
That Witchcraft still the Senior Worlds pursue.
Nature's first Usher to induct Mankind,
Prompting wise Arts to his enquiring Mind.
To Jubal thou, and Tubal, Science brought,
To This his Metals, That his Music taught.
But born a Cheat, under the Cloak of Grave,
First made him a Mechanic, then a Knave.
CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION. Of the Meaning of the Terms; who and what kind of People the
Magicians were, and how the Words Magic or Magician were originally
understood. Page 1 Chap. II. How Wisdom and Learning advanced Men in the First
Ages to Royalty and Government, and How many of the Magicians were made Kings
on that Account; as Zoroaster, Cadmus, and many others. p. 38 Chap. III. Of the
Reason and Occasion which brought the ancient honest Magi, whose original Study
was Philosophy, Astronomy, and the Works of Nature, to turn Sorcerers and
Wizards, and deal with the Devil; and how their Conversation began. p. 61 Chap.
IV. Of what Shapes the Devil assumed in his first Appearances to the Magicians,
and others, in the First Ages of the World; and whether He is, or has been
allowed to assume a human Shape, or no. p. 92 Chap. V. A Farther Account of the
Devil's Conduct in Imitating Divine Inspirations; Something of the Difference
between them; and particularly of Signs and Wonders, False as well as True, and
the Cheats of the Former. p. 125 Chap. VI. Of who were the first Practisers of
Magic, as a Diabolical Art, and how it was handed on to the Egyptians and
Phoenicians, where it was first openly encouraged. p. 141 Chap. VII. Of the
Practice and Progress of Magic, as it is now explained to be a Diabolical Art,
how it spread it self in the World, and by what Degrees it grew up to the
Height which it has since arrived to. p. 184
PART II.
INTRODUCTION. Of the Black Art it self; what it really is, why there are
several differing Practices of it in the several Parts of the World, and what
those Practices are; as also, what is contained in it in General. p. 218 Chap.
I. Of Modern Magic, or the Black Art as now in its Practice and Perfection. p.
228 Chap. II. The Scene changed; That as the Devil acted at First with his
Black Art without the Magicians, so the Magicians seem to carry it on now
without the Devil. p. 248 Chap. III. Of the present Pretenses of the Magicians:
How they defend themselves; and some Examples of their Practice. p. 284 Chap.
IV. Of the Doctrine of Spirits as it is understood by the Magicians; How far it
may be supposed there may be an Intercourse with Superior Beings, without any
Familiarity with the Devil, or evil Spirits; with a Transition to the present
Times. p. 321 Chap. V. Of the Magic of the present Time, as it stands stripped
in the last Chapter, from all the Pretenses of the Magicians, and the Delusions
of Hell; of what Length it has gone, or is like to go, in deluding Mankind;
what the Magicians can do, and that they really have now no Converse with the
Devil at all: So that the Art being at an End, the History comes to an End of
course. p. 357 Chap. VI. Of raising the Devil by Magical Operations; whether
the Magicians really have such a Power or no, and if they have, whether it is
performed as an Art, and by the Consequence of Magical Experiments, or whether
it is by Concert and mutual Consent, between Satan and the Magicians. p. 379
Chap. VII. Seeing, as the Magicians pretend, they do not Deal with the Devil,
or raise the Devil; Who it is they do Deal with, how their Correspondence is
managed, and why do they Deal with Good Spirits, by Conjurings and the Black
Art? p. 392
A SYSTEM of MAGIC.
INTRODUCTION.
Of the Meaning of the Terms; who and what kind of People the Magicians were,
and how the Words Magic or Magician were originally understood.

BEFORE I come to the main End of this Undertaking, which is plainly laid down
in my Title, it is necessary to explain the Terms, and to determine fully what
is and is not to be understood by Magic, the Black Art, and such like hard
Words as we shall be obliged to make frequent Use of as we go along.

I am willing to suppose my Readers not so unacquainted with the ancient Usage,
as not to know that the Word Magic had a quite different Signification in
former Times from what it is now applied to, and that the People who studied or
professed that which we now call Magic, were quite another sort of Folk, than
those worthy Gentlemen who now apply themselves to that Profession.

In a Word, a Magician was no more or less in the ancient Chaldean Times, than
a Mathematician, a Man of Science, who stored with Knowledge and Learning, as
Learning went in those Days, was a kind of walking Dictionary to other People,
and instructed the rest of Mankind in any Niceties and Difficulties which
occurred to them, and which they wanted to be informed about; and in this Sense
we are to be understood when we speak of the Magicians in Egypt, in Persia, in
Babylon, etc.

Thus when any Omens, ill Signs and Tokens, Dreams, or other strange things
happened in those Times, whether publicly in the Air, or particular to Persons
and Families, we find not only the ordinary People, but even Kings and Princes
sent immediately for the Magicians and the wise Men, the Southsayers, etc. to
tell them what the Meaning o^ such things was.

These Magicians are explained on many Occasions by the term of wise Men, and
that Term again by Men of Knowledge, and more than ordinary Understanding. Men,
in a word, who studied Nature, looked up into, and made Observations from the
Motions of the Stars and other heavenly Bodies, and who, as it is said in the
Scriptures, understood the Signs of the Times, the Face of the Heavens, and the
Influences of the Superior Luminarie there; who searched into the Arcana of
Nature, an^ were Masters of perhaps a little experimental Philosophy; I say a
little, for Reasons which I shall repeat presently.

It was no Impropriety in Speech to call such a^ these wise Men at that time,
though perhaps the utmos^ of their Knowledge might arrive to no more tha^ what we
would now justly call superficial. Because at that time the Knowledge of Nature
wa^ very green and young in the World; and the Philosopher of those times, if
he was to be rated by the Rules Men are pleased to judge by at this time, would
be something like our Learned Friend Sir Tho. J... whose particular Honor it
was to be a Doctor among Fools, and a Fool among Doctors.

To these Magicians Men went on the several Occasions hinted as above for the
Solution of doubtful Questions; to be resolved and directed in difficult and
intricate Undertakings; to be advised in things of Moment; and these were
therefore called Sages first, and for a long time; and afterward Magi, from
the greatness of their Wisdom. Hence the wise Statesmen to whom the Government
of the Median Interregnum was committed were called Magi; as wise Men to whom
alone it was fit to entrust so important an Article as that of the Government
of an Empire.

Thus afterward in the Israelites times, their wise Men were called by another
but very significant Name or Term ( viz.) SEERS, a Word afterward held in such
Veneration, that they thought fit to bestow it upon their Prophets, who also
were called Seers, though afterward they obtained a superior Title, namely that
of Man of God. But before that I say the wiser Men were called Seers; and this
is most expressly signified in that eminent Text, 1 Samuel ix.9. where it is said
that before time they used to say when they wanted to enquire of God, that is
to enquire about any thing difficult, come and let us go to the SEER, that is
to the Magician, the wise Man, the Prophet, or what else you please to call him.

It is plain from the same Text also that they sometimes went to those People
called SEERS upon meaner Enquiries; for they took it for granted that those
Seers dealt in all secret Matters; Thus Ahaziah sent to Baal-zebub when he was
sick, to know if he should live or dye, 2 Kings i.2, 3. and so the King of
Syria's Captains told their Master, that Elisha the Prophet told the King of
Israel what he did in his Bedchamber, 2 Kings vi.12. And to bring it down to a
meaner Case still; even when Saul wanted but to find his Father's lost Asses or
Cattle, his Servant said to him, let us go and enquire of the SEER; and so they
did, and found News of them.

Likewise it appears by the same Text, that those Seers, or Prophets, or Magi,
made an Employment of it, that it was their Business to tell Men of their lost
Goods, direct them in their Way, foretell of their Health, and the like; and
that they made a Livelihood or Trade of it; therefore when Readiness Servant
proposed to him to go to the SEER, Saul made a Difficulty of it because he had
nothing to give him; as if he should have said, I have no Money in my Pocket,
and not a Loaf of Bread to give the cunning Man or SEER, and how should I
expect that he should give me any Account of my Cattle for nothing? Then when
the Servant told him he had a fourth-part of a Shekle of Silver in his Purse, (
which by the way was not above seven Pence halfpenny, or thereabouts) Saul was
mighty glad, resolving to give the low-priz'd Magician or Prophet that vast
Fee, to tell him what was become of his Father's Asses.

It seems the Lawyers Fees were not so high in those Days as they have been
since; for if he had not had that Piece of Silver, perhaps about as big as an
English Groat, I say, if he had not had that, a couple of halfpenny Barley
Loaves it seems would have been as good, and have done as well; those Loaves
being not usually bigger than our Halfpenny, or at best than our Penny Wheaten
brown Bread Loaves are now.

Again you find when Benhadad King of Damascus sent to Elisha the Prophet to
know if h^ should live or dye, he sent the Prophet a Present forty Camels
laden with all the good things o^ Damascus, 2 Kings viii. 9. A large Fee! But
it is t^ be supposed the Gift sent, was not suited to the Prophet so much as to
the Sender; he gave as a King; but still we find the SEERS were supposed to
make the Gain their Business.

That it was the same thing with the Magi before that, we have no reason to
doubt, though we have no Particular in Story relating to that part. But we find
those Southsayers, Magicians, and wise Men, who were sent for by Pharaoh King
of Egypt to interpret his Dream, were to have received great Rewards, if they
had given Satisfaction to the King; and Joseph we see did receive great
Rewards, as well as Honor, on that Account.

Again afterward in the Case of Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, there is a sufficient
Testimony that those wise Men, Astrologers, Magicians, etc. were esteemed not
to be Wizards and Dealers with the Devil, but only (as I have explained the
Word above) mere Philosophers, or wise Men, Men of Learning and Knowledge, Men
of Science and of Skill in the works of Nature; for when the King demanded of
them to tell him not only the Interpretation of the Dream, but the Dream it
self, and threatened them with Death in case they failed to perform it, they
expostulate with the King upon the unreasonableness of the Proposal, as a thing
that no King in the World would expect from them, and that was not in the power
of Nature to perform:

As if they had said, does your Majesty think we deal with the Devil, that you
should expect such a Piece of Work as this from us? it is not in the Power of
any, or of all the wise Men, or Philosophers, in the World; and therefore it
cannot be imagined we should do it; but let the King tell us the Dream, and
then we will interpret it, and that is as much as Man can do.

It Is plain from hence, not only that the Magi or Magicians in those Days were
not really Conjurers and Dealers with the Devil, but that they were understood
to be what we may call Scholars, Men of Learning, of Wisdom, and of a superior
Understanding: So when the King calls for Daniel to prefer him, it is said he
did it because an excellent Spirit was found in him; and in another Place it is
said, that the Spirit of the Holy Gods was in him; whereas at the same time
it is certain that the King esteemed him as one of the Magicians; nay, and he
was set over them, as the Chief and Governor of all the rest. Certainly then
they did not take those Magicians to be what we have since understood of ours,
( viz.) Dealers with the Devil, and Sorcerers, such as ought to be punished for
having or using unlawful Arts, and Practices with evil Spirits and the like.

Had this been the common Opinion of them, they would have been treated after
another manner, both then and in after-Ages; for not only among the Jews, but
in other Nations, such as we call now Magicians were punished as Criminals.

But to go back a little to Originals, and to fetch up Knowledge from the
Fountain: Man born ignorant arrives to very little Knowledge but what comes by
one of these two Channels.

First, Long Experience, Study and Application.

Secondly, Teaching and Instruction from those that went before.

I shall insist only upon the last, and that particularly for the sake of what
was Antediluvean. The most early Knowledge which Mankind obtained in those
Days, is supposed to be by Teaching immediately from Heaven; for Example. Adam
and Eve's Mouths were opened at the same time with their Eyes, and they could
speak, and knew what Language to speak, as soon as they were made. But it is
most certain also, that all the speaking World since Adam and Eve learnt it
successively from them, by mere Imitation of Sounds, teaching of Parents and
Nurses, and the like.

After Adam, his Posterity having learnt to speak immediately from him, and so
to converse with one another, a consummate acquired Knowledge in several other
things quickly followed; particular Arts and Sciences were either taught by
Inspiration from Heaven, or attained by the exquisite Capacities of their
Minds; One having a Genius to this, Another to that kind of Knowledge; as one
to Music, another to working in and finding out Metals and Minerals in the
Earth, then melting, refining, casting, and other Operations and Improvements,
as Knowledge came in by the Door of Experiment.

Adam's Posterity (I mean his particular House or Family) learnt to speak more
immediately from him and Eve their Mother by mere imitation of Sounds, as we do
to this day from one another.

But having thus obtained Speech from their immediate Parents, all other
acquired Knowledge mentioned above, such as of their Improvement of Culture,
Discoveries in Nature, and the like, seemed to be the Consequence, 1. Of a
vehement and inflamed Desire after Knowledge, planted in their Minds by Nature
it self; an inquiring Disposition; being sensible of a vast Treasure hidden in
Nature apt for Discovery, and which as it were waited only for the Search, in
order to open it self to their View for the general Good. 2. A vast capacious
Understanding fitted for that Search, and which we have reason to believe the
Antediluvean Fathers were more than ordinarily furnished with, guiding them
directly to the Search after, and into all the Arcana of Nature, with a
Readiness and Accuracy so pointed, as if they had been beforehand instructed
what to search for, how to search for it, and where to find it. 3. A secret
Inspiration from Heaven, filling them with, or at least directing them to the
Knowledge of things in a more than ordinary manner.

N.B. We cannot doubt but were there now to appear a Man perfectly untaught,
not having converst at all with Men taught and instructed before him, and yet
should have a Treasure of such Knowledge in his Mind, exerting it self in
Action to such a degree as was ordinary to the Patriarchs of the Antediluvean
Age, we should presently give him up for a Magician in the grossest Acceptance
of the Word, and say in short that he deals with the Devil.

But be it so or not, and let the consummate Knowledge of those Patriarchs,
come which way it will, and, be as great as it will, or as you will suppose it
to be, this is certain, it died with them; 'twas all drowned in the Flood, the
Post-diluvean Age inherited very little of it; or if they did, it was drowned
again in the Flood of Vice and Wickedness, which almost as soon overspread the
World, as the People did the Plains of Shinaar, and much sooner than they
spread the rest of the Earth with their Posterity, however fast they multiplied.

Nor do I wrong the People of those first Ages after the Flood in the least,
when I say they seemed to have lost all that fund of Knowledge, all that
capacious Understanding, and all that sacred Inspiration, which their
Predecessors the Antediluveans were Masters of; I need go no further for an
Example of it than the building of Babel. For was it possible that any thing so
absurd and ridiculous could have entered into the Thoughts of Men, if they had
not been sunk into an unexpressible Degeneracy as to Sense, a mere Stupidity of
Understanding? To say nothing of their having lost all Pretense to Inspiration;
so far were they from any Share of sacred Light in it, that they could not be
said to have acted with common Sense. Bless us! to build a House to reach up to
Heaven! or as we may with more Propriety express it, to build a Staircase to
go up into Heaven by; and that in case of another Flood too, which adds to the
Madness of the design many ways. 1. They had certainly no Notion of Heaven it
self; not to speak of religious Notions of Heaven, they must be entirely dark
and stupid as to the Philosophy of it; The immense Distance, the differing
Regions, the Alteration of things in their natural Circumstances and Situation
by the Way, or in the Passage. 2. They had no Understanding of their own
Constitution, or at least they must have very gross and absurd Conceptions
about it; as particularly of their breathing and subsisting in the Regions
above the Atmosphere, and in the pure unmixed Ether, (or what else it should
be called) which they who mounted up to such Height would be sure to meet with,
and in which they might as easily conceive an Impossibility of breathing, as
they could conceive of the Impossibility of living without Breath. 3. They must
have had no Notion of the Nature of the Flood it self; as that of the Power,
Force, and Weight of the Waters, when moving in such a collected Body; how
unable any thing they could build would be to resist the Force, and not be
presently blown up and driven away by the Stream. 4. They must be utterly
ignorant of the Nature of the Earth on which their Building stood; how no
Foundation could be laid so deep or so firm in it, but what by the Violence of
such an immense Ocean of Water would be loosened and overwhelmed, and the
Fabric by consequence be brought down; the Earth which upheld it being washed
away. 5. They must be wholly ignorant of what our learned Theory Men insist to
have been the Causes of the Deluge, namely an Absorption or breaking in of the
Surface of that Earth which was before a known Cavity or Hollow filled up with
Water, into which the Earth fell with a Violence equal to the Fall of the
highest Mountain that could be supposed to fall into the lowest Subterranean
Deep; and in which case the Height, and Strength, and Magnitude of their
Building could only serve to make its Fall more violent, more certain, and more
terrible.


All these things, and many more, which Nature, had they been capable of
consulting it, would have dictated to them, they must be perfectly ignorant of;
otherwise they could never, with a Deliberation and long consulting one
another, as the Relation of the Story implies, have gone about so ridiculous a
piece of Work as that of Babel, than which nothing attempted by the grossest
and dullest Fancies on Earth was ever more abominably foolish and ignorant.

Were these the Posterity of the wise Antediluvean Age! whose Minds were
inspired from Heaven, and whose Understandings were so eminently large and
capacious, whose Genius led them to the inventing the most useful Arts, and to
exalt them in quest of the noblest parts of Science, (such as Music in
particular;) and to make the most refined Experiments, such as the melting,
mixing, separating, and refining of Metals; and which was still as much as all
the rest, the finding those Metals in the Oar, as the Iron, the Copper, the
Silver, and the Gold, of which we find they had a complete Knowledge, and
carried it on no doubt to the most useful Experiments? Thus Jabal and Jubal for
Example, the Sons of Lamech, who severally applying themselves to useful Arts,
became Instructors of their Posterity in Culture of the Earth, Husbandry,
breeding of Cattle, etc. Others we find were Proficients in Philosophy, and the
study of Nature; for the Doctrine of Sounds is one of the nicest Parts of
philosophical Study, and we find them immediately Masters of Music, and
inventing and instructing others in making the Instruments of Music; and
particularly those Nicest and most Difficult of all the rest, the Harp, and the
Organ, that is to say Wind-Musick, which is Vocal; and Music by Vibration,
which we call Instrumental; likewise Tubal-Cain their Brother, who was the
first Artificer, of whom we may say that he was a true natural Mechanic, and
the first and best Tinker in the World.

In the room of this capacious Understanding, and this inquiring and applying
Temper in those Ages, behold a stupid Generation risen up in Succession; stripped
as naked of the natural Glories of their Ancestors, as the Earth was of its
natural Fruitfulness after the Curse in Paradise; and instead of applying
themselves to useful Arts, and to the acquiring of Knowledge, grown as indolent
as they were ignorant, having, like Solomon's Fool, no delight in Understanding.

Instead of qualifying themselves to instruct their Posterity, we see no marks
of Wisdom left behind them fit for Imitation; nothing that could recommend them
to their Children for any thing but a Race of brutish, unpolished, unfinished
Creatures, that neither understood Heaven or Earth, themselves, or any thing
about them; that seemed qualified for nothing but merely, as the rest of the
Brutal World were, to propagate their Kind, and overspread the Earth.

Nor in their Multiplying their Species did they seem to promise any thing but
to people the World with a Race of Fools, as ignorant and sordid as their
Antediluvean Progenitors had been out rageously wicked; a Race that threatened
to make Heaven as sick of them for their Folly, as it was of those that went
before them for their Corruptions and abominable Vices; and that might be a
likely to have brought a Deluge upon them for their obstinate untractable
Ignorance, as the other had been for their Rebellion and Looseness, ha^ not
God's Promise not to destroy the World any more, been their Security.

Nor indeed were they less corrupt, their Capacities considered, than the old
World, whose flagrant Crimes had involved them in a general Destruction and if
they fell short in any thing, it was for want of Wit, not for want of
Wickedness.

This appears in all their subsequent Conduct, from the first peopling of the
World after Noah to that foolish Babel-Building-Age I speak of: In the old
World we found, that, at least for a time, Men began to call on the Name of the
Lord; and the Patriarchs of that Age were famous for Piety, of whom it is said,
as particularly of Enoch, that he walked with God: an emphatic significant
Expression, which our learned Commentators have spent a great deal of Time in
expatiating upon and explaining. The Scripture again expresses this walking
with God to be an Act of Faith, and quotes it, Heb. xi. ver. 5. as a glorious
Example of such Faith as was rewarded with an immediate Translation of the
Person into Heaven. He was not, for GOD took him; and from which the most
exquisitely and accomplishtly whimsical Mr. Asgill formed his new System of
going the nearest way (Home) to Heaven by the farthest way about, a fiery
Chariot instead of dying; as if the former were not a Change as well as the
latter, and as if Heaven had not already made the best Choice for us: But though
he suffered Martyrdom for his Scheme (having been expelled the Parliament of
two Kingdoms for it) we do not find he has yet had the Benefit of his Project,
so we must wait till he is pleased to make the Experiment.

But to return to the Antediluveans: The old World, I say, as wicked as they
were, had some shadow of Good in them, and for some Years, nay some hundreds of
Years, they maintained the Character of the Sons of God, before they were
debauched by the Daughters of Men; that is to say, before they blended the Race
with the corrupt Seed of Cain, and mingled Blood with Idolaters. Where, by the
way, we have an accurate Description of the Times, I mean in those early Days,
of the Race; it is evident 'twas just then as it is now, the Ladies were the
Devils of the Age; the Beauties, the Toasts, the fine Faces were the Baits; the
Hell lay concealed in the Smiles of the charming Sex, They were the Magicians,
taking the Word in its present Acceptance and its grossest Sense: There lay
the Witchcraft, and its Force was so irresistible, that it drew in even the
Sons of God, just, in a word, as it does now, and of which I shall have
Occasion to speak again at large as we go on. -- In the mean time, I descend
with the Story to the next Generation.

The Antediluveans might have something of Religion in them, however fatally
mixed with Crime; but as for the new Good-for-nothing Race, we hardly read of
any thing that ever was to be found among them that may be called valuable,
from Noah himself downward; and even Noah himself, we all know, fell into the
Debaucheries of Wine, and if you will believe Tradition, continued in it a
hundred Years. Now from him, and from his immediate Race, Nature seemed
prepared for the utmost Degeneracy, for they fell into all manner of Crimes,
nay into the worst Crimes first; for they did not begin low and sin gradually,
but immediately afte^ the Drunkenness of Noah himself, his Posterity
degenerated into Idolatry, or rather returned to it, for some think, and that
not without Probability enough, that Noah's Sons were Idolaters before the
Flood, and were saved in the Ark, such was the Wi^ of God, merely for being the
Posterity or Progen^ of a righteous Father; if so, then they only returned to
the Idolatry which they had been practiced it before.

But be that as it will, it is certain that the Posterity of Noah fell
immediately into Idolatry, and tha^ all his wise Dictates which he gave to his
Children, which for so many Ages were preserved by oral Traduction, and were
called the Precepts of Noah, had no sufficient Effect upon them to prevent that
hated Sin of Idolatry, no not even while he was alive.

It is worth observing here indeed, were it not too grave for your Reading, how
effectually Noah by the horrid Defection of his own Morals in that One Act of
Drunkenness, I say how effectually he shut the Door against the Force of all
his Own future Instructions: He was till then indeed a Preacher of
Righteousness, and had been so to the Antediluvean World for near six hundred
Years; but after that, he might preach indeed if he would, but what Regard
would he obtain, when the debauched Instructor had exposed himself by his
Drunkenness to the Ridicule instead of the Reverence of his Posterity, and when
the drunken Monitor by his own Practice had rendered his Instructions fruitless
and ridiculous?

How justly might they bid him hold his Tongue, and go and reform his Life,
before he pretended to instruct them? bid him first learn the Precepts he
taught, and show them by his Example what it was he would have them practice?
How might they upbraid him with exhorting them to be sober, while he went drunk
to bed? exhorting them to Modesty and Virtue, while he appeared in the most
scandalous manner, lying drunk in his Tent, and his Nakedness exposed to the
Banter and impious Jest of his Grandson Ham?

How must it cover his Face with Blushes, to find he had dishonored by his
Example the Doctrine of Sobriety which he had preached to his Children, who
were thereby brought to mock him, rather than to listen to him, and to make
Ballads of him, rather than copy his Precept for their Imitation?

But I say this is a Subject too solemn for the Age, and you will presently
tell me I am going to write a Comment upon the ninth Chapter of Genesis. So I
leave it for you to consider of, and return to the Chronology of early
Wickedness in the Post-diluvean World.

Noah being thus disabled, by his own falling into Crime, from instructing his
Posterity, what was the Consequence? he lived to see them run headlong into
that worst of all Crimes, Idolatry, and the Worship of GOD sunk as it were out
of the World, even in his own time, and before his Eyes.

This is evident from Abraham, whom the Scripture acknowledges to have been not
an Idolater only, but even bred up in Idolatry while he lived in Mesopotamia;
and it is certain Abraham was born above fifty Years before Noah died: So that
Noah lived to see his Posterity degenerated into Idolatry, not all his
Preaching or Practice being able to prevent it.

Having thus seen all the Wickedness of the old World revived in its new
Inhabitants, without the Wit and Capacities which they had before; and the Race
being thus entirely degenerated, we must begin all our historical Account of
them with taking them just as we find them, and that will bring us directly to
the Subject I propose.

The Race being thus, as I have said, stripped naked of the Beauties of their
Ancestors, whether in Matters of Sense and Understanding, or in Matters of
Piety and Religion, and running on into all manner of foolish and simple as
well as wicked Excesses, it is not at all wonderful if when any particular
Person appeared more than ordinary knowing, or but a Lover of and Searcher
after Knowledge and Wisdom, such a Person was honored in a more than ordinary
manner, was reverenced as an extraordinary Man, exalted in the common Esteem
when alive, and perhaps placed among the Stars after his Death; that he who
shined in their Esteem when living, might be supposed to be made immortal at
his Death, and to be exalted to shine in a higher Orbit.

Hence it became a vulgar Error among the first Ages, but was riveted so fast
in the Minds of Men, that nothing could persuade them not to believe it, (
viz.) that the Stars were all the transparent bright Souls of their wise
Ancestors, who for their Virtue and Wisdom were exalted by the immortal Powers
to a Station of Glory, and were made to shine in that manner for the farther
enlightening the World, to whom they had been so beneficent when they were here;
and from hence it came at last that all their great Men, and especially their
Kings, were thus reverenced and exalted, whether they were good Men or no.

It could not be, but that in Process of Time, as the World grew populous, though
they had none of the rare Parts and exalted Understandings of the Antediluvean
Patriarchs, yet there would be some Men of a more refined Genius, and of more
capacious Souls than others. Surely the World would not be all Fools, or not
all equally and alike so; nor can I doubt but that while the gross of the
People went about that hare-brain'd preposterous piece of Work which we call
Babel, there were some wiser Heads who though they might not care to oppose
themselves to the popular Humor, or perhaps to their Resentment, and did not
ridicule and mock the Undertaking, yet looked on it with a different View, and
entertained wiser Notions of Things, and consequently (when by the Confusions
which afterward happened among the Builders on Account of their Speech, they
were obliged to give over their Work) might take the Liberty to expostulate
with them upon the Weakness of the Design, and convince them afterward that it
was an unlikely impracticable thing: Or perhaps those Men had calmly argued
that Part with them before, and had, as far as the times would bear it,
declared their Sentiments about it; these Men would certainly obtain the
Character of wise Men upon this Occasion, and be valued by them as such upon
all subsequent Events.

As upon the Confusion of Languages the several Families who understood one
another Speech kept together, so it is very probable they did not separate
singly, every one running his own way, but by Families and Tribes, or by
Nations, as their Speech was or was not understood by one another; and this was
directed by Providence no doubt, for it is said in the Text, God scattered them
upon the Face, or over the Face, of the whole Earth.

It is not unlikely but that when they left off Building, and found they were
not able to pursue the Design, with that Impossibility they began also to see
into the Folly and Absurdity of the Undertaking; and began more and more every
day to reflect upon their Stupidity in going about it; that being withal
ashamed of the Work, they were ashamed of the Place too, and went every Man, or
Tribe of Men at least, their own Way, to get as far out of the sight of it as
they could: I grant indeed that this is but my Conjecture, but I think it is a
very just Conjecture, and it is made on Supposition that all wise Men look back
with Regret upon those Actions of their Lives which they have been drawn into,
and in which they have reason to see themselves mistaken. -- In short, a^ no
Man loves to see himself a Fool, and if he ha^ done a foolish thing, does not
care to have the Remembrance of it always in his View; so generally if he
cannot get the Object removed and put ou^ of his sight, he will remove himself
from it, if he can.

Upon this foot I cannot doubt, but that all the People quitted the Plain of
Shinaar as fast as they could, and run away from the hated Monument o^ their
Shame; we would have done so our selves and I cannot doubt, I say, but they did
so too.

Suppose then the People to be upon their March and going to the several
Quarters of the World, whither they were directed to settle; and let that b^
where you and Sir Walter Raleigh please; for tha^ learned Author following
Scripture Light has really marshalled them, and laid out their several Routs a^
exactly and authenticly as if he had been Commissary-General, and had gone
before to provide them Quarters.

Wherever, I say, these several Nations went, and in what Country soever they
settled and fixed their Abode, though the Government and Monarchy of each
Division was Patriarchal and Hereditary, yet we shall find upon several
Occasions afterward, that they had among them many particular Men famous for
their Wisdom and Knowledge, and for their Search into the Secrets of Nature,
whose consummate Wisdom by degrees not only obtained for them a more than
ordinary Reverence among the People; but, in short brought the People to
subject themselves to their Government, and make some of them Kings.

Thus Cadmus, a Phoenician born, became King of Thebes in Greece, by having
obtained the Fame of a wise Man, and one who dedicated himself to the common
Good of Mankind; So Prometheus obtained the Government of a Part of Armenia,
and Atlas the like in Africa; and thus several others, by their Wisdom and
earnest Search after Knowledge, obtained the Empire and Government of those
Countries where their Wisdom was so conspicuous. But pray take this with you as
you go, that those Days are over, that Wisdom crowns no Man Now, except it be
with the Rage and Malice of Enemies, with Poverty and Insult. Probitas laudatur
and Alget.


Honesty shall be praised and starved; Wisdom and Knowledge are Marks for the
Men of Power to shoot at; to be High and Great, is to be Wise and Good. He that
is Rich is Wise,
And all Men learned Poverty despise.


But this is but an Excursion, I come back reproved: The Magi were not always
Kings or Emperors; the Wise Men and the Southsayers, the Magicians and
Astrologers (who by the way were all but one sort of People) were often times
in mean Circumstances as to Money, even in those graver Days; they acted for
the public Good indeed, but it was in Conjunction with their own Interest too,
they had their Rewards for Southsaying and Divining; and when the King of Syria
asked his Servants to go to Elisha the Prophet to enquire for him about his
Health, he bad them take a Present in their Hand for the Man of God.

I cannot indeed say how high prized things went in those Days, and whether
Wisdom was not under-rated then, as it is now; whether there was due
Encouragement given for the Search, or whether Wit went threadbare and in Rags,
as it does since; Authors are not agreed upon it indeed, and it may be hard to
bring them to a Point: It is true, later and more modern Philosophers learned
to despise Money, and Solon preferred Wisdom and a retired Life to the Wealth
of Croesus; but in the more early Times of the World, the Knowledge of Nature
and the Study of Wisdom as it went then, seemed to be a communicative Good,
which therefore as they that reaped the Benefit of it ought to pay for and did
so, so their wise Men grew (in time) mercenary and mean, as in other Places.

This leads me to the Times when the primitive Wisdom of those early Days
beginning, as I said, to be more common, and that the Magi had communicated
much of their Knowledge to the common People. Those then who still pretended to
be something beyond the rest of the World, were obliged to go higher in their
Studies, and enquire into Nature, view the Aspect of the Heavens, calculate the
Motions of the Stars, and especially dwell upon their Influences in human
Affairs, which is since called Astrology.

By this Study they obtained the Name of Southsayers and Astrologers, added to
that of Magicians, which they had before: and on the foot of these Studies they
interpreted Dreams, explained good and bad Omens, foretold Events, and perhaps
played some Leger-de-main Tricks too, to impose upon the World, as their worthy
Successors do to this Day; and in a word, it is likely they did all those things
then, which these People do now, of whom we say with more Freedom perhaps than
Truth, that they deal with the Devil.

Not that those People were charged, at least not yet, with any criminal
Conversation with the old Gentleman; nor, if I understand how the Case stood
with Satan at that time, had he any manner of Occasion for them, but did his
Business quite another way; for the Devil had Altars and Temples of his own,
was another kind of a King in those Days than he has appeared to be since: THEN
he gave Audience in form of a Deity, and saw himself worshipped like a God
almost throughout the whole World: Here, under the Name of Baal; there, Moloch;
here in one manner, there in another: Nor had the GOD of Heaven One Temple in
the World, when the Devil had a great many scattered here and there, almost in
every Nation. I assure you, however modern Writers think fit to represent him,
he scorned in those days to go about like a poor shabby Out-at-heels Devil, as
he has done since, and may perhaps do now. No, He appeared in State, and as he
usurped divine Honors, so he made a Figure suitable to his Usurpation, and had
his Shrines and his Votaries, his Priests and his Places of Worship, in
whatever Shapes or Places he pleased to be worshipped in: Thus as Dagon he had
a House of solemn Worship at Ashdod, 1 Samuel v.2. and as Baalzebub at Ekron, and
the like.

Now as the Devil had thus the Government of the whole World in his own Hand,
and that he was almost in the very Letter of it the God of the World, so he had
no need at that time to employ secret Agents, and work by way of Familiars or
private Intelligence, as he does since; nor, to do the honest Men Justice, had
any of the Southsayers and Magicians, and those which were at first called
their wise Men, any Conversation with the Devil at all, no, or with any of his
Works, they carried on no Business for him.

But they were Men of Thought, or if you please, Men of deeper thinking than
the ordinary sort: They studied the Sciences, and enquired into useful things,
searched the Works of Nature and Providence, studied the Meaning and End of
things, the Causes and Events, and consequently were able to see farther into
the ordinary Course and Causes both of things about them, and things above
them, than other Men.

In the study of Astronomy, they soon found the secret Influences of the Stars
upon the Surface of the Earth, upon Plants and Animals, nay, upon both Man and
Beast: as for Example, How the Growth and Virtues of earthly Bodies were guided
and governed by the heavenly, and how even the Events of the greatest moment on
Earth oftentimes obeyed the Force of those heavenly Bodies; their Conjunctions,
Oppositions, near or remote Positions, Revolutions and Appearances; and
accordingly they were capable of making such probable Conjectures of things not
yet come to pass, as were amazing and surprising to the rest of the World; and
by which they took them, either for Men filled with sacred Knowledge, and that
those things were communicated to them immediately from Heaven; or that,
however they got it, they had a prophetic Knowledge of what should come to
pass, and could foretell Events even before the apparent Causes were ordinarily
known.

This gave the common People an extraordinary Veneration for the Persons of
those Magicians and wise Men, as they had an awful Notion of their exceeding
Wisdom and Knowledge. Thus Nebuchadnezzar, after he had exalted the Prophet
Daniel to be the chief of his wise Men, stoopt to him with a kind of Reverence,
and begins his Address not like that of a Tyrant, the Terror of the World, as
he at that time really was, but as One that had an Awe upon his Mind of the
great Respect he ought to show to a Person divinely inspired as Daniel was. See
the Text Dan. iv.9. O Belteshazzar, Masier of the Magicians, because I know
that the Spirit of the holy Gods is in thee, etc. -- And so in the 8th Verse of
the same Chapter. At last Daniel came in before me, whose Name is Belteshazzar,
after the Name of my GOD, and in whom is the Spirit of the holy Gods.

These were the Magicians of the first Ages of the World, and such was the
Opinion which the People had of them in those days; not that they were
Conjurers, or cunning Men, or such sort of People as we now call them; but were
Men, who at that time knew more than the ordinary rate of Knowledge instructed
others to know; and were endued from Heaven with extraordinary Degrees of
Wisdom above other Men. Nor was the Respect paid to them equal, but more or
less in degree, according to the particular Degrees of sacred Inspiration which
they were supposed to have. Thus in the Case of the Prophet Daniel (as above)
the King treats him not as a Magician only, nor as the Chief of the Magicians
only, but as a Man filled with higher degrees of Wisdom and Knowledge than any,
nay than all the rest of the Magicians of the Age put together, as appears Dan.
iv.18. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the Interpretation thereof, (that is
of the Dream) for as much as all the wise Men of my Kingdom are not able to
make known unto me the Interpretation, but thou art able, for the Spirit of the
holy Gods is in thee.

This is still further explained in the next Chapter, and in the Transactions
of the next Reign: I say it is farther and fully explained to my Purpose, (
viz.) as to what was the People's Opinion of these Magicians, as well as their
King. The Story is very particular. It was in the Reign of Belshazzar, the Son
and Successor, according to some, of the Great Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon;
when the King saw a Hand come out, and writing Words upon the Wall, (see the
Text) Dan. v.7. The King crye^ aloud to bring in the Astrologers, the
Chaldeans, an^ the Southsayers to read the Writing. Why were these called, but
as they were Men of Fame, for their Learning in reading strange Characters, Men
o^ Skill in Languages and Books, which in those Days the common People knew
little or nothing of.

Well, all the learned Men of the Kingdom were accordingly called together, but
none of them could answer the End; no, notwithstanding all the great Rewards
promised them. Ver. 8. Then came in a^ the King's wise Men, that is to say, the
Flamsteads, the Sir Isaacs, the Halleys, the Whistons, etc. o^ the Age, but
they could not read the Writing, etc. And what follows? Then was King
Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his Countenance was changed in him. Nor is
that all, but the Text adds, and his Lords were astonished.

It seems they thought those wise Men knew every thing, that they had been able
to understand all the Languages in the World, and that therefore if they could
not read it, it must be something supernatural, something from above, or
something from below, which was worse; And in those Cases indeed they did not
expect the wise Men should read it, for they did not suppose those wise Men
corresponded with the Devil, or had an evil Spirit. They thought indeed, if it
depended upon human Understanding, they could do it, but as to higher things
than those they did not expect them; so the King and his Lords began to be the
more surpised at it. But now see the 10th Verse. The Queen directs them to
enquire out Daniel, and send for him, and tells them he would certainly read
the Writing, and tell them the Meaning or Interpretation of it. See the Words
at large.

Now the Queen, by reason of the words of the King and his Lords, came to the
banquet-house; and the Queen spoke and said, O King, live for ever: let not thy
thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed.

There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy Gods, and in
the days of thy father, light and understanding, and wisdom, like the wisdom of
the Gods, was found in him; whom the King Nebuchadnezzar thy Father, the King I
say, thy Father, made Master of the Magicians, Astrologers, Chaldeans, and
Soothsayers;

Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding,
interpreting of dreams, and showing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts
were found in the same Daniel, whom the King named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel
be called, and he will show the Interpretation.

After this Story no Man need enquire what the World understood by the
Magicians and Astrologers, and wise Men of those Days; But it is plain they were
looked upon not as dealers with the Devil, but as Men inspired from Heaven,
filled with inspired Knowledge, Light and Understanding, and excellent Wisdom,
that they could make Interpretations, resolve Doubts, etc. as ver. 15, 16. of
the same 5th Chapter. And as such, the Princes and Lords of the Country applied
to them in all difficult and extraordinary Cases.

Now it is true, we have only Examples of the Kings and Princes making use of
these People in difficult Cases, as Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar. But
it is not to be doubted, that the People in general, of all Qualities and
Conditions, went to them to be resolved in their Doubts, and to have Questions
answered them in difficult Cases; in short this was their general Employment,
and they made a Trade of it.

On this Account we find in several ancient Writings, that the Southsayers were
made use of to interpret Dreams, and foretell things to come; to represent good
or bad Omens, and give their Opinions upon the Appearances of any extraordinary
Phenomenon in Nature; Thus you have Julian the Apostate reproached with
encouraging such Men, and listening to them, some Ages after this, when their
Reputation was sunk to a lower degree by far, than it was at in former Times.

This being then the Case, we are not to talk of the Magic of those Ages, or
of the People called Magicians, in the present vulgar Acceptance of the Word;
but they are to be understood to be what Solon, Plato, Seneca, Aristotle, or
any of the best and brightest of the Philosophers of after-Ages were known to
be, namely Men of Learning; who had applied themselves to the study of Virtue,
and to the Knowledge of and Search into the most hidden treasures of Nature;
who understood the Reasons of things, the Causes and Originals of the most
retired and difficult Accidents in Nature, that searched into, and calculated
all Astronomical Difficulties; the Motions and Revolutions of heavenly Bodies;
and, as I said before, their Influences on things below; that studied and found
out the physical Virtues of Plants, Metals, Minerals, and in a word every
difficult thing, either in natural or experimental Philosophy.

These were the Magicians of those Days, and to write a System of Magic as it
was then practiced, and is to this Day understood to be the first meaning of
it, would be to write a System of natural Philosophy; only with this specific
Difference, namely, that with the utmost of their Search, the highest of their
Reach, and the greatest of their Understandings, they knew so little of every
thing, or indeed of any thing, that the wisest of their wise Men, the most
accomplished Magician or Chaldean, in all the Egyptian or Chaldean Courts,
could not pretend to know what our present Pupils in Science come to the
understanding of in the first Lectures of Philosophy, which they go through in a
Course of Academick Study.

Their Conceptions of things were rough and rude; what they entertained was
either received by the Instruction of others, as by oral Tradition from the
like wise Men that went before them, or from the dark Conjectures of their own
reasoning and enquiring Dispositions, joined perhaps to some few, and those but
very mean, Experiments of their own making, from Observation and Reflection.

These first Lights burnt very dim in their Understandings, and gave but little
helps to them in their Search after Knowledge; but still as the rest of the
World was infinitely darker, and more ignorant also than they are now, so this
dim Light, and these glimmerings of Knowledge, appeared to them, (in proportion
to the Light they had to judge by) as bright and shining, as the greatest and
most consummate Knowledge does now to us in the Heads of a Boil, a Newton, or
the most exquisite and best accomplished Philosophers of the Age.

All things in Nature are great or little in their Appearances, in Proportion
to those proper Objects which they are to be considered with, or measured by.
The Earth it self is considered as a vast Globe of solid Substances, formed
into one Body by an infinitely powerful Hand; when on the one hand it is
measured by any particular Bodies, either Part of it self, or of any other
Body, which are small, and as it may be said inconsiderable in Bulk compared to
it: Whereas on the other hand, that very Globe or vast Body which we call this
Earth, is but as a Point, a Mote, or a grain of Dust, when considered with and
measured by the immense Bodies of the Comets, the Sun, the fixed Stars, or
other those glorious Luminaries which we see ranged above us, and out of the
reach even almost of our Conceptions.

Thus the Knowledge and Acquirement of the Magicians and wise Men in the first
Ages of Time, and of whom I have been now speaking, though mean and trifling,
superficial, and of little Worth, when compared with the accomplished, and
consummate Wisdom of the Moderns, their experimental Philosophy, their
Knowledge in Astronomy, their Improvement of Nature and Art; yet it was Great,
and worthy of Admiration, when compared in those Days, to what the rest of
Mankind knew, and looked upon by, and compared with an ignorant Age such as
that was; and therefore the King tells Daniel, that an Excellent Spirit of
Wisdom was found in him. Dan. v. 14. And doubtless the People looked upon
Daniel to be inspired with Wisdom and Knowledge from the holy Gods, that is to
say from Heaven, as indeed he was, though not from their dumb Idols, whom they
called by the Name of the Holy Gods.

In like manner, though perhaps not with so strong a Conviction, they had an
Opinion of all those they called the Chaldeans and Southsayers, Magicicians and
Astrologers, that they had secret Communication with their Gods, and that they
received all the Knowledge with which they were inspired, and in which they so
much excelled the rest of Mankind, from the several Deities which they
worshipped. I will not deny but that those Magicians might endeavor by many
Subtilties and Arts, to confirm and preserve the delusion (for they knew it to
be so) in the Minds of the People; that they might also work up the Veneration
of the deluded Multitude to a due Height, and preserve the Opinion both of
their Persons and of their Capacities; and this perhaps will appear, when
further inquired into, to be the Foundation of all the wicked things which
followed, as I shall demonstrate in its Order.

It was really a Temptation to those wise Men, as they were called, to see that
the World had a vast Opinion of them; while the World was blind, and in the
Infancy of their own Understanding, a little matter would impose upon them; but
in process of things the World grew wiser, and the light Nature began to
receive Illuminations from the light of Reason, and then it behooved the wise
Men to see that their Knowledge also increased in Proportion; for still they
were obliged to keep the Reputation of their Understandings, by passing from
one Study to another, and aspiring still higher and higher in their several
Classes of Improvement.

Now this it was easy to do, in all those early Days of Knowledge. Nay, they
had a thousand Years before them still, in which a moderate Competence of
acquired Knowledge would keep up their Characters; what Course was taken
afterward we shall see by and by.

To sum it up then in few Words; a Magician in the first Ages of the World was
nothing more or less than a Man of Learning; only you must take this with you
as you go, that by the Word Learning is to be understood not a Man of Letters
and Books, for the World knew little of either in the first Days of those
Acquirements. Nay, we have reason to be assured, that the Knowledge of Letters
was not arrived in the World, at the time when Pharaoh summoned the wise Men,
and the Southsayers, and Magicians to interpret his Dream; and as they had no
Letters, they had no Books; and therefore when it is said that Moses was learned
in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, it must be understood of oral Learning,
Wisdom conveyed to hi^ by Observation, or Instruction, or Inspiration, a^
afterward he really received it from Heaven.

The Magicians, I say, were Men of Learning that is to say Men of Study, Men of
Observation busy in the search after Knowledge; and if we will take Pains to
enquire into it, we shall find their Observations chiefly respected the Motions
of the heavenly Bodies, the Aspects and Influences of the Planets and fixed
Stars; and considering that they were absolutely without the help of Instrument
and Glasses to make their Observations by, an^ without Books, by which to
communicate the Knowledge of one Age, or of one Person, to another; I say,
considering these things were wanting, it is a wonderful thing that they arrived
to such a Degree of astronomical Knowledge as they did.

Others studied the Knowledge of Nature, in the Constitution and Contexture of
human Bodies; the Originals, the Progress, and the causes of Diseases and
Distempers, both in Men and Women; and also the physical or medicinal Virtue of
Drugs and Plants, for Cure and Ease of those Diseases; the qualities of the
several Herbs and Trees, and Productions of the Earth; and as in these things
they made daily Discoveries in Nature, which the World was till then ignorant
of, and by which they performed surprising Cures, and delivered the distressed
People in diverse Maladies, they were on that Account, and deservedly too, had
in great Esteem, were reverenced, and even worshipped by the People.

I could give many Examples in History from the most ancient Times, when their
Physicians and Astronomers were, after their Decease, ranked among their Gods,
and doubtless were had in a profound Veneration, while they were living.

In a word, Science and useful Knowledge being young in the World, those Men
who gave themselves up to the first Searches after those things, were thought
worthy of the greatest Honors, and were had in the greatest Esteem; indeed
they very well deserved of Mankind, since they gave such noble Testimonies of
their being devoted to the Public good. Thus Prometheus, who is said to be
chained down to Mount Caucasus, with a Vulture preying upon his Bowels, the
Substance or Meaning of which was no more than this: That he gave himself so
entirely up to the Study of Astronomy, and to search after the Knowledge of the
heavenly Motions, that the eager Desire after the Knowledge of them gnawed into
his very Vitals, consumed his Natural Strength, and proved fatal to his Health;
and that this was upon Mount Caucasus, intimated only, that he chose a high
Hill, or a Summit among those Mountains, where he used to lie on his Back whole
Nights together, to make his Observations more exactly of the revolving Motions
of the Stars, till he contracted Distempers by the Colds and Damps of the Air;
so that he was as it were chained down to those Mountains, till the Diseases he
contracted eat out his very Bowels.

This is that Prometheus, who for his exquisite Knowledge, is feigned by the
Poets to have first formed Man, that is to say, formed the Model of a Man by
the help of Water and Earth; and then stole Fire from the Sun to animate the
Model, and to give him Life and Motion.

The Meaning of which is no more than this, that by his Wisdom he instructed
and formed the Minds of Men in true Notions and right Knowledge of the most
sublime Objects. Prometheus first, as ancient Authors say,
First made the Model of a Man in Clay;
Formed all the beauteous Parts, and when he would done
Stole vital Heat from the prolific Sun.


And here, by the way, the first Atheists, the Epicureans and others, who
showed their mighty Willingness to deny a First Cause, a Being Prior, and
therefore Superior, to all Beings, would make Man to be the Author of his own
Form and Life; and that Prometheus having thus formed the Model, and by
borrowing Fire from the Sun, given it Life, the new-form'd Creatures had ever
since communicated that Life by Generation. But this empty Notion stands
confuted most effectually, by only joining the following four Lines to those
above. But not an Author tells us, to this Day,
Who made Prometheus first, and who the Clay,
Who gave the Great Prolific to the Sun,
And where the first Productive Power begun.


But to leave Moralizing, which my merry Readers seem to have an Aversion to, I
go on with my Story.

The learned Sir Walter Raleigh says, they are greatly mistaken who think that
the Thing as well as the Word Magic is derived from Simon Magus. He adds, that
Simon's Name was not Magus, a Magician, but Goes, a Person familiar with evil
Spirits, and that he only usurped the Title of Simon the Magician, because the
Title of a Magician was honorable and good; and my Opinion is thus
strengthened by his Authority, viz. that there is a manifest difference between
Magic, which is Wisdom and supernatural Knowledge, and the Witchery and
Conjuring by which we now understand the Word, and use it accordingly.

I join with this Exposition of the Word Magic, and shall therefore carefully
distinguish as I go along betwixt the several differing Persons known in
History for Magi, Magicians, and Professors or Practisers of Magic; and those
Magicians by which we are to understand Sorcerers, and Enchanters, and Dealers
with the Devil, of whom nevertheless I shall have occasion frequently to speak
in this Work; because, though I shall let you know that the Magicians were not
all Sorcerers and Devil-Dealers, yet I must also let you know too, that I am to
point the main of this Discourse to such as are so.

Nor is this previous determining the Point any thing less than necessary at
this time, with respect to the Variety of worthy Gentlemen, our present
Contemporaries in fashionable Wisdom; who, however willing they are to be taken
for Magicians, even in the very worst Sense of the Word, rather than not to
pass for Conjurers, must be vindicated even against their Wills, if it be only
upon the single Consideration of Incapacity; since as none of the Magi of the
World were famed for wanting Brains, so the Devil having no occasion for Fools
in the natural Sense, will always disown them, in spite of the strongest
Pretenses they make to his Service.

In justice therefore to those Wou'd-be-witches, I must clear the way as I go,
and openly distinguish between Magicians, understanding them as wise and
learned Men; or Magicians, understanding them as Black-Art Men; and FOOLS, that
are only not Sorcerers because the Devil does not think it worth his while to
employ them; and in short, that they are incapable of being as wicked as they
would be.

The Word Magus, from whence the Words Magic and Magician are derived, is a
Persian or perhaps Chaldean Term, used originally to signify a Student in
Divinity, a Man conversant in divine Studies; and Plato says the Art of Magic
is nothing but the Knowledge of the Worship of the Gods, and the Persians
called their Gods (...); which Exposition of the Word is agreeable to that of
Mat. ii.2. there came wise Men of the East, who having seen the Star of him
that was born King of the Jews, came so far to worship him.

These wise Men the Greeks afterward called Philosophers, that is, Lovers of
Wisdom; and the same is understood in the Indian Language by Brachmans, and now
Bramines; by the Babylonians, Chaldeans; by the Hebrews, Seers; and among the
Persians, Magicians.

It is true, as King James I. says in his Book of Daemonologie, that under the
name of Magic all other unlawful Arts are comprehended; but that is only as we
Moderns understand it, not that it was understood so by the Ancients; and even
in that the King distinguishes between Magic in its worst Sense, and the Arts
or Practices of Witchcraft and Sorcery; which, with his Majesty's Leave, I
think a needless Distinction: Nor shall I be so nice; but all those Dealings
which we call Necromancy, Sorcery, Witchcraft, and all kinds of diabolical
doings, shall pass with me for Magic and the Black-Art, and in this Sense I
shall afterward use the Word.

The wise Men of Babylon are distinguished in the Prophecy of Daniel, into four
Classes; the Magicians, that is, the wise Men, in the Sense as above, I mean
Philosophers; the Astrologers, which are understood the same with our
Astronomers, and with them Southsayers; the third sort are the Sorcerers, who
were called Malefici or Workers of Evil or Mischief, as some call them; these
are the kind I am to treat of, who are Workers of Evil by the Assistance of an
evil Spirit; and the last are called Chaldaeans, by which are understood
Foretellers of things to come, who understand their hidden and secret Causes.

This Exposition brings us down to the Case in hand, where by the Word or Term
of Magic is understood the two last sorts, who working Evil of several kinds,
do it also by the Assistance of an evil Spirit; that is in English, by the Help
of the Devil, by Enchantment, Conjurations, and corrupt Methods.

The Practices of these People were many ways Diabolical, even in those days;
and if we may credit King James's Account of them, they were rather worse in
those latter Ages of the World than in former times; but of that in its Place.

Philo Judaeus carries it further than any of the most ancient Writers and
Sages, and says that by this kind of Magic, that is by Astrology, and
Observation of the heavenly Bodies, their Motions, and Revolutions, Abraham,
who was certainly a very great Magician, arrived to the Knowledge of the true
GOD; even before he came out from UR of the Chaldees; that is to say, he
gathered from the wise Government, the wonderful Order and Motion, and the
immovable Decrees and Revolutions of the heavenly Bodies, that there must be an
infinite, wise, and intelligent Being, who, as he was the first Cause of their
Beings, so he was likewise the great Director of their Motions, and by his
Appointment every thing in the whole System of their Operations was guided and
appointed: In short, that Abraham learned to know the Creator, by the
Contemplation of the Creature. And doubtless as this study of Nature directly
leads us to the great Author of Nature, so Abraham by his sincere Application
to the first, and his sincere Desire to be led into the Number of the last;
GOD, who knew those Desires of his Heart to be sincere, and aiming at a right
end, was pleased to make a more clear Discovery of himself to him by Vision and
Revelation; teaching him more than he could ever have obtained by all the Study
and Application imaginable.

It is not doubted however that Abraham was the first teacher of Astronomy and
of Arithmetic in the World, and perhaps of the several Branches of the
Mathematics; The Ancients affirm, that he taught the Phoenicians, that is to
say the Canaanites among whom he lived, and the Egyptians also, all the
Knowledge they had, whether Philosophical or Divine.

Thus then, whatever Notions we have now entertained of Magic as Diabolical,
yet certainly, as our Savior says in another Case, in the beginning it was not
so. In the first Ages of the World, the Knowledge of Magic was the Wisdom of
Nature; and nothing but Ignorance brought Men to prostitute themselves to the
Devil for the increase of their Understandings.

And this indeed is the way by which Magic, and the Knowledge of the most
excellent things, has been abused in the World; when Men seeking beyond
themselves for Knowledge, and ignorant of the way to increase true Knowledge,
have been imposed upon to make use of wicked and diabolical Methods to obtain
it; the Devil not only readily concurring to assist them, but openly acting
with them by Concert, to encourage the Delusion.

Hence the weakest and most impotent of all Capacities, mere Fools excepted,
have been found sufficient to make Tools for the Devil; who hardening them for
his own Work, trains them up to his Hand, with such an unwearied Diligence,
tha^ nothing can prevent their improving in his Service.

Thus while Magic is the Wisdom of Nature, and the Magicians of those Ages
were the wisest and best of Men; the Magicians of our times, and of this new
kind, improve from nothing, begin with the vilest of Ignorance, and proceed to
the vilest of Wickedness, till they come to be the most Diabolical Creatures in
the World.

Magic being therefore nothing in those Times, but, as I have said, a degree
of useful Knowledge, and the Magicians being a Race of honest studious Men,
searching after Wisdom, and blessed with greater Shares of it, than the ordinary
Race of Men were arrived to; we must look farther, and come down lower into
Time, for the present vulgar Acceptance of the Word: In which Inquiry, it will
not be sufficient to jump at once from the beginning of things to the present
times, and from what the Magicians were in Egypt and Chaldea, to what they are
now in a Christian Age: But we must a little enquire into the Gradations of the
Change, and see by what several Progressions of Art the useful Magicians of
those Ages have come on, from mere Philosophy, to all the Extraordinaries of
Mystery, Cunning, Trick, Cheat, Stargazing, Fortune-telling, Conjuring,
Witchcraft, and the Devil; and if this be not an Enquiry, both profitable and
diverting, I must be mistaken in my Subject, or in my Readers. Let us enter
into it gradually, and with Caution, lest we raise the Devil, before we come at
him.

CHAP. II.
How Wisdom and Learning advanced Men in the First Ages to Royalty and
Government, and How Many of the Magicians were made Kings on that Account; as
Zoroaster, Cadmus, and many others.

IT was not many Ages that the World continued in a state of Dullness, equal to
that at the first scattering the Nations. We do not find them building any more
Babels, or entertaining themselves with such gross Notions any more.

As they traveled abroad they learned Experience; they saw farther into
Nature, and into the Reason of Things: instead of building Ladders and Babels
to reach up to Heaven, and keep them from drowning, they soon learnt to build
Cities to keep out their Enemies, and Ships to sail upon the Water; they
baffled the Fears of another Deluge not by their Faith, that God would not
drown the World again, so much as by the belief of this Whymsy, that seeing
they could swim in Ships and Boats, he could not do it; or that knowing they
could live upon the Water, they might seem not to care whether he did or no.

In this traveling Circumstance they grew in Knowledge, as I say, and at least
some of them being of a brighter Genius than others, advanced beyond their
Neighbors in Wisdom and Understanding both speculative and practical; and
these, as they gained every Day more Knowledge, even by knowing, so that
Knowledge gained them infinite Applause and Esteem among the People.

Hence every aspiring Genius among them getting the start of the rest, either
in real or affected Knowledge of things, and thereby gaining Admirers and
Dependents, took little differing Routs in their Wanderings; and wherever they
thought fit to plant and settle, they built Houses, called it a City, and the
Leader made himself be called their particular King.

This petty Royalty, as it was raised upon the foot of Chance, rather than
Blood, and upon the mean Circumstance of a bold aspiring Head, which a small
share of Brains above its Neighbors gave a Title to, so it seemed to subsist
on the foot of the same Chance; those Kings being as easily, and as often
deposed, as they were either overpowered by their Neighbors, or as any Decay
and Defect of the bright Part that raised them, caused them to sink in the
Opinion of their Subjects, and gave the King of the next City a better Place in
their Favor.

Yet this Diminutive Rank of Sovereignty remained many Ages in the World; and
we find, not only in Abraham's Time, when the five Cities of the Lake or
Valley, where Sodom stood, had five Kings over them; and afterward in Jacob's
time, the City of Sichem had a King over it; but even at the coming of the
Israelites into Canaan, almost every City had its King; and we have a great
deal of room to judge, that these Kings did not derive from a patriarchal
Succession, for then there would have been many thousands of Kings more than
there were; but from the exalted Merit of the Understandings and Genius of such
and such a Person, whom the People thought fit to admire and follow, and
consequently subject themselves to: and we have abundance of Examples in
History to prove, that this was the practice of those first Ages. But this is a
dry Study, and the Search after their Names would be as needless, as the List,
when obtained, would be tedious to read; so I leave it, and go on.

The reason of my naming this Part, is not to show the Veneration the most
early Ages of the World had for Wisdom and Virtue; for, God knows, these Magi,
though they had the Merit of some Knowledge above the rest, yet we do not find
they had a much greater Share of Virtue than other People: But even as we find
it now, the most knowing Men are not the best Men; even so it was then, every
wise Man, much less every great Man, was not a good Man: and as in our Age it
may be feared, we have more Clergy than Christians; so there were in those Days
more Sages than Saints: till at last their wise Men turned whimsical, their
Kings Madmen, their Southsayers mere Conjurers, and their Magicians Devils: Of
all which I shall give a farther Account presently.

I Will suppose now, that the Magicians of those Ages were, as I have described
them in the Chapter before, nothing but Men famed for extraordinary Knowledge;
mere Astrologers, Philosophers, Men of Study, and the like. You will next see
how those Men frequently raised their Fortunes by their Wisdom, or rather by
the Opinion which the ignorant World had of their Wisdom and Capacities.

Zoroaster was a famous Magician, in the Sense which I have already given of
the word. History tells us, he was a great Astrologer, and foretold things by
his Art, which were to come; that by his wonderful Predictions, he obtained
such a Veneration among the People, that the Bactrians adored him as a Man sent
down from the Gods, or if you like it as well in Scripture Terms, as a Man of
GOD; and by this mighty Opinion which they had of him, he obtained the Empire
of the Bactrians. This must be at the time when Ninus was Monarch of Assyria;
for he was afterward conquered, dispossessed of his Dominions, and slain by
Semiramis, that warlike Widow Queen of Assyria.

They report that he foretold he should be slain by Lightning, or by the Fire
of Heaven; and that he told the Assyrians, that if they could find his Ashes,
they should carefully preserve them, for that their Empire should continue no
longer than while his Ashes should remain in Being; that afterward it fell out
accordingly, that he was killed by Lightning, and that the Assyrians did so
preserve his Ashes, but that they were afterward taken from them by the
Persians, who overthrew their Empire.

N.B. All this is summed up thus in fact; That Zoroaster left behind him
wholesome Rules of Virtue and good Government, which as long as the Assyrians
kept in Memory, and worthily followed, they were prosperous, as he foretold
them they would be; but when afterward they degenerated into Vice, and ceased
to obey the Rules which he had set them, they fell into Divisions and Factions,
Civil Wars and Devastations, which at length ended in the Ruin of their Empire.

Cadmus, mentioned before, was a Phoenician, but went from his own Country and
settled in Greece, where, as they say, he built the City of Thebes, and was
made King of it, in consequence of the Performance, and in Veneration of his
Learning, having brought sixteen Letters of the Greek Alphabet among them; not
that he invented those Letters, though he has the Fame of it to this Day: the
Letters were these; a, b, g, d, e, i, e, k, l, n, o, p, z, s, t, u; the other
four th, x, ph, ch, they tell us were afterward supplied by Palamedes during
the Siege of Troy.

But the Moral of the Story is this, that Cadmus came from Phoenicia into
Greece, where by his Learning he instructed the People, civilized and polished
their Manners, and taught them the Knowldge of Letters; directed them to build
Houses, and inhabit together in Towns and Villages, which they then called
Cities; and, in a word, introduced among them Discipline and good Government:
in Recompense for which the made him their King, and called their first Tow^
Thebes, in Honor of Cadmus, who was original of the Great Egyptian Thebes, a
City much mo^^ ancient than the Nation of the Graecians.

Atlas (also mentioned before) was an Africa conspicuous for his Excellence in
all human Wi^dom and Knowledge; by this he was raised to suc^ a height in the
Affection of the People, that the made him King of Mauritania in the Norther^
Part of Afric. He was one of the most learne^ Magicians of the Time, and by his
Knowledge i^ the Motions of the Stars, and his excellent Judgment in the good
Government of Nations, he ^ feigned by the Ancients to carry the World upon his
Shoulders; that is to say, his Precepts of Government supported the Nations,
and preserved Ord^^ and Discipline in the World; and for this he wa^ as he well
deserved, chosen by the People of A^^^^ to be their King.

I have done with my Examples of wise Men being made Kings, especially being
made so for the Wisdom too; and indeed to what purpose should I go on with the
Account? it is not pretended the Example should move the World in this Age, o^
in the next: the World at present has no gre^^ occasion for more wise Kings
than they have; an^ besides, as there is a right wise Generation risin^ up to
supply the Place of Power, as fast as Natu^^ wears off the Incumbents, and we
see no Danger o^ wanting a suitable Succession; so I leave that pa^^ of the
Subject, and shall talk of another Class.

The Magicians or wise Men being, as I have the described, Men of Worth, and
justly valued in the World, let us see how long they held it, and ho^ they lost
that Character.

The first step which I meet with, which lesse^ their Figure in my Account, was
when the Man or wise Men were called in to support the Government of the
Persian Empire: And here they showed indeed, that Wisdom is not the only
Qualification of a Prince; that there is another thing requisite, which though it
is but trifling indeed among the Moderns, was an Essential among the Ancients,
who found, that to make a good Governor, it was requisite, that he should not
only be a Wise Man, but an Honest Man; and in defect of this Qualification, the
Persians cut the Throats of all the Magi, to whom they had committed the
Government of the Country; for though they were all Philosophers, and wise Men,
yet, as Fame hands it down to us, they did not find one honest Man among them.

These Magi are called by some Priests, by others Philosophers, by others
Astrologers; it is certain they foretold things to come, or at least made the
People believe so; as in the Case of the Queen of Persia Mother of King
Sapores. The Persians it seems were in great Perplexity for want of a King,
(there were no Pretenders at that time to put in their Claim) a thing which
very seldom happens in our times: The Nobility being assembled, in order to
consider of a Nomination, the Magi sent them word that they should not proceed,
for that the Queen Dowager was with Child, and would bring forth a Prince, who
should be a mighty King, and do great things for the Honor of his Country.

Upon this their Consultations broke off, and with great Joy they sent for the
Queen, and laying the Crown upon her Belly, they solemnly crowned the Embrio,
gave it the Title of King, and saluted it King by the Name of Sapor, or
Sapores; all which came to pass: And yet I may say all this might come to pass,
and no great matter owing to the Prophetic Knowledge of the Magi; for the
Queen, loath to have a King chosen too soon, before she knew how it was with
her, might venture to say she was with Child; or at least get the Priests, the
Magi, to say so for her, and leave the rest all to Fate; for if it had not
proved so, no body was injured, and it would only have been said that the Magi
were mistaken.

But we are, if you please, to suppose, that as I said, this did not last long;
the low-priz'd Learning of the Magicians answered very well, while the World
was ignorant in Proportion; but as the World increased in People, and as Years
went over their Heads, Knowledge had its Gradations too, and though it must be
confessed it was at a very slow Rate, yet some advances they did make; and as
Princes severally were lovers of Learning, so they encouraged Men of Learning
too, and their Numbers encereas'd, as well as their Knowledge.

As the common People became more knowing and intelligent, so it behooved the
Magicians to advance their Studies, and seek farther into the more sublime
Parts of Learning, to preserve the Distance they stood in, from the lower Class
of their Countrymen, and to maintain the Respect and Veneration which as I said
the People had for them; i^ they had not done this, they had soon been upon a
Level with the rest of Mankind; the Rabbl^ had been their Equals in Wisdom, and
they ha^ lost themselves in the superior Station of Magicians, which they
enjoyed before.

This put them presently upon searching farthe^ and farther into the Arcana of
Nature, pursuing the highest and most elevated Studies, with the utmost
Diligence and Application; advancin^ from one thing to another, still to keep
up the Figure and Character of wise Men which they ha^ before; that is to say,
being still as many degree above the common sort, however the common for might
be improved in Knowledge, as they were before.

Nor was this difficult to do; for as Knowledge was then, and even is still, an
unexhausted Mine and Storehouse of unvaluable Treasure, and which still the
deeper it is dug into, discovers more and more Riches, and an infinite variety
of Rarities and curious things, as well natural as artificial; so the farther
these Men of Application searched into the Arcana, or concealed Treasures of
Wisdom; and the farther and greater Experiments they made, the more they found
the Search answer their utmost Ambition; the more they knew, the more they
discovered yet to know; and all their Enquiries made good the modern Distich
made upon a like Subject. What Is yet discovered, only serves to show
How little's known, to what there is left to know.


This was not only an Encouragement to the wise Men of the Ages we speak of, to
go on in their Studies, and in their making new Discoveries in the hidden and
most retired parts of Nature; but it showed that they were still able to
maintain the Characters they bore in the World, and to make good the
Distinction which was formely made between them and the common People; so that
they still passed for Magicians, wise Men, and Astrologers, as they really at
last were; and for Men qualified to instruct the ignorant World in a superior
Knowledge.

Take them then in this new Situation, that is to say, pushing on in the
commendable search after Wisdom and Knowledge, till, as Solomom says, they dug
for it as for hid Treasures; yet the common People followed them close at their
Heels; the Nations grew wiser and wiser, as well as the Magi; till in short Art
began to fail, or rather the Numbers of the Men of Art began to increase; that
so wise Men were not such Rarities, or so high-priz'd as they had been, and
grew daily less and less it the ordinary Rate and Esteem of the World.

Thus in short, the wise Men, and the improving World, seemed like Men running
a Race, in the pursuit after Knowledge; the Magi or Southsayers, or what you
please to call them, had gotten the Start, and were a great way ahead, a great
way before the rest, but the People followed and advanced at a great Rate.

And this brings me down to the Point.

The Men of Wit and Learning being hard pu^ to it in their new Discoveries, had
but three ways to preserve the Dignity of their Profession, and keep up their
Credit as wise Mine, that is as Philosophers, Magi, and the like. 1. The first
was to pursue vigorously the Study of Philosophy, that is to say of Nature, the
several Branches of Astronomy, Astrology, Geometry, and the like. 2. The second
was to push into the Study of Art, that is to say Experimental Philosophy. 3.
The last was the Study of Reason ( viz.) Natural Homage, and the Worship of the
Gods.


In the first of these they went on with great Success; nor were they to be
followed by the common People, whose Understandings could never come up to any
uncommon degrees of Science, or indeed to make any Pretensions to it; and
therefore those that applied to this Study, kept up their Credit longer than
any of the rest.

Thus the three wise Men of the East are said to come into Judaea from a far
Country, by observing an unusual and surprising Phenomenon, ( viz.) a Star at
Noonday, moving in a particular Orbit, and pointing to them in a very
particular Manner, by which they were as it seems directed to follow it, in
order to make an extraordinary Discovery of some great Birth, and of some
wonderful Prince, whom therefore they ought to come and pay Homage to. Some
Authors tell us, these three wise Men, or Magi, were three of the Posterity of
Abraham, by Keturah his last Wife, that they dwelt in Arabia Felix, and that
they had it revealed to them, that they should see this Star, and that they
should be guided by it to see the Great Messiah, who was to come into the World
to unite the Posterity of Abraham, and to establish them in one Kingdom, which
should rule over the whole World. But I take this as it is, viz. a Chimney
corner Tale, fit for a Legend, and not capable of any manner of Improvement.

But thus far it is to my Purpose, namely, that the Credit of the wise Men of
the East was not yet quite sunk in the World; that they maintained a
Correspondence with the Stars; that they por'd upon the heavenly Motions, and
knew more of that kind than all that ever went before them.

As the Astronomers, and Star-gazing Magi kept up the Dignity of their
Characters, and out-did all the rest of Mankind in those Ages; so the second
sort too applied themselves to the Study of lower Life, observing the Mechanism
of Nature, and introducing the helps of Art, even to perform things surprising.
Among these, some studied the Microcosm of human Bodies, and searched both
Distemper and Medicin; and these (that is to say, the Physicians, and
Naturalists,) obtained a noble Ascendant in the Esteem of the Vulgar, being
able by the Knowledge of Drugs and Plants, and their Virtues, to apply proper
Remedies in Cases of the greatest Distress and Disaster; and this indeed could
not but obtain for them a fixed and large Esteem in the Minds of the People,
whom on so many Occasions they relieved. Thus the first searched into the
Curiosities of Nature, the second into the Art of Physic.

But the third were a very particular kind indeed, and these applied themselves
to the Arcana of things Divine; and at this Door came in all the wicked things,
which have since, with so much Justice too, given a black Character to the very
Name of a Magician; for under the shelter of Religion, the worst and most
Diabolical things were practiced; and in a few Ages more, we find that all the
Magicians were Priests in Egypt, or according to some, all the Priests were
Magicians. Some have offered a^ drawing a Parallel from this to our times, and
i^ some Sense it may be true, but in others doubtful^ For if by Magicians we
are to understand Philosophers, and wise Men, I shall never be brought to
acknowledge that all our Priests are Magicians, for I abhor all Slander. But to
go back to the Case as it is before me, certain it is, that the wise Me^
finding, as above, that they must take new Measures, that they must have
Recourse to some new Art, if they would keep up the Reputation of their Wisdom;
I say, finding it thus, they applied themselves to three sorts of Study.

The first was to innocent Art, secret and cunning Contrivances to delude the
Sight; this w^ call Juggling, Legerdemain, or philosophical Delusion, such as I
shall mention in its Place; but thi^ would go but a little way.

A second sort, as above, applied to religious Frauds, and set up for
Celestial Delusions, mixing their Magical Performances with religious Rites;
so deceiving the People with the Opinion of Sanctity, and with the Belief that
they had the Assistance o^ the Gods. In Nomine Domini incipit omne malum.


These last studied indeed Divinity, such as it was and how unhappily did they
pursue the Mystery they professed! for first we find they invoked the Gods,
and not finding that would do, they changed Hands and invoked the Devil.
Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.


From hence it is that I suppose our wise Describers of the Magic of the
Ancients tell us there were three sorts of Magic; 1. Natural, which consisted
of the Parts already mentioned, namely, the Knowledge of the Stars, the Motions
of the Heavenly Bodies, and their Revolutions and Influences; that is to say,
the Study of Nature, of Philosophy, and Astronomy. 2. Artificial or rational
Magic, in which they included the Knowledge of all judicial Astrology, the
casting or calculating Nativities, curing Diseases by Charms, by particular
Figures placed in this or that Position; by Herbs gathered at this or that
particular Crisis of Time, and by saying such and such Words over the Patient,
repeated so many times, and by such and such Gestures, stroking the Flesh in
such and such a manner, and innumerable such like Pieces of Mimickry; working
not upon the Disease it self, but upon the Imagination of the distempered
People, and so effecting the Cures by the Power of Nature, though that Nature
were set on work by the weakest and simplest methods imaginable. But, 3 dly,
the last is truly called Diabolical and hellish Magic, which was operated by
and with the Concurrence of the Devil, carried on by a Corspondence with evil
Spirits, with their Help, Presence, and personal Assistance, and chiefly
practiced by their Priests. And thus you have the general System of Magic,
according to my Title: But I must enter a little into the Particulars.

The first Sort of this Magic I have already described; and I am still of this
Opinion, that in all the first Ages of the World, there was very little other
Magic than this known among Men; That, all the Diabolical Practices of the
third Sort, or the Art and Legerdemain of the second Sort of Magic, was
perfectly unknown to the Magicians of Egypt or Arabia, or afterward of
Chaldea, at least for a great while.

As for the Magicians of Chaldea, I have named them already, and we find
nothing Diabolical among them: as to those of Egypt, especially such as were
ordinarily called so, it is evident also they were generally the same; for when
Pharaoh King of Egypt dreamed his first Dream of the seven fat, and the seven
lean Kine, Genesis xli. the Words are express, ver. 8. He sent for all the
Magicians and all the wise Men of Egypt; and what followed? there was none
that could interpret his Dream. Upon which, Joseph was sent for; where by the
way you may observe the difference between Joseph and the wise Men or
Magicians, let them be what they will. The wise Men came when they were sent
for, and they put the King to the trouble of telling them his Dream, and, as we
may believe, went away to consult and consider of an Answer. If they could have
amused the King with any sham Answer, so as to have quieted his Thoughts, which
were disturbed with the Oddness of the Appearance, they would certainly have
done it; whence I conclude they were not either of the second sort of
Magicians, who by Trick and Charm, muttering of Words, drawing Figures, and
such empty and simple Formalities, did their Work; if they had, they would
certainly have cheated the King with some of their Impostures and Legerdemain,
and have made him accept of this or that wild Story for an Interpretation.

Nor were they diabolical Magicians, such as by a real and immediate
Conversation with the Devil, or some of his invisible Agents which we call evil
Spirits, wrought their usual Wonders, or Delusions like Wonders; and such as
perhaps those afterward made use of by another Pharaoh King of Egypt really
were; who mimick'd the Miracles of Moses in the sight of the King and his
Court: If they had been such, the Devil would not have suffered them to be so
disgraced before their Lord, as to go away and say they could make nothing of
it, nor give him the Interpretation; the Devil would certainly have furnished
them with some kind of Interpretation, true or false, at least such as should
have satisfied the King for the present.

N.B. It is very reasonable to suggest here, that these Magicians and wise Men
of Egypt, and so those afterward at Babylon, had been usually called together
before, upon such Occasions as those; that they had often interpreted Dreams,
perhaps for the King himself, as well as for other People; that sometimes they
did perhaps make such Interpretations as came to pass, by which, they
maintained much of their Reputation among the People, as wise Men and as
Magicians: the same we see practiced among us to this day by many an ignorant
old Woman, without the least Claim to the venerable Name of Magician, much less
of Wise; also we cannot doubt but that the Kings of Egypt and of Babylon did
expect and believe those Magicians could interpret if they would; it had been
else a preposterous piece of Cruelty in Nebuchadnezzar to put all the Magicians
and wise Men to death, because they did not tell him his Dream and the
Interpretation, if he did really believe they were not able to do it; for it is
certain they did not pretend to be able t^ tell the Dream, though they did
pretend to te^ the Interpretation; but he certainly believe they were able to
do both.

But when Pharaoh comes to talk with Joseph, honestly tells the King it was not
in him; modest divesting himself of all Claim to the Honor which he foresaw
was going to be put upon him, an^ giving up the Praise to the supreme Agent, t^
whom it was due. v. 16. It is not in me, but G^ shall give Pharaoh an Answer of
Peace; and then goes on to interpret the Dream.

I give you this as an Evidence of the Difference in the Kinds of Magic
practiced in tho^^ times; the first Sort, it is plain, were, as has bee^
described, mere Men of Learning, Masters of Sc^ence, namely, the Knowledge of
Nature, studyi^^ Philosophy, Astronomy, and the like; some pract^sing one way,
some another; some looking up among the Stars, others down among the Plant some
into the Microcosm of Man, and practisi^^ Medicine for the Cure of Diseases;
some judgi^^ of Dreams and Omens, others of Signs and Apperances, and all
according to their several Studie^ and the several Branches of Science which
they a^plied themselves to; but not any Sorcery or Dev^^ work among them at
that time, or for some hu^dreds of Years after.

But come now to the same Country, viz. Aegyp^ for here, it seems, the Devil
began first to convert with Mankind, or Mankind with him rather, ^ this
familiar manner; I say, come to the same Country at the distance of less than
two hundred Year^ or thereabout, and there you find the Magicia^ turned into
another sort of People, or rather anoth^^ sort of People mixed with them; for
when Moses an^ Aaron go to Pharaoh to demand the Liberty (...) the Israelites,
and show Miracles or Signs before him, it is said Pharaoh sent for the
Magicians, etc. and they did the like.

But then let us see how the Text distinguishes the kinds, and you will find
it is exactly according to my present distinction: Before, it is said Pharaoh
sent for the Magicians and wise Men of Egypt. See Genesis xli.8. But now the
Style is changed, as the People were also, Exodus vii.11. Pharaoh called the
Sorcerers and Magicians of Egypt; and see then how they acted, ver. 22. and
the Magicians did the same with their Enchantments; and the like in several
other Places: so that here the Magicians and wise Men were of another sort, for
they acted by a Diabolical Practice, as Sorcerers and Dealers with the Devil;
besides it is every where said, they did it by their Enchantments, which we
never find so much as mentioned before; no, nor afterward among the Chaldeans
and the Magicians of Persia and Assyria; but they acted by the mere Force of
their Wisdom and Learning, viz. the Study of Nature; and when that failed them,
they acknowledged they had no other Power, and could go no farther.

Now, as I said before, having passed through the best of the Art, and the first
and only honest Part of the Practice, it follows, that we consider the
Subsequent Progressions of the People called Magicians, what they have been
understood to be, what they now are in the World, and what we are to understand
by the Word when we say Magic or a Magician; and this is,

First, A Jugler or Shower of Tricks by Legerdemain and Slight of hand; which I
call only a sham Magic, and which the World has been indeed deluded with for
many Ages.

Secondly, A real Sorcerer or Wizard that deals with the Devil, who converses
familiarly with the old Gentleman, has him at his Call, fetches him sends him
of Errands, raises him, lays him, use him, upon all Occasions and in all
Disguises, as he finds Occasion.

That there have been such as these in the World must be true, or History must
be one universal Legend of Lies, and we must have been deluded an^ imposed upon
by all the Writers and Register^ keepers that ever have been, were, or are in
Being; nay even the sacred Writings confirm it, and therefore, with the Pardon
of all our modern Unbelievers, who deny there is such a thing as a Devil or
evi^ Spirit in Being, either in the World or out of it. I say with their good
Leave, I must take it for granted.

Now though I could bring many Examples among the Moderns, where it is most
certain that some walking Gentlemen among us, who have looked a^ if they had
nothing in them more than other People^ have really been a Cage of Devils, and
as the Tex^ calls them Unclean Spirits, yet I must at present look a little
higher, because I am resolved to bring such Evidence as cannot be denied.

First, The Scripture says of Judas, that with o^ after the Sop the Devil
entered into him, John xiii 27. And after the sop Satan entered into him, that
is, into Judas; and in the same Chap. v. 2. the Devi^ having put it into the
heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's Son, to betray him: and again, St. Paul
speaking to Elymas, whom the Text calls in totidem verbis the Sorcerer, calls
him thou Child of the Devil. This, and all the Testimonies of the Devil's being
miraculously dispossessed by our Savior, and by his Disciples and Apostles,
will put it out of question, not only that there is such a thing as a Devil,
but also that he has Possession of several of his Servants in human Shape.

But this is not the case at all, for I am not now upon the Proof of the
Reality and Existence of the Devil; that has been worthily undertaken, and
historically, mathematically, and enthusiastically enough Performed by a late
Writer in another Place: But I am now talking of a Set of People who were not
possessed BY, but rather, as it may be called, are possessed OF the Devil; have
him in their keeping and Custody; where, by the way, I do not find but that the
Devil seems to be very much in Subjection to them; whether it be voluntarily,
and so perhaps, like an obsequious Dog, that fawns for what he can get; He (the
Devil) creeps and cringes, in order the better to carry on his own Designs,
which indeed is not at all improbable; or whether there were Ways and Means
which these ancient People had found out, by what superior Power I know not,
to subject the Devil to their Orders, and make him their humble Servant upon
all Occasions, to run and go, fetch and carry, at their whistle: All these
critical Enquiries may perhaps come in my way, when I come to talk more
particularly of the Magic of our present times, and the Management of our
modern Cunning Men, who pretend to have the Devil in a String, make him jump
over a Broomstick, dance and show Tricks, as the Mountebanks and Merry-Andrews
do with a Bear and a Monkey.

I must confess, if I can but, in my further Search after those things, find
out the Method the ancient Magicians had to manage the Devil thus, and bring
him to their hand, and can convey the Art to Posterity, or at least set up a
Scheme for the present Improvement of it, I shall not doubt but I shall meet
with Encouragement; and if the eminent Mr. Wh -- on will but stoop to join in
with my Design (as I doubt not he will, if there be but Money to be got by it)
we may publish our Readings, and set up Lectures for the Instruction of young
Magicians, and that with extraordinary good Success; nor do I think the
reverend Mr. Em -- in would stick out: for why should we doubt but they who
have already levelled their Savior with a Class infinitely below the Devil,
and made a mere Devil or Apparition of the great Teacher and Sanctifier of the
World, would willingly set up Lectures in Favor of the Devil himself, if they
can find their account in it.

Besides, when we are thus engaged in Satan's Service, and in Conjunction with
his Friends and Favorites, we cannot doubt but the Devil himself will be so
much obliged, that he may come frankly and Voluntier, and let us into the
Secret, bind himself Apprentice to us for a Term of Years, and enable us to
play the Devil with him for the Time to come, as he had played the Devil with
us for so many Years past. Nor, if he be a grateful Devil, can he do less; for
no Men in the World seem better qualified to advance his Interest in the main,
however for the present we may seem to keep him in a little Subjection.

On the other hand, if he should prove an ungrateful Spirit, and hang an A --,
as the Modest call it, being unwilling to come into Bondage; then, I say, we
must try if we cannot find the way to do it without him, and, by our Black-Art,
play the Devil with him, and force him to come when he is called, go when he is
sent, and do as he is bid; as our Predecessors the ancient Magicians of Egypt
did before us, who made him assist Moses and Aaron, and make Frogs, and Snakes,
just as they directed him: though it seems when they commanded him to make Lice,
the least and lousiest Creature of 'em all, the honest Devil confessed it was
out of his Power, that God was above the Devil, and that (in a Word) he could
not do it; by which (however) he lost a great deal of his Credit with his
Employers, and perhaps with the King himself.

That the Devil assisted the Magicians of Egypt to do those things, or in
short, that they made use of him as their Instrument, is plain from the Text,
viz. that they did it by their Enchantments: What manner of Conjurings or
Enchantments they were that they made use of, we have no particular light into
from the sacred Text; but perhaps some Guess may be made at it, from what
happened frequently in those Countries in after-Ages.

Also we find that whatever the Magicians in Persia, and in Media, and in those
Eastern Countries were, (for their Credit continued many Ages) yet in Egypt
they were (after that) chiefly Sorcerers and Dealers with the Devil; and in a
word, Egypt seemed to be the Nursery of human Devils for all the World. Hence
Baalim is called a Witch, and hence in the Roman times the Egyptian Sorcerers
were brought to Antioch for the Assistance of Julian the Apostate, to utter
Predictions, and to flatter the Emperor with their good Omens and their
Prognostications; in which he was so superstitious, that they put the grossest
Delusions upon him, 'till the Citizens of Antioch made a jest of him, and
exposed his Enchantments to Ridicule; for which, had he lived to come back from
the War in Persia, he had vowed a severe Revenge.

Hence also the Egyptians, are to this day, the common Strollers of the World,
and are succeeded by a Race of Vagabonds who pretend to the Art, without the
real Wickedness of it, and would be thought to deal with the Devil, when the
Truth is, they know little or nothing of him.

I suppose I need not tell you that the Word Gypsy is derived from these
strolling Magicians, which really came out of Egypt, and wandering over the
World, got Money by their pretending to Magic, telling Fortunes, predicting
Events, and Mountebanking the World with their Enchantments; 'till at last
having tired the Devil with following them, and the Drudgery of their Service
being not worth his while, Satan left them; and they have been since that, for
some time, in the Class of the well-known Cardinal -- who pretending to an
Acquaintance with the Devil, and to have three inferior Demons appointed to
wait on him, the Devil sent those three Demons to tell his Neighbors 'twas
all a Cheat, and that he, Satan, had nothing to do with him.

It Is very strange Men should be so fond of being thought wickeder than they
are; that they cannot forbear, but that they must abuse the very Devil, and
claim Kindred of him, whether he has any Knowledge of them or no: But thus it
is, and we need not go to Egypt for Examples, when we have so many pieces of
dull Witchcraft among our selves.

It is true the Devil does not often decline an Acquaintance where he can find
his Account in it; and therefore the eminent Doctor -- may hope, that after a
little farther Application to Heresy and Blasphemy, he may be thought worthy of
Admittance into Satan's Favor, at least so much as to settle a Correspondence,
that so they may act in concert for the future.

I am told some have thought it a particular Reputation to them to have it
supposed they maintain a Correspondence of this kind, which must be upon the
foot of Satan's Credit, supposing that he knows who is fit for his Business,
and who not, and that they must be all capable Heads that he thinks fit to be
concerned with in this manner; for as wise Princes always choose wise
Counselors, the Devil understands the Capacities of his Friends so well, that
he is never mistaken in his choice; but they that are concerned with him must
at least be of the Cunning Class, for he has no Inclination at all to Fools.

This brought some just Reflections into my Thought upon the Conduct of our
Times, and immediately cleared up the Characters of some of the greatest
Politicians of our Age, at least in my Opinion, seeing it is evident they either
have too much Brains, or too little, for the infernal Correspondence; let the
World judge which of the two is their Case.

I say it cleared up the Character of some great Men to me, and I concluded
they were no Magicians, that they neither practiced Magic in the first Sense,
as Philosophers; or in the last Sense, as Conjurers; what they might do in the
middle Sense, as Jugglers, that remains to be enquired into as Opportunity may
present.

Indeed I run over in my Reflections the present Situation of most of the
public Affairs in Europe, the Prime Ministers, grand Viziers, the Statesmen,
the Counselors, Generals, Admirals; the Clergy, whether Popish or Protestant,
Greek Church, or Roman Church, Christian or Mohammedan; and I must speak it to
their Honor, that except, as a late Writer taught me to except, our own
People, our own Country and Country Worthies, I can see no reason to think any
of the present Managers to be Magicians; whether, as above, we consider the
Magicians to be Philosophers, or as Jannes and Jambres, Inchanters and
Conjurers.

But having spoken of the two several sorts of Magic, 1. Honest Magic, which
I have proved to be only the Study of natural Philosophy and Astronomy, and
such useful Parts of Knowledge, which the Learned call Natural Magic; and, 2
dly, Diabolical or infernal Magic, which is a practicing by the Help of
Demons or evil Spirits;

It remains then, that I should at least mention the third, or which before I
placed as second in Order, which is Artificial Magic, that is to say, a mere
Legerdemain or Juggling with Nature: This is managed by the Wit and Dexterity
of Man, with the Advantages of concealed, occult Powers, known in Nature, but
unknown and unseen by vulgar Heads and Eyes; and such Fame tells us have been
carried to extraordinary heights, such as 1. The Glass Sphere of Archimedes. 2.
The wooden Pidgeon of Architas. 3. The golden Birds of the Emperor Leo, which
sung. 4. The brazen Birds of Boethius, which did both sing and fly; and his
brazen Serpent, which could hiss.
To which we may add, Friar Bacon's brazen Head, which spoke.

These were all Impositions upon the Sight or Hearing of the People; as no
doubt the Phosphorus would have been, which makes Fire burn without Heat, and
without consuming the Matter; and had a Man in those days of Invention found
out a Lodestone, what Wonders might he not have performed by it? what would
have been said, to see him make a piece of Iron dance round a Table, while the
Agent held the Magnet underneath; make another piece of Iron touched with it,
suspend a third in the Air, and the like; make it draw one End of a Needle to
it, and then drive it from it again, as the Poles of the Magnet were turned and
directed? Will any Man believe but he that first showed these unaccountable
things, would have passed for a Magician, a Dealer with the Devil, nay, or
rather for a real Devil in human Shape?

Whoever had first brought such a wonderful Stone into view as our ordinary
Chalk-stone, calcined and turned into Lime, supposing it never to have been
heard of before, and shown with it the Rarity of its Operation, viz. that if
you threw it into the Fire, it would put the Fire out, and if you put it into
Water it would burn.

These are some of the Delusions of Artificial Magicians, and such as these the
World has been full of, till now we begin to be too Wise to be cheated any
longer that way; but as to State-jugglers, the Magic of the Party-mongers,
Religious-jugglers, and the Magic of the Pulpit, with diverse other less fatal
Kinds, I believe they are at this time in the Meridian of their Practice and
Success, or near it; what height they may go farther we do not indeed certainly
know, it must be left to Time.

And thus you have an honest System of the Science called Magic, according to
the Title of this Undertaking.

CHAP. III.
Of the Reason and Occasion which brought the ancient honest Magi, whose
original Study was Philosophy, Astronomy, and the Works of Nature, to turn
Sorcerers and Wizzards, and deal with the Devil; and how their Conversation
began.

HAVING thus stated the Fact, and given you what I call a System of Magic,
it is necessary now, that in pursuance of my Title, I should insist more
particularly upon the third and last sort of Magic I mentioned, and which is
called Diabolical, or according to the vulgar Acceptance, the Black-art, and
bring it out to you from its very foundation.

This must be deduced Historically from the other two, or else I cannot lead
you regularly into its Original, or give you its true Description; besides, a
great many useful and agreeable Speculations offer themselves in the rise and
progress of the thing it self, which will be most necessary to speak to, as we
go along.

Magic did not jump at once into Being, as to the thing it self; it was not a
Revelation from Hell, made at once to Mankind, to tell them what they might do:
The Devil did not come and offer his Service Gratis to us, and representing how
useful a Slave he would be, solicit us to take him into Pay, and this at once
without Ceremony or Introduction.

No, no, it was a long Progression of Studies, and Improvement in wicked and
mischievous Schemes, that brought Mankind to have recourse to the Infernals, to
seek the Aid of the dark Agents below, and to solicit a Commerce of that kind:
Nor was this done till after finding many Difficulties in their other way, they
saw evidently they could not do without him, could not accomplish their
mischievous Desires by other Methods, and that this way it was to be done.

Not but that the Devil was very ready, when he found himself made necessary; I
say, he was very ready to come into the Schemes when proposed, and to serve us
in our Occasion, and that with a Willingness which was extremely obliging;
which showed him to be a Person of abundance of Complaisance, and mighty
willing to engage us whatever it cost him; as much as to say, he was glad he
could serve us, was ready to do his utmost for us, and the like.

Now to go back briefly to the Occasion which brought the Magicians to the
Necessity of seeking to him for Assistance, and to take him into the Management
of their Affairs; the Case was in short this: The World, as I have said
already, began to be wiser than the Ages before them; the ordinary Magic of
the former Ages would not pass any longer for Wisdom; and if the wise Men, as
they were called, did not daily produce some new Discoveries, 'twas evident the
Price and Rate of Southsaying would come down to nothing.

If this put them upon Stratagem and Art, in order to keep up their Credit, and
maintain the Distance between them and the inferior Rank of Men, it is not to
be wondered at; and these Stratagems were of several kinds, as the Occasion and
the Wit of the Undertakers presented; for you are to suppose the inquiring
Temper of the common People to be arrived to such a Height, that nothing could
pass with them for True, at least nothing which had any Novelty in it, unless
it was confirmed by some strange thing, some Sign, some Miracle to be wrought,
by which the Mind receiving a due Impression, entertained the rest of the
proposed Wonder with the more Satisfaction.

At first the Magicians satisfied the Curiosity of the People by Juggle and
Trick, by framing artificial Voices and Noises; foretelling strange Events, by
mechanical Appearances, and all the Cheats which we find put upon the ignorant
People to this Day; and it would be tedious to enumerate the Particulars by
which they imposed upon one another. You may guess at them by such as are
mentioned before; but principally those who studied the heavenly Motions, had
great Opportunities of recommending themselves for Men of Craft, pretending to
tell Fortunes, calculate Nativities, resolve Doubts, read the Lines of Nature
drawn in the Face, Palms of the Hand, Symetry of the Body, Moles and Marks on
the Flesh, and the like.

These things they carried to a due Length, and we find the Success was so much
to their Advantage, that the whole World, or great Part of it, has been
Gypsey-ridden by them, even to this Day.

It would fill a Volume larger than I propose this shall be, to give an Account
of the several Stratagems those People had Recourse to, in the early Days of
Sorcery and Magic, in order to maintain their Character in the World as
extraordinary. For I must do them so much Justice as I go, to observe, that
they did not immediately run to the Devil for Help; or at least, if some among
them dealt in the Dark, and corresponded below, they did not all do so; perhaps
they were not hardened enough at first for the carrying on such a Traffic.
'Twas a new Commerce, and had something a little shocking at first, till the
necessity of their Southsaying Circumstances brought them to comply with any
thing rather than lose their Trade.

The Egyptians, you must know, were a People originally attended with two
things, which naturally made way for these Magical Studies.

1. Most impertinently Inquisitive, grossly Ignorant in the main, (as Ignorance
would be called now, but mighty Wise, as things were rated at that time) and
prying into every thing with an irresistible Passion for what they called
Knowledge; on this Account they passed for the wisest Nation on Earth, and
Egypt was esteemed the Center of Learning and Knowledge. Hence Moses was said
to be learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians. It is true, and they are
upbraided with it by the Ethiopians of Arabia Felix, which they call the South;
and who, though Arabians, are called Ethiopians in Scripture; I say, it is true,
that the Egyptians learned all their Magic, that is, their Astronomy and
Astrology, from the Arabians; and they tell us that Abraham instructed his Son
Ishmael, in all the superior Knowledge in which his Posterity afterward grew
so famous.

2. With this inquisitive Temper of the Egyptians, they were also most
ridiculously Superstitious; I say, most ridiculously, because it showed it self
in that sordid and most simple Idolatry which they had mong them, in which they
sunk below the common Notions of Worship practiced by the most ignorant Nations
in the World; for they worshipped, or made a God of, almost every thing that
came in their way; as the Ox, the Calf, the Water of Nile, nay the River it
self, the Sand, the Crocodiles, and numberless things as senseless as those.

As these things were peculiar to them as a Nation, so they particularly
qualified them to be imposed upon by their Southsayers and Magicians, with all
manner of Delusions; nor did the subtle Magicians fail to make their Advantage,
upon all Occasions, of this superstitious and inquiring Humor of the People,
but used all possible Stratagem and Art to delude and impose upon them.

To this purpose, they soon mixed their Religion and their Magic together,
their Philosophy and their Idolatry were made Assistant to the general Fraud,
and to raise a due Veneration in the Minds of the People: To this or that
particular Tale advanced by their Priests, they brought always along with them
some extraordinary Revelation from the Gods, some wonderful Discovery in
Nature, or something strange and miraculous.

How strangely does religious Enthusiasm keep its hold of Mankind, and how
exactly do past things and present correspond! As the End is the same, so are
the Means: pious Frauds got ground from the Beginning, and pious Frauds get
ground to the End. As no Cheats are so fatal as those which come prefac'd with
Introductions of Religion, so no Cheats are so easy to prevail, so soon make
Impressions upon the People, or stamp those Impressions deeper.

The Priests among the Egyptians, when they turned Magicians, (or rather, I
should have said, the Magicians, when they turned Priests,) set up for
Revelation, Inspiration, and a Conversation with their Gods; and for this
purpose they withdrew into the Deserts and Wastes, of which the Country is
known to be full; and where to their Glory (Shame) be it spoken, the Religious
of the Romish Church played the same Game over again, some Ages afterward.

Hither the Egyptian Priests, I say, retired for Conversation with their Gods,
from whence they were sure to come back inspired, that is to say, filled with
some new Delusion to impose upon the People. Here they cut sacred Marks upon
the Trees, and then brought them back as the Language taught them from the
Gods; and by which they pretended, after muttering over them some unsignifying
Significations, to utter some Answers to any Difficulties proposed to them; and
then sending their Votaries into the Wilderness, they would set them to search
for the same Divine Characters; which after long looking for, they would find
upon some Stone, or Post, or Tree, and come home in Raptures for the Discovery.

Others of these Divine Magicians, or Diviners rather, would clamber up to the
top of the Pyramids, whose immense Height we have such certain Accounts of, as
may make the climbing up seem incredible, whatever else may not be so. Yet here
they went to make Observations, and Calculations of the heavenly Motions, some
say; but according to others, to make their Conjurations, their sacred
Retreats, and to carry on the Delusion of conversing with the Gods.

Here also they cut their Diabolical Marks, which the Egyptians call the
Sacred Characters, which they left behind them indeed in the Stone upon the
upper flat of the Pyramid; for according to the learned Greaves, the Summit of
the Pyramid was not a Point as the top of a Spire, or as representing a Flame,
and which by its great Height it seemed to be; but the uppermost Part formed a
Plain, which Stephanus in his Comment, supplying the Defect in Herodotus, makes
to be eight Orgyiae, which again, according to Suidas, is a Fathom, or six
Foot; so that the Plain on the top of the Pyramid must be eight Fathom square:
Others report it to be nine Foot only, though I think the former more probable.

But be that as it will, here it is certain they made, or found made by others,
certain dark, Mystic, and as they pretended sacred Characters, whose
Significations were represented by the Priests just as they pleased; for we
have reason to believe they had not then the use of Letters; and as some think,
these mystic Characters were the Original of all the Hyeroglyphick Writing,
which was afterward the ordinary Practice of the Egyptians, till the Hebrew
Characters were handed to them by Moses, from the Writing of God delivered him
at Mount Sinai.

It is very well observed by the learned Author just now named, that had not
the Priests stood in need of something extraordinary, to make their celestial
Converse seem more Weighty and Important, all their Astronomical Observations
might as well have been made from the plain of the Rock upon which those
Pyramids are built, and which support the Foundation; which, as he takes
notice, is it self so elevated, that in a Country which is all a low, flat and
level Surface, for near fifty Miles every way, and affords a fair Horison, is
as well suited for all such Observations as require a large extended Prospect,
as it would be if it were seven or eight hundred Foot higher, which is supposed
to be the Height of the Pyramid.

But the Reason is evident; the mounting the Steps or Degrees of the Pyramid on
the outside, was a work of vast Labor, and some Hazard; Every Head could not
bear the Elevation; every Mind could not have Resolution to undertake it; few
would venture up to examine the Truth of the Characters, or bring down Copies
of them, much less examine into the Nature of them. And if they had gone up it
was enough, the cunning Priest^ had impressed them there, and left the Originals
upon the top Stone of the wonderful Building, magical and awful in it self; and
as it was really so, that there the Characters were to be seen, it was no hard
matter to persuade the credulous superstitious People, 1. That they were
written there by the Finger of the Gods: 2. That the Interpretation of them was
given by Inspiration to the same Priests, or wise Men, who first discovered,
and brought down the Characters themselves.


How far these Delusions have prevailed, and do to this Day prevail among the
Egyptians, I need not tell you; it is enough to say it has gone such (...)
Length, as has encouraged Enthusiastic Pretenders, and made Egypt the Nursery
of Witchcraft to the whole World.

But why should we think it strange to have Divinity and Magic thus blended
together in a Country so superstitious as Egypt? Has there not been a stranger
Mixture of Magic and Witchcraft, not omitting Priestcraft, in all kinds of
Religions ever since, and is it less among the Politer Religions now in Vogue,
than it was in those Days?

To begin at the very Pinnacle of the Church, and to leave Judaical Magic all
behind us, though they had the Devil almost in every Synagogue; I say, to begin
at the Pinnacle of the Church, How many Popes in particular does History give
us an Account of, who have been Sorcerers and Conjurers, and who have dealt
with the Devil in the most open and avowed manner? How has the Romish Church
been established upon the Artificial Magic of the Clergy? and how justly may we
say to her, as Jehu to the King of Israel, What Peace, while the Whoredoms of
thy Mother Jezebel and her Witchcrafts are so many?

But not to make our Enquiries a Satyr upon our selves, in falling upon Popery,
where we are equally guilty; let us recommend it to our Most Reverend, and
Right Reverend, to put our own Ecclesiastic Affairs into such a good Posture,
that we may have no Magic among us; that while we pull down the formal
Magicians, we may not set up the cunning Men upon the Fall of the wise Men, and
erect Heresy in the room of Schism.

Some People pretend our Modern Divinity is so Magical in its own Nature, that
it is not easy to separate them; that is, in a word, the Devil has so far
encroach'd upon the Church, that it is impossible to cast him out: the Truth
is, if it was not so, we should hardly have such a struggle as has now been
among us to keep the true Lord in Possession. And since the Church has but one
true and rightful King and Sovereign, there would never have been such a bold
Attempt to depose him, if the Devil, the ancient Usurper of his Throne, had not
been at work again to step up in his Room. But we shall have occasion to speak
of this Part more plainly by and by.

It was with great Success, that the Egyptian Priests went on in the manner as
above, and their Artificial Magic went a great way in all the Eastern World;
they were counted the best and wisest Men, who, Mountebank like, could show
most Tricks, and invent the most surprising things to take with the Vulgar, so
as to give their Words the Force of an Oracle, and entitle them to the
Character of Divine and Prophetic: And thus we may suppose the World going on
for many Ages, till at length, to come nearer our own Times, and indeed nearer
to the Practice of our own Times too, their Mimickry was exhausted; they had no
more Tricks to play, the juggling Trade grew stale and dull, the World began to
look beyond them, and expected something more; and so the last, I do not say
the Church Jugglers, went to the Devil for Help. I had rather tell you that
another Generation, who had always been true Magicians, true Practicers of the
Diabolical Part, came in play of course, and succeeded the first, who gradually
deposed themselves by their mere Impotency; and just as Darkness is a
deprivation of Light, and succeeds it by the mere Consequence of things, so the
honest Ignorance of the innocent Magician being unable to keep the Expectation
of the People up, and answer the Importunities of the Age, dealing with the
Devil succeeded, even by the mere Consequence of things.

The new Magic coming thus in Play, let us see how it made its first Entrance
in the World, and in what Shapes it began to appear; in which Search we shall
find, in short, that Religion still opened the Door. For as the Devil aspired
at nothing more from the Beginning than to be set up for a God, so he always
built his Chapel close by God's Church; it was in the Consequence of this,
that the Priests were always his more immediate Correspondents. How long they
continued so, but especially when the Correspondence ceased, would be a
Discovery worth making to the World: but O how difficult!

It is indeed to be observed, and the Devil has done us Christians that
Justice, that Satan has discovered his Attachment to the Pagan Rites in
Distinction from, and Opposition to, the Christian Worship on many Occasions,
and that particularly as perhaps the latter is more fitted to introduce
Devil-worship in the World; we have some Instances of his making this
Distinction, particularly when the Emperor Julian, while he was only Caesar,
and had not declared himself Apostate, (nay, was perhaps more inclined to be a
Christian than a Pagan, for he was Educated a Christian,) I say, it was
observed, that he was perverted from Christianity, and confirmed a Pagan, by
Maximus a Magician.

N.B. This Maximus was a Magician, when the Word Magician signified no more a
wise Man, or a Southsayer, but a downright Conjurer, a Master of the
Black-art, or One who dealt with the Devil.

Nor was it that the Magicians were Favorers of Paganism only, but such was
the Subtilty of the Devil, that indeed the Pagan Worship consisted much in
Sorcery and Magic, Conjurings, Invocation of Devils, and raising evil Spirits;
by These the Rites and Ceremonies of Paganism were supported. It Is said of the
famous Champion of the Christian Religion, Athanasius, that he understood all
the Mysteries of the Pagan Theology; but we are not come to that Length in our
Enquiries yet.

The Devil had a great many good Reasons to befriend the Pagan Worship, rather
than the Christian; for that indeed the Substance of Paganism was a Diabolical
System in it self, and to worship the Heathen Gods, was Essentially to worship
the Devil, as we shall see in its Place.

We must observe here, that the Curiosity of Man in the most early Times was
never fully gratified, but when his Understanding was as it were confounded,
when he was under some Astonishment and Surprise, at seeing or hearing some
strange thing. The Pharisees, when they were attacking our Savior, as they
almost were always, and when as they thought they insulted him, asked him what
Sign do thou show, that thou do such things as these?

And in other Places it is said, when he did perform some miraculous Things they
were astonished at him; Astonishment introduces Silence, Men are first amazed,
and have nothing to say, and then Nature dictates Credulity as the Consequence,
viz. that when they are thus surpised with Wonder, they should consequently
believe the Person who so astonished them with his Miracles: though, by the way,
it was not always so with the Jews, for they were amazed, and yet did not
believe neither; in which they were something of Kin to an unbelieving
Christian in our Town, of Ecclesiastic Fame too; who says he, wonders and is
astonished at the Majesty of the Scripture Style, and yet does not believe a
Word they say. A bolder Infidel I have not met with since I was last at the
Pagan Circle, near old Charing, where God was owned, sworn by, imprecated,
blasphemed, and denied, all in a Breath.

But to go on: The Curiosity of Mankind I say was never fully satisfied, but
when something wonderful was offered, and therefore Miracle was immediately
called for, when any new System was offered, or any thing difficult proposed.

Thus when God sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh, he supposes the very Case;
Moses and Aaron were to assure Pharaoh that God sent them, and they were in his
Name to demand Liberty for the Children of Israel. The Demand was surprising:
'twas an insolent thing indeed, for a couple of Slaves to come, and ask the
King to release six hundred thousand Men, Slaves like themselves, from their
Captivity, and from the King's Service, whose Subjects, or rather Servants,
they were; and Pharaoh it is to be supposed began to resent it; nay we may
suppose without any Presumption that Pharaoh's Courtiers made Game at 'em, and
his Ministers of State perhaps proposed to punish them for their Impudence, and
for putting such Notions into the People's Heads, which might be dangerous, and
might excite Tumults and Rebellion; and therefore it was Prudence to suppress
the Insolence, and make Examples of the two pretended Ambassadors.

But hold! says Moses, we do not come to affront your Majesty, nor are the
People we come to speak for inclined to revolt or rebel; but we come from God;
the People of Israel whom we represent are God's chosen favorite Nation, though
they are your Servants, and they are commanded to go three days Journey into
the Wilderness, to perform a great Sacrifice, and make a great Feast to him;
and therefore we come to desire your Leave, that we may go peaceably and do the
Duty of our Worship; assuring your Majesty, that God himself, who has thus
commanded us out, has sent me to you to demand your Assent.

God sent you! says the King: a fine Story for you to put into the People's
Heads to make them idle, and hinder my Business; go, get you gone to your Work,
and to your Task, or I shall find a way to drive these Whymsies out of your
Heads again.

But still Moses and Aaron, with other the Heads of the Israelites, (for there
were many more with them) insisted, that they were sent by the immediate
Direction of God himself. And how do you prove that, says the King, what Sign
do you give me that you come with such an Authority?

With this Moses replies to Pharaoh, I shall soon convince your Majesty that I
am sent by the Great King, and God of Heaven and Earth: and with that turning
to Aaron, he says to him, Brother, Throw down the Staff, or Rod, that is in
your Hand, upon the Ground before the King.

Aaron does so, throws down his white Staff, and immediately it was turned into
a Serpent.

The Learned have spent some Thought upon what kind of Serpent this should be;
but that is not to my Purpose; nor are their Conjectures of any Weight,
especially that foolish Notion, that it was the same kind of Serpent as
appeared and talked to Eve in Paradise, and that it walked erect in Pharaoh's
Presence, so that it frighted the King.

But Pharaoh recovering the Surprise, tells them, What does this signify? you
shall see I have People of my own can do as much as this. Upon which his two
chief Conjurers or Magicians were called in; it is supposed they were at hand,
for the Devil is seldom out of call when he is wanted for any Mischief.

Upon this comes Jannes and Jambres, so St. Pa^ called them, and the Text says
they were two Magicians, and perhaps there might be a great man^ more of that
sort; for it seems the King's Cour^ was not then without a sufficient Number of
Clergy in daily waiting. And the Text adds, Pharaoh called the wise Men, and
the Sorcerers; and the nex^ Word calls them Magicians, and not only Magicians
in common, as the Word was used Personally, but as it was used Nationally, The
Magicians o^ Egypt: whence it is inferred, that there were some Magicians not
only more Eminent than others, bu^ such as were in public Office there; as the
Eminent Dr. H..... may be called the King's Astronomer, or as the more Eminent
Mr. Flamstead usually called himself the King's Star-gazer; and if it was not
so that these Men were in ordinary Attendance, and in Pay, how should they be
brought in so soon, while Moses and Aaron were in the Presence?

Well, these Men being called in, Pharaoh, in Contempt of Moses and Aaron, and
the Sign or Miracle they had shown, asked them if they could not do that as
well as Aaron?

They readily answer Yes, and fall to Paw-wawing, as the Americans call it, and
using their Inchantmens, invoking or whispering their Demons, or what other
Diabolical Arts they might use we know not; but upon this, and their Staves or
Rods being cast down, they were turned into Serpents too.

This was enough to make Pharaoh triumph over Moses and Aaron, and their
Company, and deriding their Mirale, tell them insultingly, this did not at all
testify their Mission from God, for they might see his wise Men could turn
Rods into Serpents as well as they. Nor did the Distinction which God was
pleased to show, by suffering Aaron's Serpent to devour or swallow up the
Serpents of the Egyptian Sorcerers, alter the Case with Pharaoh; for that, as
an Accident, did not import any thing at all in the Case. And thus he sent
them, or rather drove them, away with Contempt, and immediately sent
Taskmasters among the People to double their Afflictions, increase their
Labors, and force them to make Brick without Straw.

Well, Moses and Aaron come again with the same Message, and it had the same
Event, they are Banter'd and ridiculed: As if the King had called to them thus;
Well, you are come again, and you say God has sent you, pray has he furnished
you with any better Testimony than you had before, have you any other Miracle
to show?

The sacred Ambassadors gravely tell him they had, and if he would still refuse
to grant their Demands, he should see it; nay, they tell him beforehand what
it should be, namely, that they would turn the Waters of Nile, the great River
of their Country, into Blood.

Pharaoh, as may be supposed, not believing they could do it, treats them still
in the same manner, and refuses still to receive them as Messengers from God;
upon which, Moses calls to Aaron, and bids him stretch out his Rod and smite
the Waters of the River, and they were immediately turned into Blood, and all
the Waters, Ponds, and Pools besides; for Egypt is full of Pits and Ponds,
wherein they preserve the Water of Nile after the annual Inundation.

The King, frighted at this sudden Change of the Water, is a little calmer than
he was before; but considering the matter, he calls his Magicians to see if
they could not do this also, as well as Moses; when they came they did the
same, by which still the blinded Mind of the Prince continued obstinate.

I might run through the rest of the Miracles wrought there, and show you how
the Magicians brought Frogs, but could not bring Lice; but this is not to the
Case; the Story is known.

Only one thing I must note for your Direction in the reading this Part of the
Story, viz. that the Magicians could bring Plagues, at least some of them, as
well as Moses and Aaron; but the Magicians could not remove them again, as
Moses did; so that the King might have perceived that which the Magicians
themselves acknowledged in the Plague of the Lice, that it was the Finger of
God which only could remove the Plagues he brought.

The whole Design of this Remark is to show, that it was always the Temper of
Mankind to demand a Sign or a Miracle, to confirm any new advanced Doctrine, or
any extraordinary Mission, and to take those Miracles when produced for a full
Confirmation.

This Temper of the People, as it drove the Magicians to their Shifts how to
supply Miracles to obtain Credit with the People, so it drove them beyond their
Shifts too at last, and brought them to a Confederacy with the Devil for a
Supply of Wonderfuls to delude the People. They tell us of a certain Sorcerer
at Antioch, who for the Confirmation of some particular thing, which he had
affirmed to the People, to keep up his Credit with them, told them, that such
an Evening he would cause Fire to come down from Heaven, and that it should
rest on the Top of such a certain Hill, in the Sight of all the City.

Whether the cunning Artist had found out any Composition by which to make
artificial Fireworks, agreeable to what is done at this time or not, is not
certain; though it is most certain the Art of making Gunpowder was not then known,
nor for above a thousand Years afterward: But for certain he caused such a
Machine to mount in the Air, unseen in the dark of the Evening, which then
bursting, came down again in a Shower of Fire, like the Stars (as we call them)
which spread themselves and fall down upon the bursting of the Tail of a
Rocket; and this so amazed the People, that they believed afterward every
thing he said.

Thus Simon the Sorcerer is said, by his Diabolical Enchantments, to fly up in
the Air, and perform so many surprising things, that it is said the People
called him the Great Power of God, or the Appearance of the great Power of God,
Acts viii.^0.

Indeed the Description the Scripture gives there of this Simon is very
remarkable to the case in hand; first it is said, ver. 9. That he used Sorcery
and bewitched the People, that is, the People of Samaria; then it is added, all
the People gave heed to him, and said, This Man is the great Power of God; the
meaning i^ evident, this Man has done such great and strange things, showed
such Miracles, such Wonders, that none but the great Power of God could enable
him to do; and therefore it is certain that he is aided and assisted by the
great Power of God; and this he held a long time. ver. 11. To him they had
regard, because for a long time he had bewitched them with his Sorceries.

The Case of Simon and the People at Samaria was just as it was with Pharaoh
and his Magicians, when Moses and Aaron came to him. Pharaoh and all his
Courtiers gave heed to Jannes and Jambres, for that of a long time they had
bewitched them with their Sorceries.

It remains a Question here, by what Power and by whose Hand it must be, that
the Magicians of Egypt turned their Rods into Serpents; smote the Waters, and
turned them into Blood; brought up Frogs, etc. that is, in short, mimicked or
imitated the Miracles of Moses and Aaron. If I am asked by whose Permission it
was done, I know how to answer; but if you ask who was the Instrument, I must
say it was the Devil; for the Text says expressly, they did it by their
Enchantments.

On the other hand, when they were baffled in their Paw-wawing for Lice, and
could not perform it, it is said expressly, they acknowledged that they could not
do it, for that was the Finger of God, Exodus viii.19.

Now whether the Magicians meant, it is the Finger of God that hinders us from
doing now as we did before, so that we cannot bring up Lice as we did Frogs; or
whether they seemed to acknowledge, that the Plague of Lice was the Finger of
God, though they did not grant that the Blood and the Frogs were so, because the
Devil could do it also; this, I say, is a Doubt which Commentators do not
resolve, or at least do not agree about.

But take it which way you will, it is an Acknowledgment, that what they did by
their Sorcery and Enchantments, was not done by the Finger of God; and also
that when the Finger of God was in the Work, their Sorcery and Enchantments
were impotent and could do nothing.

It is not to be questioned but as this Correspondence began between these
Magicians and the infernal Spirits, they did also upon all Occasions, and with
the utmost of their Power, as well as with the greatest Artifice and Cunning,
endeavor to make the People believe, that what they did was by the great Power
of God, by the Finger of Heaven; for this alone answered the End, which was
Deluding, and Imposing upon Mankind. 'Twas the Unhappiness of that Age, as it
is of ours, when a more modern and indeed more fatal kind of Magic is
practiced in the World; I say, it was their Unhappiness that the Minds of the
People seemed prepared for their Delusions, by being more easily imposed upon
than usual.

The Eastern World had for many Ages been led and guided by the Juggles and
Legerdemain of their Southsayers and wise Men, as they were called; and when
they by the Degeneracy of the Times were, as I have said, brought so low as to
submit to Sorcery and Enchantment, they had a vast Advantage over the People,
by the good Opinion which the People had of their Sincerity and Honesty, and
that they would not by any means cheat and impose upon them.

Thus when Errors and damnable Doctrines in Religion are broached and set on
foot among us by Men of apparent Sanctity in Conversation, Men of severe
Morals, of rigid and austere Lives, blameless and mortified Manners, strictly
practicing the good things which they preach, and who by that Strictness of
Conversation have obtained a Reputation in the World, as Men that do not
willingly deceive the People, or that at least have not a wicked Design to
deceive; In such case, I say, Error comes armed with a fatal and double Power,
and its influence is much more likely to do Mischief, the Hypocrisy is the more
dangerous, and the People more easily abused.

Who could, in our Days expect, that Men of Morals, Men of unspotted Lives, and
whose Characters would be such as never to suffer any Reproach, should blemish
all their Reputation, which that commendable Rectitude of Life had obtained for
them, with harboring a horrid and detestable Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
it self, robbing the Son of God of the Equality which he thought it no Robbery
to assume, and denying the Godhead of him who is God blessed for ever*

But this is still too solemn, and I am not also come on far enough in Order of
time to talk of those People; we shall meet with them again in our Way: for the
present I must be content to go back to the South and to the East, visit the
primitive Times of Sorcery and Witchcraft, and see if we can find it out, how
the Devil and Mankind came to be so well acquainted as we find they have been;
for certainly it was not all done at once. Satan, whose Region is the Air, and
whose Business is in the Dark, was not immediately corresponded with in an
open, public, and avowed manner; he did not walk about in Person, undisguis'd
and open^ clothed in the Shapes and Figures of a Devil, and acting like
himself; he certainly made his court to Mankind by some particular
Applications, or they to him; for the Learned are not fully agreed who made the
first Advances toward the new Acquaintance, and whether the Devil made love
first, or how Mankind found him out. I must confess it is an Enquiry of Moment,
and the History of it would take up some Room in our Speculations, perhaps very
much to your Satisfaction; I mean, if we could give a true and particular
Account how the Devil and Mankind came first acquainted.

And first, it would be particularly improving to our Understandings, if we
could tell where the first Occasion of the Correspondence lay; that is to say,
1. Whether the Devil in the Administration of his Affairs found it absolutely
necessary to settle a Correspondence among Mankind, and therefore, as Mr.
Milton has it, traveled to this Globe upon the foot of new Discoveries, and
improved upon those Discoveries afterward by the dexterity of his Management,
making his Acquaintance with Mankind his own way, and as he found proper for
his Occasions: or,

2. Whether Mankind finding their Desires to be wicked, infinitely greater than
their Capacities, and being under an absolute Necessity of some exotic Helps,
some Assistances farther and other than they found natural Powers would supply,
made their Application to him; according to the laudable Example of my old
Friend and good Patron in every wicked Contrivance, the late Honorable Mr. M
-- g M -- who (saving that I cannot say I believed him) told me, that being in
an extraordinary Straight, and wanting an infallible Agent in a particular
Piece of Revenge where a certain Female had jilted and insulted him, went out
into his Garden, three Nights together, just at the moment of Twelve, ( that it
seems was the critical time for Satan to be spoke with) and called him aloud by
his Name, telling him he wanted his immediate Attendance in an Affair of the
utmost Importance.

Now, I say, which of these two was the Case at the Beginning of the
Intercourse between Man and his Master, is hard to determine, and would be a
most admirable Discovery if the Certainty could be come at, in a manner
agreeable to the nature of the thing, so as it might be depended upon. For my
own Part, if I might give my Opinion, I should determine it in Favor of the
Devil, and that Mankind were the Agressors, first sought the Acquaintance,
implored his infernal Majesty's Assistance, proposed a League or Confederacy
with him offensive and defensive, and vowed themselves to be his faithful
Allies, and to serve him to the utmost of their Power; upon which Application,
Satan, as powerful Princes often do, yielded to their Importunities, granted
their Petition, took them into his Protection, and has been their constant
Friend and Confederate, on all wicked Occasions, eve^ since.

But there is one Difficulty in the way of thi^ Opinion, which indeed gives me
a shock in the Faith of it, and seems to intimate that it cannot be so, at
least that it cannot be absolutely and fully s^ in the largest Sense; and that
is, How did Mankind come first to know that there was such (...) Creature as a
Devil in Being? that he was capable of giving them Assistance in the Agency of
such black Designs as they really wanted his Help in? that he was a Spirit
qualified for his Correspondence, and that he would upon Application give him
the Assistance he wanted? And again, if he did know, o^ that any traditional
Memoirs remained with him from the Records of Past Ages, of the Agency of the
Devil with old Eve, or with any of the Antediluvean Race, and how Satan had
managed things in those Times; yet it does not appear how he found the Way to
correspond, whether he had any Instructions for his Application, and in a word,
how he knew where to find the Devil out, and to come to the Speech of him.
These Difficulties indeed lie in the way of my last Hypothesis; and 'till they
can be solved to the general Satisfaction, I doubt I must quit the supposed
Application of Man to the Devil, and allow that Satan himself first picked
Acquaintance with him, that the Correspondence began that way, that the Devil
offered his Service to him, and let him know beforehand how ready he would be
to come at his Call, and to assist him upon all Occasions.

I must confess this Supposition lays the Devil a little low in your thoughts,
depreciates his Character, and places him beneath the Dignity of his Seraphick
Original: But it cannot be helped; if the Devil will make himself a Slave, he
must; and if he will be, according to the happy Title of the Chief of his
Confederates, Servus Servorum, who can help it? The thing explains it self:
Whatever he was at first, he certainly has been, is, and is like to be the most
obsequious, humble, diligent Devil that ever Mankind could have had to do with.

I must acknowledge that I did not enquire of my Friend just now named, whether
the Devil gave his Attendance immediately, and with his usual Alacrity, upon
his calling out so Audibly to him; not that I ever doubted but that the Devil
did wait upon him, because it is visible that he has acted as if the Devil had
been in him ever since; but, I say, I should have enquired whether he came at
the first Call, for without doubt he called loud enough for him to hear; for,
as Voice always ascends, the Vibration moving most naturally upward, and that
Satan's particular Residence is said to lie that way, there is no room to
question but he could hear him; unless, as Elijah said to the Priests of Baal,
he might be busy, or asleep, or gone a Journey; which seldom happens to him, so
as to be out of the way of Mischief.

N.B. Here indeed I ought to make some small Apology for what I happened to say
of the Honorable Person I just now mentioned, and who I seemed to suggest was
not to be believed; which Expression (he being a Person of Honor) I ought to
explain, as I do by these Presents, and in Manner and Form following, that is
to say; that he is always to be believed, in all Cases, and relating to all
Persons, but himself; but he claiming a Right and Privilege of slandering
himself, and being exceeding fond of being thought wickeder than he is, I
ventured, by way of Observation, to suspect his Veracity, when he talks of his
Father's only Son; knowing that as he has so constantly boasted of Sins he was
never able to commit, and that every thing must be false which cannot be true,
so there is no Credit to be given to him in that Particular.

But in all other Cases you must understand me to acknowledge him for a Man of
as nice a Taste, and as strict an Observer of Truth and Decency, as ever Satan
corresponded with; which public Acknowledgment I hope he will take for ample
Satisfaction.

Now, with Pardon for the needful Digression above, I go on with repeating in
Substance what I concluded before, viz. that this Difficulty is so great, that
I cannot easily get over it, viz. to resolve who began the Acquaintance between
Satan and our Ancestors of the East, for there it seems they first corresponded.

Nor can I proceed Historically in my present Undertaking, without coming to a
Certainty in this Point, and 'till it is determined one way or other; and for
that Reason, I think I must for the present, 'till the Devil thinks fit to
clear himself of the Charge, leave it at his Door, and grant that he found the
Correspondence so much to his Advantage, that is to say, so much for the
Interest of his present Undertakings of another kind, that he made no Scruple
of being first in the Application; that he stooped without Ceremony to make the
first Visit, and so began the Treaty afterward in his own Name.

Nor has the Devil been very nice in his subsequent Intimacies, or in the
Management of the Correspondence after it was begun; but has on so many
Occasions testified his Resolution to cultivate the Friendship so (happily for
him) begun, that they found him ever after at their Elbow when they had
Occasion for him, and sometimes whether they had Occasion for him or no;
whether he is less kind to their Posterity, let his Friends and Confederates of
the present Age testify.

It is true that sometimes we find, or at least they tell us so, that he is too
cunning for his Correspondents; and that when he has drawn them into Bargains,
he is not so just to his Word as he should be, or as they expected; and this
brings some Scandal upon the Acquaintance, as if he was not a faithful
Confederate, and that he leaves his Friends often in the Lurch, as he did the
late famous Cartouch in France, Jonathan Wild in England, and as he has done
the poor Trooper lately at Dresden, who, they say, he ought to have secured
from the Officers of Justice; and that when he had killed Monsieur Halm the
Lutheran Minister, the Devil should have given him an invisible Cloak to have
carried him off, and not have left him to the Mercy of the Protestants, after
he had done him such an eminent Piece of Service.

But let us bring things to a right Understanding, do Satan Justice, and set
the Saddle upon the right Devil. In these Cases, the Question is not, whether
the Devil, after having made Bargains with these People, did not perform, and
was not so just to his Word as they expected; but whether he was not as just to
his Word as they ought to have expected? For Example, perhaps in making their
Bargains with the Devil, they expect things to be performed which it is not in
his Power to perform; the Mistake lies not in Satan himself, but in them who
make a God of him, and will have him be able to do every thing.

Now it is true that Satan, as he is a Spirit, is Magnipotent, but he never was
Omnipotent; and therefore there may be, and are, abundance of fine things which
such People expect of him, which he really not only never promises, but is not
in any Condition to perform; and if People will have him do what he is not able
to do, that is their Fault, not his; all they can blame him for in that case
is, that he does not tell them how far he can, or cannot, serve them; and that
truly, to give him his Due, seems to be none of his Business; but like a
cunning Artificer, who is loath to tell you what he cannot do, but enlarges and
expatiates upon his real Abilities; so the Devil, if you are willing to believe
he can do thus and thus for you, it is enough if he does but equivocate, and
tacitly grant it, without engaging to perform; but he is not bound to confess
his Impotence, and own he cannot do it: So these People pretend to blame him,
whereas in truth they ought only to blame themselves for expecting things of
him, that even the Devil himself is not able to perform.

Thus our late Friend Jonathan, while he kept within Bounds, had, no doubt, a
faithful and friendly Correspondence with him. 'But, said the Devil, What would
Jonathan have me do? did he expect I could save him, when he committed a Felony
even with his Fetters on, and while he was in Newgate? I had been his Protector
in a thousand Rogueries, Things, which if I had not stood by him, he could
never have got over: I had hanged a hundred and fifty honest Rogues to save
him; every one of which, if I had not helped him to be too cunning for them,
and stopped their Mouths till 'twas too late to open them, could have hanged him
and saved themselves; but he was come to such a Pitch at last, and pushed his
Fate so far, that not I, no not the Devil himself, could save him.

The like Plea the Devil made for himself, no doubt, in the case of his French
Favorite Cartouch; 'Had he thought fit, after a thousand audacious Villainies
successfully committed, and an infinite Stock of Treasure amassed, for he was
grown rich by the Trade; had he thought fit to have left Paris, and marched
off, either out of the Kingdom, or at least out of the City where he was so
well known, and so diligently pursued, I had carried him safe off.' But he was
obstinately and inconsiderately bold; and the Devil is not bound to save those
that resolve they will be hanged. Nay, if am not misinformed, the Devil himself
told him, he would be taken if he staid in Paris; and added, that the Search
after him was so hot, and such Rewards promised, and he so well known, that if
he, Satan himself, was so perfectly described, and so hotly pursued, he should
certainly be discovered. Though by the way, I would have you take that Part only
ad referendum, as the Men of Business call it.

Now it is an unreasonable thing that Men should make a Bargain with either Man
or Devil for more than they are able to perform, and then pretend to blame them
for Nonperformance; and therefore a certain noble Lord, now in Exile, (whom
they charge with contracting with Satan for some Particular, in favor of his
late Dumblane Enterprise, and which the Devil has, it seems, failed him in)
ought not, as they say he does, to blame the Devil, who really could do no more
for him than he did.

Having then brought it to this Conclusion, that the Devil has been really
first in the Confederacy, that Satan made the Acquaintance, and that Man
neither knew how to come at the Devil, nor so much as knew originally that
there was any such thing as a Devil in Being, it would add to our more perfect
understanding of the whole Matter, if we could be informed in what manner the
Acquaintance begun.

The first Attack the Devil made upon our Mother Eve, we have had fully
described. Sacred History relates the Fact; and honest, grave Mr. Milton has
given us the Particulars as distinctly, and in as lively Colors, as if he had
been at the Conference, heard the Courtship, and how cunningly the Devil
managed; with what Address he insinuated into her weakest Part, and how
entirely he conquered her Virtue, her Obedience, her Sense of Religion, brought
her to forget the Command that she had but just learned to remember; and to
sacrifice her Soul, and all her Posterity, to her Appetite: I say, Mr. Milton
has done it in so lively a manner, that it seem^ plain, that though Solomon could
not understand the way of a Man with a Maid, but placed it among the things
that were too wonderful for him; Milton seems not to be at a Loss to describe
the way of the Devil with a Woman.

Now, I say, we have a distinct Account how the Devil made the first Attack
upon Eve in Paradise; but how he picked Acquaintance with the Sons of Noah
after the Deluge, and in what manner, or upon what Occasion that was begun, we
are utterly at a loss about.

Nor have we any historical Account who were the Persons who entertained the
first Correspondence with him, or upon what Occasion; nothing appears upon
Record to give us the least Light into it, other than this, that we find the
Effects of an invisible Devil in Ham or Cham, one of Noah's Sons, and in Canaan
his Grandson; but it is not the invisible Devil that I am enquiring after, but
an appearing conversible Demon or Evil Spirit, who assuming human Shape, or at
least Voice, and intelligible Operations, could supply the Office of the Devil
in assisting Mankind in the several Exigencies of their Affairs, when any kind
of infernal Work was upon their Hands.

This, I say, is the Devil I am enquiring after; and as I would fain bring
Mankind and him to be acquainted together in a decent and regular manner, I
must confess I am at a great Loss for want of the Particulars, as well of
Persons, as of the Circumstances in which those Persons were concerned.

However since that Part cannot be entered any farther into, or at least not so
far as to make a full Discovery, we must take up with so much as we find upon
Record, and this may perhaps be enough to satisfy us that so it was.

The Story of Job, according to the sacred Chronology, and by comparing it with
other Accounts of things, appears to be very ancient; even so old as to be in a
very few Years after Abraham; for Eliphaz the Temanite could not, by
Calculation, be many Removes from Esau, and Ishmael; and Job being at that Time
an old Man, no less than a hundred Years old, he might probably be alive within
the time of Japhet, one of the Sons of Noah; for it is thought Job was above a
hundred Years old when his first Sorrows came upon him.

Now in the time of Job, it is evident the Devil had made his visible
Appearances upon Earth, and among the Sons of GOD too; for he appeared before
the Lord at the time, as is supposed, of a solemn Service or Sacrifice. What
his Business was there, and on what Occasion he came, does not lie before me on
the present Occasion.

In the next place, the Devil not only had personally appeared, but it seems
plain from the Text, when God had given Job into his Hands, that is to say, had
given him Commission to fall upon and afflict him, and that he was gone out
from the Presence of God, that he immediately set his human as well as
elementary Instruments at work; that he raised a Storm of Wind, from or in the
Wilderness, and blew the House down upon Job's Sons and Daughters; that he
brought Thunder and Lightning upon the Flocks, and burnt up the poo^ Sheep, and
the Servants that looked after them This was nothing but what, as a Devil and a
Prince of the Air, might be expected from him: but that was not all; he raised
War upon him; the Chaldean^ from one side, (the North) and the Sabeans from
another side, (the East) made out their Armies and came upon him, and plundered
him; the first carried away the Camels, and the other the Oxen.

It Is certain those Nations were at Peace with Job before, and his Servants fed
unmolested by them and in their Neighborhood, 'till the Devil took upon him to
break the Peace, and excite them to Insult Job and fall upon his Substance. How
came this to pass; and what had Job done to any o^ them, to move them to use
Violence with him? I make no question but the Devil went to them, and told them
God had sent him to order them in his Name to ravage the Lands and carry away
the Goods of Job; that God had destined him to Misery and Poverty, and had
given his Estate to them, and therefore it was lawful for them to fall upon and
destroy him and his Family; and to give them a Sign, as I said before, and that
they might know he came with a Commission, they should see he would go and send
down Fire from Heaven and destroy his Sheep; and if they would not carry off
the Camels and the Oxen, he would do the like by those also.

This, and the Bait of Plunder, was enough to animate those Nations against
poor Job, and so they came immediately and did as the Devil directed.

This seems to me to be the first visible Appearance of the Devil among the
Sons of Noah, in the Post-diluvean Ages. I will not say his Acquaintance begun
here, though if I should suppose it did, I do not see that I could be
contradicted by any authentic Vouchers from History. Indeed it was a plausible
Occasion enough, for it was apparently a Favor bestowed on the Sabeans and on
the Chaldeans, to give them Job's Goods merely for fetching: and this, for
ought we know, may be the Reason that the first Magicians that we read of any
where, were among those two Nations, viz. Chaldeans and (Arabians) Sabeans; nor
can I doubt but that the Devil having made his Acquaintance first here, kept
his Hold and Interest amongst them upon account of the good Offices he had done
them, and perhaps might do them on many other Occasions.

Now, though I would not be positive where there is the least Uncertainty, being
mighty cautious (as I am at present acting in the Capacity of an Historian) of
doing the Devil any Wrong or Injury; so I enter my Caveat too against an
Objection here, viz. that if this be not the first time that any Man gives an
Account of Satan's Appearance, and that this was not the first of his Pranks
which he played upon Mankind after the Flood, let them show us another before
it, if they can; nay, I believe the Devil himself cannot tell us any one Time
or Place, or any other Occasion, on which he ever showed himself, or perhaps
durst show himself, in a visible Appearance in the World, I mean after the
Deluge.

Nor is it easy to be determined, what Shape, what Case of Flesh and Blood, or
(as I might say with more Propriety) what seeming Flesh and Blood he appeared
dressed in at that time; nor will I take upon me to guess what Figure he made,
when he appeared among the Sons of God, and whether they knew him or not; that
is to say, knew who he was, and on what occasion he appeared there; whether Job
was among them or not, (for he was doubtless one of the Sons of God, and the
Text owns him as such; my Servant Job; for Son and Servant I take there to have
the same Signification;) and whether the short Discourse which it is said there
the Lord held with the Arch-Enemy of his Servant was audible and articulate,
and whether the rest, heard it or no; all these Difficulties I leave, as the
Learned say, to another Opportunity, that is to say, because I am not able to
say one Word to them at this.

CHAP. IV.
Of what Shapes the Devil assumed in his first Appearances to the Magicians,
and others, in the First Ages of the World; and whether He is, or has been,
allowed to assume a Human Shape, or no.

AS I have ingenuously acknowledged in my last Chapter, that I can give you no
Account of what Dress or Shape the Devil appeared in, when he presented himself
among the Sons of God, as noted in the first Chapter of Job, or whether he was
visible to any else but his Maker; so I am equally uncertain in what Figure he
made his first Appearances afterward, among his own Acquaintance and Servants,
when he was introduced.

It must therefore suffice to tell you, that however it was managed, we find
there was certainly an Intelligence carried on, a Correspondence maintained,
and what was not perfo^^^d ^^^onally, was done by Enchantments, which we call
Sorcery; by Voices and by Dreams, or by Apparition in such Shapes and Postures,
as Satan, for Reasons of State, thought fit to take upon himself for the
Occasion.

Some have doubted, whether the Devil is empowered to take up any human Shape,
or to appear in the Figure of a Man; and they argue that it does not seem
consistent with the Goodness of the great Father of Mankind, to suffer the
Arch-Enemy of his Creatures to go about in such a Disguise, so dangerous, and
that might be so fatal to him; for that he would be always in danger of being
deceived to his Hurt, that he could never be safe; but that as the Scripture
directs us to be courteous to Strangers, because some by being so had
entertained Angels; so it would make us be shy, and afraid of Strangers, for
that we should be always afraid we might receive the Devil into our Houses, and
especially into our Friendship, and Familiarity. And hence I believe came the
foolish empty Notion, though such as it is impossible to root out of the Fancies
of Men, viz. that the Devil cannot appear without his cloven Foot; of which I
shall say nothing here, but that it is a thing so ridiculous as to merit no
Notice, either now or at any other time.

Though there may be many things said for this Opinion, and particularly to that
Part which relates to the Safety of Mankind, in case of the several Disguises
that the Devil may appear in, yet I cannot exclude the Devil from the Privilege
of putting on our Clothes sometimes, and that too perhaps oftener than we may
think he does; and that he appears in such a Shape too, oftener than we may
believe he does. As to the Danger of it I may speak of that by it self.

I have taken it for granted in my last Chapter, that in the first Acquaintance
between Mankind and the Evil Spirit, after the Deluge, Satan was the Aggressor;
that he made his Application to them first, made his Proposals of Assistance
and Help, in the Cases wherein he knew they wanted his Correspondence; and I
shall add, that he perhaps raised difficult perplexed Cases in the World, on
purpose to prepare the Way for his rendering himself useful.

We are come now to the Manner, I mean How, and in What Way the cunning Manager
made his first Address to Mankind. It is true, we are something deficient in
the History of this first Transaction, because we do not yet know, nor can
easily find out, who was his first Correspondent in the World; but if you will
take what has been, by what is, and judge of his first Method, by his
subsequent Practice, I think I may give you room to make a fair Judgment. Nor
do I think it is an improper way of determining the Point, since as Satan found
the first Step successful, it is probable he found no occasion to alter his
Measures; and though differing Circumstances of Place and Persons may make him
vary a little as he sees Occasion, yet I have I think a great deal of reason to
suppose that the general rule of his Practice is much the same, and that he
proceeds upon the same foot with Mankind in all Ages, and on all Occasions,
mutatis mutandis, as he finds the Circumstances of the People the same, or not
the same.

Take then the Devil's first Method with Mankind to be grounded upon his own
Experience in his Antediluvean Practices with their Ancestors; upon his
Knowledge of their Present Circumstances, I mean Present at the time after the
Flood, you must allow Satan to have so much Cunning in him, as to be able,
without the least Hesitation, to know what was the best Method to come about
the Man, and how to compass him; and for that reason, I say, I do not allow him
to have made any Change in his Measures.

The first Method then, that I suppose the Devil took to make his Acquaintance
with Mankind was by the way of Dreams; and here I shall go back so far as to
suggest, that he put Canaan, Noah's Grandson, upon intoxicating the good
Patriarch his Grandfather with Wine: for I join with a late Opinion, that it
was Canaan, not Ham, that was the Occasion of it; though Ham was guilty of
triumphing over the old Man, when he was overcome, and exposing him, as far as
lay in him, to his modester Brethren.

Suppose then young Canaan very busy, helping and assisting his Grandfather, in
planting and dressing the Vines after the Flood, and in gathering the Fruit;
take then the following Observations upon those Circumstances in particular.

First, I cannot come into that foolish Notion, that Noah did not understand
the Nature of the Vine, or the Strength of the Juice, when the Grapes were
pressed, and the Wine ran out, and that he drank it ignorantly; I say, I cannot
come into that Opinion: For Noah, who had no doubt preached against the Vices
of the Antediluvian World, and against Drunkenness among the rest, must
certainly know the Use of the Vine, and the Abuse of it too; how else did he
come to plant it at all, and to press the Juice out for Drinking it at all?

Genesis ix.20. Noah began to be an Husbandman, and he planted a Vineyard.

21. And he drank of the Wine, and was drunken.

Secondly, It does not seem, that the time of Noah's Drunkenness was upon the
pressing of the Grapes, or the pressing the first Grapes of his new Plantation;
it must certainly be a considerable time after his planting them, and after his
first making of Wine. For though it is very probable that he planted the Vines
immediately after the Flood, and the Text seems to intimate as much; yet it is
evident it must be many Years after that, when he fell into the snare of
Drunkenness. For Canaan, who was the^ a Man grown, was not Born at the coming
out of the Ark, and there must be at least twenty or thirty Years between that
time and the Fact For if Canaan had not been Major, had not been at Man's
Estate, he would not in probability have been cursed by his Grandfather, as a
Principal in the Crime, as it is evident he was: For it does not seem that he
was cursed so particularly, as an Accessory only, or for the mere Offense of
his Father, nor would it have been Righteous in Noah to have done so. But as he
is so warmly fallen upon, and so particularly by the old Patriarch, in hi^
Anathema, it is very probable he was a Principal in the Fact of abusing him.

Suppose then, I say, young Canaan busy in assisting his Grandfather in
planting and dressing the Vines, and in pressing the Fruit; the Devil takes
this for a Handle, and subtly makes Canaa^ dream. (For I Will grant, with Mr.
Milton, that the Devil had, from the Beginning, the Art of whispering to him in
his Sleep, as that Author makes him do to Eve in Paradise, and thereby making
him dream of any thing he pleased.) Take him the^ whispering to Canaan, that he
should make his Grandfather drunk with the Wine, and that he should be able to
do what he pleased with him ever after; insinuating, that the Effect of it
would be to make his Grandfather have a greater Affection to him than to any of
the rest of his Grandchildren. This is not improbable, because the Devil always
Tempts with the Expectation of some apparent Good.

Others suggest, that Noah having reproved and reproached Canaan for some
Crime, and perhaps caused him to be corrected for it, the Devil took hold of
his Resentment, (which, by the way, is not much unlike a Devil,) and proposed
this method of Revenge to him in a Dream; as if he had dreamed that he had
prevailed over his Grandfather, by persuading him to drink himself drunk, and
had thereby made him expose himself in a beastly manner, 'till he became the
Ridicule and Jest of the whole Family, which by that time was very numerous;
and that Canaan, pleased with the lively Representation of his Grandfather's
Shame, resolved (the Devil prompting him to it in other subsequent Dreams) if
possible, to give himself the Satisfaction of bringing it to pass, and to
persuade the old Man to drink himself Drunk, the next time he came to assist
him in the Business; and that accordingly he did so, and prevailed.

Whether Satan did it thus, or by any other method of Insinuation, we are not
sure; but it is very probable it was by a Dream: Nor is it clear to me, that
the Devil had ever any other way but by Dream or Apparition, to come at the
intelligent Faculties of Man. It Is evident he does suggest Evil; now he must do
it sleeping, or waking; if sleeping, it must be by a Dream, in which he does
but imitate the good Spirit, which, as the Scripture says plainly, and gives a
multitude of Instances of it, opens the Understandings of Men in the Night
Visions, and seals their Instructions: Nor is it a new Practice of Satan to
mimick and imitate his Maker, in the Measures and Operations of his Wisdom with
Mankind.

But be that as it will, we are sure the Devil does communicate his malicious
Proposals of Mischief to Mankind; you have two eminent Examples of it in
Scripture, which are too plain, and too direct to my purpose here, to admit any
Dispute; first, in the Case of David, and his Project of numbering the Poeple,
it is said expressly, 1 Chronicles. xxi 1. Satan moved David to number the People.
Where, by the way, though it was his Sin, yet by it we gain a piece of
Information, how prodigiously populous the Tribes were at that time, viz. that
there were fifteen hundred and seventy thousand fighting Men in only ten of the
Tribes; an incredible Number to inhabit so small a Spot of Ground as the Land
of Canaan, besides Women and Children: But that by the way.

The second Example, which renders it out of all doubt that Satan has Access to
the Thoughts of Men, is that of Judas, John xiii.2. Satan put it into the Heart
of Judas to betray Christ. Now, I say as above* this must be done sleeping, or
waking; if sleeping* it must be by Dreams; if waking, it must be by Voice,
Possession, or Apparition. We shall consider them all in their Place.

It is probable that the first Method the Devi^ took in the World was by Dream;
as for Posse^sion, we do not meet with it very early; as to Voic^ and
Apparition, we take them to be all subsequen^ and the Effect of a long
Acquaintance: as amon^ Men there are several degrees of Communicatio^ with one
another, after Men have a Personal Knowledge and Acquaintance, before it comes
up to Intimacy and Friendship.

Dream then being the first way of Access, or by which the Devil found the way
into the Man* there is no room to doubt but by this Method h^ found means also
to infuse into his Mind an infinite Variety of corrupt Imaginations, wicked
Desires, and abhorred Conclusions and Resolutions* with some ridiculous,
foolish, and absurd things (...) the same time.

Thus I cannot think but the Devil first put it into the Hearts of the Men of
the old World to go about that ridiculous piece of Work (as I observed it to be
before) of building of Babel; first by filling their Thoughts with daily
Terrors and Apprehensions of another Inundation, thronging their sleeping
Imaginations with Fancies of new Rains to overflow them; by which, every time
they had any hasty Showers which raised the Water of the Rivers or Brooks to
what we call a Land-Flood, they would be immediately alarmed as if another
Deluge was a coming upon them, and that they were immediately to be drowned.

Thus raising the Vapors in their Hypocondrias, they were every Night dreaming
that they heard it Thunder, that they saw heavy Rains, and that the Brooks and
Rivers swelled, or as we say in our common Discourse on such Occasions, the
Waters were out; in Consequence of this, he puts them upon considering of Means
for their own Security, and then they dream every Night of Methods: One while
they are for building another Ark, another time for building a Thousand, that
is to say, an Ark for every Family, or Patriarchate, or Tribe; one time this
foolish thing, and another time that; and perhaps many Men dreaming on many
several Methods, till at last they bring their sleeping Cogitations to a waking
Consultation; and there they resolve upon the meanest, emptyest, and most
inconsistent Project, that ever any Body of Men formed in their Heads: And
which, if the Devil had not been in them, and drawn them into it, as I say,
merely to impose upon, and expose them even to their own Ridicule, could never
have come into their Heads, I mean the Building of Babel.

If the Devil did excite that foolish Imagination, he must do it as he was a
mere Devil, to show his Malice, to put them upon doing something extremely
Ridiculous, and which should at last expose them to their own Resentments on
the Madness and Folly of it; or, which I rather think, he bewildered their
Imaginations, without any immediate Prospect, other than this, that he knew it
would end in some ridiculous Undertaking, either very foolish, or very wicked;
not knowing which it would be, and perhaps not much caring, so it would be but
provoking to their Maker, and what might any way bring his Displeasure upon
them.

And here, by the way, I cannot but observe, that the Method, God in his
Providence was pleased to take with Mankind, upon their entering upon that
foolish Piece of Work, was the mildest and kindest that could be imagined, and
the most to their Interest, calculated for their Good, evidently issuing so;
and that much more than letting them go on in their Madness would have been.

Had Heaven thought, fit to have winked at the audacious Attempt, and to have
let them go on with it, as far as their own Ignorance and Obstinacy would have
guided them, 'till by the immense Circle of the first Stages of the Building
they had formed an Ascent higher than any thing of its kind could be supposed
to stand; yet they must have stopped at last, it must have ended somewhere; the
time would have come at length, that as they had called a Council about the
first Building of it, they would have called another, with a go to now, shall
we leave off this mad Piece of Work? that as they had advised with one another,
saying Go to, let us Build, Genesis xi.4. so they would have said, Go to, let us
leave off Building.

Suppose them to have found the Way up to the Regions above the Atmosphere, or
where else you can imagine; and that they then found themselves as much remote
from Heaven, whither they had proposed the Tower should reach, as they were at
first; and that among the other Mischiefs they had met with, such as the
Difficulty of carrying Materials so high, and the Difficulty of breathing, etc.
they had also begun to discover that their Work was fruitless, and would be
endless, as must have been the Case, they would certainly have given it over at
last, and with Indignation at themselves, perhaps at one another, have laid it
aside.

What a piece of Folly would the fruitless Toil have been, how would they have
reproached themselves, and perhaps falling out, and going together by the Ears
about it, the Victors would have made the Vanquished pull it down, and carry
away the Materials, that the Monument of their Shame might be removed out of
their Sight. The first, that is, leaving off the Work, I say, must have
happened at last; the other it was very likely would have happened; so that
it is out of doubt Heaven acted the kindest Part for them, by confounding their
Speech, to make the going on with it impracticable, so bringing them to a
Necessity of laying it aside, before they had carried it on too far.

Having thus, with a rational Prospect, proposed the first Method of Satan's
making his Acquaintance with Mankind, and so brought him to a Scene of Action;
it is very rational to suggest, that he began the Method very early; and
therefore those two Experiments of Canaan and the Builders of Babel, are not
improper to mention, as they seem to be things which Mankind had never
attempted, if the Devil had not put them upon it; nor had the Devil at that
time any other way to bring it to pass but by Dreams, at least not as we know
of.

It may also be observed, that the first Converse of Mankind with the invisible
World, whether with the evil Spirits, or with the Good, or even with their
Maker himself, was by Dreams; and therefore it is not improbable that Satan
made his Application to them the same way: We have it very early mentioned,
Genesis xv.1. The Word of the Lord came to Abram in a Vision, that is a Dream; and
again, A deep sleep fell upon Abram, and lo a horror of great Darkness fell
upon him, and he said unto him -- ver. 12, 13.

It is in some particular Texts said the Lord appeared to Abram, which if
interpreted by other Places, must be understood to be in a Dream; for in those
Places, when God conversed by Apparition with Abram, or called to him by Voice,
it is distinguished expressly in so many Words, that God said; and God^ went up
from talking with Abram; and the Lord appeared to him in the Door of his Tent;
and the like.

As God himself took this Method with Abram, and so with Moses, and so with
many others, both before and since; so the Devil found means to make his
Address to Mankind by the same way. Hence we find a mighty great Stress laid
upon some of the Dreams of the Ancients in those Days; and much ado was made
about the Interpretation of them: For when once a Man of Note had dreamed any
Important Dream, any Dream which seemed to have something extraordinary in it,
away they went to their Cunning Men, their Southsayers and Magicians, to
enquire of them the Meaning and Interpretation of these Dreams.

Now bring all these Circumstances together, and you will find the Devil
subtily insinuating Dreams into the Heads of Princes and Great Men, and then by
like Dreams communicating to his Correspondents those very Dreams, and what
Interpretations they should make of them.

This was a particular Favor done in Aid of those Magicians, who were more
than ordinarily in his good Graces; and no doubt it gave them a particular
Reputation at Court, and in the Opinion of the People; as having a more than
ordinary Understanding in hidden Matters, or having a very particular
Intelligence in the secret and reserved Part of Nature, or a Correspondence in
the World of Spirits.

Ali Albrahazen, a Persian Wizard, had doubtless this Intercourse with the
Devil, if what I have to say of him is true. He was, it seems, a Sabian by
Birth, and had obtained a wonderful Reputation for his Witchcraft; the same
which I suppose the Scripture calls Enchantments, in the Case of the Magicians
of Egypt, when Moses and Aaron came to work Miracles before Pharaoh; he, you
may suppose, was sent for by the King of Persia upon some extraordinary
Occasion, such as the Interpretation of a Dream, or of some Apparition like
that of Belshazzar's Handwriting, or some Meteor or Eclypse, and he never
failed to give them great Satisfaction on such Occasions. For whether his
Accounts were true or false, he always delivered them in such ambiguous Terms,
that something of what he predicted might be sure to be deduced from his Words,
and so seem to Import that he had effectually revealed it, whether he had
really done so or not.

This Ali, (so Fame tells you,) being in the Desert wandering by himself, and
musing much upon the Appearance of a certain Fiery Meteor, which had, to the
great Terror of all the Country, been seen every Night for twenty or thirty
Nights successively; was mighty desirous to understand the Meaning of it, and
what it should Portend to the World; but being utterly incapable to make the
least probable Guess at the Thing, the Reason or Nature of it, much less its
Import or Meaning; he sat him down under a Palm Tree, weary with his
Traveling, and his Mind also tired and wearied with fruitless and unperforming
Imaginations; Here he vehemently wished that some attending Spirit would be so
assisting to his Fancy, that he might at least make some probable Conjectures
at the true Meaning of that strange Phenomenon; and also at what might
probably be the Issue and Event of it to the World.

With this very warm and importuning Desire he fell asleep, and being in a deep
Sleep he dreamed that a tall Man came to him, of a venerable majejestic Aspect,
but with a pleasing and cheerful Smile on his Face; and calling him by his
Name, told him, that he was come at his Request to answer his Importunities;
and that he would tell him the Signification of the Great and Terrible Fire in
the Air, which was seen in his City, and in all Arabia and Persia.

And now, says he, you shall understand that these fiery Appearances are
nothing but certain Collections of Matter exhaled by the Influence of the Sun
from the Earth or Sea, or perhaps from other solid Bodies in the Compass of the
Solar System, such as the Planets and other Bodies, which you in this Earth
know nothing of.

These being set on Fire, in their wandering Motion appear like Stars or Comets
for a time, being driven about in the Expanse by the Impetuosity of their own
Motion, and become visible in this Hemisphere to the infinite Terror of the
People, as thou see it now is; though those Apprehensions and that Amazement of
the People are very groundless, and raised only from their own Folly and
Ignorance.

For as to the Importance of them to human Affairs, the truth is, Ali, and you
are to be undeceived in that Point, they have no Import or Signification at
all, other than that sometimes by their near Approach to the Earth, and by
their Attraction, or by their Dissipation of moist Vapors they occasion
sometimes great Drought, and insupportable Heat; and at other times distilling
great and unusual Rains, by condensing in an extraordinary manner the Vapors,
which by their acquired Heat they have exhaled.

Ali was surpised at this Account; and being encouraged to speak, he replied,
But what shall I answer to my People, who expect great things from me? I have
often satisfied them in like Difficulties, but when I shall come to tell them
that it signifies nothing at all, that it is only the effect of a natural
Cause, and is of no Import more than an ordinary Star; they will stone me, and
say, that Heaven never hangs out such Signals, without some Signification; that
I only impose upon them, because I am Ignorant, and do not understand the
Motions and Intimations of the Heavenly Bodies, or how the Affairs of this
World are influenced by them.

O Ali, O Albrahazen, highly favored! said the Apparition; I will instruct
thee then how to prevent thy being despised by the Elders of thy People, on
Condition that thou will now, and on all Occasions, give ear to my
Instructions, and follow those Rules that I shall set thee.

To this he readily assented, and made such Assurances as were satisfactory to
the Spectre. Go then, says the Vision, and warn thy Nation, that this Fiery
Meteor Portends an excessive Drought and Famine; for know thou, that by the
strong exhaling the Vapors of the Earth, which is occasioned by the Meteor's
unusual nearness to this Hemisphere, the necessary Rains will be withheld, and
by a long Drought thou know Famine and Scarcity of Corn succeeds of course.
Thus by judging according to the Rules of Natural Causes, thou shall predict
what shall certainly come to pass, and shall obtain the Reputation which thou
so earnestly desire, to wit, of a Sage Magician and wise Man.

But, says Ali, and what shall I say to the Lords of the Persian Court, wh^
have sent for me, to enquire of me on the same Phenomenon? what shall it
Portend to that Nation? will the same Fate be the Consequence to their Country,
as is portended to this?

To this the subtle Devil answers: This Inquiry is to thee of the utmost
Consequence. Fiery Me^eo^ sometimes from the same Natural Causes produc^ just
contrary Events; and whereas these Bodies, (...) I said, exhale an infinite
Quantity and Bulk of Vapors, which they ra^ifie by their Heat, and (...) cause
immoderate Drought and Heat in such an^ such Climates, and particular
Countries, where they approach too near; so on the other hand the^ are in
themselves vast Collections of humid and watery Vapors, which if hastily
condensed wou'^ be sufficient to deluge the World, and drown Mankind; and
sometimes they condense in so considerable Quantities, as to descend upon the
Earth, an^ cause excessive Rains and Floods, and great Desolations of the
Country. Go then fearless, says he to the Persian Court, and Predict to them
excessive Rains and Floods, which shall greatly hurt the Fruits of the Earth,
and occasion great Dearth also Thus, if either of these succeed, as it is most
proba^le, thou shall be assuredly received as a Sage Magician in one Country,
if not in the other: Also (...) both these thou may suggest, as a Probability
only, the Consequence of these to be a Plague, or Infection among the People,
which is ordinarily the Effect as well of excessive Wet, as of excessive Heat;
if this happens, thou shall gain the Reputation thou desire; and if not,
seeing thou did not positively foretell it, thou shall not incur the Ignominy
of a false Predictor.

This was very obliging in the Devil, it must be confessed, if the Story be
true; and Ali was very sensible of the Help it was to him, and failed not to
ask the Vision how he should obtain his promised Assistance in the like Cases
of Difficulty. Upon which the Vision told him, that whenever he wanted his
Help, he should come again to the Palm Tree, and that surrounding the Tree
fifteen times, he should call him aloud by his Name three times, every time he
went round the Tree; and at the end of the fifteenth time he should find
Sleepiness come upon him, when he should lay himself down as he did now, with
his Face to the South; and if he fell asleep, he should be sure to receive a
Visit from him in Vision: and with this he gives him the Magic Name which he
was to call him by.

Ali was infinitely exalted with the thoughts of this Information, which let
him so much into the Secret of Nature, as to enable him to speak in a Dialect
infinitely superior to the common Understanding, and in particular to make a
Judgment of things, out of the reach of the most Pretending of the rest of his
fellow Magicians. When he went home among the People, he failed not to give his
Judgment of the terrible Appearance in the Air, and told them positively it
portended a great Drought and Heat in the approaching Summer; to which he
added, as a Suggestion only, that he had great reason to believe it would be
attended with a Famine, and perhaps the Famine might be followed with a Plague;
insinuating, that if the Famine was not attended with a Plague among his own
Countrymen, as he had said it would, it was then likely it would appear first
in Persia, their Neighboring Kingdom, and perhaps it might afterward spread
among them.

This terrible Prediction, delivered with the Authority of one whom they had
the Venerable Opinion of before as a Magician, and one that could foretell
Events of things, gave the People an Alarm, and also their King with them, to
whom the News of the Prediction was soon carried; but the Magician concealed
entirely from their Knowledge the Manner of his obtaining his Information, so
that it came to them on the single Authority of his own Judgment.

It happened as a Confirmation of his Prediction, that after the Meteor ceased
to appear, and the Spring Season advanced, an extreme hot Season came on, with
a long Drought following for several Weeks, which began very much to burn up
the Fruits of the Earth; immediately the People remembering the Words of the
Magician, and finding so much of what he had said prove true, it put them in a
great Consternation from the Apprehension of what, according to his Account,
was yet to follow.

It happened some time after this, that the King of the Country dreamed a
Dream, which much perplexed him, and all the Magicians and Astrologers were
sent for, to interpret the said Dream; but Ali was not sent for, which grieved
him much, thinking that he was not esteemed enough among the Princes of the
Country, and that he feared his having foretold the portentous Events of the
late Meteor, which were not yet determined by the time that he predicted, he
was neglected, as a Person that would not give any good Interpretation of the
King's Dream. However, when Ali saw that the Magicians and Southsayers, who
were sent for, gave the King no Satisfaction; for they were confounded in their
Accounts, and differed one from another, and the King was so angry, that he was
about to command them all to be put to Death; with this he was comforted again,
and resolved to apply himself to the Palm Tree, to see if he could furnish
himself with any Intelligence suitable to what he desired; in which Case he
would soon let the King know, that though the rest of the Magicians could not
answer his Desire, he could supply that Defect; and so he should gain more
Reputation, than if he had been sent for with the rest.

Upon this, he retires himself as usual into the Desert as before, and comes to
the Spot where he had the first Vision. Here he surrounds the Tree fifteen
times, and every time calls the Spectre by his appointed Name three times over,
and as loud as his utmost extended Voice would admit; when, according to
Direction, he laid himself down with his Face to the South, shut his Eyes, and
obsequiously waited till he fell asleep, which was not long: No sooner had his
Senses forsaken him, whether doz'd with any infernal Charm or otherwise, the
Account does not specify: But, I say, no sooner was he asleep, but the Vision
appeared to his Fancy, and asked him what was the Occasion of his coming.

He answered, That the King had dreamed a Dream, and had told it to the
Magicians, whom he sent for in order to have them interpret his Dream, but that
he had not been sent for, which was at first very grieving to him; but that
upon further Enquiry he found that the Magicians had given the King no
Satisfaction; and that it had highly provoked him, so that he was going once to
have killed them all, and that now he was glad he was not called; but that if
he could now put him into a Condition to interpret the King's Dream, it would
establish his Reputation for ever, not with the King only, but with the whole
Country, for that he was sure to be exalted to the highest Pitch of Honor that
the King could give; and besides, all the People would adore him as one that
had Intelligence among the Gods; so that he should be had in the highest
Reverence imaginable.

The Vision assured him that he could not only qualify him to interpret the
King's Dream, but that he had made the King dream it on set Purpose to to give
him Occasion to interpret and explain it; and so he let him into the
Particulars of what it was the King had dreamed; and that the Dream being thus
directed by him, he likewise could direct him to such an Interpretation as none
but himself could put upon it; and so he at once told him both what the King
dreamed, and what Interpretation he should give of it; adding, that he would
yet do greater things for him than those; for that if he had Occasion to
recommend himself to the King, or to any other Person of Note, he would put it
into his Power at any time, not only to tell the King what his Dream signified,
but should make the King Dream any thing that he thought fit; so that he should
be able to say to the King, Tomorrow Night a deep Sleep shall come upon you,
and you shall dream so and so, which Dream shall portend such and such things
to you and your People.

Ali was exceedingly raised in his Thoughts upon such a Motion as this, and you
will not wonder that he expressed, though in his Sleep or Vision, his high
Satisfaction at such a Favor; and from that time he entertained a constant
Correspondence with this Vision or Apparition, not being aware, or perhaps not
concerned, that he was all this while conversing with the Devil, and that the
new Friendship he had engaged in, was neither less or more than an immediate
Correspondence with Hell.

We have a Parallel Story to this, and almost of the same kind, of the Devil
and an old Arabian in the Court of a Pharaoh King of Egypt, upon the
Appearance of a Comet or Blazing Star, and of which I shall give an Account in
its Place.

Nor was this any thing extraordinary in those Times; 'twas natural to Satan's
way of conversing with Mankind, who had frequently midnight Thoughts injected
to them by a supernatural Power, that is, by the evil Spirit, without their
knowing by what Hand they were injected; and the Devil was able most certainly
to give the Interpretation of those Thoughts which he had been the Occasion of.

This whole Affair, though remote in Time, I give this Account of, to suggest
from it the probable Method which Satan has taken from the Beginning to
insinuate himself into Mankind; and, as I said before, to begin the
Acquaintance; which, when once begun, he took particular Care to cultivate to
all the degrees of Intimacy possible; so that in few Years, such People have
been as intimate with the Devil, though perhaps not thoroughly knowing who it was
they conversed with, as they could desire to be.

By this Method he found Opportunities, upon all Occasions, to bring Men to
converse freely and fully with him; and as he often furnished them with
Materials and Subjects to amuse the rest of the World with, he was always able
to oblige them in the utmost manner: seeing nothing could be more to the
Satisfaction of such People than the raising their Reputation in their
Profession, and giving a Sanction or Confirmation to their Predictions.

I know it is doubted by many among the Learned, whether the Devil has himself
any Knowledge of Futurity, and whether he can predict or foretell Events, or
any thing future and to come; and this very Vision or Apparition, supposing it
to be true, verifies the Opinion; for he put the Alternative several times upon
him, that so if he missed giving a right Interpretation in one thing, he might
be sure in another; and if one Conjecture should miss, another might hit, as
you see in the Construction of the appearing Body of Fire.

But the Question is needless here; for if it be in the Devil's Power to inject
the Subject of a Dream, and put Thoughts into the Heads of those that are
asleep, it is then most certainly so far in his Power to give the Interpretation
of those Thoughts to whom he pleases to grant such a Favor; seeing the whole
Scheme may be a mere Cheat and Delusion of the evil Spirit, on purpose to form
another Delusion, namely, that of bringing in a Conjurer or Dreamer of Dreams
to interpret it. This is indeed a true Piece of the Legerdemain of Hell, and it
may be called, the Devil turned Juggler; for it is so in the very Abstract, and
nothing else.

All this is no great matter for Satan to do, if we grant him only the Power of
infusing Midnight Thoughts into the Mind, which we have good reason to believe
he is able enough to perform, and yet have no great matter of Craft in him
neither, not so much as we are ordinarily willing to suppose the Devil is
Master of. The Variety is infinite, that I might suppose the Devil is capable
to act among his Disciples by this piece of Cunning, if we do but allow him so
much; and I cannot but say it is very clear to me, that the Devil has a secret
Power to inject innumerable things into our Heads by Dream, and to make us
dream almost what, and when he pleases, so as may best serve his Occasions, and
Ours too.

And his Advantages are very great by this Fraud, for he gives his Instrument
such an undoubted Reputation for a Revealer of Secrets and an Interpreter of
Dreams, that nothing can be like it. Not Daniel himself, who they said had an
excellent Spirit, and that the Spirit of the Holy Gods was in him, could do
more; for by this Means, the Southsayer would be able to tell the Dreamer what
it was he dreamed of, as well as what it signified.

If any Man doubt that the Devil can, as I say, infuse midnight Thoughts, and
whisper Suggestions by Dream of any kind to the Mind, I refer him to Mr.
Milton, who shows us the Devil in the Shape of a Toad crept close to Eve's Ear
in her deepest Slumbers, and injecting lustful or loose and wandering Thoughts
into her chaste Mind, (I say chaste, for such it was without doubt before) and
making her dream with Pleasure of the Sin which he resolved to allure her to
commit the next Day, and so prepare her for the Crime, which till then her very
Soul abhorred.

This granted, and the Devil being allowed such an Advantage over Mankind,
whether good or bad; I cannot wonder either that he makes use of it at all, or
that he makes use of it in such a frequent and extraordinary manner as to
bewitch and inspire his Friends and Favorites: Nor that those Friends or
Favorites of his, whom he does thus assist, make such corrupt uses of it as we
find they do, for insinuating an Opinion of themselves into the World: for we
find presently, when this Familiarity is once obtained with the Evil Spirit,
and they begin to act by his Instruction, the first thing they do is, to put a
Fraud upon Mankind, and make the World believe that all they did was from
Heaven; that they spoke by Inspiration and Revelation, and that their
Intelligence was immediately from the Gods; to speak in the Language of thos^
Times.

Thus Balaam tells the King of Moab, he can speak nothing but as God shall
command him; wherea^ it is plain, had not the Devil been restrained from
directing him at that time, he would as heartily have cursed Israel as he
blessed them, and so have gained the Rewards of his Office, which was the Wages
of Divination; but he confesses the Impotency of his Art, when he found a Lock
put upon hi^ Tongue, and the Key in the Hand of a supreme Power; I say, he
confesses the good Will he ha^ to the Reward, but the Weakness of his Black-A^^
where Heaven interposed its Power, Numb. xxiii. 23. Surely there is no
Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any Divination against Israel:
intimating, that he had tried the utmost of his Skill, but could do nothing;
and in ver. 20. Behold I have receive^ commandment to bless, and he has
blessed, and I cannot reverse it: Nothing can be plainer, He would, but the
Devil and he together were not able to reverse the Blessing. The only thing
strange in this Story of Balaam is, that God should thus suffer a Sorcerer and
Inchanter, a Witch or Dealer with the Devil, to receive Commands from himself,
and to bid him go and do thus and thus, and to meet him, and put into his Mouth
what he should say on that Occasion; from whence some might insinuate, that the
Wizards and Magicians of those Days had a mutual or alternate Converse,
sometimes really with God himself, and at other times with the Devil; as if the
Wretch were to day a Man of God, and tomorrow a Sorcerer, Conjurer, and an
Instrument of the Devil; and as if God would stoop to employ those who had so
far stooped below the Dignity of reasonable Creatures, as to converse with the
Devil.

By this means the People also were the more easily subjected to the Abuse of
the Conjurer, and exposed to the Delusions of an evil Spirit, not being able to
know when he spoke from One or from the Other; no doubt the Deluder would
always pretend he spoke by the immediate Illumination of Heaven, as he had
sometimes really done so, it would not be difficult to obtain the Opinion that
he did always so.

Now it is most certain that nothing can more assist the Delusions of the Devil
in such cases as these, than to have it entertained among the People, that all
the Inspiration is from Heaven; even the Devil himself cannot desire a stronger
Auxiliar; it is an Assistance so natural to the Delusions which he is carrying
on among Men, that all his infernal Art cannot form an Equivalent to it. And
hence it came to pass, at least I believe so, that the Devil chose always that
way of coming at the Senses of Mankind, I mean by Vision and Dream, by Voices
in the Night, and by Injections of Midnight Thoughts; because God himself had
made use of the same Means to inspire the Minds of Men with divine Ideas; and
the Devil, by imitating the superior Revelations, could not only enable his
Magicians and Southsayers, and such other Instruments of Delusion, to impose
their Cheats upon the People, but could even delude, and impose upon those
Dreamers themselves too, persuading them to believe their Inspirations were
from Heaven, and that they had such and such things revealed to them from the
immediate Spirit of God, when it was only a Flatus from Hell, throwing them
into Ecstasies, and as Balaam said, being in a Trance but with his Eyes open,
that is to say, possessed with the Witchcraft of an evil Spirit, as is said of
the Maid in the Acts, c. xvi. ver. 16. who had a Spirit of Divination, and
brought to her Master great Gain by Southsaying, that is to say, by speaking as
the Devil dictated to her; nay, and the Text is plain in acknowledging that it
was the Devil that possessed her, for in the Original you have his Name what
Devil it was; and if you want a farther Explanation of him, you may have it
too; his Name is called PYTHON, and some of your Bibles (supposing for once
that you read any) has it in their Margins; what particular Devil Python was,
whether an avaritious, a treacherous, a deceiving Devil; but some think it was
the first, because she hired out herself, and her Devil with her, to a Master,
and what she got by her Devil, her Master was to make the best of; the Terms
much the same as a late Irish Mar -- s married two Wives for, then let them out
again at so much a Year, and took the Income of both their Devils for his
Jointure. A rare Bargain indeed, and something akin, I believe, to the Devil
Python!

How much were it to be wished, that some of our Southsaying Wits, who are
really neither wise Men or Southsayers, Magicians or Conjurers, and who will
have us, in spite of our Senses, believe that they are really inspired, could
but tell us too, with any moderate Certainty, whether those Inspirations are
from God or the Devil; Whether the F^ghts of their Insipids are Ecstasies of
the Adored, or of the Horrid; whether when they rail at Heaven, and burlesque
their Maker, we may not really believe they are overrul'd by a divine
Influence, to do it with so ill a Grace, and so little common Sense, that it
may be directed to exalt the All-wise, by the very means used to expose him,
and to make them mix Impudence with so much Ignorance, that others equally
wicked, but of better Judgment, may grow sick of the Crime for the mere
Deficiency of the Wit.

Doubtless, He that knows how to serve the best Ends by the worst Means, can
leave the meanest Heads and the most brainless Wits to be thus wicked, to
intimate to others the Weakness of the Crime, and the gross Absurdity of
Atheism. I don't therefore think it at all profane, at least if not so
intended, to say Such a Fellow is one of God-a-mighty's simple One's; by which
I would be always understood, that he is one to whom Heaven has denied the Gift
of Brains, and suffered the Devil to fill up the empty Spaces in his Head with
a Share of glaring Impudence, such as will pass for Wit with those that have
none, and for the worst of Folly with all the rest of Mankind.

This sort of wise Men, of whom the Age is plentifully stored at this time, are
doubtless placed up and down in proper Stations by the Allowance of Providence,
for the Conviction of Mankind in their particular Spheres; just as the Devil
himself has, in many cases, been a Preacher of Truth, and will be so to the End
of the World, though sore against his Will.

Of so much Force is Ironical Righteousness, that the blackest Agents are
fittest to be made the brightest Examples of it; since also the greatest and
best Principles are often illustrated by their most infamous, and consequently,
by their compleatest Contraries.

But to go back where I left off. The Devil, who has always had the Impudence
to mimick his Maker, and sometimes to personate him too, in his Applications to
Mankind, has made, I say, his first Acquaintance with him by this Method of
Dream and Midnight Vision, for that very Reason, viz. because it is the Method
by which God himself often used to reveal himself to the Prophets and other his
most eminent Servants of old, as instanced before in Abraham, and of which the
Scripture has many Examples. (I hope that Book, when it is taken as a History
only, may obtain Credit enough to be brought in Evidence.) I have mentioned
Abraham already, and perhaps it may be offered that this is not sufficient,
because God conversed, as the Text says in another Place, Face to Face with
Abraham; but take it then with his Grandson Jacob: God appeared to Jacob, Genesis
xxviii.13. in his Dream of the Ladder reaching up to Heaven. And behold the
Lord stood above it and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father. But if
this will not do neither, then take it with one who it might be as likely
should have the Devil appear to him as God himself, but still 'twas the same
thing, Genesis xx.3. God came to Abimelech in a Dream; So might the Devil too, for
Abimelech was an Idolater: And again, ver. 6. And God said unto him in a Dream.
Now Abimelech was a Philistin of the cursed Race destined to Destruction by the
Posterity of Abraham, and yet God appeared to him, or came to him in a Dream,
and spoke to him in a Dream.

From hence the Devil, who is cunning enough to imitate all those Methods of
Access to the Minds of Man, which it is possible for him to come at him by, and
which his Maker has used for the like Communications, has always made use of
this Method; and when he has designed the Delusion, or the perplexing of
Mankind, or any other of his infernal Infatuations, he has brought them to pass
by the Injection of evil Thoughts or other dark Means, moving his Passions and
Affections, instilling all the hellish Imaginations that are requisite to the
Mischiefs he designs. And thus you have the Circumstances, and the Reason too,
of the Devil's way of working with Mankind.

It remains a Question, though of no extraordinary Importance, what Shape or Form
the Devil made use of in his first acquainting himself with Mankind. It is
Satan's Misfortune, to say no worse of him, that he cannot appear in his own
Figure, clothed with any of his native Beauties; but that it would render him
so frightful to his Emissaries, and even his best Friends and most useful
Servants would be terrified, and would run away from him instead of conversing
with him; and the most accurate Magician or Southsayer in Arabia would, instead
of going into the Deserts and Wilderness to meet him, abhor the very Place, and
tremble at the Thought of seeing him.

Hence, to whisper to them in the Night, and only talk in Vision and
Appearance, is the kindest thing the Devil can do to them, as well as the
wisest way for himself; for was he ever to appeal, I say, in his own Clothes,
none of his Friends would ever come to receive his second Visit. Now his coming
in the Night, or in Dream, as is hinted in the Story of the Magician above, is
certainly needful; for as in a Dream the Voice without the Vision is
sufficient, so if a Shape is represented to the Imagination in the Sleep it
sooner wears off, and the Impressions are sooner razed out of the Mind, than if
the Apparition was visible with open Eyes, and in the Light of the Day; there is
a great deal of difference between what we really see, and what we only dream
we did see.

We have indeed some of Balaam's Dreamers, that is to say, who dream with their
Eyes open; indeed some of them may be said to be always in a Dream, they are
scarce any thing but Apparition themselves; their whole Lives are a kind of
moral Delusion; and as they live in a Dream, so we must dream too, to make any
thing of them, for they never are what they seem to be, or seem to be what they
are. But as I may perhaps endeavor to discover those People to the World, a
little plainer than I can discover them to themselves, I say no more of them in
this Place, leaving the Devil and them to act in Concert awhile, that they may
illustrate, and be Foils to one another.

It is true that by this way of dealing in Dreams, the Devil has infinite
Advantage, for the making C^njurers, that is to say, Magicians and Southsayers,
in the World: Whether that sort of People have been of any Use to him for the
propagating his Interest in the World, is a Question by it self.

That the Devil took this Method for the first establishing himself in the
World, and, as I called it, making his Acquaintance with Mankind, I have taken
Notice of already: How useful he has found his new-made Friends, and how apt to
carry on his Business, and especially for the farther extending his Power, and
propagating the Delusions of others, History will inform us; and we cannot
doubt but he has found his Advantage in it: But it remains a Question of
Importance still undecided, whether are best pleased in these nocturnal
Operations, the Devil or the Magician; my Opinion is for the first. I believe
indeed the Devil has got the better of them in the main, and whereas he at
first was mighty eager to make his Acquaintance among them, and glad of the
Means; he seems now to have overreached them, and to have worked them up to a
Desire after the Correspondence in such a manner, that the subtle Manager is
not so cheap to be had since, but makes Bargains, nay, brings them up to his
own Terms, and sometimes tells them plainly, he has no Occasion for them; but
on the other hand, if they want him, they must give him his own Price, and do
what he conditions with them for, or else he has no more to say to them, though
he is a Cheat in that too.

Thus like a cunning Chap, he turns his Back and is gone, knowing very well
that they will call him again, and give him his Price; yield to his Demand, and
rather sell themselves to him Soul and Body, as we are told is now very
frequent, than go without his Assistance. This is all owing to his Subtilty,
and Mankind's Folly and Fondness; for had they stood as they did at first, he
must have come to their Conditions; but he found the way to make himself
necessary to them, and to please them, and he managed accordingly.

It is indeed an Evidence how shrewdly the Devil overreached Mankind in the
most early Ages of the World: For, First, as I mentioned before, this was to
come to them with some Authority, and with the Magnificence of a God, and it
always gave them an Awe and kind of Reverence of his Appearance; Secondly, it
really so far prevailed with them, that we have a great deal of Reason to
believe they did not always know whether their Intelligence was from Above or
from Below, and whether they were conversing with God or with the Devil; If
this is true, as I have no Reason to question, I have less Reason to doubt that
he often deluded them to think the former. And thus perhaps many false Prophets
in former times came to the poor People, and began their Predictions with the
usual Preface, Thus says the Lord; when in Justice they ought to have begun
with, Thus says the Devil, as they might easily have seen afterward, by the
Consequence of it, and by the nature of their Prediction; for I believe that
way it is most easily discovered.

The Discovery seems indeed to be directed by this very Method, where the
Scripture says. If a Prophet comes, shows Signs and Wonders, and then adds, go
serve other Gods, his very Doctrine proves him to be an Impostor, and on that
very Account he is to be rejected: God's Prophets will always teach God's
Truths, a false Prophet is easily known by his Teachings; the Devil may deceive
for a while, but even the Devil himself cannot hold it long, the cloven
Principle will appear, which I suppose the Fable of the cloven Foot to be an
Emblem of, and no more.

But to come back to the Example of the Magician going into the Desert; why,
the very Place was a Branch of that Complication of Fraud which constituted all
the rest: The Man went thither first casually, fell asleep by the natural
Consequence of his Weariness, and under the Palm Tree, as customary, to
preserve him by its Shade; the rest was all a Cheat; the Devil could as well
have made him dream and see the Vision in his Chamber at Susa, or where else he
dwelt in Persia, or Arabia, as in the Wilderness; but he caught him there, and
took that Advantage, to introduce the Ceremony of his future corresponding; and
therefore he appoints him to come again to the same Place, and there gives him
the Formality of Measures to be observed; he must make his Tour fifteen times
round the Tree; he must call him by what infernal Title he was pleased to give
himself; and this to be done three times every Circuit he made about the Tree;
and when all this was done, as he might well be inclined to do, he was to lie
down and go to sleep. And what need all this Cookery, but to dish up the
Delusion with a due Form, give a Sanction to the Vision itself, and command a
suitable Regard to the Audience which he had the Honor to be admitted to?

If this had not been the case, it might as well have all been transacted any
where else; but Satan finds his Account in these things: For during many Ages
after this, and perhaps in other Places, the Southsayers and Magicians of
Arabia, went out in the Night, and into the Wilderness, and Solitary Places, to
meet with their Inspirations, and to dream Dreams, and then came back, stored
and qualified to make their Predictions; as much as to say, they go to their
Palm Trees, to meet Visions; there they met their Devil, and then came back,
and spread their Delusions, as their Instructor had furnished them.

Semiramis it seems, and we may suppose her Successors in the Babylonian
Monarchy, kept several Sets of these People; and as they had their several
Denominations, so they had their several Offices and Employments under her: As
particularly her wise Men or Magicians; these were to explain to her the Aspect
of the Heavens, the probable Effects of all surprising Phenomenon in Nature:
her Astrologers and Southsayers; and these were employed to consult their
private Devils, and were Revealers of Secrets, Interpreters of Dreams, etc. and
then they had Wizards, and Sorcerers, and such as used Enchantments; and these
foretold the Success of her Military Enterprises, expounded Omens, the Signs
and Circumstances of Creatures, the flying of Birds, Voices, Apparitions, and
all such things as were particularly uneasy or disturbing to the Queen, or to
her Court, and wanted their Explaining: The first of these I have voted already
to be honest Men, but the last two I make no doubt consulted with the Devil,
and the Devil with them, upon all Occasions. Nor do I doubt at all but that
they made Prodigies, and then explained their Meaning, as I said before; that
they appointed Dreams on purpose, and for the sake of interpreting them; of
which I shall give you another Account hereafter.

Sometimes it seems, these conjuring, enchanting People, were so far from
explaining things to the Queen's Mind, or interpreting things after the manner
that she expected, that her Majesty was pleased to dispatch them out of her
way, and hang them by Dozens. And thus Nebuchadnezzar commanded all the wise
Men of Babylon to be put to Death, though it does not appear that his Commands
were executed, nor are we certain they were not; but it is evident it was very
much the Custom to do so.

Hence I suppose they were generally inclined, like the Prophets in the case of
King Ahab, to take care, and prophesy nothing but what should please the King.
And when Micaiah, a true Prophet, or Prophet of God, came to tell the King what
really came to pass, we see what his Fate had been, if the King had outlived
the Battle.

Nor to this Day do the Princes of the East make any scruple to truss up their
Conjurers and Southsayers, when they find them juggle with them, and find they
cheat and impose upon them; an admirable Method to deal with the Broachers of
Atheistical, Deistical, and Enthusiastic Whymsies in our Age, where we have a
more sure Word of Prophesy, which we are commanded to take heed to, and which
the modern Agents of the Devil are only employed to counter-act, and drive out
of the World, if possible, that the old Oracles of Devil-worship, and other
Delusions, might be again introduced.

But I am loath to seem vindictive in my Notions, nor would I set up Fire and
Faggot; no, not against the Devil and his Agents; they may have enough of that
hereafter, with the Devil and his Angels: And besides, such a Persecution must
necessarily at this time be so bloody, that I know not what City, or Town, Inns
of Court, Palace, College, or University, ( our own excepted) which it would
not almost lay waste, desolate, and make void of Inhabitants. Mercy on us!
persecute and punish Men for being Atheists, and Deists; for dividing the
Trinity, and unsanctifying the Holy Ghost, who is the Sanctifier of the World,
and such difficult Trifles as these? where would it end! and what would become
of all the religious Part of the World! what a Schism, in the most literal
Sense, would this make among us? and where is there a Church, Chapel,
Meeting House or Congregation, that would not be divided against it self, and
set up a new Body of Dissenters? Truly so, as dissenting not from this, or that
Opinion of Religion, but from all Religion, and all Opinions in Religion
whatsoever.

Well, let the Church of Rome send Protestants to Heaven by the Rack and the
Gibbet, I would not be instrumental to send all the Atheists and Arians to the
Devil; no, not for the sake of my Native Country, for fear of laying waste the
Glebe, and leaving Posterity no body to instruct them better.

CHAP. V.
A Farther Account of the Devil's Conduct in Imitating Divine Inspirations;
Something of the Difference between them; and particularly of Signs and
Wonders, False as well as True, and the Cheats of the Former.

HAVING observed how the Devil, in the Infancy of his Correspondence with
Mankind, came to him, and made his Acquaintance by the same Method that God was
pleased to reveal himself on Occasions of the greatest Importance; it would be
very much to the Advantage of our present Enquiry, if we could come at some
more Particulars in the respective Appearances, and know something of the
Difference in them, that so for the Future we might distinguish our Modern
Inspirations, and not oblige the Devil so much, or his Favorites either, as to
flatter their Vanity with thinking they are divinely inspired, when, as I said
before, they are on^ deluded with the Enthusiasms of Hell, and imposed upon by
Mother Eve's Toad at their Ears, that (...) to say, by the Whispers of the
Devil.

That God was pleased to reveal himself to h^ Servants of old by Vision and
Dream is eviden^ besides the Examples mentioned before, from h^ own
Declaration, that this was the way he resolv'^ to transact with them, Numb.
xii.6. If there be (...) Prophet among you, I the LORD will make my se^ known
to him in a Vision, and will speak unto him i^ a Dream. My Servant Moses is not
so, (that is to say, was more than so,) with him will I speak Mouth (...)
Mouth, even apparently, and not in dark Speeches, etc.

This is a noted Declaration of the Manner how God would discover himself to
his Servants; and we cannot doubt but the Devil, who knew it very well, did
quickly imitate the like Method, and bring in a thousand Delusions at the same
Door: It being in his Power, as I have said, to inject Midnight Thoughts and
Amusements, and make his Appearances in Vision and Dream as he pleased; how
near he might come to imitate the Visions and Revelations of God, is what I
cannot undertake to determine: I am sure it is more than probable that he might
do so, in a manner as might deceive those unguarded Persons, to whom he often
thus appeared, and whose Ends in seeking him out might be almost as wicked as
his that appeared to them.

It may be something too much in the Favor of the Pretenders to new Light and
Prophesies, and to the ancient Revelations and Discoveries made by false
Prophets, properly so called in the holy sacred Writings; but I cannot answer
it to my own Reason, if I should say, that I believe they all knew, and every
time too when they said, thus says the Lord, that it was false, that they told
a wilful premeditated Lie, and that they ought to have said, Thus says our
sovereign Lord the Devil.

Nor will I venture to say, that all the Modern Heathens, the Druids among the
Britains, the Priests of the Heathen Temples, who uttered the Oracles of the
Devil, however they came by them, or the Bramans and strictest Recluses of the
Indians, the Dervises of Mahomet, and the like, do all actually know, that is
to say, by immediate Communications from Hell, and the Instrumentality of its
Agents, that they really are Confederate with the great Enemy of Mankind, and
carrying on a Correspondence with the Devil. I have so much Opinion of the
Power of common Sense in Man, as a human Creature, and so much Charity for the
good Meaning of those, who we do not find immediately vile, profligate, and
immoral, as to think they would not act with Satan upon that foot.

I have much more Reason to think the four Ecclesiastics of Switzerland, in
the Story Jetzer, acted with Satan open-ey'd, and open-fac'd, when they
proposed to the poor foolish Creature to renounce God and Jesus Christ, and so
to carry on the Fraud they had begun, with a kind of Sanction instead of an
Oath of Secresy, and it appeared indeed to be so at last.

But certainly, as in other Cases, abundant Paralels might be brought. The
Devil, who generally acts in Disguse, has carried those Disguises so artfully,
that I doubt not but many of his false Prophets, long before our times, have
said, thus says the Lord, with a good Grace; that is, with a real Belief, that
God had spoken to them, or, as was the Language of the Scripture Times, had
spoken by them, when really it was the Voice of the Devil, and of no body else:
And let not our Modern Enthusiasticks take this to be said only in Favor of
themselves; I am not come so far down in the course of my Work, so much as to
think of them, no not of St. Dunstan, St. Francis, or of the more eminent
Deceiver St. Ignatius, the greatest Enthusiastic of the last ten Centuries:
when I come to them, we shall reckon as we meet.

But I am yet talking of the specific Difference between the Inspirations of
false Prophets, the Dreams whispered and suggested by the Devil; and those on
the other hand from the contrary Appearances of the good Spirit, that is to
say, of God himself. I am in the first place to intimate, that they are not
always to be discerned, no nor easy to be discerned; if they were, there would
not be so many Delusions in the World as have been; for the Men are not all
Devils before they come to him, they don't come to him resolving to be
deceived, and intending to deceive every Body they are concerned with. I must
own, I do not think that all the four hundred Priests of Baal, whom Elijah
summoned together to the great Sacrifice at Mount Carmel, would have showed so
many antic Tricks, leaping upon the Altar, cutting themselves with Knives, and
crying O Baal hear us! if they had believed they were under a Delusion of the
Devil all the while, and that Baal was no Body but a dead Stock, a lifeless
Image, without Sense to hear, much more without Power to answer. They must
certainly believe, that Baal was a Something, or a Somebody, whom it was their
Duty to pay a Homage and Reverence to; or that they paid that Homage to the
true God, through the Medium of an Image, a sort of a Model of that meaner and
more ignorant Idolatry called Popery.

But to look forward beyond this Image of Idol-worship, we have the old false
Prophets coming much nearer to the true, and the Inspirations bearing an
Affinity in a more significant Point; and that is, in Signs and Wonders, or
what we call Mircales, which yet may be all from the Devil; so hard it is for
the deceived false Prophet to know when he is right and when he is wrong; and
so easy is it for him to be imposed upon himself, and consequently to delude
the People he converses with.

The Devil, as far as his Agency of this kind will reach, must certainly be
mightily pleased with it; for by thus inspiring his Tools, not only to the
degree of false Prophets, but to an Ability of working Miracles, showing Signs
and Wonders, whether Real or Imaginary, he not only the more effectually
imposes upon his false Prophets, but gives or deputes so much of Devil to them,
as to make them able to delude and deceive others, nay to deceive the whole
World; or as the Text expresses it Matt. xxiii.24. to deceive (if it were
possible) the very Elect.

It Is remarkable in this same Text, that it is predicted there shall come false
Christ's, and false Prophets, (Devils, or Devil's Agents) and shall show great
Signs and Wonders.

There is also another Text, which gives us a Caution against such, though I do
confess I cannot see how it can be made use of till the Delusion has gone some
Length; and that is in Deuteronomy. xiii.1, 2. If there arise among you a Prophet, or
a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a Sign, or a Wonder, and the Sign, or the
Wonder come to pass. Now this, I say, requires so much time, as to the
fulfilling the Token or Prediction of the false Prophets, till when, and till
the false Doctrine which he preaches shall detect him, the People are
manifestly in danger of the Delusion; for as in all such Cases in those ancient
Times, every Novelty was confirmed by Signs and Wonders, What could be more
deluding, and more apt to impose upon the People, than to have the Shewer of
those Signs and Wonders confirm his Teachings by a Miracle, and that the
Miracle should come to pass? Yet all this may attend the lying Wonders of a
Magician, a false Prophet, nay of a Devil; That such Wonders man be wrought as
are justly termed false and lying Wonders, we have again predicted 2 These. ii.^
which Text I doubt touches a little our holy Father the Pope, whose coming is
said to be after the working of Satan, with all Power and Signs, and lying
Wonders; intimating that there are Wonders which are Delusive; said to be
wrought, but not wrought a la Mode the Legend, the Fables of Monkery, the Devil
of London, and the like. Wonders indeed c^^ scarce be called lying upon any
other Foundation for if they were real, and actually performed, ho^ can they
then be lying? but if promised to be performed, and not done; or said to be
really perform^ and done, but were not, then they are inde^^ Lies, or lying
Wonders; and take them which wa^ we will, I doubt as before, and leave my
Master^ the Jesuits to bring his Holiness off their ow^ way.

But I come on upon modern Time too fast; H^story demands that we advance by
just degrees, an^ to that purpose I must look a little more particularly into
the Antiquity of these things. SATAN, to give the Devil his due, did not manage
with so little Dexterity, his first Acquaintances with Mankind, as to suffer
his secret Methods to be discovered and detected, or his Instruments to be
exposed; On the contrary, he put innumerable Wonders upon Mankind, acted with
inextricable Stratagem and Art; from which Dexterity, and the difficulty of
explaining his Management, the common Operations of his Favorites obtained the
Sanction of Devilish; and the ART they used, obtained the honorable Title of
BLACK; and this, according to my Title, is what I am now to describe.

The World was now so much improved in Knowlegde, that, as I hinted above,
nothing new could be started, but a Miracle was presently inquired after to
confirm it; and he that could do the most eminent things of that kind, was the
most famous in their Opinion. Mopsus was a Southsayer, and said to be the Son
of Apollo: He was in such Credit and Esteem in his time, that it grew into a
Proverb, to be as infallible as Mopsus.

This Mopsus meeting one Chalchas, a Man likewise eminent in the same devilish
Profession, they fell into Dispute about some things relating to their ART.
Mopsus asked Chalchas, how many Figs such a wild Fig Tree, as he pointed out to
him, had upon it; the Southsayer Chalchas would not answer him, but alleged,
that it was not a fair Question. Upon which Mopsus told him the Number, and
upon counting them up, it was found true to a Fig; upon which Chalchas was so
confounded, not being able to conceive how it was performed, that though the
thing was trifling, he died for Grief.

It seems, Chalchas had his Fortune told him by the Oracle, (viz.) that he
should dye when he found out a better Southsayer than himself; all which I can
resolve into nothing but this, that Mopsus had more Favor with the Devil than
Chalchas, at least at that time, and that he whispered the Number of the Figs
in his Ear; or to clear up the Juggle, Mopsus had counted them before, and so
the Question was a Juggle in it self; which indeed was the most likely of the
two.

The Humor of the Times being, as I said, to require Miracles and Wonders, the
Southsayers and Dreamers of Dreams bestirred themselves, and sought out (every
Man his own Way) for secret Inspirations and Illuminations, and the Devil was
very useful to them on many Occasions, till at last he found the Work increased
upon his Hands, and he was obliged to set up Delusion-Offices, as I may call
them, and give out Answers at the Shrines of the People's Idols, and in the
Names of their Gods.

These were so far from crying down the Office or Dignity of a Southsayer in
the World, that it rather encreast their Fame. For as the Number of those
Oracles were but few, not above twelve or fourteen, great and small; so the
wise Men, the Magicians and Southsayers, were often sent by their respective
Princes, whose Favorites they were, to those Oracles on extraordinary
Occasions, and to be resolved in their Doubts; whence they frequently brought
such Answers, as they knew would please and oblige the Prince that sent them;
perhaps as best suited the Circumstances of those Princes, and which those so
sent best knew, whether the Oracle gave such Answers or no, the latter being
not always necessary.

This working by Miracle seldom or never failed; it confounded the
Understandings of Men; and when any of their Southsayers had once obtained an
Esteem by such a Performance, he never wanted any thing more to continue his
Character, and to gain him Admittance into the Favor and Court of the greatest
Princes. Hence Joseph's telling Pharaoh's Chief Butler and Chief Baker their
Dreams, and those Dreams exactly coming to pass, opened the Doors of the Prison
for him; as his adding to it that of telling the Interpretation of Pharaoh's
Dream advanced him to the second Chariot, and to the crying Abrek before him,
that is Bow the Knee.

It Is the Opinion of some Learned in the Wisdom of the Egyptians, that Joseph
continued the Art of Southsaying (for in that the Wisdom of the Egyptians
chiefly consisted) for a great while after; and I acknowledge my self to be of
that Opinion, whether I am learned in the Wisdom of the Egyptians or no, and
that he had never been continued in such a high Post so long, if he had not.

For this Reason those Words he used afterward to his Brethren, Wot you not
that such a Man as I can Divine? are a kind of Admiration; that is to say, Are
you so ignorant in the Customs of this Country, as not to know that a Man in my
Post must be able certainly to divine? Genesis xliv.15.

And indeed, without putting any strained or constrained Meaning upon the
Sacred Text, I cannot doubt but that the People of Egypt took Joseph to be
what they called the Prince of the Magicians of the East; that is to say, one
of the Chief of them, and extraordinarily qualified by the Gods for the
Understanding deep Mysteries, for diving into hard Questions, interpreting
Dreams, and resolving Doubts. In a word, in the same Sense that Daniel, almost
a thousand Years after, was esteemed at Babylon, viz. that the Spirit of the
Holy Gods was in him; whether they meant by their Gods the Crocodile, or the
River Nile, or the Great Calf at the Egyptian Thebes, or Isys, or Osyris, that
I shall not enquire into here, but they doubted not that some of the best and
brightest of their Deities inspired Joseph with an Excellent Spirit.

Nor was it unreasonable for the poor People under the dark Circumstances of
that Age to believe so of him; for how else should he have the Foreknowledge of
the dreadful Famine seven Years before it came? how that Sagacity to gather
such immense Quantities of Corn in the plentiful Years before it; and lay it up
in such Places, and in such Proportions, and so secured, as to supply suitably
the whole Country of Egypt, so vastly extended, and so populous as it was at
that time?

How Joseph came by all this Knowledge and Wisdom, they (as we have like reason
to believe) were as ignorant of, as they were positive that it was so, by some
means or other; and therefore it was no Absurdity for them to suggest that he
did all by Divination, that is to say, by Enchantment, or secret Converse with
the Spirits of another World; or as we call it, with more Propriety at least in
our Opinion, that he dealt with the Devil; and that this was done by the Charm
of the Silver Cup which was put in the Mouth of Benjamin's Sack.

That they believed so is evident from the Words of the same Chap. Genesis xliv.5.
Is not this it in which my Lord drinks, and whereby he divineth? The Words
are fully explained by the Customs and Usage of the Magicians and Devil-hunters
in those Days; who used strange Gestures, and clanging Sounds, such, or not
much unlike such as our old Women now use to hive their Bees; by these they
called the familiar Devils, the Pythons and Apollyons of their Acquaintance
about them, whatever Occasions made it necessary for them to speak with them.

That Joseph knew better, and that he certainly neither used such Methods, or
conversed with any such kind of Foreigners or Infernals, was most certain; but
his Steward was directed to speak in the Language of the Country; nor would he
have talked to have been understood, if he had not: and this confirms the
Conjecture as above, and makes it most reasonable; namely, that all Egypt took
him ( Joseph) to be a Southsayer or wise Man, and that certainly he could
Divine.

This Part of Joseph's Story is useful to explain by what manner of
Communication the Diviners of those days used to maintain their Acquaintance
with the Infernals, and how mean and scandalous Methods the Devil contrived to
settle his Correpondence; that in short, by the clanging of an old Kettle, or
Brass-pot, the whole Hive of Devils should be alarmed, be told that some of
their Masters on Earth had occasion for them, or as we call it, wanted to speak
with them, and that they should immediately fly to hand, and mount to the Place
to know the Business.

This will be a very material Point to discuss more fully, and to explain the
Philosophy of, if we should come to examine the most accurate and polite
Methods of that particular Art, which we call raising the Devil, of which so
many valiant old Women have been completely Mistresses; and that so eminently,
that Satan durst no more refuse to attend the Call, or fail of his Duty when he
heard the Summons, than a Schoolboy that has been well lashed for playing
Truant, dares do it again, before his Backside has done smarting: For
doubtless, the Scolding of an old Woman, and upon such a Disappointment too,
would be enough to terrify the Devil himself, if he has any Sense of that
outrageous Animal, called an old Witch, upon his Mind.

But I leave that Part to a particular Dissertation upon the Species, when I
shall learnedly and politely examine, and, if practicable, determine for the
good of Mankind, the two following Wehigty and Important Difficulties.

First, Whether upon an immergent and sudden Occasion, the Music also being
the same, old Mother Anthony of -- in the County of -- could not be as
effectual with her Voice to hive a Swarm of Bees, as any Brass Kettle or
Warming-pan in all the Village; and so both frugally save her Neighbors from
the risque of bruising their Household Stuff; and the said Mother Anthony,
instead of being liable to the Ducking-stool for a common Disturber, become a
useful Servant to her King and Country, and enjoy a Pension for her good
Offices.

Secondly, Whether the same Mother Anthony, according to the Hypothesis of
Joseph's Cup of Divination, might not be also made useful in her Generation
upon like extraordinary Occasions, to lay the Devil, and that too by the same
Rules that others raise him; since the Bees in their greatest Hurries and
Tumults are quieted, as above, by the same Noise, which at another time would
fret and disorder them; the Philosophy of which is not yet understood, nor can
the Reason of it be discovered in all the Philosophical Transactions or
Transactors who have so long studied it. From whence they say, the Tinkers
beating their Pans when they publish their Occupations, or as we call it
vulgarly in England, Cry their Trades, are extremely uneasy to all the old
Women above their ninth Climacteric, and unsufferable to those who are engaged
in the Article of Circle-making, and Paw-wawing; insomuch that if a Tinker
should have stopped in a Village and beat his Kettle above a certain limited
time, at, or within hearing of the Town of ^pswich, in Mother Lackland's time,
she would have been obliged to have raised the Devil for her Assistance. But
this I leave to Experiment.

As, I say, these two important Questions may take up a large Tract by
themselves, and as they must needs be of vast Consequence to the Readers, I
doubt not the Booksellers, who are generally Publick-spirited Gentlemen, will
embrace the Opportunity of publishing such a valuable Piece for the Good of the
Nation; so I shall adjourn it for the present.

Come we next in order, according to the Contents of this Chapter, to the
particular Question in what Shape the Devil appeared to the first Magicians, or
the Inchanters of the most early Times; and the Answer is, as far as we can yet
learn, that he did ^ot assume any Shape or visible Appearance at all: whether
it was his Modesty or his Policy is a Question has been a little, though not
fully discussed, and those that speak most favorably of Satan, think it was
the first; for in the early Times of his Intimacy he might be loath perhaps to
expose himself to his new Acquaintance; whereas afterward, when he became
really a familiar Spirit, in the litteral Sense of the Word, he made no
Difficulty to converse with his Favorites more openly, see and be seen; of
which in its Place.

But if this was not the Case, it seems to me, that at first, and while being
only a Night Visiter he communicated himself by Vision and Dream only, there
was no manner of Occasion for the Locality of his Person, and for a real
Appearance; nor, if his Business was done, was it material whether he delivered
it by his own Mouth, or by the Voice of any of his trusty and well-beloved
Angels and Agents, who are certainly as capable to officiate in his Place as if
he was there in Person.

Besides, as much a Spirit as the Devil is, we have Reason to believe he is so
far from being Omnipresent, that he would not be able to dispatch a thousandth
Part of the Business he has upon his hands, if he had not a^ innumerable number
of Deputy Representative Devils always at his hand, to execute his Commissions,
and make their Appearance for him, when and as often as the meanest of the
Southsaying Enchanting Race calls him.

And for this Reason it might be, that Ali Albrahazen, as is said above, in the
first Intimacies betwixt him and the Favorite Spirit who spoke to him in
Dream, had a Name given, by which he was to be called three times at every
Round of the Palm Tree Circle; which when he had rehearsed, the Devil, (that is
to say, that particular Deputy Devil which was appointed to wait upon him) was
always to attend and be ready. Whether that said particular Spirit was bound to
his due and daily Attendance for that one Occasion, History has not yet
determined: I have only to say, that if it was so, Friend Ali must be a
Magician of some Quality, that had a whole Devil to attend him personally and
singly, who was allowed to do no other Business, but just wait to receive his
Orders, and give back the Instructions which Ali might stand in need of, unless
perhaps now and then he might go upon some other Errands, where the Occasion
was extraordinary.

We are told, that in America, and in some Nations in Africa, the Magicians or
Wizards and Pawaws found Ways and Means to converse with Satan Face to Face, as
particular Occasions required; and that from the Beginning of Time: for perhaps
his Conversation in those remote Countries might be as ancient as it was any
where, Egypt and Arabia excepted.

It is said also that, he does appear in those Countries, and upon certain
Times or Occasions, in human Shape, sometimes in one Posture, sometimes in
another, as Circumstances may vary; as sometimes he appears angry and
frightful, surrounded with Fire, pr^ceded with Tempest, and the like terrifying
Objects, to let the People know that he can hurt them; sometimes in Smiles, and
sweet spicey Perfumes, and preceded by Music and Melody in the Air, to let them
know he is pleased.

It Is true, it was late in the World before we, in these Parts, knew any thing
of it; and it might be so also before he begun those Practices there: they were
too gross to go down with the first Ages, when the Knowledge of God was not so
entirely obliterated from the Minds of Men as it was afterward; But Idolatry
had prevailed to such a degree in America, that the Devil was perhaps the only
God they had heard any thing of for some thousands of Years. But I return to my
Subject.

Except in those and such like remote and unacquainted Parts of the World, we
do not find much Evidence of the Magicians seeing or conversing with evil
Spirits, of whatever Kind or Quality, in the Shapes of Men or Women: Gods
Angels indeed, who are in sacred Text called the Heavenly Host, are and have
been frequently allowed to make their Appearance, and have been sent hither on
immediate and special Business, as to Abraham, to Jacob, to Moses, to the
Father of John the Baptist, to the Virgin Mary, to the Shepherds at the Birth,
to our Savior himself on diverse Occasions, and to the Women at the Sepulcher,
at the Resurrection, and at the Ascension.

Perhaps this may be the Reason why the Devil has kept his distance; he
remembers no doubt his former Rencounters with Uriel and with Gabriel, or other
Angels, no matter who, mentioned by Name in Mr. Milton, and how they drove him
about from one Part of the Waste to another, out of Heaven, out of Paradise,
and every where else, where they and he happened to meet; and doubtless he does
not much care to rencounter them.

What Shape or Figure he appeared in when he came to tempt his Maker and our
Savior, at that time himself in a State of Personality as Flesh and Blood, as
it is not expressed, so I will not pretend to make a Guess at it: It Is plain
when he was at any time cast out of the poor distempered People by our Savior,
or by his Disciples, though he came evidently out of the Demoniac or Possessed,
yet he did not come out visibly and in Shape, but walking off like a detected
Thief in the dark, and imperceptible, he always played out of sight.

The same Method I believe he took with all sorts of People in the World for
some Ages, especially at the Beginning of Time; and would all our possessed or
professed Dealers with this cunning Manager act in the Dark, and keep him to
themselves, that we might not see their Instructor, or be acquainted with the
Instructions, their Witchery and Craft of Hell would, I believe, be much less
hurtful to the World than it is.

But now it seems as if our modern Magicians acted upon another foot; that they
do not go to the Devil, but the Devil comes to them; they do not go to him in
the Deserts and Retreats of the Dark for Directions and Instructions, but he
acts with them in Concert, and there is a kind of mutual Cohabitation, they go
on hand in hand, and are Fellow-Agents, both Principals and both Accessaries,
only with this usual difference on the Devil's side, viz. if they happen to do
any capital Mischief, so as to bring them to the Gallows, he always leaves the
Hanging Part to them, there he, as we say, slips his Neck out of the Collar,
and is gone.

This subtle Agreement in Mischief between the Magician and the Spirit that
acts with him, is not at all for the Advantage of Mankind; and the Magicians of
the former Mould seem to have been much the less hurtful kind, for they
generally were known to be what they pretended, and were only made use of by
People when they wanted 'em, and for what was required of them; so they had
their Pay and Wages of Unrighteousness, and you had done with them.

But here we converse with the Men, knowing nothing of what they are, and do
not see the Devil that is within them; so we deal with the Devil at second
hand, as we may call it, that is, we talk to him in disguise, make Bargains and
Contracts with him, and that some of the worst kind, by the Agency of these
Magicians, and see not the evil Spirit who is all the while both Director and
Principal in all the Affair. Thus far for those Magicians who really deal in
secret with him, and this is that Magic which we call the Black Art, that is
to say a secret undiscovered Conspiracy between Satan and those Agents of his
which apply to him for Direction, and then their acting again by those
Directions, to abuse, impose upon, and deceive Mankind.

CHAP. VI.
Of who were the first Practicers of Magic, as a Diabolical Art, and how it
was handed on to the Egyptians and Phoenicians, where it was first openly
encouraged.

THE Writers upon this Subject before me seem to have all been at a loss to six
the Original of Magic as an Art Diabolical, and they would fain have us
believe it was in Practice in the Antediluvean World. This I have not denied,
nor shall I deny it still; but granting the Devil to have a Conquest upon the
first Woman, and by her Weakness and Treachery drawing her Husband into the
same Snare, we may give up all their Race for as black as Hell could make them:
And indeed the sacred Text describes them in Terms as black as can well be
expressed, Genesis vi.12. God looked upon the Earth and behold it was corrupt, for
all Flesh had corrupted his way upon the Earth; and ver. 13. The Earth is
filled with Violence; and ver. 5. speaking of Man, the Imagination of the
Thought of his Heart was only Evil continually; and the Wickedness of Man was
great upon the Earth: upon this Account, I say, I gave up all that Race in the
Beginning of this Work; and be it so, or be it only supposed to be so, it is
much the same, nor is it (...) disputing with any Body; if the Devil had the
^agement of them, as it is evident he had, much ^ess could not be expected, let
that part go.

But my Question has been all along, not what was done before but since the
Deluge, and how did Satan introduce himself to the post-diluvean Ages, when and
where, with whom, and in what manner did he make his first Acquaintance and
breaking in upon Mankind for a second Possession, or Management of Art?

I mentioned Zoroaster slain in Battle by Semirami^, and Prometheus and others,
and very early they were; and I stand by my Account of them, that they were the
first Magicians, as the Word or Term Magician implied a Man of Learning, of
Wit, and more than common Understanding, searching after Knowledge, studying
the Rudiments and first Precepts and Principles of Philosophy. But we are now
in Search after another sort of People, who, though they were Searchers into
Knowledge too, yet looked into it in another manner, and for other Purposes,
namely, who searched deeper into things, and into deeper things, I mean
searching into HELL it self; who began first to enter upon Diabolical Enquiries
into the infernal Mysteries and Arts of the Devil, and where those begun it is
not so easy to find out.

Some Authors, as Serenus, and Cassianus from him, and the learned Sir Walter
Raleigh from both, hand down this fabulous Original for our Speculation, viz.
that Ham or Cham the Son of Noah having practiced those superstitious and
sacrilegious Arts (I take their own Words) before the Flood, and knowing that
he could bring no Book or Memorial of that nature into the holy Vessel where
his Life was to be secured by the goodness of his Maker, and wherein he was to
remain with his righteous and godly Father, caused the Rules and Precepts to be
graved in Metal, and in hard Stone, which should receive no Impression from the
Water.

But this is such an evident Fiction, and full of so many Absurdities and
Contradictions, as well as Falsehoods, that it is not only unlikely it should,
but impossible it can be true.

For First, Where were those Plates left? If they were to be preserved in the
Ark, it is certain Noah who had the Superintendency of the whole Building, and
of every thing that was brought into it, or to be admitted, would much less
have admitted copper Plates to be brought in there, or Tables of Stone with
such Abominations engraven on them, than he would have taken in written Books,
if such had been then in use.

Secondly, Had Cham been such a Person, so far engaged in a Correspondence with
Hell, we may reasonably suppose God, who for the Reasons taken from the Sins of
the rest of Mankind destroyed the whole World, would never have spared him, and
so by him laid the Foundation of the Devil's second Kingdom, and of his
debauching the World with Sorcery and Witchcraft: nor do we read that Cham or
Ham was cursed by his Father on any such Account, but for Sins actually
committed after the Deluge, and after their coming out of the Ark; but to
charge Ham with Sorcery and Diabolical Practices before the Flood, is a gross
begging the Question, and by no means to be admitted without good Evidence.

And again, the Writing and Graving upon hard Stones, Metal, etc. requires a
Proof that there was any such thing as the Knowledge and Use of Letters among
Men before the Flood; which after the strictest Enquiry is not yet ascertained,
much less agreed upon by Men of Learning; the same having not been preserved to
Mankind after the Deluge, which it is highly probable would have been, if such a
thing had been in use, the Knowledge having been both innocent and useful.

Thirdly, If such Writing or Engravement were made by Cham, or any one else,
where were they laid, and how found again? when, by the universal Convulsions
suffered during the Flood, not the least Vestiges, Ruins or Remains of Cities
or Towns were to be seen upon the Surface of the Earth, but all was huddled
together in the general Confusion of the Parts, and either buried and
overwhelmed in the Body of the Earth, or driven down by the rapid Currents
which followed at the going off of the Flood; and it seems strange that these
Stones or Plates could be found, when every thing else was lost and overthrown;
when the Surface being perfectly new, no one Part of the World could be known
from another, much less any Place be known by the Situation which it had before.

There are many more Absurdities in the Case as it is proposed; but I must not
dwell too long in a Place, that have so long a Journey to go.

Zoroaster is the next to whom they would ascribe the Magic Art; but I have
proved him to be a very honest Man, and a wise Man, properly speaking, in my
former Chapters, and that he was employed in a much better and honester Study,
such as in discovering the Nature of Herbs and Plants, Metals and Minerals,
precious Stones and Jewels; that he invented the Doctrines and first Principles
of natural and moral Philosophy; and many useful and beneficial Parts of
Knowledge for the Good of Mankind; the Power of Simpathies and Antipathies, and
their various Workings and Objects; in all which I take Abraham also, who was
still before him, to have been especially famous; and that it is probable
Abraham was particularly instructed by Noah himself, for it is evident that
Abraham was upwards of fifty Years old when Noah died.

To come off of all this, there are others who make another Zoroaster, a real
and Diabolical Magician, who was not slain by Semiramis, as that wise Prince
Zoroaster was; but on the other hand, having been teaching his Disciples the
Art of raising and conversing with Spirits, was by one of them taken away out
of his School, all his Scholars looking on; or, if you will have it in a modern
Style, he raised the Devil, to show his Disciples a Test of his Art; and the
Devil carried him away in the face of them all, to give them a Test of his
Power: which (by the way) was but poor Encouragement at that time, for any one
of them to turn Magician; and for that Reason, and knowing the Devil to be no
Fool, makes me give the less heed to that Part of the Story.

Other Writers, of whom Josephus is one, (whose Credit, I must always premise,
goes but a very little way with me) tells us, that Seth the Son of Adam first
discovered the Planets or wandering Stars with their Motions, Influences,
Revolutions, etc. that those with several other useful Branches of Astronomic
Knowledge were handed down by Tradition to Noah, and by him to the new World,
and that then coming from Noah immediately to Abraham, to Zoroaster and others,
they were handed from them to Posterity, as we find it at this Day.

But all this is nothing to the purpose, that is to say, nothing to our
Diabolick Magic, nor does it give any Light into the grand Question, Who was
the first Author of that kind of Study; who was Satan's first Correspondent in
the new World, or first dealt with the Devil after the Flood? I cannot think
indeed that the Devil suffered Mankind to live long unmolested by him, or that
Mankind could go on long without some Business between them: they would be both
eager to renew the Acquaintance, and restore the ancient Familiarity; and it
could not be long before they found some means or other to bring it to pass;
for Lovers you know will meet, whatever are the Difficulties which first
obstruct: and especially the great Artist on his Side had many dark Designs in
view, and new Foundations to lay for the Overthrow of a rising Generation,
which required to be laid deep and strong, and the sooner they were begun, the
better for him.

As to Cham being the Author of Magic in the new World, that indeed I cannot
grant, that is to say, not as the Ancients bring in the Story; namely, that he
invented the Seven liberal Sciences, and wrote them in fourteen Pillars of
Brass or Stone, etc as above; that Cham, as he was, notwithstanding the Curse
he incurred by his ill Behavior to his Father, one of the immediate
Progenitors of the new Race, and particularly of those great and mighty Nations
the Egyptians, Arabians, Africans, and Phoenicians, among whom all human
Wisdom and Learning first flourished, and indeed first began; so I doubt not
but he was capable to instruct them in much of the antediluvean Knowledge, and
that of even the best things, and did so: That he reigned afterward in Egypt a
very long while, is confirmed by all the ancient Writers; particularly in the
Catalogue of the Egyptian Kings, of which Cham was certainly the first, they
are said to reign and succeed one another thus, Cham peopled Egypt the Year of
the World 1847, 191 Years after the Flood. Osyris or Mizraim the Son of Cham
2008, 352 Years after the Flood.


N.B. This was the King who elevated Joseph, and who built the Pyramids, not
for Tombs and Monuments only, but for Magic, that is, Astronomick
Observations, as Semiramis did the great Tower of Babylon.

From hence it appears that Cham came to Egypt when he was near three hundred
Years old; suppose him to be an hundred Years old when he came out of the Ark,
which was the most, for his elder Brother Sem was no more, and that he reigned
in Egypt one hundred and sixty one Years, in which time he made the Egyptians
and the Arabians, and also the Phoenicians, for they were all his Offspring,
very polite Nations.

The Arabians were his Posterity by his Son Chus. The Phoenicians by his Son
Canaan whom Noah cursed. The Egyptians by his Son Mizraim, which was the King
Osyris above. The Libyans and Aethiopians by his Sons Phut and Lud.
So that in short, Cham was so exceeding fruitful, that he peopled all Africa,
and since that, from Africa all America, and those particularly populous Parts
of Asia called Arabia and Syria.

I expect my lightheaded Readers, whose Wits are too volatile for this remote
Story, will call this a dry Subject, though to me I confess it is just the
contrary; but as it is too grave for them, I will endeavor it shall not be too
long for them; so to oblige Folly, and I am sure to the Dislike of the truly
wise and solid Heads, I leave off before I have done, that I may not abate that
most fashionable Custom of writing most of that which is pleasant, and least of
that which is profitable; so willing is your humble Servant to be a Man of
Mode, and such a Weight does he put on those who have really no Weight in
themselves.

In favor then of the Usage of the Times, and especially of the Genius and
Temper I mention above, I am to leave off those grave though useful Digressions,
and come back to the Progress of Magic, the particular Subject before me.

That the Devil was the Aggressor in his new Correspondence with Mankind is not
to be doubted, but that is not so much our Business; as to know when this
Correspondence began, who was the first among Men that carried on the
clandestine Dealing, and how it was managed on both Sides.

We have cleared Cham of the Charge, as far as Probabilities will go in his
Favor; and the Truth is, Cham grew quickly too great, was above the Occasion
for it, and being the first, and perhaps the greatest Monarch upon Earth, even
before Ninus or Bell ( Baal) he had no need of turning Conjurer and Magician,
which became presently the Work of a meaner Race of Men than Cham; for the
Magicians, especially speaking of them now as Witches and Inchanters, were not
Kings and Emperors, but the Servants of Kings and Emperors; kept and maintained
for the wicked Works and Services which they did for them.

Indeed the Magicians which I mentioned at first, were Worshippers of the
divine Being, or eminent Examples of the Homage Men owed to the true God; nay,
and even after some time were Teachers of divine things too, though under the
mistaken Mediums of Idols and Images; These Magi, or Magicians, as I have
observed, were at first so reverenced and honored by the Nations they served,
as often to be made Governors of the Commonwealth; Public Benefactors having
the most Right to the public Honors and Advancements in those Countries where
they had been accepted for their Merits.

Hence it seems most natural, that all Kings should be Patriots, seeing the
very Name and Dignity, much more the Office, began in the Thing; but that by
the way; how far the Patriot and the Royalty go together in these Days, how the
Name and the Dignity correspond, let the Kings of the Earth examine, whose
Business it is to mend it where it is not so, and to let it be more known where
it is.

It is then pretty hard to find out who were the first Magicians, taking the
Word Magic as I now understand it, viz. in the worst Sense; and yet it does
not seem to be very long after the Flood before we shall find some of them at
work; for in the immediate Reign after Cham, that is, in the Reign of Mizraim
or Osyris, which History makes to be the Pharaoh whose Dream Joseph
interpreted, and who reigned two hundred sixty one Years; in his Reign it is
evident there were such People. See the Place, Genesis xli.8. He sent and called
for all the Magicians of Egypt, and all the wise Men thereof.

It is true it does not appear positively that these were Magicians of the
worst Sort, but it seems to be so, because Heaven reserved from them the
revealing to Pharaoh the Interpretation of his Dreams; which however might be
to preserve the Honor to Joseph, and to make way for all the great Events
which followed; but still, I say, we do not know that here were none of the
present kind of wicked Magicians, and we have much reason to believe there were.

But within the Space of about two hundred Years after, we are sure to find
them; nay, the Text is plain, they were there when Moses and Aaron stood before
the last Pharaoh who held the People in Captivity; for then they imitated the
Miracles of Moses and Aaron by their Enchantments, that is, by Sorcery and
Witchcraft; now even this was but a little above eight hundred Years from the
Flood; and thus much may suffice for the Chronology of of Witchcraft and
Sorcery.

Being thus come to a tolerable Certainty as to Time, when this Art was first
practiced, we shall be led more directly to the Persons, by entering a little
into an Enquiry after the Practice, that is, the Manner made use of in those
early Times of the Art; for by discovering what they did, we shall discover
also who did it: They acted certainly from the Beginning, by certain Mystic or
concealed Conjurations, such as uncouth Noises and Sounds, strange Gestures,
Postures, and barbarous Magic Noises, of which we shall say more in their
Place.

But what, say our Enquirers, were those things called Enchantments, which
constitute what is called the Black Art, or the Craft Magical? The Text says
the Magicians did so and so, by their Enchantments; that is, whatever Wonders
or Miracles the two Prophets of God wrought by the Finger and Power of God,
these Men imitated by the Power of the Devil.

Those Enchantments I take to consist of certain agreed Gestures and Noises,
certain barbarous Names and Words, and such inexplicable Terms of hellish Art,
which upon Concert between Hell and the hellish Agent, are to be so and so
understood between them; on expressing of which, and making such Circles and
Figures on the Ground as is agreed, the evil Spirit with whom they have
concerted the Affair beforehand, shall appear, and appear too in such and such
Form as they appoint to bring him out in; and this I give as a brief Definition
of what they call Enchantment.

And here, not to preach upon the Point, or to insist that even what is thus
acted must be by the Power of Heaven concurring, for this is what all that are
not Atheists acknowledge; but, I say, not to dwell on this Part, I make so free
with our Fellow-Conjurers as to say, they put a great deal of Cheat upon the
World, in pretending to act by supernatural Powers in those Enchantments, let
them be of what sort they will, whereas they really acted much by Cheat and
Trick, Lege^demain or Slight of Hand, and pretended the Prince of the Air, when
he had nothing to do in it; that however some of those things were certainly by
his, the Devil's Aid and Assistance, as it was with Ali Albrahazen, and has
been with others to this Day, which we shall not and cannot deny, yet 'ti^
apparent much of it has been, as I said, mere juggling and deceiving.

As the Devil has not tied himself up to Methods in his acting with Mankind, so
neither have the Magicians of the World kept to any certain Methods, as to a
stated Rule in their Actings among us, but have, on many Occasions, made use of
differing Methods; I mean as to their Management between the Devil and them;
and also as to their apparent putting the Belief of it upon us.

How we shall do to know and distinguish when the Magician puts the Devil upon
us, and when he only acts the Juggler, would be worth while to find out; and
did either the Devil or the Magician act by any stated Rules and Methods, we
might make some Judgment about it; but on the other hand, they are so much and
so often both Devils and both Jugglers, that it is very difficult to fix them.

For Example, in their coming to Audience, obtaining Admittance, or call it
what you will, the great Question is, How do they let the Devil know they want
to speak with him? either he is always at their Elbow, and can hear them
whenever they call, wherever they are, and on whatever Occasion; and that
would be to ascribe either great things to him, as a Person, or a great Number
to him, as an Host.

Be that as it will, it is certain these People have certain concerted Terms
agreed, as I said above, upon repeating which he is to appear to them, and act
for them as they shall agree, and those I call Enchantments. There are also
other agreed Signals, upon making which, the Devil, according to the Terms
agreed on between them, shall act in such and such a manner without appearing;
and those I call Charms.

Thus, it seems, the Devil and Dr. B^reman agreed the Matter; the good Doctor
having a mind to pay home an old Jest upon a young Gentleman that had abused a
poor Girl, a ^lient of his; the Doctor, it seems, told her, that if she could
persuade him to get into her Smock upon their n^x^ Intimacy, he would certainly
agree to marry her; upon which the poor Girl makes herself a new one, and very
large for the Purpose, and getting the young Fellow into it, the Doctor, as was
said, laid such a Charm upon it, or the Devil by his Order, that the Fellow
could never get out of it till he gave the Girl a Note under his Hand to marry
her the next Morning, and accordingly did it.

If the Story be Fact, as is loudly affirmed, the Devil acted upon the honest
side it seems; which I do not however charge upon him as a thing that he is
often guilty of; but now and then, for the Credit of his Employers, he may be
allowed to go out of his Way a little.

What those things called Charms are, and how made use of, may occasion some
Speculation as we go on, and when we come to speak of Charms as they are used
between the Magicians and the People; but I am now upon the Subject of Charms
and Enchantments, as they relate to the proper Intercourse between the Magician
and the Devil, or the Spirit whom he acts with, or by or for whom he acts, for
it is not easy to express it right.

I say, it is not easy to say in what Capacity the Magician is to be understood
to act. 1. Whether WITH (that is) in Concert and Agreement, or, 2. as we might
say, in Partnership with the Devil; or whether in a superior Orb, as a Magician
of Quality, making use of an attendant, obsequious, commanded Devil, always at
his call, to do what he bids him, jump over his Stick, run and go, fetch and
carry like a Dog, as some eminent Magicians of State have been said to act; or
as St. Dunstan, St. Francis, the Abbot of Crowland, and others did by him, who
they tell us set him to work, sent him of Errands, made him ring the Bell to
Vespers, sweep the Church, and a thousand good things the serviceable Devil did
for them, if his good Humor is not belied by the Priests knavery, and Satan
charged with more Complaisance for 'em, than ever he was guilty of: Or, 3.
Whether the Devil is Master, which I must own is more likely, and the Magician
Servant; and then he does not act the Devil, but the Devil acts him, and makes
him do every thing he bids him; I say all these are doubtful Points, and not
yet fully understood by us, or at least not easily.

But be it which of these it will, there must be some concerted Terms of come
and call between the Devil and his Correspondents; like Ships at Sea, they must
converse by Signals, they must know when to meet, and when to summons for a
meeting; when to appear, and when to disappear; and to do this, is one of the
constituting Parts of Magic; for without it the Magician is as good as no
body, and the Devil in short would appear of no use to him.

In some Parts of India they allege to this Day, that he is talked with in the
apparent Shape of a Man, and in the Habit of their Priests; but that is not the
Business; they add that whenever they want to speak with him, they go up to
such and such Mountains in Troops or Assemblies; such as ours at New-Hall
perhaps, only with some specific Differences, which I might mention but that
they are too trifling to trouble you with. When they are all together, they
call him with a little Kettle-Drum, just as I told you the good old Wives hive
their Bees, save that they beat it on the wrong side; then they pronounce some
Words which they call Charms, and the Devil comes without fail.

It is hard to find out in History, what Words those were, that were used for
Charms in Egypt, and Arabia, between the Devil and the Magicians for so many
Ages; it is certain they differed in differing Countries, and it is as certain
they differed as the several Persons acted together or apart; but I am as much
at a loss to find out what the Devil should mean by suffering those Words, or
any Words at all, to charm, call, awaken or alarm him, as I am to know what the
Words were; but at present let us think of the Words.

The Greeks have left us a Word, which was used by the Magicians of Antiquity
among them, upon these and many more such Occasions. This is that famous Trine,
or Triangular Word called Abracadabra, which drawn out in its Equilateral Sides
stands thus. ABRACADABRA

There is abundance of learned Puzzle among the Ancients to find out the
Signification of this Word; the subtle Position of the Letters gave a ^ind of
Reverence to them, because they read it ^s it were every way, upwards and
downwards, ^ackwards and forwards, and many will have it still that the Devil
put them together: Nay, they be^an at last to think it was old Legion's
Surname, and whenever he was called by that Name, he used to come very readily;
for which reason the old Women in their Chimney-corners would be horribly
^fraid of saying it often over together, for if they should say it a certain
number of times, they had a Notion it would certainly raise the Devil.

They say on the contrary, that it was invented by one Basilides a learned
Greek, that it contained the great and awful Name of the Divinity, and that it
was used for many Years for the opposing the Spells and Charms of the Pagans;
that is, the Diabolical Spells and Charms of the Pagan Magicians.

But be this as it will, it fell into Contempt in after-Ages, and was used by
the Magicians themselves; so that its containing, or being intended to contain
the Name of God, seems to me to be a Pretense only, to add a kind of Veneration
to the Word; whereas it it now dropped, only that some of our old Women, and
quack Magicians, use it for a Spell or Charm, as they would have it called, to
cure Agues, being written on a piece of Parchment, and hanged about the Neck of
the afflicted Person.

It would be nothing but crowding our Work with old Stories, to collect
together what they call Spells and Charms, which our People here make use of,
(wherever they had them) to cure Distempers. I know an old Book-ridden
Bunyanist, that is to say, a Baptist Preacher in Bedfordshire, who cured Agues,
by only saying some Words, while he gave the Patient a piece of Paper to put
into his Pocket; others I have known cured by saying some Words only, and
giving them nothing at all I could give you many Examples, and you will find
many more in the learned Collections of Mr. Aubery, and others, where in
particular there is the Question answered, Why saying some Words which have no
Signification, and which neither the Person to whom they are said, or the
Person himself who says them, can understand, should work a Cure; and the
Answer is, because the Gods understood what the Person meant, who first
implored their Aid in those Words, and to which they have still regard.

This shows a little, what I am bringing all these things to; namely, that this
was the Remains of the old Pagan Magic, and is all derived from it, though
perhaps it is practiced with less criminal Correspondence than it was then, the
People that now do these things not knowing what they say, or to whom they say
it, yet certainly the thing is the same.

And this too gives us a light into the ancint Practices of the Magicians in
Arabia, and Egypt, and the Nature of those things which the Scripture call^
Enchantments; and how, and to what uses those Enchantments were obtained and
applied. take The whole in this summary Account, which I gather from the
exactest Observation of the usage of those Times, and of the behavior of the
People in the following Ages.

Of the Nature and Original of Enchantments.

The Story of the Devil and Ali Albrahazen the Sabean or Persian, stands as a
good Foundation; we have another without a Name, an Egyptian, I will not add a
Name by way of Invention, because I will not put my Sanction to the Truth of
all the Particulars, ^ut the Story is of the same Use, whether one Word of the
Fact be true or no. And so, though I might take up some time with Vouchers for
the Relation, I leave it upon your Hands as a current Tradition, for those
things are too ancient for Quotation of any sort.

N.B. There is no room to question, but that in Arabia, Egypt, Syria, and
those Countries, where so much Magic was at first practiced, and where the
Devil's Correspondence with Mankind was begun, where Magic was in its
Perfection for so many Ages, and practiced with such apparent Success, there
are a great many strange Stories current to this Day, and the Mouths of the
People are still filled with Traditional Accounts of the Wonders of the
Ancients; their strange Perfomances, and the Effects of their Magical Skill;
the People are full of them, and even our Europeans, when they travel into
those Countries, bring away innumerable Tales of this kind, which lose little
in the coming, as perhaps this among the rest.

The Account I am now going to give, relates to a Magician of great Note it
seems, though, as I have said, I have not his Name, whom the Devil, if it was the
Devil, managed much in the same way as the other, and it is of like use in the
Case before us. For as it confirms the Devil's Conduct to be much the same with
Mankind, though in different Places, so it shows us that the same occasions suit
him to make use of: Before, he frighted the Sabeans with a Meteor or Ball of
Fire in the Air; Now he alarms Egypt with a Comet; either of them things of no
Signification in themselves, and which we in those days can look on without
running to Conjurers for their Interpretation: But in those younger days they
were surprising and terrifying, and therefore very proper to amuse the World
with, and to make even Kings, as well as People, send for their Magicians, to
enquire after the Events of them.

In like manner we find in both these Accounts, the Devil not only making use
of Dreams for disturbing the Fancies of the People, as well their Kings as
others; but we find him in both using that Power peculiar to him as a Spirit,
namely, of causing People to Dream of this, or that, (whatever he pleases) on
purpose to furnish a Counterfeit Interpretation to his Favorite Southsayer,
and raise his Reputation at Court, in order to serve his ( Satan's) Interest in
other subsequent Delusions: But I refer to the Story.

An Arabian of Ancient Fame, and Eminent in the Egyptian Court for his great
Skill in South-saying, having long studied the Knowledge of hidden and secret
things, and arrived to great Skill in the Motions and Revolutions of the Stars
and Planets, had made himself famous on that Account: Having also much studied
the Appearances and Nature of the Planets, Vapors, Meteors, and other the
Phenomenon of the upper Regions, from whence he made great and accurate
Improvements in Natural and Experimental Philosophy; he also studied and
understood the nature of Plants, Flowers, Drugs, Gums, etc. and the Influences
of the Heavenly Bodies upon them, giving them Virtue, Color, Aromatic
Flavor, and most healing and comforting Powers; and by this Knowledge, our
Learned Arabian obtained the Fame of a most excellent Physician, as well as of
a wise Man, and Southsayer, and was had in universal Esteem, but especially I
say in the Court of Pharaoh King of Egypt.

N.B. They do not tell us which Pharaoh this was, so that the Chronology of
this Arabian is something defective in that Part; but neither is this very
material, because much of it will be discovered by the other Circumstances.

Unwearied in his Diligence and Studies, and eaten up with the Desire of
Knowledge, this Arabian Doctor (for such we shall now call him) not at all
abating his Search after Wisdom by the Fame already obtained; but seeing daily
that there was an Abyss of Knowledge yet behind, and that all he knew was as
nothing, compared to what he was still ignorant of, he pursued his Search into
Nature with the utmost Application: All Night, yea many Nights together, he
continued upon the Hills, and in the Deserts, whither he wandered; for Egypt
is a plain Country for many Leagues together, from Memphis where he resided. I
say, all Night he spent in looking up into Heaven, and all Day in poring upon
the Earth, searching into the Secrets of Nature, and trying and proving the
Virtues of the Plants and Fruits, and other Rarities, the Product of that rich
and fertile Soil: And thus he wasted and exhausted his vital and animal
Strength, to feed and nourish the Strength of his Mind, and fill his Head and
Heart with Divine Wisdom and Understanding. Thus far it must be acknowleg'd he
was a true Original Magician, and a Man of Merit as well as Fame.

It happened in his wandering through the Desert, to the Station where he
usually fixed his Place of Astronomick Observations, that he saw rise up out of
the Sea, Northward from his Situation, a Body of Fire, which at first seemed to
him one plain Flame, making an oblong Square, of an immense Length and Breadth.
But as it ascended with the ordinary Motion of the Heavens, or rather according
to the new Systems, the ordinary Motion of the Earth, it lessened in its
apparent Dimensions, and also came to bear a more regular Form than before;
till coming to its full Height it appeared after some time to be a Comet or
Blazing-star, which was visible above the Horizon, as is usual in such Bodies,
for about twenty six Days (or Nights rather) successively, and then was seen no
more.

This Appearance being entirely new, surmounted all the powers of his
Understanding, and extremely perplexed him; and being one Night more than
ordinarily afflicted about it, he broke out into Words to this purpose, though
not directed to any of the Gods, not knowing it seems which of them were able
to inform him, and which not. O! that some of the blessed Inhabitants of the
UNSEEN WORLD would assist me in searching out the Mystery of this strange
Phenomenon.

He was the more anxious about it, because, at his return to his own House at
Memphis, he had an Account, that Pharaoh had summoned all the Magicians and
wise Men of Egypt, to give him their several Opinions of the meaning of this
strange Appearance; for the King had either seen it, or heard of it from
others. The Appearance of it, as I have said, being constant for about twenty
six days after the Arabian had first discovered it; and the wise Men differing
very much in their Accounts of it, their Judgment had increased the King's
Curiosity very much; besides, the Arabian Southsayer had notice given him, that
he would receive a Summons or Order to come to the King's Palace upon the same
Occasion.

Being thus, as is said, extremely puzzled with this Affair, and believing
perhaps that he should do no more when he came to the King, than discover his
Ignorance, as the rest of the Southsayers and the Magicians had done, he was
very uneasy, and resolved to retire into Aethiopia for some time, till the
Enquiry might be over; and as he was not sent for to the King, when the rest of
the Magicicians were, it would be no Impeachment of his Fame, that he was gone
abroad for some time.

One Day, while this public Uneasiness lasted, as he was walking toward his
usual Observatory as above, there joined him a grave and venerable old Man, who
saluting him with the usual Blessing of the Times, and in the Arabic Tongue,
falls into Discourse with him upon diverse Subjects, such as seemed to show that
the Stranger was, like himself, an Enquirer after Knowledge. Among the rest of
their Discourse, the Arabian particularly gave the Stranger an Account of the
late Appearance which he had seen, as above.

They walked together till they came to the Foot of a gently rising Mount, on
the Top of which the Arabian had erected for himself a little Hut, or Bower of
Palm Tree Leaves; here the Stranger seeing him ready to go up to the Hill,
offered to take his Leave, but he entreated him to go up to his Observatory (as
he called it) with him, and to stay with him that Night, that he might show him
the said Appearance, and that in the Morning he should go whither he pleased.

When they were come up to the Ascent of the Hill, the Day being shut in, and
the time for Observation of the Stars come on, the Heavens being clear, and the
Moon absent under the Horizon, leaving them a fair View of the Stars, perfectly
bright and clear; the Stranger asked him, in what part of the Hemisphere he had
seen the Comet rise and set, and what was the particular Sphere of its Motion;
all which he showed him most exactly, and at last the Comet it self, not
forgetting at the same time to let the Stranger know, how anxious and concerned
he had been to understand the Nature and Reason, as well as the Import of the
Appearance of such a Body, and to what particular Nation it had a Reference;
and at last told him, how vehemently he had called out to the Gods, to give him
some wise Interpreter, to instruct him in the Nature of such Appearances, and
of that in particular.

The Stranger took no notice of his knowing that he had done so, but began with
a Philosophical Discourse of Comets; as of Stars, which, in their ordinary
Revolutions, are but seldom visible; and therefore when they do appear, says
he, it is generally supposed that they import great Changes and Troubles among
Men, which, says he, may in one Sense be true, because they frequently are very
much the occasion of them.

But, says the Arabian, how shall we know when they have Important
Significations, and when not, and to what Nations and Countries their
Significations are directed, and which are not concerned in them?

Says the Stranger, There are Methods to know these things also; and the Gods,
when they are minded to communicate these things, do it their own way. But
Father, says the Arabian, if you can relieve my Thought in the Signification of
the present Difficulty, pray be so kind; for I acknowledge my Ignorance, and
that which perplexes me the more about it, is, that I expect to be called
before Pharaoh tomorrow, whom I reverence in the highest manner. I beseech you
inform me what I am to call this strange new Appearance, and what are its
Consequences to the World.

Here the Stranger looking upon him with a smiling Aspect, replied; I have
great Regard for your being esteemed by Pharaoh, and shall let you into the
Knowledge of what you desire, for your farther good Fortune. Know then, added
he, with an Aspect all shining and pleasant, 'The Appearance we now see, is a
Comet or Blazing-star, the like of which has not been seen in Egypt in the
Memory of the most ancient Man in the Kingdom, which makes the wise Men
entirely at a loss about it; neither have they received any traditional Account
of such a Phenomenon from their Fathers. 'Comets, continued he, are not, as
fixed Stars, Bodies of Fire, burning in the same manner as the Sun; but Bodies
of a different Nature, composed either of prepared created Matter, suited from
the beginning for Inflammation, or of vast Collections of exhaled and condensed
Matter, subject to Inflammation, and more or less inflamed according to the
Position of their Orbits and Motion; and therefore the Eruption of their Flame
is but on one side, or on one side chiefly, (as we see this burning) with a
continued and vehement Eruption: They move in the utmost Extent of the Waste or
Expance of Space, which you call the Ether or Air, and their Distance is so
great, and their Revolutions so tedious, that they sometimes do not come so
near this Globe as to be visible, no not in five hundred or a thousand Years;
and this is the second that was ever seen in this Hemisphere, since the great
Deluge of the Earth, in the Years of Pharaoh's Great Grandfather's Father,
being now above eight hundred Years past.

'The long Tail, or extended Flame which you see at one side of the Star, is
the Eruption of Flame, which, as I say, continually burns with great Violence,
and is sometimes extended to an immense and unmeasurable Length, even to that
of many hundred thousand Millions of Stadia, and blazes out for ever.



The Arabian heard this with a surprise of Pleasure, and was even ready to
kneel down and worship him; which you will say it is much the Devil should
refuse: But when he was just going to enquire of him what Import this
Appearance was to the World, and to Egypt more especially, and above all to
the King in particular, he was not only disappointed to the last degree, but
most miserably afflicted and surprised; for that turning his Head casually from
him, or rather his Head being turned, or his Eyes turned from him, he in that
very Moment disappeared, and was gone.

It was in vain that the Arabian Doctor ran out of the Hut or Bower, and down
the Hill after him, to his two Servants, who always attended him at the Foot of
the Hill, enquiring of them if the Father, the venerable Stranger, came not to
them; they constantly and faithfully affirmed that they had watched, as was
their Duty, against wild Beasts for his Security, and that nothing had passed
by them.

It was in vain also, that he went back lamenting, and calling aloud upon the
Stranger, whom he styled Father, to return. How is it, said he, that you could
thus far illuminate my Understanding, and reveal the secret of Wisdom but in
part; promising to me a clear and perfect Knowledge, and then leave me
uninstructed, and in the dark, in the main and grand Inquiry? But no Voice, no
Appearance returned, which afflicted him sore; and the Day appearing, he
resolved to continue there the next Night, in hopes he might see him again in
the Evening, as he had done before. After resolving on this, and having been
waking (as is said) all Night, he laid him down to sleep. He was no sooner
fallen into a deep Sleep, but he dreamed that he saw, (or, to speak it in the
Language of the East,) the ancient Father, the venerable Stranger, appeared to
him again in a Dream.

He was most agreeably surpised with the Sight of him, and according to the
Eastern Custom fell at his Feet, embracing his Knees, and with all the
passionate Expressions which he had used before, expostulated with him, that he
should leave him so in the dark, and half informed, after having assured him
that he would fully let him into the Knowledge of that most important Secret.

The Vision on the contrary seemed displeased, and looked at him with a less
smiling and pleasant Countenance than he had done before, when he was awake;
and with a stern Voice asked him wherefore he called after him so
importunately, when he had staid so long with him, and had so fully informed
him of all things he could desire.

O my Father! says the Arabian, (though himself a hundred and fifty Years old)
did not you put me in Expectation, that you would likewise inform me of what
mighty Importance this frightful Comet should be to Pharaoh, and to his
Kingdom, and to the Country where we are, that I might obtain the Favor of the
King, and be accepted for my extraodinary Wisdom and Knowledge among the People?

' Thou Fool! says the Vision harshly: O thou of weak and empty Judgment! was
it not sufficient to thee, that I had let thee know it was no new thing,
nothing out of the Course of Nature, but a Comet or Star of a different kind
from, and remoter Position than the rest; that it came to be visible here only
in the Course of its ordinary Revolution, and may perhaps appear just in the
same Manner, and in the same Place again, about seven or eight hundred Years
hence?

'Can any thing be more natural, than that when I had told thee this, thou
should know also that there are no extraordinary things portended in
Nature's common and ordinary Events; no Portentous Threatening; no ill Omens or
Bodings in the common Appearances of the Heavens; no more in one Star than in
another? When I had therefore told thee, that it was only an ordinary
Revolution of a Comet, I in effect told thee that it imported nothing, either
to Pharaoh or to thee, or to any Person or Place whatever.



The Arabian, surprised, and yet informed by this Discourse, stood justly
reproved, and for a while answered not a Word; which the Vision as it were
observing, spoke again as follows.

'Tho' I have given thee sufficient Light, whereby to expose the Ignorance of
the wise Men, who have been called before Pharaoh, yet there are many things
which thou may say to the King, which are of great Importance to him and his
Kingdom to know, which thou shall be enabled by me to give him the Knowledge
of, and which, if thou diligently listen to my Instructions, shall set thee at
the right Hand of the King in all his Councils, and cause thee to be esteemed
the wisest Man in his Kingdom: But then thou must be very careful to observe
all the Rules which I shall give thee, and to act in exact Obedience to them.

The Doctor awaking, and the Vision being ended, he now began to understand who
it was he had been conversing with, namely an Angel of the invisible World, (I
suppose the Word Devil was not known among them at that time,) and that for the
future he had a fair Opportunity of good Intelligence from the other World,
upon all necessary Occasions, and upon the most important Enquiries.

Comforted exceedingly with this Intelligence, he hastens back to the City, and
being sent for to appear before the King, as he expected, Pharaoh told him the
Occasion of his sending for him, and how the Southsayers and wise Men were
puzzled and perplexed about it, but could give him no Rational Account of it.

Upon this the Arabian told the King, that he was sorry to find him, Pharaoh,
made so uneasy by the Apprehensions of a thing, which though above the Reach and
Understanding of the Magicians, had yet in it nothing Extraordinary, nothing
out of the Course of Nature; that there was nothing in it more than the
necessity of its own Motion occasioned, and that it had therefore no portentous
Import or Signification to Pharaoh, or to any of his People, or of his
Dominions; and that this he might be assured of.

Then he went on, and gave the King an Account of the Nature of the thing, as a
Comet or Blazing-star; and that Word for Word as the ancient Stranger or Spirit
had delivered it; and this he did too in the Audience, not of Pharaoh only, but
of his whole Court; and that with such a general Applause, that all the other
Magicians and Southsayers acknowledged the Justice and Reason of what he said,
and the King was made perfectly easy upon that Account. From whence they tell
us, that the Egyptians, though in other Cases the most superstitious People in
the World, and that used formerly to be the most concerned upon all new
Phenomenon in the Heavens, or upon any unusual Appearances, flying immediately
to the Divinations, and to their Southsayers, and Magicians, to interpret and
account for such things to them, are yet, ever since this Discovery by the
Arabian Southsayer so long ago, under no Concern at all upon the Appearance of
Comets or Blazing-stars, on any Account whatsoever.

But I return to the Arabian. It was no small Fame which he gained by the
Solution he had given of this Appearance of a Comet; Pharaoh preferred him
before all the Magicians of Egypt, and exalted him to diverse Honors, but
particularly to that of being near his Person, to counsel and advise him upon
all extraordinary Occasions, as well in Matters of State and Politics, as
Matters of Difficulty: Nor did the rest of the Magicians envy him the Honors
he enjoyed, for they were convinced he merited all the King had done for him;
and which was more, they did not find they could come at any Part of the
extraordinary Intelligence or Understanding in things, which he was Master of.

In the mean time, as he was too wise to communicate to any body the source of
his Information, so he was too well satisfied with his new Intelligence, to
neglect the Part he was directed to act, which was frequently to meet with the
Vision, which had once been so favorable to him: In a word, he followed with
the greatest Assiduity the begun Intimacy, and sailed not to attend the very
next Night in particular, after he had made his Speech concerning the Comet
before the King.

On that occasion, going toward his Observatory as usual, he was encountered
by a Man, in the Habit of an Ethiopian, riding upon a Mule, and having a Bow
hanging over his Shoulder, a Sheaf of Arrows at his Side, and a Lance in his
Hand; the Man seemed to shun him, and offered to go forward, but presently
turned back, and with a kind of Compliment to the Arabian Doctor, inquired of
him, if there were any way for him to Foord through the River Nilus, which at
that time of the Year was so low, as to be in some Places almost dry, and
easily passable on Horseback. The Arabian courteously answered him, that there
was not any Place near the Road or Track which he was going in, and that he
being as he perceived a Stranger and alone, it would be hazardous for him to
venture; but that if he would be pleased to stay, and go with him to a little
Hut which he had hard by, for his Retreat in the Night, he would guide him in
the Morning to a Place where he should pass the River with Safety.

The Traveller thanked him for the kind Offer, but seemed rather inclined to go
on; Sir, says the Arabian, the Night approaches, and you may meet with other
Dangers in the way from Crocodiles, Lions, etc. pressing him again to stay; but
he declined it again, and as to the Dangers he laughed at and despised them;
Well then, says the kind hospitable Arabian, let me send one of my Servants
with you to guide you. He seemed at first inclined to accept so kind an Offer
as that was, but falling a little farther into Discourse, the Arabian perceived
the Stranger began to look pleased, and fancying he would accept the first
Offer, viz. of staying all Night, moved it again, and with a little additional
entreating, the Stranger consented to that Part, and turned back with them.

The Arabian, though with two Servants with him, was always on foot; he had
himself no Weapons, being without fear but of wild Beasts, against which his
two Servants were his Security, who were armed with Swords and Lances; but the
Stranger, well armed as above, turning back, they went on fearless together
toward the Hill, which was about the Distance of two Miles.

In the Way, the Arabian was a little shocked with the unusual Civility which a
great overgrown Crocodile showed them; who rushing out of a marshy kind of Bog
near the Way, came forward toward them, but on a sudden turned back, and very
obsequiously crept into the lurking Place, where it had just before come out
from, and lay still there as quiet as if it had been hushed by its own Fears,
as perhaps it was.

At a small Distance farther they met two She Lions, or as some call them
Lionesses; and as they heard them growling at some Distance, before they were
seen; they, that is, the Arabian and his two Servants, began to show some
Concern about it; but behold, when the Lions appeared, they immediately turned
about, and fled with the utmost Precipitation.

After a little farther walking, the Arabian turning to his Guest, told him,
There, pointing to the Hill which was close at hand, was his little Retreat, to
which he had invited him, and desired him to leave his Mule with his Servants,
and to walk up the little Mount with him; which the Traveller very readily did,
bidding his new Landlord go before to show him the way, and he would follow
him, as also he did; but what a Surprise think you was the poor Arabian in
between Joy and Fright, when turning about at the Top of the Ascent to receive
his Guest, he saw nobody but the ancient venerable Stranger, who had at first
appeared to him, and from whom he ^ad received so much kind Instruction and
Assistance before.

The Apparition (for such I suppose it should be now called) perceiving him in
some Confusion, bid him not be surprised, for he was still his Friend, and in
the same Disposition to serve him as before, and asked him whether he came that
Night in Expectation of meeting him or not; to which the Arabian replied, He
did, hoping to see him in Person or in Vision, having something to offer, which
he hoped he would be so kind as to comply with him in.

Upon asking what it was, he told him, That Pharaoh had a great Difficulty upon
him, and had asked him his Opinion therein, and he knew not what Answer to give.

What is this Difficulty? says the Apparition.

Why, says the Arabian, he has a private Account from his Spies, that
Thermesbus, the General of the Armies of Aethiopia, designs to invade him in
the Beginning of the Year, with an infinite Number of Troops; and as the King
is in greater Readiness to begin the War, than the other, he wants my Opinion
whether he shall make War upon Aethiopia forthwith, or stay till he is obliged
to do it in his own Defense.

Go you back, says the Spectre to him, and wait till the King sends for you to
interpret his Dream or Dreams.

What Dream? says the Arabian.

Why tomorrow Night, says the Spectre, the King shall dream, that a black
Elephant came up to the Gates of his Palace, and that with his mighty Tusks or
Teeth he broke down the Gates, and was entering in to make farther Spoil; when
the Gates being, as I say, broken down first, the Tower which was over the
Gates being shaken with the Fall, fell down soon after upon the Elephant, and
well-nigh crushed him to death; but that, though by his great Strength he bore up
the Weight, yet he was so terrified with the Fall of the Tower upon him, that
he withdrew into the Desert and went quite away.

And what Interpretation shall I give of this Dream? says the Arabian.

You shall tell him, says the Spectre, That the black Elephant is the King of
Aethiopia; that he shall send his General to invade him, even to the Gates of
his Frontier City of Zaba, and shall enter the Gates thereof; but that the
Egyptians in Garrison within shall break out and fall upon him, and though by
the great Power of their Troops they shall escape, yet that they shall retire
and go back into the Deserts of Aethiopia, and not dare to look upon him any
more.

But what then shall I advise to be done? says the Arabian.

You will find it most rational, says the Spectre, to advise him to begin the
War; and may promise him Success, without Fear; but if not, let him place very
great Garrisons in all the Frontier Towns of his Dominions, South, and
especially in Zaba or Zabda; and let him wait in a good Posture of Defense,
till the Ethiopian Army advances to the Siege of that Place; and so his Dream
will come to pass.

This was all wonderful; the Arab was surprised with being thus furnished for
ingratiating himself with his Master the King of Egypt; he knew well enough,
that to be able to make Pharaoh dream what he pleased, and then to interpret it
how he pleased, must needs make him pass for a great Man, in a Country too so
superstitiously addicted to Dreams, and so uneasy to have those Dreams
interpreted, as the People of Egypt were.

Thus furnished, he goes back to the City, where he heard nothing till the
third Day in the Morning, when the whole Court was in Disorder, all Faces
seemed cloudy, and every Mind disturbed: The News was soon spread into all
Parts of the City, that the King had had a frightful and terrible Dream, which
had so distracted his Mind, ('it is supposed they did not call him His Majesty)
that he could not rest.

The wise Men and the Southsayers, Magicians and Astrologers were immediately
sent for in a great hurry to give their Opinion, and interpret Pharaoh's Dream:
The Circumstances of the Dream were much the same with those already mentioned
with this Addition, that at the Beginning, Pharaoh being in a deep Sleep, heard
as he thought a sudden great Noise, that it alarmed the whole City, and that
his Guards, as we call them, or Soldiers which were about him, were awakened,
but all fled away, and that the City was even left without Defense, only that
the Gates were shut.

That in the midst of this Hurry, a monstrous black Elephant, breaking down all
before him, and even overthrowing the Houses and Buildings which were without
the City, came on, no one resisting him, to the Gates of the City or Castle
where Pharaoh slept; that with the Force of his mighty Tusks, or Teeth, he beat
down the Gates thereof; but that the Tower being shaken also, Part of the
Building fell down upon the Back of the Elephant, and, as the King thought at
first, had crushed him to Death.

But that notwithstanding the Weight of the Building which fell down was very
great, yet that the Elephant by his mighty Strength bore it self up and
received no Injury by it; but being made afraid by the great Blow it received,
it withdrew, and retired into the Desert toward the South.

None of the Magicians could interpret this Dream, or rather, they could not
agree in their Interpretations of it; some said one thing, some another, so
that Pharaoh received no Satisfaction from their Interpretations; whereupon the
Arab, who appeared at Court purposely to be called in, was summoned, the King
being told that he was there.

He came without any Hesitation at the first Call; and the King, with great
Appearance of Disturbance, tells him what a strange Dream he had had, how it
had disturbed him, and the like, and added, that none of the Interpretations
which the wise Men had given of it, were satisfactory to him, or agreeing with
one another. The Arab having then demanded a Particular of the King's Dream,
had it related to him as above; then he desired to know what Account the
Magicians had given of it, and how they had interpreted it; which when he was
told, he expressed some Wonder that they should all amuse the King in such a
manner, and should say nothing but what was perfectly remote from the Case.

But turning to the King, 'Let not Pharaoh (says he) be any more disturbed
about the Interpretation of his Dream, seeing the Event shall redound to the
Honor of the King and Prosperity of his Dominions; for that the Dream being
interpreted, is a Representation of what shall immediately come to pass:' and
then he went on to interpret boldly the Dream thus.

'The Noise, O King, says he, which thou wast alarmed with in the City, and
which thy Soldiers were intimidated with, so as to run out of the City; this is
nothing else but a Rumor of War from the South, and a certain Alarm upon the
Approach of an Army upon the Borders, at whose Approach all the Inhabitants of
the Country shall fly into the Mountains and Cities for fear of the Invaders.

'The black Elephant assaulting the Gates of the King's Palace is the General
of the Armies of Aethiopia, who shall make War upon Pharaoh, and shall invade
his Kingdoms with a great Army, and shall break down the Gates of his strong
Cities; but let not the King be dismayed at the Strength of this Enemy which is
so great, for the Power of Pharaoh shall fall upon him, and shall strike him
with Terror and Amazement; so that he shall flee away with all his Army into
the Wilderness, and into the Desert Country, and shall be seen no more.



He had no sooner delivered his Interpretation, but Pharaoh embraced him with
Joy, and told him, That he had indeed given him a right Interpretation of the
Dream; and that he fully believed it would come to pass in the same manner:
Whereupon Pharaoh forthwith caused Preparations of War to be made, and sent
Ambassadors into Aethiopia to denounce War.

The same Year that the Arabian had given this Interpretation of the King's
Dream, the Aethiopians with a great Army invaded the Coasts of Egypt, wasting
the Country and slaying the People, even to the Gates of Zaba or Zabda, a
fortified City on the Frontiers of the Country, which they besieged, but in
vain; and the King of Egypt marching against them with all his Chariots and
Horses, at their Approach the Aethiopians fled, and retired into the Desert
Country, and were seen no more.

This Story, supposing it, or the Substance of it, to be true, lets us into the
Manner and Method in and by which the Devil first introduced a Correspondence
with Mankind, and how he transacted the same with the Magicians of Egypt,
which was certainly continued by him for many Ages afterward, in the very same
manner, and by which the Magicians of Egypt obtained so much in the Opinion of
Mankind, that they passed for the wisest Men in the World; whereas all this
Knowledge, if we may believe Tradition, was neither more or less than a mere
dealing with the Devil, a plain downright Hellish Correspondence, managed by a
magical Scheme, dictated by the Devil himself, and observed by the Magicians
with but too much Exactness on all Occasions.

By this Diabolical Magic the Devil conversed freely with the Magicians, and
they with him; and whatever some may pretend, that the Devil cannot assume a
human Shape for his Correspondence with Mankind, it is most certain that he did
appear in diverse Shapes, and on many Occasions, or else all the Accounts of
such things which Tradition has handed down to the succeeding Ages must be
false and fabulous, made up by the Invention of the Ages in which they were
written.

But that this was not so, is apparent from the Scripture, as also from the
first Writers of the Egyptian and Phoenician Histories, by all which we read
of the Wickedness of the Magicians; as particularly in the Story of the Wonders
wrought by Aaron and Moses in the Presence of Pharaoh, where it is allowed that
the Magicians wrought by Enchantment, which I always understood to mean by
Invoking the Assistance of the evil Spirit, and by receiving Help and Secret
Powers as well as Intelligence from those evil Spirits; and besides the working
by Enchantment or Sorcery, so taken Notice of there, we see it mentioned again
in the Book of Wisdom, Chap. xvii. speaking of the Plague of Darkness, he says,
They were scattered under a dark Veil of Forgetfulness, being horribly
astonished and troubled with (strange) Apparitions, Noises as of Waters falling
down, sounded about them, and sad Visions appeared unto them with heavy
Countenances. Ver. 6. Only there appeared to them a Fire kindled of it self
very dreadful; for being much terrified, they thought the things which they saw
more terrible than the Things they saw not.

Ver. 7. As for the Illusions of Art Magic, they were put down, and their
vaunting in Wisdom was reproved with Disgrace: For they that promised to drive
away Terrors and Troubles from a sick Soul, were sick themselves with Fear, and
worthy to be laughed at.

This whole Quotation is a Description of the Darkness of Egypt, in which,
according to this Text, there were strange Apparitions, being evidently the
Devil and evil Spirits with human Shapes, horrible Appearances and heavy
Countenances.

I think this is so plain, as to need no Confirmation from other Opinions:
Magic was reproved, that is to say, disgraced, because the Devil could not
assist the Magician, so as to make any Abatement of the Darkness, which was
wrought by Heaven; for even the Fire could not be made to give any Light, so
the Power of Art, nay even of Magic it self, was at an End.

In this terrible Case, the Devil or rather Devils were, it seems, permitted to
appear in horrible and frightful Shapes, with heavy Countenances, etc.

In like manner I cannot doubt but he appeared to the Magicians when he and
they had Occasion to meet and converse, and carry on their Hellish
Combinations, and Confederacies for doing Mischief; and this brings me of
course to speak of the Manner of the Magicians conversing with the Devil, for
hitherto we have only spoken of his conversing with them.

The Case is this: Whenever the Devil had an Occasion to speak with the old
Arab, or in Ages after that (for the Arab was first) with Ali Albrahazen the
Magician of Saba in Arabia, he knew well how to find them out, and could go to
them, meet them in Apparition, or speak to them in Vision; But what was to be
done when they wanted his Assistance upon any Emergency?

The Story of Ali, mentioned already, stated the Matter for him, namely, that
he was to go into the Desert to a certain Palm Tree, surround it so many times,
call the Devil so many times in every Circle by such and such a Name, and then
he would come.

Here was indeed a great deal of Ceremony, before his Worship would be spoken
with; and I cannot but think our Friend Roger M -- (Accepted Free Mason, etc.)
speaks with him sometimes upon much easier Terms; for the World is grown much
nicer of late, than they were then, and the Devil is obliged to treat with them
on Terms of less Ceremony.

But the rest of the Story of the old Arabian will state this Matter much
clearer, and to the Understanding of every Reader; and will let us see a little
what Methods they took to raise the Devil in King Pharaoh's time, and before
our modern Experiments were in use.

The Arab was now a great Person, all Egypt received him as a wonderful Man;
his Words were the Oracle of the Day, for whatever he said came to pass; he was
sent to far and wide, and Messengers came from Persia, from Phoenicia, nay from
Aethiopia, for him to come thither, and give the Interpretation of their
Visions, and explain to them every doubtful Case; but he would not leave the
Court of Pharaoh, and he was in the right, for the King highly honored him.

All this while his Reputation wholly depended upon the constant Intelligence
which he kept up with his familiar Spirit (so I may now call it) I mean the
Apparition which came to him in the Desert; but as this Appearing was
arbitrary, and when it pleased, and might not be at hand when he might have a
more than ordinary Occasion for it, it occurred to him one Night to propose
Methods of a more constant and less difficult Correspondence, and that the
Apparition might be brought to a greater Familiarity, so as that when any
Exigence was upon him, he might be sure of his Aid, might be able to call him
to his Assistance, and that he would not sail to appear.

Story does not record what Condition the Devil might make with the old Arab;
as for selling Souls, signing Contracts, and the like, it seems to me there was
little need of these things in those Days, if there had, and the Devil had
insisted on it, I doubt not the Arabian would have made no more Scruple of it,
than our Brother of the Trowel, who adorns so often his blue Ribband with the
most honorable Badge of the Leather Apron; and being first incorporated, as
above, in the ancient Society of free Th -- s may, for ought we know, build two
or three Churches abroad, seeing the Devil and he are known to be upon their
Travels together.

You have thus a Sketch of Satan's professed Correspondence with his Agents in
the first and most early Days of the Magic Art; if by those Subtilties he
brought them into great Reputation among the People, and in the Courts of
Princes, you are not to doubt but he found his Account in it; for by gaining a
Reputation to his Agents, and at the same time keeping them at his Command, for
the sake of the Illuminations which they gained from him, he had them always at
his hand, ready to do or undertake any thing however black, which in the course
of their Witchcrafts came in their way. We shall find some flaming Examples of
this kind very quickly.

But for the present let us keep to our Arab as a Sample or Instance of the
ordinary way of such People in their future Correspondences; hitherto you see
the Devil very assistant, and, in his way, obliging to the last degree, to his
new Acquaintance the Arab. I will for the present suppose he had no other
Correspondent, at least not in Pharaoh's Court, nor was there any need of
another; but you are to suppose he had more such, or such like, in other Places.

He had, it seems, found out the Way to make himself necessary to the Arab, so
that the Doctor could not bear the Thoughts of wanting his constant Assistance:
The Sense of this puts the Arab upon proposing to him, that for the future the
Devil should be so favorable to him as always to come to him whenever he had
Occasion, and this without obliging him to go into the Desert and up the Hill,
in search of him, which many times the extraordinary Demands of the Court would
not admit, nor allow him time for.

If the Devil did concede this Favor, which was more than he granted to Ali
Albrahazen, (for he obliged him to come to the Palm Tree, walk so many times
about it, call aloud so many times upon him every Circle he made) before he
would come; I say, if he yielded to this at the Desire of his Acquaintance the
Arab, it was certainly for the great Ends which were to follow.

Upon his new Proposal, Measures were stated between them that upon such and
such formal managing, (for there was some Reason, it seems, to make it a Piece
of great Formality,) the Devil should always, that is some of the innumerable
Legions, should always appear; whether Satan himself, or some of his
Messengers, Servants, or Gentlemen in waiting, History indeed is not so
particular as that I should be able to give you the Names of them, whether
Christian Name or Surname, as in other Cases might be expected.

The Forms of his appearing, the Occasion, the Conditions, etc. being thus left
to the Arab to determine as should be for his Occasion; let us see how near we
can come to the Particulars.

Circles and Figures visible to others, with some needful Cant or hard Words
which might be made use of audibly, as there might be Occasion; these seem to
have been appointed as the Pomp and Ceremony of the thing called Conjuring and
Magic, and might be found necessary for many Reasons: and in several Ages
these were varied and changed, as the Magician and the Devil might agree about
it between themselves.

It was no doubt a great Condescension that the Devil would stoop to be always
at hand, and to come when he was called; but he found his Account in it: the
Arab now had him at his Beck, and whenever Pharaoh had any difficult thing to
propose, the old Arab could as they call it raise the Devil, when he pleased,
to assist in it.

This is what Aftertimes called having a Familiar, and a familiar Spirit, and
is acknowledged to this time to be frequently practiced by Witches and
Warlocks, and what we find mentioned in Scripture. Menasseh in particular, though
one of the Kings of Judah, the Scripture is express in it, That he used
Enchantments and dealt with familiar Spirits and Wizards, 2 Kings xxi.6.

Several hundred Years before this it is apparent, by the Laws against such as
these, that such were; and that doubtless while they were in Egypt, nay it
must be there; the Law is very express, and reckons up several Sorts, Deuteronomy.
xviii.10, 11. There shall not be found among you, (mark the Kinds,) 1. One that
uses Divination. 2. An Observer of Times. 3. An Inchanter. 4. A Witch. 5. A
Charmer. 6. A Consulter with familiar Spirits. 7. A Wizard. 8. A Necromancer.
then follows the just Character of those Practices, ver. 12. For all that do
such things are an Abomination to the Lord.

Now from the same Text we shall prove that these were Practices in the Nations
of that Part of the World, even long before the Children of Israel came into
the Land of Canaan. See the same Chapter, Verse 12. And because of those
Abominations the LORD thy GOD does drive them out from before thee. And again,
Ver. 14. For these Nations which thou shall possess hearkened unto Observers of
Times, and unto Diviners.

Now such a one was this Arab; let him act as he did, and be that how it will,
it is evident he had a Familiar; the meaning is, he was in or under a Covenant
with the Devil; he had made an Agreement with the Apparition for continuing the
Correspondence, and for attending him constantly, to furnish him for his
Predictions, foretelling Events, and acquainting them with secret and hidden
things.

These are the known Interpretations of these several Expressions, having a
Familiar, using Divination, Enchantments, etc. All imply a Correspondence with
the Devil, to help them in such extraordinary Cases.

Such a sort of People it seems there was among the Canaanites, that is to say
the Phoenicians; and the Abomination was come to such a height, and God had
born with it so many Ages, that now he was resolved to drive out those Nations,
for this very Crime: Now, as there were such People among the Phoenicians, no
doubt but there were such among the Egyptians too, from whom these People of
Israel came out, and who, though with the firstborn of their Children slain in
Egypt, the Loss of their Army and King in the Waters of the Red Sea and other
Calamities, they were reduced low enough at the Time that we read of them, yet
were a strong and powerful Nation, even from the time of Mizraim their greatest
Monarch after Cham.

As they were a powerful and great People, so they were a wise and learned
Nation, as Wisdom and Knowledge went then in the World, and therefore we find,
that however the Chaldeans and Arabians boast that they were the first
Searchers into the Mysteries of Wisdom and Knowledge, and that the first
Rudiments of the celestial Studies were conceived among them, which yet does
not appear other than in their Pretenses; yet suppose it, or suppose we were to
grant it, we still find that they went to Egypt for their Practice and
Encouragement; that perhaps in Arabia they might drink in the first Knowledge
and Principles of things; But Arabia, a Country always poor, and not able to
give Encouragement to Learning, as we say of a Neighboring Country, afforded
Nothing but the dry Study, they must go farther for the Improvement of it; in
short they might stay at home, and get Knowledge, but they must go abroad if
they would get Money.

This was the Reason that, as it is at this time somewhere else, as soon as the
Poor Wretches had got a little smattering of Arabian, Mountain Wit, and a
little Star-gazing Knowledge, away they went to Egypt, and there they set up
immediately for wise Men and Conjurers, and we scarce know what of Philosophers.

The Egyptians, a wealthy but from the very Beginning a superstitious kind of
People, always hunting after secret Interpretations, and hidden reserved
Events, poring upon rather than understanding mysterious things, and loving to
have strange Stories told them by any one, especially Foreigners, gaped eagerly
after the fine Tales of these second-sighted Arabians, dr^nk in their Magic as
it was then called, and freely parted with their Money to have their Fortunes
told them, and the Lines in their Palms explained to them by the crafty
wandering Arabs.

On the contrary, the cunning Artists, that, though they knew nothing of the
matter at first, yet seeing plainly that even that little was esteemed a great
deal, while the People they talked with knew less, and finding the Egyptians
easy to be imposed upon, willing to be cheated, and particularly contented to
have their Pockets picked for the Satisfying their simple Curiosity; I say, the
cunning wandering Strangers made a good Market of them, grew rich and famous
among them, and kept up the Reputation of their Craft by all the Subtilties of
Wit and Invention.

This Success encouraging their Studies, we may easily suppose they pushed into
all manner of natural Enquiries, and as far as they were able improved
themselves, and furnished their Heads with the Knowledge of human Things, such
as Reason, Philosophy, and natural Experiments might supply; and at length
pushing at every thing, they found the way, or he found it out for them, as I
have already observed, to deal with the Devil. And thus we are come at the
Original of Magic, as we now understand the Word, that is to say of Diabolical
Practices, or a certain spreading of Delusions by the Assistance of the Devil.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Practice and Progress of Magic, as it is now explained to be a
Diabolical Art; how it spread it self in the World, and by what Degrees it grew
up to the Height which it has since arrived to.

WE have pitched upon Egypt to be the Spot where the first hellish Artists
studied this that I now call Diabolical Magic. I shall not keep you long upon
the cold Scent. It was practiced there very early, and very long, before we
heard much of it any where else; but when it took a run, when it started from
thence, we shall soon hear of it abroad: For however secret the Black Part may
be, and however private the Magicians and their great Master the Devil managed
their Correspondence, yet the Practice of it, and the Game they played upon
Mankind by it, was always public and open, as we shall have reason to say,
among other Nations, as well as among our own.

As to the Chronology of it, and when it began, in what Ages of the World those
Arabians began to practice as above, when they first dealt in this Craft, when
the Egyptians began to be their Scholars, and they the Devil's, it is not
(however ancient) so difficult to come at the Knowledge of in general, as some
other things in the World, which yet we think our selves very certain of.

The Scripture, whether our good Friends that read Books in this Age will bear
with our quoting it in Matters of Religion or no, yet is generally allowed to
be a tolerable good History. Nay, if we may believe some good Authors, it must
be allowed to be the most ancient History, and the Writing from which all other
Authorities take their Rise; that Moses was long before Berosus, Homer, Hesiod,
or in a word, any of the Writers on Earth. Nor could it be well otherwise, if
what is lately advanced is true, that the first Knowledge of Letters to write
by, and to read upon, was dictated to Moses from Mount Sinai, by the immediate
Revelation of Heaven. I say it could not be otherwise. For how should they
write before they had Letters, and knew how to form the sound of Words upon the
Tables, where they were impressed?

As Moses had the first Knowledge of Letters, so he had the first Knowledge of
Things too, and was therefore the best qualified to be a Collector of
Antiquities; nor was it so difficult a Matter for Moses to write a History of
the Creation, and of all the material Events of things that had happened before
his time, as some may imagine: Since by the Calculations of Time, Moses might
easily have an Account of those things by a successive Supply of Oral Tradition
from Noah himself, as you may gather from the Times wherein he lived, and the
Persons with whom he had conversed; of which take the following short Sketch,
as a leading Thread or Chain of things directly confirming my Argument.

If Moses then had the most early Knowledge of things by a short Succession of
the Persons relating them, and that even from Adam and Noah in a right Line;
and if Moses had the first Knowledge of Letters, even immediately from a
superior Hand, then at least you must allow me, that Moses was certainly the
best qualified to form a History of the first things ^ran^^cted in the World;
and was the first Man, or at least the Man best able to write that History
down. For who could form a History of things they did not know? and who could
write before they had Letters to form the Words he was to write by? and who
could read what was written, unless those Letters had been known, and made
public in the World?

Hence I infer that Moses was the first Historian, and the Books of Moses are
the first History in the World; and if the first, consequently most likely to
be the best Authority; at least, as I have said above (and that my Readers may
not be pushed upon too hard, to believe those Books which they have so ill a
relish of) I say at least, they will allow that the Scripture or Pentateuch is
a tolerable good History, and that is all I ask of them as a Favor.

Now to begin with the Chronology of things: The Law given to the Jews from the
Mouth of the Oracle upon Mount Sinai, of which Moses gives us the History, was,
according to Sir Walter Raleigh, published Anno Mundi 2514. Joseph died 2370.
Moses was born 2433. The Children of Israel came out of Egypt 2513.

But we find in the History of Joseph, and we find by the Commands to extirpate
Witches and Sorcerers, mentioned in the first Law given the Israelites; I say,
we find the Practice of Diabolical Magic was much more ancient than Moses, nay
than Joseph, and that it was practiced so long ago, not only in Egypt, but in
Phoenicia also; and perhaps in the last, as soon as in the first.

First, It seems that God resolved to drive out the Phoenicians, that is the
Canaanites, before the Children of Israel, even for this very Offense among
others; and I cannot come up to the modern rate of Skepticism, as to believe
God would have driven them out of their Country, for a Crime which they were
not guilty of; and especially too, that he would have assigned that for a
Reason of it, which the poor People could have stood up and cleared themselves
of, and have said they did not understand what it was.

This goes far to a Suggestion, that the Canaanites were guilty of it even four
hundred Years before, and before God's Promise to Abram to give him that
Country; or else we must suppose the Canaanites condemned to an Explusion
before the Crime for which they were to be expelled was committed; and I can no
more come into that than the other.

Certainly, GOD's Promise to turn out the Inhabitants for Abram's Posterity
must be allowed to be a Sentence of Condemnation upon the Canaanites even at
that time; and he would not have condemned them to Banishment, I mean as a
Nation, for Crimes which they were not even then guilty of; especially that
very Crime being assigned as the Cause of their said Condemnation and Sentence.

If this Argument is just, as I think it must be, then I have gained the Point
as to the Antiquity; for then this Crime of Diabolical Magic is as ancient as
Abram; and it is evident Abram was born above fifty six Years before Noah died.
How long this wicked Trade was known before Abram, we cannot determine, but may
grant it might be some considerable time.

It is certain however that in the Reign of Mizraim, who was but the Grandson
of Noah, they were grown very considerable, I mean as to their Reputation, in
the Egyptian Court; and I am willing to suppose my old Arab was one of the
Chief, if not one of the first of them in Mizraim's Reign, and perhaps near the
Beginning of it: For as the Devil introduced himself as it were Voluntier to
him, it should seem that he had no Correspondents of that kind there before,
and took that Method to begin his Acquaintance; perhaps allowing his
Correspondents to convey the same Method of Intelligence from one to another,
and perhaps to renew the Contract as often as he their Instructor thought fit.

But be that how it will, it is certain the Devil must be Aggressor, in all
Ages, of this Art. He knew well enough how to break in upon them, how to show
himself, and make his Appearances to them as often as he thought fit; and could
begin it, or renew it, how, and whenever he pleased. But the Case was quite
different on their Side, for no body knew how to come at him, they did not so
much as know him when they saw him, or know where he lived, where he kept his
Residence; how to go to him, or send to him; or, in a word, to have any
Correspondence with him, but just as he thought fit to enter into a Familiarity
with them, and give them Methods and Rules by which they should obtain Audience
of him, when, and as often us they had occasion.

This being the case, it is not to be wondered that the Devil, and those Men of
Craft, became acquainted very soon in the World; for the Devil is too diligent
to neglect his own Affairs any longer than till they were ripe for his
Agitation.

Having then brought all the Southsaying and Magic of the first Ages as it
were within his own Management, and established a Correspondence with the wise
Men of the most early Times, we are next to examine how it proceeded, and what
Progress it made: And in making this Inquiry, it comes directly in my way to
tell you a very unhappy Truth; namely, that the Clergy of those times seem to
me to be the first Conjurers, and Dealers with the Devil; and so in all the
subsequent Times, and in all or most of the Distant Nations of the World; I
mean next immediately after those Egyptian Proficients.

I hope our Most Reverend, and Right Reverend of the sacerdotal Order in these
Days, and in this wise Magical Age, will take no Offense at me for this, at
least till I have farther and fully explained my self. Far be it from us (and
sad would be our Circumstances should I venture) to suggest that any of our
Clergy should be Conjurers, and deal in Magic: no, no; plenty of Grace, and
paucity of Brains, I hope, is our established Protection from such a dismal
Eruption as that would be upon us.

In order therefore to explain my self fully upon this Subject, I must go back
to the early Ages of the World, even just where I was before. The Devil, after
the Flood, observing the World begin to fill, and that the People spreading
themselves over it, began to People it again, and form themselves into Nations,
and Governments; one of his first Cares was to debauch their Principles as to
Religion, to dictate false Notions of Homage and Worship to them, and, in a
word, to introduce Idolatry.

As he knew perfectly well the End he aimed at, so he was not at a loss to find
out the Means. It would be too long a Story to tell you, in what manner he
found out Gods for them to worship, and how he canonized their Heroes for them.
The Tale of Ninus or Nimrod appearing to the wise Men in a Flame of Fire, and
telling them, he was going just then up into Heaven, from whence he would
always shine upon them in the Shape of a Star, and that they should build a
Temple to the glory of his Memory; that he should be called Baal or Bell, which
is as much as to say a great God, and that he would be always ready to help
them against their Enemies, as he was to fight for them while he was alive;

I say, this Tale, suppose it but a Tale, was not at all unlikely to take with
the People, who had the Memory of their dead Hero-King fresh in their Thought,
and who were ready to idolize the very empty Sound of his Name. Suppose the
wise Men as they called them, only feigned, or forged this Story, and reported
it to the People as a Vision which they had really seen, though they had not seen
it at all, yet it was not unlikely to make Impressions upon them, in their
first Ignorance of things.

But suppose, on the other hand, the Devil, who is always awake, should have
really shown himself in such an Appearance, and then have drawn in the wise
Magicians of that Age, upon seeing such a Sight frightful and horrid like the
Devil, that formed it, to relate (as they might with Truth,) the Fact to the
People: It was not at all strange, that the wise Men mentioned should go to the
King with that Story also; and that he the King, bigoted by the Magicians, and
terrified as they were, should immediately order a Temple to be erected,
Sacrifices to be appointed, and a formal Worship set on foot, to the Honor of
this great God Bell, whose Memory was so high in their Esteem before.

History is very full of the first Fury of idolatrous Zeal, and of the
extravagant Branches of their Devotion, I mean in their Princes. Ninus built a
House for the Worship of Bell, the Walls and Towers are a Prodigy in
themselves; what the manner of Worship was we do not read, though afterward we
have the Description of their abominable Rites, as the Sacrifices to Moloch,
viz. making their Children to pass through the Fire; whether they were burnt to
Death, or horribly scorcht, Authors do not yet resolve us. The King of Moab
sacrificed his Son, the Heir Apparent of his Throne, upon the Walls of the
City, only to obtain Deliverance from the Siege by the help of his Idol, at the
Price of his Son's Blood.

As those Idols were introduced by the Art of the Devil, so it must be that the
Direction came from him; I mean as to the manner of the Idol-worship, and that
he certainly held an immediate Correspondence with the Institutors and Managers
of the Idol Rites.

These were the Magicians and Astrologers, who by his Directions were
instructed what Ceremonies, what Rites, what manner of Worship to offer to
their Gods; and as they consulted the Magicians for the Institution of their
Worship, so in a few Ages after the Magicians or Southsayers were their
Priests, and their Priests were all Magicians and Southsayers. Hence the
Auruspices, the Sacrificers, and the Priests of the several Temples, where
Answers were given to Questions, Events predicted, and the like, were the
Givers of those Answers from the Oracle; that is in plain English, the Priests
were Magicians, and the Magicians were the Priests, and the Devil brought
Witchcraft and Idolatry to be at last but one Science.

As he corresponded personally with Ali Albrahazen, and the old Arab, in the
Infancy of time, and when his Kingdom was, as it were, but just erecting and
setting up in the World, so when that Personal Correspondence appeared
successful in setting up Idolatry, he made it equally useful for the
Propagating it, and the Magicians became Priests in the Temples of their Gods.

Nothing could be more agreeable to the Priests of their Idols, than this
Intimacy with the Infernal Spirits; for the Devil, who was always his Craft's
Master, failed not as well to delude the Priests themselves, as by them to
impose upon the World; nor could he have carried on his Game upon Mankind
without it. For if the Priests had not believed that they conversed with the
Gods, when really they conversed with the Devil; if they had been all let into
the Secret, and made to propagate their Religion as a Cheat upon the World, to
which they were to have been privy; if it had all been known to be, as it
really was, a Conspiracy against Heaven in Favor of the Devil, and with real
Design to impose upon and damn the World, they would never have been brought
universally to have kept the Devil's Council, and have come into the Plot, at
the Price of their eternal Felicity, and the Souls of all their Friends.

The Devil's Plot would certainly have been blown long before it was, and the
Priests of the Oracles would most certainly have first or last have betrayed
their Master, and exposed the whole Cheat. But the Case was evidently this, the
Devil found the way to delude and impose upon the very Priests themselves; and
not only suggested to them, but made them really believe, that the Gods
conversed with them, that the Voices they heard, the Answers dictated by their
Oracles, the Apparitions, etc. were all the real Appearances of their Gods,
those in particular whose Servants and Priests they were; when in Truth it was
no more than a gross Delusion, and an Appearance of the Devil.

I make no doubt, but that the Tumult raised by the Silversmiths at Ephesus,
though they in particular were touched with the sense of their Interest, and the
loss of their Craft and Trade, yet was carried on in the Sincerity of their
Ignorance by those who called her the Great Goddess Diana, whom they and all
the World worshipped; that they who cried Great is DIANA of the Ephesians,
believed her to be so, and had not the least Notion of their worshipping the
Devil.

I doubt not but the Priests of Apollo at Delphos, who waited there to give out
the Answers to the several Enquirers that came with their Gifts to the Oracle,
believed that the said Oracles were issued by the GODS, and especially by
Apollo himself; and little thought that they (the Priests) were Tools of the
Devil, to cheat and amuse the World, and propagate Idolatry; for which the true
God, who was highly affronted in the Fraud, would one Day put them all to
Silence.

Thus far, I think the Clergy are beholden to me very much, for establishing
their Honesty at the Expense of their Heads, and telling you they were all
Fools, rather than Knaves. At the same time it holds still, and this part can
never be denied, that as the Devil carried on his Kingdom by the Art Magic, or
what we call the Black Art, so the Priests were the Instruments both of the
Witchcraft and the Idolatry.

How far the two Infernal Juggles are still carried on, and whether the Priests
in most Parts of the World (our own, God bless us! always excepted) are not
Magicians, and Dealers with the Devil, even in their Sacreds, and by the mere
Consequence of their Office; let the Padres and Men of the Tonsure tell us, and
give us Satisfaction if they can.

We have now brought the Magicians of Egypt, and the Priests of the Pagan
Temples to be something akin; at least we may say, I have brought them to be
all of a Trade; and I believe it is not very difficult to show you, that as they
served the same Master, so they had their Instructions by the very same
Channel, and from the same Original: In a word, that the Worship of the Gods,
which was indeed the Worship of the Devil, was dictated in the very same way,
namely, by an immediate Correspondence with the Devil, and with all the
Circumstances mentioned in the Text before quoted; (viz.) Divination,
Enchantment, Conjuration, Apparition, Vision, Dream, Familiar Spirits,
observing Times, observing Seasons, and flying of Birds, Entrails of Beasts,
and the like.

It may seem a little difficult to bring all the Schemes of Idol or Pagan
Worship down to a Level with Witchcraft and Diabolical Magic; and some will
tell us, that several Parts of the Pagan Worship, or even Paganism in general,
was established upon pure and just Principles, an exact and regular Virtue, the
height of Morals, principles of Truth, and of natural Religion, of good
Government, and of Dedication to the public Welfare of Mankind; nay even upon
Principles of Piety, and a Homage to be paid to the Divine Being, as the first
moving Cause of Life, and as a Debt due to that Being, for all the good
attending Human Life; that nothing has been wanting in some Pagans but a
Revelation from Heaven, and an opening the Eyes of the Soul by Divine
Inspiration, to know the Only True God.

Those that are of this Opinion, support it by the Example of Numa Pompilius,
the Founder of the Roman Rites, and to whom the establishing the greater part
of the Pagan Ceremonies is justly assigned; who, they tell us, acted upon the
highest Principles of Morality and Virtue, and even of Piety; that he went even
to the utmost length that Nature and Reason could go; that he not only
acknowledged a Supreme Power, to whom Mankind owed his Homage for the good
received, and who would not fail, in a Life to come, to distribute Rewards and
Punishments, agreeable to the Life and Conduct of every Man here: But owned
also that Worship as a Natural Debt, to be paid by all Mankind; hence upon the
Door of the Temple of the several Gods he caused to be written, as a Direction
to all Mankind, this short Precept, a Jove principium; intimating that every
Action of Man's Life should be begun with Application to the Gods. They add,
that Numa had a profound sincere Veneration for the Creator of all things, as
the Author of Life, and the supreme God of Heaven and Earth, and that he wanted
nothing to be a sincere Worshipper of the true God, but a true Revelation from
Heaven, inlightning his Mind, and guiding him to know what way of Worship that
God would be pleased to accept.

They give us several other Examples of Great and Illustrious Men, who though
professed Heathens in the manner of Worship, and the immediate Object, yet
formed their Notions upon just and noble Principles, strictly adhering to the
natural Principles of Religion, closely pursuing Justice in Government,
Impartiality in matters of Right, preserving Virtue and Honor in the People,
and making wholesome Laws for their better Government, upon all Occasions; such
are Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian, Confucius the Chinese, Solon the wise
Philosopher, and sundry others.

They also name to us the Books of the Sybils, which, so far as they are
discovered, they say are filled with summary Rules for well-governing Mankind,
and directing a due Homage to the great God.

But let us look through all this. God for wise Ends did not think fit to accept
these little Emanations of Natural Light, or to reveal himself to the Persons;
however sincere they may be said to be in the pursuit of Divine Light; as then
they were left to the dim and dusky Shadows of natural Reasonings only, so it
appeared that those natural Reasonings were not sufficient to inform the Mind
of Man concerning God; But that when they had done all, for want of farther
Illuminations, the Devil was suffered to chop in, and confound all their
brightest Ideas of Worship, with a horrid Rhapsody of complicated Idolatry.

This very Observation is sufficient, or at least it might be expected that it
should be sufficient, to crush the Notions which our more Polite Gentlemen now
advance, in favor of the study of Magic, as an Art or Science only; They
contend that the Word Magic is greatly mistaken, and that we do not understand
what we speak of; that Magic is nothing else but a received well-guided way of
thinking and acting; that it is truly the Science of Reflection, and the Art of
making a right Judgment of things, by giving every Object, however distant, its
due Weight; thinking of things according to the true Rate of them; that the
humane Judgment is in its self infallible, and therefore in some manner equal
to the divine Being; a Light issued from Heaven, and darted by Emanation into
the Souls of Men; which, if rightly cultivated and improved, and especially if
sincerely followed, adhered to, and obeyed, guides the Soul to understand
things in a superior way; This they say is Magic: the very Word which
intimates a superior and divine Knowledge, leads to understand what it means;
and this, say they, duly followed, would from the Beginning have made Men be,
as the Serpent told them they should be, viz. like Gods, knowing Good and Evil.

Now these fine-spun Notions or Imaginations, I say, are fully answered, by
taking Notice, that there is apparently no such Infallibility in Man's
Judgment, unless assisted by a yet higher and superior degree of Illumination;
that is to say, unless GOD, the Author of all perfect and complete
Illumination, should add to it the Revelation of himself, and of his Mind and
Will, giving the Man Rules and Laws for his farther Illumination, and for the
Direction of himself.

This appears in the Particular mentioned above, namely, that notwithstanding
Man's infallible Judgment led him to the Knowledge of a Divine Being, and that
there was a great first Cause, Infinite, Eternal and Superior, because Prior to
all Being, and that this first Being had a Right to the Homage and Obedience of
his Creatures; yet 'till God by Revelation directed it, all the Perfection of
human Judgment could never lead Mankind to a right Knowledge of the Worship and
Homage this Great Being required. But they sunk down into Idolatry, worshipping
many Gods, and Images, the Representations of Gods; and in a word, into the
grossest and dullest Conceptions of things relating to their Deities, such as
one would think it was impossible humane Judgment, under any manner of
Improvement, could fall into; things unworthy of GOD, nay unworthy of Men.
Hence they made their Jupiter, though they called him the Father of Gods and Men,
a horrid Picture of ungoverned Lust, a Ravager of the World, ravishing
Innocence and Virtue, transforming himself into diverse Shapes, to obtain his
vicious Desires; as into a white Bull, to carry away Europa; into a golden
Shower, to fall into the Lap of Danaae, and the like. Here is the Picture of
infallible humane Judgment! Wonder no more that at last it carried them all
headlong into the Arms of the Devil, and not only to be ignorant of the Worship
of the true God, but to pay the Homage they owed to their Maker, to him who was
their Destroyer and Enemy.

Thus Numa, with all his Sincerity and Piety, resolved all his Ideas into a
confused Mass of idolatrous Ceremonies, adorning the Priests, forming new
Orders and Degrees of his Clergy; and, in a word, drawing a Scheme of pompous
Paganism; establishing Games, and inhumane Fightings of Gladiators, Races and
Exercises for Sport, in Honor of the Gods: Besides crowding the City with
Temples and Altars, to innumerable and unknown Deities; so that, in a word,
after he had acknowledged that there was a supreme Power, a GOD of all the
Earth, a great first Cause of Life, and to whom all Homage was due, I say,
after all these sublime Ideas, he yet sunk down into the grossest of all
Idolatries, the worshipping imaginary Gods, deifying the Stars of Heaven, and
offering Sacrifices, building Temples, dedicating Priests, and making Vows to
Stocks and Stones, the Work of their own Fingers, and the Idols of their own
Brain.

Will any one think we wrong the Pagan Institutions, much less the Institutors,
to say, that the Devil had a Finger in all this? does not Satan in Policy
suffer an Appearance of Virtue and Piety to be set up, to mock the World into
true Devil-worship? How could he set himself up to be worshipped as a God, and
how could he make himself truly the God of this World, if he did not enjoin to
his Worshippers, at least seemingly, some Forms of Life, and appearing
Principles, agreeable to the Rules of Virtue and Honor? It Is by this that in
general he has carried on the Delusion, and this, as I may say, has been the
Magic of his Art, as well as the Art of his Magic.

The Romans were the most civilized Heathens that the World ever saw; their
Government had in it all the Appearance of Justice and Moderation; they
honored and rewarded Virtue and Honor, Love to our Country, Courage,
Gallantry: How did they crown those that saved a Citizen, give Triumphs to
those that had conquered their Enemies, give Prizes to those who excelled in
the most commendable Things? How did they honor Chastity in their Vestal
Virgins; Temperance, Eloquence, Learning and Philosophy in the Persons of those
that excelled, and erect Statues to their Memory when dead?

Yet all this while their Religion was Devil-worship; their Augurs and
Southsayers, and the Priests of their Temples and Oracles, were Diviners,
Magicians, Wizards, and in the very Letter of it Dealers with the Devil, and
that in the worst Sense; all their Sacrifices, and their Institution of Games,
for appeasing the angry Gods, were the most horrid and barbarous Pieces of
Ignorance, or hellish Cruelty and Brutality, that could be imagined, even
sometimes to human Sacrifices; and in all those excesses of their Devotion, the
Devil led them on blinded by strong Delusions to such Performances, in order to
appease the Wrath of Heaven, as were unworthy of God, inconsistent with his
Nature, as a bountiful beneficent Being, as a fountain of Goodness and Mercy,
infinitely Compassionate to his Creatures; and who could not take Pleasure in
those things which were injurious to Mankind, in order to be reconciled to
them, or be pacified by destroying those, whom it was his glory to save and
protect.

All the while that they erected Temples to Justice, to Honor, to Virtue, and
to Peace, they studied all possible ways, by War, and Blood, to amass
Treasures, and enlarge their Empire, 'till, as the Roman Histories confess,
they left no Nation unsubdued, except such as they found it not in their Power,
or worth their while to Conquer; that is to say, such as the Parthians, who
were too powerful for them to conquer, and so poor when conquered, as not to be
worth the Attempt; or the Indians and Aethiopians, who though rich, yet were so
remote and fenced by wide unpassable Deserts, and protected by the excessive
Heat of the Climate, so that it was not in their Power to assault them. Their
Armies were not able to endure the March through the Libyan Sands, or over the
Mountains and vast Waters of India, under or near the Equinox, and where there
was nothing to shelter or relieve them under the excessive and violent Force of
the Sun.

All the rest of the World, as I have said, they continually invaded and
subdued, and mattered not the Reason and Justice of the War, if the Reward of
their Treasures, and the Advantage of Governing them, was apparent.

Thus Caesar invaded the Gauls, the Helvetians, the Germans, without any just
Pretense of making War, except only that of Conquest, Plunder and Dominion.
What Pretense of War had the Romans against a quiet, a remote, an inoffensive
Nation, as the Britains certainly were? They neither offered to disturb the
Roman Government, or were in Condition to do it; having no Knowledge of Arms
equal to any such Attempt, no Alliances or Correspondence with any of the
Romans Enemies, no Ships to traverse the Ocean, and make them terrible.

Nothing called Caesar over hither to invade the innocent Britains, but thirst
of Glory, and enlarging Dominion; a Principle imbibed from the tyrannick Nature
of the Devil; to raise humane Glory, not by Deeds truly Great, not by virtuous
Actions, but by destroying and insulting the Weak in Presumption of Strength,
and by shedding Blood to triumph over the Wrongs and Oppression of their
Fellow Creatures.

And what was the Reward of Caesar's Ambition and Thirst of Glory? A Conquest
indeed he gained; but of what, and for whom? a Conquest of Innocence, and a
Conquest for the Devil; the fruit of which was thus to be summed up: They,
first and last, destroyed two Millions, some think five or six Millions, of the
Inhabitants; they spilt also an Ocean Roman Blood; eighty thousand Romans were
killed at one time by the gallant Queen Boadicia at Camolodinum, now Malden in
Essex; and after a Possession of above six hundred Years, they were forced to
abandon it with Infamy and Scandal, and so ended just, where they began.

Whence was all this, but from the Devil? whose Government of the World had
this Magic indeed always in it, that it spread Cruelty and Tyranny in all
Parts, founded Dominion in Blood, and made the World a Theater of Rapin and
Violence.

This was the secret Magic of his Government, and yet this was always carried
on under the Mask of Justice, Peace and Religion; that is to say, Avarice was
Justice, and to gain the Plunder of a Nation was a sufficient Pretense to
quarrel with and subdue it: Conquest then brought Peace; that is to say, when
Rapin or Slaughter had impoverished or extirpated a People, then the Romans
gave them Peace, and protected the Remnant; and as to Religion, the Substance
of it was, as above, Cruelty and Superstition.

This is the Sum of the Roman Polity, and of the Methods taken in a Government
and by a People who, as above, are said to be the most civilized of all the
Pagan Nations and Governments in the World; and this, in a word, serves to open
the Eyes of Posterity, and betrays the Devil's Conspiracy against Mankind in
the openest manner possible. The Magic of Hell discovers it self here, that
under the specious Pretense of just Government, and under the Fame of a
civilized Nation, governing themselves and the World by the Rules of Justice
and Virtue, a Loose was given to all mander of Barbarisms, Cruelty, Blood and
Oppression.

It is clear in so many Examples, that I need say no more to explain it, that
the Roman Government and the Roman Religion was all founded on a Diabolical
Regimen, and was maintained by the Magic and Ar^ifice of the Devil and his
Instruments; which Instruments were chiefly the Priests of the Idol Temples and
Worship, who by the Subtilty of their Arts (Religious Art, the worst sort of
Magic) made such deep Impressions on the Minds of the deluded World, that not
the common sort only, not the Vulgar, or as we say the Canaile, the Mobb and
Rabble of the People came into it, and believed the lying Wonders; but the
learned World, the Philosophers, the Poets, Men of the most exquisite Parts,
and the most polite Knowledge, nay of the noblest Principles of Virtue, and who
had the most refined Ideas of Justice and Honor, even these all came into the
Delusions of this Black Art, believed, and, as I may say, relished the
Witchcraft and Delusions of the Magicians and Sorcerers, and were taken with
their lying Wonders; even the Cato's, the Tully's, the great and the greatest
Heroes, Philosophers, Scholars, 'twas all one, they were swallowed up by the
Arts of the Magicians and Southsayers; nay, their Kings stooped to deal in this
Black Art themselves. Romulus the Founder of the City of Rome, and the first
Father even of the Roman Name, was himself a Southsayer; that is to say, a
Magician, a Diviner or Inchanter; in plain English a Dealer with the Devil, and
the great Propagator of the infernal Art; I say, the great Propagator of it,
for he was the first that instituted the Augurs in the Pagan Worship, and, as I
said, Hooked in the Magicians into their Religion, making all the Wizards and
Conjurers, Priests; though I must insist upon it, not Romulus, Numa, or the Devil
himself, could make all the Priests Conjurers, no not to this Day.

Some have been of Opinion that Numa Pompilius, who I have said was sincerely
inclined to Religion, ^s it was simply understood to be a mere Homage due from
Man a Creature, to God the Creator; that he acted from a sincere Principle, and
that he went farther toward establishing the true Religion, than any Pagan in
the World ever did before him.

But they add, he was lost for want of revealed Light: that having determined
by the Light of his Reason that there was a God, and that he was to be
worshipped, but not knowing how or in what manner that Worship was to be
directed, and not being able to find out by his utmost Search what Worship
would be acceptable, He sunk into Idolatry and Polytheism, as the only Pattern
that was before him; with this Addition, that having thus taken his Rise from a
wrong Beginning, his devout Temper hurried him on into all the Extremes of
Idolatry and Paganism, 'till at length he came into this very Mischief I am
speaking of, I mean, Magic, Sorcery, and dealing with familiar Spirits, that
is, the Devil.

This is just what I had said already; but it is most certain, that though at
first they acted upon some Foundation of natural Principles, or if you please,
Principles of Natural Religion: Yet they afterward run farther into this
Sorcery and Southsaying, and that with such an universal Gust of Inclination,
that it became a chief Part of their Religion; and there were very few of their
great Men, nay even of their Kings and Emperors, but what were Magicians
themselves; and some of them, if not all of them, took it for a Part of their
Imperial Titles, and a Badge of their Honor, to be called Pontifex Maximus,
and sometimes appeared in the Robes of a Sacrificer, and of this or that Order
of the Priests, as they thought fit; 'till at length unsufferable Pride and
Insolence led them to accept of divine Honors themselves, to lay aside the
Priest, and assume that of a God; placing themselves so above the Sacrificer,
as to suffer themselves to be sacrificed to: But this went but a little Way.

At length the Christian Religion, in spite of Persecution and obstinate
Resistance, both from the Jews as well as the Pagans, began to spread it self
in the World: and as Christ himself says, that he came to destroy the Works of
the Devil, so it appeared; for immediately the Glories of the Pagan
Superstition began to fade, their Oracles ceased, the Priests became dumb; and
the Devil, not able to carry on the Cheat any farther, threw it up; the Augurs
and Southsayers fled from the Face of the Christian Doctrine, and from the
Preaching of the Apostles and their Successors, as not able to exercise their
Sorceries and Divinations, no not so much as in the Presence of the Christian
Ministers.

We have two remarkable Instances of this in the sacred Text; one is Acts
xiii.7. when being at the Isle of Cyprus, Elymas the Sorcerer ventured to
withstand St. Paul, when he preached the Word of God to Sergius Paulus the
Governor; but for the audacious Attempt was struck blind by the miraculous
Word of the blessed Apostle, so being made an Instrument to confirm the
Governor in his Faith, and complete the Conversion which the conjuring Wretch
sought to oppose, ver. 12. The Deputy, when he saw what was done, believed,
being astonished at the Doctrine of the LORD.

The other Instance is in Acts xix.19. where indeed there is a double Evidence;
First, of the Power of the Christian Doctrine prevailing over the Magic and
Diabolick Arts then in Practice; and, Secondly, of the prodigious Increase of
those Magical Delusions among the Romans, however wise and polite a People they
were; the Story is short, and fully to the purpose. St. Paul, preaching at
Ephesus, made a wonderful Progress in converting the Pagans of that great City,
to the Christian Faith. Some Histories tell us, he converted one hundred
thousand People there and in the Country adjacent; but that by the way: In a
word, the Text says, ver. 17. the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. And
how, but by this eminent Victory over the Devil? For (besides the Conquest of
the Exorcists who went about to cast out a Devil by their Conjurings and
Spells) the Magicians themselves were converted by Paul's preaching, and that
to a prodigious Number of them, ver. 19. Many also of them which used curious
Arts, brought their Books together, and burned them before all Men: and they
counted the Price of them, and found it fifty thousand Pieces of Silver. What a
height must the Black Art of the Devil be come to at that time, that the Books
which were to be found in that one City should amount to such a Sum of Money? I
give this Account, as I have said, to let you see to what an extravagant height
the Devil had carried this Matter; and how and in what manner he supported his
Interest in the World. But I must go back to the Beginning of things, where I
left off, viz. at the Institution of the Augurs, who were for some Ages the
Engrossers of all these Delusions in the Roman Empire.

The Augurs were a sort of Roman Priests, who pretended to foretell Events by
Omens, by the chattering of Birds, howling of Dogs, and other uncouth Noises of
any kind in the Air: They were erected into a Society, and formed in a College
of Hall by the King's special Order; the Number at first was but three, one
being taken from every Roman Tribe; and while they were thus few, the Dignity
was very valuable, and it was highly esteemed among even the Patricii and
Nobility. Servius Tullius increased their Number to Four, and caused them to be
taken only from the Nobility: Afterward Quintus and Caeneus Agellinus obtained
that Five more should be added to their Number, and should be chosen out of the
Plebeii or Common People. So ambitious were the Romans of this Diabolical
Preferment, and so much Honor had the Devil's immediate Servants in the World;
nay, upon this Increase of their Number to Nine, the Government was so resolute
against lowering the Price of that Reverence and Esteem they had among the
People, that they passed a Decree against increasing their Number any more.

However Sylla, one of the most bloody and cruel Tyrants of his Time, that he
might, according to Custom, join his Care of Religion to his Thirst of Blood,
added six more; so that now their Number was fifteen. The eldest, whether in
Years of longest standing in Order, (I am not positive which) was made Father
or President of the College, and had the immediate Direction of all the rest.

Their Privileges, like their Institution, were exorbitant; for they were never
to be deposed or expelled, no not for any Crime how great soever, nor their
Places filled up by another.

N.B. Crime did not render the Devil's Agents scandalous in their Profession,
but rather the wickeder they were, the fitter for the Priesthood or Augurate.
How far the same Maxim may hold in some of the sacred Order in the World at
this time, if I was of their Number, I should not vote to have it examined.

And now for the Ceremonies of the Augurs Trade; for we must note, that the Art
Magic had always abundance of dark and uncouth Usages attending it, as it has
to this Day; raising the Devil was not done with a Whistle, like calling a Dog;
or with a Beck of the Head or Hand, as we beckon to Servants when we call them
silently to come near us; the Devil knew very well that his Affair must be
clothed with Ceremony, or it would not take with the World, or at least would
not hold long in it.

The Pagan Rites were indeed loaded with Burdensome Ceremonies; all the
Devil's Worship was filled with Conjurings and Mutterings, strange Gestures,
Agitations, Ecstasies, and I know not how many Distortings of the Limbs and
Countenances, wild Practices and frightful Noises, that filled the People with
Terror, and with a kind of awful Horror at the Majesty of their Gods.

The Augurs Observations were attended with a great Variety of those things, as
the Apparatus to their Visions, or whatever else they were to be called. The
Augur first placed himself upon a high Tower like one of our Observatories, and
perhaps the Tower erected upon a high Hill, as upon the Mons Palatinus in Rome:
Here he seated himself in the clearest Day, or in a Starlight Night, to
observe what came by him, or in his Sight, by Day, or what he might hear or see
by Night.

He held in his Hand a Lituus, that is, a crooked Staff, with which he used a
great many wild Gestures and Motions; and he had on, his grave Laena, that is,
his Southsaying Gown or Mantle: He placed himself always with his Face to the
East, and at his first fixing his Station he uttered certain Sentences and
exotic barbarous Words, which none knew the Meaning of but the Devil and
himself.

Being thus seated and fixed, as I have said, he quarters out the Heavens, or
Hemisphere rather, into four Parts or Regions, each Quarter having beforehand
such and such Predictions assigned to it: If it was Day, then he was to mark
every Bird that rose up, or came flying by, or toward him; which of the said
four Quarters he first appeared in, and then killing his Sacrifices, and
muttering over certain Sentences, joining some petitionary Speeches to such or
such a Deity, or Demon rather, (which Speeches were called Effata) he then
proceeded to Divination.

If it was in the Night, he observed in the like manner any fiery Meteor, any
flying or shooting Fires, any sudden Vapor, (as the Nights are full of such
things,) or any Cloud eclipsing the Light of any particular Planet or Star of
the first Magnitude; and then he proceeded in the same manner, only with some
particular Words and Mutterings, as regarded the several Appearances
respectively.

In the Night, it was said, they had the Company of several Spirits assisting
them, and communicating to them the Knowledge of the Things they desired. Their
Divinations were arbitrary and positive, nor durst any Man ask or enquire of
them the Reason of what they predicted, or how they came to know that it would
or should be so and so. A Provision, I must confess, very prudent in the
Priests, and which, as the case has stood with some of them, would be very much
to their Convenience to this Day, as I shall show in its Place.

By this taking such a kind of State upon them, they politickly preserved the
Reverence and Esteem of their Order, and imprinted a kind of Awe in the Minds
of the People, concerning not the Holiness of their Persons only, (though that
went a great way,) but concerning the divine Mysteries, as they were called,
which were put into their Hands; and they were looked upon as Persons to whom
the Gods had committed the most secret Things that were otherwise known only to
themselves, and were communicated to the Augurs, Favorites of the Gods, for
the good of Mankind.

A Learned Author, speaking of this Mystery of Southsaying, says, it came first
from the Chaldeans, who taught it to the Greeks, of whom Amphiaraus was an
eminent Proficient; but he mentions nothing of who taught it the Chaldeans, in
which I believe my Account is the most authentic; namely, that the Devil
taught it to the Arab I have mentioned, or to some other, if any was before
him; that these gave it to the Egyptians, and Chaldeans, and Phoenicians, much
about the same time; and that the Phoenicians taught it the Greeks; their
Prince Cadmus being an eminent Southsayer: and so you see its blessed Original.

In a word, as it is a particular Familiarity with the Devil, and depends
entirely upon his Assistance, so no body can contend that he was not the first
Introducer of it as an Art; since, as I observed, he might easily begin a
Correspondence with Man; but it was utterly impossible that Men should begin a
Correspondence with him; or know where to find him, and how to call him to
their Assistance, whatever the Occasion might be, without his Direction,
Assistance, and Consent.

As to the Introducing it from one Nation to another, it may indeed be
something difficult to assign the manner; But as to the mere divining upon the
flying of Birds, upon Noises, and Appearances in the Air, the Chattering of
Pyes, the Croaking of Frogs and Ravens, and the like, I take much of that to be
mere Juggle and Legerdemain of the Priests and Augurs; and they have carried on
the juggling Trade to a great Perfection in the same Country to this Day; (
stand clear DOMINICANS:) of which hereafter.

But now for a downright Converse with the Devil, I don't understand that Satan
ever tied himself down by Articles, that not only such and such a Man as my
Arab, or Ali Albrahazen, of whom I have spoken, should be able to call him up
when they pleased, by such and such Forms, Ceremonies, Voices and Sounds; but
that to whomsoever they should communicate the same Tokens, or Watchwords, they
should have the same Power, and that the very Words should call him or his
Agents up to an Appearance, whoever made use of them.

This would have been to have the Devil bind himself Prentice to them and their
Heirs for ever; and to have chained himself down, Gallyslave like, to the sound
of the Words, which I take to be quite wide of the Case; nor would it serve his
Designs, for the Devil loves to know his Agents, and not be at the call of
every Boy, because perhaps his Grandmother told him the Words which she used to
raise the Devil with, or because the Devil and she had agreed upon the Matter.
But no doubt Satan, who is certainly the Author of all this kind of Magic, and
which therefore and for that very Reason is called by his Name, Diabolick; I
say, no doubt, as he is the only Teacher of the Art, so he teaches it
immediately by himself; that is, he make^ Men Magicians, and Wizards, and makes
old Women Witches (ay and young too) by an immediate Converse and Contract with
them only, and between them and himself. Nor does he stick at the Pains of
beginning anew with every Person, and in every Country; and this is the Reason
why the Black Art, as we righteously entitle it, is not the same in all
Countries, nor is the Devil talked to in the same Words, for then all the
Witches and Magicians of every Nation must learn the same Language; but on the
contrary, as the Devil talks all Languages when he pleases, so he talks to
every one of his Disciples in their own Mother Tongue, and directs them to do
the same to him; so that a Roman Wizard calls him up in Latin; a Tuscan
Conjurer in Italian; a High German Doctor makes his Circles, and casts his
Figures, and talks Magic to him in the suitable Tongue called High Dutch; the
second-sighted Highlander in Irs, and the Lancashire Lady in English.

So propitious, so civil, so well-manner'd is Satan to all his Drudges and
Devotees, that he, to put them to as little trouble as possible, stoops to
hearken to their Summons, as they think fit to express themselves in their own,
or any Language. Nay, though the Magicians sometimes form a Cant of their own, by
which they amuse their Clients, yet their familiar Friend takes it in good
part, and onverses with them in their own way.

Even the poor Indians, Pawaw with him in the Language of the most Northern
America, the Banians in the Language of the East Indians, the Islanders of
Amboyna in the Language of the Celebes and Moluccos, and the Chinese in that of
Grand Tartary.

The Magicians seem to act in this Part, as if the Devil condescended to them,
not they to him; but then this makes it evident, that he converses Personally
with them all, that he makes his Bargains and Agreements with them always
separately, in all Places, and in all Languages; whereas, if he gave them a
general Commission to empower others to divine, inchant, and raise the Devil,
or evil Spirits, they must all understand one universal Language.

The sum of the Matter is this; the Devil, as a Learned Author says, has three
ways by which he carries on his Kingdom in the World, and by which he works all
his Wonders, which amuse and deceive them. 1. By moving the Affections and
Thoughts of Men, whether sleeping or waking; and this, as it respects his
causing them to dream on any Occasion as he thinks fit, is one very
considerable Branch of his Power. 2. By his exquisite Knowledge of Nature, by
which he turns the Causes of things to his own Purposes, and often brings to
pass such Events as suit with his particular Occasions. 3. By Illusion and
Fraud, imposing upon the Senses, binding and blinding the Understanding and the
Eyes, both of the Body and of the Minds of willingly-deceiv'd Men.


N.B. And I may add a fourth, which perhaps he was not acquainted with in
former times; namely, by familiar Agreement, Compact and Contract with the
Bright Men of the Times, who he brings over to converse and correspond with
him, and who he acts by, and allows them to play their Game and his own
together; and this is Magic.

Having then established a Correspondence with Man, we are not to wonder if, to
gratify his new Correspondents, he empowers them to act abundance of strange
and unaccountable things in the World, that they may by that means obtain a
Reputation of being wiser and craftier than their Neighbors, and may also be
admired and esteemed first, and consequently believed.

These Wonders they work by his immediate Hand, by his Power and Assistance, as
well as Direction; and this I call Magic, and it is so in the worst Sense.

To this he subjoins a Power, as it may be called, over himself; authorizing
the Magicians or Conjurers to summon him in to their Aid whenever they have
Occasion for him, to demand his Presence and Assistance whenever they please.
It was said of Hamed an Egyptian Sorcerer, that he had the Devil so at his
Command, that if he did but draw a Circle upon the Ground, and stamp with his
Foot in the middle of it, the Devil would appear, and bring as many Devils with
him, as the Magician stamped several times on the Ground; and that upon their so
appearing, he could again send them of such Errands, and for the Dispatch of
such Business as he required; whether to do good or evil, to bring on Mischief,
or to prevent Mischief, as he that so called him up pleased to direct; but I do
not vouch the Truth of the Devil's Complaisance in this Particular, nor see the
Reason of it.

If the Magicians in those ancient Days had such Influence upon him, it is
undoubtedly true that they did him great and signal Services, for, and by it;
or else Satan, who does not use to dispense his Favors gratis, must have some
secret View in it, which they or we have not yet discovered.

This great Use which the Devil makes of Magicians and Conjurers, is a certain
Discovery that he is confined by a superior Hand in his Workings, and that he
can only act by Stratagem, by Cunning, and Craft, not by Force and Power.

It is reported of a Sorcerer in Rome, that he could call for Lightning and
Thunder whenever he pleased, and that the Devil would produce it for him; but
that calling him up once to procure Thunder, that should burn a House, and do
great Mischief, to gratify the wicked Design of the Conjurer; he told him No,
he could not gratify his Revenge so far, at least not at that time; and that
the same Sorcerer did at last confess, that the Spirit which he conversed with,
could show his Power many ways in a miraculous manner, but could not do any
Mischief by it.

It may be true, and no doubt is so, that the Magicians, were they fully
empowered, and at Liberty, would really do more Mischief than the Devil
himself, had he the same Power; not that their Malice can be greater, but their
Policy is certainly less; and as they do not see so far before them as he does,
so they do not always see into the Reason of things, and whether it would be
for the common Interest or no: for Example; were the Devil empowered to fire
Houses, destroy Families, lay waste Kingdoms, he might incline to do it; but
his Prudentials and Politics might sometimes tell him, that it would be more
for his Interest to let it alone; and so the Magicians likewise find it, I say,
for their common Interest, to act by Craft and Subtilty as their Master the
Devil has done before them, rather than by open Rage and Fury; I mean for their
common Interest as Magicians. The Devil, could without doubt, in the ordinary
Exercise of his Power as a Spirit, burn, kill, destroy, and in some sense put
an end to God's Creation: But this would not answer his End; he knows his Maker
is his Governor, and could if he pleased punish him immediately, even as he
expresses it in the Scripture, before his time: And he knows likewise, that
when he had destroyed, and made havoc of Mankind, God could, with the Breath
of his Mouth, form a new Species, and that such a Kind as he should have no
Power over; and therefore it is not in short the Devil's Interest to make that
Spoil in the World, which as an Angel, as a powerful Spirit, he might do; and
especially if we suppose him not to be chained and fettered down to superior
Limitations, which however we know to our infinite Satisfaction that he is.

In a word, the Devil's Business, and all his Aim, is not to destroy, but to
damn Mankind; not to cut him off, and put his Maker to the trouble of a new
Creation, but to make him a Rebel, like himself; and even this he is fain to
bring to pass by Subtilty and Art, making use of Man against Man, arming Flesh
against Spirit, and setting Nature in Defiance of the God of Nature; and this
by secretly corresponding with some of the worst and vilest abandoned Wretches
that he can find; instructing them, and teaching them his own Methods, and so
making them Traitors to their own Kind; drawing them in to engage with him in
ruining the Souls and Bodies of others, and concerting Measures with these
corrupted Instruments, whose Principles he has first debauched, that they may
act and do for him, and in his Name, all the Mischief which he finds it is not
for his Purpose to do himself.

While he thus lies behind the Curtain himself, and is not seen, or at least
not publicly, he corresponds most punctually with these Agents, empowering and
directing them by a great variety of hellish Arts and Contrivances to work
Wonders, amuse and impose upon Mankind, and carry on all his Affairs for him.
And this is that we call the Black Art, and so I am come back to my Text.

If it be true that the Devil is the Prince of the Air, then he can form
Tempests in it, can poison and infect it so, as that all Creatures, Humane as
well as sensitive and vegetable, should perish in it; But as he is yet a Prince
under Limitations and Restrictions, so he can exert no more Power than he has;
and when his humane Agents, who are therein worse Devils than himself, would be
for Conflagrations, and general Destruction; He wisely, or rather cunningly,
puts them off, and diverts them, without telling them, or giving them room to
think, that he really has not Power himself to enable them.

It is impossible to close this Article of the Magicians Power being limited,
without an agreeable Reflection upon the modern Furies of our Age, your Party
Leaders, and Politic Scheme-Makers; what merry work they would make in the
World, if the Devil, their Head Engineer, was not limited, and not in Condition
to trust them with the Power of doing Mischief as they desire it.

Perhaps the Sense of this Limitation in the Power of their chief Correspondent
is one Reason, that however studious they are to do Mischief, yet they have not
so much studied the Diabolical Art as they would otherwise have done; in a
word, they are not complete Magicians, because they see the Black Art is not
wicked enough for them, and they cannot obtain a Power by it to out-sin the
Devil.

But I come back to the Art it self. The Artists are certainly very helpful to
the Devil, as well as the Devil to them: For as he is obliged to work by
Stratagem, not by Force, all his Cunning is employed to carry on his Kingdom
and Government in the World; and this brings me to the Reason why the Devil
does not care to act in Person, in most cases of his Administration; but to
employ those People, whom we call Magicians, that they may act with his full
Directions, and though with Art, yet with Power also sufficient to stand his
Ground against all humane Opposition.

Under the Cover of these Agents he acts with infinite Success, by their
Influence he carries on all his Affairs, and especially those of Kingdom and
Dominion, in which it is not for want of Impudence if he does not rival or
indeed dethrone his Maker. By his secret Correspondence with them it is that he
fills the World with sham Wonders, and false Stories, which being detected and
exposed, reflects upon the Magicians, not upon the Devil; neither indeed ought
it to affect him, for that it is not for want of his Assistance if any of them
miscarry, but from their expecting more from him than it is fit he should
grant, or than perhaps it is in his Power to grant. No wonder then he is so
officious, and so willing, that he runs and goes, and dances Attendance upon a
set of ignorant Magicians; I say ignorant, except only as he instructs them;
it is evidently, because he makes his Advantage of them, and they act for his
Account.

It Is then apparent, that the Magicians are Instruments by which the Devil
carries on his Politic Affairs in the World. It is time then, in the next
Place, to enquire in what manner they perform it, and from what Principles they
act; and then we shall come to some Historical Account of their merry
Proceedings in the World.

A SYSTEM of MAGIC. PART II.
INTRODUCTION.
Of the Black Art it self; what it really is, why there are several differing
Practices of it in the several Parts of the World, and what those Practices
are; as also, what is contained in it in General.

I Have all along, till now, spoken of the general Correspondence of the Devil
with Mankind, under the Head of Diabolick Magic, as a mere Intimacy only; I
have represented it as a Method which the Devil first took, to form his
Interest and Acquaintance with Mankind, when he was drowned out of his Kingdom
in the old World by the Flood.

It Is too certain that the Devil acted by this Method at first, for the
Propagation of his own Designs only, and to set on foot a new Administration of
his Affairs; it being for many Reasons not his Business to act openly and
barefacedly in the World as a Devil; but now it is also as apparent, that after
the Devil had thus established a Correspondence, he soon found Man as forward
as himself, as willing to embark with him and engage, as he could desire; nay
so forward in the new Trade, so eager for Mischief, so glad of being vested
with Power (though Infernal) to do it, and to gratify those vilest of his
Passions, Envy, Revenge, Malice and Strife, that the Devil himself, as is
observed in the last Chapter, is forced to restrain him, and gently to divert
his Thoughts to some less violent and less destructive Methods; not being
willing, and sometimes indeed not being able, to act so much the Devil as these
new Hellfire Agents would have him at it.

The Correspondence being thus settled between the Devil and the Magician, and
the Treaties between them signed, ratified, and exchanged in Form, the
Instrument (Man) is immediately furnished by the Employer (Satan) with all
necessary Qualifications for his Business, and is completely qualified for an
Infernal Mountebank; and so he falls to his Juggling-box and to showing his
Tricks, his Pawawing and Conjuring, and in a word, exercising his new
Acquirements and Hellish Talents upon Mankind; and this we call, and that with
a great Propriety of Speech, the BLACK ART.

The brief Definition of what we call the Black Art, that is to say, as I would
have it be understood in the rest of my Discourse, is, that it is a new general
Term for all the Branches of that Correspondence which Mankind has maintained,
or does, or can carry on, between himself and the Devil, between this and the
Infernal World; comprising all the eight Particulars which I mentioned before,
as they are taken from the Prohibition of them, and the Declaration against
them in the Law of Moses, viz. Divining, the same as Southsaying. Observing of
Times. Using Enchantment. Witchcraft. Charming, or setting of Spells. Dealing
with Familiar Spirits. Wizardizing, or Sorcery, thought to be the same as
Witchcraft, but mistaken. Necromancing.


The Practice of these, or of any of them, or of all of them, is what we are to
understand by this general Term the Black Art; and as these several Parts are
expressed after a differing manner, and perhaps practiced in a differing Form
in several and remote Parts of the World, it may be necessary to give a brief
Description of them one by one; that so when we name them apart, I may yet be
rightly understood, and may need no more Digressions for Explanation of Terms
as I go on.

1. Divining. A Diviner I understand to be the same as was antienly called a
Southsayer; this is expressly confirmed in Scripture, if you will take its
Authority for any thing, Acts xvi.16. A certain Damsel possessed with a Spirit
of Divination met us, who brought her Master great Gain by Southsaying: So that
Divination and Southsaying is the same thing.

N.B. Observe that this Divination is here called a Spirit, that is to say, the
Devil, or a Devil; and he was really in her, for it is said, Paul cast him out
of her.

This Southsaying also, as we are to understand it, contained all those lesser
Pieces of low-priz'd Art, called, telling Fortunes, resolving Difficulties,
finding out and discovering secret things; and perhaps all the juggling Part
practiced at this time; and that without any Correspondence with the Spirit
Python that Paul cast out, or any other Spirit but that of Fraud and
Legerdemain, which the Divining or Southsaying is only made a Cover to.

2. Observers of Times. These I take to be some, who, by Correspondence with an
evil Spirit, declared such and such Days or Times to have a particular
Fatality, so that no Business which was undertaken on that Day could prosper;
and this Part of the Black Art may take in such as carrying on the Study of
judicial Astrology to the extreme, and to the Gates of Hell, ascribe Events of
Things to the Government and Influence of the Stars, and that Influence to be
so or so directed for Good or Evil, according to the particular Position,
Opposition, Conjunction or Situation of those Stars or Planets in differing
Houses; as if these could be the Directors of the Fate of Persons, Families and
Nations; and that the Events of things were directed by them, and by the
Seasons and Times of their Stations here or there in the Course of their
ordinary Motion, whether direct or retrogade: In a word, the Practice of
judicial Astrology, though not a dealing with, or by the Help of the Devil, is
condemned here, as being a plain robbing Divine Providence of its known Glory,
in directing and disposing both Causes and Events in all things relating to the
Government of Mankind, or indeed of the whole World, and ascribing that to the
poor innocent unconcerned Stars or Planets which is singly in the Disposition
of him that made them. The Stars and Planets are no intelligent Beings; they
have indeed a vegetative or active Life, but as to Knowledge or Acquaintance of
or with human Affairs they are entirely lifeless Bodies, utterly incapable of
influencing or directing any thing, or of any Motion or Action, other than by
the Direction of the same Power and Providence which made and guides them in
common with the rest of the World.

3. Using Enchantments. These are variously described by the Ancients; but to
explain it by our modern Terms of Art, this is what we call Conjuring; and this
is certainly performed by the immediate Agency and Assistance of the evil
Spirit, when the Magician using these Enchantments, works by the secret Aid of
the Devil some wonderful thing, so as to surprise the Beholders, and make them
think the Operator is vested with supernatural Power, and consequently is some
extraordinary Man. Thus when St. Paul healed the lame Man at Lystra, the
People, surprised with the Miracle, cried out presently, The Gods are come down
to us in the Likeness of Men. Thus the Magicians in Pharaoh's Court made Frogs,
turned the Water into Blood, and the Rods into Serpents by their Enchantments,
that is to say, by the immediate Hand of the Devil; who was permitted, it
seems, to increase the Plagues of Egypt, doing Mischief being his particular
Talent: But I do not read that whenever Aaron and Moses denounced any of those
Plagues, the Magicians could stop or prevent them; if they could have done that
indeed, they had been worth Notice, but it was quite otherwise; for, lest they
should boast too much of their Power, they were restrained, and not able to
make Lice, though they had made Frogs and Serpents; but they were obliged to
acknowledge in public, that they were unable to do it, that it was the Finger
of God, and that he had put a stop to their Enchantments; in a word, it made
them acknowledge that, according to an old Proverb which, for ought I know, is
derived from thence, GOD is above the Devil.

4. Witchcraft. This is indeed the blackest part of the Black Art it self: I
need not describe it any farther than this, that it is a Power received
immediately from the Devil to do Mischief; to gratify Rage, Envy, Malice,
Revenge, and the vilest Passions of Men, giving it into their Hands to bewitch
Men, Cattle, Places and Things; to burn and destroy, though limited, as hinted
before in many Particulars; the Effects of this Witchcraft we often see, and
shall say more to it in its Place.

This includes Persons being immediately agitated by an evil Spirit, carried
often violently into the Air by the Help of the Devil, and being able to carry
away others in the Air also; and not to insist upon all the improbable things
said of them, and said to be done by them; yet that the Devil certainly plays
his Pranks by those Tools sometimes in a most extravagant manner, I must grant.
Why it is generally practiced by old Women only, is a Point to be considered by
itself.

In this Article of Witchcraft is included what we call an Evil Tongue, an evil
Eye, Cursing, Blasting, Bewitching, and abundance of Hellish things which those
Creatures are permitted to practice, to the Hurt of those that they point their
Malice against.

5. Charming. This is certainly a Piece of the Black Art, and consists of
diverse Branches, such as setting Spells, drawing Circles, within which if the
Person to be operated upon sets his Feet, he shall not be able to stir out of
the Compass of it without Leave from the Charmer; likewise Dozings, giving
Filters, Potions, and Hellish Contrivances to cause Barrenness, Impotence,
Idiotism, Lunacy, Love, Hatred, and abundance more nameless Wickednesses, which
nothing but the Devil and Father of Mischief could empower them to do.

6. Dealing with Familiar Spirits. This is what was more immediately proper to
a Magician; I mean, such a Diabolical Magician as I have been describing; and
as the Title expresses it, is an immediate conversing with a Devil, who always
attends him at his Call, to come and go as he pleases, to consult with, be
advised and directed by, and in a word, to do for him whatever He, the Magician
desires.

Thus we read that King Menasses dealt with the Devil; the Text says expressly,
he used Witchcraft and Enchantments, and dealt with a familiar Spirit. And who
could doubt it, from what followed? nothing but a Man abandoned to Hell, and
that had the Devil at his Elbow, could have been prevailed with to do what he
did, which at that time was the most dangerous piece of Impudence that ever had
been heard of, viz. to set a carved Image in the very Temple, the House of God.

7. Wizards. This some take to be nothing but what they call a Man Witch; but
in the Practice it has been carried farther, namely, to be one that consults
with the Devil, to give Answers to difficult Questions, to reveal and discover
Conspiracies, and to govern the greater things of Life; as to blast or succeed
the Enterprises of Princes and People; to tell and foretell the Success of such
and such Undertakings; and even to influence the Undertakers. Such a one as
this was Baalim, who being famed for a Wizard, was sent for a long way by the
King of Moab to curse the Camp and Army of the Hebrews.

The Northern Word used in our own Country for this Kind is a Warlock, the
ancient Import of which was one that could give good or bad Speed to any
Undertaking, or at least could foretell whether the thing enquired about should
succeed or no.

We have abundance of merry Tales scattered abroad in the Oral Tradition of
ancient times, and among those ancient things called Old Women, concerning
Wizards: how the Kings and Princes used to consult with them, before they
undertook any great Enterprise: They tell you in the North; how an old Wizard
warned King James IV of Scotland who was killed at Flodden Field, not to pass
the Tweed with his Army, but encamp on the Northern Bank of the River, and that
if the English passed the Water of Tweed to attack him, he should certainly
defeat and overthrow them; but that if he fought on English Ground, he should
lose both his Army and his Life; which accordingly happened. They relate the
same of old Mother Shipton in England, who, (though so many Fables are made of
her) was a real and known Person, and was not a Witch or a Prophetess, but a
Warlock or Wizard, and it is certain she did foretell to Cardinal Woolsey his
falling into Disgrace at Court, his Loss of the King's Favor, and his Death;
all which accordingly happened.

8. The last of these is a Necromancer, a Word very ancient, and containing
indeed the Black Art in its full Perfection; this being One who not like the
Wizard foretold or predicted, but who, when the People came to him, would carry
them to his Originals, that is to say, would go to work, and bring the Devil up
by his Art to talk with and do their Business for them himself; and this indeed
might properly be said to be a Teacher of the Black Art, that is to say, not
that he could tie the Devil down to appear to the Person, whoever it was, that
he took a Fee of, and be at his Summons as he was before at his the
Necromancer's own; but if ever any Person had a mind to come into the wicked
Class, and have a Personal Conference with the Devil in order to make a Bargain
with him, the Necromancer's Business was to raise the Devil, present the
Stranger, bring them acquainted, and then leave the Devil and the Man to agree
the Matter among themselves.

In a word, the Necromancer, (like the famous Mr. Whiston of good, lying, merry
Memory) was the Devil's Broker, neither more or less; he brings Grift to the
Devil's Mill, Customers to his Shop, and farthers his Trade, and his own Gain
by the ordinary Method of his Employment.

It is true these blackest of the Black-Art Men have a great many other things
in their Practice, besides that of brokering for the Devil; they were used to
raise Storms, Whirlwinds, and Hurricanes, by which they made themselves very
terrible to the People, as if it was in their Power to do all the mischievous
things in the World: By this they brought in their Customers, for the People
usually bribed them, as the Indians worship the Devil that he may do them no
Harm. The strong Opinion the common People had of these Men in time past was
such, that they would go to them for Rain in Drought, and for fair Weather in
Harvest, for Abatement of Floods, and for protecting their Cattle in Lightning
and Thunder.

To sum them up all, the Diviner and Southsayer, the judicial Astrologer and
Conjurer, the Inchanter and Charmer, the Witch and the Wizard, the Necromancer
and Dealer with a Familiar Spirit all put together and practiced in their
fullest Extent, make up this One Black Art which I am speaking of, in its
Perfection; and in this Sense I am to be understood in the following Part of
this Work.

Only take a few Hints by way of Observation, on this Occasion, viz. that the
Devil has some little Out-lyers and sculking Operators in the World, and which
he makes great use of, which may not be said to come under any of those
Denominations; as particularly our Second-sight Men in Scotland; the Wind
Merchants in Norway, who sell fair and foul Weather, Storms and Calms, as the
Devil and you can agree upon a Price, and as your Occasions require: Also in
Lapland, Muscovy, Siberia and other Northern Parts of the World, he is said to
act by differing Methods, and govern his Dominions by a more open and arbitrary
Method, not prescribed and limited to Art and Craft as he does here.

We have also some new Practitioners in Magic among ourselves, who deal with
the Devil in a more exalted sublime Way, and who, for ought I know, are able to
teach the Devil some new and more accurate ways of managing them, and the rest
of the World too, than ever he knew before. In a word, instead of enquiring at
the Devil's Oracle, and learning from him, I think the Devil must even come to
School to them; for as Alphonsus of Castilo said, If God Almighty had consulted
with him when he made the World, he could have showed him how to mend it: So
certainly, if the Devil had consulted these Gentlemen in his first Rebellion,
they might as well tell us, they would have shown him how to have martial'd his
Army better, and perhaps not have lost the Day as he did; at least they would
take upon them to give him new Measures for his present and future Conduct,
that so he may rebel against Heaven again whenever he pleases, and shall be
sure to carry on the War (at least defensively) with better Success than ever
he did before.

We have also some modern Sects of Hellish Divinity not formerly known, no not
to the Devil himself; which seem to partake of the Black Art in a peculiar
manner, and which, though not contained under any of the eight Heads already
mentioned, yet the Professors claim to be incorporated among the Devil's
Graduates, and may be justly esteemed Members of the Society of Deceivers; and
that they have practiced the Black Art in a more exquisite Method than any that
ever went before them; of whom, and of their Art and Management, if I may
obtain a Freedom of Thinking in an Article of such Importance as this, I may
give you a very profitable Description in the Process of this History.

There remains a Vacancy too for our Friends of the Legend and Calendar, among
whom we shall find certain Red Letter Black-Art Men who deal with the Devil
under the sanctified Vizor of the red Hat, the Coul, and the Tonsure; among
whom, I say, many have been, and many still may be Agents of Hell in the most
abstracted Sense, and therefore cannot be denied to be Practitioners in the
Black Art, as effectually, and to all Intents and Purposes, as fully as ever
the Monks of Loudon, or the Patrons of Father Jetzer, and the Maid of Kent; of
all which in their Order.

CHAP. I.
Of Modern Magic, or the Black Art as now in its Practice and Perfection.

THE ancient Magic having by a long Succession of Art and Time been handed
down to the Grecians, and from them to the Romans, we cannot but acknowledge
that they went a great way to the improving it, for they mingled the Black Art
so entirely among their religious Worship that it is not to this day possible
to distinguish between the Rites and Ceremonies of their Gods, and the
Enchantments and Charms, Conjurations and Divinations immediately directed by
the Devil.

I have mentioned something of this already in their Augurs, and the several
Institutions of Romulus, Numa Pompilius, and others; but nothing so effectually
discovered the Black Art to be blended with their Religious Rites, and the
Craft of the Devil with the Worship of their Gods, as the setting up Oracles,
giving Responses, and solving Doubts, as if by Enquiry of the Gods; whereas
indeed it was all managed by the Craft of the Devil, and the Agency of those
solemn Knaves the Priests; and this I call Ecclesiastic Magic.

There was not a little Knavery in the setting up the Augurs, in the
Divinations and Predictions from the flying and chattering of Birds; and before
that, in the Priests poring upon the Intrails of the Beasts sacrificed to their
Gods: Here this Art went such a length, that the Truth is, the Devil saw
himself outdone by the Priests, and the Witchcraft of Superstition went beyond
all that Satan himself ever pretended to in the first Institution: So far did
the crafty and avaritious Priests engross the Devil's Business, that they
really seemed to take the very Trade out of his Hand, or as we say of an
invading Tradesman that sets up under his Master's Nose, he takes the Bread out
of his Mouth.

The Greeks were the most superstitious of all the Devil-Worshippers in the
World, worse than the Persians and Chaldeans, from whom they borrowed all the
Fundamentals of their Idolatry, and far worse than the Romans, who were
afterward their Scholars: Image and Idol Worship were Essentials in all their
Temples, which the Romans at first rejected with Disdain; even Numa Pompilius,
the most devout and superstitious of all the Romans, despised it; and many of
the most learned of the Roman Authors exclaim against it as absurd and
ridiculous; however they came into it afterward also.

But the Greeks, I say, from their particular Love to Superstition, were the
first that worshipped the Images of their Gods: thus you read of the Ephesians
having the Image of Jupiter which came down from Heaven; in like manner they
had particular Images in every Temple, and Temples almost in every Corner; and
being the fittest People to be thus imposed upon and deluded, the Priests who
were equally subtle there as in other Places, invented (or the Devil directed
them to) that grossest of all Cheats, the Oracles of their Gods; to whose
Temples they constantly repaired for Answers in the most difficult and doubtful
Cases; and the Romans took it from them.

These Oracles were indeed the Devil's Masterpiece, for here the Priests and
himself juggled together in so notorious a manner, that no Contrivance for
putting a public Cheat upon the World ever met with the like Success: The
Devil assisting the Priests gave Answers in the most subtle, doubtful and
ambiguous Terms imaginable, so that they frequently possessed the People with a
Belief of the Things predicted being come to pass; whereas it was all owing to
the Double Entendre of the Answers, which left things to be understood any way
the Priests thought fit, and left the Priests room to suggest a Correspondence
between the Oracle and the Event, when indeed there was no manner of
Similitude, no Coherence, or any thing like it.

History gives several Examples of the ambiguous doubtful Answers of the
Oracles, and yet so bigoted were the Greeks to their Notions of them, that on
the Day of the great Battle at Plataea with the Persians they would not give
Battle, though the Enemy was upon them, and began to trample down their Infantry
with the Horse, till they knew the Will of the Gods, as they expressed it, and
had a full Answer from the Oracle; the Soldiers sitting still upon the Ground,
and letting the Enemies cut them in Pieces. But as soon as they had understood
that the Oracle had given its Answer, and that their Sacrifices for Victory
were favorable, their Commanders assuring them that the Gods were propitious,
and that they had a Promise of Victory, they immediately roused up from their
Seats, formed their Battalia or Phalanx, and fell on with such Fury, that the
Persians and the other Greeks that were confederate with them, were utterly
overthrown, and cut in Pieces.

It will not be amiss, in order to show the World how great the Powers of
religious Infatuations were, and how far Mankind may be imposed upon, to give a
short Account of but that one Day's Action between the Grecian Army under their
General Pausanias, and Mardonius Leader of the Army of Xerxes the King of
Persia.

The Persian Army consisted of three hundred thousand Persians, the Flower of
Xerxes's Army; and fifty thousand Greeks; Thebans, Macedonians and Thessalians,
Auxiliaries or Confederates with Xerxes. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians
consisted of no more than forty thousand Grecians, but old Soldiers, and well
armed, commanded by Pausanias, to whom they had joined indeed seventy thousand
Auxiliar Militia, but these were only raw and unexperienced People; nor had
they any Dependence on them for their Valor or Discipline, only for making
Excursions, plundering, and the like.

'The Greeks had sent to enquire of the Oracle at Delphos, to know the Success
of the War, and were answered, that they should certainly have the Victory,
provided they fought the Battle upon Athenian Ground, or in the Plains of Ceres
and Proserpina, and made their Prayers to such and such GODS, Demi Gods and
NYMPHS, (Excellent Conjuring and Magic to patch up Religion with!)

'This Answer of the Oracle was an apparent Cheat, for no body knew where this
Piece of Ground could be: The Plain of Ceres was indeed on Athenian Ground, but
then it was not near where the Armies lay, and they being inferior in Force,
could not choose their Ground, or fight where they pleased; But there was an old
Temple of Ceres and Proserpina, near their Camp, and likewise some dedicated
Places sacred to those Nymphs and Demi Gods spoken of upon Mount Ctihaeron; but
then the Land belonged to the Citizens of Plataea, and not to the Athenians,
and this perplexed them much.

'While they were in this Uneasiness, the Plataeans, to show their good will,
and encourage the Army, bestowed all the Lands which those Temples and
dedicated Places stood on, and for a large Space round, by Deed of Gift on the
Athenians, so to cause them to fight on Athenian Ground.

'All things being thus cleared up, and the Armies just ready to engage, the
Grecian General caused Sacrifices to the Gods for Victory to be brought to the
head of the Troops; nor would the Athenians stir, or strike a Stroke, till they
were ended, and that the Priests gave Signals of the Fortunate Omens. The
Persian Army advanced, the Horsemen charged in upon the foremost Troops, the
Arrows flew in Clouds, and many were slain; but 'twas all one, the Soldiers sat
upon the Ground, and would not stir a Foot.

'But as soon as Pausanias had Notice that the Sacrifices were happily ended,
and that he found those Tokens in the Entrails of the Beasts, which the
Superstition of the Age esteemed Fortunate, and Signals of Success; he
immediately caused the Army to raise a Shout, and gave the Signal of Battle:
Upon which the Soldiers suddenly rise up upon their Feet, with Acclamations,
and received the Charge of the Barbarians in such excellent Order, and with
such undaunted Bravery, that notwithstanding the Enemy came pouring in upon
them with their Multitudes, expecting to bear all down before them, yet the
Persians were repulsed, and utterly overthrown, and Mardonius with above three
hundred thousand Men killed upon the Spot.



What Ecclesiastic Magic was this! what Superstition, without ground! The
Sacrifices would have gone on, though the Armies had engaged; or if not, why were
they not brought sooner to the Place, and how in a few Moments more might the
whole Army have been cut in Pieces without Resistance, for want of the Ceremony
of a timely Sacrifice? But such is the Power of Superstition, and to such a
degree of Possession or Infatuation had the Devil, by the means of his
Instruments the Magicians, brought Mankind.

This I take to be the Meridian of the Devil's Influence, and when the Magic
Diabolical was at its greatest Height. The Romans were superstitious enough,
but not so grossly given up: and yet the Grecians were a wise Nation; the
Athenians were famed for Wisdom and Knowledge; for Philosophy; Art and Science
flourished among them to a degree beyond all the rest of the World. Nay they
despised the Wisdom of all the World in comparison of their own; yet swallowed
up with the Magic of Superstition, they were in short bewitched by a religious
Sorcery, and run into Superstition to an excess equal to Madness and
Distraction.

The Romans, as I said above, followed them at the Hells; and though at first the
wisest of their Leaders rejected the Image Worship of the Greeks, nay stood out
one hundred and seventy Years from Numa Pompilius, esteeming it absurd and
impious to represent things glorious, by things base or mean; yet Tarquinius
Priscus following the Usage of the Greeks, (who, I say, of all the Nations of
the World were the most deluded by the Devil,) brought in the Custom of setting
up the Images of their Gods in their Temples; and in some Ages after, this Use
of Images came up to such a height, and multiplied to such an infinite Number,
that it was next to impossible to know them one from another, but they were
obliged to write their Names over their Statues and Images; and the Numbers of
their Gods, and Demy-Gods, grew up to such a Multitude, that they were obliged
to marshal them into Regiments and Classes, Degrees and Orders, and even of
them too many to repeat. Such as Dii Consentes Select^, Dii Patritii, Dii Medii
Insigniores, Dii Mediorum or common Gods, Terrestial and Celestial Heroes,
Gods and Demy-Gods, Nymphs, and in a word, an infinite Throng of Gods.

Happy Art! however Infernal and Diabolick, that could furnish Gods from the
Street to the Capitol; nay Dung^il Gods, Door-keeping Gods, and Senate House
Gods, Dii Conscripti, and above all the rest, as the Learned Lactantius says,
the Rabble of Gods beatify'd by Men. Epimenides Cretensis erected in the
Athenian Plains the famous Altar to the Dii Ignatii, the Unknown Gods, of which
St. Paul took Notice, for it remained there to his time, when he made that
famed Oration, Inimitable for its Eloquence and Beauty of Language, as well as
Excellence and Strength of Argument, when he stood upon Mars-Hill at Athens,
confuting the Wisdom of the Philosophers, and perhaps Magicians.

And whence now came all this Ignorance and Superstition? but from the early
Delusions of the Devil, carried on among Men by the help of this we call Magic
of Black Art, and in all its several Compositions? that is to say, as above,
Divining Southsaying, Enchantment, Whitchcraft, Sorcery, and dealing with
Familiar Spirits, Necromancy, and the Devil.

These things introduced Enthusiasm, Enthusiasm brought up Idolatry, and then
Witchcraft and Magic brought down the Minds of Men to a Meanness fit to be
deluded by them.

It may not be improper to observe here, that the Black Art, as thus explained,
may be less needful in those Days, when the deluded World was more easy to be
imposed upon and cheated, than now, when the World seem to have their Eyes
open, and require more Artifice to impose upon them with.

In the Grecian and Roman Times, the Minds of Men untaught, and without the
Assistance of Divine Illuminations, were easily imposed upon, given up to
strong Delusions, and to believe Lies; they were bigoted by the Priests, and
by their own Native Superstitions, and were easily deluded to worship any Gods,
every bodies Gods, and even as above, Unknown Gods. Happy Ignorance! compared
to our Age, who by their Excess of Knowledge and Sense are arrived to a degree
of Liberty, from the Slavery and Bondage of all Religion; that esteem
themselves wise, in having found out a new Happiness for Mankind, freeing him
from the Chains of Doctrine and Principle, triumphing in a State of complete
Atheism and Irreligion, and instead of worshipping many Gods, save themselves
the trouble of Idolatry, and worship no God at all.

It must be confessed it has cost the Devil some Pains, he has employed a world
of Agents, and bestowed a great deal of Magic, to bring this to pass; nay, in
my Opinion it seems that he never was able to bring it to pass, no, not by all
his Agents, and whatever Pains and Expense he had been at; but on the contrary,
it came into his Management by an unforeseen, and, even to the Devil himself,
an unexpected turn of his Affairs: For first it seemed to be a new Discovery in
its very Nature, and what Satan had no Notion of for many thousands of Years;
and I do not find the most Learned in these Matters are agreed yet about it, as
whether it is immediately from Hell, a new Invention of the Place, and so
introduced by the Devil as a Favor and Advantage to Mankind; or whether the
Case is inverted, and as Man has in this Practice out-sinn'd the Devil, so he
has been the Devil's Instructor in it, and brought the thing to him, as a
Projector does a Scheme to the Person whom he would have to manage it for him.

Indeed I must do the Devil the Justice to say I think it was the latter; that
it never entered into Satan's Head, as cunning as he is, to imagine any thing so
gross would go down with the World; that though it is true he had begun early in
setting up himself in the place of God, and had gotten himself to be worshipped
as a GOD, yet he never offered to suggest to Mankind that there was no God to
be adored at all; no Supreme Being existing, to whom the Homage of the World
was due, as to its Creator and Preserver.

The Devil knew the early Principles, and whence they were infused; he knew
that it was a Fire kindled with the Life, and that could not be extinguished
but with the same Life; that it was the Work of Nature in Man, twisted with his
Reason, and as he thought it impossible to be erac'd and obliterated, so he
never attempted it. Not to believe a God! All Hell acknowledged the Mighty
Truth, and the Devil himself could never imagine Mankind could be brought to
question it. Infernal Spirits Themselves have deify'd,
But Devils nor Men the Being of God denied;
'Till wiser Ages found new ways to Sin,
And turned the Devil out, to let the Atheist in.


This Attainment is indeed a new Invention; but like our late South Sea Stock
it is run up, and has gained upon Mankind by a general Infatuation, and may
well be called Magic in its very Abstract. Nothing indeed but a kind of
thinking rightly called FREE, and founded on Schemes of the most refined
Infidelity, could act upon such a System as this: What Magic must there be to
work up the Mind of Man to a Possibility of receiving such a Principle, without
Astonishment. No God! what a Shock it gives to the Soul, what a Blow to the
reasoning Powers! The secret Trepidation racks the Soul,
And while he says No God, replies, thou Fool!


It must be a most exquisite Piece of Magical Work, and Magic in it self must
be a most exquisite Art, more refined and more superior in Wickedness, than the
most superlative Craft of Hell ever arrived to, that should raze out the
Impressions of a GOD from the Soul of Man, where they were first riveted by the
very same Hand of Power that created him; that could harden the Soul against
the Terrors of his Maker, and blot out all the Representations of God, which
the light of Nature and of Reason had printed upon his Mind.

It is beyond even the lofty Theme I am upon, and as the Power of Magic cannot
reach it, so it is also beyond me to conceive of it, either what Power it is
wrought by, or from what strange corrupted Fountain it flows. I confess, I
cannot find in my Heart to charge Satan with it, for I would not slander the
Devil; nor do I find any Footsteps of it in all the Devil's Story, or in all
the Accounts of his Management in the World: I leave it therefore to the
Learned Searchers into the Antiquity of these Times, to find out, if it be
possible, its Original, and tell us from whence it proceeds; promising in the
mean time, that if they will but tell me where it begun, I Will take care to give
them an Account where it will end, and that from very good Authority.

The bringing Mankind to deny the Being of their Maker, is a thing in it self
so surprising, so shocking to Nature and to common Sense, that it cannot but
raise our Curiosity, if possible, to find out its Original; I acknowledge my
self to have lost a great deal of Labor in the Search, nor have all the
Methods I have hitherto taken been able to give me any considerable Light into
the Matter. I am loath I confess to go to Satan himself to enquire about it, and
so deal with the Devil my self, while I am exploding the Practice in others.
Besides, I am very doubtful, whether, if I did, he could give me a true, or at
least, a full Account of it; for I am under a full Persuasion that it is beyond
him, that the Original was from the Nature of Man, arrived by his own
Improvement to a height beyond his first Instructor. How the Heart of Man
became receptive of Wickedness beyond the Power of Hell and Devils to infuse,
is a Point too curious to dwell upon here, we may meet with it again in our way.

It may be true, and we have good reason to say we find it so, that the Devil
greedily embraced the Proposal; and like the King of Spain, when Columbus
brought him the first News of a new World in America offered to his Government,
and adding a new Empire to his Dominiom; He whose Ambition had before grasped
the whole World in Imagination, yet greedily accepted the Discovery, how mean
soever the Discoverer was. Thus Satan, however outwitted and out-sinn'd by the
Dexterity of Men, being showed a way of insulting his Maker, (his darling Sin,
and the height of his Ambition) which he never thought of before, though perhaps
secretly disdaining to be out-shot in his own Bow, yet greedily embraced the
Discovery, embarks in the Scheme, and prompts the wicked Contrivers to go on
with it, with the utmost Application.

It may be asked of me, why I will Insist upon this matter in a Treatise of
Magic; that this relates to the Atheists, not to Magicians, and that by the
same Rule, all Enthusiasms, Heresies and mysterious things in Religion, as well
as in Science, may be rated in the same Class, and be called by the same Name,
and so we shall make a Magic of Religion at last.

But let a short Answer suffice to this weak Objection; All Errors in Religion
are not equally Diabolic, no, nor equally mischievous; and as I have said
above, that this seems to be of an Original deeper than Hell, and out of the
Reach of the Devil; so, as far as it is a Crime which derives from the Man as
an Independent, and acting the Devil by himself, I think it must have the
Height of human Imagination and Invention in it, and so may be called Magical,
as Magic is a Sicence or Art of doing Superlative Evil.

If then it shall be allowed at least to be, as it really is, an Extreme of
human Wickedness, it must have the Essence of Magic in it, as Magic is now
considered; and therefore when I mention it in the Title of this Chapter, I
call it MAGIC in its Practice and Perfection. What mysterious Power must it
be, or as it is usual to express it, what Magic must there be in it, that
Mankind can be hardened to a Pitch, capable of denying the POWER that made
them, capable of arguing against the Reality of that Being, which gave them
Being?

Nor does the Magic consist in the Fact, neither do I lay the Stress of it
there; or upon the Sin against Reason, against common Sense, the Ingratitude to
their Maker, the open Insult of Heaven, the Venture of provoking that Being
whose Power it insults, and many other things of like Importance; these are
things the People I am talking to, and the Age I am talking in, can ridicule,
and make a Jest of, and laugh at the mention of them; not shall I dwell upon
them, the Divines are equal to this Task, and their proper Work it is. I leave
it with them.

But my Enquiry looks another way, and there the Magic discovers it self; viz.
by what strange Influence, by what secret Wonder in Nature it is brought about,
that Men who say they have Souls, that have a Capacity of reasoning and
judging, and whose universal Passion is to be vain of that Judgment, proud of
their reasoning Powers, and of their being capable of censuring the Defects of
others, that These should ever be capable of being thus imposed upon, of
receiving such a Notion, and even of desiring it should be true. This is indeed
astonishing! and here I confess there must be some Magic, some secret
prevailing Artifice, whether of the Devil, or of what else, who can tell? Here
must be some Wheels and Springs, able, when set a going, to give a Progression
to the whole Movement; and here must be some secret Hand turning those Wheels
and Springs; be it Internal, External, or Infernal, I leave it as I find it;
only I think, as I thought before, my Judgment dictates to me, that the Devil
is not in the Plot, that he had no hand in it, at least not at first; what he
may have done since I know nothing of yet, and I do not see how I shall, at
least not till I have made farther Inquiry.

In looking into this Absurdity, which so many Men of Parts, and who scorn
Absurdities in other things, are pleased to come into, I cannot but observe how
busy they are; how many Arts and Tricks truly Magical, do they find out, to
reason themselves into the belief of that horrid Inconsistency? What
subterfuges do they fly to, what Arguments, weak as they are, do they use; and
how do they cleave and cling about them, loading every Word that can be offered
against them with innumerable Cavils, and with the most apparent Sophistry!

One sort will have a God of one kind, One of another. The Sceptick forms the
Notion of a God in his Mind, but strips him of all his governing Power, divests
him of Knowledge and Wisdom, Holiness and Justice, and all those glorious
Attributes for which he is worthy to be adored, and which make him justly the
Object of our Homage, and of our Affection too.

The Deist strips him of the very constituting Part of the Deity, and brings
him down to a Level with our Reasoning; divesting him of all Governing,
Protecting and Preserving Providence, and particularly of all Resentment
against the vilest Offenses; robbing him of the Power of Rewards and
Punishments, and making him so good, so kind and gracious, that they do not
leave him room to be Just, or allow him any Resentment let the cases be what
they will.

The Atheist out-goes them all, and not able indeed to reconcile their Notions
to common Sense, much less to reason himself into their Opinions, audaciously
shuts his Eyes against Reason and Sense also, and tells you there is NO GOD at
all.

Now Magic puts an end to all this Difficulty; for by consulting the dark
Oracle, and entering a little into the Secrets of the sacred Science, as they
wickedly tell you it is; they come out transformed into a new kind of Species,
they tell you that they are arrived to a complete Knowledge of the Eternal
Mysteries; that GOD is nothing but the Sum of human Desires, the Ecstasy of an
exalted Spirit, carried up into the Regions of eternal Calm and Quiet, where
the Soul is in Raptures of Joy and Love. This they resolve by the Light of the
refined sublime Judgment to be the Perfection of Happiness, and that is God.
Amor DEUS est JUPITER quodcunque cupis.

They tell your farther, to descend to the Personality of a GOD, is talking
wildly and immethodically, and what is inconsistent with Nature; that GOD is a
Quality, rather than a Being, that cannot be described by Words, any more than
it can be limited by Space; that the supreme Essence is an inconceiveable
Spirit of Light and Glory, and the Soul receives an assimulating Light and
Knowledge, even by the Contemplation of it, by the Rays of a communicable
Effulgence; so that having been once illuminated, it continues enjoying a full
Luster of eminent Glory for ever after.

This unintelligible Stuff is all Magic to me, and I believe we may truly say
it is so to us all; it is some of the Cant of the Trade, the Terms of Art in
that Profession; and if this be the Discovery that Magic makes to the Mind,
the Magicians will have small cause to boast of their Improvement, I presume it
shall leave the Mind darker than it finds it.

Now that this makes room for Atheism, or Deism, or Polytheism in the Mind, it
is very evident; for, next to the denying the divine Being, our entertaining
false and corrupt Notions unworthy of God, and of the reasoning human Soul, are
fatal to Religion.

Yet, what Impressions have these things made upon some of the politest Men in
this Age, who pretending to extirpate all the Notions of Religion in their
Souls, begin it with denying the Being of the God that evidently made them; if
you pretend to argue from Reason, from Nature, from visible Things, to
invisible, they reject it all, and call for Demonstration; they will have
Heaven measured Mathematically and Geographically, as it were by Scale and
Compass, and will judge of things invisible according to Gunter; they will
allow of nothing but what they can see with their Eyes, and feel with their
Hands, nor will they believe any such thing as an Incomprehensible. They will
have all Heaven resolved into Nature, all Religion into Reason, and all God
into Philosophy. They are not thus difficult in other things; less Evidence
will serve them in Crime, and they will make shift with the weakest Arguments
in the World, to persuade themselves into the Lawfulness and Justice of the
vilest things that they allow the Practice of; so partial are they to their
corrupt Inclinations, so prejudiced against every thing that looks like a
superior and legal Restraint to their Vices; is not this justly called Magic?
is it not with the utmost Propriety brought into a System of Magic? is it not
really a Black Art, a Piece of Conjuration and Witchcraft? is it not all
Necromancy and the Devil?

When Human Wit, in search of things Divine,
Would Reason's Light with Revelation join,
Expect to have Almighty Being made known
By the same Light, by which we know our own;
Creating by Created would explain,
And Demonstration of first Powers obtain;
How does the wild Philosophy confess,
Its Weakness, Ignorance, and Emptyness;
How do the Naturalists, and SO SO's Dream,
When gravely they present the Sacred Scheme!
Lay down the Draught, draw out the Magic Plan,
A self-deriving World, a self-creating Man;
And would a Nature void of GOD explain.
Strange! how when Men are once of Crime possessed,
Their reasoning Faculties are all suppressed.
If of Religion they some Hints desire,
What Proofs, what Demonstrations they require?
What Difficulties, ere they can submit,
What reasoning Scruples raise, what turns of Wit,
To shift the strong Conviction from the Mind;
As if Religion all to Sense confined,
Should every School Distinction undergo,
And Rules of Faith, to Rules of Reason bow.
But if to hardened Crime they but incline,
In vain their reasoning Light pretends to shine,
The wildest Notions blindly entertain;
Reason and Nature struggle: but all in vain.
Error, like Mother's Milk they swallow down,
And by their Choice make every Crime their own.
The deadly poisonous Draught drink freely in,
And ask no reasoning Questions when they Sin.
Take Crime by Lump however absurd and gross,
And wed Mistakes, for better or for worse.
So pedling Merchants, as their Stocks increase,
Turn Wholesale-men, and only trade by the Piece.
The bringing Mankind then into these Absurdities, I say, is the height of
Magic; it is making them capable of entertaining Atheistic Notions, and on
Pretense of reasoning to receive Principles inconsistent with Reason; and
because things Divine are in some Particulars incomprehensible, they run into
Notions neither comprehensible or rational.

This is infinitely beyond all the Enthusiasm and religious Frenzy in the
World; it is brought about by a Possession, a mere Rapture of the Imagination,
which, in a word, forms in the Mind a new Scheme of Nature, new Notions of
Being, of Life, of Motion, of past, present, and future; nay, they tell you as
much; they tell you the common Conceptions of things are only calculated to
keep the World blind and dark, that wrapped up in their own Ignorance, they may
be easy.

That if by a supernatural Light, and by the Study of sacred Science, (that is
to say of Magic) a few of the more enlightened part of Mankind have attained to
a clearer View of things, and that View or Knowledge is communicated to the
Souls of those Few, by a sublime Influence; yet it is not so in the main, that
the rest of the World understand nothing of it, and that Mankind remain blind
and ignorant, for want merely of Application to, and Study of a true Knowledge.

These are the Things which they tell us of themselves, and which they talk in
a kind of Cant particular to their own sort; representing themselves as a kind
of angelick People, that live above the rest of the World, and that act in a
higher Sphere, are endowed with superior Light, that live beyond the ordinary
Rate of their Fellow Creatures. What Reality there is in these things, what
Seize they have, and how they have exercised them, we shall discover more
plainly, when we look a little into the rest of it; when we see what angelick
things they do, and in what manner they exercise their extraordinary Faculties;
whether they appear to be Illuminations from Heaven, or Delusions of Hell;
whether Emanations of the Realms of Light, or Mists and Vapors from the
Regions of Darkness; in a word, whether they are Revelations and Inspiration
from the good Spirit above, or Enthusiasms, Witchcraft, and Sorcery, prompted
and assisted by the Devil.

How low-priz'd are all their Undertakings, how mean and contemptible the
Methods they take to exert these noble and superior Faculties? How do they
practice upon Mankind by Conjurations, Spells and Enchantments, by the most
pitiful and scandalous Delusions, pretending to divine and superior Knowledge?
One part of their Performances consists in juggling and slight of Hand, another
part in Fraud and Falsehood, another in the most ignorant Pretenses; and the
last, and as I may say, the only real Part, in a mere Necromancy and Dealing
with familiar Spirits.

In their Operations, were their Acquirements Divine, was their Power from
Heaven, were the extraordinary Accomplishments which they boast of, truly and
as they say Seraphick and Heavenly, it would appear in this, that like their
heavenly Original they would be exerted in doing good; they would be shown in
acts of Charity, of Beneficence to Mankind, moving the World to reform, and in
a word, in bringing a Glory to Religion, and to every laudable thing; whereas
on the contrary we see, the Magicians of the latter Ages of the World are, and
always have been, employed in the extreme of Wickedness, in the blackest
Crimes, in protecting and encouraging the worst and most devilish Practices in
the World, prompting confederated Mischiefs, joining in with Murder, Treason,
Assassination, and all manner of wicked things.

Thus they tell us of the Magicians among the Germans, who fomented the
Rebellion of those Enthusiasts call Anabaptists, which brought so many
thousands to their Grave by War and Treason. Some will tell us, that Count
Wallestine, the Great General under the Emperor Ferdinand II, and who fought
the great Battle of Lutzen, against the King of Sweden, used Magic, and that
several of the German Officers had Charms and Spells about them, to render them
invulnerable, so that no Sword would cut them, no Bullets wound them; but that
they were deluded by the Magicians, for that many of them were found among the
Slain, with Charms hanging about their Necks; and that Wallenstine himself,
notwithstanding his Magic Art, was overthrown, and shamefully beaten by the
Swedes in that great Battle, and was himself afterward assassinated and killed
by an Irish Captain in the Castle of Egra in Bohemia, though surrounded with
his Guards.

Many Instances have been given, and History is full of them, where the
Pretenders to this Art have been abandoned to Ruin, either deluded by the
Demon they trusted, or through the real Deficiency of the Art it self; the
latter of which I insist upon has been chiefly the Reason of it; for what
Operation could they expect from the help of Magic, to counter-act the
Determinations of Providence? even Balaam himself could declare it thus; Surely
there is no Enchantment against JACOB, neither is there any Divination against
ISRAEL. Numb. xxiii.23.

CHAP. II.
The Scene, changed; That as the Devil acted at First with his Black Art
without the Magicians, so the Magicians seem to carry it on now without the
Devil.

HItherto I have made the Devil the Aggressor in all the Transactions between
himself and Mankind, but now we must turn the Tables; for whether it be, that
finding things go on currently, and to his Mind, he only sits still and looks
on, like an Engineer who has with infinite Art and great Fatigue formed a new
Machine, then sets it at Work, and seeing it perform according to Expectation,
sits down with Satisfaction, and lets it go round of it self: Or whether the
Nature of Man, corrupt, and prompt to all the foolish and foul things the Devil
could put into his Head, does really run on faster than the Devil can drive
him: This as a Doubt, which either Philosophy or Divinity have not yet
resolved, I must leave it to Time and Experience to explain.

That thus it is, the Fact is plain; if the Black or Diabolick Art was at first
a Machine of the Devil, or let it be whose it will, it works now of it self, it
performs to the Devil's Satisfaction; he has little to do but to sit still, and
see the Wheels go round.

Nay, we may say, the Scholars teach the Master, the Magician seems to guide,
nay to command the Devil, whose Art it is that he professes, and according to
the Lines in my Title, The obsequious Devil attends the Sorcerer's Spell;
The Mill turns round the Horse, who first turns round the Mill.


It Is worth observing here, how remarkable the Turn is that seems to be given
to the working of these Infernal Machines. At first, the Devil had some
Difficulty with Mankind, was obliged to act with great Craft and Subtilty, to
make his Acquaintance among them, as I have observed at large; after this he
got the Ascendant to such a degree, that he (as the Devil you know is apt to
encroach where he finds room for it) set himself up for a Guide, then a
Governor, then a God; was first followed as a Director or Adviser, next obeyed
and submitted to as a Governor and Commander; and then ( for he never rests)
worshipped as a God; which no doubt was his first, and of Necessity must be his
highest Aim and Ambition.

But now, by we know not what Fate, Mankind seems to have got the better of
him; instead of being waited upon in Form, and humbly expected, as in his first
Appearances; instead of being Paw-wa'd, and great Assemblies and Ceremonies
used to obtain an Audience of him, he comes now at every old Woman's Call, and
upon the most trifling Occasion; instead of being a Counselor or an Adviser,
much less a Governor, now he is a mere Errand Boy, runs and goes, will do any
Drudgery, work like a Horse, fetch and carry like a Dog, dig Ditches, carry
Burdens, build Churches, or any thing the Priests and the Conjurers bid him
do; witness New Market Heath, Stone-henge, Crowland Abbey, and a thousand more
things, which to be sure the Devil did, because we don't know how else they
could be done.

The Magicians were formerly the Devil's Servants, but now they are his
Masters, and that to such a degree, that it is but drawing a Circle, casting a
few Figures, muttering a little Arabic, and up comes the Devil, as readily as
the Drawer at a Tavern, with a do you call Sir? or like a Scots Caude, with
What Is your Honor's Wull Sir? Nay, and as the learned in the Art say, He must
come, he cannot help it: Then as to tempting, he is quite out of Doors. And I
think, as the old Parliament did by the Bishops, we may even vote him useless:
In a word, there is no manner of Occasion for him; Mankind are as forward as he
can wish and desire of them: Nay, some cunning Men tell us we sin faster than
the Devil can keep Pace with us; as witness the late witty and moderately
wicked Lady -- who blessed her Stars, that the Devil never tempted her to any
thing, he understood himself better, for she knew well enough how to sin
without him, and that it would be losing his time to talk to her.

Likewise our happy Friend the much honored Sir H --, who values himself upon
this particular Accomplishment, that he is able to SIN like a Gentleman; nay he
merits much from Satan, in that, if he may be believed when he speaks the worst
of himself, he is also able to teach him (the Devil) to be more refinedly
wicked than he is: This Sir H -- certainly gives the Devil very little Trouble
about him: and though I don't hear that the old Gentleman is yet come to School
to the Baronet; yet as the Baronet don't come to learn of him, so he (the
Devil) need not come to teach him, for that he is certainly as well
accomplished in the horrid Art as the Devil can make him.

The Age we live in, fruitful in Black Arts (whether in that which by way of
Eminence we call Black Art or no, is yet undetermined) affords us many, I dare
not say bright, Examples of flaming Wickedness: It Is no new thing to hear the
Right Honorable my Lord -- though his Lordship is known to be no Necromancer
neither, rate himself above the low, mechanic, poor-headed Rabble (as he
justly calls them) who dare be Devils, but don't understand it; have Impudence
enough, but not a Genius to be truly flagrant: It is indeed a modern
Accomplishment, and requires some Additions of Art and Practice to be able to
sin like a Lord. And though the great Man just now mentioned may, perhaps, have
reason to exalt his own Acquirement, and to boast of accumulated Crime;
insomuch that he would take it for an Affront, if the Devil should pretend to
prompt him; and that perhaps Satan, who understands good Breeding, has had more
Manners than to disturb his Lordship that way, seeing him go on so happily
without him; yet it may be acknowledged the watchful Seraph does find a little
Business sometimes among some of his Lordship's Imitators, being at some happy
Pains to form them, as the Moderns express it, and make them as finished Devils
of Quality as his Lordship; so that we may be satisfied there is no great Fear
we shall want a Succession of human Infernals, no not among Men of Rank.

Wonder not then that the Devil growing so much out of Business in the World,
and Men growing, as I said, such Proficients in the Science of the Abominables,
is in proportion humble as to his Conduct, and allows himself to be the
obedient Servant of every Star-gazer and Figure-caster; that he comes when he
is called, goes when he is sent, nay sometimes comes before he is called, and
is the most diligent Devil imaginable. He would be very ungrateful, it must be
allowed, if he should not, where the Age is so obliging to him; but besides
that, he finds it for his Interest too, and he is too cunning not to push his
Game wherever it will go.

I have heard of a Magician, that, when the Devil and he had made a Bargain
that he should always come when he was called, that is to say, that whenever
the Magician drew such and such Circles, and made such and such Figures, and
then called him by Name, that then he should be sure to appear, had a mind to
try whether the Devil would be honest to him or no; and for making this
Experiment performed all his Exercises, as I may call them, by himself, and
when he had no manner of Occasion for it: However, the punctual Devil kept his
Word, and came to a Tittle, which the Necromancer was mightily pleased with.
After this he thought he might make a little Game with the Devil; so he calls
him up again, and when he came, the Spirit asked him, what was the Business; he
told him, he had no Business, only called him for his Company, and to be better
acquainted. Very well, says Satan, or Beelzebub, or who you will call him, for
I don't remember that he knew what his Name was; but it seems the patient Devil
answered him 'Twas very well, and showed no manner of Resentment; but after
some Conversation left him again very quietly.

The foolish Fellow, it seems, went on with the Sport, making a Fool of the
Devil so often and so long, 'till at last the Devil asking him, as before, what
he called him up for, and he telling him he had no Business, but only that he
liked his Conversation, and called him up for the sake of his Company: Very
well, says the Devil, not at all displeased, I am glad to hear it; then go
along with me, and you shall have enough of my Company, without giving me the
Trouble to come so far: and with that the Conjurer felt himself lifted up in
the Air a little from the Ground, which made him cry out horribly.

I don't know what Argument, and Entreaties he used, so as to move Compassion
in him that is known not to be furnished with any thing of that kind; but
perhaps the Devil was not quite ready for him, and knew that he might do him
more Service in the Station he was newly entered into; so it seems he did not
take him quite away that time: However it was, the Magician was effectually
cured of trying Experiments, and never offered to make a Jest of the Devil any
more.

If I should tell you the Name of this bold Spark of a Conjurer, and that he
lived not far off of one of our Temples; you would perhaps wonder at the Man,
who indeed no body ever took to have Wit enough to banter the Devil; but I must
not bring my Characters too near home; besides, who knows but the Devil may
charge me with discovering his Secrets, and betraying Conversation; so I say no
more: If any body finds me out, and guesses at the Man by the Story, I shall be
only sorry for the Person, not for the Picture.

As I was musing of these things the other day, and having a great many merry
Stories of this sort in my Budget, was considering which was fit to be told,
and which not, it came into my Thoughts, how traveling some time since, from
Daventry toward Leicester, I met on the Road with a Countryman, of whom, being
my self a Stranger to the Road, I asked the Way to Northampton; the Countryman
told me, but with a Tone of Melancholy and Dejection, that he was going to
Northampton, and if I pleased, and I would not over-ride him, he would show me
the Way.

I was very glad of his offered Service, and so suiting my Pace to his, for he
had but a very poor Horse, we went on together; I still perceived the Man to be
pensive and sad, spoke little, and never but when I asked him some Question
which obliged him to an Answer; often sighed and lifted up his Hands, and
sometimes his Eyes, and minded his Way so little, that if his Horse had not
been more sagacious than he, the Man would have run against a Post, or into a
Ditch; and two or three times he did get into a Hole or some other ill Place in
the Way, which he might have shunned. Countryman, says I, what is the matter
with you? and so we begun the short Discourse as follows:

Countryman. Why, Sir?


Author. Why, you don't seem to mind your Feet, or your Horse's Feet; you may
lead me to Northampton, but I think you want somebody to lead you too, or else
you will be in a Ditch.


Co.m. I care not much indeed, where I go, or what becomes of me.


Au. So I think truly; why, if you were in some Roads that I know, you would
have found a Stable for your Horse by this time.


Co.m. A Stable for my Horse! what, in a Ditch, I suppose?


Au. Yes, I mean so indeed; you will be but an odd Guide to me if you cannot keep
your self out of Harms-way.


Co.m. As I said before, I care not what becomes of me; but however, Master,
I Will guide you well enough the Way to Northampton. And * then --

* N.B. Here he stopped and fetched a Sigh, and I thought I saw Tears stand in
his Eyes.


Au. And then! what then? what will you do with your self then?


Co.m. Nay, I don't know, not I; hang my self, I think, I don't know any thing
I can do better.


Au. Pr'ythee, Friend, what is the matter? is it such a Secret you dare not tell
it? I hope you have not committed Murder.


Co m. No, no Murder; I have committed neither Murder nor Robbery; it is no
such great matter neither.


Au. No great matter, and yet talk of hanging your self!


Co.m. It is a great matter to me, though it may be it would be nothing in the
Eyes of others.


Au. Well, Friend, if it be not too much a Secret, let me ask you what it is;
perhaps I may help you.


Co.m. Ay, you or fifty more may ask me; but I am a Fool if I tell you.


Au. Well, Countryman, if it be a Secret, pray keep it to your self; I don't
desire to know any of your Affairs.


Co.m. Nay, it is no great Secret neither; and yet it is a Secret too, or else I
should not have gone to Northampton today.


Au. You're a merry Fellow, Countryman; what, a Secret and no Secret! that is a
Secret indeed of it self. I don't understand you.


Co.m. Why Master, if you must have it, you must; the matter is this: I am a
Cuckold, and my Wife's a Whore, that is no Secret; But I cannot tell who does it
for me; that is a Secret, and that is what I want to find out; so there is the
Secret and no Secret made out at once. An't I right now, Master?


Au. Poor Man! I think thou have made it out indeed; but why so melancholy at
it? Sure you would not hang your self to find it out?


Co.m. No, Master, not to find it out; but I am fit to hang my self because I
cannot find it out. Would not any Man hang himself to be a Cuckold, and cannot
find out the Man?


Au. And what if you did find out the Man? what would you be the better for
that, unless you could prevent it?


Co.m. O, I Would prevent it, I warrant ye; I would not hang my self, I assure you;
but I Would hang the Dog, I Would soon prevent their whoring.


Au. Well, but Countryman, that is wrong again, that has the Gallows at the end
of it; and that would be but poor Work for you to bring your self to the Devil,
because your Wife's a Whore.


Co.m. Nay, I don't care where I go, rather than be a Cuckold.


Au. Is that such a frightful thing to you! would you commit Murder and be
hanged, rather than be a Cuckold?


Co.m. Why Master, what must I do?


Au. Do! Be contented, if you cannot help it, as many an honest Man is forced to
do.


Co.m. No, no, that will not do; I cannot be contented; I must and will find it out.


Au. Well, but do you think hanging your self will discover it to you, or being
hanged for Murder about it; do you think you shall know the Secret when you're
hanged?


Co.m. No doubt of it.


Au. Well, but what if you did?


Co.m. Did? why, do you think I could not get Leave to come again and plague them?


Au. Who do you think could give you Leave? As for Heaven, I suppose you don't
think much about that, especially upon the foot you speak of, I mean Murder;
and as for the Devil, I don't think he would part with you, if he once had you
fast; so I would not have you depend upon it too much.


Co.m. Well, but the Devil, it may be, would tell me who it is.


Au. And what would you be the better if he did?


Co.m. Why I would get him to come and plague them a little, and that would do
as well another way; for I am resolved they shall have no Rest.


Au. You are a terrible revengeful Fellow, that you would be content to go to
the Devil to be revenged of the Man that cuckolds you.


Co.m. And of the Whore too; you should have put that in, Master.


Au. I wonder indeed you have not been revenged of her already, considering your
furious Spirit: why you are a Madman, I should be afraid you should murder
your Wife.


Co.m. Ay Master, she is afraid of that too; but she has been too cunning for
me, for she is run for it, and got out of my Clutches.


Au. She Is in the right of it: can you blame her?


Co.m. Ay, but she has robbed me too.


Au. Robbed you! ay, what could you expect? why if you would have murdered
her, she must have been a Fool to have staid; and if she was forced to fly, you
could not think she would go away empty, could you?


Co.m. Well, I will find them out, if they are above Ground.


Au. If you can, you mean; but pray are they gone together?


Co.m. Nay, if I knew that, then I should know who the Rogue is, which is one
of the main things I want to be informed of.


Au. And which you would be content to go to the Devil to discover?


Co. m If I was sure he or any one else could but tell me, I didn't care where
I went.


Au. Why, do you think if the Devil did know, that he would tell you?


Co.m. Why not, Master?


Au. Why do you think the Devil is more your Friend than theirs? do you think
he cares how many Whores and Cuckolds there are?


Co.m. Nay that is true indeed, I did not think of that; but however, I shall be
informed where I am going, whether the Devil knows any thing of it or no; and
if he does --


Au. What then, what if he does?


Co.m. Why then I believe I shall get it out of him.


Au. What, do you mean, out of the Devil? why, where are you going?


Co.m. To one of his Acquaintance, Master, that will tell me, I dare say, for a
Piece of Money; and though the Jade han't left me a Shirt to my Back, I have
borrowed a little Money for this Work, and I will have it out, if Money will do
it.


Au. What do you mean, Countryman, are you really going to the Devil?


Co.m. Why to tell you the Truth, I am going to a Cunning Man, Master, hard by
Northampton, that I am told will discover it all to me.


Au. Well, but do you call that going to the Devil?


Co.m. Yes certainly, for he deals with the Devil, or else he could never do
such strange things.


Au. What strange things does he do?


Co.m. Why he can cast a Figure, tell Folks where their lost Cattle are, tell
who robs them, and oftentimes helps them to get their Goods again.


Au. And so you think he can tell who has cuckolded you, don't you?


Co.m. To be sure he can, Master; why should not he tell one thing as well as
another?


Au. He Will take your Money to be sure, that is all you can be sure of. I tell
thee, Countryman, it is all a Cheat; they are only Rogues and Jugglers, they
know nothing of the matter.


Co.m. Why that cannot be, Master; they say he will show me the Man's Face in a
Looking-glass.


Au. And what if he does show you a Man's Face and you don't know him, where
are you then?


Co.m. Nay, that is none of his Fault.


Au. 'Twill be his Fault to put a Cheat upon you, and show you a Face you don't
know, pretending that is the Man, and you never the wiser.


Co.m. Well, but he will make me dream of the Man, and see him in my Sleep.


Au. Very well, and so if you chance to dream of an honest Man, you will go and
murder him will you, for making you a Cuckold? I tell you your Cunning Man is
a Cheat; he no more deals with the Devil than you do.


Co.m. Well then, I Will go to Oundle, there is a Man that deals in Magic, and
he will raise the Devil for me if I desire it, and I shall see him and talk with
him my self.


Au. And you believe it, do you?


Co.m. I shall believe it sure when I see it, shall not I? why do you think I will not
believe my own Eyes?


Au. Why, do you know the Devil when you see him? how will you be sure it is the
Devil?


Co.m. I shall know him by his cloven Foot, shall not I, Master?


Au. I believe not; did you ever see the Devil in your Life?


Co.m. No not I, but I have heard of a great many that have; why is that such a
strange thing, Master?


Au. It Is such a strange thing, that I don't believe one Word of it.


Co.m. What, don't you believe that a Magician can raise the Devil?


Au. I do not know, Countryman, but the Devil may be called up upon
extraordinary Occasions; but hardly by your three-half-penny Conjurer, nor upon
such a Business as yours is.


Co.m. Why, will not the Devil come when he is called? why, the Magician at Oundle
can make him come, they say, whether he will or no: if he does but draw a
Circle and turn round five times in it, the Devil cannot help appearing, no more
than if we said the Lord's Prayer backward.


Au. Why, will he come if we say our Prayers backward?


Co.m. Ay, certainly, Master; Why, you don't doubt that, do you?


Au. Nay, I don't say I doubt it; but did you ever try it your self?


Co.m. No, I never tried it, that is true; but I have heard an old Woman at
Dav'ntry used to raise the Devil that Way very often.


Au. I wonder you should not try it, when you have such Occasion to talk with
him.


Co.m. Ay, I want to talk with him, that I do, but I dare not talk with him by
my self neither.


Au. Why not? you know well enough what to say to him.


Co.m. Ay, that is true, but I don't know how to manage him as they do; they are
used to him; it is their Trade to deal between him and us.


Au. But it would save you the Charges, and I fancy the Devil and you are no
Strangers.


Co.m. What do you mean, Master? I never saw him in my Life.


Au. Well, if you ha'nt been in his Company, I dare say he has been in yours.


Co.m. Why so, Master?


Au. You would never talk of hanging your self, and of being hanged for
Murder, so familiarly as you do, if he had not been at work with you.


Co.m. Why, I am half mad, Sir; What would you have me do? I must be revenged
on 'em.


Au. Ay, I told you the Devil had been with you, it is he makes you talk of
Revenge; that is all the Devil, and ends in Damnation; for if he is a Spirit
which waits to devour, and that does all he can to destroy us, we may very well
think all evil Motions come from him.


Co.m. I don't understand those things, Master, not I; but I am sure the Devil
has had nothing to do with me, either in that or any thing else.


Au. I tell thee, honest Friend, thou do not know when the Devil is working
in thee, and when not; all such horrid Thoughts as thou have had about
Self-murder, Revenge, and doing Mischief to others, must be from the Devil.


Co.m. Well, Master, let us talk no more of that, my Head runs another way at
present.


Au. Why, will you really go to enquire of the Devil about who has made you a
Cuckold?


Co.m. No, not to the Devil, I only go to the Cunning Man.


Au. Yes, and to the Conjurer at Oundle, you say, and he can raise the Devil,
it seems.


Co.m. Well then, he deals with the Devil, not I.


Au. And do you think, as I said before, the Devil would befriend you so far as
to hinder your Wife's Wickedness? do think he would not rather make her
wickeder than she is?


Co.m. Nay, that is true; but however, I Would try what I can do; I am resolved I Will
go to him.


When I found he was so positive, I bad him even go and try the Experiment; but
depend upon it, said I, the Devil will not betray the Secret to you; he is too
much of the other Side.

By this time we were come to Queen's- Cross, a little of this side
Northampton,; and seeing the Town from the Hill, I offered to go on faster,
seeing I knew the Way was before me: but he bespoke me to keep him Company;
for, Master, says he, if you lie in the Town all Night, I Will certainly come and
tell you what the cunning Man says to me.

I was not unwilling to hear the Result of the Story, but was particularly
curious to hear what the Magician at Oundle could do; so I resolved to stay at
Northampton that Night, and we kept Company together to the Town. When we came
to the Town, I put up at the George Inn, and thought he would have gone in with
me; but when we came to the Door, he bad me Good-by for the present, for the
Cunning Man, he said, lived two Miles out of the Town, and he would talk with
him, and come to me at Night.

I went into my Inn and staid there all Night, but heard no more of my poor
Cuckold the Countryman all that Evening. The next Morning I was indisposed,
which made me stay longer at the Inn than I intended, and indeed was obliged to
stay there all that Day and Night too, but still I had no News of my
Countryman, which made me a little chagreen; but at last he came back again,
and comes to me, but not 'till the next Day about eleven a-Clock.

Then as I had been waiting before very patiently, I began, and spoke a little
angrily; What Is the Business now, says I, what is the matter with you, that you
dodge about so?

O Sir, says he, let me come in, and I Will tell you the strangest things --

Well, come in then, says I, and sit down; I thought you had been lost, or had
forgot your Promise. So he came in, and we begun another short Discourse, as
follows:

Co.m. O Master, I have had a hard Night's Work on it.


Au. What do you mean of a Night's Work, where have you been?


Co.m. Why first, Master, I went to my cunning Man, and gave him a Shilling,
which it seems he takes before he will speak a Word.


Au. Ay, ay, they are in the right, it is the only thing I can call them cunning
Men for.


Co.m. Why are they cunning in that?


Au. Because they know if they did not take the Money beforehand, no body
would give it them afterward, because they can tell nothing, nor say any thing
to the purpose.


Co.m. Well, I gave him the Shilling; he demanded Half a Crown, but I told him
I was a poor Man, and so he condescended in Charity to take a Shilling.


Au. That is to say, he saw there was no more to be had, so he took what he
could get; and so they all do. But come, what did he do for it, what did he
tell thee?


Co.m. O he examined me very strictly, I assure you.


Au. Examine you, about what?


Co.m. Why, how long my Wife had been gone, what she carried with her, what
a-Clock she went at, what file said at parting; and took every thing down in
Figures.


Au. Very well, this was all Grimace, to put a Countenance upon things.


Co.m. Then he bid me hold my Tongue, and he fell to making Figures and
mutt'ring to himself; and on a sudden he starts up; Well, says he, I find your
Wife is gone away, and that you beat her very severely before she went. Now, I
could not deny that Part, Master, because I knew it was true; but how should he
know that, Master, if he wan't a cunning Man?


Au. Well enough: when he had examined you so strictly before in all the
Particulars, he might easily guess you had used her hardly, by the Rage you
were in, when you came to him; and when you talked of hanging your self and
murdering her, he might easily judge that you had talked the same to her,
which had frighted the Woman, and she was run away for fear of you; there is no
great cunning in all that. I was a going to say so to you my self once, for I
really thought of it before.


Co.m. Why then you are as much a cunning Man as he.


Au. Well, what else did he say to you?


Co.m. Nothing to the purpose, only to vex me and make me mad.


Au. Nay that he could not do, for I verily think you were mad before; but what
was it? come, tell me.


Co.m. Why, Master, he fell to scribbling and scrawling again upon a Piece of
Paper, and then he rises and walks up and down, and round and round, as I
thought, he made Circles three or four times, and talked to himself all the
while.


Au. Well, and that frighted you, I warrant you; did not you think he was going
to raise the Devil?


Co.m. Why you know every thing, Master, aforehand, I think you are as cunning
as he; I was so frighted I trembled like an Aspen Leaf, Master.


Au. Why, didn't you say you wanted to see the Devil, to tell you all?


Co.m. Ay, that is true, Master, but I was deadly fraid for all that, especially
when I thought he was just a coming.


Au. Well, and how then, what came of it?


Co.m. Came on it! why, Master, the Man's a Rogue, a mere Cheat; he had got my
Money, and when all come to all, he told me nothing, at least nothing that
signified any thing to me.


Au. Well, but what was it? for I find he told you something, though you don't
like it: did he bid you go home and be quiet and easy, and not trouble your
self about it?


Co.m. Hang him, Rogue; when he had made all his Turns, and his Circles, and
said all his Witchcraft over to himself, he sits down and calls me to him, and
very civilly bad me sit down, and begun his ugly Story.


Au. I find he has not pleased ye: I really fancy the Man has given thee good
honest Advice, and bid thee go home and mind thy Business, and be easy; did
not I say the same to thee?


Co.m. I Will tell it you all, Master, if you will have Patience; he is a Rogue; a
Rogue, Master. I told you he would have my Money beforehand, and so he had, or
he should never have had a Farthing; and he knew that well enough.


Au. No, no, he knew Folks never pay when they don't like the Story; but go on,
what did he say?


Co.m. Why, as grave as a Judge, he takes me by the Hand, felt my Pulse,
holding his conjuring Paper in the other Hand, all the while; Hark thee, Friend,
says he, I have calculated the Times and the Seasons, I have brought your Names
in a direct Opposition, I have done every thing to satisfy you, that can be
done, and all my Numbers and Accounts agree, and this is the Sum of your Case;
You are a poor, honest, fretful, passionate Fellow that stands here on one
Side; and then he showed me his damned Figures, and Crosses and Circles, on one
side; and here is your poor Wise a the other side, says he; and then he showed me
his Figures again; she has angered you, and scolded at you for your ill Usage
of her, and you have fallen upon her and beaten her unmercifully, and
threatened to murder her, and she is run away for fear of it; and now you call
her Whore, and come to me to tell you who has made a Cuckold of you.


Au. And did the Man say all this to you, Friend?


Co.m. Yes, Master, and a great deal more, like a Rogue as he is. He a cunning
Man! he is a Blockhead; why, I knew all that before.


Au. Ay, and he might easily gather it from your Discourse.


Co.m. No, Master, that he could not, I Am sure.


Au. Well then, you will make him a cunning Man indeed, at the same time that you
call him a Blockhead and a Fool. I tell you I gathered as much before from you,
and you cannot help it; you are too full of your own Story. But go on, what did
he say then?


Co.m. Why, then he fell to preaching, and giving me Advice; Go home, Friend,
says the Toad, and be easy and quiet, and tell your Friends you are sorry you
have been in such a Heat, and that you hope your Wife will come home again, for
you will not do her any Hurt; and then your Neighbors will tell her, and she will
come lovingly again to you; For I tell thee Friend, says he, thou art in the
Wrong, the poor Woman is no Whore, I can show it you in black and white here;
and then he pointed to his cursed Conjuring Paper; she is a very honest Woman,
thou have only a Whymsie come in thy Head because she is gone, I tell thee thou
art no Cuckold, go home and be quiet.


Au. And did he say all this to thee?


Co.m. Yes, to be sure Master, and a great deal more such Stuff; what should I
be in such a Passion with him for else?


Au. Upon my Word, Friend, whether he be a cunning Man or no, that I have
nothing to say to; he may make thee believe so, that is for his Advantage; but
of my Conscience I think he is a wise Man, and an honest Man, and I would advise
thee to follow his Counsel; for I do tell thee, I firmly believe it is thy Case
to a Tittle, and I tell thee thy whole Discourse discovered it; he might have
said it all without his Figures and Circles; that was done to amuse you, but
it is plain from all you have said, that is thy very Case.


Co.m. Ay, ay, Master, it is no matter for that, let him be as cunning and as
wise as he will, I have had another guess Account of it, and better Advice
since; for I have been at Oundle, Master, since that, and there I have met with
a cunning Man indeed.


Au. Why, have you really been consulting with the Devil then?


Co.m. I believe I have indeed.


Au. Nay, then it is like you have had good Advice indeed; may not a body know
what you have met with there too?


Co.m. Truly Master, I don't know whether I can tell it you or no, for I have
been frighted out of my Wits. I Am sure if my Hat had been on, my Hair would
have lifted it off, though I had had a good Basket of Apples upon my Head.


Au. Come let me hear it however, as well as you can.


Co.m. Why Master, when I came to the Man's House, ('it is within two Mile of
Oundle I think, or thereabout,) it was almost dark, and that made it the worse.
I knocked at the Door, and out came a tall black frightful old Man. I begun to
be frighted at the very first Sight, for I thought it had been the Devil was
come before I asked for him.


Au. And are you sure it was not?


Co.m. Yes, I think he was not the Devil, for he spoke very civilly to me; and
when I asked him if he was the cunning Man, he smiled, and bad me come in; so
he carried me into a large Room, which had but one dim burning Candle in it,
and I trembled every Inch of me, for I thought the Candle burnt blue as soon as
I looked at it.


Au. Very well, so you thought you were come into good Company, did not you?


Co.m. Indeed, I wished my self out of the House again, that I did; but the old
Gentleman whistled, and in came a young Fellow that looked like a Servant, and
he bad him go snuff the Candle, and bring in another, and that comforted me a
little; then he sat him down in a great Elbow-Chair, with a little Table before
it, and upon the Table was a great many Books, and a Pen and Ink, and Paper.
Come Friend, says he, let me know thy Business, for though I am none of those
ignorant Fellows you call Cunning Men, yet perhaps I may tell you what you want
to know, upon a better foot.


Au. Well, he begun pretty high: what could he pretend to?


Co.m. I replied, Sir, I was told you was one that dealt in secret things, that
understood the Black Art, and those we call Cunning Men; if I am mistaken, I am
very sorry: and so made as if I would go away again, but he stopped me, and
said, Look you Friend, I am none of those Fellows you call cunning Men, I look
upon them to be all Cheats; my Practice is all Divine, of a superior Nature, I
study things in a higher Sphere, I deal in the Mysteries of an invisible World,
and converse with the World of Spirits unembody'd, who are beneficent and kind
to us, who are Spirits embodied, and not only converse with us below, but are
helpful and serviceable to us on all Occasions. I cannot remember all his hard
Words, Master, but he said a deal more to that purpose.


Au. Well, did not he ask for your Money before hand too, as the other did?


Co.m. No indeed, but when he bad me tell him my Case, I put my Hand in my
Pocket, and pulled out two half Crowns, and went to offer him the Money, for I
found he was not an ordinary Fellow, and so I thought he would not be very
low-priz'd.


Au. But he took the Money, I suppose?


Co.m. No, he said he did not do these things for Money, as he found I believed
he did; but he said, you may put what you please in there, pointing to a Box
that stood upon the Table; I shall dispose of it charitably, and to better
Uses, it may be, than you would do your self; so I put the Money into his Box,
which had a slit like a Tradesman's Till.


Au. Very well, this looked great indeed.


Co.m. Then he bad me tell him my Case; for, says he, I perceive you are a Man
of a troubled Countenance, your Mind is oppressed, the Passions of your Soul
have been in a Perturbation, your Spirits are fluttering still, and in a Storm,
though something abated of what they have been; pray be very free, and tell me
your whole Case, as fully and plainly as you can.


Au. Well, I assure you, he spoke in state with a great deal of Majesty.


Co. m Yes, and yet he spoke very courteously too, and I began to like him
mightily; so I began, and told him my Case at large, just as I did you, Master.


Au. That is to say, that you wanted to be revenged of your Wife, and to find
out the Man that had cuckolded you, and the like; so you expected presently he
should tell you who it was.


Co.m. Yes, so I did; but he brought me to understand things better, and I
found he was in Earnest, and that he was not to be cheated. He examined me too
as the other had done, and asked me abundance of Questions.


Au. And, I doubt not, gathered your Case in every Part of it from the weak
inconsistent Account you gave him of it.


Co.m. I don't know that; but after he had done asking me all his Questions, he
took his Pen and Ink too, and wrote down a great many things upon his Paper,
and made Lines with a short brass Rule and a Pencil, and then took out a pair
of Compasses, and drew several Figures and Marks, but I understood nothing of
them, neither could I see them distinctly by the Candle Light; then he asked me
my Christian Name, which I told him was Edward, and he set it down in great
Letters, but such as though I can read Master, I am sure that I never saw such
Before. Then he asked my Wife's Christian Name too, which I told him was
Abigal, and he set that down in the same kind of Letters as before; then he
asked my Age, and my Wife's Age, and the Age of my two Children; of all which I
gave him a full Account.


Au. I suppose you had told him that you had two Children; he did not conjure
out that, did he?


Co.m. Yes, he had asked me that before, and I told him; so when he had done
all, and I believe we had talked together above an Hour, he rose up, and
offered to go away, and I rose up too, but he laid his Hand upon my Arm, Do you
sit still, says he, and I Will come to you again; at which I was a little
frighted to be left alone, and he perceived it. Don't be afraid, says he, there
shall nothing hurt you, nor speak to you; and if you hear any Noise don't you
stir, but sit still here. So he took up one of the Candles, and went into
another Room by a little Door like a Closet-Door, and when he shu^ the Door
after him, I perceived a little Window of one broad Square of Glass only, that
looked into the Room which he was gone into.


Au. I warrant ye, you wanted to peep, did not ye?


Co.m. Yes, I did, but I durst not stir for my Life, because he had charged me
I should not.


Au. Well, but you was to hear some Noises, was you not?


Co.m. But I did not, except once that I heard a Noise like the drawing of a
Chair upon the Floor, which being nothing but what was ordinary, did not
disturb me.


Au. Well, how long did he stay?


Co.m. About half an Hour, and came in again, looking very well pleased, and
asked me how I did, and then sat down as before. Well, says he, I have been
consulting on your Case, and I find things not so threatening to you as I
expected; perhaps you may not be in so ill a Case as you imagine; however, I am
ordered to tell you, that some Days after your return, your Wife shall come to
a House near you, and send to know if you will receive her again kindly; if the
Person she sends is a Woman, you may conclude your Wife has abused you; but if
she sends a Man, then she is innocent, and you are mistaken.


Au. This was point blank, I assure you.


Co.m. I did not like it however, and that he might see well enough; for I
cannot allow any if's or and's. Tell me of being mistaken! said I to him, I
cannot be mistaken. Well, says he, I Will go again and consult farther about you;
and seeing me begin to get up too, he turns again; You are not afraid, says he,
are you? No, not at all, said I? Well, nor you will not be afraid, will you, if
you see nothing frightful? No, not at all, said I again. But I ly'd, Master,
for I was almost frighted to Death, when he spoke of my seeing something; but
as I had said No twice, and spoke it pretty heartily too, he said, Well then,
come along with me into the next Room.


Au. I doubt you were afraid then indeed.


Co.m. Ay, so I was heartily, and he perceived it too again; Well, says he, if
you are afraid to go into my Room of Practice, I Will stay here with you; only,
whatever you see or hear sit you still, and neither speak or stir out of your
Chair.


Au. Well, did you observe his Direction?


Co.m. No, indeed Master, my Heart failed me; I durst neither go nor stay, but
I Will tell you what I did when he was gone into the next Room, I went to the
Window and peeped.


Au. And what did you see? it is odd peeping at the Devil, I must tell you.


Co.m. I saw my old Gentleman in a great Chair, and two more in Chairs at some
Distance, and three great Candles, and a great Sheet of white Paper upon the
Floor between them; every one of them had a long white Wand in their Hands, the
lower end of which touched the Sheet of Paper.


Au. And were the Candles upon the Ground too?


Co.m. Yes, all of them.


Au. There was a great deal of Ceremony about you, I assure you.


Co.m. I think so too, but it is not done yet; immediately I heard the little
Door stir, as if it was opening, and away I skipp'd as softly as I could tread,
and got into my Chair again, and sat there as gravely as if I had never stirred
out of it. I was no sooner set but the Door opened indeed, and the old
Gentleman came out as before, and turning to me, said, Sit still, don't ye
stir; and at that Word, the other two that were with him in the Room walked out
after him, one after another cross the Room, as if to go out at the other Door
where I came in; but at the farther end of the Room they stopped, and turned
their Faces to one another and talked; but it was some Devil's Language of
their own, for I could understand nothing of it.


Au. And now I suppose you were frighted in earnest?


Co.m. Ay, so I was; but it was worse yet, for they had not stood long
together, but the great Elbow-Chair which the old Gentleman sat in at the
little Table just by me began to stir of it self; at which the old Gentleman
knowing I should be afraid, came to me and said, Sit still, don't you stir, all
will be well, you shall have no harm; at which he gave his Chair a kick with
his Foot, and said, Go, with some other Words, and of other Language, and away
went the obedient Chair sliding two of its Legs on the Ground, and the other
two off, as if some body had dragged it by that Part.


Au. And so no doubt they did, though you could not see it.


Co.m. As soon as the Chair was dragged or moved to the end of the Room, where
the three, I know not what to call 'em, were, two other Chairs did the like
from the other side of the Room, and so they all sat down, and talked together
a good while; at last the Door at that end of the Room opened too, and they all
were gone in a Moment without rising out of their Chairs; for I am sure they
did not rise to go out, as other Folks do.


Au. What did you think of your self, when you saw the Chair stir so near you?


Co.m. Think! nay, I did not think; I was dead, to be sure I was dead, with the
Fright, and expected I should be carried away, Chair and all, the next Moment.
Then it was, I say, that my Hair would have lifted off my Hat, if it had been
on I am sure it would.


Au. Well, but when they were all gone, you came to your self again, I suppose?


Co.m. To tell you the truth Master, I am not come to my self yet.


Au. But go on, let me know how it ended.


Co.m. Why, after a little while my old Man came in again, called his Man to
set the Chairs to rights, and then sat him down at the Table, spoke cheerfully
to me, and asked me if I would drink, which I refused, though I was a-dry indeed.
I believe the fright had made me dry; but as I never had been used to drink
with the Devil, I didn't know what to think of it, so I let it alone.


Au. But you might even have ventured, for the old Necromancer was but a Man,
whatever Correspondence he might have, and his Ale would not have hurt you. But
what else did he say about your Business?


Co.m. Why, he told me the invisible Agents were favorable in their Answers;
that there appeared nothing but well; that he was assured by the Aspects which
any way concerned me; that I was more concerned about this Matter, than there
was reason for; that I should go home and wait, till by the Signals he had
given me, I might judge for my self, and till I heard from my Wife as before;
and that if I could make any plain Discovery, that there was real Guilt, I
should come to him again, and he would endeavor to point ou^ the Man. But if I
could not, I should rest satisfied that I had been wrong informed of things it
my Family, and might make my self easy.


Au. This is an odd Story, why this Man is only a Cheat like all the rest; he
bids you go home, and if you can find out any real Guilt, then come to him and
he will tell you what to do; that is to say, he knows nothing: Is this your
Necromancer pray where does he dwell?


Co.m. Nay, Master, the Man has done me n^ wrong. I was directed to the House,
but I can'^ find it again, if I was to be hanged for missing it; however I
will not betray him neither, let him b^ what he will.


Au. Well, but it seems you are not fully satisfied yet, because he does not
confirm your Notion that your Wife is a Whore; I fancy you have a Mind i^
should be so.


Co.m. I don't care what she is, so I could bu^ find it out.


Au. But you see, neither the honest Man a^ Northampton, nor the Devil at
Oundle, would give you any reason to think so. I would have you go home, as the
first Man advised you, and be quiet. I verily believe there is nothing at all in
it, but you have been a cruel Husband, have used your Wife like a Dog, and
frighted her with worse, and she is fled from you, as a poor naked defenseless
Sheep would from a Lion or a Wolf.


Co.m. And you would have me go home and submit to my Wife? no, I Will hang my
self first.


Au. I don't say submit to your Wife; though if you have wronged your Wife, as I
doubt you have, I ^ee no reason why you should not make a Wife Satisfaction for
the Injury done her Character, as well as you would to a Man that was able to
cudgel you into it. But I say go home, and mend your Wife's Husband, and that
will in all probability mend your Wife, and you may live comfortably again
together.


Co.m. I cannot promise, Master, to take any of their Advices, or yours either.


This Story is not told so much to give an Account of the Man, who was nothing
as I could understand by it all, but a base passionate Fellow to an honest
Woman his Wife; but it is a kind of a History of modern Magic, or of the Craft
which is at this time in Practice in the World. Nor is it a singular Example,
for we have many more People among us, who are Pretenders to the sacred
Sciences, as they call them; who yet do not level their Knowledge of them to
such mean Uses, as to go Mountebanking with them, to get a Crown or two for
petty Discoveries, and set up for what they call cunning Men; which is indeed
the lowest Step of this kind that a Spirit of the invisible World could well be
supposed to take.

It is true, it is something hard to describe what this thing we call Magic is,
and how it is to be understood now; what it was formerly we know something of,
and yet even then no great things were performed by it; something they did,
whether by the thing it self as an Art, or by the Devil being present to assist
them, we know not; that which would be called wonderful is, that they did then,
as they pretend to do still, several things which the Devil really has no Power
to do; and particularly that of foretelling things to come, which we do not,
generally speaking, grant the Devil to have in his Power; he can indeed make
better Judgment of things than we can, but that the Knowledge of Futurity is
given him, I deny.

For the Augurs and Southsayers, they did strange things formerly; by whose
Power, is not in my reach, nor any ones else to determine: For Example; In the
latter end of the Life of Augustus Caesar, while the Ceremonies were performing
in the Campus Martius, the Emperor and a vast Concourse of People being
present, an Eagle came into the Place, and hovered over the Emperor some time,
flying round and round him in the Air, and then flying toward a small Temple
or Oratory, it settled upon a little Pinnacle, just over the Statue of Agrippa.

This was taken as a Presage or Omen to the Emperor, whether of Good or Evil
was hard to determine; but the Augurs being consulted, they determined it to be
Evil, and that it betoken'd the Death of the Emperor in a short time.

Another Accident happened the very next Day, viz. a Flash of Lightning broke
upon the Statue of the Emperor, over the Senate House, and struck out the
Letter C, from the Word Caesar, in the Inscription upon the Capital of the Work
over the Statue. The Augurs were again consulted, and they again consulting
with one another, and by the ordinary Observations, declared the Emperor would
dye within a hundred Days; signified by the Numeral Letter C being struck out,
and that he should then be reckoned among the GODS, because the Word AESAR in
the Hetrurian Tongue signifies a GOD.

Now it fell out according to this Prediction; the Emperor, and Tiberius his
Heir Apparent, went as far as Beneventum, he was taken Sick there of a
Diarrhaea, and causing himself to be carried to Nola near Capua, he expired
ninety nine Days after the Stroke of the Thunderbolt or Lightning as above. If
then the Devil has no Knowledge of Futurity, but that the Study of the
Intellectual World, or World of Spirits, be a sacred Science, as the Professors
of it contend; then those Augurs who acted upon the foot of the ancient Magic,
were illuminated from those Intellectual Beings, and had converse with Spirits
of a differing kind from those which we call Devils or Diabolical.

Now, as it is hard, to distinguish these Illuminations, otherwise than by the
Events and Consequences of the Intelligence they bring; so I think, that if
first of all, the Distinction be allowed between good and evil Spirits, then
it is a just way of determining, viz. that such Intelligence as tends to the
good of Mankind, to the Propag^tion of Virtue, and preserving Honor, Chastity,
Property and Religion, may be suppo^'d to proceed from good Spirits, whether
Angels or other Spirits unembodyed; on the con^ray, where the Correspondence
has a general Tendency to Mischief, to encourage Crime, to the hu^t of Mankind
in general, to discourage Virtue and Religion, to insult Heaven, and in a word,
where the Tenor and Bent of the Illumination is to do Evil, or to direct to
the doing it, there we may without Injury to Persons, or to the Devil himself,
say it is from him, or by his Agency, and that he (the Devil) is principally
concerned in it; for we know it is his Nature and particular Property to be
propagating Evil, and that he is apparently known to have Mankind, and abhor,
envy, and malign the Holy Nature of the Eternal Being.

It may be a very just Distinction between the blessed eternal Being, and the
curs^d exiled condemned Species of Evil Angels, in (...) word, between God and
the Devil, to say o^ them thus: GOD is the Perfection of Good. The Devil is the
Extreme of Corruption. God the Perfection of Purity and Holiness. The Devil a
Composition of the utmost Impurity.


From these two Contraries derive (...) ^xecutive Power of Good and Evil (...)
can no m^ be the Genuine Part (...) actions, than an ev^^ Tree can bring (...)
good Frui^ (...) Darkness, which is a Privation of (...) ^^us Light, can be a
Consequence or Pro^ of it.

GOD can no more be the (...) of Evil, than he can Annhilate himself, and Cease
to be; and he cannot Cease to be, because, he that Exists from Eternity is
Eternal, and Exists necessarily, as well as from himself.

If then the Intelligence given, or the Illuminations received by the Art which
these Men pretend to, is found to have these essential Qualifications of
Goodness; viz. Beneficent to Mankind, directing Men to the preserving Virtue,
Honor, Property and Piety; then I should be tempted to think they have an
Acquaintance with the Intellectual World, a Converse with good Spirits, and a
Prescience communicated from the good Angels, those Guardians of Mankind,
waking Sentinels, set to guard the World from Evil, and to counter-act the
Malice and Rage of Hell, but not else.

Here then is a Test of the Magicians Art, and let us not be amused and imposed
upon by the Pretenses to the sacred Sciences, and to the study of exalted
Mysteries, Incantations Divine and Sublime, and many other lofty Expressions;
significant in themselves, but not so in the case before us, unless testified
by the Virtue and just Productions which appear in their Practice. I say, let
us not be amused with these to embrace Hell in the Disguise of Heaven, and
converse with a Deceiver in the Robes of an Angel of Light.

If there are such glorious things attained to by Art, and by the Study of
these sacred Sciences, where shall we find the Practice of them? I think we
must be referred back to the Augurs and Diviners among the more honest
Heathens; for we may almost answer for it, that nothing of this kind is seen
among us; or at least if it is found in Theory, and there is in Nature a
Reality of Art, such as I have mentioned above; that Magic is a Science
laudable in its Study, justifiable in its Practice, sublime in its Attainment;
it is yet so blended with the wicked Part, by the Corruption of its Professors,
that we scarce know where to find one, either in Being or in Story, in the
whole Christian Time, whose Practice can be allowed to be sacred, whatever can
be said of the Science.

It is true, there was a famed Magician in Kent, who pretended to this, and of
whom I shall speak at large in the next Chapters; and he seemed to act wholly
upon the Principle of doing good, detecting, punishing, and exposing Crime: but
I shall give my Exceptions to it when I come to his Story.

At present therefore the World are to be excused the Mistake, if they run into
it even with a kind of general Consent, taking the Word Magic and Magician in
the worst Sense, understanding them all as practicing the Diabolical Part of
it, viz. a Converse with Evil Spirits, and a Dealing with the Devil; inclusive
also of all those several Classes into which I have distinguished it before.

Hence perhaps it is, that in our Discoursing with even the most Learned Men
upon this Subject, a few, a very few excepted, it is very hard to bring them to
any Notions of a Difference between Magic and Witchcraft, between a Magician
and a Sorcerer, between a Student in the exalted Sciences, a Converser with the
Intellectual World, and a Wretch that has a Familiar, a Wizzard or Necromancer;
but they will, though they may be wrong in it too, have them be reckoned all in a
Class, that they are all Practitioners in the Diabolical Part, and in a word,
that they all deal with the Devil. Indeed the Difference is not easily
preceptible, because of the Pretenses which the worst of them make to the high
Illumination, when they are really acting the vilest Part, and that in the
ordinary course of their Practice; it is therefore by the Consequences only,
that they are to be known. Witchcraft and Sorcery may in one Respect be justly
said to be all Magic; but I must not allow that all Magic is Witchcraft, as I
distinguished before between a Witch and a Wizzard. But seeing it is so hard to
know them asunder, and that the Imposture is so great, the best Method I can
take is, where History or Conversation will supply Materials, to give you as
many Examples of the several Practices and Practisers in these last Ages of the
World as we can meet with, as well for your Diversion as Instruction.

I must here enter a Caution too against a weak, but vulgar Mistake, which to
the Reproach of human Understanding the World has been very much possessed
with; and that is, to ascribe every difficult unaccountable Performance to the
Art Magic; and every superior Genius, every Man of a sublime Thought, and more
than ordinary Capacity, to be a Magician. Archimedes was a most accomplished
Genius, and an excellent Mathematician, but we will have him be a Magician too.
Friar Bacon, who by his Skill in the Mathematics, and the Doctrine of Motion,
and of Sounds, made a Brazen-Head to speak; of which by the way there are many
Examples in History, more ancient than Father Bacon, yet we will have this
honest Friar be a Witch, a Magician, a Conjurer, only because the thing was
beyond the ordinary Conception.

Men of Thought and Head, who have a Genius a little above their Neighbors,
have on all Occasions been liable to be thus treated; even our Savior himself,
when he acted such Wonders as the like had not been seen, and cast out Devils;
what said the amazed World? The more weak and admiring and innocent Thoughts
were amazed, the Text says they were astonished; and at another time they were
filled with Wonder, and the like; but the self-wise Heads, the pretending
Pharisees, having neither Knowledge to reach the Divine Power by which he
wrought, and too much Pride to submit to Faith, reproached him with dealing
with the Devil; He casts out Devils by Belzeebub the Prince of Devils. Mat.
xii.24.

This Mistake may therefore take place in the Case before me; and Men who have
studied, in the most exquisite manner, any of the Sciences which are lawful and
commendable, and are arrived to a degree of Knowledge beyond others, may be
suspected of Magic, and of the Diabolick Magic too, which I have been
speaking of.

I will not venture to state the Bounds, critically speaking, between the
lawful Study of Magic as a Science, and the unlawful Part of its Practice as a
Diabolick or a Black Art, any more than between the noble Study of Astronomy,
including the Motions of the heavenly Bodies, and that corrupt and horrid
Impositio^, that worst of Juggle, the most simple and scandalous of all Cheats,
called judicial Astrology.

That Magic may be a handle to Witchcraft, that one may begin where the other
ends, this I will not deny; but I must be allowed to say, that if there is an
invisible World, a World of Spirits, if there is a Converse between the Spirits
unembodied, and our Spirits embodied, which also I cannot deny, whatever lawful
way there can be found, if such can be found, to form an Intelligence between
them, must be a sublime and heavenly Attainment, at the same time, I will not
venture to say such an Intelligence can be formed.

Nor will I venture to say, that there can be any settled Method found out to
call up any of those invisible Inhabitants of the World of Spirits, to a
visible Appearance in this World, and to an audible and vocal Conversation, so
as to receive Intelligence of things present, or Directions in things to come,
to be advised, counseled or informed by them, or to any such Purpose; it does
not seem probable; If at any time they do or can appear, which yet I do not
grant, it must be spontaneous and arbitrary, how, when, where, and on what
Occasion they think fit: But as to our calling them up by Art, except it be by
a Diabolical Magic, and by the immediate Assistance of the Devil, and perhap^
too it may be only a Delusion of Satan's, who pretending to visit us by the
good Spirits we want to converse with, constitutes a missionary Devil to
personate the Spirit expected, and so put a Cheat upon the Enquirer, as the
Witch of Endor raised ^ Spectre or Sham Samuel in the room of the tru^ Prophet
Samuel; who we may without Presumption believe knew nothing of the matter.

To pretend by Art to bring those good Spirit from their State of Felicity,
wherever it is, to a^ Appearance for our private Concerns, seems to have no
Consistence in the Nature of a future State that there may be an invisible and
imperceptibl^ Converse of Spirits which we cannot describe, an^ appointed by
Providence for Ends which we do no^ fully understand, I believe is possible;
But it is the done their own way, and we know nothing of the manner.

There is much said of Guardian Angels, and some seeming Ground from Scripture,
but not enough to be called an Authority from whence to ground an Hypothesis of
the manner; nor will the greatest Magician that ever was, how much soever he
pretends to the sacred Science, takes upon him to say he can call up or cause
to appear one of those guardian Angels; no not by the utmost and most exquisite
Art that was ever attained to; so that all that Part of calling up good Spirits
or Guardian Angels to a visible Appearance, seems to be fictitious and
groundless. As to calling up evil Angels or evil Spirits, that is to say Devils
as it is to be done by the Assistance of the Devil, and that he has given his
Assistance to the doing it, and therefore can do it, I make no Question; and
therefore when the Magicians do at any time bring up Appearances and frightful
Apparitions by their Art, I shall always suppose it to be the Devil, that is to
say, the Devil raised by Consent of the Devil; the Devil coming up at their
Call, who he had before consented should have Leave to call him; for he must
come Voluntier too, nor can he be called up or disturbed without his Consent;
but he bargains with those wicked People upon such Conditions as they agree
between them, that he shall obsequiously attend whenever they use such and such
Methods to call him, and this is Witchcraft, and this is Magic; This Magic is
Witchcraft, and this Witchcraft is Magic: let any one distinguish between them
if they can.

CHAP. III.
Of the present Pretenses of the Magicians: How they defend themselves; and
some Examples of their Practice.

THE Magicians, such as acknowledge them^e^^es (...) acquainted with the Black
Art, as we call i^, are not dumb and speechless in their own Case; on ^he
contrary, they defend themselves with the utmost Artifice; have their
historical Accounts of their Practice, and give the most fair and plausible
Sketches of the Art it self that can be imagined.

They insist that it is a general Mistake, a vulgar Error, and injurio^s to all
the Practisers of this Science, to say they have a Familiar, as we understand
the Word, th^^ is, an evil Spirit, or that they deal with the Devil; they own
they have Access to, and an Intercourse with superior Beings, and converse
with the World of Spirits; but that they are the good and well-disposed
Spirits, who are always beneficent, kind, and ready to do all possible Offices
of Love to Mankind; that they are certainly influenced from above, and that
consequently it is so far from being true, that they are Diabolick and wicked
Spirits, that on the contrary they are always employed in Matters superior to
the Nature of the Infernal Spirits; that they do not amuse the World with
Fictions, and deceive and abuse the People, that come to them with their
Enquiries; that they do not, like the Devil's Oracles of old, give ambiguous
and doubtful Answers in the Cases and Enquiries that are brought before them,
to cheat and delude the innocent Enquirer; but that they, on the contrary, tell
them the Truth of every thing, be it for Good or Evil to them; that they often
detect Criminals, expose Vice, prevent Mischief, and promote Virtue; Things no
body will pretend are in the Intent and Meaning of evil Spirits; that they do
not impose upon the ignorant to cheat and defraud them, or make unjust
Advantages of them.

In discoursing many Years since upon this Subject with a particular Friend, a
judicious and learned Man, and one that was not easily imposed upon, I seemed
to be doubtful of the Reality of the thing in general, and whether there was
indeed such a thing as that of Men having Intercourse with the World of
Spirits, and whether we might distinguish between that and Witchcraft,
insisting that I thought it was all Witchcraft, Sorcery, and the Devil.

He told me he was of my Mind 'till some Years before, that he had Occasion to
converse with the famous Magician called Dr. Boreman in Kent, who he assured me
was a very grave judicious Man, and, as he believed, a good Man. I had once,
said he, above all the rest, a long Conference with him on a particular
Occasion; but it is too long to tell you the Particulars. If it is not too long
for you to tell, said I, it will not be too long for me to hear, for I am
really impatient to know what is to be known of that Kind; and the more,
because I am at a loss to pass a Judgment about it. Well, said he, if I tire
you then with the length of it tell me, and I will leave off: So he began his
Story thus:

'I had, said he, a Friend, a young Man, who desired me, upon an extraordinary
Occasion to go with him (as he called it) to a Cunning Man.

' I asked him, What was the Business?

' He said, It was Business of Consequence to him, and though he did not care to
tell it just then, yet I should know it afterward.

' I told him, I had no Faith at all in those sort of People whom they called
Cunning Men.

'Nay, says he, I believe they deal with the Devil, but I don't care for that,
if I can but have Satisfaction in what I go about.

' I told him, I differed from him in that too, for I neither believed that
they dealt with the Devil, or the Devil with them; or that they could say any
thing to him that was to the Purpose.

'Why, they do tell strange things, says he.

' I told him, I believed nothing of it; but that it was all a Cheat; and so I
seemed loath to have him go to the Cunning Man at all.



N.B. You must understand here, that my Friend was not so really doubtful as he
made the young Man believe he was; but, as he had told me before, he believed
there was something in it, but he could never come at the Speech of one of the
Pretenders to the Art, and so was entirely ignorant of what they did, or how
they proceeded, and therefore (as he told me) he was mighty willing to go with
him, though he made some Show of being back-backwards; so he went on with his
Discourse.

'I was not only loath to let him go, says my Friend, but I told him I did not
care for it, and therefore desired he would excuse me going with him; but when
he told me who the cunning Man was, and that he would go to the famous Dr.
Boreman, my Curiosity prevailed with me, not only not to persuade him against
going, but to resolve to go with him my self.

'In a word, we appointed a Day, and I went with him, for I had a great mind to
talk with the Doctor.

'When we came to the House (it was in Kent, not far from Maidstone, where the
Doctor lived at that time; I don't remember the Place exactly) but, I say, when
we came to the Place, a Servant came to the Door, and very civilly led us into
the House, and bad us sit down; leaving us in a large Hall, where we walked
about, looking on his Magical Pictures, of which we saw a great many, whose
meaning I did not at all understand, and the Servant went away, as I suppose,
to call his Master.

'After a while the Doctor came in with a Staff in his Hand like a Crutch, as I
thought; and I thought also he was lame, having lately had the Gout: He was a
grave old Man, with a long black Velvet Gown on, his Beard long, and the upper
Lip of it trimmed into a kind of Muschato, a Cap on his Head with a Border of
Hair within it, as was the Custom in those Days.

'After usual Civilities, he began to enquire our Business; and directing his
Speech to me, as the Senior in appearance, I told him, that young Man (pointing
to him that came with me) my Friend, had something of Importance to communicate
to him, and which he wanted his Advice in; and so, says he, I bid the young Man
give the Doctor an Account of his Business.

'This young Man had; it seems, a particular Case which he went to him about;
and though he had desired me to go with him, as I have said, yet he had not told
me his Case; so I was obliged to direct him to tell it himself.

'Then the Doctor desired the young Man to give him his Case in writing; but he
told him, he could not write well enough, or explain his Case so intelligibly
to him in writing.'

'Well then, says the Doctor, tell it me in Words at length, and I Will write it
down from your own Mouth: However, I persuaded him to write it down as well as
he could; upon which, he desired a Pen, Ink and Paper, which the Doctor ordered
his Man to give him; and in the mean time, the Doctor asked me to walk into
another Room; come, says he, we will leave him to do it, that we may not
disturb him. So we went into the next Room.

'Then he began a Discourse, by asking me if I knew any thing of the young
Man's Case; which I really did not, and therefore told him so; but if I had
known it, I should hardly have given him any Account, for I took that to be a
Piece of his Art, to pick as much of the Circumstance of the Case out privately
as he could, so to guide his Answers; but I quite mistook the Man. From that we
fell into several other Discourses, and among the rest, I asked the Doctor, if
it would be no Offense to him to let us talk a little about the Study of those
things which he was so famed for.

'He said, No not at all, if I was disposed to talk of them in a serious and
friendly manner.

'I told him, I hoped he did not think I had any ill Design, though a Stranger;
if he did, I would not desire to say any more; and that as I did not know what
he might understand by the Word Friendly, I would not move it any farther.

'He said, He did not apprehend any thing dangerous; for he used no unlawful
Arts, but he said several Persons made a Jest of those things which he esteemed
sacred, and that he did not care for those Discourses or those People who
buffoon'd things because they did not understand them.

'I told him, that whatever I thought, he should find I would neither treat
him, or the Subject we might discourse of, with any Disrespect.

'He told me he would take my Word for it; so we fell into several Discourses
about Science in general, particularly of the Study of Magic and the Practice
of it, and when first it was known in the World.

'He told me, I seemed Ignorant in the thing it self, and to what purpose, says
he, should I go to speak of the Original of a thing which you have not right
Notions of? So we discoursed a little farther upon it, thus:

A. What Notions would you have me entertain of it? I scarce know what you mean
by the thing itself.


Dr. Why, Sir, you seem neither to know what I mean, or what you mean your self.


A. That is to say, I do not express my self perhaps right; then you may set me
to rights, and it would be very kind to do so.


Dr. You speak of my practicing as an Art; now I practice no Art, nor use any
Art; I am no Juggler, Sir; you don't see me show Tricks.


A. I would not offend you, Sir; will you tell me then what it is you do
practice?


Dr. Neither will I be offended; but if you will give me leave to ask you a
previous Question or two, I shall be the better able to answer your other
Question afterward.


A. Any Question you please.


Dr. Why then, will you tell me what brought you hither to me?


A. Why really, Sir, my Answer must be, I cannot well tell; my Friend who is
writing there in the other Room, will tell you that better than I.


Dr. Why then shall I tell you what you come for? perhaps you will think that
something odd.


A. So indeed I should, if I did not consider you as a Man of Art.


Dr. No, no, not a Man that deals with the Devil, as you fancy I do.


A. Nay, you must deal with some body, if you tell me my Business here, when I
don't know it my self.


Dr. Why, I will tell you in few Words then; your Friend comes about Business,
you to satisfy your Curiosity.


A. Upon my Word I think you are in the right.


Dr. Well, I have used no great matter of ART you see yet.


A. Nay, I don't know that; I suppose wh^^ you do is pretty much in the dark,
and imperceptible; so you might use Art, and I know nothing of it.


Dr. That Is true, or else it would be no Art.


A. But is my Curiosity any Offense to you Doctor? if it is, I Will have done and
say no mo^^ but leave you and my Friend together, for I don'^ come to affront
you, far from it, I assure you.


Dr. No, no, it is no Offense at all to me; only since you seem to talk friendly
and freely, gi^^ me leave to ask you some Questions first, and the I Will state
yours for you, and answer them directly and I hope to your Satisfaction.


A. With all my Heart; ask me what y^^ please.


Dr. What did you suppose me to be, what did your Friend tell you I was, before
y^^ came?


A. And you will promise me not to take it if I speak plain English?


Dr. Not in the least; I Will put it into yo^ Mouth, for I know what you took me
for, as w^ as you do your self.


A. I doubt you do, Sir; and that looks as if (...) were in the right.


Dr. Not at all neither, but of that afterward; you and your Friend took me
for a Necromancer, a Magician, one that deals with the Devil, can raise the
Devil, converses with him, and by his Help can resolve difficult Questions,
give Answers in doubtful Cases; and, in short, that I am a Conjurer.


A. And so you must be, I think, or else how do you know all this?


Dr. How I know it, is not the Question; but whether it is true or no?


A. Exactly true to a tittle.


Dr. And if I am no such Person, have I not then a great deal of wrong done me?


A. You know, Sir, it is natural for People to say, a Man deals with the Devil,
when he tells People their Thoughts, foretells to them what comes to pass, and
resolves such Doubts as no body but the Devil could resolve.


Dr. And perhaps the Devil himself could not do those things if he was to
appear and do his utmost, for he knows no more of things to come than you or I
do, and perhaps not so much.


A. Nay, do not join me to your self, pray, for you may know more than the
Devil himself can tell you.


Dr. Or else I would burn my Books, and pretend no more to the sacred Sciences
which I have so much Veneration for, and which you call my Practice.


A. If I was sure of that, I should have another kind of Notion of you and your
Practice than I have yet, I assure you.


Dr. If you was sure of what?


A. Why, that you do not perform these things by the Help of a familiar Spirit.


Dr. Nay hold, I don't say that neither; but are there no Spirits but what are
Devils?


A. I don't know indeed as to that; but we understand no other; when we talk of
a familiar Spirit we always understand (by it) the Devil.


Dr. Then you misunderstand it, Sir, that is certain: unsufferable Ignorance!
why, are there no good Spirits?


A. I can say nothing to that.


Dr. And perhaps are not desirous to be informed.


A. Nay there you wrong me, and take me for a Fool into the Bargain; for there
are none but Fools that have no Delight in understanding; I would be informed
of every thing that I do not know.


Dr. There would be no such things as Fools, Sir, if they were willing to be
informed. If Fools could their own Ignorance discern,
They Would be no longer Fools, because they would learn.



A. Well, I am very willing to learn, I assure you, and of you too, whatever
you please to inform me; perhaps I may be in the wrong as to what you say of
good Spirits; but I never heard of any.


Dr. That Is strange indeed! you have been much out of their Care, sure.


A. I don't know that neither; I hope not. If they have any of us in Charge for
Good, I may be under their Care I hope, and yet know nothing of it my self.


Dr. At least it seems you have been out of their Acquaintance, but that is not
much to the Case; the Loss has been yours to be sure, and the Fault too.


A. The Loss may have been mine; but how does it appear that the Fault has been
mine too?


Dr. It seems evident to me; and perhaps I may convince you of it, if you allow
me to ask you a few more such innocent Questions as these.


A. With all my Heart, especially if they are innocent.


Dr. If you have any Reason to suspect them, do not answer.


A. And you give me Leave to use my Liberty, Sir, without Offense?


Dr. Ay, your utmost Liberty, Sir; why should I be offended? I think you ought
rather to be offended, if I ask any thing that does not become me: The first
Question I would ask you is, whether you think there is an invisible World.


A. That Is no unfair Question at all; and you shall find, Sir, I will not cavil,
I Will answer directly. I make no doubt but there is.


Dr. But let my Question be direct too; by an invisible World, I don't mean, as
the Astronomers suggest, that there are Planetary Worlds, made invisible only
to us by their Distance.


A. No, no, I do not take you so; I believe there is a World of Spirits, and
that I suppose is what you mean by invisible; also that this World you speak of
is inhabited by Spirits only, and therefore justly called invisible.


Dr. You are kind, nay generous in Argument, for you grant faster than I ask.


A. I do that to save Circumlocutions, and giving you Trouble.


D. Well Sir, where do you suppose this World of Spirits is? for there must be
a Locality for the dwelling even of Spirits; how else do we call it a World?
and Heaven itself is a Place, according to the common understanding of the Word.


A. It is hard to say where it is, at least it is hard to me; so I cannot answer
that Question, at least not directly as I would do.


Dr. It is true, the infinite Spaces above are not easily described, as they
are not to be mathematically lined out; but we have Reason to know the
Inhabitants of it are not very remote from us, and that brings on another
Question.


A. I know some People think the Regions of the Air, even within the Compass of
the Atmosphere, are full of Spirits, and that of diverse kinds, some good, and
some evil.


Dr. I have nothing to say to that Notion; I cannot allow they inhabit
promiscuously the same Regions, and dwell together; as good and bad People live
here among one another without Distinction.


A. I don't pretend to resolve that Question indeed.


Dr. Neither did I propose it, Sir: but my Question is this; As you grant a
World of Spirits, and that you do not know where it is; so that for ought you
know it may be very near, as well as very remote; nor to a Spirit is distance
of Place any thing worth considering, if I may speak my Opinion: But my
Question, I say, is this: Do you believe that the Spirits inhabiting the
invisible World have any Converse with us, or with our embodied Spirits, in
this World?


A. Truly it is a nice Question, and what I have often considered very
seriously; I am of Opinion there is a certain secret Converse of Spirits, though
I cannot understand any thing of the manner.


Dr. Well, Sir, your Conceptions are much the same with mine, only that you
believe there is, and I am sure of it.


A. That Is carrying it a great way; and I think this brings me to turn the
Tables, and to demand Leave to ask you some Questions in my turn, if you have
done, or when you have done.


Dr. With all my Heart, Sir; pray ask what you please.


A. My first Question will be, Sir, how you can say you are sure there is such
a Converse with the Spirits of the invisible World?


Dr. Because I have actually conversed with them my self.


A. Now you come to the Point indeed. But what then do you call Conversing?


Dr. Why, I call seeing them, speaking to them, and hearing them speak,
Conversing; is not that as clear as the other?


A. The Expression is clear, but the thing expressed is not so, at least not to
me: How do you reconcile seeing, and speaking, to the thing called Spirits?


Dr. Why, therein you and I differ in our Circumstances, and this is the
sublime Quality of the Sciences which we profess; that being under the
Operation of a higher and exalted Mind, the Eyes of the Soul, which is a
Spirit, can operate upon immaterial Objects, and see what to common Sight is
called invisible.


A. This is all mysterious, and if you will allow me the Freedom, we should
call it all Cant and unintelligible.


Dr. I know it very well; and we on the other hand call your Discourse empty
and insignificant; for that you neither understand what you say, nor say what
you might easily be taught to understand; and if a Man enlightened in this
superior Manner comes to talk with you, and would instruct you a little, you
presently fly out, and cry a Magician, a Conjurer, that he has a Familiar, and
deals with the Devil; this was not always so.


A. This brings me to my first Question Sir exactly, namely, Whence is the
Orignal of what you call your sublime Practice, and where and when did it begin?


Dr. I could run you back, Sir, to its Original, and give you the History of
it, but 'twould be too long. I doubt your want of Patience.


A. My Curiosity is too great to let me want Patience.


Dr. Well, I Will give you an Abridgement then of it thus; Before the Deluge,
when the Antediluveans had the Blessing of Longevity, to the Number of almost a
thousand Years, we have many Testimonies of their conversing, not only with the
Spirits of the invisible World, but with the great Life of Spirit, the Being of
Beings; and if we can deduce any thing from Consequences, divine Spirits daily
illuminated the Minds of Mankind, and conveyed all useful Science to them, and
that to such a degree as has never been attained to since, by which all the
most exalted Parts of both natural and supernatural Knowledge were conveyed
into their Understandings.


A. They had, without question, a superior Genius in the Antediluvean State,
far above what we have now; and your Notions of that kind are very clear to me,
I agree with you in that.


Dr. They had not so much a superior Genius, as they had a superior
Illumination; what should you and I have, if we had lived three or four hundred
Years, and had conversed all that while in an angelick Society, and with an
invisible Species of Creatures, in whom complete Knowledge was but mere Nature,
and who had the Goodness to be always communicating the most perfect Ideas, the
most sublime Images to our Thoughts? what should we be capable of?


A. Nay, I think you might say, what should we not be capable of.


Dr. Then considering that at the end of that three or four hundred Years we
were but in the Prime of our Age, in full Strength of Judgment, and Vigor of
Mind, capable to receive the most divine Impressions of sacred Knowledge, what
should we not learn with such Teachers?


A. But how do we know that they were thus blessed?


Dr. Why, does not all your Accounts of those Times bring in the People
conversing thus? Nay, do you not say that GOD, or that Inconceivable Something
(which you call so) the King, and Governor, and Maker of Spirits, conversed
among them, talked with and to them?


A. Yes, we believe GOD himself conversed with them, particularly with Adam the
first of them, and with Noah ^he last of them, and no doubt with many others
between.


Dr. Well, and did the great Being of Beings converse with Man, and not the
smaller and lower degrees of Spirit? do you think the Servants did not
converse, if the Master did?


A. Why, that indeed I never considered before, I confess.


Dr. But where else had they the Knowledge of some things, which nothing but
Spirit and spirituous Converse could possibly convey?


A. What things were they? I do not rightly understand you.


Dr. Why, first for Example, MUSIC, that Heavenly Science, the Doctrine of
Sounds; measured and divided so as by Dissonance to make Harmony, to be admired
by every Ear, to move the Passions, and agitate the Soul, to be read by Notes,
understood by the differing Key of Sounds, the only universal Character in the
World. Could the Genius of Man invent it? No: it came from the invisible World,
and was certainly communicated from the Fountain of Knowledge, by the Agency of
the good Spirits, with which they so freely conversed.


A. You advance boldly, Doctor.


Dr. That may fairly be asserted, which is impossible to be otherwise.


A. I will not venture to say it is impossible.


Dr. But I dare say it, and with good Reason; then there is the Doctrine of
NUMBERS, which we call vulgarly Arithmetic; this with Music seem to be two
Infinites, the Bounds of them and the Variety is not to be measured, or
conceived of, and how could human Genius measure them out?


A. What do you infer from thence?


Dr. Nothing but this; that those good beneficent Spirits, with whom Mankind
had then the Blessing of a daily Society, filled their Minds, and inspired
their Thoughts with these noble and useful Discoveries, and qualified them
daily to improve upon them.


A. You talk above me now indeed.


Dr. You cannot say but I talk plainly, and intelligible.


A. So you conclude, that the good Spirits instructed them in these sublimer
Parts of Knowledge? Pray, why did they not teach them Astronomy, natural
Philosophy, and all the usefu^ Branches of the Mathematics?


Dr. And so no doubt they did. There Is the Ark for Example; you say, GOD spoke
to Noah and told him in general what kind of Vessel (...) should be; by which I
suppose you may understand, GOD told him that the World should b^ drowned, and
that he should be saved in a Ship which he should build? But can you think Noa^
could do all this without the more particular Direction of these good and
beneficent Spirits, instructing him how to perform the Work? How the Beams, and
the Timbers, the Planks and all the Parts were to be put together; how the
Bottom was to be shaped for swimming, the Head and the Stern for breaking off
the Force of the Water, in that truly unbounded Ocean the Flood; all these
things I make no Question he was instructed in by the daily Assistance of the
good Inhabitants of the invisible Regions, who freely had at that time an
Intercourse with the embodyed, that is, imprisoned, Spirits of Men; and these
are the same that we converse with now: so that I have fairly brought it down
to our own Times.


A. Sir, your Discourse is very well laid together I confess; but you make a
long leap, and some of it in the dark too; from Noah, and the Year of the World
1576, or thereabouts, to our time, which is about three thousand Years after.
How is it that those good Spirits left off their Good Will toward Men, and
seem to shun us as much now as they courted us before?


Dr. I do not find it so, I rather say they do and would converse with us
still, if we either saw the Blessing of it, or knew how to value it, and made
it appear we desired it.


A. But when did it break off? what, did the Flood put an end to it?


Dr. It seems, that Men, by a differing Conduct, and a way of Life too gross
for so excellent and sublime a Converse, have rendered themselves unworthy and
unqualify'd since the Flood; so that the angelick Train seem to have forsaken
the Earth, and only communicate themselves to such as render themselves
acceptable and worthy by a Life of earnest Application to the Study of divine
Science, and who seek after the high Illumination.


A. So that there are some who enjoy this extraordinary Society still?


Dr. Why not, pray? The good Spirits are the same; they change not, neither is
their Goodwill toward Men abated; but the custom of the World has been, and
still is, to be shy and afraid of them, take them to be evil Spirits, and, as
the World calls them, Devils; so that a good Spirit cannot now offer its
Assistance to Man, or go about to do any good to Mankind, but they are frighted
and terrified, and cry out the Devil, fly from it, and refuse to accept the
Benefit offered.


A. But it seems all do not treat them so.


Dr. No. But how then are they treated who act after another manner?


A. Why, how are they treated?


Dr. Are we not treated as Daemoniacks, as Magicians and Conjurers,
Necromancers, and that deal with the Devil. Did not you take me for such?


A. It is very true, I did.


Dr. Ay, and are you not under some sort of Fright, even all the while you are
talking with me, as if you were talking with the Devil, and lest I should raise
the Devil while you are here?


A I cannot say but it is in some measure true.


Dr. And yet we know no more of the Devil than you do, nor converse any more
with him than other Folks do, nor so much neither.


'Having carried on our Conversation thus far, my Companion, who was all this
while a writing his Case, came to the Door, and calling to the Doctor, told him
he had done; Well, says the Doctor to him, pray give me the Paper then, and let
me read it over; so he gave him his Paper, which was a long one indeed, and
very close written, containing all his Case, which it seems was very
particular, and required abundance of better Advice than I thought the grave
Doctor was able to give him, but I was really mistaken.



I was far from being tired with this Account, and believe I shall not tire the
Reader with setting it down. Indeed I interrupted him here, with asking him if
he did not yet know his Man's Case, and if he did not read the Paper; but he
told me he did not, so I desired him to let me have the rest of the Story, and
he went on thus.

'My Man, said he, who was with me, told me little or nothing of his Case, as I
hinted before, except that he said it was very Difficult and Intricate; and
that if it could not be resolved, and brought to a Conclusion, he was sure he
should never get over it, but should be undone, and that therefore he came to
this Man.

'Why, says I, what do you take the Man to be?

'Why, what should I take him for, says he?

'Nay, I suppose, said I, you take him for a Conjurer, and one that deals with
the Devil.

'I care not who he is, or who he deals with, says the Man, so I do but get my
Business done by him, find out a Man or two that I look for, and have some
satisfaction in my other Affairs.

'I don't know who you look for, said I, and I doubt you don't know who it is
you seek to.

'Why, the Devil, says he; who do you think I seek to, when I come to a Cunning
Man?

'This Discourse was before we came to the Doctor's House, and was the Occasion
indeed that I was at first so shy of him, and made so many round-about Cautions
when I first spoke to him.

'When he had written his Case down, and given it to the Magician, the Doctor
asked him if he could not leave the Paper with him, and come again in two or
three Days? The Enquirer seemed uneasy at that, though he did not directly say
No; but the Doctor perceived it; Well then, said he, are you willing to stay
here with me about eleven or twelve Hours, and sit up all Night? The Man looked
earnestly at me, as if it had been to ask me whether he should venture to stay
all Night, but withal looked a little frighted too.

'The Doctor seeing him look at me, as if he would ask my Advice, turned to me,
smiling at the Man's Backwardness.

'Sir, says he, I perceive you must decide it; he seems a little frighted, I
don't know at what.

'Sir, says I, smiling, I believe he is afraid the Candles will burn blue.

'Ay, says he, you see the Reason why the good Spirits have left off conversing
with Mankind; and you see how we that are Men of Art, and who have studied the
sacred Sciences, suffer by the Errors of common Fame; they take us all for
Devil-Mongers, damned Rogues, and Conjurers.

'It is very true, Sir, said I, I see it now; he is afraid in short that you
will raise the Devil. With that he turns to the Man; Hark ye Friend, says he,
are you afraid to stay all Night? speak honestly, if you are, and tell me so.

'Why, Sir, says the Man, I cannot say but I am a little uneasy about it, though I
don't know at what, for I an't very apt to be afraid of Sights, not I. With
that I put in a Word to my Companion; Why Cousin, says I, if you are uneasy
about seeing any strange Sight, or hearing any thing uncommon, what did you
come to this Gentleman for? you know very well what you told me you understood
him to be, and what you expected of him.

'Nay, says the Conjurer, I must needs say, he that is afraid to the sea Devil,
should never come to see US.

'Why, you don't always deal with the Devil, do ye? says the Man.

'Nay, says he, I have not told you yet that I deal with him at all; but I say,
you should not be afraid of him, when you come of these Errands; for it seems
you suppose we talk with him for you.

'Why, that is as much as to tell me, says the young Man, you can raise the
Devil for me, if you please.

'Well, come be plain with me, and tell me; have you have a Mind to see him or
no? says the Doctor laughing.

'No, not I, says he, not at all, and that made me uneasy.

'Well, well, says he, you shall not see the Devil then.

'But shall I see nothing else, Sir? says he. I would see none of your Spirits,
whether they are Devils or no.

'I tell you, says the Doctor, you shall see nothing to hurt you.

'But, says the Man again, I don't know what to say, you speak in generals;
pray don't fright me, any more than hurt me.

'I tell thee again, says the Doctor, I Will neither hurt thee, nor fright thee;
but if you will have nothing done for you, what do you give me your Case for?
and if you are afraid to see, or hear any thing, why do you not care to leave
your Case with me, and come again?

'This was such a reasonable Proposal, that I could not but tell my young Man,
that I thought he was playing the Fool with the Doctor; if you stay, you must
be content to see what is to be seen; and if you don't care to venture that,
cannot you go, and come again? so in a word, I advised him to leave his Case
with the Doctor, and go away, and come for an Answer when he should appoint him.

'As we were going away, the Doctor takes me by the Hand, the young man being
gone out of the Door; You see, Sir, the Notions the poor innocent well-meaning
People have of all the good Spirits of the invisible World; and though in their
Distresses they will come to us, and we make some Search for them, yet they
give the Devil all the Praise of it; nay though they receive good from it; and
yet they acknowledge the Devil to be the Author of nothing but Mischief.

'But Sir, said I, you could I suppose give this honest Man what Answer you
shall purpose to give him, without letting him see any Appearances to fright or
terrify him?

'I have nothing about me, says he, or that converses with me, that need to
fright or terrify any one, much less that will do him any hurt. I do not say,
but as the good Spirits are beneficent and kind, and may meet and converse upon
any Occasions, and in any Place from their own happy Inclination, to serve and
assist the oppressed or indigent Creatures, may come and go, pass and repass in
or near my House, which would be to me the greatest Felicity of Life. On this
Occasion the Man might have heard some little Noises, and perhaps have seen
some Motions rather than Bodies, which he might call Specter and Apparitions,
or Devils, or what he would; yet these, as they would take no Notice of him, or
do any thing to terrify or disorder him, so he would have nothing to do but to
sit still, and not offer to stir, or speak, and be under no Concern at all.

'Well, Sir, said I, were the Case mine, as it is not, I assure you I would
have trusted you, for I do not think, let the Case be what it will, that it is
your Business to suffer your Clients to receive any Hurt in your House, or to
be frighted, so as to bring any evil Report upon you.

'Sir, says the Doctor, my Business is to do good to all Men, and to hurt none,
as is the Desire of those superior Beings, which I have the Happiness to
converse with; and therefore it only is wanting to us, that the poor People
were a little less afraid of us, and that they came to us for mere Necessity
only, and not merely to satisfy their Curiosity, as is often their Case.
However, added he, as to the young Man your Friend, let him go home, tomorrow
you will see he will come back to me in a great Hurry, though I have not ordered him
to come till Friday, as you heard; but I warrant ye he will dream some strange
Dream tonight, his very Fright will make him do it, and then he will come and
desire me to interpret his Dream for him; and then you may hear farther.

'Well, Sir, said I, I shall observe him, and perhaps he will ask me to come
along with him; if he does, I shall venture to come.

'No, says the Doctor, I don't think he will ask you to come, I believe he will
be in better Heart tomorrow; and it may be he will offer to stay all Night with
me, and all Day too, if I desire him, let him s^e what he will.

'I think, said I, he is a Fool, he don't stay now; indeed if it had been my
Case, I would have trusted you.

'Well, Sir, says he, if you have any Occasion in which I can render you any
Service, I shall be always ready to answer your Expectations in the best manner
I am able; and in the mean time, I hope you will no more have those weak
Notions, as if all the Intelligence Mankind can attain to from the invisible
World must be with the Devil, or the evil Spirits. I hope you will see, that
there are Cases come before me, which the Devil would no more be a Devil if he
should give any Satisfaction in, or any Relief to the Inquirer.

'I gave him an Answer in as obliging Terms as I could, and so we parted, and I
came to the young Man, who waited for me with the utmost Impatience, and with
some kind of Terror; for I found he was in a Sweat, though it was a cold Evening
too.

'When I came up to him, I asked him how he did.

'Pretty well, says he, but I Am glad I am got away.

'Why so? said I. No body offered to detain you, I thought the Doctor spoke
very civilly to you; and I Am sure he did so to me.

'Ay, says he, he did so, and I had a mind to have ventured once to stay all
Night, but I am heartily glad I didn't; I should have been frighted out of my
Wits, if I had seen the Devil.

'Why, I can assure you, that he says positively he has nothing to do with the
Devil, and if you had seen any Appearance, it would have not been an evil
Spirit, or Devil, but a good Spirit; that it would have come to render you
Service, and do you good, rather than have hurt you, and that you would have
had no need to be frighted.

'No matter for that, says he, all Spirits are Devils to me; if I had seen a
Spirit, or an Apparition, all he could have said to me, would not have
persuaded me to believe it had not been the Devil.

'Why, would you not have believed the Doctor, if he had told you so?

'No, says he, nor a hundred conjuring Doctors more, not I.

'But what is it you go to him for then? said I. If you will not believe what he
says, what signifies your going to him? you had better have kept it to your
self, and never have troubled him.

'Nay, that is true, said he, and that was the reason I was loath to leave my
Case with him.

'But you have left it with him, says I, have not you?

'Yes, says he, and let him make the best of it, and the worst of it, I never
intend to go to him again.

'What, says I, will not you go to him for an Answer?

'No, not I, said he, I have enough of him; come away. I am so frighted
already, I am almost dead; don't you see what a Sweat I am in? for all it is
such cold Weather, the Sweat runs down my Face in Drops.

'Why, what do you sweat for now? said I. You are far enough out of his way here,
an't you?

'No, no, says he. Why, if he has his Devil within Doors, do you think he has not
his Devil without Doors too? Why, all the while I have stood here for you, I
fancy every Tree is a Man, and every Man a Shadow, and every Shadow a Spirit.

'You see, said I, it is Evening, and the Light begins to be Dusky, and so you
see double: Why, sure you an't so frighted as you seem to be?

'Indeed I am, says he, I don't know what is the matter, I don't use to be so; I
used to laugh at People when they talked of seeing Apparitions, and being
frighted with Spirits.

'Well, well, you will come again, for all that, said I, I warrant you.

'No, if the Devil catches me there again, I Will forgive him, says he.

'You don't know your own Mind, said I. Why, he will answer all your Questions.

'Ay, so he shall, when I come again, says he.

'I warrant you will come again to him, says I, for an Answer tomorrow.

'Nay, says he, I am not appointed till Friday.

'Ay, says I, it is no matter for that, I dare say you will not have Patience to
stay so long. Why, you will dream of it all Night: I don't doubt but you will be
with him again also, for Satisfaction to your Enquiries; I know you have not the
Patience, though I don't know your Case.

'You may say what you will, says he, but I assure you, I Will go near him no
more.

'This kind of Discourse held us to a Town hard by, where we lodged that Night,
for it was too late to go any farther. And in the Morning I happened to
over-sleep my self; For, in short, my Head ran so much upon the Doctor, and his
invisible World, that it kept me awake almost all Night; so that in the
Morning, when I got up, 'twas near ten a Clock.

'When I called for my young Man, the Master of the House told me he was gone.
Gone! said I; what, and never stay for me, nor to speak to me?

'Nay, Sir, says the Man of the House, I believe he is mad. Why, he has made
such a Noise and a Disturbance, he has frighted all the House two of my People
have been fain to sit up with him all Night; he says he has seen the Devil.

'Seen the Devil! says I: does he know the Devil when he sees him? I believe he
never saw him i^ his Life. I suppose it was some Dream.

'Nay, says the Man, I don't know how h^ should see the Devil here, I Am sure my
House is not haunted. I fancy he has been at Dr. Boreman's lately.

'Dr. Boreman, (says I) who is that?

'O, Sir, says my Landlord, did you never hear of Dr. Boreman? Why, he is the
most famous Man in all this Country, he does a thousand strange things.

'What, says I, is he a Conjurer, does he deal with the Devil?

'I don't know for that, says my Landlord, I cannot fancy he deals with the
Devil neither; for he is a very honest Gentleman, and does a great many good
things. Folks that deal with the Devil don't use to do any thing that is good.

'Pr'ythee, says I, what good does he do?

'Why, Master, says my Landlord, they say, he lays the Devil, when other Folks
raise him; he can cure a House when it is haunted. Here was a House in our Town
so plagued with evil Spirits, that no body could lie in it; and when the Doctor
was sent for, he went and sat up all Night in it; what he did there no body
knows, but he so frighted the Devil to be sure, that the House has never been
haunted any more since; and the poor Wenches are so afraid of him all round the
Country, that they dare not see him.

'Why, says I, what does he do to them?

'Why, Sir, says he, a poor Girl cannot let a young Fellow kiss her, but the
Docter will TELL; and if they prove with Child, he will tell the Father of it
presently; nay he will discover all the little whoreing Intrigues in the Country.
Now, Master, adds he, this is not Devil's Work; you know the Devil didn't care
if they were all Whores, not he.

'That's very true, indeed, says I; but what then must the Doctor be called? is
he a Magician?

'I suppose he is, Master, says he, though I don't know what that means. But he
charms Folks, and sets Spells, and a young Fellow dares not come near an honest
Girl, for fear of him. Why, they say, he drew a Circle the other Day round a
young Lass's Bed that was suspected; and when the Fellow, that they thought had
to do with her, came to her, truly he could not get away till the Doctor was
sent for to release him.

'And do you believe all this? said I.

'Believe it, Sir! says he. Why, all the Country believes it, and the young
People are kept in such Awe by it, that I don't think there will be one Bastard
got this Year, no, not in twenty Parishes hereabout; and that is very hard,
Master, says he, this War time too, when the King is like to want Soldiers.

'This Discourse was diverting, but still I wanted to hear of my Man. I was
loath to go back to the Doctor to seek him there; so I was obliged to go away
without him.



Thus far I have entertained you with my Friend's Relation, as I had it from
him in a continued Discourse, and this last Part is merry enough; nor is it
more than I have heard by many other Hands, I mean of the Doctor's Exploits;
and particularly 'twas certainly true of him, that he kept all the young
People, I mean the wicked part of 'em, in Awe; whether by Spells or Charms, and
what those Spell or Charms were, that I could never come to a Certainty about.

The Story of his persuading a young Fellow and his Wench to get both into her
Smock, and that when he was in, the Doctor set his Spell upon him, so that he
could never get out till the Doctor was sent for to release him; and that he
would not release him till the Fellow obliged himself to marry the Girl; this
Story, I say, is so firmly believed all over that Part of the Country, that no
body doubts of it.

But to come back a little to my Friend, and the Story of the young Fellow that
was with him, which I shall give you now in a more summary way, it being too
long for my Work; The Short of the Case was this: The Fellow being heartily
frighted, as you have heard, was no sooner got to Bed, and fell fast asleep,
but he dreamed that the Doctor came into his Chamber and to his Bedside, with
two Devils or Spirits with him; that he was at first so terrified, that he was
not able to speak; but that the Doctor spoke kindly to him, and bad him not be
afraid, for that here was a good Angel come to him, to give him a full Answer,
happy, and for his Satisfaction, to all his Difficulties; and that he had
nothing to do but to hear and receive his Message, and be easy; and that upon
this, the Spirit advanced close to the Bedside; but that he cried out, and
refused to hear him; at which the Doctor spoke angrily to him, and said, Well,
since you refuse the Advice and Direction of a good Spirit, we shall leave you
to the same disturbing Devil which possessed you before: and upon this the
Doctor and the good Spirit vanished out of his Sight, and an ugly frightful
Devil remained in the Place, which grinn'd and threatened him in a terrible
manner, but said nothing to him: that the Horror of the last Spectre frighted
him so terribly, that he waked out of his Sleep, knocked up the People of the
House, and told them the Devil was in the Room, and, in a word, disturbed the
whole Family; the Hostler and a Maidservant sat up with him, but saw nothing;
and in the Morning as soon as it was light, he took his Horse and went away.

As the Doctor had told my Friend, and as he said to the young Man, so it was;
for being terrified to the last Degree with this course Appearance, away he
went to the Doctor's House in hurry enough. It happened that when he came to
the House, the Doctor was at his Door, speaking to somebody that he was just
dismissing, and the Party went away just as the young Man came up.

'Well, says the Doctor, what is the matter now? why, I did not bid you come
till Friday.

'O Sir, says the young Man, but let me speak with you a little upon another
Occasion that has happened since, and I Will wait upon you again about the other
Business on Friday, as you appointed.

'Come, come in then, says the Doctor, I believe I know your Business; I
warrant ye you have been dreaming some frightful thing or other tonight: what,
have you seen the Devil in your Sleep? you had even as good have let me have
shown him you.

'Why so you have, Sir, says he, have not you? pray have not you been abroad
tonight?

'Abroad, says the Doctor, what do thou mean by that? I am but just out of
Bed.

'Why, Master, says he, have not you been at Wrootham tonight?

'At Wrootham! why, thou art mad; I tell thee I am but just up.

'It's no matter for that, says the Man, still staring and wild; I am sure I
saw you there, and spoke to you, and you to me.

'Come Friend, says the Doctor, I see you are frighted, and you have dreamt
waking; you have dreamt of the Devil, or of Spirits, all Night; why, thou art
not come to thy self yet; come, let me know the whole Story.

'Nay, Sir, says the young Man, it is a plain Case you know the whole Story
already, as well as I.

'Not a Word, not I, says the Doctor, I assure you.

'Why, Sir, says he, have not you told me the very Case, have not you told me I have
been dreaming of the Devil, and seen the Devil? how can you say, you know
nothing of it?

'Truly, says the Doctor, any one that saw what a Fright you were in last
Night, without the least Reason, and sees how bewildered you look now, might
guess you have been terrified in a Dream, and that without any Witchcraft or
Conjuring in the least: But, adds the Doctor, what signifies telling me I know
it already? If you think fit to tell me the Case, well and good; if not,
pr'ythee go about your Business, I desire not to meddle with it.

'With that he begged the Doctor's Pardon, and told him, if he did not know his
Case already, he hoped he would not be angry with him for what he had said, at
least he was sure he would not, when he had told him. So he gave him the whole
Story at large as I have told it you, with a great many more Particulars.

'Well, says the Doctor, you see there are good and beneficent Spirits in
Being, who are willing to relieve and extricate us out of Difficulties, at
least by their good Counsel and Advice; and if thou had had Courage and
Patience to have heard it, no doubt you would have had all your Doubts
explained, and your Questions answered; and would have had no need to come to
me: But the Devil, who you say stood behind, and who afterward appeared
terrible and frightful to you, prevented your accepting the good Counsel, and
the Answers which you would have had from the first Appearance: and as for my
appearing to you, depend upon it your Imagination supplied that Part, for I
have not stirred out from home all Night; besides, a good Spirit might assume a
Shape and Appearance like me, that it might be more familiar to you.

'But, Sir, says the young Man, what must I do now? if I have rejected this
good Offer, it may be the same good Spirit will not now resolve me, or do any
thing for me.

'Perhaps it may, says the Doctor, or perhaps I may obtain a Resolution for
you; are you willing to stay with me now, by Daylight?

'Ay Sir, with all my Heart; I Will wait all Day, and all Night too now, if you
please; for I am satisfied now, that you will do me no hurt.

'In short, the Fellow's Case was thus: (Take it in my Friend's own Words
again;) He was desperately in love with a young Gentlewoman in the Country, had
courted her a long time, and gained her Good Will so far at last, that they had
agreed to be married; but on a sudden, some other Object had presented to her
Friends, who had a better Estate than this young Man; and he found his Mistress
was at first kept up from him; and at last, that though she was at Liberty, she
was grown cold and indifferent to him, and he was half mad with the
Disappointment: That after this she seemed a little kinder, and told him the
Reason of her Coldness; but after all that, another thing perplexed him, and
that was; That three Nights together he dreamt that he saw a Neighboring
Gentleman kissing his Mistress, and in downright English, lying with her.

'This last tormented him, and he was so perplexed between his Love and his
Jealousy, that he could not rest; to this was to be added, that though his
Mistress was kinder to him than before, yet her Father had given him a positive
Denial, and he knew not what to do; and for a Direction in this Difficulty he
went to the Cunning Man.

'Upon these things, the Doctor, after all the intervening Circumstances which
have taken up your time, gave him this very good Advice; whether by his Art,
consulting of Spirits, or by what other Method I know not, but he delivered it
to him in this Form, or to this Purpose.

'Friend, says the Doctor, the Intelligence which I have had relating to thy
Affairs from the invisible Regions, and by the Aid of those good Spirits which
thou art so afraid to receive it from, is very kind and favorable to thee, if
thou art disposed to hearken to good Advice.

'The young Woman that thou art so deeply in love with, is not dishonest; those
Dreams thou had in Prejudice of thy Affection are injurious, and proceed from
the grinning, angry Spirit, which, as thou said, appeared to thee in thy last
Night's Disturbance: However, it would be wisely done, if thou would withdraw
thy Affection from this Object, for I am well assured her Parents, who are
resolved to dispose of her another way, will never favor thee; and if thou
take her against their Consent, will neither give thee Portion or Blessing,
nor will thy Marriage be happy.

'Ask me not by what Rules I obtain this Information; quiet thy Mind in the
view of other Offers which may present; preserve thy Virtue and Temperance;
there seems something in View, though yet at a Distance, which shall be more to
thy Satisfaction even than this, had it gone forward; and I see a Light of
moderate Happiness glancing toward thee from a remote Part, intimating that
thou shall be very happy, and live comfortably, if the Exercise of a patient
and quiet Temper prevail over Rashness and Passion; but if the latter prevail,
expect Misery and distracted Circumstances may be thy Lot.

'The Youth went away better instructed than I should have expected from an Art
which I have so very bad an Opinion of: But this Dr. Boreman was a strange Man,
according to all the Reports of the Country about him, and did abundance of
things, even by the Methods of his Art, which carried a Face of Good with them,
as is said before, Page 309; if it was delusive and came from the Devil, it was
so much the more dangerous, as it came covered and colored with a Mist of
Virtue, and a religious Character, and with a Mouth always full of a lofty
Cant, as if talking from a divine Oracle, and directed by Spirits always
employed for the Good of Mankind in general, and to do Acts of Charity and
Beneficence to afflicted or perplexed Persons in particular.



Thus far from my Friend who conversed with Dr. Boreman: He gave me several
other Accounts of him, which, notwithstanding all the good things pretended to,
and the fine canting Words of the Doctor, convince me still that he must have
had some unlawful Conversation with such Spirits or such Beings as I should
still call Devils: That he used Spells, and Charms, and Familiars; that he did
not disown the Appearance of Spirits to him, assuming visible Bodies, was, it
seems, well known; and that he had several Books of Magical Experiments I have
heard it also well attested; whether there were any wicked Magical Performances
in those Books, or not, I cannot tell.

It is true, or else general Report must lie most unusually, that he did
perform several strange things; yet they say he was never known to do, or
direct the doing any Mischief, or to encourage any injurious thing: It was
usual, as they report of him, to set Spells for the Country People for the
preserving their Cherry-Gardens from being plundered, and their Orchards from
being robbed: Take some of the Tales which pass for creditable, as follows.

That three young Fellows being gotten into an Orchard, which I suppose was
under his particular Care, he caused a large Bell to hang to the Heel of their
Shoes behind, like a Heel-spur, by which they alarmed the House and raised the
People, who surrounding the Orchard, took them all; when they were taken, the
Bells being to be pulled off, could not be seen, and yet the Sound of them was
heard all the Way they went to the Justice of the Peace, till he committed
them, and then ceased.

Another time, some Boys being gotten into a Cherry-Garden, and one of them
being up a Cherry-Tree, he made the Boy see a great Mastif Dog sitting at the
bottom of the Tree, waiting for his coming, looking him full in the Face, and
grinning and snarling at him if he offered to stir; so that the poor Boy not
daring to come down, was obliged to sit in the Tree 'till he cried out for
Help; by which means, the People of the House came and found him in the Tree;
and as soon as they were come, he could see no more of the Dog, neither could
any body see it but himself.

The Methods he took with lewd People of those Times, were, it seems, exceeding
many, and such that, as the Landlord told my Friend, the young Wenches stood in
awe of him, and were terrified with the very Name of him.

No petty Thefts but he would discover them, even after they were committed;
and if we may believe common Fame, if People's Cattle were gone astray, he
would tell them which Way to look for them. Whether he could have told Saul how
to find his Father's Asses, I cannot say; But I dare affirm he could not have
told him of the Kingdom, as Samuel did.

And yet this Dr. Boreman, as they say, would not suffer any such thing as a
Witch to live in the Country, but exposed and detected them on all occasions;
and the wicked Spirits on all occasions fled from him, as was reported of the
House which they said was haunted.

How to reconcile this to a Correspondence of Devils only, I cannot say; and
yet that Magic Powers are communicated by good Angels, and by divine
Appointment, I can see no Reason to suggest; but the contrary seems to be
evident by the People of Ephesus, coming and bringing their conjuring Books,
and burning them, upon receiving the Christian Faith by the preaching of the
Apostle Paul, to the Value of fifty thousand Pieces of Silver.

There are abundance of Books upon this Subject left by this Dr. Boreman; and
some, as they say, with Rules of Art, as they are called; but they are kept so
up in private Hands, that I do not find they are to be come at, by any means.
The Works of the right famous Enthusiast Jacob Behemen seem to be of the same
kind, though something more refined, and less rational, being all in the Clouds
and Confusion.

This Jacob Behemen took it very ill to be called a Magician; but he was a kind
of a Visionist. He pretended to see things invisible, and hear things
unutterable; and I might add, he seemed to have some Truth in it, for he
published things unintelligible.

His Writings are either Magic or Enthusiastic, or rather both, for I never
met with many that would pretend to understand them, and never with one that
was the better for them; except it was one very particular Man among his
Admirers, who declared himself to be the better for them, only, and for that
very Reason, namely, because he did not understand them.

Now that I may not seem to pass my Censure rashly, I desire that my more
intelligent Readers will please to reduce the following things into Meaning, if
they can, and favor us with the Interpretation; being some particular Account
of the Life of this famous, religious Ingineer, for I know not what else to
call him, and the Titles of some of his Books.

By the Differences and Controversies in Religion which he knew not how to
satisfy himself in, he was stirred up and moved to ask, seek and knock, that he
might know the Truth.

Upon which by the Divine Drawing and Will he was in Spirit wrapped up into the
Holy Sabbath, in which he remained seven whole Days by his own Confession in
highest Joy: After he came to himself, he laid aside the Folly of Youth, and
was driven by divine Zeal earnestly to reprehend impudent, scandalous, and
blasphemous Speeches, and did forbear in all his Actions the least Appearance
of Evil, and continued to get his Living by the Labor of his Hands, 'till the
Beginning of the Sixth Seculum, which was the Year 1600, when he was the second
time possessed with a Divine Light, and by the Sight of a sudden Object was
brought to the inward Ground or Center of the hidden Nature.

Yet somewhat doubting, he went out into an open Field, and there beheld the
miracul'us Works of the Creator in the Signatures and Figures of all created
things manifestly laid open; whereupon he was taken with an exceeding Joy, yet
held his Peace, in Silence praising GOD.

But ten Years after, in the Year 1610, through the over-shadowing of the holy
Spirit, he was a third time touched by GOD, and renewed, and became so
enlightened, that least so great Grace bestowed upon him should slip out of his
Memory, and he resist his God, he wrote privately for himself (without the Help
of any Books but the holy Scriptures) many Books, such as these: A Book of the
Signature of all things. A Consolatory Book of the Four Complexions. A
Misterium magnum upon Genesis. A Book of 177 Theosophick Questions. Certain
Letters to diverse Persons at certain times, with certain Keys for some hidden
Words.




These learned Labors of this right learned Enthusiast may, for ought I know,
be still extant; they are recommended here for their extraordinary Titles, and
I believe are much about as intelligible as the above Rhapsody of his Life; to
all which I recommend the curious Reader, if he has a mind to embarrass his
Understanding for an Age or two, and come out as wise as he went in. The
Specimen I think to be much of a Piece with the good Dr. Boreman, only with
this specific Difference, viz. that Friend Jacob carries us up into the Clouds
to understand things there, if any body there may be found to teach us; and Dr
Boreman was for bringing the Clouds down to us, to reach us what we could
understand nothing of, when we were taught.

Thus you have the two invisible and unintelligible Brothers together; whether
they have left any to carry on the unmeaning Magic, I know not.

There have been some Pretenders to the Art who have succeeded the Doctor, but
we see nothing of their Performance, at least not equal to his: Let us look a
little higher.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Doctrine of Spirits as it is understood by the Magicians; How far it
may be supposed there may be an Intercourse with Superior Beings, without any
Familiarity with the Devil, or evil Spirits; with ae Transition to the present
Times.

WHEN the seven Sons of Scaeva the Jew pretended to Exorcism, and to cast the
Devil out of a possessed Person, the Devil taking it in scorn to be affronted
by mere Pretenders, and disdaining those that had no Authority to make use of
the Names which he was subjected to the Terror of, flew upon them, as the Text
says, in a Rage, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, says he, but who are ye? and he
never left them till they fled away from him naked and wounded.

Now in what Name or by what Authority Dr. Boreman or any of these Magicians
dismissed the Devil from haunted Houses, chased away Spi^its from the Places
where they had made any Appearance, and kept the Devil in such Awe as is
re^orted, I cannot yet learn. Had the Doctor really cast the Devil out of any
Demoniack or possessed Person, and openly have exercised such an absolute Power
over him, and had it been well vouched by Persons of known Integrity and sound
Judgment, we must then have believed that there were some good Spirits, some
superior intelligent Beings, whom the Doctor was so favored by, that know^ng
his good Intentions, they would assist him with their Aid against the evil
Spirits.

But there are innumerable Difficulties in the Way; the Words of our Savior
are express, that this Kind goes not out but by Prayer and Fasting, and I do
not read much of the Doctor being a Person so pious and so religious as to
exercise himself that way at all; what he might do in private I know not, but
by all I can learn, he acted as by the immediate Deputation of those good
Spirits; intimating, that they brought him Intelligence, that they acquainted
him with the Circumstances of every enquiring Person; that they directed him
what Answers to give; that he was but, as i^ were, their Messenger to evil
Spirits, ordering them to remove from such and such Places; tha^ they empowered
him by speaking such and such Words, to charm and bind down such People a^ he
was directed to operate upon, to such a Limit^ and within such a Circle of
Ground.

But all this is still attended with this Doubt, viz* That the Fact is not
proved; let us see therefore what it is likely these good Spirits can do; an^
what they really are believed to do in any Part o^ the World, for the general
Good of Mankind.

That there are some Appearances in the World and that of such Spirits as we
may call Good, ^ will not deny here, whether I grant it at present or no. The
People in Norway tell you of a goo^ Spirit which at all times gives People
Notice o^ things fatal and destructive; that it appears in ^ flying Ball of a
yellowish green; and is seen in the Air, and will knock at their Doors before
approaching Tempests and deep Snows, that they may sa^ their Fishing-Boats by
hauling them up upon the Shores, or into narrow safe Creeks where they w^
receive no Damage, and that on Shore they m^ bring home their Cattle and secure
them from tho^ deep Snows and severe Colds.

In Laponia we are told of several Spirits which they converse with, not by way
of Witchcraft and Sorcery, but which they call their good Spirits, and whom
they consult with upon every urgent Occasion for Relief and Assistance, and who
never do any Hurt to them or to their Cattle. What the Lapland Witches may do I
know not, neither is it my present Inquiry.

Whether these good Spirits are not those, who at the Request of some certain
People on all the Coasts of Norway, are said to procure fair Winds for Ships
going to Sea, I will not undertake to say; But this I have upon strict Enquiry
learnt.

First, That it really is so in Fact; that upon going to certain People there,
and upon paying them a small Consideration (not above two Dollars) they have
been assured of a fair Wind, exactly at such a Time, from such a certain Point
of the Compass, and to last so many Hours as has been agreed for.

Secondly, That this has been agreed for when the Winds have been, as the
Seamen call it, set in to blow Trade from a directly contrary Point, and for a
considerable time before; and that when they have gone away and declined the
Agreement, they have lain a long time without a fair Wind, till complying; and
again, that upon so complying they have never sailed.

Thirdly, That if you offer to desire, or give Money to them to raise a high
Wind, that is, a Storm, they will be very angry, refuse your Money with
Disdain, and ask you in their Language, if you think they deal with the Devil?
that their Power comes from a good Spirit, that never does any Hurt in the
World, but always does things kind and good, and for the Benefit of Mankind.

All our Accounts, Histories and Relations concerning the Northern Parts of
Britain are full of he Appearance of Spirits to the Inhabitants on sundry
Occasions, and yet none of those Spirits are hurtful to them, or join in any
hurtful things.

Either these Spirits inhabit in the Regions of the Air, and so are near us and
take Cognizance of our Persons and Affairs, or they do not: if they do not,
what do they appear for? if they take cognizance of us and of our Affairs, and
yet do None Hurt, then they are not Devils though Spirits, for the Devil would
certainly do the utmost Mischief he could; on the contrary, those Spirits do
eminent good Services on sundry Occasions to Mankind; they must therefore be
supposed at least to be good and beneficent Beings, inhabiting somewhere in the
vast Expanse of Space which we call the Habitation of Spirits, or the invisible
World.

And this leads us by the Hand to that hitherto unintelligible thing called the
Second-sight; that is to say, that those good Spirits make themselves visible
to some particular Persons, and represent to them the Form or Shadow of this or
that Person that they have a mind to have seen; and even those Persons are
represented not to do them Hurt, but oftentimes to warn of approaching
Mischief, Death or Danger.

To what purpose should the Devil, who is never guilty of doing Good, except
with design of Evil, I say to what purpose should he foretell Evils awaiting
this or that Man, who cares not what Evil may or can befall him? to represent
to him things in Effigy, which shall yet come to pass in Reality? to give him
warnings of Evils in time, that he may avoid it? This is not like the Devil,
who is always seeking Man's Destruction. For Example:

The Second-sighted Highlander sees a young Lady with three Gentlemen standing
at her right Hand, intimating that they should every one of them in their Turn,
be her Husband and, however unlikely, this comes to pass: He sees the like
number of Women standing on the left hand of a Man, and he is directed by this
to know they shall all be his Wives; the very Faces and Habits of them are
described, and that so as to have them known; and this, though seeming at first
ridiculous, comes to pass. A Second-sight Man traveling on the Road, sees a
Man on Horseback at a great distance coming toward him; a great River being
between them; He says to his Friend that was with him, Ride forward to the
River Bank and you may chance save the Man's Life, for he will pass the Ford,
but will be driven away by the Water, and you may chance assist him to get out.

The Man to whom it was said, galloped up to the River's Brink and calls to the
Man on the other Side, bidding him not come forward, for the River at the Ford
was newly risen, and the Water or the Current would be too strong for his
Horse, adding that he would be in Danger: I know the Ford, says he, better than
you, mind your own Affairs, and with that comes on and enters the River, and
was accordingly driven away with the Current, and in great Danger; but the Man
sent to warn him was so careful, that running on the other side of the River,
he had an Opportunity to throw a Rope to him, which at last he took hold of,
and with great Difficulty is drawn to the Shore: and in that manner his Life
was saved.

Now, though it is true, that the Intelligence which this Man gave, was the
saving the Man's Life, yet they will have it, that this Man dealt with the
Devil: How else, say they, should this Man know that the other Man, a Stranger
to him, should be in Danger? But I answer, that the Devil has no Knowledge of
Futurity, and therefore this could not be the Devil, or from the Devil.

Besides, why should the Devil tell the Man, and warn him of the Danger of
passing the River? would he not much rather that the Man should have been
drowned, and as many more as he could?

It Is evident that in Witchcrafts and familiar Spirits, where the Devil acts by
the Agency of the Witch or Wizard, they are always famed for doing Mischief,
prompting to all manner of Evil, tormenting the particular People they are
empowered to act upon; murdering others, destroying Cattle, setting Fire to
Houses, Ships, Stacks of Corn or Hay; and in a word every thing hurtful, and
every thing hateful.

There is some Reason therefore certainly to distinguish between those Spirits
who are kind, and careful, and assistant to Mankind, and those that are
mischievous, destructive, and declare themselves Enemies to the comm^n Good:
The Last are evidently of Hell, the very Nature of the Devil appears in all
their Actions, and in the Ends and Aims of all the Emissaries they employ. What
contrary Judgment is to be made from contrary Effects, remains to be considered.

They both act, at least we understand them to act, by the Assistance of some
invisible Spirit; or, as it may be more properly expressed, the invisible
Spirits act in them and by them.

As to Witchcraft and Possession, that I think is plain, and needs no Discourse
upon it; it is known to be all from an evil Spirit, or in (...) English, from
the Devil: There is no Room to dispute i^; the Wretches employed acknowledge
it, ^^d the Hellish things they do discover it; so w^^ ^^ed say no more of
that, nor is it the Business ^^fore me.

But who is it that acts these other sorts of People? what Spirits inform them?
what secret Power opens their Eyes, to see things hid from the rest of Mankind?
I meet with many that have examined into this Matter of the Second-sight, and
who have discoursed with the People who are, what shall I call it? I can hardly
say, Blessed with it; neither do they call it so themselves; and all that I
have enquired of about it, seem only to hold up their Hands with a kind of
Astonishment at the thing, but can give no Account of it; they wonder at, but
do not understand it.

To me it is more a Wonder that it should not be understood; for it seems to be
nothing more or less than this: That supposing an invisible World, or World of
Spirits, as we have already been discoursing, and have in part granted; I say,
supposing there are such Spirits, and that they inhabit the invisible Regions;
how near to or remote from us, we know not, and that the Reality of their
Existence is certain, this Second-sight then is accounted for thus:

Two Ways those Spirits find to converse with Mankind; be it for Good or Evil,
that is a Question by it self; I say, they maintain an Intercourse with Mankind
two Ways.

First, By immediate, personal, and particular Converse with this or that Man,
and by such particular Methods as is only known to the Person; whether by the
Means of any Science, or Art, or otherwise, we know not; this we call Magic,
and the Man so conversing with them, we call a Magician.

Secondly, Or these Spirits, acting at a distance, render themselves visible,
and their Transactions perceptible to such and such particular Persons, and on
such Occasions as they think fit, and as they find needful; without any farther
Concern or Acquaintance with the Person, or communicating to him or them any
thing of the Reason or Nature of the Discovery, or any Knowledge of the Person
so making the Discovery; and this is what we foolishly enough call the
Second-sight.

Nor is this Notion in any thing inconsistent either with Reason or the Nature
of the thing; the Angel that stood with the flaming Sword in his Hand was seen
by the Ass of Balaam, and not seen by his Master. Our Savior in his glorified
State after his Resurrection was seen and conversed with in the openest and
freest manner imaginable by the two Disciples going to Emaus, and yet they knew
not who it was; and as soon as they knew him he became invisible to them again.

Now, suppose one of these invisible Inhabitants designs to make itself
visible, either to discover such or such an Evil at hand, to particular Men, or
to warn this or that Person of Mischief attending another; so that he may
immediately go and prevent it: Can we think it difficult for that Spirit to
make itself visible to this or that particular Man, and not to another? I think
there is nothing strange at all in it.

A Second-sighted Man going toward a Gentleman's House in Bradalbin, sees the
Gentleman, toward whose House he was going, riding on the Road with a
neighboring Gentleman, whom he also knew, attended with three Servants on Foot
and one on Horseback, six in all; then he suddenly sees a Troop of Highland
Robbers, forty or fifty in Number, rushing out of a Wood or some other Place
where they lay in Ambush, who surrounded the Gentlemen, dismounted and robbed
them, wounded the first Gentleman in the Arm, and killed one of the Servants.

The Man going forward to the Gentleman's House, just in the Court or Entry
before his House sees the Gentleman, with the other Gentleman his Friend,
mounting his Horse to ride abroad, and the Servants attending, just three in
Number, besides the Gentleman's Steward on Horseback.

He immediately speaking to one of the Servants, enquires which way their
Master was traveling; they answer him, that he is going to Innerlochy, upon
such and such Business. Which Way does the Lord intend to take? says the Man.
Such a Gat, says the Servant. I beseech his Honor, says the Man, that he go
not by that Gat, (that is to say, by that Road) for if he does, he will fall
into bad Hands.

The Servant tells his Master, and he calls the Stranger, and asks him what he
meant by telling him so. Sir, says he, I tell it for good, if your Honor
please to hearken to it. For if you go by that Gat, (mentioning the Road which
his Servant had named) you will fall in with the Robbers, who haunt those
Hills, and will be overpowered and mischiev'd.

What, says the other Gentleman that was to go with him, mocking at the
second-sighted Man, are ye one of those Fool-Bodies (a Scots Expression) that
they call SEERS? have ye been seeing a Vision this Morning? Pr'ythee, how many
were they, and what did they say to you?

An your Honor will gang, says the Man, gang your wa: But you will remember
what I have told you, when ye find it true.

The first Gentleman answered, Were they a Troop, say you? Yes, and't please
your Honor, says the Man.

Well, well, says the Gentleman, I shall go an a Troop of Devils were in the
Way. So the Man was flouted on all Hands, and went his way back; the two
Gentlemen went on, as they said they would, and were attacked and robbed; one
Servant killed, and one of the Gentlemen had his Arm broke with a
Pistol-Bullet, and was brought back the same Day to his own House.

What Spirit it must be, that could thus form an Appearance of things that
would come to pass, that we cannot determine; but supposing this Story to be
true in Fact, as many such have been, this had certainly one Token of a good
Spirit in it; namely, that it gave the Gentleman fair Warning to shun the
Danger that awaited him, and as it were, sent an Express to him from the
invisible World, which if he had not despised, he might have escaped, and
avoided the Danger.

Now, had this been the Devil, if I have any Notion of the Devil and of his
Nature, as well as Designs, his Part would rather have been to have sent an
Agent of his (...) the Troop of Robbers his Friends, to give them Notice, that
such a Gentleman, and such another with him, was coming upon the Way, and that
in such a Place they should be sure to meet and surprise them. He would have
been so far from warning the Gentlemen of their Danger, that he would have run
them into it with all the Artifice he was Master of; and I will not say that he
did not prompt the two Gentlemen above, to scoff and flout at the poor
second-sighted Man, and make a Jest of his Intelligence, as you have heard;
that so they might go on, and fall into the Danger they were warned against,
rather than go another Way, and avoid it.

Some of these informing Spirts think fit to appear themselves to these
second-sighted People, and not to others; and if the Author of the Description
of the Western Islands of Scotland may be credited, who also names not the
Circumstances only, but the Persons, they have not only abundance of these
second-sighted People there, but they have abundance of things discovered to
them in this Manner, and especially upon the approaching Death or Disasters of
any Person or Family. It is true, the Examples he brings are most of them
trifling, but we have many Relations in that Country generally received for
Truth, which are considerable; and diverse Examples are to be had, which are
new, and without Precedent; nothing is more frequent among them than that of
Foretelling the Death of any Person, some Examples of which I can give of my
own Knowledge.

I was at a Gentleman's House in this Town, near St. James's, and he happened
to have some Friends invited to his House that Day upon an Entertainment, the
Occasion of which I do not just now remember. Among the Guests at his Table was
an ancient Gentlewoman, and her Daughter a fine beautiful young Lady, and was I
think to be married the next Week, or within a very few Days: There sat
opposite to her another Lady, of what Country I do not remember, but she was a
Foreigner, and I think was a Dutch Woman, but appeared as a Person of good
Figure.

This Foreigner it seems came to the Gentleman's House, not as invited to the
Entertainment, but upon some Business of Consequence; Dinner being just ready
he asked her to stay, and told her they would dispatch their Business
afterward, and so led her in among the Ladies.

After Dinner, the Gentleman and this Foreign Lady withdrew to dispatch their
Affair, which was something relating to the Exchequer, where he had an Employ;
and in Discourse, she said to him, Pray Mr. -- who is that elderly Lady that
sat opposite to me? so he told her the Lady's Name; and that young charming
Lady is her Daughter, I suppose? says she. Yes, says the Gentleman. Poor Lady,
says she, I am very sorry for her, for that her Daughter is a most beautiful
Creature indeed, and I see she is very fond of her, it is a sad thing! What do you
mean? says the Gentleman. Why, says she, the young Lady will not live above a
Fortnight, and the poor Lady her Mother will almost break her Heart for her: I
am very sorry.

The Gentleman (who told me Story with his own Mouth) was extremely surprised
at what she said, and would fain have understood it as if she jested with him;
but she affirmed it seriously, and showed so much Concern at it, that he could
not carry it off for a Jest; then he asked her how she knew it? I see it upon
her, says she, I wish I could show it you, I tell you she is a dead Woman, all
the World cannot save her, for her Hour is come, ask me no more Questions. My
Friend told me the Story immediately; the Concern about it had almost frighted
him, and the Event answered it all; in about three Days the young Lady was
taken very ill, which turned to a Vomiting, and that to a Fever, and she died
on the very fourteenth Day afterward.

Another time walking in a Friend's Garden near London, there was a young
Gentlewoman walking in the next Garden, and there being but a low Wall between,
and a Mount on that Side where we were, we could see her walking with her
Father on one side of her, and a Sister on the other; said one Gentleman that
was with me, Who is the middlemost Person of those three? we told him she was
the Gentleman's Daughter who walked by her.

Has she been sick? said he. Now it was true, that the Lady had been very ill,
and was come into the Country for Air, and we told him how it was. Well, says
he, the Air will not recover her, for she will dye within a very few Days. I
earnestly pressed him to tell us how he knew it; he answered ambiguously a good
while, but as I pressed him with great Importunity, he told me seriously: Said
he, you cannot see it as I do, I wish I could not see things so as I do, but
her Face now at this Instant is to me exactly what you call a Death's Head;
that is, the Skeleton of a Head or Scull, and no other.

The thing was right, and the young Woman died within a Week after.

But to return to the Subject: As these Spirits we may suppose can make any
Representations of things visible, and that to whom they please, so it may be
supposed they can make themselves visible also, when, and to whom they please;
and this is attested by many Witnesses, and evidenced by several differing
Circumstances, of which I have by Enquiry met with a great many in my time.

In the Highlands and Islands, they tell you of a Spirit, which the poor
ignorant Country People call Browny, or Bronne, as it seems was the more
ancient Name they gave it, as the Norwegians have another, whom they call
Bielke.

Much Pains has been taken to examine who this Browny is, and whether he is a
good Spirit or a bad; but most of the Stories I meet with are so fabulous, or
trifling, or ridiculous, that I rather take the Appearance to be imaginary than
real; If it be real, it must be some low-priz'd Spirit, employed among the
meanest of People, and on the meanest Occasions, scarce worth naming, and yet
most of them rather for evil than good.

It is worth observing, that where these frequent Appearances are, and these
second-sighted Visionists, we rarely hear of any Paw-wawing or Conjuring, no
Black-Art-Men, very little Magic. I fancy it seems rather, that what Business
these invisible Agents have to do, and what Intercourse they carry on with this
World, they generally do it themselves, they are not managed by Art, or called
in to the Aid and Assistance of the Artists. But as they make things visible at
Pleasure, they want no Agents, they do their own Business their own way; and in
a word, they have no Magicians among them, none of those they call Cunning Men,
or that consult with the invisible World in behalf of others; it seems they
have no Occasion of such Men, they are not so fanciful, or overrun with
Vapors, as we are in this Part of the World.

Yet they have some Remains of Sorcery among them too, and particularly they
are strangely addicted to Charms. In the Isles of Orkney they use a Charm to
stop Bleeding, and they tell you it is as effectual as the strongest Stiptick,
be the Bleeding outward by a Wound, or inward by any breaking the Vessels,
Wrench or Strain, or by Distemper; and for this they have particular People,
whom they call Charmers. What Part of the Black Art or Magic these Charmers
practice, I know not, but it seems they perform it at a Distance, and without
seeing or knowing the Persons; only the Person who is in Distress by Bleeding,
sends his Name to the Charmer, and he sends the good Spirit he talks of, and
(as the Magicians say) converses with, and the Bleeding is stopped in a Moment.
This the Charmer, as they call him does, by repeating the Name of the Person
afflicted, to which he always adds some barbarous unintelligible Language of
his own; upon repeating which he sends the Messenger away, and the Cure is
perfected. Now this is much the same with the Magic of other Practisers; for
this they tell you is the Charmer's speaking to the good Spirit he converses
with, who immediately flies invisible to the poor distressed Patient, and works
the Cure.

These Charms are also of several Kinds, and for several Purposes; some to cure
humane Bodies, some to cure Cattle, some to quiet great Dogs, and prevent their
falling upon People as they go along, and some perhaps to prevent their Barking
when a Thief may attempt the House; that Part I suppose they will not call the
Work of a good Spirit. They have such a Variety of those things in other Parts,
as well as in our own Country, and especially in Ireland, in Norway, and in
some Parts of Germany, that it would be needless to give an Account of them,
and a little out of the way too in such a Work as this.

But I must come a little nearer home. These Arts are used more on this side
the World, as the rendering darker things visible, seems to be more the case on
that side; and as I am enquiring rather what our Magicians practice without the
Devil, than what the Devil or any other Spirit practices without the Magician;
I come to bring all these things down to your immediate Understanding.

We have been diving into Mysteries long enough, and been serious till perhaps
you are tired; for a little grave doings wearies us at this time of day; let us
see if the Subject will afford us any Diversion. The Age is witty beyond
measure, and not a little wicked too; but whence is it that we have no Magic
in our Wit? It is not many Years ago, since the sprightly Part of human Wit
relished with Mankind, and Men were bright by mere Inspiration; the good
Spirits, if such there are, dictated things of Value to the Minds of Men, they
conversed in the very Confines of the mysterious World, but without Raptures
and Agitations; they had the Sublime without the Infernal, the Humid without
the Horrid; they had the Fire without the Brimstone; they could laugh without
Baudy, and jest without Blasphemy; talk without Buffoonry, and vote without
Bribery; write without Pedantry, and read without Party.

But now, bless us all! how strangely is the Course of things changed; what
with good Spirits and bad Spirits, we do every thing without Spirit; we are all
Magic, and no Witchcraft, the Devil without the Devil; we laugh without a
Jest, and jest without Wit; we write without Sense, and read without Taste; we
are lewd beyond Whoredom, and devout beyond Religion; we preach without
Doctrine, are religious without Principles; pray without Doxology, and worship
without a God.

Now, how shall we do to find out the Magic of all this? it is certainly
brought about by some strange Fascination, some Devilisme that we feel, and
don't see. Here must be some Intercourse between us and the invisible World,
though I doubt it is some of the darker Part of it. Every Man seems to me to have
his Demon of a particular kind, proper and separate to himself, by which he
either governs himself, or is governed, I know not well which to call it; and
so he walks on in his own way, follows no body, and leads no body; but is a
Principle, a Doctrine, a Governor, nay a God to himself.

Formerly the Broachers of Errors, and particular Notions, had always their
Disciples and Followers; and they judged pretty much of the goodness or badness
of the Doctrine, whether Religious, Philosophic or Moral, by the Number and
Quality of the Followers they had; even the Jews did thus of our Savior, Have
any of the Elders or of the Rulers believed on him?

But now, God save us! so many Men, so many Maggots, Tot Homines, Tot Di... s;
every Man broaches his own Opinions, preaches them to himself, is his own
Convert; his Soul is the Disciple of his Fancy, and his Senses the Pulpit of
his Humor; as for other People, as he teaches no body, so he scorns to be
taught by any body, and bids God da... him, if he had not rather go to the
Devil, than not go to Heaven his own way.

Thus we live in a general Disguise, and like the Masquerades, every Man
dresses himself up in a particular Habit, not two appear a-like in the whole
Place; and that the Simily may be perfect, the Humor carries it on to the
minutest Part; as the Habits are not alike, so they are always particularly
remarkable for being directly opposite to the Person they cover; the Phlegmatic
dresses a la Sanguine, the Sober mimicks the Drunkard, the Chaste chooses to
dress a la Courtisane, the Atheist puts on the Religieuse, the Christian has
the Vest and the Turban, and the Quaker a Habit from the Theater.

In the Appearance of the superior Part it is much the same: Mimickry, and
opposite Capacities engross Conversation; the Beau turns Polemic, the Atheist
disputes Principles, the Actress practices Modesty, and the Pedant panegyricks
upon Wit: Fools write Satyr, as Clowns teach Manners; the Fops are the Men of
Weight; and since, by Accident, Wit and Sense appeared under the Title of the
TATTLERS, the eternal Clang of Tea-Table TATTLE has rung the Changes upon
Scandal, and set up for the universal Censors of Conversation.

And need we go any farther now for our Enquiries after Magic? could things
take such a Turn as this, without a general Converse with the World of Spirits?
will any Man tell me this could happen by the Nature of things, or even by the
Things of Nature? No, no: invisible Operations are acted from an invisible
World; the Magicians are in the right, all the great things they do could never
be done without an Intercourse with a superior Rank of Beings, be they
Infernal, or what other Devils you please to call 'em.

Take a few bright Doings for Examples. Upon what foot does the bright Lord --
sit every Morning over his Chocolate, talking upon all the Works of the
Learned, himself Unlearned to a Scandal? And how good-natured and well-manner'd
is the Age, that no body laughs at him till he is gone, or forbears it
afterward? How wise are his Remarks! how just his Reflections! when he talks
so much, and understands so little, that it may be truly said, no wise Man
talks like him. In which however his Lordship had this Happiness, that he chose
to take it for a Compliment, instead of a Satyr.

Sir Timothy Title Page is an admirable Gentleman; his Knowledge of the first
Leaf of every thing, completely covers his Ignorance of the Inside of any
thing. His just Character is so true a Picture of the Age, that you need go no
farther for a Reason why Nonsense bears such a Price, and the Booksellers Trade
is so much improved; seeing they buy most Books that read least, and that,
according to the famous Dr. Salmon, the having a good Library makes a Man a
Doctor. However, Sir Timothy no doubt understood the Names of Authors, and had
as good a local Memory as to the Editions of Books, as most Men that could not
read Latin. Nor was he ever out in his Judgment, that I have heard of, till an
unlucky Linnen-Draper asked him once concerning the Learned Author called
Crocus and Hinderlands are two particular sorts of coarse Germany Linen, which
are Imported by the Hamburgh Merchants, and ar^ known to every Draper.
Crocus upon Hinderlands, who the Knight presently owned, but unluckily forgot
that the Impression was made in Germany, and that the Books came over not in
Quires, but in Rolls, from Bremen and Hamburgh.

The Happy, Miserable, Generous, Cynical, Good-natured, out of Humor Bart. Sir
-- would be approved by Somebody, if he was not laughed at by Every body; he
might sometimes pass for pleasant, if he was not always surly, and to like
something, only that he dislikes every thing. He sets up for a Critic, with
this unhappy Addition to his Profession, that he alters every thing, and mends
nothing. How unanswerable a Demonstration is this extraordinary Genius of the
Influence of the Invisible World upon the Affairs of Mortals here? seeing if he
had less than a hundred thousand Devils in him, he could never carry on the
Practice of an universal Pedant, without being whipped out of Human Society for
a Scandal to the very ABC; and, to turn the Poet's Words a little awry for him,
Fellows, that never were heard or read of,
Would long ere this have wrote his Head off.
Roch. to Shadwel.

The Ladies afford us an infinite Variety, and to inspect their Share in the
Magic of this Age's Management, would take up a Volume by it self; In a word,
they are all Magicians, and I will not take upon me to say, that as Witchcraft,
generally speaking, has for some Ages been engrossed by the Sex, and the
Possession chiefly lay among the Matrons; that is to say, that none but old
Women were Witches: So now the same Sex seem to have engrossed the sacred
Sciences, and the Magic lies in ^hort all among the Ladies. Who shall enter
into ^he Description of it? The Magic of their Wit, O how Subtle! the Magic
of their Beauty, how ^xquisitely New-fashion'd! and the Magic of their
Tongues, how charmingly Loud! not to say Sono^us and Musical.

To make these Beauties of the Sex the more dif^usive in their brightest
Qualifications, and infi^itely more so than was possible in former Ages, we
have three new invented Colleges of Wit and ^ood Manners, where the Ladies
receive daily Ad^ition to their Ordinary Acquirements; and which ^e them
infinite Advantage over the past Days of ^eir Ancestors, (Grandmothers) and in
the fre^ent Access to which they must necessarily excel all that went before
them. These are the Tea-Table, the Assembly, and the Masquerade; at the first
they learn to be Lightheaded, at the second to be Light-hearted, and if at the
third they don't learn to be Light-heel'd, the Defect must lie somewhere else
than in the laudable Endeavors of those that set them up in so many Parts of
this newly-reform'd Nation; whose Endeavors for the public Good can never be
enough commended, either in Print or in Manuscript.

I have had some Thought to enquire among al^ the real Magicians of the Times,
and especially o^ the more Eminent Pretenders about Baldwin's-Gardens,
White-Cross-Alley, Old-Street, White-Chappel etc. and to get Intelligence from
the invisibl^ World concerning this Important Question; Whether any of the good
Spirits or bad Spirits, the white Devils or black Devils, or whatever Spirits
they were which formerly inspired the Roch^sters, the Dorsets and Drydens of
the last Ages, an^ yet in Being? And if they are, what has been the Occasion
that they have withdrawn the Spirit of Poetr^ from the English World? That not
only the Fire extinguished, and the genial Inspiration decayed but that the
relish of true Poesy is lost? That there is nothing performed that will bear
readin^ so no Readers that can taste a Performance! eve^ the exalted Merit of
the greatest Men is sung Notes without Music, Lines without Meanin^ Words
without Energy, Verse without Poetr^ and Poetry without Spirit.

I wonder sometimes that the great Men, or M^rather, who we see daily
Persecuted by the horr^^ Jingle (I think I should say Jangle) of their Rhi^ing
Expectants and Dependents, do not consider paying their Debts (I mean their
poetical Debts) kind, and give the poor versifying Devils now and the a Distich
(at least) in Balance of their volumino^^ Labors: if they paid but after the
rate of public Interest, but three per Cent. it would at least in time reduce
the Debt, and might in the mean time lay the Foundation of a good Sinking Fund.

If they do not think of this or some other way, (for Pensions will rather
increase the Number, and like Sweat-meats draw the Flies about them) I say, if
they do not think of some such way, they may I think justly swear the Peace
against the Assailants, and safely affirm that they go in Danger of being
Panegyrick'd to death by 'em. For in short, such writing is little less in my
Opinion than a poetical Assassination, and the Ministers are in Danger of dying
the Death of Edward V. and being smothered with Feather-beds.

Heavens deliver every honest Statesman from the insupportable Burden of
Panegyric, especially where it is attended with two Negatives, want of Money,
and want of Wit; the last makes the first lamentable, but the first makes the
last unsufferable; the first is piteous, the last is pitiful; the first is
afflicting, the last tormenting; the first importunate, but the last
impertinent: and as a wise Giver would give any thing to be delivered from
them, so a wise Receiver would rather decently starve, than to receive at the
Price of being a Plague to the bountiful Hand, and of being relieved, as the
unjust Judge relieved the Widow, to be rid of her.

As for the poetical Gentlemen themselves, I think it may be said of them with
respect to their Magic, as was said of a late Author of a Quadruple
Performance with respect to his Merit; namely, that there might be some in his
Poverty, but there was none at all in his Poetry.

In my Opinion, however, there is a great deal of Magic or Black Art, or call
it dealing with the Devil if you will, that Poetical Dregs should regale the
Age. If they were sent to the Druggists, and sold there for Emeticks, or made
up in Lotions, and given for Glisters, I should not doubt their effectual
Operation: But that they should be paum'd upon us for Wit, (By Jove, and all
the Hell-born Clan of Deities!) I think the Authors, like Coiners of
Counterfeit Money, should be drawn, hanged and quartered, for High Treason
against the Peace of their Sovereign Lord King Drama, his Crown and Dignity.

Where Is the Cadence, the Propriety, the Plot, the Genius, not to say any thing
of the Wit, in any one Play, written for these two, or three, or four last
Reigns? The Drums and Trumpets of the War, the Broad-sides of the Fleets at
Barfleur and La Hogue, together with the more terrible Clamours of the Street
Mobs, and all the and ceteras of Parties, Rabbles, Riots and Rebellions, quite
silenced the Muses, struck them Dumb, and I am told they could never make any
Music since, no not all Nine of them put together.

Now we talk of the Black Art, of Magic, of raising Spirits, of having an
Intercourse with superior Beings and the like; I think the Art of our Days, the
Magic of this Age, has been exercised to lay the Spirits, not raise them; to
sink the Devil of Wit, not lift him up; and if they have any Intercourse with
the invisible World, it must be among the inferior Beings, not the Superior, if
they know any Degrees among the Seraphick Train: Certain it is, the Impetuosity
of our Wit has for some Years been all let off in Squibs and Crackers, and so
like the lesser Volcano's of Lipary and Strombolo, have given Vent to the
Subterraneans of Sulphur and Nitre, while the Quantity was moderate. Whereas
when the luxuriance of Wit overpowered those smaller Eruptions, then Mount
Gibello ( Aetna) and Vessuvius roared aloud, and overrun all the Country with
a Torrent of liquid Fire. Where then is the Fire which once flamed in this
Hemisphere! Those Comets in Wit which blazed in their several Orbits are
disappeared, and when the Revolution of their Spirits shall be visible again,
what Astronomer, what Calculator can inform us? not all the Newtons, the
Whistons, or Halleys in the Nation can solve this Difficulty.

What Magician now can bring us to an Intercourse with those departed Wits, or
assist us in the bringing them to converse with us again? If there is an
Acquaintance with this World of Spirits, let us call upon the Sons of Art to
exert their Utmost, and bring those good Spirits again in play; and to restore
the Commonwealth of Wit, that the new-fashion'd Ribaldry, which the World now
relishes for Wit, and the Dogmatick, which, upon the strictest View of our
other Performances, the utmost Perfection of them, may receive their due
Censure, to the Satisfaction of all the true Masters of common Sense, and the
due Mortification of the voluminous Scriblers of the Age.

Pardon me then, from the strange turn of Affairs in these Times of ours; I
say, pardon me to look back again a little to the Conjurings and Black Art of
the middle Ages of Time, especially among those of them who did not pretend to
deal with the Devil, and it will presently bring us to an understanding of
things among our selves.

After the ancient Magicians had tired the World with their Tricks, and the
Devil began to fail them, except to those who kept an immediate Correspondence
with him by way of Familiar, there came up a new sort of Magic, as well as a
new sort of Magicians; the Case was this.

The People it seems began to discover that the Magicians having left off that
useful and valuable Study of Science, called the Knowledge of Nature, the
Improvement of Art, and the Instruction of Mankind in Wisdom and Virtue, had
turned their Hands to a new and inferior Study; that they consulted Demons
and Evil Spirits, that they qualified themselves by hellish Correspondences to
do Mischief, instead of doing Good; and that in short they dealt with the
Devil, making themselves the Terror instead of the Blessing of Mandind.

When this came to be their Character, no wonder the People began to be afraid
of them, to shun and avoid them as a kind of Devils themselves; so that except
a few, who kept up their Reputation by a closer and cunninger Manage, the
People withdrew their Reverence from the Magicians, till at last the Devil was
fain to shift Hands too, and act by other Instruments, or he would have
endangered his Kingdom in the World. So Monarchs, when their Politics grow
stale,
Change Measures, and by Novelty prevail.


Upon this Change of the Devil's Measures, he frequently found Reasons to
change some of his Instruments too, and thus from the Magi, he turned over to
the Clergy; and so, as I hinted in its Place, the Augurs, the Auruspices, and
the Oracles came in play.

Now it happened to Satan, as it has frequently happens to other mighty Princes
and Tyrants in the World; that finding his Servants and Statesmen cease to be
Popular, cease to be the darlings of the People, as they used formerly to be;
he found also a necessity to shift Hands, dismiss his Tools and Instruments,
and take up with others. So Philip II. had, as was said, eleven new Ministers
and Governors in the Netherlands; but no new Management; if any of his Agents
and prime Ministers grew odious to the People, he valued not disgracing them,
recalling them, exposing them, and turning them out; but took care, that when
another Governor came, the Government should be the same. And when the Prince
of Parma, who by his Conduct recovered the whole Low Country Possessions to the
Crown of Spain, would have preserved them by his Prudence, when he had gained
'em by his Valor; the Spanish Councils, which were all for Tyranny and for
Cruelty, chose to discourage that gallant Prince, rather than not carry on
their old absolute Dominion. So every Governor there, if the People complained,
was sure to be turned out, and yet the next was obliged to pursue the same
Tyranny, 'till they were petitioned out, as others had been before them. --
When Ministers of State
Cease to be popular, they know their Fate.
The Crafty Tyrant has no more to do,
But sacrifice a Favorite or two.
The Mobb are easily cajoled, and then
He changes not the Mischiefs, but the Men.


By this Method, as I say, the Devil pursued his Interest in the World; When
one Generation grew out of Use, out of Fashion, and stale, he took to another;
when the Augurs grew stale, when the Cheats of the Oracles were exposed, when
the Priests could no more predict by the Entrails, he sets his Wits to work to
find out other Ways and Means, for the carrying on his Game: as,

1. By a kind of Astrological Magic, in which he managed with a great deal of
Subtilty and Art, bringing the Stars and planetary Influences into Play; and by
an unpracticed Subtilty, the Art was then carried on with Spell and Charm, by
Words cut in Metals, and in Stones, divining by the Byril, by the Amathyst, by
the Luster of the Emerald, and the Ruby, and by all the old Superstitions
brought into a new Rule of Practice. This was called the Talismans; or the
Sympathetick Conjuring-stone.

It would be too tedious for this Work, to give a long History of the Delusions
and Cheats which the Devil put upon Mankind for three or four hundred Years
Practice of this kind in the World. I shall satisfy my self only to let you
see, by way of Abrigment, what these Talismans were, and what the Authors of
them pretended; take the Description of them, as collected from the best
Authors, thus.

' Talismans, or Muthalsans, was the Name of certain Magical Figures graved
upon Stones or Metals, whereof the Anonymous Author of a Book, entitled, the
Talismans Justified, gives this Description. The Talismans, says he, is the
Seal, the Figure, the Character or Image of a Celestial Sign, Constellation, or
Planet, graved on a Sympathetick Stone, or on Metal correspondent to the Star.
The Effects which were attributed to these Figures are altogether mavelous;
it is said, for Example, that the Figure of a Lion engraven on Gold, while the
Sun is in Leo, preserves those from the Stone that carry this Talisman about
them; and that that of a Scorpion made under the Sign Scorpio, secures from the
Wounds of that Animal. For to give Beauty and Strength of Body, they grave the
Figure of Venus, on the first Face of Libra, Pisces or Taurus: to purchase
Honors and Dignities easily, they grave the Image of Jupiter, that is, a Man
having the Head of a Ram, on Silver, or on a white Stone; and he that carries
this Talisman about him will see (say they) surprising Effects: To be
successful in Merchandise and Gaming, they represent Mercury on Silver; to be
courageous and victorious, they engrave the Figure of Mars on the first Face of
Scorpio; to procure the Favor of Kings, they represent the Sun in Likeness of
a King, sitting on a Throne, with a Lion at his Side, in very fine Gold, in the
first Face of Leo. In the Number of Talismans are ranked the Palladium of Troy;
The Roman Bucklers called Ancilia; The fatal Statues of Constantinople, for the
Preservation of that City: The Statue of Memnon in Egypt, which moved and gave
Oracles, as soon as the Sun was risen: The Statue of the Goddess Fortune, that
Sejanus had, which brought good Luck to those that possessed it: The brazen
Fly: Virgil's golden Leach, which hindered the Flies from entering Naples, and
destroyed all the Leaches of a Well in that City: The Figure of a Stork, which
Apollonius set up in Constantinople, to drive away these Animals: The Statue of
a Knight, which served that City as a Preservative against the Plague: The
Figure of a Serpent in Brass, which hindered all Serpents from entering into
the same Place; whence it happened, that Mahomet, soon after the taking of
Constantinople, having broken the Teeth of that Serpent, a prodigious Number of
Serpents came upon the Inhabitants of that City, but without doing them any
hurt, because all their Teeth were broke, as were those of the brazen Serpent.

' Talismans are distinguished into three sorts, viz. Astronomical, Magical,
and Mixed: The Astronomical are referred to Signs of Celestial Constellations,
which are engraven with other Figures, and some intelligible Characters: The
Magical have extraordinary Figures with Superstitious Words, and the Names of
unknown Angels: The Mixed are composed of Signs and barbarous Names, but which
are neither superstitious, or of unknown Angels. They bury them in the Earth,
or in the Squares of public Places, or they may carry them about them. Some
have believed that Apollonius Tyanaeus was the first Author of the Talismans,
but others are of Opinion that the Egyptians were the Inventers of them, which
Herodotus seems to insinuate in the second Book of his History, when he says,
this People having first of all given Names to the twelve Celestial Gods, did
likewise engrave Animals on Stones. The Inhabitants of the Island of
Samothracia made Talismans with Gold Rings, which had Iron set in them instead
of Precious Stones: Petronius speaks of it, when he says, that Trimalcio
carried a Gold Ring set with Stars of Iron. The Gods, which they called the
Gods of Samothracia, were those that presided over the Science of the
Talismans, which is confirmed by the Inscriptions of those three Altars whereof
Tertullian speaks. Before the Pillars, says he, there are three great Altars,
dedicated to three sorts of Gods, which they call Great, and Mighty, and
Strong, and which are believed to be those of Samothracia. Apollonius makes
mention of three Divinities, to whom he joineth Mercury, and relates the
barbarous Names of those Gods, which it was prohibited to reveal, (viz.)
Axierus, Axiocerso, Axiocersus and Casmilus, which he says, are Ceres,
Proserpina, Pluto and Mercury. The Egyptians, from whom the greatest Part of
other People have learned the Secret of those Rings, had also other Talismans
for all Parts of the Body. And perhaps it is for this that we find so many
little Figures of Gods, Men and Animals, in the ancient Tombs of this Country.
The most ancient Talismans are made upon Plants, Branches of Trees, or Roots.
Josephus speaks of them in the eighth Book of his Antiquities, and attributes
the Invention of them to Solomon. They apply, says he, to the Nose of the Sick
possessed by the Devil, a Ring, wherein a Root was set instead of a Stone:
Solomon had taught it in his Works. This Historian says, that he has even seen
the Effects; and that a Jew, Eleazer by Name, cured many possessed in this
manner, in the Presence of the Emperor Vespasian. The ancient Egyptians
believed, that certain Stones cut out into Beetles, had considerable Virtues to
procure Strength and Courage for those that carried them about with them;
because, says Aelian, this Animal has no Female, and is an Image of the Sun.
They put likewise sometimes the Figures of Frogs in Talismans, and Pliny
testifies that if we believe those that improve that Science, a parcel of Frogs
ought to be esteemed more significant in a Commonwealth, than a body of Laws.
Aelian says, that those of Egypt took a Reed, which preserved them from being
devoured by Adders or Crocodiles of the Nile, and that they are the Emblem of
Wisdom and Prudence.

' Tzetzes relates, that a Philosopher put a Stop to a Plague at Antioch, by a
Talisman of Stone, wherein there was the Head of Charon graved. Apollonius made
use of the Figures of Storks and Serpents, and the Egyptians commonly made use
of the Figures of Serapis, of Canopus, God of the Egyptians, of the Spar-Hawk
and Asp, against the Evils which might come from the four Elements, Earth,
Water, Air and Fire.



The modern Talismans are not so curious as the ancient, and we may know them
by the Characters, which are purely Arabic, Turkish, or of other Oriental
Tongues. The principal Authors that have treated on this Subject in the latter
Ages, are Camilli Leonardi, who has writ the Mirror of Stones. Geber, Bacon,
and Paracelsus, who have treated of Astrological Magic, and of the Sympathy of
Stones, Metals and Planets. Gaffarel has composed a Book on this Subject;
entitled, Unheard Of Curiosities. And Agrippa has treated of it in his Occult
Philosophy. Gregory of Tours relates, that the City of Paris had been built
under a Constellation, which preserved it from Conflagration, Serpents and
Mice; and that a little before the Fire that happened in the Year 588, they had
found in raking up an Arch of a Bridge, the two Talismans Preservers of that
City, which were a Serpent and a Mouse of Brass. Some have derived the Arabic
Name Talisman from the Greek (...), which signifies Preservation. We will not
spend time to show the Vanity of the Talismans, for we live in an Age that is
not much addicted to such Superstitions.

But these things went but a little way, compared to what followed; for now the
Pagan Worship declining, the World began to see with other Eyes; the Devil lost
Ground every where, and the Christian Religion spread it self insensibly, and
in a surprising manner, especially over all the Eastern and Northern Parts, as
into Asia, and into Germany and France; and now it behoved the Devil to take
new Measures also.

Nor was he at all at a Loss, for he knew his Method presently, and that was to
put on the Face of Religion, rank in with the sanctified Part of the People, to
wit, the Clergy, and draw them into his Scheme, as he had done the Pagan
Priests before.

Upon this he took up the Tonsure, shaved himself for a Monk, or a Monkey,
which you please, dressed himself up in the Habit, put on the sacred Vestments,
and got presently into Orders. The Popes quickly fell in with him: Pope
Sylvester II. gave him Institution and Induction, and from this time forward he
quitted the Astrologick, and set up an Ecclesiastic Magic in the World: The
Success has been wonderful, beyond even his own Expectation; for it must be
confessed, when the Priests first began a Correspondence with him, they
out-stript him in their Speed, for they run even before they were sent. St.
Francis and St. Ignatius out-did all the Arts of infernal Magic that ever were
known, or in use in the World, and with his Assistance did more to establish a
Race of Inchanters and Church Magicians in the World, than the Devil himself
could have expected.

This served his Interest effectually on one Side of the World, that is to say,
for Europe especially, and all the Western World: And Confucius drew out
another Plan of Ecclesiastic or rather Philosophic Magic for him in China
and Japan. But he was still at a Loss for all the rest of Asia and Africa,
which we might then call the middle Part of the World; and which at that time
was ripe for any kinds of Enthusiasm or Church Magic, let it be almost what it
would.

Satan, who always sees his Opportunity, and has no want of Vigilance to lay
hold of it, saw the Occasion, but could not readily find out a Handle. He could
not presently think of a Method, 'till at length the industrious Devil found
out the Contrivance of setting up the Unity against the Trinity, the House of
Ishmael against the House of Isaac, the Race of the Bondwoman against the Race
of the Freewoman; the Circumcision against the Baptism; and the Magic of
Mahomet's Pidgeon to mimick the Christian Dove.

Having thus settled the Scheme, he found out a Tool fit for his Purpose; a
fierce ignorant Arabian, bold, subtle, cruel, and merciless; to Men insolent,
and audacious to Heaven; who by this mere Magic of Enthusiasm, backed by the
Sword and Spear, set up the boldest, the grossest, and the most senseless of
all Impostures that ever was in the World; and which yet at this Time, and for
above a thousand Years past, has strangely triumphed over the Christian World,
has spread itself over Asia and Africa, from the utmost Islands of India East,
to the utmost Corner of Africa to the West; and it was, 'till within a few
Years past, Master of a fourth Part of Europe besides.

Such is the Force of Ecclesiastic Magic, and how far it is gone besides this
to break into the Ecclesiastic Affairs of the Christian World, is not hard to
describe, though it would take up too much Room, especially at the Close of this
Work, to enquire into the Particulars.

What a continued Series of Ecclesiastic Magic has been acted among the Romish
Clergy, and in the whole Papal Hierarchy! Even Popery itself seems to me to be
one entire System of Antechristian Magic; its Constitutions are all Sorcery
and Witchcraft; they prevail upon Sense by Nonsense, upon the Head by the Tail,
upon Zeal by Enthusiasm; and upon the Christian Doctrine by the Doctrine of the
Devil.

How could it be possible that Mankind, blinded by their own Obstinacy, could
sink their Reason to erect Notion; establish Fraud and Cheat, against Christian
Sincerity and Plainness; make Men refuse to see when their Eyes are open;
worship Priests in the Name of God, and set up Darkness in the room of Light;
if they were not bewitched with the Magic of Hell, and under the entire
Management of the Devil?

It would be worth while here to draw a Table of Proportions, and let us see
how much more fatal to the World this Ecclesiastic Magic of Popery, inclusive
of a few other spiritual Delusions and Enthusiasms, has been, than all the
Magic of Paganism, and all the Conjurations of Hell were before.

That Men should renounce the Idols, and then worship the Priest; condemn
Oracles, and enquire of the Devil; cast off the Baals, the Jupiters, and the
Saturns of the Pagans, and set up a Breaden God that they should first Worship
and then devour!

That whole Nations should relinquish the glorious Host of Heaven, the much
more rational Gods of their Forefathers, and empower every Priest to make a
God for 'em with half an Ounce of Meal! The Clergy were indeed in the right of
it so far, that they, like the Silver-smiths of Ephesus, when they had once
drawn the People into this Magic of a Worship, took care to engross the Art of
making Gods all to themselves.

Nor was it the least Part of the Magic of this Contrivance, that they should
make eating their God be a Part of their most solemn Idolatry, I cannot call it
Worship; that when they had made a Bushel or two of Gods, and been paid for
'em, the People that came to Church might eat 'em up, and the Priests be richly
set to work to make more.

If ever the Talismans of the Greeks, the Augurs and Auruspices of the Romans,
the Lap-dog of Venutius, or Mahomet's Pidgeon could outdo these Delusions of
Church Magic, I am quite mistaken and shall be ready to acknowledge it.

That Men should sin against God, and then ask the Priest Pardon for it; as if
a Man should commit Treason in England against the King, and then go to a
Chimny-sweeper, or a Black-guard-boy, to be pardoned for it: That a Man shall
go to a Shopkeeper in Cheapside to buy a License to commit Whoredom, or to rob
upon the Highway, and stock-job Heaven in Exchange-Alley by Puts and Refusal.

If ever there was any Magic in Egypt or Arabia like this, History is
entirely silent in it, nor had the Devil ever Craft enough to teach his
Disciples any such Art. What Sums of Money would the Heathen Priests have
raised if their Gods had took Bribes as ours do, and Pardons for Sin, and
License to sin, had been to be bought and sold at the Church Doors, as it is
with us?

But these are merry Times, and the Church Magic out-does all the Conjurings
of the Ancients, as much as Madam Violante out-does a common Stage-Tumbler, or
as an Hospital thorough-bred Surgeon does a Mountebank Tooth-drawer.

As to our religious Magic, the Enthusiasms and Heresies that reign among us,
I think we must deal with them just as their Maker seems to have done, let them
alone, give them up to their own Magic, and to their own Delusions, to believe
the Lies of their own making. For as those holy Cheats are the easiest to be
discovered, they are the hardest to be cured, because they are generally
supported from this invisible World of Spirits, these mighty good superior
Beings, that is to say, the Devil, with whom the Fathers of these religious
Frauds have so intimate Acquaintance, that the Mischiefs they spread, and the
Confusions which they bring every Day into all our religious Establishment, are
too deep rooted for all the Skill and Application of the more religious World
to cure.

But I must observe one thing here, which is necessary to your Illumination,
and though it should bring me back and draw me in again to the Sin of Gravity,
which the Town hates; yet venturing the general Displeasure, I say it is
necessary to take Notice here, that these religious Effluvia of Hell, which at
present make such Confusion of Principles among us, are so demonstrably
embraced by the present Magi, the Sages, the Conversers with good Spirits, the
Rosicrucians, and Masters of the Occult Sciences, and all the other Pretenders
to Supernaturals, and secret Illuminations; that they leave us no more room to
doubt but they are all Natives of the same Climate, bred up in the same
Country, carrying on the same Interest, and will share at last in the same
Destruction; when the Tares and the Wheat shall be skilfully and critically
separated, as we are well assured they will be.

This indeed stands fair against all the modern Teachers of the Rosicrucian
Whimsies, and the Doctrine of Spirits, viz. that None of them apply to the
Establishment of true Religion. On the contrary, they establish, or strive to
establish, old Errors, and continually broach new; they preach another
Doctrine, and their Notions, were they not exposed by their own Extravagancies,
and Enthusiastic Brains, would expose themselves, being a kind of religious
Ramble, a confused and a confounding Heap of Nonsense: The poor People would
otherwise be in Danger of being wheedled into their Delusions, but this
unravels all their dark Schemes, and tends to show us the Cheat of all the
rest, and to convince us that it is all a Black Art, all a Diabolick, a mere
Emanation of Hell.

Thus all their Magic detects and exposes it self, all the high and blustering
Bombast of Sacred, Divine, Excellent, and such like, discover whence they come;
the Pretenses to Illuminations, Communication, or Intercourse with Spirits, and
an invisible World, appear to be Pretenses, and no more; Their Dreams of Aerial
Substances and Spirituous Bodies, the Inhabitants of the Elements, the refined
incorporeal Essences; their Abstracts of Quintessence, and a thousand more
which they put upon the World; I say, they all smell of the Fire and Brimstone,
are born of Hell, their invisible World is evidently to be understood the
Infernal World, and their Study of the Sacred Sciences, is neither more or
less, to speak in the common Dialect, than dealing with the Devil; there it
begins, and there it must and will end.

What else means their Philosophic Cant of mingling the supernatural Essences,
their confounding the Terms of Religion and things Divine, with the Dreams and
the Jargon of their unsignifying Language? loosing the Name of GOD, Devil,
HEAVEN, Hell, in the Cant of their Trade, and the labored Expressions of
sacred Flame, mental Fire, immortal Spirit, Perfection, Corruption,
illuminating Genius, and a vast Throng of Words, tending to amuse the Foolish,
and distract the Wise; tending to destroy Religion and all the solid
Establishment of Heaven, whether for the Felicity of the Just, or Punishment of
the Wicked?

Had their Magic any Tokens of a truly Divine Institution, of a heavenly
Original, and was this demonstrated by its confirming, and conforming to the
Principles of either Natural or Revealed Religion, something might be said for
it; or was its Tendency to establish, not bewilder the Understanding, and to
fix the Knowledge of the true God in the Minds of Men; was it qualified to
establish our Faith in divine Illuminations, and truly to direct our Worship
and Homage to Him, encouraging at the same time Peace, Justice, Humility, and
every Christian Virtue; Were this the Case, we should not dispute with them the
Converse of Spirits between us and the invisible World, the Spirits uncas'd and
fled from hence, with the Spirits yet embodyed, by an invisible and
inconceivable Communication. But leave it as it is, a Matter indifferent to us
at present, till it comes to be understood better when we arrive there.

CHAP. V.
Of the Magic of the present Time, as it stands stripped in the last Chapter,
from all the Pretenses of the Magicians, and the Delusions of Hell; of what
Length it has gone, or is like to go, in deluding Mankind; what the Magicians
can do, and that they really have now no Converse with the Devil at all: So
that the Art being at an End, the History comes to an End of course.

HAVING, in the last Chapter, brought down this Idol called Magic to its true
Original, stripped it of all the Masquerade Dresses, jested a little about it,
and at last laid the Bastard at the Devil's Door, who is the true Father of it;
One would think so Barefaced an Imposture should be able to appear no longer
in the World, that it would be hissed off the Stage, and that the very Boys and
Girls would throw Stones and Dirt at it in the Street.

But the Case is quite otherwise, and in spite of Contradiction the Devil goes
on his own way; if this or that Nation, or Country, or People drop him, and
refuse him, he goes to another; like a true Pedlar, if he is answered No at one
Door, he knocks at the next. If he sells Counterfeits, and is called Cheating
Knave at one House, he calls himself honest Man at another. The Devil is never
balked, but carries on his Game, in spite of all the Repulses he meets with,
nay in spite of Heaven i^ self.

Besides, he is never at a loss for Disguises, and like a Lady at the Ball, if
she happens to have been known in her Masquerade Habit Yesterday, tomorrow she
gets another that shall be a more perfect Disguise. If he happens to be blown
here, he is concealed there. If he is discovered and known for a Devil today,
you shall mistake him again, and take him for a Saint or Magician of another
kind tomorrow.

Nay, and after all, even where he is known to be the Devil, and finds he
cannot be disguised any longer; yet he has his ways with him, to win and please
you, and draw you in, at least to bear with him, seeing he does you no harm.
Thus, do you not see the Crowd about the Puppet-Show, and do they not laugh,
and halloo, and appear infinitely pleased with the grossest and simplest of all
Cheats; and that though they know them to be Cheats and Delusions, and that they
are but mere Puppets?

So our Magicians, though you know them to be Cheats, though you know that
notwithstanding all their Pretenses, they really deal with the Devil; yet we
have People among us that would be content, and deal with them upon that very
Score. I want to know, says the jealous-headed Countryman, who has made me a
Cuckold, and don't tell me of the Cunning Man going to the Devil for
Information. Why, I Would go to the Devil my self, if I knew where he was, rather
than not find it out.

Nay, though you convince them, that even in the worst of it all, the Fellow is
not so wicked as they think he is, or as he makes of himself, that he knows
nothing of the Devil any more than they do, but only cheats them, and persuades
them to believe he knows something, when indeed he knows nothing of the matter,
yet still they will go to him; Such an old Woman, or such a young Fool, told
'em, that they had been with the Cunning Man, and they will go too; nor is it
possible to persuade them against it, till they have thrown their Money away,
and come back ashamed.

So that the Delusion still goes on. A young Girl has two Sweet-hearts, and she
goes to the Cunning Man to know which of those two shall have her. A young
Fellow has lost his Mistress, and must know who Courts her. Another has lost a
Cow, and away he goes to the Cunning Man to know who has stole her. The crafty
Sh^^er, like the Devil's Oracles of old, gives doubtful Answers, satisfies no
Body, and yet pleases every Body. He sends the Girl home with an old Wife's
Tale; bids her lay two Sticks across under her Pillow, and the first she
dreams on will be the Man. The poor Girl's Head runs upon the Affair of a
Husband, it is no wonder she should dream of one of them, and it may be the
right, as well the wrong, so that it is an even Lay. But the Conjurer is right;
and to be once right, secures him the Custom of all the young People in the
Country; whereas, if he is out, that is forgotten, and does him no Harm.

This is the Devil's low-priz'd Game, and he carries it on a great way; and as
the Mountebank oftentimes gets more Money than a licensed Physician, and the
Quack than the Doctor; so the Devil gets more Clients than the Counselor, and
his Agents have as much Practice as the Lawyers, and perhaps upon as honest a
foot too as some of them.

I should enquire a little here, and expose the weak Doings of those Cunning
Men, and how they delude the poor People; but it is of no great Use. For as it is
one of the simplest things of its kind in the World, and by which the poor
People are the most imposed upon, yet it is perhaps one of the last Delusions in
the World that they will be cured of; nor can all the Cunning Men of a higher
Kind in the whole World reason them out of it. They will leave the Surgeon for
the Mountebank, the Physician for the Quack, the Parson for the Conjurer, and
God for the Devil. A few short Tales upon this Part may perhaps illustrate the
Speculation, and show you the Force of Fraud, though I doubt it will not do much
toward a Cure.

A Magician giving out his Bills, and boasting of his mighty Perfomances, went
down in the way of his Calling, as other Tradesmen do, to Bristol Fair, and
there he did Wonders, told Fortunes, calculated Nativities, looked in the Girls
Hands, peeped in their Eyes, talked broad things to them to make them blush;
and then guessing from their Color how things stood with them, and by a
thousand cross Questions, first crept into their Cases, and then told them for
a mighty Discovery, what they had discovered to him with their own foolish
Tongues that very Minute.

Among the rest of the young Lasses that came to him with their Grievances,
there comes one with that laudable Question; if in Love, whether I shall marry
the Man or no? She was so Modest that she could not tell the Doctor her Case
her self, but she brings it him in Writing; and instead of stating the Question
as above, If in Love, she had written it, if Courted.

The Doctor (for they are all Doctors) looks upon the Paper, and seeing it a
Woman's Hand; It Is your own Writing, Child, says he, I suppose, you would not
trust any body else with it; she curtisy'd, and said Yes: so he reads it out,
If in Love, whether the Man will marry me or no? The Girl colored and said,
it is not so, you don't read it right, Sir. Well Child, says he, I Will read it
right, by and by; come hither Sweetheart, pull off thy Glove, let me see thy
Hand; so he takes her by the Hand, looks in the Palm, cries Hum, very well,
all is right there; then he feels her Pulse, Ha! says he, with a kind of Start,
is it so? well, come Child, says he, sit down in this Chair, I Will tell thee a
Story: so the Girl, after a few Courtesies and slight Refuses, sits down; and
the Doctor begins his Story: There was, says he, a young Woman, a very pretty
cleaver Girl, as you are, my Dear, (and with that he feels her Pulse again)
came to me the other Day just with such a Question as this, and after I had a
little Talk with her, and feeling her Pulse, as I do yours, my Dear, (and then
he felt her Pulse again, and started again Ha, says he, it is so indeed, and
then goes on) I by the Help of my Art, which is the most certain Line for the
Discovery of hidden Truth directed by Nature, and by the Intercourse of
invisible Beings, which inform me of every thing proper to be known, and for
the Service of those who come to be assisted with my exalted Genius, I say by
my infallible Judgment I found the poor Girl had concealed something from me,
which indeed she ought not to have done.

For by giving me a wrong Account of her Case, how should I give a direct
Answer? were it not that I, who am assisted by the good Spirits, the
Inhabitants of the superior World, am not to be deceived.

So I said to her, Sweetheart, thou have concealed the chief Part of thy Case;
is there not something more in this Question than thou have acknowledged? She
made me no Answer at first, till I being illuminated by the bright Spirit of
the fifth Region of Alahamed irwishah, and by all the assisting Lights of the
high exalted Atmosphere, (Here the Doctor run over a great many Greek Words,
which almost frighted the poor Girl whom he held fast by the Hand or Wrist all
the while) I, said he, that could not be deceived, told her in plain Words, Why
thou have concealed from me that thou art with Child; at which, continues he,
the guilty poor Girl having nothing to say, and being not able to deny what she
found was revealed to me by my never-failing Intelligence, confessed to me,
that it was so; and I having Compassion for her Circumstances (for she had been
deluded) promised her my powerful Assistance to bring the Knave to marry her,
which is now happily done to her infinite Satisfaction. All this while he held
her by the Wrist, and looked frequently in her Face.

By the first he discerned an unusual Fluttering and sudden Disorder in her
Pulse, occasioned by the Story being well enough told, and the first Girl's
Behavior mimick'd to the Life; by looking in her Face, he saw her Color come
and go; and when he talked of his knowing every thing from the superior Beings
and the invisible Word, he saw she was in the utmost Confusion.

Now my Dear, says the Doctor, raising her by the Hand out of the Chair, give
me Leave to look a little farther; so leading her to the Window, he gently
lifted up one of her Eyelids, then he gave two Hums and said, Pretty well
there. The Girl all the while blushed and colored, and changed now red, and
then pale; a little Conjuration indeed would tell the Doctor how it was with
her.

Now, my Dear, says he to the Girl, you would do well to be so free with me as
to let me know your whole Case, if you think fit to trust me with it, and for
that, I am as secret as Death; you need not be under the least Concern about
that, for it is my Business, I am trusted with the Secrets of Princes, and am a
Counselor of Counselors; and if I should betray any body, it would be a
double Offense, neither would the invisible Spirits communicate the Secrets of
People's Affairs to me if they did not judge me faithful, therefore you may
trust me with the utmost Safety, Child, adds he, I shall never divulge any
thing that you commit to me.

The Girl was as mute as a Fish, and said not one Word to him, but blushed and
colored as red as the Gills of a Turkey-Cock when he is angry.

Come, my Dear, says he, perhaps you cannot express your self freely, so I will not
press you any farther; but sit down till I consult the good Spirits again, who,
as I told thee, are always ready to assist distressed Innocence; and who will
not fail to give me a full Information of your Case, and Directions also for
your Good; so that I do not need you should make any kind of Confession of your
Case to me. I shall be able presently to tell it you directly without your
Help; so pray sit but two or three Minutes, and I Will come to you again.

Having said this to her, he offered to go away, at which the Girl fell a
crying vehemently; and the Doctor, too cunning not to take hold of it, and
satisfied that he had hit the Mark, stopped, and came back to her: Well, my Dear,
says he, I see how it is, and I had partly Intelligence of it before, as you may
easily perceive; But, come Child, adds he, let us see, what is to be done for
thee? She cried all the while; but when he said, What Is to be done, she said,
but could not speak it plain for crying, That Thomas would -- and there she
stopped. I understand thee Child, says he, that I should make Thomas marry
thee, is it not? YES, says she, and blubbered most sadly.

Well, says the Doctor, but how far are you gone with Child? let me know that,
and then I Will tell thee whether I can bring it to pass or no. With that he laid
his Hand gently upon her Belly. I doubt thou art far gone, says he: About four
Months, says the Girl. Well, Child, says he, come to me again Tomorrow in the
Afternoon, and I Will tell thee what is resolved in thy Case by the Powers who
assist my never-failing Art. So taking a Crown of the Poor Girl for letting him
pump the Truth out of her own Mouth, and getting the Reputation of a most
eminent Magician and Man of Art, he dismissed her for that time, letting her
know that if he undertook to bring Thomas to marry her, he should expect a more
considerable Acknowledgement.

In a word, he took Thomas's Name, and where he lived, and found Ways to manage
Thomas so well, that Thomas came to him in two or three Days to get rid of a
Ghost, that haunted him. The Case was this: The Doctor had an Implement which
he carried with him upon the Occasion of his Business; a sub^le, oily-tongu'd,
young Fellow, who was a Jack-of-all-Trades, here he was a Juggler, there a
Tumbler, Today a Conjurer, at one time a Ghost or Apparition, at another a
Devil or Spirit, and so acted all Shapes and Postures that could be desired.

The Doctor having had his Intelligence from the Girl where Thomas lived, and
finding very happily that he lodged in a public House not far off, being
Servant to a Tradesman, who not having Room for him in his House, paid for a
Lodging for him in the Alehouse; I say, having gotten this Handle, he sends
his Ingineer to lodge in the same House.

This Fellow finds an Opportunity to come so far acquainted with Thomas, as
always to know whither he went, and upon what Errands and Business: and the
first Time that Thomas was sent of an Errand (very happily for him) was to a
Village, about a Mile out of the City, and in the Evening.

As Thomas was going to this Village, this subtle Rogue gets behind a Wall in
his Way, and with a hollow dead kind of Voice calls him three times by his
Name; and immediately conveyed himself away into a Field of Corn, where, had
Thomas suspected him, he could not have found him; and getting out of the Corn,
he runs round by another Way, and puts himself just in the Way that Thomas was
to come, and as if he had been farther that Way, and was returning, meets
Thomas full-but, as they call it, one going from the City, and the othere
coming to it.

They salute as usual, and as Acquaintance, and fall into a short Discourse
upon the Occasion of the Voice that Thomas had heard.

George, says Thomas, I am very glad to see you; I wish you would go back with
me to yon' Town there, I Would be much beholden to you for your Company.

I am in great Haste, says George; I cannot go now.

O Pray do, if you can, for I Am terribly frighted, says Thomas.

Frighted, says George, at what?

Why, as I came along by the stone Wall there, says Thomas, at the Bottom of
the Hill, I heard a Voice call me three Times by my Name, aloud.

Why, what does that signify, says George? 'twas somebody behind the Wall, to
be sure, that knew you; what should you be frighted at that for?

No, no, 'twas not behind the Wall, 'twas rather on the other side of the Road,
says Thomas; but the Voice was up in the Air, to be sure it must be some Spirit.

Nay, if it was up in the Air indeed, says George, there may be something in
it; those Voices are sad things; my Master now would tell you exactly what it
meant.

Why ay, says Thomas, so they say; your Master can tell Folks all such things,
but cannot you tell a-body something of it too? come, do, go back with me a
little.

Nay, says George, since you are so concerned, I will go 'till I see you safe
at the next Town, or so, but I must run Home then, for it is almost Night, and
my Master will want me.

[ So in short, George goes along with him, which was all he wanted.

But George, says Thomas, what can this Voice mean?

How many Times did it call you? says George.

Three Times, says Thomas.

And was it very loud and distinct? says George. Are you sure you are not
deceived? for sometimes People fancy Voices when there are none.

Ay, that may be, says Thomas, but I an't so fancyful; I am very sure I heard
it three Times; it called my Christian Name and Surname, Thomas first, then
Thomas Saunders, and Thomas Saunders again; 'twas a Devil's Voice to be sure,
'twas harsh and hollow as the Devil.

Nay, I don't like it, I confess, says George; it seems to signify Death when
People are called so, and it may be in three Days, three Weeks, or three
Months, or three Years.

Cannot you tell me which? says Thomas.

No really, says George, I cannot go so far as that. If my Master was to know
the Case, he would tell you exactly; but I dare say it is Death, or something
very bad.

They had not gone far after this, but George watching a convenient Place,
gives a little Start, and stops, looking as if he saw something: Hold a little,
says he to Thomas.

What Is the matter? says Thomas.

Matter, says George; Nay you best know what is the matter; have you committed
Murder, Thomas? have you killed any body?

I killed any body! Mercy upon me! says Thomas, what do you mean?

Why, do you see nothing, says George, do ye see nothing * there?

He points to a great Tree which stood on the Common which they were going
over.

No, not I, says Thomas; don't fright me; you know, George, I am frighted
enough already.

Nay, says George, I don't desire to fright you, Thomas; but you would be worse
frighted than I if you saw it; I Am glad you don't.

But what is it? says Thomas. Dear George, tell me, is it the Devil?

No, no, not the Devil, says George, but it is a Spirit, it is a Ghost to be
sure; that made me ask if you had killed any body.

Well, I shall die, says Thomas; I Am even dead with the F^ight; Why how should
you see it and not I, George?

O, there is a Reason for that, says George; my Master gave me a particular
Sight; that I can see Apparitions when others cannot, it belongs to our
Business; but you will see it presently, for it will come nearer, I see that.

O, says Thomas, what shall I do, George? will it speak to me?

I don't know yet, says George, it may be not, I Will tell you presently.

They continued going forward all this while, and began to come pretty near the
Town; when by-and-by, says George, I don't know what to think of it, Thomas; it
threatens and makes Signs as if it would come up to you and strike you.

Strike me! says Thomas: nay then 'twill kill me to be sure.

No, no, they never kill any body; besides, I see you are in such a Fright,
I Will see if I can speak to it, and keep it off; if my Master were here, he would
send it away with a Word speaking. With that George goes three Steps forward;
bids Thomas stand still, draws a Circle with his Stick upon the Ground, and
puts Thomas into it: Stand there, says George, and you shall be safe, and don't
be afraid, I Will see what I can do for thee.

Thomas stands still as he was bid, but quaking and trembling in the utmost
Confusion; and George goes forward a little out of the Way and talks aloud, but
so that Thomas could hear only the Voice, not understand the Words; and George
makes a great many Motions and Crosses in the Air, and this he held a good
while, when he comes back to Thomas.

Well, Thomas, says he, I believe I have delivered you for this time, but
something is the matter; this Apparition threatens you strangely; I fancy
you will hear of it again.

But is it gone now? says Thomas.

Stand still, says George, a little, I think it is a going.

So George and he stand still a little: Ay, there, says George, it goes off
that Way (pointing North) and now it is gone up in the Air, says George, come
now we'll go on. So away they went to the Town, and George tells him he must
take his Leave of him, and run home as hard as he can drive.

Dear George, says Thomas, don't leave me; why, I could not go back in the dark
if you would give me a thousand Pounds.

I cannot possibly stay, says George; if you are so frighted, you had best lie
there all Night, and come Home in the Morning.

I dare not do that neither, says Thomas, my Master will be so angry, it is as
much as my Place is worth.

Why then you must get somebody to come with you at the Town, says George, for
indeed I cannot stay now. So away comes George and leaves him, and sets up a
Run, as if he was bound to be back again with the utmost Expedition.

When George had got away and was out of sight, he altered himself, as he knew
very well how to do by his Skill in Postures and Tumbling, which, as before,
was a Part of his Trade; and having a linen Habit in his great Pocket, dresses
himself up in the Habit of a Ghost or an Apparition, not in a Shroud like a
dead Body, but all in white, down to the Feet, and a Woman's Head-dress upon
his Head; and in this Posture he places himself where he knew Thomas would
come. But before this, covering his Habit with his great Coat, he placed
himself at the Village in sight of the Door where Thomas went in, that he might
be sure to know when he came out, and which Way he went, lest he should take
some other Way; and also to know who and how many he got to come with him.

He soon found Thomas on his Way, for he came out of the House and two Fellows
with him in about an Hour: So George followed 'em at a distance, 'till he saw
them in a little Lane leading into the Common as before, and when he knew they
could go no other Way; upon which, he run by another Way over the Fields, and
got into the Common before them.

The first thing he did was to get into a little Thicket, where lying flat on
the Ground, and out of Sight, he lay and hissed like a Serpent most
frightfully; This had its immediate Effect, for it frighted them all, and he
heard one of them say, It was the Devil, and that he was come for Thomas to be
sure: and the other said so too, adding that he would go no further; this was
enough for George, for by this he knew they were no Champions that Thomas had
brought along with him; so removing and getting to another Place a little
behind them, that they might not run back again, there he changed his Note, and
then growl'd like a great Dog, and that frighted them again. Now having made
this Beginning, he leaves off a little, and goes into the Common, and stands in
the middle of the Road just where the Lane opened into the Heath; so that he
might be sure to be seen all in white, a little before they came out of the
Lane.

The Night was not very dark, but no Moonlight; some Stars, not many, were
seen; when coming to the Lane's end, they saw the Spectre, and no sooner saw
it, but all three run away and cried out most terribly. George had now his End,
for he didn't desire to carry it on any farther; so he kept his Post 'till he
found by their Noise they crossed the Common farther off and out of Sight; then
he put off his Habit, and made the best of his Way to their Lodging; where when
Thomas came, he found George very sedately standing at the Door smoking his
Pipe.

He bad Thomas well-come Home, but said no more, not taking the least notice of
any thing; but found that Thomas went immediately up Stairs, and threw himself
down upon the Bed; and the next Morning Thomas was very sick.

George in the mean time went home to his Master, and gave him an Accoun^ of
the whole Transaction, who finding his Engines work to his Mind, gave George
farther Instructions; which were in short, to haunt the poor Fellow Night and
Day, and give him no Quiet, 'till he had managed him up to a Necessity of
coming to him (the Doctor) for Help, which was not long first.

I should have observed that the Doctor or Cunning Man finding he should
compass his Ends upon Thomas, sent now for the poor Girl, and told her, that he
had employed the utmost of his Art and Skill in her Behalf; And upon my Word,
adds he, my Child, I have had a fatherly Concern for you; and I have engaged so
many of the good Spirits of the superior Regions in your Favor, that they
(always ready to do Acts of Beneficence and Kindness to distressed Mortals)
have assured me that Thomas shall marry you; ay, and shall come and court you
to have him too, as much as if he had not gotten this unjust Advantage of you,
or he shall have no Rest in this Life, nay he shall have no Rest in this Life
'till he does.

The poor Girl ^mil'd, and was mightily pleased, as you may well suppose, and
puts her Hand in her Pocket, and gives the Doctor half a Guinea for the good
News. The Doctor took the Money, but told her modestly, that if he did her such
a great piece of Service as this, she must consider, etc. She understood him,
and told him, she had not a great deal of Money, but yet she had a rich Aunt,
and other good Friends; and Thomas need not have used her so; for, that if --
and then she cried again, she would have scorned to have married him, but -- I
understand you, Child, says the Doctor; now you must not only take him, but
must be glad he will take you? Yes, Sir, says she.

Well, says the Doctor, and does your Aunt know this unlucky Story?

Yes Sir, says the Girl, and she bid me tell you, she will make a handsome
Present to you, if you can bring it about.

Well Child, says the Doctor, tell your Aunt, I will undertake to do it, if she
will be as good as her Word.

Indeed she will, Sir. I will bring it you, says she; and named the Sum, which
was no less than twenty Pounds; and the Doctor, with an unusual Modesty, not
craving any more, told her generously, that if he failed, he would have nothing
more than she had given him already.

This Treaty took up two or three Days, and in the mean time George haunted
Thomas, upon several Occasions: Nay, he could hardly stir out of Doors in the
Night, but he showed himself, sometimes all in White, sometimes all in Black;
till at last Thomas comes to him one Evening: George, says he, dear George, if
you don't help me, I know not what to do. I am harrass'd out of my Wits. This
Devil, if it is the Devil, haunts me so, that it gives me no Rest. Last Night
it called me again three times at my Chamber Window, the very same Voice, and
three times over, just as it did at the long Wall.

N.B. George had cunningly got a Ladder in the Night, and set it up to the
Fellow's Window, and went up, and called him aloud, with the same hollow dead
Sound, as he did before.

Well, says George, I am sorry for it, Thomas; I would have you send for a
Minister, and prepare for another World, for I doubt you are not very long for
this World.

But did not you tell me, says Thomas, your Master could do something for me?

Yes indeed, says George, I did so; and I believe he could, if you have not let it
run too far, and if you have not done some sad thing, Thomas; For the Spirits of
the invisible World, which my Master knows and converses with, are all good
Spirits, Thomas, and they will do no nothing for you, adds he, if you have
committed Murder or Robbery, or any such thing; and therefore if that be your
Case, do not let me carry you to my Master, for he can do you no good.

Thomas star'd as if he had been bewitched. Mercy upon me! what do you mean,
Brother George, says he, I am as Innocent as the Child unborn. I never did any
such thing in my Life.

Well, Thomas, says George, if you speak honestly, I Will let my Master know your
Case, and if you will come to our Office to-morrrow Morning, you shall have his
Answer.

Good George, says Thomas, don't put it off till tomorrow; what shall I do?
Why George, the Devil will murder me tonight.

What would you have me do? says George. I Will go immediately, if you will, but
I doubt he is not at home.

However, Thomas pressing him, away they go to the Doctor together; which was
indeed what George wanted. When they came to him, George introduces the young
Man; and, in a word, tells him the whole Story at Large, and implores his high
superior Assistance to the poor distressed young Man, who was daily terrified
and harrass'd, to the danger of his Wits

But, says the Doctor, (just as George had been taught to do before) I fear
this Man has committed some flagrant Crime, and so the evil Sprits have a right
to pursue him. Hark thee Friend, come hither to me, let me see thy Hand; have
thou not committed Murder, or Treason? No indeed, Sir, says Thomas, never in my
Life.

Well, pull of thy Glove, says the Doctor.

Here, Sir, says Thomas, you may see I an't burnt in the Hand.

Pr'ythee, young Man, says the Doctor, I don't look for that; so he examines
his Palm. Well, says the Doctor, all is well here. Nor you have committed no
Robbery or Felony? don't come to me if you are Guilty of any such Crimes as you
ought to be hanged for.

No, indeed, I have not, and't please you, says Thomas.

Then the Doctor feels his Pulse, and looks him full in the Face: Here is some
Disorder, some Guilt here. Look ye young Man, assure your self, if you have
stole any Thing, or committed any Crime, the good Spirits, Inhabitants of the
invisible World, whose sublime Influences I shall apply to them for in your
Behalf, and to deliver you from the Power of the evil Spirits which haunt you
thus, will do nothing for you, if you are a Criminal; and more than that, they
will certainly inform me of it, as soon as I make my Application for your
Relief, and tell it me as the Reason why they can do nothing for you; so you
had better let me know it beforehand.

Indeed, Sir, and please you, says Thomas, I have never done any such thing in
my Life.

Have thou ever done any Injury, says the Doctor, to any, for which thou can
be thus plagued?

No indeed, Sir, not I, says Thomas.

Well, Friend, says the Doctor, I enquire for your Service only; for I don't
care what you have done, nor do I care to know it. But let me ask you one
Question more, and then I shall be able to speak for you in general, as a very
innocent, honest Person. Are you willing to make Satisfaction, or Reparation,
to any Body, or to every Body that you have done any Injury to?

Yes, Sir, with all my Heart, says Thomas; and Sir, adds he, I have never done
any Hurt in all my Life.

All this while the Doctor holds him by the Hand, and every now and then feels
his Pulse. Look you, Friend, says he, here is some little Disorder here in your
Blood, your Conscience flutters, and is a little disturbed. Come, don't send me
of a Fool's Errand, for if thou do, I cannot only do thee no good, but these
evil Spirits will tear thee to Pieces, when they know, as they will do, that I
have spoke for thee. Come, I Will ask thee but one Question more: Has there been
no Love-^usiness between any young Girl and you, and she has b^oke her Heart,
and is dead for you, and now pays you home for it, and plagues you? for it
seems you say the Apparition had a Woman's Head-dress on.

No, indeed, Sir, says Thomas, I never had any Fancy, but for one, and she is
alive; I am sure I saw her several times since this happened.

Now the Doctor had him fast. Well, is there any thing between you, is she your
Sweetheart still?

No, and't please you, says Thomas, we have done.

Done! says the Doctor, What have you done? you have not lain with her, have you?
But however; come, Thomas, says the Doctor, I must own that is not a fair
Question, so I don't press you to answer me. I hope you have done the Girl no
Wrong, if you have, you say you will make Reparation. Come, sit down there,
till I go into my Study, and if you have been Honest, I shall serve you, I
don't doubt; but if you have not, I shall come back, and tell you all you have
concealed, without giving my self the Trouble of asking you.

Here Thomas began to stare, and look frighted. Why, Sir, and't please you,
says he, must I confess every thing?

No, no, Thomas, says the Doctor, I don't ask you to confess any thing; I Will
come back presently, and tell you, as well as if you told me your self.

Ay, but then, Sir, says Thomas, you say, if I don't tell you every thing
first, then I shall get no Help afterward?

That Is very true, Thomas, says the Doctor gravely, I do say so; and therefore,
if you have any thing to tell me before I go, let me know it; but I don't
oblige you to tell, you may do as you will; if you have any thing to say, tell
me; if not, tell me.

Why, nothing, Sir, but about the Girl, a little.

Why, there now, I thought so, when I felt your Pulse: didn't I almost tell you
so? says the Doctor. I warrant you, ye have lain with the poor Girl now, and it
may be got her with Child: is that it?

I Am afraid so, indeed, Sir, says Thomas; but it was but twice.

Well, says the Doctor, you drew her in, I dare say, by promising to marry her,
didn't you?

I think you know every thing, says Thomas; indeed, it is so, Sir.

And then, says the Doctor, when you found the poor Girl was with Child, you
disappointed her, I suppose?

Yes, Sir, says Thomas; there is no hiding any thing from you, I think.

Well, Thomas, says the Doctor, but what shall I do for you now? for unless you
make this poor Girl some Satisfaction, there is no saving you. Where is she? you
say she is alive, it seems.

Yes, and't please you, she is alive, says Thomas, she don't live far off.

Well, what must be done, Thomas? says the Doctor. What, would you marry her?
will that give her Satisfaction, Thomas?

Yes, and't please you, I Will marry her; and I Will send for her just now, says
Thomas.

What, and marry her in the Dark? says the Doctor: that will not do, Thomas.

Why, Sir, says Thomas, I Will marry her over again, by Daylight.

No, no, Thomas, says the Doctor, we will not break through the Laws neither. I Will
tell you what you shall do. Send for the Girl, and let me hear her Story, and
what she demands; if marrying her will do, Thomas, and that will satisfy her,
you shall sign a Bond here to her, to marry her tomorrow Morning; and then to
protect you from the Devil that haunted you, you shall lie here with my other
Man Will. tonight, and I will answer none of them will dare to haunt you in my
House.

With all my Heart, an't please you, says Thomas, if you will promise me, I
shall not be haunted any more afterward.

Why, Thomas, says the Doctor, to secure you, I Will cast a Figure for you
tonight, and I will know if those Voices and Specter were upon her Account,
or no; and if they were, I will answer for it, you shall hear no more of them
after you have married her; and if they were not, you shall not be obliged to take
her; that is a fair Proposal, Thomas.

Nay, Master, an't please you, says Thomas, I think I should take her, that is
the Truth on it; and I Will even have her, I think, whether I am delivered or no,
since you say it is just, and I should do it. And, besides Master, says Thomas,
she is a good honest Girl, and loves me too mainly, and she will be a good Wife:
I Will even take her, Master, for better for worse.

Now you speak honestly, says the Doctor. Now I like you, Thomas. I warrant you
the Devil will haunt you no more, if you take her; but you have been but a kind
of a Rogue to her before, I understand.

Upon the whole, the Doctor heartens him on, the young Fellow is easy, and the
young Woman is sent for; and in the Morning they were married, and had a great
Wedding-Dinner near the Doctor's House; so that all was done to the Girl's
Mind, and the Conjurer's too. For the Doctor had two Gunieas of Thomas, for
delivering him from the Devil, (Who could do it cheaper!) and twenty of the
good Wife's Friends, and the Lady that gave the Money thought it very well
bestowed.

This Management of the Magician, serves to let you see, with what Art and
Dexterity these Men play the Doctor with our ignorant People; and well they
deserve the Name of Cunning Men; and as this is the greatest Part of the Magic
they are Masters of, so this is the chief End and Aim of this Relation, to let
the Reader into the Cheat of it. Here were two Fools managed by one cunning
Knave; yet both of them are served. The Knowledge of their Story, and the way
to do them both Justice, is picked out of their own Mouths; yet they are
brought to do one another Justice, and believe it is all done by the Magic of
the Cunning Man; he gets their Money, and they come both off thankful into the
Bargain. And here is not an Ounce of Magic in it all; here is no dealing with
the Devil in all this. It Is nothing but a Bite, a kind of a Juggle; a Devil and
no Devil, a Doctor no Conjurer, a Vision without a Spirit, a Dance without a
Fiddle; and in a word, here was Craft, but no Knavery neither: For what he did,
ended in doing a poor injured Wench Justice, and bringing a young impudent
Fellow upon his Knees, making him take the Woman, not indeed for the Fear of
God, but for Fear of the Devil.

This Account of the Doctor, or Cunning Man, may stand upon Record, as a
Specimen of the Magic which we have now generally practiced among us; or if
you please to take it as a Specimen of what is at present put upon the World
for Magic. For as to the Real Black Art, or Dealing with the Devil by way of
Compact, Intercourse, Witchcraft, and such like, we find so little of it left,
that we have some reason to say it is quite out of Use, and we have heard very
little of it in this Part of the World for many Years.

Not that we are much better than our Ancestors, nor have we seen any thing in
the Manners of the People less addicted to Sorcery than formerly; but Custom
has made Men turn Magicians to themselves, we seem to carry on our
Correspondence with Hell single handed, and by a kind of immediate Intercourse;
so that we want no more the Help of the Magician, whatever we do of the Magic.
And here I think the Magic it self being as it were brought to a Conclusion,
the History of it is justly at a Conclusion also. The Arts of Hell are now no
more carried on by particular Instruments, and by way of Profession; the Black
Art is at End; the Devil having no more need of the Magicians, has dropped them,
and manages his Affairs himself; and the Magicians having no other Access to
the Devil, than what is Imaginary, and carried on by mere Legerdemain, whatever
it was formerly, their Number is decreased, and in a manner worn off by Time;
so that you have now nothing left but a few Jugglers, Cunning Men, Gypsies and
Fortun-tellers. In short the Trade is decayed, and we may suppose the Managers
of the Black Negotiation have turned their Hands to other Employments.

CHAP. VI.
Of raising the Devil by Magical Operations; whether the Magicians really have
such a Power or no, and if they have, whether it is performed as an Art, and by
the Consequence of Magical Experiments, or whether it is by Concert and mutual
Consent, between Satan and the Magicians.

RAising the Devil has been thought by some to be a Branch of Witchcraft rather
than Magic; and then it should not be mentioned in this Place; but the Point
is not fully decided. It seems both the Worthy Professions have pretended to
it, and perhaps both have attained to practice it, and so it may be reckoned
among the Occult Sciences, in common to the Practitioners of both Kinds, and
then may be properly treated of in which part of our Undertaking we please.

It is a kind of a vulgar Expression, and has not much Propriety in it, I mean
that of raising the Devil; for the Devil is not raised, he is rather brought
down. As his Abode is expressly said to be in the upper Regions, and his
Principality is in the Air, he is not fetched out of the Earth; and as some
have thought with the stamp of a Foot, as if he lodged under us, and we knocked
for him, as the sick Body knocks upon the Floor for the Nurse to come up
Stairs, and speak to him.

Satan certainly is not far out of Call, though it is still someting doubtful in
what particular Element he inhabits.

1. Not in the Earth, (say I) because then he would be empowered to shake the
World with Earthquakes, overturn Cities and Towns, and give Mankind perpetual
Disturbances, and perhaps would be obliged to do so as often as he moved from
Place to Place. Nay, it would seem necessary that the Earth, notwithstanding
his spirituous Nature, must suffer some Convulsions, Dislocations, and
Openings, or some or other Distortions, every time an old Woman had Occasion to
speak with him.

2. Not in the Sea: this is apparent by the Devils of Gadarene, who besought
Christ not to send them away into the Deep. It seems they have an Aversion to
the Water, and that therefore Instinct led the Herd of Swine to run into the
Sea, to deliver themselves from the Devil, supposing he would leave them when
they came there. But the Hogs it seems were not sagacious enough to find their
Way out again, or to consider that before they went in. Luke viii.31, 33.

3. Not in the Fire; Because that Element is appropriated for their final
State, is to be their Prison, and the Place of their Punishment; and as they
have at present an Interval for Action, so they must have a Medium of Space for
their Residence during the time of Action.

4. It must then be in the Air, or airy Regions; and as we have reason to
believe that they are not confined to the Atmosphere of this Globe the Earth,
which compared to them, their Numbers, and the Extent of their Operations,
would be by much too narrow a Place for them, too much prescribed and limited,
and give them no room for Action in proportion to themselves; so I am willing
to ^llow Satan to be in Capacity, (at least able) to visit all the Atmospheres
and Spaces in the immense Waste, whether of habited, habitable, or uninhabited
Bodies; and whether in those we call Planets, or such Bodies as we have no Name
for, because no Knowledge of.

Thus the Devil cannot complain that I have not given him room enough, since I
have denied his Locality to no Place but Heaven, where he cannot come, and
perhaps does not now desire it, and the other gross Elements which could not
contain him.

The Devil being Resident, chiefly at least, in that invisible Wo^d, the Air,
and which we particularly call the World of Spirits, our bringing him out into
Company is very unworthily called raising the Devil; for how can that be raised
up, which is already not below?

However, if we will talk intelligibly, we must call things as other People
call them, and speak of them as other People understand them, that they may
know what we talk of, and know how to think upon what we speak to them about.
Having therefore no other way of expressing it, you must be content to hear me
speak of raising the Devil, though at the same time I tell you it is Nonsense in
the very Terms, and contrary to Nature.

But to hold you no longer upon settling Preliminaries, the Point in hand is,
Can the Magicians who we are now speaking of, raise the Devil, or can they not?
Can the Magic Art perform this high Operation, is it in the reach of the
Profession, and is Satan subjected to it? is he obliged to come when he is
called, when such and such Words of Command are given out, such and such
Methods used, such and such Words repeated? is he roused, as the Keeper rouzes
the Lions in the Tower, disturbed from his Abode, and obliged to come away? or
as the Huntsman unharbours a Deer, by his Horn and his Hallow?

If the Devil is under this Necessity, and is thus at the Summons of every
Glass Trumpet, as we may call it, that every Scoundrel rascally Figure caster
and Circle-maker can fetch him up, when they think fit; I must say, I think
Satan is no free Agent; He is very far from being a Prince, and a Prince of the
Power of the Air. Nay, there are so many rational Objections against it, so
many Difficulties, Absurdities, and even Impossibilities in it, that I think
there is hardly room for any farther Dispute about it; the thing has nothing in
it rational, or agreeing to common Sense.

But how is it done then? for that it is so, and that the Devil does appear,
when they call, does come, when he is sent for, and that by the meanest of
those Creatures who have those Dealings with him, is not to be denied; nor
never has been deniable since the Witch of Endor's Days, nor will it want
Confirmation on many Occasions since that: Did not she put it to Saul, who he
would have her bring up? intimating that she could bring up whom she pleased,
even the Devil himself, if he wanted him.

It must be then by Concert and Agreement; for if the Devil cannot be forced out
of his Den, if he is not conjured up, as we call it; he must be invited in a
friendly manner, and prevailed upon by Entreaties, or expected by Agreement;
and in both these Cases it is much more ageeeable to our Understanding, and we
can conceive of things with much more Propriety.

Either he is invited by Entreaties and Petitions, importuned and earnestly
desired to come; and this is a kind of Peculiar; for that it is a Reality we
have no room to doubt. I say, it is peculiar to those Countries where the Devil
is worshipped as a God, where they bow the Knee, and, as the Indians call it,
say O to him as a supreme Power. That he willingly observes these Summons, and
comes when they desire him, is easy to suppose; as he is a politic Devi^ and
willing to preserve his Possession among ^^^m, willing to be worshipped and
adored, as he most obsequiously as upon those Occasions, and which he in a
manner triumphs over his Maker by, as if he ^^d gained a Victory, had conquered
those Parts of his Dominions, and taken them from him by Force.

Or on the other hand, he is obliged by Contract, between h^mself and those
Infernal Merchants that trade with him. I say, he is obliged to come when they
have Occasion for him; and in this case he must perform his Promise, or else he
would not maintain his Credit, and would not be trusted again. Thus, in one, he
is bound to come as he is a cunning Devil, and knows his Interest; and in the
other Case, as he is an honest Devil, and keeps his Word; though the last is
subject to many Breaches and F^lsifications, and he is not always as good as
his Word neither.

All the Difficulty that lies before us here, is, how he makes his Bargains.
Witches and Wizards, they tell us, sign Contracts, let him prick their Hands,
and sign with their Blood; Hellish Doings! but I do not tell you I give any
Credit to them. But the Magicians, who, it is supposed, are Persons of a
sup^^^ur Dignity, seem to act upon a better foot, and by the Help of what they
call Art; have to do with him in a superior Way; what that Way is, and what Art
it is to be called, that brings the Affairs of Hell into such a Management, is
the great Question before me.

It is true, the Magicians deny it, and Dr. Boreman would have told you he
scorned your Words; he raised no Devil, he had to do with no evil Spirits, he
dealt with no such Cattle; but on the contrary, that he laid the Devil when
other People raised him; that he cured Houses that were haunted, and turned the
Devil out of Doors when he was got in; all which I believe as steadfastly as I
do that St. Dunstan took him by the Nose with a pair of red hot Tongs; or that
St. Francis would have nothing to do with him, when he appeared to him in the
Shape of a Bag of Money; or that St. Ignatius resisted him, when he tempted him
in the Shape of a naked beautiful Lady.

Where, by the way, if the Legend Makers of the Romish Church could prove those
two Passages to be true in Fact, so that we could no more doubt them, we should
have much more Reason to take those two Persons for Saints than ever I thought
we had. It must be confessed, the thing would be rare in itself, to see a
Priest kick a Purse of Gold out of his Way upon the Road, and not think it
worth his while to take it up: So, to see a young Lady, beautiful and charming,
offer herself to a Priest, and he turn from her, as Joseph from his Mistress,
looked a little more Saint-like than I must own I should expect from any of the
Tribe, especially on the Roman Side of the Question. I hope our own Church has
abundance of such Saints among the Clergy, though I may not have the Honor to be
acquainted with many of them.

But these Men of Art can raise him; that seems to be a Truth too solid to be
denied; and I must not hazard my Reputation so much as to oppose all the old
Women that have seen him, or dreamed they saw him: So that I must take it for
granted, that they can raise him; though I believe it no more than I do that Dr.
Boreman could lay him when other People had raised him, which I take to be
whimsical and ridiculous.

But supposing then, for Discourse sake, that they can raise him, as they call
it; What is it, and how is it done?

As to what it is, I take it to be no more than this; that the Devil is
pleased, at their Desire signified to him in such manner as to the Magician in
his great Wisdom seems meet, to assume a Visibility, and pu^ on such a Shape or
Person as he and the Magician agrees upon for the present Purpose. This being
granted, two Things necessarily follow: 1. That the Devil and the Magician
really correspond. 2. That the Devil was present before, only not visibly.


First, That the Devil and the Magician correspond: By Corresponding must I
think be understood that the Magician knows where Satan is; that Measures are
concerted between them, how to converse; as was the ^ase between him and
Albrahazen, o^ whom already; and that by these concerted Measures, he can ask
the Favor of Satan as often as he pleases, to make himself visible for such or
such an Occasion, as at that time presents

2. By this it should seem, according to the Opinion of Some learned in this
Wisdom, that those Magicians that are eminent in their Practice, have some
Devil or other always with them, visible to themselves, though invisible to
others; and that they both see and converse with them continually. This is very
rational to believe, and is what I take to be that which the Scripture means by
having a Familiar Spirit; and that Menasseh had such, the Text is positive in.
Now that these Men or Women, whether Magicians or what you please to call them,
can desire the Favor of their Familiar or Secondary Devil, to assume a Shape
and put on Visibility, I make no question of; it seems to be no great matter,
and to have no great Difficulty in it. On the other hand, these seem to be the
only People that can raise the Devil; for how should any body else do it upon
such common and ordinary Occasions, if he was not at their Elbow? how could
they call him with muttering over a little Gibberish, and talking it in Whisper
too? The Devil is not Omniscient; he cannot, at the Distance of his airy
Dwelling, know the Thoughts of the Agent, or see the Circles and Figures he
draws; he must therefore be invisibly present with him, can see his Circles,
Crosses and Figures, and all his Motions, whether public or private; and I
insist upon it, that none can raise the Devil in this manner but such Men as
those, that have a certain and constant Intercourse with him. I do not say that
the Magicians have this Correspondence with him, nor do I say or believe that
all of them can bring Satan into Apparition when they please; but this I do
both say and believe, that those that can or do thus raise him, as we call it,
do it by this Means, and have such a Correspondence and Intimacy with him, and
that it can be done by no other.

All the Notions which we can have of the Devil, founded upon the Scripture, or
upon Reason, seem to justify this Opinion; for unless we shall allow him to be
Infinite, Omniscient and Omnipresent, (and that would be to make him a God) we
cannot make it rational that he should be commanded into Visibility and Action
just when we please.

If he is confined to Locality, if he is any-where, and that Any-where is
Some-where, then he must have some settled Intelligence established between him
and Mankind for the carrying on his Business; and this must be carried on by
the Agency of some Spirits, it cannot be by Voice only, by mere Whisper and
Suggestion, if he be not present; for though it may be true that Spirits converse
without the Help of Voice, yet infernal Spirits cannot act, as the Infinite
Eternal Being acts, namely, by infinite extensive Knowledge; they must converse
by the Instrumentality and Agency of their Persons: it is true it may be
imperceptible to human Sight, and it is so; but there is not the less Reality
in their Agency, for that there is not the less Personality nor Agency of
Persons or Places on that account; for That may as really be that cannot be
perceived to exist, as That which is visible.

Now stand clear Magic, and stand clear Magicians; for if the Magician can
raise the Devil, he must correspond with the Devil; and if he corresponds with
the Devil, he must have a Familiar; or how does he do it? The Devil must either
be always by him, or have an Agent Devil in Commission always attending him,
and always ready to act ^s he shall direct; a Deputy Devil under Orders, and
^nstructed to act for him, and to personate either Devil, or other Shape, as
Occasion presents, or as the Magician pleases to direct. It can be no
otherwise, ^ot the Devil himself can act upon any other foot.

All we have to say for our Magicians is, to hope that what they have to say
for themselves may have ^ome Truth in it; namely, that they deal with Spi^its,
but that it is with good Spirits, not with the Devil, or with evil Spirits; and
this we have only their own Words for; we cannot be sure it is so, ^or will I
venture to say that we have a great ^eal of Reason to believe them; at least
there may ^e room to doubt the Truth of it.

I would rather advance for them what I have much more Reason to believe, and
that is, that they deal with no Spirits at all, either good or bad; for if I
should once entertain a Belief that they really consulted with any Spirits at
all, I should be afraid they were Devils; because, as I have said that I
believe the Devil would not be at their Book at every Turn, so often as they
have Occasion for him; so I am less of the Opinion that the good Spirits would
be called backward and forward on their trivial and frivolous Errands, nor is
it rational to believe they should.

If then they have any Spirits, I doubt they are Devils, not good Spirits; but
my more justifiable Opinion, and which I think is really well-grounded, is,
that most, if not all of them, who pretend to this Converse with Spirits, have
no Knowledge of, or Correspondence with, any Spirits at all; but that all the
Cant of their good Spirits, the Inhabitants o^ the invisible World, and their
Intelligence with them is a Cheat, a mere Cheat and Delusion, to abuse the
ignorant world, impose upon the weak, and i^ possible gain themselves a
Character and a Fame o^ Knowledge and Wisdom, in order to pick Pockets and get
Money.

How many Tricks do they play with Mankind how many Frauds do they put upon us!
under how many Sham-Appearances do they juggle with us It Is plain, when any
sublime Doctrine comes to b^ discussed by them, they are all in the dark; the
neither can conceive right themselves, or teach u^ how to make a right Judgment
of any thing, bu^ appear to be empty ignorant Creatures themselves who have,
like Jacob Behemen, got a high Cant o^ mystic Language, Words without Meaning,
and as I said before, valued only for their being u^ intelligible, and that
entirely so; and very part^cularly too, for that they are so put together, that
not only no body that hears them can understand them, but that they do not
understand 'em themselves.

This certainly is the just Character of most of the Magicians we meet with in
our Times; what may have been formerly, or what may yet be, where the Devil has
really a Correspondence with any of these People, and if there are any
Albrahazens alive, I will not determine; but then, I say, either these must
have a more than intimate Converse with the Devil personally, as Ali had, or
they must do it by way of Familiar, by a constant attending Agent; and then
they are no more Magicians, but Necromancers, and downright Dealers with the
Devil; and this is not what we are talking of, it not what they pretend to, nor
is it really in them.

To bring it then down to the Case in hand, I mean about raising the Devil; the
present Question is of two Parts, First, Whether the Magicians have a Power to
raise the Devil, that is, to produce an Appearance or Apparition of the Devil.
This, I say, I will not deny; only that then I say, they are no more Magicians,
but Witches, Wizards, Necromancers, or what else you please to call those
People that have an immediate Conversation with the Devil.

Secondly, Whether, if they can do it at all, it is done as an Art, a System,
for the Practice of which there are Rules and Methods, which being learned by
others, enables them to perform the same thing, as an Operation, whether
mathematical or otherwise? and this I think I may venture to deny; because I
think it subjects Satan to such a Situation of Circumstances, as are
inconsistent with all the Notions we have of him as a Spirit; as a powerful
unlimited Seraph, a Prince of the Air, and who (except where his Maker has
limited and prescribed him) is placed in a Station inconceivably superior to
all human Influence or Operation.

To talk of screwing the Devil up into an Engine, that like a Jack in a Box he
may be brought out and shown for a Sight to the People whenever a Conjurer
thinks fit, or to be shown like a Puppet-Show for Twopence a-piece, I must
needs say, this is really dishonouring the Devil himself.

What may be done by Concert and Agreement between the Devil and them, is one
thing; but to talk of bringing him out by an Art or Invention, so that, as I
said before, the Artists may call him in, or call him up, when they (...), this
wou^^ be raising him indeed, in the very litteral Sense of the Word; and may
be, for ought I know, what was the true Meaning of the Expression at fir^^
^^^nd I must observe here, this raising the Devil is an old way of speaking,
and was formerly much more in use among us than it is now; for I am not yet
determined in the matter fully, whether it be a Fact or a mere proverbial
Speech: My Opinion at present must necessarily be for the latter; for as to
raising him, it is, as I have said already, a piece of Nonsense, because (1) it
intimates that he is fetched up ab inferis, from Below; whereas I have given
many good Reasons to move you to believe he is already rather Above than Below:
and, (2) Because I can give you many more to prove, that if he was Below, that
is to say, in Hell, in the bottomless Pit it self, as we have too much fancied
he is; all the old Women and old Witches, and all the Prayers in the Parish,
read backward, all the Circles and Figures, all the Paw-waws and Conjurings in
the World, could never fetch him out again; 'till He comes, who has the Key of
the Bottomless Pit, and who shuts, and no Man can open.

We are told that St. Peter gave our holy Father of St. Angelo the Keys of
Heaven; but I doubt he has not the Keys of the other Place too; if he has, he has
been but a sorry Jailer, for the Devil has been abroad these four thousand
Years to our Knowledge, and continues still at large; not a Constable can take
him up, even a Escape Warrant cannot apprehend him.

As he is then at large, though he is a Prisoner too in one Sense, but as I say
the Devil is at large, he is then a free Agent as to us, he goes to and fro, in
or throughout the Earth, and walks up and down therein, Job. i.7. He has free
Liberty of Egress and Regress, can go and come, when, where and how he pleases.

I must plead for Liberty, you see, though it be for the Devil. It has pleased
his Maker to give this roaring Lion Liberty to go up and down, seeking, etc.
and how came he to sell or lose that Liberty? How came the Magician to be the
Devil's Jailer, that he should have him in his Custody, to call him out when he
thinks fit? If it is so, it is a voluntary Confinement, and the Devil finds his
Account in it, or he would never submit to it; so that it must be by a Consent
of Parties, and then we come into the Road of things again; that is to say,
that the Devil may consent to appear when he is so and so, and for such and
such Purposes, required; but this is quite another thing than what the
Magicians are said to do; I must therefore give it against them. The Devil is
not to be raised by Art; no Magic, no Conjuring, no Circles or Squares, no
Prayers read backward, no, or forward either, will bring him out, unless he
pleases, and finds it for his Purpose. If he comes at all, he comes of himself,
and about his own Business, or by Agreement with his own Domestics, such as
old Mother -- of Endor, or Mother Lackland of Ipswich, or such as he is in
actual Confederacy with; but as for your Pretenders to Art, that they can raise
him, and lay him, ^etch him in or send him out, it is all a Cheat, and the
Magician has this to be said in his Favor, that he really is not so intimate
with the Devil as he says he is.

CHAP. VII.
Seeing, as the Magicians pretend, they do not Deal with the Devil, o^ raise
the Devil, Who it is they do De^ with, how is their Correspondence managed, and
why do they Deal with Good Spirits, by Conjurings and the Black Art?

THERE remain but two Questions then, which have any Difficulty in them, to
speak to in this Affair of Magic; the first is the natural Consequence of what
is said before; If the Magician cannot raise the Devil, who and what it is he
does raise? for we will have it that he has Spirits about him: If they are not
evil Spirits, as he will assert in his own Defense, what Spirits are they, and
by what Power or Influence does he maintain such a Correspondence among the
Intelligent Beings of the invisible World, as to procure those superior
Angelick Creatures to appear upon Earth, either at his Request, or upon such
Occasions as he represents to them?

There is too much Difficulty, I had almost said Absurdity, in this Part, for
us to come into it, as the Magicians pretend to desire; they would have us
believe that all they do is by the Aid and Assistance of these happy
Intelligent Beings, that they, upon the mere Principle of Affection to Mankind,
and merely from their Beneficent Nature and Disposition, are ready at all times
to assist their faithful Agent or Servant the Magician, in doing acts of
Charity, Kindness and Benevolence to their Fellow Creatures.

It is true, the Magician by this puts a great Compliment upon himself, and
suggests that he is himself a general Blessing to Mankind; and that as such
these Generous and Beneficent BEINGS single out them (the Magicians) as the
proper Instruments of their Kindness to their Fellow Creatures; and that they
even could not act, at least not so fully and effectually, without them.

That therefore it is, those superior Beings are pleased to converse with these
Magicians, and communicate to them a superior Knowledge of things, making them
useful to Mankind, and giving them a Reputation for their Wisdom, that so the
distressed People may apply to them for Assistance, Direction and Counsel.

But then the second Question is, How do they converse with them, by what means
do those good Spirits come to know when the Magician has any thing to be
assisted in, and in what manner do they claim or desire their Assistance? Now
the Difficulty of this Question raises a Doubt almost unanswerable against the
Truth of the Magician's Answer to the first.

They tell us they converse with the good Spirits of the invisible World: That
they would have us take as a first Principle, a Postulatum that should be
granted; though it is pretty much to ask too: but to oblige them as far as with
any color of common Sense can be done, let us suppose it, though I can by no
means grant it.

But how then is it managed? How is this Converse carried on? In a word, how do
they come together? It must be either, 1. By the Magicians applying to these
Spirits for Advice when they want it. 2. Or by the Spirits officiously coming
to them upon such Occasions, of their own mere Goodness. 3. Or those good
Spirits must be always present, and to be seen, spoken to, and conversed with,
without calling, or without seeking to be called.


I must be so plain with our Magicians, as to say, that I do not see how either
of these three can be made out by them; nor yet how they can defend themselves
from the Charge of Diabolick Magic, unless they make out all the three, and
that very clearly too.

1. As to Magicians applying to these Spirits for Advice and Intelligence; this
I know is their Pretense, this they all allege; and when the poor ignorant
People apply to them, they make a great deal of Ceremony with their Circles and
Figures, with Magical Books, Hebrew or Arabic Characters, muttering of hard
Words, and other Barbarisms innumerable; Just, in a word, as the old
Necromancers do, when they consult with the Devil.

Now, is there any thing of all this requisite in order to converse with a good
Spirit? did the Prophets of old use any thing of this Mimickry, when they went
to enquire of the Lord? If they would have their Art be called the Sacred
Science, and we must believe that they converse with Heavenly Beings, what need
of all these Amusements, these Conjurings and Paw-wawings?

Will they make us believe that the good Spirits are to be used as the Wizards
and Witches use the Devil? that they are to be brought down by Mutterings and
Conjurings, by Postures and Distortions, or (as our Dancing-Masters talk) by
Grotesque Characters? This would do very little to oblige our Reverence, Nor to
me, would it look like any thing but talking to the Devil.

If it is done to put an Amusement upon the ignorant People that come to them,
and to give a Soleminity (as they call it) to the thing, then it is evident it
is done to cheat them. For what Occasion could there be for such things, if
they were really about to converse with the exalted Spirits of a heavenly Kind,
and Inhabitants of the invisible Regions?

It is manifest they apply to their invisible angelick Spirits, just as the
other sort of People do to the Devil. Their Ceremonies of Address are much the
same, and when the poor ignorant Stranger seems surpised at it, they tell him
he should not fear, for they are not going to raise the Devil; granting clearly
that there was good reason to suspect it.

If they are Honest, why then will they not tell us the reason of all these
Barbarisms? What Cause, and what Necessity, when they are applying to Heaven,
to act just as those do who apply to Hell? Let them examine History or
Antiquity, nay let them examine Nature; are the Application to God and Idols
the same? The Devil may mimick the Methods of the best Service, and seek to be
served in the same manner as his Maker; but we no where read that ever the
Servants of God mimick'd the Devil; 'till now.

Let them look at that eminent Time, when the Prophet Elijah brought himself
and the Priests of Baal to a Test for the Truth of their Worship, and the
Reality of the GOD they worshipped: The Idolatrous Priests began their Pagan
Rites, their Sacrifices were alike; that was appointed by the Prophet, because
they should not say but their Idol Devil had equal Honor done him, as the true
God had, in a Proportion. But when they came to the Service of the Priests, the
Idol-Priests used their Exorcisms, their Conjurings, their Ecstasies and their
Barbarisms, leaping up upon their Altars, and dancing to their God, then
cutting themselves with Knives, and the like.

But when the truly reverend Prophet came to be ^n the sacred Office, and the
Apparatus of laying the Sacrifice upon the Wood was simply performed; what did
Elijah? nothing, but in a solemn manner, and in the Audience of all the People,
and in the Vulgar Tongue, that they might all understand what was said, and
with a loud Voice, call upon the True God to hear him, and to glorify himself
in the Sight of the People; and God did hear him, and magnified his Power
accordingly, to the Conviction of the People, even to the Conviction of their
Senses.

Bring this down to our Case now. Here is a set of Men pretending to consult
the good Spirits, Inhabitants of the superior Regions, and who dwell in the
angelick World, wherever that is. To these they give all the adorable Names
they can devise, in strange and Outlandish Terms, and advance them in their
Notions, that they may raise the Regard of their wondering, but ignorant
Admirers.

When they have done all this, they apply to them just after the Pattern of the
Wizards and Necromancers in their enquiring of the Devil, with Mutterings and
Whispers, with hard and exotic Words, and unintelligible Speeches; as if the
good Spirits did not understand English, ^s well as Arabic and Hebrew, or as
well as their unmeaning, unsignifying Devil-Language; a Jargon of their own
forming, without any real Usage among Men, h^^ such as they please to put upon
it.

How can this be reconciled to the conversing with Good Spirits? Intelligent
and Beneficent Beings, who partake of the Heavenly Nature, and are always
inclined to do good to Mankind, who assist the Indigent and Distressed, and
protect those that are in Danger, direct in Difficulties, and are ready on all
Occasions to do good Offices and Acts of Kindness to every one?

How are they thus ready and beneficent, if they are thus to be called out of
their happy Abodes, like Devils, with Spells and Conjurations, with Necromancy
and Wizardism? Were they such blessed, bountiful, and beneficent Beings, and so
ready to help and assist Mankind in times of Difficulties, protect them from
Evil, and from evil Spirits, 'twould be but reasonable to suppose they should
give some Directions to Mankind, how to obtain and procure their Assistance,
when they want it.

It is supposed, if these Spirits are such good, such beneficent, compassionate
Beings, and so particularly inclined to do good to Mankind; I say, it is to be
supposed they are so, by the determinate Appointment of their Creator; their
Heavenly Father, from whose inherent Goodness all good Desires, and all good
Thoughts do proceed, as well in Heaven as in Earth, as well in Angels and
Spirits, as in humane Creatures. These good Spirits then, if they were such as
is pretended, would certainly direct Mankind to obtain their Aid, by praying to
the Supreme Being, under whose Command and Direction they immediately are, that
they (the said good Spirits) might be sent to direct, assist, and protect those
that so desire their Assistance.

It is a shrewd Sign to me, that these Spirits are of another Class, and that
they do not proceed from Him who is the Author of all Good; that they must be
applied to in such a scandalous manner, just as the Devil is applied to; that
they take the Honor to themselves of being applied to directly and
immediately, as God himself is, and without giving the Honor to God, the first
Cause and Original Author of all Good; and that they at the same time stoop so
low, as to accept of the like mean and base Methods of being called to for
Help, which are used when we want to raise the Devil.

What do the Magicians mean by this uncouth Jargon, I Will go and consult with
the good Spirits which I converse with, and I Will bring you an Answer? Where are
these good Spirits, and how do they converse with them? If they would say, I
will pray to God that he may send his Angels, or some of his Angels, or good
Spirits, to advise and assist you; this had some Sense in it; something like
the usual Method: then when we came to the Magician or Cunning Man, our
Language would be, we pray you Enquire of the Lord for us; and thus it was when
God had his good Prophets, and his good Spirits to act between his People and
him, as much as can be supposed now.

But now the Magician, instead of saying I will enquire of the Lord for you,
says I will consult with the good Spirits of the invisible World, who I have
the Honor to converse with, and I will tell you what they say in your Case.
Here Is not a Word of God, or of what he pleases to do, or not to do, to direct
or not to direct; but these good Spirts are to teach and direct; as if he that
made these good Spirits was out of the Question, and had nothing to do, either
with them or us.

These things, I say, render it very suspicious that there are no such things
as good Spirts in the Case, especially when they are joined with the scandalous
manner of their being applied to; and if there are no good Spirits, and they
disown all Conversation with bad Spirits, it may be said without Offense, (though
in the vulgar way) not, What the Devil are they doing? but, What Devils are
they doing with?

2. But here is a second Suggestion to help them out, and this is, that they do
not go to converse with these good Spirits, by a special Influence, calling
them to their Assistance; but the good Spirits (thereby showing themselves to
be good and beneficent, as has been said,) condescend to come Voluntier, to
help and assist, counsel and direct, in case of the Distress of those helpless
Creatures called Men; and that they do this officiously by the Assistance of
their chosen Servants the Magicians; who, like the Almoners of a great Prince,
are always laying before their Eyes Suitable Objects for their Help and
Benevolence.

This is a formal Story, and might have some Weight in it, if it were not that
it wanted Truth of Fact to support it; and that this is so, we must believe,
'till we get the following Difficulties removed. The first is, How do they know
the Condition and Circumstances of those that want to be assisted? That these
good Spirits must either know it by an infinite Prescience, by which they must
every one of them know every thing, and that not every thing that is visible to
human Eyes and Real, but every invisible and imaginary Thing, the Thoughts, the
Anguish of the Soul, the Desires, Wishes, Fears, Terrors, and Hopes of, not
only the particular Persons they are to assist, but of all People whatever, in
all Places and Times, and on every particular Occasion whatever; and to do so
would be to be absolutely and essentially God, and every one of them separately
so; a Thought attended with a Heap of horrid Confusions, and forming distracted
Images in the Mind, such as tend to all manner of Blasphemies on one hand, or
gross Absurdities on the other.

The next thing is, if the good Spirits cannot by their own Prescience know the
Condition and Circumstances of those that may want their Assistance; how, or by
whom must they be, or are they informed of it?

Now here is the only Crisis in which the Magician makes himself necessary; for
if the good Spirits had, joined to so universal Beneficence in their
Disposition, an infinite Knowledge of all the Persons and their Circumstances
who stood in any need of their Help, they would then certainly, in consequence
of the general good Disposition of their Nature, immediately apply themselves
to the proper Objects, and in Compassion to them would relieve and assist them
of their own free Goodness and Beneficence, not needing the Interposition of
any other Agent whatsoever.

But now this we do not find: but these good Spirits, with all the Good Will
which they bear to us, yet sit passively still, and see all the Miseries of
Mankind, and all the Distresses which this or that particular Person labors
under, and perhaps languishes in, and at last lets him perish without the least
Help or Assistance.

This, I think, destroys the very Notion of their Prescience, or else it must
destroy the Notion of their Beneficence; one or other must drop: they must
either not know of the miserable Wretch and his Distresses, who wants their
Assistance; or knowing it, they must want a Will or Power to assist and deliver
him.

But here comes in the Magician, and he truly, to make himself a necessary Man
in his Generation, is to be made acquainted with our Distresses and our
Complaints, and he is to lay them before these good Spirits, and procure their
Answers; in which Case it follows most naturally,

First, That those good Spirits are short-sighted, ignorant and uninform'd
Beings, 'till they receive Information from some inferior Hand: Thus in short,
the Counselor at Law; he is ready to give his Advice in the most difficult
Case, and perfectly qualifyed and able to direct what you should do; but he
sits in his Chambers in the Temple or in Lincoln's Inn, and waits (perfectly
passive in all Business) 'till the Client, brought by the Attorney or
Solicitor, comes to him with his Brief; and if the Client does not come, he
may sit still and be ruined for any Advice or Assistance the Lawyer will give
him, 'till he is asked: Or as the Physician; he is Master of his Business, able
to direct and advise, able to pre^cribe a Specific, a certain Cure, for such
or such Distempers; but sits in his Study, and stirs not out of his easy
Chair, to do the distressed People in his Neighborhood any good, or to help
them in their greatest Distress, 'till he is sent for, and the Case laid before
him, and then he shows his beneficent good Disposition: If they have staid
'till the Distemper is ^o far gone, he pities them and shows his Concern for
them; but adds, Why did not you let me know his Condition sooner? I could have
saved his Life if you had sent to me in time; but how should I do him any good,
when you did not so much as let me know he was sick? and thus the poor Patient
languishes and dies, and the Physician is not blamed by any body, for how
should he help him, when they did not send to him for Advice, or so much as let
him know he was sick?

Secondly, That the Magicians are a most necessary Generation of Men, that
without them the miserable World would be robbed of the Assistance of all those
beneficent good Spirits in the invisible World, which wait to do us good, but
cannot apply themselves to exert the good Dispositions they are filled with,
for want of knowing the Condition and Circumstances of those distressed
Creatures which stand in need of their Help; and that those Magians being the
only Men that converse in that invisible World, and hold any Correspondence
with the Spirits that are disposed to assist us, they alone can hand that
Assistance to us, being the only People that can acquaint the said good Spirits
with our Condition.

Thirdly, That therefore it is our only Business to cherish and encourage these
useful Men called Magicians, and to take care that the Race be not extinct, and
the World deprived of their extraordinary Performances.

This would be a noble Doctrine for the Men o^ Figures and Circles, a Magician
would outdo al^ the Mountebanks, Quacks and Pretenders to infallible Remedies
in the World; they would bring Law, Physic and Divinity into one Head of
Practice, and, good Spirits inspiring, they would cur^^ the Age of all its
Distempers both of Soul an^ Body, they would resolve all Cases of Conscience
Jure divino, cure all the Incurables in Guy's Hospital, and make that old -- 's
Charity as useless as his -- s. They would abridge the Practice of the Law to
Perfection, and bring all the Pleadings at Bar to Chamber Practice; the good
Spirits would all be Peacemakers, and Magicians be general Arbitrators.

But this not being at present our Case, from hence I venture to conclude, that
these good Spirits, if such there be, are not so intimate with our modern
Magicians as the latter pretend they are; and it is to be doubted these carry on
their Intelligence with a different sort of Spirits, and in a Manage savouring
a little more of the Diabolick than the Angelick; or, as I said before, with no
Spirits at all.

FINIS.

