HOMER'S BATTLE OF THE FROGS and MICE.

[Price 1 s. 6 d.]

HOMER'S BATTLE OF THE Frogs and Mice. WITH THE REMARKS of ZOILUS. To which is
Prefixed, The LIFE of the said ZOILUS.

Vide quam iniqui sunt divinorum munerum Aestimatores, etiam quidam Professi
Sapientiam. Seneca. LONDON, Printed for BERNARD LINTOT, between the
Temple-Gates. MDCCXVII.

PREFACE.
HAVING some Time ago heard, that the Translation of HOMER'S Iliad would be
attempted, I resolved to confer with the Gentleman who undertook it. I found
him of a tall Presence, and thoughtful Countenance, with his Hands folded, his
Eyes fixed, and his Beard untrimm'd. This I took to be a good Omen, because he
thus resembled the Constantinopolitan Statue of HOMER which Cedrenus describes,
and surely nothing could have been liker, had he but arrived at the Character
of Age and Blindness. As my Business was to be my Introduction, I told him how
much I was acquainted with the secret History of HOMER; that no one better
knows his own Horse, than I do the Camel of Bactria, in which his Soul resided
at the Time of the Trojan Wars; that my Acquaintance continued with him, as he
appeared in the Person of the Grecian Poet; that I knew him in his next
Transmigration into a Peacock; was pleased with his Return to Manhood, under
the Name of Ennius at Rome; and more pleased to hear he would soon revive under
another Name, with all his full Luster, in England. This particular Knowledge,
added I, which sprung from the Love I bear him, has made me fond of a
Conversation with you, in Order to the Success of your Translation.

The civil Manner in which he received my Proposal encouraging me to proceed, I
told him, there were Arts of Success, as well as Merits to obtain it; and that
he, who now dealt in Greek, should not only satisfy himself with being a good
Grecian, but also contrive to hasten into the Repute of it. He might therefore
write in the Title Page, Translated from the Original GREEK, and select a Motto
for his Purpose out of the same Language. He might obtain a Copy of Verses
written in it to prefix to the Work; and not call the Titles of each Book, The
First, and Second, but Iliad Alpha, and Beta. He might retain some Names which
the World is least acquainted with, as his old Translator Chapman uses
Ephaistus instead of Vulcan, Baratrum for Hell; and if the Notes were filled
with Greek Verses, it would more increase the Wonder of many Readers. Thus I
went on; when he told me, smiling, I had shown him indeed a Set of Arts very
different from Merit, for which Reason, he thought, he ought not to depend upon
them. A Success, says he, founded on the Ignorance of others, may bring a
temporary Advantage, but neither a conscious Satisfaction, nor future Fame to
the Author. Men of Sense despise the Affectation which they easily see through,
and even they who were dazzled with it at first, are no sooner informed of its
being an Affectation, but they imagine it also a Veil to cover Imperfection.

The next Point I ventured to speak on, was the Sort of Poetry he intended to
use; how some may fancy, a Poet of the greatest Fire would be imitated better
in the Freedom of Blank Verse, and the Description of War sounds more pompous
out of Rhyme. But, will the Translation, said he, be thus removed enough from
Prose, without greater Inconveniences? What Transpositions is Milton forced to,
as an Equivalent for Want of Rhyme, in the Poetry of a Language which depends
upon a natural Order of Words? And even this would not have done his Business,
had he not given the fullest Scope to his Genius, by choosing a Subject upon
which there could be no Hyperboles. We see (however he be deservedly
successful) that the Ridicule of his Manner succeeds better than the Imitation
of it; because Transpositions, which are unnatural to a Language, are to be
fairly derided, if they ruin it by being frequently introduced; and because
Hyperboles, which outrage every lesser Subject where they are seriously used,
are often beautiful in Ridicule. Let the French, whose Language is not copious,
translate in Prose; but ours, which exceeds it in Copiousness of Words, may
have a more frequent Likeness of Sounds, to make the Unison or Rhyme easier; a
Grace of Music, that attones for the Harshness our Consonants and
Monysyllables occasion.

After this, I demanded what Air he would appear with? whether antiquated, like
Chapman's Version, or modern, like La Motte's Contraction. To which he
answered, by desiring me to observe what a Painter does who would always have
his Pieces in Fashion. He neither chooses to draw a Beauty in a Ruff, or a
French-Head; but with its Neck uncovered, and in its natural Ornament of Hair
curled up, or spread becomingly: So may a Writer choose a natural Manner of
expressing himself which will always be in Fashion, without affecting to borrow
an odd Solemnity and unintelligible Pomp from the past Times, or humouring the
present by falling into its Affectations, and those Phrases which are born to
die with it.

I asked him, lastly, whether he would be strictly litteral, or expatiate with
further Licenses? I would not be litteral, replies he, or tied up to Line for
Line in such a Manner, wherein it is impossible to express in one Language what
has been delivered in another. Neither would I so expatiate, as to alter my
Author's Sentiments, or add others of my own. These Errors are to be avoided on
either Hand, by adhering not only to the Word, but the Spirit and Genius of an
Author; by considering what he means, with what beautiful Manner he has
expressed his Meaning in his own Tongue, and how he would have expressed
himself, had it been in ours. Thus we ought to seek for HOMER in a Version of
HOMER: Other Attempts are but Transformations of him; such as Ovid tells us,
where the Name is retained, and the Thing altered: This will be really what you
mentioned in the Compliment you began with, a Transmigration of the Poet from
one Country into another.

Here ended the serious Part of our Conference. All I remember further was,
that having asked him, what he designed with all those Editions and Comments I
observed in his Room? he made Answer, That if any one, who had a Mind to find
Fault with his Performance, would but stay 'till it was entirely finished, he
should have a very cheap Bargain of them.

Since this Discourse, I have often resolved to try what it was to translate in
the Spirit of a Writer, and at last, chose the Battle of the Frogs and Mice,
which is ascribed to HOMER; and bears a nearer Resemblance to his Iliad, than
the Culex does to the Aeneid of Virgil. Statius and others think it a Work of
Youth, written as a Prelude to his greater Poems. Chapman thinks it the Work of
his Age, after he found Men ungrateful; to show he could give Strength, Lineage
and Fame as he pleased, and praise a Mouse as well as a Man. Thus, says he, the
Poet professedly flung up the World, and applied himself at last to Hymns. Now,
though this Reason of his may be nothing more than a Scheme formed out of the
Order in which HOMER's Works are printed, yet does the Conjecture that this
Poem was written after the Iliad, appear probable, because of its frequent
Allusions to that Poem, and particularly that there is not a Frog or a Mouse
killed, which has not its parallel Instance there, in the Death of some Warrior
or other.

The Poem itself is of the Epick Kind; the Time of its Action the Duration of
two Days; the Subject (however in its Nature frivolous, or ridiculous) raised,
by having the most shining Words and Deeds of Gods and Heroes accommodated to
it: And while other Poems often compare the illustrious Exploits of great Men
to those of Brutes, this always heightens the Subject by Comparisons drawn from
Things above it. We have a great Character given it with Respect to the Fable
in Gaddius de Script. non Eccles. It appears, says he, nearer Perfection than
the Iliad, or Odysses, and excels both in Judgment, Wit, and exquisite Texture,
since it is a Poem perfect in its own Kind. Nor does Crusius speak less to its
Honor, with Respect to the Moral, when he cries out in an Apostrophe to the
Reader; Whoever you are, mind not the Names of these little Animals, but look
into the Things they mean; call them Men, call them Kings, or Counselors, or
humane Polity itself, you have here Doctrines of every Sort. And indeed, when I
hear the Frog talk concerning the Mouse's Family, I learn, Equality should be
observed in making Friendships; when I hear the Mouse answer the Frog, I
remember, that a Similitude of Manners should be regarded in them; when I see
their Councils assembling, I think of the Bustles of humane Prudence; and when
I see the Battle grow warm and glorious, our Struggles for Honor and Empire
appear before me.

This Piece had many Imitations of it in Antiquity, as the Fight of the Cats,
the Cranes, the Starlings, the Spiders, etc. That of the Cats is in the
Bodleian Library, but I was not so lucky as to find it. I have taken the
Liberty to divide my Translation into Books (though it be otherwise in the
Original) according as the Fable allowed proper Resting-Places, by varying its
Scene, or Nature of Action: This I did, after the Example of Aristarchus and
Zenodotus in the Iliad. I then thought of carrying the Grammarians Example
further, and placing Arguments at the Head of each, which I framed as follows,
in Imitation of the short Ancient Greek Inscriptions to the Iliad.

BOOK I. In Alpha, the Ground
Of the Quarrel is found.
BOOK II. In Beta, we
The Council see.
BOOK III. Dire Gamma relates
The Work of the Fates.
But as I am averse from all Information which lessens our Surprise, I only
mention these for a Handle to quarrel with the Custom of long Arguments before
a Poem. It may be necessary in Books of Controversy or abstruse Learning, to
write an Epitome before each Part; but it is not kind to forestal us in a Work
of Fancy, and make our Attention remiss by a previous Account of the End of it.

The next Thing which employed my Thoughts was the Heroes Names. It might
perhaps take off somewhat from the Majesty of the Poem, had I cast away such
noble Sounds as, Physignathus, Lycopinax, and Crambophagus, to substitute
Bluffcheek, Lickdish, and Cabbage-Eater, in their Places. It is for this Reason
I have retained them untranslated: However, I place them in English before the
Poem, and sometimes give a short Character extracted out of their Names; as in
Polyphonus, Pternophagus, etc. that the Reader may not want some Light of their
Humor in the Original.

But what gave me a greater Difficulty was, to know how I should follow the
Poet, when he inserted Pieces of Lines from his Iliad, and struck out a
Sprightliness by their new Application. To supply this in my Translation, I
have added one or two of HOMER'S Particularities; and used two or three
Allusions to some of our English Poets who most resemble him, to keep up some
Image of this Spirit of the Original with an equivalent Beauty. To use more
might make my Performance seem a Cento rather than a Translation, to those who
know not the Necessity I lay under.

I am not ignorant, after all my Care, how the World receives the best
Compositions of this Nature. A Man need only go to a Painter's, and apply what
he hears said of a Picture to a Translation, to find how he shall be used upon
his own, or his Author's Account. There one Spectator tells you, a Piece is
extremely fine, but he sets no Value on what is not like the Face it was drawn
for, while a second informs you, such another is extremely like, but he cares
not for a Piece of Deformity, though its Likeness be never so exact.

Yet notwithstanding all which happens to the best, when I translate, I have a
Desire to be reckoned amongst them; and I shall obtain this, if the World will
be so good-natured as to believe Writers that give their own Characters: Upon
which Presumption, I answer to all Objections beforehand, as follows:

When I am litteral, I regard my Author's Words; when I am not, I translate in
his Spirit. If I am low, I choose the narrative Style; if high, the Subject
required it. When I am enervate, I give an Instance of ancient Simplicity; when
affected, I show a Point of modern Delicacy. As for Beauties, there never can
be one found in me which was not really intended; and for any Faults, they
proceeded from too unbounded Fancy, or too nice Judgment, but by no means from
any Defect in either of those Faculties.

THE LIFE OF ZOILUS.
THE LIFE OF ZOILUS.
Pendentem volo Zoilum videre. Martial.
THEY who have discoursed concerning the Nature and Extent of Criticism, take
Notice, That Editions of Authors, the Interpretations of them, and the Judgment
which is passed upon each, are the three Branches into which the Art divides
itself, But the last of these, that directs in the Choice of Books, and takes
Care to prepare us for reading them, is by the learned Bacon called the Chair
of the Critics. In this Chair (to carry on the Figure) have sat Aristotle,
Demetrius Phalereus, Dionysius Halicarnassensis, Cicero, Horace, Quintillian,
and Longinus; all great Names of Antiquity, the Censors of those Ages which
went before, and the Directors of those that come after them, with Respect to
the natural and perspicuous Manners of Thought and Expression, by which a
correct and judicious Genius may be able to write for the Pleasure and Profit
of Mankind.

But whatever has been advanced by Men really great in themselves, has been
also attempted by others of Capacities either unequal to the Undertaking, or
which have been corrupted by their Passions, and drawn away into partial
Violences: So that we have sometimes seen the Province of Criticism usurped, by
such who judge with an obscure Diligence, and a certain Dryness of
Understanding, incapable of comprehending a figurative Style, or being moved by
the Beauties of Imagination; and at other Times by such, whose natural
Moroseness in general, or particular Designs of Envy, has rendered them
indefatigable against the Reputation of others.

In this last Manner is ZOILUS represented to us by Antiquity, and with a
Character so abandoned, that his Name has been since made Use of to brand all
succeeding Critics of his Complexion. He has a Load of Infamy thrown upon him,
great, in Proportion to the Fame of HOMER, against whom he opposed himself: If
the one was esteemed as the very Residence of Wit, the other is described as a
Profligate, who would destroy the Temple of Apollo and the Muses, in Order to
have his Memory preserved by the envious Action. I imagine it may be no
ungrateful Undertaking to write some Account of this celebrated Person, from
whom so many derive their Character; and I think the Life of a Critic is not
unseasonably put before the Works of his Poet, especially when his Censures
accompany him. If what he advances be just, he stands here as a Censor; if
otherwise, he appears as an Addition to the Poet's Fame, and is placed before
him with the Justice of Antiquity in its Sacrifices, when, because such a Beast
had offended such a Deity, he was brought annually to l is Altar to be slain
upon it.

ZOILUS was born at Amphipolis a City of Thrace, during the Time in which the
Macedonian Empire flourished. Who his Parents were is not certainly known, but
if the Appellation of Thracian Slave, which the World applied to him, be not
merely an Expression of Contempt, it proves him of mean Extraction. He was a
Disciple of one Polycrates a Sophist, who had distinguished himself by writing
against the great Names of the Ages before him; and who, when he is mentioned
as his Master, is said to be particularly famous for a bitter Accusation or
Invective against the Memory of Socrates. In this Manner is ZOILUS set out to
Posterity, like a Plant naturally baneful, and having its Poison rendered more
acute and subtle by a Preparation.

In his Person he was tall and meagre, his Complexion was pale, and all the
Motions of his Face were sharp. He is represented by Aelian, with a Beard
nourished to a prodigious Length, and his Head kept close shaved, to give him a
Magisterial Appearance: His Coat hung over his Knees in a slovenly Fashion; his
Manners were formed upon an Aversion to the Customs of the World. He was fond
of speaking ill, diligent to sow Dissension, and from the constant Bent of his
Thought, had obtained that Sort of Readiness for Slander or Reproach, which is
esteemed Wit by the light Opinion of some, who take the Remarks of ill Nature
for an Understanding of Mankind, and the abrupt Lashes of Rudeness for the
Spirit of Expression. This, at last, grew to such a Height in him, that he
became careless of concealing it; he threw off all Reserves and Managements in
Respect of others, and the Passion so far took the Turn of a Frenzy, that being
one Day asked, why he spoke ill of every one? It is (says he) because I am not
able to do them Ill, though I have so great a Mind to it. Such extravagant
Declarations of his general Enmity made Men deal with him as with the Creature
he affected to be; they no more spoke of him as belonging to the Species he
hated; and from henceforth his learned Speeches or fine Remarks could obtain no
other Title for him, but that of The Rhetorical Dog.

While he was in Macedon he employed his Time in writing, and reciting what he
had written in the Schools of Sophists. His Oratory (says Dionisius
Halicarnassensis) was always of the demonstrative Kind, which concerns itself
about Praise or Dispraise. His Subjects were the most approved Authors, whom he
chose to abuse upon the Account of their Reputation; and to whom, without going
round the Matter in faint Praises or artificial Insinuations, he used to deny
their own Characteristicks. With this Gallantry of Opposition did he censure
Zenophon for Affectation, Plato for vulgar Notions, and Isocrates for
Incorrectness. Demosthenes, in his Opinion, wanted Fire, Aristotle Subtilty,
and Aristophanes Humor. But, as to have Reputation was with him a sufficient
Cause of Enmity, so to have that Reputation universal, was what wrought his
Frenzy to its wildest Degree; for which Reason it was HOMER with whom he was
most implacably angry. And certainly, if Envy choose its Object for the Power
to give Torment, it should here (if ever) have the Glory of fully answering its
Intentions; for the Poet was so worshipped by the whole Age, that his Critic
had not the common Alleviation of the Opinion of one other Man, to concur in
his Condemnation.

ZOILUS however went on with indefatigable Industry in a voluminous Work which
he entitled, The (...), or Censure of HOMER: 'Till having at last finished it,
he prepares to send it into the World with a pompous Title at the Head,
invented for himself by Way of Excellency, and thus inserted after the Manner
of the Ancients.

ZOILUS, the Scourge of HOMER, writ this against that Lover of Fables. Thus did
he value himself upon a Work, which the World has not thought worth
transmitting to us, and but just left a Specimen in five or six Quotations,
which happen to be preserved by the Commentators of that Poet against whom he
writ it. If any One be fond to form a Judgment upon him from these Instances,
they are as follows:

Il. 1. He says, HOMER is very ridiculous (a Word he was noted to apply to him)
when he makes such a God as Apollo employ himself in killing Dogs and Mules.

Il. 5. HOMER is very ridiculous in describing Diomedes's Helmet and Armor, as
sparkling, and in a Blaze of Fire about him, for then why was he not burned by
it?

Il. 5. When Idaeus quitted his fine Chariot, which was entangl'd in the Fight,
and for which he might have been slain, the Poet was a Fool for making him
leave his Chariot, he had better have run away in it.

Il. 24. When Achilles makes Priam lie out of his Tent, left the Greeks should
hear of his being there, the Poet had no Breeding, to turn a King out in that
Manner.

Od. 9. The Poet says, Ulysses lost an equal Number out of each Ship. The
Critic says, that is impossible.

Od. 10. He derides the Men who were turned into Swine, and calls them HOMER'S
poor little blubbering Pigs. The first five of these Remarks are found in
Didymus, the last in Longinus.

Such as these are the cold Jests and trifling Quarrels, which have been
registered from a Composition that (according to the Representation handed down
to us) was born in Envy, lived a short Life in Contempt, and lies for ever
buried with Infamy.

But, as his Design was judged by himself wonderfully well accomplished,
Macedon began to be esteemed a Stage too narrow for his Glory; and Egypt,
which had then taken Learning into its Patronage, the proper Place where it
ought to diffuse its Beams, to the Surprise of all whom he would persuade to
reckon themselves hitherto in the Dark, and under the Prejudices of a false
Admiration. However as he had prepared himself for the Journey, he was suddenly
diverted for a while by the Rumor of the Olympic Games, which were at that
Time to be celebrated. Thither he steered his Course full of the Memory of
Herodotus, and others who had successfully recited in that large Assembly; and
pleased to imagine he should alter all Greece in their Notions of Wit before he
left it.

Upon his Arrival, he found the Field in its Preparation for Diversion. The
Chariots stood for the Race, carved and gilded, the Horses were led in costly
Trappings, some practiced to wrestle, some to dart the Spear, (or whatever they
designed to engage at) in a Kind of Flourish beforehand: Others were looking on
to amuse themselves; and all gaily dressed according to the Custom of those
Places. Through these did ZOILUS move forward, bald-headed, bearded to the
Middle, in a long sad-colour'd Vestment, and inflexibly stretching forth his
Hands filled with Volumns rolled up to a vast Thickness: a Figure most
venerably slovenly! able to demand Attention upon Account of its Oddness. And
indeed, he had no sooner fixed himself upon an Eminence, but a Crowd flocked
about him to know what he intended. Then the Critic casting his Eyes on the
Ring, opened his Volume slowly, as considering with what Part he might most
properly entertain his Audience. It happened, that the Games at Patroclus's
Obsequies came first into his Thought; whether it was that he judged it
suitable to the Place, or knew that he had fallen as well upon the Games
themselves, as upon HOMER for celebrating them, and could not resist his
natural Disposition to give Mankind Offense. Every One was now intently
fastened upon him, while he undertook to prove, that those Games signified
nothing to the Taking of Troy, and therefore only furnished an impertinent
Episode: that the Fall of the Lesser Ajax in Cow Dung, the Squabble of the
Chariot-Race, and other Accidents which attend such Sports, are mean or
trifling: and a World of other Remarks, for which he still affirmed HOMER to be
a Fool, and which they that heard him took for studied Invectives against those
Exercises they were then employed in. Men who frequent Sports, as they are of a
cheerful Disposition, so are they Lovers of Poetry: This, together with the
Opinion they were affronted, wrought them up to Impatience and further
Licenses: There was particularly a young Athenian Gentleman who was to run
three Chariots in those Games, who being an Admirer of HOMER, could no longer
contain himself, but cried out, What in the Name of Castor have we here, ZOILUS
from Thrace? and as he said it, struck him with a Chariot-Whip. Immediately
then a Hundred Whips were seen curling round his Head; so that his Face,
naturally deformed, and heightened by Pain to its utmost Caricatura, appeared
in the Midst of them, as we may fancy the Visage of Envy, if at any Time her
Snakes rise in Rebellion to lash their Mistress. Nor was this all the
Punishment they decreed him, when once they imagined he was ZOILUS: The
Scyronian Rocks were near 'em, and thither they hurried him with a general Cry,
to that speedy Justice which is practiced at Places of Diversion.

It is here, that, according to Suidas, the Critic expired. But we following
the more numerous Testimonies of other Authors, conclude he escaped either by
the Lowness of those Rocks whence he was thrust, or by Bushes which might break
his Fall; and soon after following the Courses of his first Intention, he set
Sail for Egypt.

Egypt was at this Time governed by Ptolomy Philadelphus, a Prince
passionately fond of Learning, and learned Men; particularly an Admirer of
HOMER to Adoration. He had built the finest Library in the World, and made the
choicest, as well as most numerous Collection of Books. No Encouragements were
wanting from him to allure Men of the brightest Genius to his Court, and no
Time thought too much which he spent in their Company. From hence it is that we
hear of Eratosthenes and Aristophanes, those universal Scholars, and candid
Judges of other Men's Performances: Callimachus, a Poet of the most easy,
courteous Delicacy, famous for a Poem on the Cutting of Berenice's Hair; and
whom Ovid so much admired as to say, It was Reason enough for him to love a
Woman, if she would but tell him he exceeded Callimachus; Theocritus, the most
famous in the Pastoral Way of Writing; And among the young Men, Aristarchus and
Apollonius Rhodius, the one of whom proved a most judicious Critic, the other
a Poet of no mean Character.

These and many more filled the Court of that munificent Prince, whose liberal
Dispensations of Wealth and Favor became Encouragements to every One to exert
their Parts to the utmost; like Streams which flow through different Sorts of
Soils, and improve each in that for which it was adapted by Nature.

Such was the Court when ZOILUS arrived; but before he entered Alexandria, he
spent a Night in the Temple of Isis, to enquire of the Success of his
Undertaking; not that he doubted the Worth of his Works, but his late
Misfortune had instructed him, that others might be ignorant of it. Having
therefore performed the accustomed Sacrifice, and composed himself to rest upon
the Hide, he had a Vision which foretold of his future Fame.

He found himself sitting under the Shade of a dark Yew, which was covered with
Hellebore and Hemlock, and near the Mouth of a Cave, where fate a Monster,
pale, wasted, surrounded with Snakes, fost'ring a Cockatrice in her Bosom; and
cursing the Sun, for making the Work of the Deities appear in its Beauty. The
Sight of this bred Fear in him; when she suddenly turning her sunk Eyes, put on
a hideous Kind of a loving Grin, in which he discovered a Resemblance to some
of his own Features. Then turning up her Snakes, and interlacing them in the
Form of a Turbant to give him less Disgust, she thus addressed herself: Go on,
my Son, in whom I am renewed, and prosper in thy brave Undertakings on Mankind:
Assert their Wit to be Dullness; prove their Sense to be Folly; know Truth only
when it is on thy own Side; and acknowledge Learning at no other Time to be
useful. Spare not an Author of any Rank or Size; let not thy Tongue or Pen know
Pity; make the living feel thy Accusations; make the Ghosts of the dead groan
in their Tombs for their violated Fame. But why do I spend Time in needless
Advice, which may be better used in Encouragement? Let thy Eyes delight
themselves with the future Recompense which I have reserved for thy Merit. Thus
spoke the Monster, and shrieked the Name of ZOILUS: The Shades who were to bear
the same Name after him became obedient, and the Mouth of the Cave was filled
with strange supercilious Countenances, which all crowded to make their
Appearance. These began to march before him with an Imitation of his Mien and
Manners: Some crowned with wild Sorrel, others having Leaves of dead Bays
mingled amongst it; while the Monster still described them as he passed, and
touched each with a livid Track of malignant Light that shot from her Eye, to
point where she meant the Description. They (says she) in the Chaplets of wild
Sorrel, are my Writers of Prose, who erect Scandal into Criticism: They who
wear the withered Bay with it, are such who write Poems, which are professedly
to answer all Rules, and be left for Patterns to Men of Genius. These that
follow shall attack others, because they are excelled by them. The next Rank
shall make an Author's being read a sufficient Ground of Opposition. Here march
my Grammarians skilled to torture Words; there my Sons of Sophistry, ever ready
to wrest a Meaning. Observe how faint the foremost of the Procession appear;
and how they are now lost in yonder Mists which roll about the Cave of
Oblivion! This shows, it is not for themselves that they are to be known; the
World will consider them only as managing a Part of thy Endowments, and so know
them by thy Name while they live, that their own shall be lost for ever. But
see how my Cave still swarms! how every Age produces Men, upon whom the
Preservation of thy Memory devolves. My Darling, the Fates have decreed it!
Thou art ZOILUS, and ZOILUS shall be eternal: Come, my Serpents, applaud him
with your Hisses, that is all which now can be done; in modern Times my Sons
shall invent louder Instruments, and artificial Imitations, Noises which drown
the Voice of Merit, shall furnish a Consort to delight them. Here she arose to
clasp him in her Arms, a strange Noise was heard, the Critic started at it,
and his Vision forsook him.

It was with some Confusion, that he lay musing a while upon what he had seen;
but reflecting, that the Goddess had given him no Answer concerning his Success
in Egypt, he strengthened his Heart in his ancient Self-Love and Enmity to
others, and took all for an idle Dream born of the Fumes of Indigestion, or
produced by the dizzy Motion of his Voyage. In this Opinion, he told it at his
Departure to the Priest, who admiring the extraordinary Relation, registered it
in Hieroglyphics at Canopus.

The Day when he came to Alexandria was one on which the King had appointed
Games to Apollo and the Muses, and Honors and Rewards for such Writers as
should appear in them. This he took for a happy Omen at his Entrance, and, not
to lose an Opportunity of showing himself, repaired immediately to the public
Theater, where, as if every Thing was to favor him, the very first Accident
gave his Spleen a Diversion, which we find at large in the Proem of the seventh
Book of Vitruvius. It happened that when the Poets had recited, six of the
Judges decreed the Prizes with a full Approbation of all the Audience. From
this Aristophanes alone dissented, and demanded the first Prize for a Person
whose bashful and interrupted Manner of speaking made him appear the most
disgustful: For he (says the Judge) is alone a Poet, and all the rest Reciters;
and they who are Judges should not approve Thefts, but Writings. To maintain
his Assertion, those Volumns were produced from whence they had been stoll'n:
Upon which the King ordered them to be formally tried for Theft, and dismissed
with Infamy; but placed Aristophanes over his Library, as One, who had given a
Proof of his Knowledge in Books. This Passage ZOILUS often afterward repeated
with Pleasure, for the Number of Disgraces which happened in it to the
Pretenders in Poetry; though his Envy made him still careful not to name
Aristophanes, but a Judge in general.

However, Criticism had only a short Triumph over Poetry, when he made the next
Turn his own, by stepping forward into the Place of reciting. Here he
immediately raised the Curiosity, and drew the Attention of both King and
People: But, as it happened, neither the one nor the other lasted; for the
first Sentence where he had registered his own Name, satisfied their Curiosity;
and the next, where he offered to prove to a Court so devoted to Homer, that he
was ridiculous in every thing, went near to finish his Audience. He was
nevertheless heard quietly for some Time, till the King seeing no End of his
Abusing the Prince of Philological Learning, (as Vitruvius words it) departed
in Disdain. The Judges followed, deriding his Attempt as an Extravagance which
could not demand their Gravity; and the People taking a License from the
Precedent, hooted him away with Obloquy and Indignation. Thus Zoilus failed at
his first Appearance, and was forced to retire, stung with a most impatient
Sense of public Contempt.

Yet notwithstanding all this, he did not omit his Attendance at Court on the
Day following, with a Petition that he might be put upon the Establishment of
Learning, and allowed a Pension. This the King read, but returned no Answer: So
great was the Scorn he conceived against him. But ZOILUS still undauntedly
renewed his Petitions, 'till Ptolomy, being weary of his Persecution, gave him
a flat Denial. HOMER, (says the Prince) who has been dead these Thousand Years,
has maintained Thousands of People; and ZOILUS, who boasts he has more Wit than
he, ought not only to maintain himself, but many others also.

His Petitions being thrown carelessly about, were fallen into the Hands of Men
of Wit, whom, according to his Custom, he had provoked, and whom it is unsafe
to provoke if you would live unexpos'd. I can compare them to nothing more
properly, than to the Be, a Creature winged and lively, fond to rove through
the choicest Flowers of Nature, and blessed at home among the Sweets of its own
Composition: Not ill-natured, yet quick to revenge an Injury; not wearing its
Sting out of the Sheath, yet able to wound more sorely than its Appearance
would threaten. Now these being made personal Enemies by his malicious
Expressions, the Court rung with Petitions of ZOILUS transvers'd; new Petitions
drawn up for him; Catalogues of his Merits, supposed to be collected by
himself; his Complaints of Man's Injustice set to a Harp out of Tune, and a
Hundred other Sports of Fancy, with which their Epigrams played upon him. These
were the Ways of Writing which ZOILUS hated, because they were not only read,
but retained easily, by Reason of their Spirit, Humor, and Brevity; and
because they not only make the Man a Jest upon whom they are written, but a
further Jest, if he attempt to answer them gravely. However, he did what he
could in Revenge; he endeavored to set those whom he envied at Variance among
themselves, and invented Lies to promote his Design. He told Eratosthenes, that
Callimachus said, his Extent of Learning consisted but in a superficial
Knowledge of the Sciences; and whispered Callimachus, that Eratosthenes only
allowed him to have an artful habitual Knack of Versifying. He would have made
Aristophanes believe, that Theocritus rallied his Knowledge in Editions as a
curious Kind of Triffling; and Theocritus, that Aristophanes derided the
rustical Simplicity of his Shepherds. Though of all his Stories, that which he
most valued himself for, was his constant Report, that every one whom he hated
was a Friend to Antiochus King of Syria, the Enemy of Ptolomy.

But Malice is unsuccessful when the Character of its Agent is known: They grew
more Friends to one another, by imagining, that even what had been said, as
well as what had not, was all of ZOILUS'S Invention; and as he grew more and
more the common Jest, their Derision of him became a Kind of Life and Cement to
their Conversation.

Contempt, Poverty, and other Misfortunes had now so assaulted him, that even
they who abhorred his Temper, contributed something to his Support, in common
Humanity. Yet still his Envy, like a vitiated Stomach, converted every Kindness
to the Nourishment of his Disease; and 'twas the whole Business of his Life to
revile HOMER, and those by whom he himself subsisted. In this Humor he had
Days, which were so given up to impatient Ill Nature, that he could neither
write any Thing, nor converse with any One. These he sometimes employed in
throwing Stones at Children; which was once so unhappily returned upon him,
that he was taken up for dead: And this occasioned the Report in some Authors,
of his being stoned to Death in Egypt. Or, sometimes he conveyed himself into
the Library, where he blotted the Name of HOMER wherever he could meet it, and
tore the best Editions of several Volumns; for which the Librarians debarred
him the Privilege of that Place. These and other Mischiefs made him universally
shunned; nay, to such an Extravagance was his Character of Envy carried, that
the more superstitious Egyptians imagined they were fascinated by him, if the
Day were darker, or themselves a little heavier than ordinary; some wore Sprigs
of Rue, by Way of Prevention; and others, Rings made of the Hoof of a wild Ass
for Amulets, lest they should suffer, by his fixing an Eye upon them.

It was now near the Time, when that splendid Temple which Ptolomy built in
Honor of HOMER, was to be opened with a solemn Magnificence: For this the Men
of Genius were employed in finding a proper Pageant. At last, they agreed by
one Consent, to have ZOILUS, the utter Enemy of HOMER, hanged in Effigy; and
the Day being come, it was on this Manner they formed the Procession. Twelve
beautiful Boys, lightly habited in white, with purple Wings representing the
Hours, went on the foremost: After these came a Chariot exceeding high and
stately, where sat one representing Apollo, with another at his Feet, who in
this Pomp sustained the Person of HOMER: Apollo's Laurel had little gilded
Points, like the Appearance of Rays between its Leaves; HOMER'S was bound with
a blue Fillet, like that which is worn by the Priests of the Deity: Apollo was
distinguished by the golden Harp he bore; HOMER, by a Volumn, richly beautified
with Horns of inlaid Ivory, and Tassels of Silver depending from them. Behind
these came three Chariots, in which rode nine Damsels, each of them with that
Instrument which is proper to each of the Muses; among whom, Calliope, to give
her the Honor of the Day, sat in the Middle of the second Chariot, known by
her richer Vestments. After these marched a solemn Train aptly habited, like
those Sciences which acknowledge their Rise or Improvement from this Poet. Then
the Men of Learning who attended the Court, with Wreaths, and Rods or Scepters
of Laurel, as taking upon themselves the Representation of Rhapsodists, to do
Honor, for the Time, to HOMER. In the Rear of all was slowly drawn along an
odd Carriage, rather than a Chariot, which had its Sides artfully turned, and
carved so as to bear a Resemblance to the Heads of snarling Mastiffs. In this
was born, as led in Triumph, a tall Image of Deformity, whose Head was bald,
and wound about with Nettles for a Chaplet. The Tongue lay lolling out, to show
a Contempt of Mankind, and was fork'd at the End, to confess its Love to
Detraction. The Hands were manacled behind, and the Fingers armed with long
Nails, to cut deep through the Margins of Authors. Its Vesture was of the Paper
of Nilus, bearing inscribed upon its Breast in Capital Letters, ZOILUS the
HOMERO-MASTIX; and all the rest of it was scrawl'd with various Monsters of
that River, as Emblems of those Productions with which that Critic used to
fill his Papers. When they had reached the Temple, where the King and his Court
were already placed to behold them from its Galleries, the Image of ZOILUS was
hung upon a Gibbet, there erected for it, with such loud Acclamations as
witnessed the Peoples Satisfaction. This being finished, the Hours knocked at
the Gates, which flew open, and discovered the Statue of HOMER magnificently
seated, with the Pictures of those Cities which contended for his Birth, ranged
in Order around him. Then they who represented the Deities in the Procession,
laying aside their Ensigns of Divinity, ushered in the Men of Learning with a
Sound of Voices, and their various Instruments, to assist at a Sacrifice in
Honor of Apollo and his Favorite HOMER.

It may be easily believed, that ZOILUS concluded his Affairs were at the
utmost Point of Desperation in Egypt; wherefore, filled with Pride, Scorn,
Anger, Vexation, Envy, (and whatever could torment him, except the Knowledge of
his Unworthiness) he flung himself aboard the first Ship which left that
Country. As it happened, the Vessel he sailed in was bound for Asia Minor, and
this landing him at a Port the nearest to Smyrna, he was a little pleased
amidst his Misery to think of decrying HOMER in another Place where he was
adored, and which chiefly pretended to his Birth. So incorrigible was his
Disposition, that no Experience taught him any Thing which might contribute to
his Ease and Safety.

And as his Experience wrought nothing on him, so neither did the Accidents,
which the Opinion of those Times took for ominous Warnings: For, he is reported
to have seen the Night he came to Smyrna, a venerable Person, such as HOMER is
described by Antiquity, threatening him in a Dream; and in the Morning he found
a Part of his Works gnawed by Mice, which, says Aelian, are of all Beasts the
most prophetic; insomuch that they know when to leave a House, even before its
Fall is suspected. Envy, which has no Relaxation, still hurried him forward,
for it is certainly true that a Man has not firmer Resolution from Reason, to
stand by a good Principle, than Obstinacy from perverted Nature, to adhere to a
bad one.

In the Morning as he walked the Street, he observed in some Places
Inscriptions concerning HOMER, which informed him where he lived, where he had
taught School, and several other Particularitieswhich the Smyrneans glory to
have recorded of him; all which awakened and irritated the Passions of ZOILUS.
But his Temper was quite overthrown, by the venerable Appearance which he saw,
upon entering the Homereum; which is a Building composed of a Library, Porch,
and Temple erected to HOMER. Here a Phrenzy seized him which knew no Bounds; he
raved violently against the Poet, and all his Admirers; he trampled on his
Works, he spurned about his Commentators, he tore down his Busts from the
Niches, threw the Medals that were cast of him out of the Windows, and passing
from one Place to another, beat the aged Priests, and broke down the Altar. The
Cries which were occasioned by this Means brought in many upon him; who
observed with Horror how the most sacred Honors of their City were profaned
by the frantic Impiety of a Stranger; and immediately dragged him to
Punishment before their Magistrates, who were then sitting. He was no sooner
there, but known for ZOILUS by some in Court, a Name a long Time most hateful
to Smyrna; which, as it valued itself upon the Birth of HOMER, so bore more
impatiently than other Places, the Abuses offered him. This made them eager to
propitiate his Shade, and claim to themselves a second Merit by the Death of
ZOILUS; wherefore they sentenced him to suffer by Fire, as the due Reward of
his Desecrations; and ordered, that their City should be purified by a
Lustration, for having entertained so impious a Guest. In Pursuance to this
Sentence, he was led away, with his Compositions born before him by the public
Executioner: Then was he fastened to the Stake, prophesying all the while how
many should arise to revenge his Quarrel: particularly, that when Greek should
be no more a Language, there shall be a Nation which will both translate HOMER
into Prose, and contract him in Verse. At last, his Compositions were lighted
to set the Pile on Fire, and he expired sighing for the Loss of them, more than
for the Pain he suffered: And perhaps too, because he might foresee in his
prophetic Rapture, that there should arise a Poet in another Nation, able to
do HOMER Justice, and make him known amongst his People to future Ages.

Thus died this noted Critic, of whom we may observe from the Course of the
History, that as several Cities contended for the Honor of the Birth of HOMER,
so several have contended for the Honor of the Death of ZOILUS. With him
likewise perished his great Work on the Iliad, and the Odysses; concerning
which we observe also, that as the known Worth of HOMER'S Poetry makes him
survive himself with Glory; so the bare Memory of ZOILUS'S Criticism makes him
survive himself with Infamy. These are deservedly the Consequences of that ill
Nature which made him fond of Detraction, that Envy, which made him choose so
excellent a Character for its Object, and those partial Methods of Injustice
with which he treated the Object he had chosen.

Yet how many commence Critics after him, upon the same unhappy Principles?
How many labor to destroy the Monuments of the dead, and summon up the Great
from their Graves to answer for Trifles before them? How many, by
Misrepresentations, both hinder the World from favoring Men of Genius, and
discourage them in themselves; like Boughs of a baneful and barren Nature, that
shoot across a Fruit-Tree; at once to screen the Sun from it, and hinder it by
their Droppings from producing any Thing of Value? But if these who thus follow
ZOILUS, meet not the same Severities of Fate, because they come short of his
Indefatigableness, or their Object is not so universally the Concern of
Mankind; they shall nevertheless meet a Proportion of it in the inward Trouble
they give themselves, and the outward Contempt others fling upon them: A
Punishment which every one has hitherto felt, who has really deserved to be
called a ZOILUS; and which will always be the natural Reward of such Men's
Actions, as long as ZOILUS is the proper Name of Envy.

Names of the MICE.
PSYCARPAX, One who plunders Granaries. Troxartas, A Bread-eater. Lychomile, A
Licker of Meal. Pternotractas, A Bacon-eater. Lychopinax, A Licker of Dishes.
Embasichytros, A Creeper into Pots. Lychenor, A Name from Licking. Troglodytes,
One who runs into Holes. Artophagus, Who feeds on Bread. Tyroglyphus, A
Cheese-Scooper. Pternoglyphus, A Bacon-Scooper. Pternophogus, A Bacon-Eater.
Cnissodioctes, One who follows the Steam of Kitchens. Sitophagus, An Eater of
Wheat. Meridarpax, One who plunders his Share.
Names of the FROGS.
PHYSIGNATHUS, One who swells his Cheeks. Peleus, A Name from Mud. Hydromeduse,
A Ruler in the Waters. Hypsiboas, A loud Bawler. Pelion, From Mud. Seutlaeus,
Called from the Beets. Polyphonus, A great Babbler. Lymnocharis, One who loves
the Lake. Crambophagus, Cabbage-eater. Lymnisius, Called from the Lake.
Calaminthius, From the Herb. Hydrocharis, Who loves the Water Borborocates, Who
lies in the Mud Prassophagus, An Eater of Garlic. Pelusius, From Mud.
Pelobates, Who walks in the Dirt. Prassaeus, Called from Garlic. Craugasides,
from Croaking.
HOMER'S BATTLE of the FROGS and MICE BOOK I.
TO fill my rising Song with sacred Fire,
Ye tuneful Nine, ye sweet Celestial Quire
From Helicon's imbow'ring Height repai^
Attend my Labors, and reward my Pray'^
The dreadful Toils of raging Mars I writ^
The Springs of Contest, and the Fields of Fight;
How threatening Mice advanced with warlike Grace,
And waged dire Combats with the croaking Race.
Not louder Tumults shook Olympus' Towers,
When Earth-born Giants dared Immortal Powers.
These equal Acts an equal Glory claim,
And thus the Muse records the Tale of Fame.
Once on a Time, fatigued and out of Breath,
And just escaped the stretching Claws of Death,
A Gentle Mouse, whom Cats pursued in vain,
Flies swift-of-foot across the neighboring Plain,
Hangs over a Brink, his eager Thirst to cool,
And dips his Whiskers in the standing Pool;
When near a courteous Frog advanced his Head,
And from the Waters, hoarse-resounding said,
What art thou, Stranger? What the Line you boast?
What Chance has cast thee panting on our Coast?
With strictest Truth let all thy Words agree,
Nor let me find a faithless Mouse in thee.
If worthy Friendship, proffered Friendship take,
And entering view the pleasurable Lake:
Range over my Palace, in my Bounty share,
And glad return from hospitable Fare.
This Silver Realm extends beneath my Sway,
And me, their Monarch, all its Frogs obey.
Great Physignathus I, from Peleus' Race,
Begot in fair Hydromeduse' Embrace,
Where by the nuptial Bank that paints his Side,
The swift Eridanus delights to glide.
Thee too, thy Form, thy Strength, and Port proclain
A sceptered King; a Son of Martial Fame;
Then trace thy Line, and aid my guessing Eyes.
Thus ceased the Frog, and thus the Mouse replies.
Known to the Gods, the Men, the Birds that fly
Through wild Expanses of the midway Sky,
My Name resounds; and if unknown to thee,
The Soul of Great Psycarpax lives in me.
Of brave Troxartas' Line, whose sleeky Down
In Love compressed Lychomile the brown.
My Mother she, and Princess of the Plains
Where-e're her Father Pternotroctas reigns:
Born where a Cabin lifts its airy Shed,
With Figs, with Nuts, with varied Dainties fed.
But since our Natures naught in common know,
From what Foundation can a Friendship grow?
These cursing Waters over thy Palace roll;
But Man's high Food supports my Princely Soul.
In vain the circled Loaves attempt to lie
Concealed in Flaskets from my curious Eye,
In vain the Tripe that boasts the whitest Hue,
In vain the gilded Bacon shuns my View,
In vain the Cheeses, Osspring of the Pale,
Or honey'd Cakes, which Gods themselves regale.
And as in Arts I shine, in Arms I fight,
Mixed with the bravest, and unknown to Flight.
Though large to mine the humane Form appear,
Not Man himself can smite my Soul with Fear.
Sly to the Bed with silent Steps I go,
Attempt his Finger, or attack his Toe,
And fix indented Wounds with dext'rous Skill,
Sleeping he feels, and only seems to feel.
Yet have we Foes which direful Dangers cause,
Grim Owls with Talons armed, and Cats with Claws,
And that false Trap, the Den of silent Fate,
Where Death his Ambush plants around the Bait;
All-dreaded these, and dreadful over the rest
The potent Warriors of the tabby Vest,
If to the dark we fly, the Dark they trace,
And rend our Heroes of the nibling Race.
But me, nor Stalks, nor watrish Herbs delight,
Nor can the crimson Radish charm my Sight,
The Lake-resounding Frogs selected Fare,
Which not a Mouse of any Taste can bear.
As thus the downy Prince his Mind expressed,
His Answer thus the croaking King addressed.
Thy Words luxuriant on thy Dainties rove,
And, stranger, we can boast of bounteous Jove:
We sport in Water, or we dance on Land,
And born amphibious, Food from both command
But trust thy self where Wonders ask thy View,
And safely tempt those Seas, I Will bear thee through:
Ascend my Shoulders, firmly keep thy Seat,
And reach my marshy Court, and feast in State.
He said, and leant his Back; with nimble Bound
Leaps the light Mouse, and clasps his Arms around
Then wondering floats, and sees with glad Survey
The winding Banks dissemble Ports at Sea.
But when aloft the curling Water rides,
And wets with azure Wave his downy Sides,
His Thoughts grow conscious of approaching Woe,
His idle Tears with vain Repentance flow,
His Locks he rends, his trembling Feet he rears,
Thick beats his Heart with unaccustomed Fears;
He sighs, and chilled with Danger, longs for Shore:
His Tail extended forms a fruitless Oar,
Half-drench'd in liquid Death his Prayers he spoke,
And thus bemoaned him from the dreadful Lake.
So passed Europa through the rapid Sea,
Trembling and fainting all the venurous Way;
With oary Feet the Bull triumphant rode,
And safe in Crete deposed his lovely Load.
Ah safe at last! may thus the Frog support
My trembling Limbs to reach his ample Court.
As thus he sorrows, Death ambiguous grows,
Lo! from the deep a Water- Hydra rose;
He rolls his sanguin'd Eyes, his Bosom heaves,
And darts with active Rage along the Waves.
Confused, the Monarch sees his hissing Foe,
And dives to shun the sable Fates below.
Forgetful Frog! The Friend thy Shoulders bore,
Unskilled in Swimming, floats remote from Shore.
He grasps with fruitless Hands to find Relief,
Supinely falls, and grinds his Teeth with Grief,
Plunging he sinks, and struggling mounts again,
And sinks, and strives, but strives with Fate in vain.
The weighty Moisture clogs his hairy Vest,
And thus the Prince his dying Rage expressed.
Nor thou, that flings me flound' ring from thy Back,
As from hard Rocks rebounds the shatt'ring Wrack,
Nor thou shall 'scape thy Due, perfidious King!
Pursued by Vengeance on the swiftest Wing:
At Land thy Strength could never equal mine,
At Sea to conquer, and by Craft, was thine.
But Heaven has Gods, and Gods have searching Eyes:
Ye Mice, ye Mice, my great Avengers rise!
This said, he sighing gasp'd, and gasping died.
His Death the young Lychopinax espied,
As on the flowery Brink he passed the Day,
Bask'd in the Beams, and loyter'd Life away:
Loud shrieks the Mouse, his Shrieks the Shores repeat;
The nibbling Nation learn their Hero's Fate:
Grief, dismal Grief ensues; deep Murmurs sound,
And shriller Fury fills the deafen'd Ground;
From Lodge to Lodge the sacred Heralds run,
To fix their Council with the rising Sun;
Where great Troxartas crowned in Glory reigns,
And winds his lengthening Court beneath the Plains;
Psycarpax Father, Father now no more!
For poor Psycarpax lies remote from Shore;
Supine he lies! the silent Waters stand,
And no kind Billow wafts the Dead to Land!
HOMER'S BATTLE of the FROGS and MICE. BOOK II.
WHEN rosy-finger'd Morn had tinged the Clouds.
Around their Monarch-Mouse the Nation crowds*
Slow rose the Monarch, heaved his anxious Breast,
And thus, the Council filled with Rage, addressed.
For lost Psycarpax much my Soul endures,
It Is mine the private Grief, the public, yours.
Three warlike Sons adorned my nuptial Bed,
Three Sons, alas, before their Father dead!
Our Eldest perished by the rav'ning Cat,
As near my Court the Prince unheedful sat.
Our next, an Engine fraught with Danger drew,
The Portal gaped, the Bait was hung in View,
Dire Arts assist the Trap, the Fates decoy,
And Men unpitying killed my gallant Boy!
The last, his Country's Hope, his Parent's Pride,
Plunged in the Lake by Physignathus, died.
Rouse all the War, my Friends! avenge the Deed,
And bleed that Monarch, and his Nation bleed.
His Words in every Breast inspired Alarms,
And careful Mars supplied their Host with Arms.
In verdant Hulls despoiled of all their Beans,
The buskined Warriors stalked along the Plains,
Quills aptly bound, their bracing Corselet made,
Faced with the Plunder of a Cat they flayed,
The Lamp's round Boss affords their ample Shield,
Large Shells of Nuts their covering Helmet yield;
And over the Region, with reflected Rays,
Tall Groves of Needles for their Lances blaze.
Dreadful in Arms the marching Mice appear:
The wondering Frogs perceive the Tumult near,
Forsake the Waters, thick'ning form a Ring,
And ask, and hearken, whence the Noises spring;
When near the Crowd, disclosed to public View,
The valiant Chief Embasichytros drew:
The sacred Herald's Scepter graced his Hand,
And thus his Words expressed his King's Command.
Ye Frogs! the Mice with Vengeance fired, advance,
And decked in Armor shake the shining Lance;
Their hapless Prince by Physignathus slain,
Extends incumbent on the watery Plain.
Then arm your Host, the doubtful Battle try;
Lead forth those Frogs that have the Soul to die.
The Chief retires, the Crowd the Challenge hear,
And proudly-swelling, yet perplexed appear,
Much they resent, yet much their Monarch blame,
Who rising, spoke to clear his tainted Fame.
O Friends, I never forced the Mouse to Death,
Nor saw the Gaspings of his latest Breath.
He, vain of Youth, our Art of Swimming tried,
And venurous, in the Lake the Wanton died.
To Vengeance now by false Appearance led,
They point their Anger at my guiltless Head.
But wage the rising War by deep Device,
And turn its Fury on the crafty Mice.
Your King directs the Way; my Thoughts elate
With Hopes of Conquest, form Designs of Fate.
Where high the Banks their verdant Surface heave,
And the steep Sides confine the sleeping Wave,
There, near the Margin, and in Armor bright,
Sustain the first impetuous Shocks of Fight:
Then where the dancing Feather joins the Crest,
Let each brave Frog his obvious Mouse arrest;
Each strongly grasping, headlong plunge a Foe,
'Till countless Circles whirl the Lake below;
Down sink the Mice in yielding Waters drowned;
Loud flash the Waters; ecchoing Shores resound:
The Frogs triumphant tread the conquered Plain,
And raise their glorious Trophies of the slain.
He spoke no more, his prudent Scheme imparts
Redoubling Ardour to the boldest Hearts.
Green was the Suit his arming Heroes chose,
Around their Legs the Greaves of Mallows close,
Green were the Beetes about theit Shoulders laid,
And green the Colewort, which the Target made.
Formed of the varied Shells the Waters yield,
Their glossy Helmets glist'ned over the Field;
And tap'ring Sea-Reeds for the polished Spear,
With upright Order pierced the ambient Air.
Thus dressed for War, they take the appointed Height,
Poize the long Arms, and urge the promised Fight.
But now, where Jove's irradiate Spires arise,
With Stars surrounded in Ethereal Skies,
(A Solemn Council called) the brazen Gates
Unbar; the Gods assume their golden Seats:
The Sire superior leans, and points to show
What wondrous Combats Mortals wage below:
How strong, how large, the numerous Heroes stride;
What Length of Lance they shake with warlike Pride:
What eager Fire, their rapid March reveals;
So the fierce Centaurs ravaged over the Dales;
And so confirmed, the daring Titans rose,
Heaped Hills on Hills, and bid the Gods be Foes.
This seen, the Power his sacred Visage rears,
He casts a pitying Smile on worldly Cares,
And asks what heavenly Guardians take the List,
Or who the Mice, or who the Frogs assist?
Then thus to Pallas. If my Daughter's Mind
Have joined the Mice, why stays she still behind?
Drawn forth by sav'ry Steams they wind their Way,
And sure Attendance round thine Altar pay,
Where while the Victims gratify their Taste,
They sport to please the Goddess of the Feast.
Thus spoke the Ruler of the spacious Skies,
When thus, resolved, the Blue-Ey'd Maid replies.
In vain, my Father! all their Dangers plead,
To such, thy Pallas never grants her Aid.
My flowery Wreaths they petulantly spoil,
And rob my crystal Lamps of feeding Oil.
(Ills following Ills) but what afflicts me more,
My Veil, that idle Race profanely tore.
The Web was curious, wrought with Art divine;
Relentless Wretches! all the Work was mine.
Along the Loom the purple Warp I spread,
Cast the light Shoot, and crossed the silver Thread;
In this their Teeth a thousand Breaches tear,
The thousand Breaches skilful Hands repair,
For which vile earthly Dunns thy Daughter grieve,
And Gods, that use no Coin, have none to give.
And Learning's Goddess never less can owe,
Neglected Learning gets no Wealth below.
Nor let the Frogs to gain my Succor sue,
Those clamorous Fools have lost my Favor too.
For late, when all the Conflict ceast at Night,
When my stretched Sinews worked with eager Fight.
When spent with glorious Toil, I left the Field,
And sunk for Slumber on my swelling Shield,
Lo from the Deep, repelling sweet Repose,
With noisy Croakings half the Nation rose:
Devoid of Rest, with aching Brows I lay,
'Till Cocks proclaimed the crimson Dawn of Day.
Let all, like me, from either Host forbear,
Nor tempt the flying Furies of the Spear.
Let heavenly Blood (or what for Blood may flow)
Adorn the Conquest of a meaner Foe,
Who, wildly rushing, meet the wondrous Odds,
Though Gods oppose, and brave the wounded Gods.
Over gilded Clouds reclined, the Danger view,
And be the Wars of Mortals Scenes for you.
So moved the blue-ey'd Queen, her Words persuade,
Great Jove assented, and the rest obeyed.
HOMER'S BATTLE of the FROGS and MICE. BOOK III.
NOW Front to Front the marching Armies shine,
Halte'er they meet, and form the lengthening Line
The Chiefs conspicuous seen, and heard afar,
Give the loud Sign to loose the rushing War;
Their dreadful Trumpets deep-mouthed Hornets sound
The sounded Charge remurmurs over the Ground,
Even Jove proclaims a Field of Horror nigh,
And rolls low Thunder through the troubled Sky.
First to the Fight the large Hypsiboas flew,
And brave Lychenor with a Javelin slew,
The luckless Warrior filled with generous Flame,
Stood foremost glitt' ring in the Post of Fame.
When in his Liver struck, the Javelin hung,
The Mouse fell thund' ring, and the Target rung;
Prone to the Ground he sinks his closing Eye,
And soiled in Dust his lovely Tresses lie.
A Spear at Pelion Troglodytes cast,
The missive Spear within the Bosom past;
Death's sable Shades the fainting Frog surround,
And Life's red Tide runs ebbing from the Wound.
Embasichytros felt Seutlaeus' Dart
Transfix, and quiver in his panting Heart;
But great Artophagus avenged the slain,
And big Seutlaeus tumbling loads the Plain,
And Polyphonus dies, a Frog renowned,
For boastful Speech and Turbulence of Sound;
Deep through the Belly pierced, supine he lay,
And breathed his Soul against the Face of Day.
The strong Lymnocharis, who viewed with Ire,
A Victor triumph, and a Friend expire;
And fiercely flung where Troglodytes fought,
With heaving Arms a rocky Fragment caught,
A Warrious versed in Arts, of sure Retreat,
Yet Arts in vain elude impending Fate;
Full on his sinewy Neck the Fragment fell,
And over his Eyelids Clouds eternal dwell.
Lychenor (second of the glorious Name)
Striding advanced, and took no wand' ring Aim;
Through all the Frog the shining Javelin flies,
And near the vanquished Mouse the Victor dies;
The dreadful Stroke Crambophagus affrights,
Long bred to Banquets, less inured to Fights,
Heedless he runs, and stumbles over the Steep,
And wildly flound' ring flashes up the Deep;
Lychenor following with a downward Blow,
Reached in the Lake his unrecover'd Foe;
Gasping he rolls, a purple Stream of Blood
Distains the Surface of the Silver Flood;
Through the wide Wound the rushing Entrails throng,
And slow the breathless Carcass floats along.
Lymnisius good Tyroglyphus assails,
Prince of the Mice that haunt the flowery Vales,
Lost to the milky Fares and rural Seat,
He came to perish on the Bank of Fate.
The dread Pternoglyphus demands the Fight,
Which tender Calaminthlus shuns by Flight,
Drops the green Target, springing quits the Foe,
Glides through the Lake, and safely dives below.
The dire Pternophagus divides his Way
Through breaking Ranks, and leads the dreadful Day.
No nibbling Prince excelled in Fierceness more,
His Parents fed him on the savage Boar;
But where his Lance the Field with Blood imbrued,
Swift as he moved Hydrocharis pursued,
'Till fallen in Death he lies, a shatt' ring Stone
Sounds on the Neck, and crushes all the Bone,
His Blood pollutes the Verdure of the Plain,
And from his Nostrils bursts the gushing Brain.
Lycopinax with Borbocaetes sights
A blameless Frog, whom humbler Life delights;
The fatal Javelin unrelenting flies,
And Darkness seals the gentle Croaker's Eyes.
Incensed Prassophagus with spritely Bound,
Bears Cnissiodortes off the rising Ground,
Then drags him over the Lake deprived of Breath,
And downward plunging, sinks his Soul to Death.
But now the great Psycarpax shines afar,
(Scarce he so great whose Loss provoked the War)
Swift to Revenge his fatal Javelin fled,
And through the Liver struck Pelusius dead;
His freckled Corpse before the Victor fell,
His Soul indignant sought the Shades of Hell.
This saw Pelohates, and from the Flood
Lifts with both Hands a monst'rous Mass of Mud,
The Cloud obscene over all the Warrior flies,
Dishonours his brown Face, and blots his Eyes.
Enraged, and wildly sputtring, from the Shore
A Stone immense of Size the Warrior bore,
A Load for laboring Earth, whose Bulk to raise,
Asks ten degenerate Mice of modern Days.
Full to the Leg arrives the crushing Wound,
The Frog supportless, wriths upon the Ground.
Thus flushed, the Victor wars with matchless Force,
'Till loud Craugasides arrests his Course,
Hoarse-croaking Threats precede, with fatal Speed
Deep through the Belly runs the pointed Reed,
Then strongly tug'd, returned imbrued with Gore,
And on the Pile his reeking Entrails bore.
The lame Sitophagus oppressed with Pain,
Creeps from the desperate Dangers of the Plain.
And where the Ditches rising Weeds supply,
To spread their lowly Shades beneath the Sky,
There lurks the silent Mouse relieved of Heat,
And safe imbower'd, avoids the Chance of Fate.
But here Troxartes, Physignathus there,
Whirl the dire Furies of the pointed Spear:
Then where the Foot around its Ankle plies,
Troxartes wounds, and Physignathus flies,
Halts to the Pool, a safe Retreat to find,
And trails a dangling Length of Leg behind.
The Mouse still urges, still the Frog retires,
And half in Anguish of the Flight expires;
Then pious Ardor young Prassaeus brings,
Betwixt the Fortunes of contending Kings:
Lank, harmless Frog! with Forces hardly grown,
He darts the Reed in Combats not his own,
Which faintly tinkling on Troxarters' Shield,
Hangs at the Point, and drops upon the Field.
Now nobly towering over the rest appears
A gallant Prince that far transcends his Years,
Pride of his Sire, and Glory of his House,
And more a Mars in Combat than a Mouse:
His Action bold, robust his ample Frame,
And Meridarpax his resounding Name.
The Warrior singled from the fighting Crowd,
Boasts the dire Honors of his Arms aloud;
Then strutting near the Lake, with Looks elate,
Threats all its Nations with approaching Fate.
And such his Strength, the Silver Lakes around,
Might roll their Waters over unpeopled Ground.
But powerful Jove who shows no less his Grace
To Frogs that perish, than to human Race,
Felt soft Compassion rising in his Soul,
And shook his sacred Head, that shook the Pole.
Then thus to all the gazing Powers began,
The Sire of Gods, and Frogs, and Mouse, and Man.
What Seas of Blood I view, what Worlds of slain,
An Iliad rising from a Day's Campaign!
How fierce his Javelin over the trembling Lakes
The black-fur'd Hero Meridarpax shakes!
Unless some favoring Deity descend,
Soon will the Frogs loquacious Empire end.
Let dreadful Pallas winged with Pity fly,
And make her Aegis blaze before his Eye:
While Mars refulgent on his rattling Car,
Arrests his raging Rival of the War.
He ceased, reclining with attentive Head,
When thus the glorious God of Combats said.
Nor Pallas, Jove! though Pallas take the Field,
With all the Terrors of her hissing Shield,
Nor Mars himself, though Mars in Armor bright
Ascend his Car, and wheel amidst the Fight;
Nor these can drive the desperate Mouse afar,
And change the Fortunes of the bleeding War.
Let all go forth, all Heaven in Arms arise,
Or launch thy own red Thunder from the Skies.
Such ardent Bolts as flew that wondrous Day,
When Heaps of Titans mixed with Mountains lay,
When all the Giant-Race enormous fell,
And huge Enceladus was hurled to Hell.
'Twas thus the Armipotent advised the Gods,
When from his Throne the Cloud-Compeller nods,
Deep lengthening Thunders run from Pole to Pole,
Olympus trembles as the Thunders roll.
Then swift he whirls the brandished Bolt around,
And headlong darts it at the distant Ground,
The Bolt discharged inwrap'd with Lightning flies,
And rends its flaming Passage through the Skies,
Then Earth's Inhabitants the Niblers shake,
And Frogs, the Dwellers in the Waters, quake.
Yet still the Mice advance their dread Design,
And the last Danger threats the croaking Line,
'Till Jove that inly mourned the Loss they bore,
With strange Assistants filled the frighted Shore.
Poured from the neighboring Strand, deformed to View,
They march, a sudden unexpected Crew,
Strong Suits of Armor round their Bodies close,
Which, like thick Anvils, blunt the Force of Blows;
In wheeling Marches turned oblique they go,
With harpy Claws their Limbs divide below,
Fell Sheers the Passage to their Mouth command,
From out the Flesh the Bones by Nature stand,
Broad spread their Backs, their shining Shouldersrise,
Unnumber'd Joints distort their lengthened Thighs,
With nervous Cords their Hands are firmly braced,
Their round black Eye Balls in their Bosom placed,
On eight long Feet the wondrous Warriors tread,
And either End alike supplies a Head.
These, mortal Wits to call the Crabs, agree;
The Gods have other Names for Things than we.
Now where the Jointures from their Loins depend
The Heroes Tails with sev'ring Grasps they rend.
Here, short of Feet, deprived the Power to fly,
There, without Hands upon the Field they lie.
Wrench'd from their Holds, and scattered all around,
The bended Lances heap the cumber'd Ground.
Helpless Amazement, Fear pursuing Fear,
And mad Confusion through their Host appear,
Over the wild Wast with headlong Flight they go,
Or creep concealed in vaulted Holes below.
But down Olympus to the Western Seas,
Far-shooting Phoebus drove with fainter Rays,
And a whole War (so Jove ordained) begun,
Was fought, and ceased, in one revolving Sun.
ZOILUS'S REMARKS.
Ingenium magni Livor detractat Amici,
Quisquis and ex illo Zoile nomen Habes.

I MUST do my Reader the Justice, before I enter upon these NOTES of ZOILUS, to
inform him, that I have not in any Author met this Work ascribed to him by its
Title, which has made me not mention it in the LIFE. But thus much in general
appears, that he wrote several Things besides his Censure on the Iliad, which,
as it gives Ground for this Opinion, encourages me to offer an Account of the
Treatise.

Being acquainted with a grave Gentleman who searches after Editions, purchases
Manuscripts, and collects Copies, I applied to him for some Editions of this
Poem, which he readily obliged me with. But, added he, taking down a Paper, I
doubt I shall discourage you from your Translation, when I show this Work,
which is written upon the Original, by ZOILUS, the famous Adversary of HOMER.
ZOILUS! said I with Surprise, I thought his Works had long since perished. They
have so, answered he, all, except this little Piece, which has a PREFACE
annexed to it accounting for its Preservation. It seems, when he parted from
Macedon, he left this behind him where he lodged, and where no one entered for
a long Time, in Detestation of the Odiousness of his Character, 'till Maevius
arriving there in his Travels, and being desirous to lie in the same Room,
luckily found it, and brought it away with him. This the Author of the PREFACE
imagins the Reason of Horace's wishing Maevius in the 10th Epode, such a
Shipwreck as HOMER describes; as it were with an Eye to his having done
something disadvantageous to that Poet. From Maevius, the Piece came into the
Hand of Carbilius Pictor, (who, when he wrote against Virgil, called his Book,
with a respectful Imitation of ZOILUS, the Aeneidomastix) and from him into the
Hands of others who are unknown, because the World applied to them no other
Name than that of ZOILUS, in Order to sink their own in Oblivion. Thus it ever
found some learned Philologist or Critic, to keep it secret from the Rage of
HOMER's Admirers; yet not so secret, but that it has still been communicated
among the Literati. I am of Opinion, that our Great Scaliger borrowed it, to
work him up when he writ so sharply against Cardan; and perhaps Le Clerc too,
when he proved Q. Curtius ignorant of every particular Branch of Learning.

This formal Account made me give Attention to what the Book contained; and I
must acknowledge, that whether it be his, or the Work of some Grammarian, it
appears to be writ in his Spirit. The open Profession of Enmity to great
Genius's, and the Fear of nothing so much as that he may not be able to find
Faults enough, are such Resemblances of his strongest Features, that any one
might take it for his own Production. To give the World a Notion of this, I
have made a Collection of some REMARKS, which most struck me, during that short
Time in which I was allowed to peruse the Manuscript.

THE REMARKS OF ZOILUS UPON Homer's Battle OF THE FROGS and MICE.
VERSE I. TO fill my rising Song.] As Protagoras the Sophist found Fault with
the Beginning of the Iliad, for its speaking to the Muse rather with an abrupt
Command, than a solemn Invocation, so I, says ZOILUS, do on the other Hand find
Fault with him for using any Invocation at all before this Poem, or any such
Trifles as he is Author of. If he must ase one, Protagoras is in the right; if
not, I am: This I hold for true Criticism, notwithstanding the Opinion of
Aristotle against us. Nor let any one lay a Stress on Aristotle in this Point;
he alas! knows nothing of Poetry but what he has read in HOMER; his Rules are
all extracted from him, or founded in him. In short, HOMER'S Works are the
Examples of Aristotle's Precepts; and Aristotle's Precepts the Methods HOMER
wrought by. From hence it is to be concluded as the Opinion of this Critic,
that whoever would entirely destroy the Reputation of HOMER, must renounce the
Authority of Aristotle beforehand. The Rules of Building may be of Service to
us, it we design to judge of an Edifice, and discover what may be amiss in it
for the Advantage of future Artificers; but they are of no Use to those who
only intend to overthrow it utterly.

After the Word [ Song,] in the first Line the Original adds, [ What I have
written in my Tablets.] These Words, which are dropped in the Translation as of
no Consequence, the Great ZOILUS has thought fit to expunge; asserting for a
Reason, without backing it with farther Proof, That Tablets were not of so
early Invention. Now, it must be granted, this Manner of proving by Affirmation
is of an extraordinary Nature, but however it has its End with a Set of Readers
for whom it is adapted. One Part of the World knows not with what Assurance
another Part can express itself. They imagine a reasonable Creature will not
have the Face to say any Thing which has not some Shadow of Reason to support
it; and run implicity into the Snare which is laid for good Nature, by these
daring Authors of definitive Sentences upon bare Assertion.

VERSE 15. Whom Cats pursued.] The Greek Word here expressly signifies a Cat:
ZOILUS, whom Perizonius follows, affirms, It was Weezils which the Mouse fled
from; and then objects against its Probability. But it is common with one Sort
of Critics, to show an Author means differently from what he really did, and
then to prove, that the Meaning which they find out for him is good for nothing.

VERSE 25. If worthy Friendship.] In this Proposal begins the Moral of the
whole Piece, which is, that hasty, ill-founded, or unnatural Friendships and
Leagues, will naturally end in War and Discord. But ZOILUS, who is here
mightily concerned to take off from HOMER all the Honor of having designed a
Moral, asserts on the other Hand, That the Poet's whole Intent was to make a
Fable; that a Fable he has made, and one very idle and triffling; that many
Things are ascribed to HOMER, which poor HOMER never dreamed of; and he who
finds them out rather shows his own Parts than discover his Author's Beauties.
In this Opinion has he been followed by several of those Critics, who only dip
into Authors when they have Occasion to write against them. And yet even these
shall speak differently concerning the Design of Writers, if the Question be of
their own Performances; for to their own Works they write Prefaces, to display
the Grandness of the Moral, Regularity of the Scheme, Number and Brightness of
the Figures, and a Thousand other Excellencies, which if they did not tell, no
one would ever imagine. For others, they write Remarks, which tend to contract
their Excellencies within the narrow Compass of their partial Apprehension. It
were well if they could allow such to be as wise as themselves, whom the World
allows to be much wiser: But their being naturally Friends to themselves, and
professedly Adversaries to some greater Genius, easily accounts for these
different Manners of Speaking. I will not leave this Note, without giving you
an Instance of its Practice in the Great Julius Scaliger: He has been free
enough with HOMER in the Remarks he makes upon him; but when he speaks of
himself, I desire my Reader would take Notice of his Modesty; I give his own
Words, Lib. 3. Poet. Cap. 112. In Deum Patrem Hymnum cum scriberemus tanquam
rerum omnium conditorem, ab orbis ipsius creatione ad nos nostraque usque
duximus. -- In quo abduximus animum nostrum a corporis carcere ad liberos
campos contemplationis quae me in illum transformaret. Tum autem sanctissimi
Spiritus ineffabilis vigor ille tanto ardore celebratus est, ut cum lenissimis
numeris esset inchoatus Hymnus, repentino divini Ignis impetu conflagravit.

VERSE 53. The circled Loaves.] ZOILUS here finds Fault with the Mention of
Loaves, Tripes, Bacon and Cheese, as Words below the Dignity of the Epick, as
much, (says he) as it would be to have opprobious Names given in it. By which
Expression we easily see, he hints at the First Book of the Iliad. Now, we must
consider in Answer, that it is a Mouse which is spoken of, that Eating is the
most appearing Characteristick of that Creature, that these Foods are such as
please it most; and to have described particular Pleasures for it in any other
Way, would have been as incongruous, as to have described a haughty loud Anger
without those Names which it throws out in its Fierceness, and which raise it
to its Pitch of Phrenzy. In the one Instance you still see a Mouse before you,
however the Poet raises it to a Man; in the other you shall see a Man before
you; however the Poet raises him to a Demi-God. But some call that low, which
others call natural. Every Thing has two Handles, and the Critic who sets
himself to censure all he meets, is under an Obligation still to lay hold on
the worst of them.

VERSE 75. But me, nor Stalks.] In this Place ZOILUS laughs at the
Ridiculousness of the Poet, who (according to his Representation) makes a
Prince refuse an Invitation in Heroicks, because he did not like the Meat he
was invited to. And, that the Ridicule may appear in as strong a Light to
others as to himself, he puts as much of the Speech as concerns it into
Burlesque Airs and Expressions. This is indeed a common Trick with Remarkers,
which they either practice by Precedent from their Master ZOILUS, or are
beholding for it to the same Turn of Temper. We acknowledge it a fine Piece of
Satyr, when there is Folly in a Passage, to lay it open in the Way by which it
naturally requires to be exposed: Do this handsomely, and the Author is
deservedly a Jest. If, on the contrary, you dress a Passage which was not
originally foolish, in the highest Humor of Ridicule, you only frame something
which the Author himself might laugh at, without being more nearly concerned
than another Reader.

VERSE 103. So passed Europa.] This Simile makes ZOILUS, who sets up for a
professed Enemy of Fables, to exclaim violently. We had, says he, a Frog and a
Mouse hitherto, and now we get a Bull and a Princess to illustrate their
Actions: When will there be an End of this Fabling-Folly and Poetry, which I
value my self for being unacquainted with? O great Polycrates, how happily have
thou observed in thy Accusation against Socrates, That whatever he was before,
he deserved his Poison when he began to make Verses! Now, if the Question be
concerning HOMER'S good or bad Poetry, this is an unqualifying Speech, which
affords his Friends just Grounds of Exception against the Critic. Wherefore,
be it known to all present and future Censors, who have, or shall presume to
glory in an Ignorance of Poetry, and at the same Time take upon them to judge
of Poets, that they are in all their Degrees for ever excluded the Post they
would usurp. In the first Place, they who know neither the Use, nor Practice of
the Art; in the second, they who know it but by Halves, who have Hearts
insensible of the Beauties of Poetry, and are however able to find Fault by
Rules; and, thirdly, they who, when they are capable of perceiving Beauties and
pointing out Defects, are still so ignorant in the Nature of their Business, as
to imagine the Province of Criticism extends itself only on the Side of
Dispraise and Reprehension. How could any one at this Rate be seen with his
proper Balance of Perfection and Error? or what were the best Performances in
this Indulgence of ill Nature, but as Apartments hung with the Deformities of
Humanity, done by some great Hand, which are the more to be abhorred, because
the Praise and Honor they receive, results from the Degree of Uneasiness, to
which they put every Temper of common Goodness?

VERSE 130. Ye Mice, ye Mice.] The Ancients believed that Heroes were turned
into Demigods at their Death; and in general, that departing Souls have
something of a Sight into Futurity. It is either this Notion, or a Care which
the Gods may take to abate the Pride of insulting Adversaries, which a Poet
goes upon, when he makes his Leaders die foretelling the End of those by whom
they are slain. ZOILUS however is against this Passage. He says, That every
Character ought to be strictly kept; that a General ought not to invade the
Character of a Prophet, nor a Prophet of a General. He is positive, That
nothing should be done by any one, without having been hinted at in some
previous Account of him. And this he asserts, without any Allowance made either
for a Change of States, or the Design of the Gods. To confirm this Observation,
he strengthens it with a Quotation out of his larger Work on the Iliads, where
he has these Words upon the Death of Hector: How foolish is it in HOMER to make
Hector (who through the whole Course of the Iliad had made Use of Helenus, to
learn the Will of the Gods) become a Prophet just at his Death? Let every one
be what he ought, without falling into those Parts which others are to sustain
in a Poem. This he has said, not distinguishing rightly between our natural
Dispositions and accidental Offices. And this he has said again, not minding,
that though it be taken from another Book, it is still from the same Author.
However, Vanity loves to gratify itself by the Repetition of what it esteems to
be written with Spirit, and even when we repeat it our selves, provided another
hears us. Hence has he been followed by a Magisterial Set of Men who quote
themselves, and swell their new Performances with what they admire in their
former Treatises. This is a most extraordinary Knack of Arguing, whereby a Man
can never want a Proof, if he be allowed to become an Authority for his own
Opinion.

VERSE 146. And no kind Billow.] How impertinent is this Case of Pity, says
ZOILUS, to bemoan, that the Prince was not tossed toward Land: It is enough he
lost his Life, and there is an End of his Suffering where there is an End of
his Feeling. To carry the Matter farther is just the same foolish Management as
HOMER has shown in his Iliads, which he spins out into forty Triffles beyond
the Death of Hector. But the Critic must allow me to put the Readers in Mind,
that Death was not the last Distress the Ancients believed was to be met upon
Earth. The last was the remaining unbury'd, which had this Misery annexed, that
while the Body was without its Funeral-Rites in this World, the Soul was
supposed to be without Rest in the next, which was the Case of the Mouse before
us. And accordingly the Ajax of Sophocles continues after the Death of its
Hero more than an Act, upon the Contest concerning his Burial. All this ZOILUS
knew very well: But ZOILUS is not the only one, who disputes for Victory rather
than Truth. These foolish Critics write even Things they themselves can
answer, to show how much they can write against an Author. They act unfairly,
that they may be sure to be sharp enough; and triffle with the Reader, in order
to be voluminous. It is needless to wish them the Return they deserve: Their
Disregard to Candor is no sooner discovered, but they are for ever banished
from the Eyes of Men of Sense, and condemned to wander from Stall to Stall, for
a temporary Refuge from that Oblivion which they cannot escape.

BOOK II. VERSE 9. Our Eldest perished.] ZOILUS has here taken the
Recapitulation of those Misfortunes which happened to the Royal Family, as an
Impertinence that expatiates from the Subject; though indeed there seems nothing
more proper to raise that Sort of Compassion, which was to inflame his Audience
to War. But what appears extremely pleasant is, that at the same Time he
condemns the Passage, he should make Use of it as an Opportunity, to fall into
an ample Digression on the various Kinds of Mouse-Traps, and display that
minute Learning which every Critic of his Sort is fond to show himself Master
of. This they imagine is tracing of Knowledge through its hidden Veins, and
bringing Discoveries to Daylight, which Time had covered over. Indefatigable
and useless Mortals! who value themselves for Knowledge of no Consequence, and
think of gaining Applause by what the Reader is careful to pass over unread.
What did the Disquisition signify formerly, whether Ulysses's Son, or his Dog,
was the elder? or how can the Account of a Vesture, or a Player's Masque,
deserve that any should write the Bulk of a Treatise, or others read it when it
is written? A Vanity thus poorly supported, which neither affords Pleasure nor
Profit, is the unsubstantial Amusement of a Dream to our selves, and a
provoking Occasion of our Derision to others.

BOOK II. VERSE 23. Quills aptly bound -- Faced with the Plunder of a Cat they
flayed.] This Passage is something difficult in the Original, which gave ZOILUS
the Opportunity of inventing an Expression, which his Followers conceitedly use
when any Thing appears dark to them. This, say they, let Phoebus explain; as if
what exceeds their Capacity must of Necessity demand Oracular Interpretations,
and an Interposal of the God of Wit and Learning. The Basis of such Arrogance
is the Opinion they have of that Knowledge they ascribe to themselves. They
take Criticism to be beyond every other Part of Learning, because it gives
Judgment upon Books written in every other Part. They think in Consequence,
that every Critic must be a greater Genius than any Author whom he censures;
and therefore if they esteem themselves Critics, they set enthroned Infancy at
the Head of Literature. Criticism indeed deserves a noble Elogy, when it is
enlarged by such a comprehensive Learning as Aristoile and Cicero were Masters
of; when it adorns its Precepts with the consummate Exactness of Quintilian, or
is exalted into the sublime Sentiments of Longinus. But let not such Men tell
us they participate in the Glory of these great Men, and place themselves next
to Phoebus, who, like ZOILUS, entangle an Author in the Wrangles of
Grammarians, or try him with a positive Air and barren Imagination, by the Set
of Rules they have collected out of others.

BOOK II. VERSE 37. Ye Frogs, the Mice.] At this Speech of the Herald's, which
recites the Cause of the War, ZOILUS is angry with the Author, for not finding
out a Cause entirely just; for, says he, it appears not from his own Fable,
that Physignathus invited the Prince with any malicious Intention to make him
away. To this we answer, 1st. That it is not necessary in relating Facts to
make every War have a just Beginning. 2dly, This doubtful Cause agrees better
with the Moral, by showing that ill-founded Leagues have Accidents to destroy
them, even without the Intention of Parties. 3dly, There was all Appearance
imaginable against the Frogs; and if we may be allowed to retort on our
Adversary the Practice of his Posterity, there is more Humanity in an Hostility
proclaimed upon the Appearance of Injustice done us, than in their Custom of
attacking the Works of others as soon as they come out, purely because they are
esteemed to be good. Their Performances, which could derive no Merit from their
own Names, are then sold upon the Merit of their Antagonist: And if they are
sensible of Fame, or even of Envy, they have the Mortification to remember, how
much by this Means they become indebted to those they injure.

BOOK II. VERSE 57. Where high the Banks.] This Project is not put in Practice
during the following Battle, by Reason of the Fury of the Combatants: Yet the
Mention of it is not impertinent in this Place, forasmuch as the probable Face
of Success which it carries with it tended to animate the Frogs. ZOILUS however
cannot be so satisfied; It were better, says he, to cut it entirely out; nor
would HOMER be the worse if half of him were served in the same Manner; so,
continues he, they will find it, whoever in any Country shall hereafter
undertake so odd a Task, as that of Translating him. Thus Envy finds Words to
put in the Mouth of Ignorance; and the Time will come, when Ignorance shall
repeat what Envy has pronounced so rashly.

BOOK II. VERSE 77. And tap'ring Sea-Reed.] If we here take the Reed for that
of our own Growth, it is no Spear to match the long Sort of Needles with which
the Mice had armed themselves; but the Cane, which is rather intended, has its
Splinters stiff and sharp, to answer all the Uses of a Spear in Battle. Nor is
it here to be lightly past over, since ZOILUS moves a Question upon it, that
the Poet could not choose a more proper Weapon for the Frogs, than that which
they choose for themselves in a defensive War they maintain with the Serpents
of Nile. They have this Stratagem, says Aelian, to protect themselves; they
swim with Pieces of Cane across their Mouths, of too great a Length for the
Breadth of the Serpents Threats; by which Means they are preserved from being
swallowed by them. This is a Quotation so much to the Point, that I ought to
have ushered in my Author with more Pomp to dazzle the Reader. ZOILUS and his
Followers, who seldom praise any Man, are however careful to do it for their
own Sakes, if at any Time they get an Author of their Opinion: Though indeed it
must be allowed, they still have a Drawback in their Manner of Praise, and
rather choose to drop the Name of their Man, or darkly hint him in a
Periphrasis, than to have it appear that they have directly assisted the
perpetuating of any one's Memory. Thus, if a Dutch Critic were to introduce
for Example Martial, he would, instead of naming him, say, Ingeniosus ille
Epigrammaticus Bilbilicus. Or, if one of our own were to quote from among
ourselves, he would tell us how it has been remarked in the Works of a learned
Writer, to whom the World is obliged for many excellent Productions, etc. All
which Proceeding is like boasting of our great Friends, when it is to do our
selves an Honor, or the Shift of dressing up one who might otherwise be
disregarded, to make him pass upon the World for a responsible Voucher to our
own Assertions.

BOOK II. VERSE 81. But now where Jove' s.] At this fine Episode, in which the
Gods are introduced, ZOILUS has no Patience left him to remark; but runs some
Lines with a long String of such Expressions as Triffler, Fabler, Liar,
foolish, impious, all which he lavishly heaps upon the Poet. From this Knack of
calling Names, joined with the several Arts of finding Fault, it is to be
suspected, that our ZOILUS'S might make very able Libellers, and dangerous Men
to the Government, if they did not rather turn themselves to be ridiculous
Censors: For which Reason I cannot but reckon the State obliged to Men of Wit;
and under a Kind of Debt in Gratitude, when they take off so much Spleen,
Turbulency, and Ill Nature, as might otherwise spend it self to the Detriment
of the Public.

BOOK II. VERSE 98. If my Daughter's Mind.] This Speech, which Jupiter speaks
to Pallas with a pleasant Kind of Air, ZOILUS takes gravely to Pieces; and
affirms, It is below Jupiter' s Wisdom, and only agreeable with HOMER' S Folly,
that he should borrow a Reason for her assisting the Mice from their Attendance
in the Temple, when they waited to prey upon those Things which were sacred to
her. But the Air of the Speech rendering a grave Answer unnecessary; I shall
only offer ZOILUS an Observation in Return for his. There are upon the Stone
that is carved for the Apotheosis of HOMER, Figures of Mice by his Footstool,
which, according to Cuperus, its Interpreters, some have taken to signify this
Poem; and others those Critics, who tear or vilify the Works of great Men.
Now, if such can be compared to Mice, let the Words of ZOILUS be brought home
to himself and his Followers for their Mortification: That no one ought to
think of meriting in the State of Learning only by debasing the best
Performances, and as it were preying upon those Things which should be sacred
in it.

BOOK II. VERSE 105. In vain my Father.] The Speech of Pallas is disliked by
ZOILUS, because it makes the Goddess carry a Resentment against such
inconsiderable Creatures; though he ought to esteem them otherwise when they
represent the Persons and Actions of Men, and teach us how the Gods disregard
those in their Adversities who provoke them in Prosperity. But, if we consider
Pallas as the Patroness of Learning, we may by an allegorical Application of
the Mice and Frogs, find in this Speech two Sorts of Enemies to Learning; they
who are maliciously mischievous, as the Mice; and they who are turbulent
through Ostentation, as the Frogs. The first are Enemies to Excellency upon
Principle; the second accidentally by the Error of Self-Love, which does not
quarrel with the Excellence itself, but only with those People who get more
Praise than themselves by it. Thus, though they have not the same Perverseness
with the others, they are however drawn into the same Practices, while they
ruin Reputations, lest they should not seem to be learned; as some Women turn
Prostitutes, lest they should not be thought handsome enough to have Admirers.

BOOK III. VERSE 5. The dreadful Trumpets.] Upon the reading of this, ZOILUS
becomes full of Discoveries. He recollects, that HOMER makes his Greeks come to
Battle with Silence, and his Trojans with Shouts, from whence he discovers,
that he knew nothing of Trumpets. Again, he sees, that the Hornet is made a
Trumpeter to the Battle, and hence he discovers, that the Line must not be
HOMER' S. Now had he drawn his Consequences fairly, he could only have found by
the one, that Trumpets were not in use at the taking of Troy; and by the other,
that the Battle of Frogs and Mice was laid by the Poet for a later Scene of
Action than that of the Iliad. But the Boast of Discoveries accompanies the
Affectation of Knowledge; and the Affectation of Knowledge is taken up with a
Design to gain a Command over the Opinions of others. It is too heavy a Task
for some Critics to sway our Judgments by rational Inferences; a pompous
Pretense must occasion Admiration, the Eyes of Mankind must be obscured by a
Glare of Pedantry, that they may consent to be led blindfold, and permit that
an Opinion should be dictated to them without demanding that they may be
reasoned into it.

BOOK III. VERSE 24. Big Seutlaeus Tumbling.] ZOILUS has happened to brush the
Dust of some old Manuscript, in which the Line that kills Seutlaeus is wanting.
And for this cause he fixes a general Conclusion, that there is no Dependence
upon any thing which is handed down for HOMER' S, so as to allow it Praise;
since the different Copies vary amongst themselves. But is it fair in ZOILUS,
or any of his Followers, to oppose one Copy to a Thousand? and are they
impartial who would pass this upon us for an honest Balance of Evidence? When
there is such an Inequality on each Side, is it not more than probable that the
Number carry the Author's Sense in them, and the single one its Transcribers
Errors? It is Folly or Madness of Passion to be thus given over to Partiality
and Prejudices. Men may flourish as much as they please concerning the Value of
a new found Edition, in order to bias the World to particular Parts of it; but
in a Matter easily decided by common Sense, it will still continue of its own
Opinion.

BOOK III. VERSE 69. With Borbocaetes fights.] Through the Grammatical Part of
ZOILUS'S Work he frequently rails at HOMER for his Dialects. These, says he in
one place, the Poet made use of because he could not write pure Greek; and in
another, they strangely contributed to his Fame, by making several Cities who
observed something of their own in his mixed Language, contend for his being
one of their Natives. Now since I have here practiced a License in Imitation of
his, by short'ning the Word Borbocaetes a whole Syllable, it seems a good
Opportunity to speak for him where I defend myself. Remember then, that any
great Genius who introduces Poetry into a Language, has a Power to polish it,
and of all the Manners of speaking then in use, to settle that for Poetical
which he judges most adapted to the Art. Take Notice too, that HOMER has not
only done this for Necessity but for Ornament, since he uses various Dialects
to humor his Sense with Sounds which are expressive of it. Thus much in Behalf
of my Author to answer ZOILUS: As for myself, who deal with his Followers, I
must argue from Necessity, that the Word was stubborn and would not ply to the
Quantities of an English Verse, and therefore I altered it by the Dialect we
call Poetical, which makes my Line so much smoother, that I am ready to cry
with their Brother Lipsius, when he turned an O into an I, Vel ego me amo, vel
me amavit Phoebus quando hoc correxi. To this let me add a Recrimination upon
some of them: As first, such as choose Words written after the Manner of those
who preceded the purest Age of a Language, without the Necessity I have
pleaded, as regundi for regendi, perduit for perdidit, which Restoration of
obsolete Words deserves to be called a Critical License or Dialect. 2 dly,
Those who pretending to Verse without an Ear, use the Poetical Dialect of
Abbreviation, so that the Lines shall run the rougher for it. And, 3 dly, Those
who presume by their Critical Licenses to alter the Spellings of Words; an
Affectation which destroys the Etymology of a Language, and being carried on by
private Hands for Fancy or Fashion, would be a Thing we should never have an
End.

BOOK III. VERSE 149. Nor Pallas, Jove.] I cannot, says ZOILUS, reflect upon
this Speech of Mars, where a Mouse is opposed to the God of War, the Goddess of
Valor, the Thunder of Jupiter, and all the Gods at once, but I rejoice to
think that Pythagoras saw HOMER' S Soul in Hell hanging on a Tree and
surrounded with Serpents for what he said of the Gods. Thus he who hates Fables
answers one with another, and can rejoice in them when they flatter his Envy.
He appears at the Head of his Squadron of Critics, in the full Spirit of one
utterly devoted to a Party; with whom Truth is a Lie, or as bad as a Lie, when
it makes against him; and false Quotations, pass for Truth, or as good as
Truth, when they are necessary to a Cause.

BOOK III. VERSE 203. And a wholeWar.] Here, says ZOILUS, is an End of a very
foolish Poem, of which by this Time I have effectually convinced the World, and
silenced all such for the future, who, like HOMER, write Fables to which others
find Morals, Characters whose Justness is questioned, unnecessary Digressions,
and impious Episodes. But what Assurance can such as ZOILUS have, that the
World will ever be convinced against an established Reputation, by such People
whose Faults in writing are so very notorious? who judge against Rules, affirm
without Reasons, and censure without Manners? who quote themselves for a
Support of their Opinions, found their Pride upon a Learning in Trifles, and
their Superiority upon the Claims they magisterially make? who write of
Beauties in a harsh Style, judge of Excellency with a Lowness of Spirit, and
pursue their Desire to decry it with every Artifice of Envy? There is no
Disgrace in being censured, where there is no Credit to be favored. But, on
the contrary, Envy gives a Testimony of some Perfection in another; and one who
is attacked by many, is like a Hero whom his Enemies acknowledge for such,
when they point all the Spears of a Battle against him. In short, an Author who
writes for every Age, may even erect himself a Monument of those Stones which
Envy throws at him: While the Critic who writes against him can have no Fame
because he has no Success; or if he fancies he may succeed, he should remember,
that by the Nature of his Undertaking he would but undermine his own
Foundation; for he is to sink of Course when the Book which he writes against,
and for which alone he is read, is lost in Disrepute or Oblivion.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for BERNARD LINTOT, between the Temple-Gates.
THE Rt. Honorable the Ld. Lansdown's Plays. Mr. Pope's HOMER, Vol. I, II,
III, in large and small Paper, Folio. -- His Miscellaneous Works collected into
one Volume, Printed as Homer, in large and small Paper, Fol. The Ambassador and
his Functions, Written by Monsieur de Wicquefort, in large and small Paper,
Fol. Fresnoy's Art of Painting, Translated by Mr. Dryden. 2d. Ed. The 5th
Edition of the Clergyman and Gentleman's Recreation in the Art of Gardening, by
the Revd. Mr. Lawrence. The 3d Edition of Letters, Poems and Plays, by Mr.
George Farquhar, with Cuts. The 2d Edition of the Art of Cookery, in Imitation
of Horace's Art of Poetry, by Dr. King. -- His Art of Love, in Imitation of
Ovid de Art amandi. -- His Miscellanies. Callipaedia, or the Art of getting
pretty Children, with Cuts. The diverting History of the Count de Gabalis. The
4th Edition of the Rape of the Lock, an Heroi-comical Poem. The 2d Edition of
the Temple of Fame, a Vision By Mr. Pope. The 2d Edition of Windsor Forest, a
Poem. By Mr. Pope. The 5th Edition of an Essay on Criticism. By Mr. Pope. An
Ode on St. Cecilia's Day. By Mr. Pope. Miscellany Poems, by Mr. Fenton The 2d
Edition of Trivia, or the Art of walking London Streets. By Mr. Gay. The 2d
Edition of the What do you call it, a Tragicomic-pastoral Farce. By Mr. Gay.
Three Hours after Marriage, a Comedy. By Mr. Gay. Miscellany Poems by
Shakespeare, Printed from his own Edition, 1609. Observations, Rules and Orders,
collected out of diverse Journals of the House of Commons, entered in the Reigns
of Edward the VIth, Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, K. James I. K. Charles I. and IId.
By Old Anthony Earl of Shaftebury. The Works of Mr. Edmund Smith, late of
Christ-Church, Oxon.

