The GREAT LAW OF Subordination considered; OR, THE Insolence and Unsufferable
Behavior of SERVANTS in England duly inquired into.

ILLUSTRATED With a great Variety of Examples, Historical Cases, and Remarkable
Stories of the Behavior of some particular SERVANTS, suited to all the several
ARGUMENTS made use of, as they go on.

In Ten Familiar Letters.

Together with a CONCLUSION, being an earnest and moving Remonstrance to the
Housekeepers and Heads of Families in Great Britain, pressing them not to
cease using their utmost Interest (especially at this Juncture) to obtain
sufficient Laws for the effectual Regulation of the MANNERS and BEHAVIOR of
their SERVANTS.

AS ALSO A PROPOSAL, containing such Heads or Constitutions, as would
effectually answer this great End, and bring SERVANTS of every Class to a just
(and yet not a grievous) Regulation.

LONDON: Sold by S. Harding, at the Post House, in St. Martin's-Lane; W. Lewis,
in Covent Garden; T. Worrall, at the Judge's-Head, against St.
Dunstan's-Church, Fleetstreet; A. Bettesworth, in Paternoster Row; W. Meadows,
in Cornhill; and T. Edlin, at the Prince's-Arms, against Exeter-Exchange, in
the Strand, 1724. Price Three Shillings Sixpence.

THE PREFACE.
THE unsufferable Behavior of Servants in this Nation is now (it may be hoped)
come to its Height; their Measure of Insolence, I think, may be said to be
quite full.

Private Families have struggled long with it; the injured Reputation of
Masters, Mistresses, Young-Ladies, and Gentlemen, which has lain so long at the
Mercy of their Servants Tongues, has groaned under it; the Patience of the
Heads of Families, under the Rudeness and Insults they have suffered, has been
enough, and indeed too much provoked; the poor Husbandman, Artificer, and
Manufacturer, have suffered sufficiently; in a Word, the Grievance is become
national, and calls aloud for a Remedy.

I confess, in the Beginning of this Work, I seemed to stand alone in the
Complaint, and some to whom I showed these Sheets, though they owned the Fact,
did not think it important enough to appear; that it was below the Dignity of
the Pen, and would not influence the World, as I hoped it would, to attempt a
Cure.

But those Gentlemen are since convinced of their Mistake, and that they did
not think it was an Evil of so extensive a Nature as it now appears to be; they
thought it only regarded a few Citizens Wives, and Tradesmens House-Maids, or a
few Gentlemen's Footmen, and the like; they did not imagine, that the Husbandmen
are ruined, the Farmers disabled, Manufacturers and Artificers plunged, to the
Destruction of Trade, and Stagnation of their Business; and that no Men who, in
the Course of Business, employ Numbers of the Poor, can depend upon any
Contracts they make, or perform anything they undertake, having no Law, no
Power to enforce their Agreement, or to oblige the Poor to perform honestly
what they are hired to do, though ever so justly paid for doing it

They did not consider, that the Peace of Families is ruined; all Household
Discipline at a full Stop; and that such innumerable Disorders are the
Consequences of this one Grievance; that there was an absolute Necessity of
some speedy Application for a Remedy.

But in the middle of this Undertaking, and after this Work had been a
considerable time in the Press, I had the Satisfaction to see, that the whole
Representative Body of Great Britain concurred with my Opinion; and that which
to some seemed not important enough for a Book of Complaint, was found so
significant, as that the House of Commons thought it worth while to take it
into their Consideration, and to resolve upon Measures for its Redress.

May those Resolutions end, as we have Reason to hope they will, in such Laws
as shall effectually deliver us from this Burden, which, I have too much
Reason to say is become intolerable to to the whole Nation.

THE Great LAW OF Subordination considered, etc.
LETTER I.
Dear Brother,
IT was formerly said of England, by way of Proverb, That it was the Hell of
Horses, the Purgatory of Servants and the Paradise of Women; what might be the
Case in former Days, I know not, but I must confess (as things stand now) I see
no just Reason for that way of Speaking,

As for the Horses, I shall not trouble you much upon that Subject; it is
certain, they have as great a quantity of Horseflesh here, as any Nation in
the World, and as good a Kind, if not better, considering that they excel in
the Breeds of all the sorts of Horses together, whereas other Nations are
singlar to a sort; some Nations have fine shaped Horses, as Spanish Genets and
Barbs, some swift Gallopers, as the Persians; some strong and vastly large,
Coach-Horses, as in Handers, some good Draught-Horses, as the Swiss; others
good Cuirassiers, or Charging Horses, as in Holstein; and other Parts of
Germany; but England excels in all the Kinds together, and no Nation goes
beyond them.

It is true, the English have a great deal of Business for Horses, and that
almost in all Parts of the Island: They have but little Inland Navigation, and
therefore not only their Husbandry requires the Labor of their Cattle, but
most part of the heavy Goods, which are carried from Place to Place, in Trade,
are carried by Land; such as Grocery-Ware, Corn, Meal, Malt, Wine, Oil, Wool,
and Woolen-Manufacturies, etc. Also in many Places even their Metals and
Minerals, such as Lead, Iron, Copper, wrought Iron, Stones, and even Coals, and
Salt, and other weighty and bulky Goods are carried by Land-Carriage; so that
the Horses in England do really work very hard, and this, perhaps, may be the
Cause of the old Saying, that England is the Hell of Horses, though I do not
think it is just neither, for this may really be said in the Case, that as the
English work their Horses very hard, so generally speaking, they feed them very
well, and take Care of them well also, and that better than in most Countries
that I have been in; so I do not think it can be said, it is the Hell of Horses;
but that by the way.

As to the Women, and England's being the Paradise of Women, it chiefly relates
to the good Customs and ancient Laws made in behalf of the Ladies, by which
they have better Provisions made for them by the Law, with respect to their
Claim to the Estates, and the Effects of their Husbands, after Death, and to
the Right of Division among the Heirs in Personal Estates, and in some
Copy-holds, and to a Right of Coheirship by the Customs of several Tenures, and
in several Cities and Corporations, and the like, I say, better than in other
Countries.

But if we come to talk of the good Usage of Wives in England, whether we speak
of the generality of the Nation, or of particular Persons, I have not so much
to say for them as perhaps they may expect; the good Treatment of Wives in
England is not such, as may be much boasted of at present; nor am I of the
Opinion of the ancient Writers here, that used to boast of the Women of
England, that if there was a Bridge over the Narrow-Seas, all the Women in
Christendom would run over into England.

In the first Place I must acknowledge, that since Drunkenness is so much
increased in England, to which we owe a great many other ill Customs which were
never known in England before; I say, since this terrible eruption of Drinking
in England, the Usage of Wives in this Country is much altered from what it
used to be in former Times, and even in a few Years past: You can not doubt,
but that Flood of Infatuation which has spread over the whole Kingdom in the
manner I shall inform you of in its Turn, has had its Effect, not only upon the
Morals, but even upon the Senses and good Manners of the English Nation; the
very Blood and Nature of Men seems to be changed; with their Temperance they
have lost their Temper, and with their Virtue so much of their good Humor, for
which they used to be so famed, that they seem to be quite another Kind of
People than their Ancestors were usually said to be, and even than I myself
remember them to be.

In those Days, as the ancient Fathers have reported things, at least to me,
there was a Softness and Tenderness among them, which I can see little of now,
especially for the Women; they generally treated them with a courteous, kind,
and respectful Manner, different in many things from other Nations; and it is
to this kind benevolent Temper, to which we owe all the ancient Constitutions,
made in favor of the Women, which they talk so much of, and with so good
Reason, in England; for, in short you see very little done in their behalf in
the last fifty or sixty Years, nay, not in the last Century, nor have they any
great Prospect of new Favors; it is well if they can retain the Privileges
which the good-humored Ages of their Ancestors left them possessed of.

For now the Case is quite altered, Family-Government is exceedingly changed,
if not inverted, and the Men grow rigid, surly, cruel, tyrannick, and
outrageous; in a Word, as it is the Cause of all the rest, so the Word may well
comprehend all the rest, they grow Drunken, and when I say that, I have said
all.

The Effect of this is seen abundance of Ways in their Families, for it is of
that I am now speaking, and particularly of their Conduct, and Treatment of
their Wives; that they grow Sottish and Stupid, more than ever, and by that
sordid way of living, drink away their Understandings, and even their Senses
also, to say nothing of their Substance and Estates; by this they become
Brutish, and Sour in their Families, and at best deprive their Wives and
Daughters, not only of their Care and Management, on which the Prosperity of
Families so much depends, but of the Solace and Comfort of their relation, of
their Company, and of all that Enjoyment which derives from what we call a
Social Life.

As Drunkenness has increased, so indeed, the Comfort and Family-Happiness of
the Women in England are decreased in Proportion, and in that very Article
their Paradise, if they had one before, is in my Opinion, very much altered,
and most of the Pleasure of it lost.

But this is not all, for as Extremes follow one another, and one ill Habit may
have a hundred ill Consequences, so this new Usage of Drinking as it Stupifies
and makes Sots of some, so in others it affects the Passions, fires the Blood,
raises their Spleen, and sends Men home to their Families mad and outregeous;
so that instead of the kind, mild, and affable Temper, which the English Nation
used to be famed for, as to their Wives, the Men are now made a Terror to them,
and to their whole Families, rageing, storming, and quarreling, and too often
fighting; so that if you will believe themselves, the Case of the Women in
England is truly Deplorable, and there is scarce a good Husband now to twenty
that merited that Name in former Times; nor was beating of Wives ever so much
the Usage in England, as it is now; the Difference is manifest, and they tell
me, that it is so frequent now, especially among the meaner sort of People, that
to hear a Woman cry Murder now, scarce gives any Alarm; the Neighbors scarce
stir at it, and if they do, if they come out in a Fright, and ask one another
what is the Matter, and where is it that they cry Murder? the common Answer to
one another is only thus; it is nothing Neighbor, but such a one a beating his
Wife; O dear, says the other, is that all? and in they go again, composed and
easy, as hearing a thing of no great Consequence, that has no great Novelty in
it, nor much Danger, and what, if it had, they don't much care to meddle with;
in a word, it is so common a thing now, to bully and abuse their Wives when they
are in Drink, that I believe I may say, there are very few Men get Drunk, but
that they do quarrel with, beat, or misuse their Wives, one way or other: If
this be their English Paradise, the Women here may enjoy it by themselves; I
believe none of the Wives in our Country will trouble them, or crowd in upon
them for a Share of the Enjoyment.

But this is not my present Design neither; the Women's Case is too long for
this Undertaking, and deserves to be considered by itself: It is added, that as
England is the Paradise of Women, so it is the Purgatory of Servants: This I
object against, more than I do that of Women, nay, I exclaim against it;
nothing is more certain, than that as the Women's Case is made worse by the
change of their Usage among us, so that of the Servants is infinitely varied
the other Way; and we must allow, that the Proverb should be turned, and we
should say, it is the Purgatory of Wives, and the Paradise of Servants; and
this is the Subject I intend to entertain you with for some time.

Nothing is more visible, nor indeed, breaks in so far upon our Civil Affairs
in this Nation, as the surprising Difference that there is in the Behavior of
Servants of every Rank and Degree among us, from what it was in former Times;
from what it is now in other Nations; and from what, indeed, in the Nature of
the thing, ought to be everywhere: The Complaint is so general, and the
Grievance so very notorious, that I need enter into no Search after Evidence of
Fact; I shall therefore, give you some general Account of it in this Letter,
and descend to Particulars hereafter.

By Servants you are to understand me to mean, the several Denominations
hereafter mentioned; for I am not going to entertain you with a long Complaint
of a few Footmen, and Cook-wenches, but the Grievance possesses the whole Body
of the Nation; and all that bear the Name of Servant, may be said to be more or
less concerned. 1. Apprentices, as well the Apprentices to Merchants, and more
eminent Tradesmen, as the Apprentices to meaner People; such as Shopkeepers,
Handicrafts Artificers, Manufacturers, etc. 2. Menial Servants such as Cooks,
Gardeners, Butlers, Coachmen, Grooms, Footmen, Pages, Maidservants, Nurses,
etc. all kept within Doors, at Bed and Board; that is to say, such as have
Yearly or Monthly Wages, with Meat, Drink, Lodging, and Washing. 3. Clerks to
Lawyers, Attorneys, Scriveners, etc. and to Gentlemen in public Offices, and
the like; I shall speak of the Laboring Poor, that is, of Servants without
Doors, in a Letter by itself; for I have much also to say of them, I assure you.


In every one of these there appears a visible and important Difference, in
almost every Article, which relate to them as Servants; by Difference I mean,
between them and Servants of the same Class in former Years.

The first and last of these, already named, I mean Merchants Apprentices, and
Lawyers Clerks, might indeed, be said always to have some particular Regard
showed them, as being oftentimes the Sons of considerable Families, bred
something above the ordinary Rate of Servants, and that gave large Sums to
their Masters, in order to be introduced into a capital Business, which they
were likely to have considerable Stocks of their own to carry on; yet these
differ too very much.

In former times it was usual to give great Sums, I say, with Apprentices to
Merchants, but then those Sums were called great in those times, which are
accounted but small Sums now; the Reason of that I need not examine; however, I
say great Sums were given to principal Merchants; as particularly 200 l. and
sometimes, but very rarely, and more lately 300 l. to eminent Turkey Merchants;
To the more considerable Spanish and Italian Merchants, from 100 l. to 150 l.
and these were the first-rate Premio's that were given in the City of London,
for about 50 or 60 Years ago, nor, if I am informed Right, was ever more than
100 l. given with an Apprentice to the best Turkey Merchant in London, before
the Year 1640, or thereabout; and to other Merchants such as Dutch, French,
Hamburg, and East-Country Merchants, in Proportion; to Shopkeepers of the
first Rank, as Linen and Woollen-Drapers, Mercers, wholesale Grocers, and
other considerable Dealers, 50 l. and afterward 100 l. and so of other Trades
in their Proportion also.

But now such a strange Change is there upon the Face of things, that it is very
ordinary to give a thousand Pound with an Apprentice to a Turkey-Merchant, 400
l. to 600 l. to other Merchants; from 200 to 300 to Shopkeepers, and wholesale
Dealers, Linnen-Drapers especially; and so in Proportion to other Trades, and
the like with Clerks to Lawyers, Attorneys, Scriveners, etc.

As the Premio's given with such Servants as these, are thus strangely
differing from what was formerly done, so the Usage of these kinds of Servants,
in the Families where they are taken, differs also; and so in Proportion does
their Services they are employed in differ; it may be alleged, that upon their
Masters demanding such great Sums of Money with their Apprentices, they have
reason to treat them as Gentlemen, and not as Servants; to let them see that
they are rather brought into their Counting-Houses as Pupils to a Tutor, and
Scholars, or Students to a College, than as Servants; that their Business is to
be introduced handsomely and reputably into Business, sent Abroad, and received
into the management of Affairs, and not indeed, to be accounted, or called
Servants, or to be used as such; and this may be granted; but still it breaks
into the great Foundation, the Rule of Subordination, which I say is essential
to all Family-Oeconomy, and these Youths should be called Lodgers, not
Apprentices or Servants; for as their coming in differs, as above, in a much
greater Proportion does their Behavior and Conduct differ; the Consequence of
which, in a great measure, is, that more of them are ruined, debauched, and
come to nothing, for want of Subordination, and being under Government, than
was wont to be the Case; to the great Calamity of their Families, especially of
their Parents, of which abundince of lamentable Examples might be given; but
neither is this the particular Design of these Letters, which is more
especially to give you a Sketch of Low-Life, and describe to you the horrible
degencracy of the meaner sort of Servants, and the mischiefs which this Nation
suffers upon that Account.

From these kinds of Servants therefore, I mean Apprentices to Merchants,
Wholesale-Men, and the like, I must descend to the Apprentices of meaner
Tradesmen, and yet not of the laboring Trades neither, that is to say, the
Handicrafts, Artificers, and the like, they remain to be mentioned by
themselves.

It is but few Years ago, and in the Memory of many now living, that all the
Apprentices of the Shopkeepers and Warehouse-keepers, as well in London, as in
other Places, except the few mentioned before, submitted to the most servile
Employments of the Families in which they served; such as the young Gentry,
their Successors in the the same Station, scorn so much as the Name of now;
such as cleaning their Masters Shoes, bringing Water into the Houses from the
Conduits in the Street, which they carried on their Shoulders in long Vessels
called Tankards; also waiting at Table, waiting on their Masters to the Church,
and carrying their Bibles, Prayer-Books, etc. and many more such things;
whereas now the Apprentices of the very same Class, are so far from stooping to
such things as these, that it is very rarely that they will condescend to open
or shut the Shop-windows, much less to sweep the Shop, or Warehouses; but
their Masters are obliged to keep Porters or Footmen to wait upon the
Apprentices, and do all those things for them; so far are they now from
cleaning their Masters Shoes, that the Apprentices scorn to clean their own
Shoes; but there are poor Women generally attending at the Shop-Doors, to do
those things, as well for the Apprentices as for the Masters, and are paid for
it; so far are they from being subjected to their Masters, or to their Family
Discipline, that they think it hard to have any Enquiry made after them when
they go out, and keep oftentimes later Hours than their Masters; and as often
are pleased to come home in Drink, which also their Masters have scarce the
Authority to resent, or question them about.

This unsufferable Liberty, is not so much granted by the Master, as it is
assumed by the Apprentices; and if at any times Words happen between them, it is
very seldom but that the Servant is as high as the Master, and scorning to give
an Account of his Excursions, takes it very ill to be examined, and much worse
to be restrained; and though perhaps, they may reply in Language a little more
decent than meaner Fellows talk in, yet they shall not fail to tell their
Masters, they did not give such Sums of Money to be confined like Prisoners, or
to be used like Foot-boys; and that if they (the Masters) do not like their
Service, (as they would call it) they are willing to be otherwise disposed of;
not forgetting to add, that if the Master consents to Part with them, they
expect Part of their Money back again, and the like; intimating, that the
Master will bear with their Disorders, rather than part with them, and refund.

The Effect of this Insolence, for I can call it no less, is, that there are
more of these Servants, called Apprentices, ruined by these Liberties, than one
would think it was possible could be found in the whole City; all manner of
Wickednesses are practiced by them; and as they are generally but Youths, have
their Pockets unadvisedly supplied with Moneys by their Relations, and thus
assume Time and Liberty to spend it, they indulge themselves in all sorts of
Liberties: This has been so Examplar on many Occasions, that never was so many
Masters robbed by their Apprentices as now; and I think I might give an Account
of 11 or 12 young Clerks and Apprentices, that have been Hanged here in London,
or near it, within these few Years, besides innumerable others, ruined by the
many several Ways of being undone; of which this Town affords them perhaps
more, than any other Place in the World.

The next Head, or Class, is, that of the lower Menial Servants; and here,
whatever is the Occasion, we find the Wages of almost all sorts of Servants
doubled, and of some trebbled, as in the Article before; but for the Behavior
of these People, their Sauciness, Drunkenness, and abusive Language on the side
of the Menservants; the gaiety, fine Clothes, Laces, Hoops, etc. of the
Maidservants, nay, even to Patches and Paint, are hardly to be described; it
would be a Satyr upon the Ladies, such as perhaps, they would not bear the
reading of, should we go about to tell, how hard it is sometimes to know the
Chambermaid from her Mistress; or my Lady's Chief-Woman from one of my Lady's
Daughters; nor can she bear to be called any thing less than Mistress by the
rest of the Servants; or is it altogether improper; as I shall show in its
Place.

From this gaiety of Dress, must necessarily follow Increase of Wages, for
where there is such an Expense in Habit, there must be a proportioned Supply of
Money, or it will not do.

The Pocket thus furnished, and the Back thus clothed, and the Servant thus
exalted, how can it be expected she should not be above herself, much more
above her Business, and most of all, which is to my Purpose, above Reproof; to
be talked to, is to hear how Saucy she can be, and as she is impatient of being
told when she is in a Fault, so she is sure to be in as many such Faults, as
ever Servants can be supposed to have been.

But as abundance of Faults are protected by a Saucy Tongue, and every Master
or Mistress may not be quallified to scold with their Footmen and
Chamber-maids, so they rather wink at the more venial Mistakes of their
Servants, than be troubled with their Clamor.

Thus I have made my first Letter a kind of Index of my whole Design, and you
will see how you must be prepared to read a black History of the Degeneracy of
English Servants: I shall illustrate it with some Examples as they occur to my
Observations, and are apposite to the Cases where I relate them.

In the mean Time, how happy are you in France in this Particular, though in many
other you do not come up to the English, as in the solid Security of Property,
and of Religion, etc. but in this you outdo England indeed; for your Servants
are indeed, Servants; a French Footman, if he was to write to his Master, might
well subscribe, your Humble Servant, even in the literal Sense of it, for your
Servants are Humble, and you keep them so; they are taught a due Subordination
as their Introduction, and you hold them to it, and I am sure France is in the
right of it.

But here there is no such thing as a good Servant, in the true Sense of the
Word; whither the monstrous Evil may spread, and what may be the Effect, if
some Laws are ot speedily made to regulate the Office of a Servant, and to
prescribe to them their Bounds, sorm them into Classes, and then oblige them to
do the Duty of a Servant, I say, how far it may spread, who can tell.

But when I talk of Laws to regulate this, I talk of a thing the most difficult
to be done, of anything of that kind that I know, in England; I shall take up
your Time a little upon the Subject hereafter.

I am, etc. Dear Sir, Your Brother, and humble Servant.

LETTER II.
Dear Sir,
BEing, as by my last, to give you some Account of the Conduct of Low-Life in
this Country, where it differs so much from all the rest of the World, I
proposed to begin it by way of Preliminary, that as I have already laid down
Heads of the Grievance in general, so I may now lead you a little to the
Fountain from whence it flows, and the manifest Degrees by which it is swelled
to such a Height, as almost to overwhelm the National Economy, and embarrass
our Families in constant Vexation and Disorder.

As I hinted in my last, the miserable Circumstance of this Country is now
such, that, in short, if it goes on, the Poor will be Rulers over the Rich, and
the Servants be Governors of their Masters; the Plebeij have almost mobb'd the
Patricij; and as the Commons, in another Case, may be said to be gotten above
the Lords, so the Cannaille of this Nation impose Laws upon their Superiors,
and begin not only to be troublesome, but in time, may be dangerous; in a word,
Order is inverted, Subordination ceases, and the World seems to stand with the
Bottom upward.

How and by what Steps things have been brought to this Height, and from whence
all this Disorder proceeds, though it may be Difficult to find out all the
Springs and Causes which have assisted in it, yet some Part of it may be seen
in the following Particulars, which are the Preliminaries I mentioned in my
last.

I. AS the People here are universally blessed with real and valuable LIBERTY,
more than any Nation in the World, SO the common sort are withal so possessed
with mistaken Notions of that LIBERTY in general, and of their own Legal
Liberties in Particular, that it runs them upon the most preposterous Follies
imaginable; particularly abusing that Liberty to indulge their Wickedness;
suggesting that Liberty is a Freedom to Crime, not a Security against
Oppression and Injustice. II. AS the common People, not Exclusive of a great
Part of the Nobility and Gentry, are miserably overwhelmed in a Dreadful
Innundation of Vice and Immorality; infinitely more than was the Case in former
Days; SO the particular Vices which are most concerned in the present
Complaint, are those two above all the rest, namely Drunkeness, and profane
Swearing
To the Account of these two, I place the Guilt of almost all the Evils that I
am now to speak of, what additional Helps may have been had from other and
lesser Excursions of the Poor miserable People, who I am going to describe, I
may speak to as I go on: I will not say but that as all the little Brooks and
Currents descending from the rising Grounds adjacent to a River, assist to
swell the Stream of that River into a Flood, so there may be many other smaller
Helps from Hell, to prompt the ruin of a Nation's Peace; but these two like the
principal Channels, support the main Current.

It is from these that the Passions are raised, Men put out of their own
Government, and the general Temper of the People, as I said in my last, changed
and altered; it is from hence that Calm, that Sobriety, that Kindness, and
goodness of Humor which formerly was the famed Disposition of the People of
England, is changed, and become violent and outrageous, from these come
contempt of Government, quarrellings, and fighting with one another; insulting
Masters, Employers, and every Degree of Superiors; and, in a word, innumerable
other Disorders, to the breaking off all manner of Discipline and Regulation,
the abuse of themselves, and the destroying the common Peace and good
Neighborhood of the People one with another.

If in describing this, I come to let you see the several Steps, by which these
things have encroach'd upon the Conduct of the meaner Sort among as; how, and
by what fatal Degrees their Manners were first depraved, and to what Extreme
they are since hurried on; I flatter myself, it will be both diverting and
informing, and you will not think your time lost in reading my Letters; however
tedious they may otherwise be.

LIBERTT is the Glory of an Englishman; it is as Natural to him to desire it, as
it is lawful to him to maintain it; it is his Inheritance, purchased with the
Blood of his Ancestors, and as it is his Portion, so it is his Pride; but it is
with an Englishman about his Liberty, as it is with many of them about Popery;
there is a kind of national Aversion among them to Popery; it is the universal
Scarecrow, the Hobgoblin, the Spectre with which the Nurses fright the
Children, and entertain the old Women all over the Country, by which means such
horror posesses the Minds of the common People about it, that I believe there
are an 100000 stout Fellows, who would spend the last Drop of their Blood
against Popery, that do not know whether it be a Man or a Horse,

In like manner Liberty is a word of Endearment, it is the Hereditary Favorite
of the People; it is the Nation's Mistress, I was a going to say it was the
Nation's Whore; in a Word, it is talked of by everybody, valued by everybody,
and understood almost by nobody; this English Liberty is as blindly espoused,
as I said Popery was blindly hated by those who mistake it in the grosest
manner.

This leads me to the Conduct of our ignorant People, in the claim they make to
this thing called Liberty, and their scandalous Management of it on many
Occasions.

Pray take me right as I go along, that I am talking now chiefly of the common
People, though it is too true, that even among the better Sort there are too many,
whose Notions of Liberty are not only inconsistent with true Liberty, but
destructive of it; for nothing is more certain, than that true Liberty consists
in a freedom to do well, not giving a Loose to the Passions, gratifying every
vicious Gust, and taking off the Restraint of Laws, leaving every Man to do
what is right in his own Eyes.

What the People's Notions of Liberty are, I shall best describe, by giving you
some historical Examples of the Behavior among the Common People, such as have
come within the compass of my own Observation.

England is certainly, in its constituted Liberties, the best Nation for any
Subject in the World to live in, where the Laws, which are their Protection,
are likewise their Inheritance; but then, for the contempt of those Laws, and
abuse of Liberty, I must say, that no Nation I have been in, comes up to them:
I Will venture to give you a double Example of this in one and the same Story;
the Case happened with in the Verge of my own House, and among my own
Neighbors, as follows:

You know there are very severe Laws against profane Swearing in this Country,
and the Legislature, to do them Justice, have often repeated those Laws, and to
add to their Sanction, have made additional Clauses, to oblige the Magistrate
to put those Laws in Execution, and yet I believe Common or Customary Swearing
is no where in the World more frequent and that of a Kind particular to the
English Nation, or perhaps to the English Tongue, namely, to imprecate
Damnation upon themselves; a thing not only highly profane and wicked, but
absurdly so, especially in that way they practice it here.

Several Nations are addicted to the wicked Custom of Cursing, besides England;
and especially when they are angry with, or provoked at a Person, but then they
will curse that Person pretty freely, and it is too much the Practice in common
Discourse to curse one another; but here when a Man is angry with another, he
curses himself; he does not say Damn you Sir, but Damn me, Sir; which is one of
the foolishest as well as wickedest Ways of Speaking, that can be imagined.

Now this way of swearing and cursing is so frequent here, among all sorts of
People, that I believe I do the English no Wrong in saying, no Nation in Europe
are guilty of it to such a Degree of Madness and Absurdity.

Nor is this the Vice of the common People only, but it is among the Gentry, the
Quality, and which is still worse, the Magistrates; so that nothing is more
frequent than to hear those very Men swear, who the Law obliges by Virtue of
their Office, to punish Men for swearing; in a word, the Law is not executed,
because those who have the executive Power of the Law in their Hands, are
guilty of the very Crime which they ought to punish; and this I Mention here,
because it brings on the Story I refer to above, which is a double Example as
well of the Contempt of the Law against swearing, as of the false Notion of
Liberty.

I had a little Affair one Day with a Gentleman here, that is my Neighbor,
which occasioned some Words between us, but the Interposition of Friends stopped
it, before it came to any Height, and we are since that, very good Friends
again; but I name it on this Account, my Neighbor's Servant had let some
Horses break into my Ground, and I had frequently caused them to be only turned
out again, without any Complaint, other than speaking to the Servant to prevent
it for the future; but I was surpised afterward, to find that the Servant was
so far from endeavoring to prevent it, that in the Night he turned his
Master's Horses in himself, and a Person I set to watch him took him in the
Fact.

Upon this I Pounded the Horses, and went to my Neighbor and complained, but
instead of finding him ready to do me Justice, I observed him very much
concernd about it, took it very ill that I should Pound his Cattle, began to
justify his Servant, and added, that he was a very honest Fellow: I was
surpised at that, and when he said his Man was very Honest, I told him, I did
not believe him to be an honest Fellow.

He lost his Patience at this, and with a Heat, no otherwise to be expressed,
than by repeating his mad Words, replied, Dam me Sir, what do you mean? not
believe me, Dam me, what not believe me, Dam me, Sir, I cannot take that; what
Sir! Dam me, do you give me the Lie? Dam me, Sir, what do you mean?

Upon these Words thus awkwardly put together, and so repeated, he gets up,
walks up and down the Room, fretting and fumeing, with twenty more Damme's, at
last he ends it all with coming up to my Teeth, and letting fly at me, with Dam
me, Sir, explain yourself.

I kept my self as cool as I could, but was obliged to show that I was not
frighted at him, so with a kind of Smile, I said, I should have explained
myself with out his Damming so often, if he had given me Room to crow'd in a
Word among his Curses.

This provoked him more than I intended it should, and he flew out at me then
with the like Number of Damme's all over again, or rather twice as many, for my
Laughing; Dam me, Sir, what do you Laugh at me? and Dam me, Sir, am I to be
Laughed at? and the like.

But to carry the Tale no farther than is to the Purpose that I am writing of,
I then told him the Fact, and that I had not said I did not believe him, but
that I did not believe his Man was honest; and that my Reason was because I had
caught him opening my Gate with his own Hands, and driving the Horses into my
Field, and that I had brought the Person who see him do it, to Witness against
him.

Upon this my Neighour was as calm and as civil as could be desired, for
awhile, and begged my Pardon for being warm before; after which, the two
Servants were called in, and heard, and my Man testified as above; his Servant
impudently denied it, and my Man as positively affirmed it; but with this, he
flies out in the same Rage at my Man, as he was in before at me, and then it
was Dam me, I will not believe a Word you say, you are a lying Dog, you see my Man
denies it; my Servant then offered to go before a Justice, and swear it, then
he flew out again, you swear it! you are a Rascal, G -- Dam me, I will not believe
your Oath, no more than your Word, and there he went storming, and swearing,
and rageing about the House, and calling my Man a thousand Dogs and Villains,
and between every two or three Words, was the imprecation upon himself of G --
d Dam me.

Now, had he said always Dam you, instead of Dam me, though it had been Wicked in
it self to call upon God to Damn any body, and very Unchristian too, to curse
his Neighbor, yet it had had some show of Sense in it, it had not been both
Wicked and Absurd too; but that it now seems to be of Use only to show the
Dominion that our Passions have above our Reason, that they content themselves
to talk the grosest Nonsense, so it does but give vent to the Rage that
posesses the Mind at that time; for they will frequently call upon God, in
their Passion, in the same kind of Heat, to Damn their Horses, their Dogs, or
any thing that offends them, whether it has a Life of Sense, or vegetative
Life, or no Life at all.

In a word, it is so much a Custom now in England, to Rage, and Damn, and Curse,
in this Manner, that they not only do it without regard to Reason and Sense,
but, which is still more wonderful, they do it without Thought, without being
in any Passion, or under any Provocation, nay, they do it without Anger, and
without any Distaste; without any Evil in their Design, that is to say, without
thinking at-all, but as in mere Jest and Mirth.

But to return to my Neighbor; as I told you, some Friends over-hearing the
Quarrel, made us Friends again, as to the Matter in dispute; and one of them a
grave, sober Gentleman, took the Liberty in a mannerly and courteous Manner, to
speak to him about his frequent swearing and cursing, and how ill it was for
him to do so, who was a Person of Years, of Learning, and Breeding, and the
like; he defended himself awhile, by saying he thought no Harm, the usual
Defenses the English Gentleman make for it, and which generally is very true;
but when the other Gentleman carried it a little further, and pressed him to
restrain himself in such unlawful Excesses, and he could not tell what to say
more than he had said, he seemed a little warm, and answered, Sir, I am an
Englishman, and I love Liberty, pray let me alone, I must have my Liberty.

I should have told you, while this happened, my Servant, to whom, as I said he
was very passionate, was mightly affronted at being called such ill Names, and
I heard him so very high among his Fellow Servants in the next Room, that I
went out to see what was the matter; my Man told me, in short, that what I said
to him at any time was nothing, for I was his Master; but he hoped I would not
expect he should take it from Esquire -- that he would not be called Dog, and
Rogue, and Rascal, by never a Gentleman in the Country; that he valued his
Reputation as much as Esquire -- at any time, and that his Livelihood depended upon
it; that if he was one that would Swear any thing, and was not fit to be
believed upon his Oath, he was not fit for any Gentleman's Service, and he
could not blame any Gentleman for refusing him, if he had such a Character; and
therefore he was resolved to do himself Justice.

I knew that really all the Fellow said was true, that he was very much
injured, and that he was, indeed, a very honest Fellow in the main, and a good
Servant, as Servants in England go now; so I gave him good Words, and seeing he
was heated, and that he had just Cause to be a little moved, I endeavored to
calm him; but I found it would not do, he insisted, that he was resov'd to do
himself Justice; why you Fool you, says I, what do you mean by doing your self
Justice? you don't pretend to put yourself upon an equal Foot with this
Gentleman, and go and demand Satisfaction of him, do you? No Sir, says he, I
know myself better than that, too; but is there no way that a poor Servant may
take to do himself Justice, when he is injured, but presently to Fight with his
Superiors? I will do myself Right without Fighting, says he; I looked earnestly
at him upon those Words, What way can you take, says I? Why, Sir, says he, in
the first Place, I will make him pay for swearing, I hope the Law will bear me
out in that.

I mused awhile, and it presently occurred to me, that if my Man did make Oath
that he swore 500 times, besides his cursing, he would do him no wrong, but
yet, that if he did so, it would renew the Quarrel between my Neighbor and I,
for he would presently say it was all my doing; so I did all that lay in my
Power to persuade my Man to put it up, and let him alone; besides, William,
says I, you know he is a powerful Man in this Part of the County, and if ever
he meets you, he will certainly run you Thoro'; in the mean time his Men will
abuse you, and insult you, and you will have no fair Play with them.

But I found my Man was too Warm to be moved by all such Persuasions as these;
nor was that all, but he would stay for the Gentleman's coming out, to talk
with him again: this I took up, and told him, I would have no Gentlman
affronted by any Servant of mine: Well Sir, says he, very short, then while I
am your Servant, I will not say anything to him, but then I hope you will dismiss
me from your Service this Minute, for I must do myself Justice: No Sir, says I,
angrily, I shall not dismiss you just now neither; why then, Sir, says he, I hope
you will not take it amiss that I dismiss myself, and from this Minute I am your
Servant no longer; and as I am a Freeborn Englishman, and no Slave, I live in
a Free Nation, and must have my LIBERTY. O! Liberty, said I to my self, thou
art a brave Article to set Servants above their Masters; if I had this Fellow
in France now, or in Germany, or any where, but in England, I knew very well
how to handle him; but here I must submit to my Servants.

All this I say, was only a Reflection in my own Thought; but I recovered that
Confusion his Sauciness had put me into, and I answered him calmly, Well,
William, you shall be dismissed; so I begun to ask him what Wages was due to
him, which was not above two Months, and I paid him; and ordered another
Servant to take an Account of some things that were in his Custody, and let him
go; but now William, says I, as you have dismissed yourself from my Service, so
you must let me dismiss you out of Doors too, for I will not have you insult
the Gentleman in my House; I saw this was some Uneasiness to him, but I would
not stir from him, till he had stripped my Livery off, put on his Frock, and went
off.

As he went away, he began to Triumph, for he was now grown, not saucy only,
but impudent; and clapping his Right Hand to his Left Shoulder two or three
times; now I am my own Man again, says he, now I am at Liberty again Sir, and
Liberty is the Birthright of an Englishman; Well, William, says I to him, for I
overheard him, but take Care how you make use of it, do not abuse your Liberty;
your being an Englishman, and having a right to the Liberty of an Englishman,
does not make you Equal to a Gentleman; take Care how you behave, you know
there is a Whiping-Post in the Parish, William; yes, yes, Sir, says he, I know
it, and will take Care; I will indeed; and here he repeated it two or three
times in a scoffing, saucy Tone, I will take Care.

I will, Sir, but I will speak with Esquire -- for all that, Sir.

Look you William, says I, do not be ill-manner'd in my House; if you do, I
will lay you by the Heels myself; I do say again, you shall not speak to him in
my House.

This made him be a little civiler, but yet it was not without some Difficulty,
that I got him out of my House, and the Fellow was so heated with the Usage he
had, and so Drunk with his Notion, of being now at Liberty, that he was as much
out of his Senses, as if he had been Drunk indeed with Liquor.

However at last I got him out of my House, and sent another Servant after him,
to see whither he went; for I had a mind to see what he intended to do; it was
not above half an Hour before my other Man came in, and told me that William
went directly to Justice -- 's, and offered to depose that the Gentleman had
Sworn 200 Oaths.

The Justice endeavored with all his Might, to prevent his Swearing to it, in
regard to the Gentleman that he swore against, who was his Friend, and
questioned him so many Ways, that he had almost puzzled the Fellow, and once or
twice he was going away, to see for another Justice, telling that Justice, that
the Law gave him Liberty, and he was an Englishman, and would have his Liberty;
and as long as he was sure he swore nothing but the Truth, he would not be
directed; that he came there to swear to the Truth, and he would take the
Hazard of what followed.

However, the Justice, by good Words, and Persuasions, brought him down to
threescore, and he would come down no lower, but appealed to me, and desired
the Justice to ask me; so the Justice took his Oath, and dismissed him; after
this, the Justice seeing another of my Servants there, as above, beckoned to
him to stay; and when the Fellow was gone, he bade him desire of me, that I
would call and see him in the Evening.

In the mean time the first Gentleman staid in my House, I had given him an
Account of all that had happened; and much Difficulty I had to keep him from
going out, to chastise this Fellow (as he called it) himself; however, I did
prevail with him, for, indeed, as I knew the Fellow would be saucy, and that
the Gentleman was warm also, and passionate, I was afraid he should kill him;
and I was willing to prevent that kind of Mischief.

But I was delivered from my Anxiety for a Time, by the following Accident: The
Gentleman had two Servants that waited while their Master was with me, and they
overheard the Account my Servant had given me of what William had done, and
they walked out into the Street, of their own Accord, (for I can bear their
Master witness, he knew nothing of it) and finding William loitering about in
the Street, one of them went up to him, and asked him what was the Matter, and
what he did there? William answered, very surlily, that he waited there to
speak with his Master, meaning Esquire --; my Master! says the Servant, What do you
mean by that? don't you know where my Master, lives? cannot you come to his
House? what, do you pretend to way-lay him in the Street? If you have anything
to say to my Master, come to Morrow Morning, and I Will engage my Master will let
you speak to him.

William now began to be more in the Wrong, than he had been in the Right
before; for I could not say, but that at first, William was in the Right.

But as the Servant talked thus far very calmly, and rationally to William, so
William talked hot, and high; told the Fellow, his Master had abused him (
William) without a Cause, and that he was not a Servant now, but at Liberty,
and he would not be abused by any Gentleman whatever; and he would speak with
him, ay, that he would.

Very well, says the Servant, jeeringly; so you are now my Master's Equal, are
you? and you intend to demand Satisfaction of him, do you? Pray. where is your
Sword, Esquire William? where is your Sword? Liberty has made you a Gentleman, I
find that, and Gentlemen never go without a Sword.

Well, Mr. Servitor, says William, if I am not your Master's Fellow, you are
not my Fellow neither, till you have stripped off your Livery as I have done;
your Master has abused me, and I took it from him, but I will not take it from you.

My Master abused you! Sirrah, my Master abuses nobody, says the Servant.

Yes, says William, he has abused me, and he shall know it too, as soon as I
can see him.

You Dog you, says the Servant, do you threaten my Master? What, do you wait
here to assassinate him? Prithee John, says he to his Fellow, go fetch a
Constable, I Will take Care of Esquire William, since he will not stay till to Morrow
Morning to speak with our Master; I Will secure him for to Night, and he shall
wait for him in the Cage.

Away goes John for a Constable; but while he was gone, William grew very
insolent, and giving the Servant ill Language, and upon his Master too, they
fell from one Word to another, and then to Blows; and though William was a stout
Fellow of his Hands, yet the other Fellow was too hard for him, and William was
upon the Point of yielding, when the Constable came, and carried them both
before the Justice; the same before whom William had been swearing.

William was as high before the Justice, as he was before with the Gentleman's
Servant, and behaved not only warm, but impudent; he was a Freeman, he said,
and not a Slave; and if a Gentleman had injured him, he would be at Liberty to
tell him so.

The Justice persuaded him, and told him, he ought to be quiet, till another
time, as the Footman had persuaded him to be; that to stay in the Street, and
talk as he had done, was threatening the Gentleman, and that he ought to be
searched, if he had no Weapons about him.

William offered himself to be searched, and indeed, he had no Weapons, nor did
he intend to do any thing, but to be saucy with his Tongue, which he might have
paid dear enough for too, as I observed; but the Justice took Care of him for
that Night, and the next Morning made him bring Sureties for the Peace, the
Servant making Oath, that he gave both his Master and him too, threatening
Language of his being revenged, and the like.

The rest of the Story is short, viz. William, was humbled for the Liberty of
his Tongue, but the Gentleman was forced to pay for his threescure Oaths, and
so for that time William had no great Benefit of his being Freeborn, or an
Englishman.

But William is not the only Example of the prostituting this glorious thing
called English Liberty to the basest Purpose; I must tell you another Story,
which happened in the Compass of my own Family too.

I had a Steward, or as the English call them, a Baily, who looked after a
small Concern which I have in the Country, and who I trusted with the whole
Management of it, to such a Degree, that he had several Workmen and Servants
employed by me, under him, and whose Business was left to his Care and
Inspection.

This Fellow I had a particular Confidence in, and a very good Opinion of, and'
very unwilling I was to hear any Accusation against him; and the more, because
several things that had been alleged against him, when they came to be
inquired into, and examined, were sound either so trivial as to be not worth
Notice, or he so effectually cleared himself, that nothing could be fastened
upon him.

But one of my Servants, who I employed, in another Business, remote from that
where this Steward was employed, came very seriously to me one Morning with a
sad Complaint, viz. that his Wife had been gone from him some time, and that,
though he had with the utmost Application searched her wicked Haunts, and had for
some Years suspected it, and been assured of it from others, that she kept
Company with my said Steward, yet he could never come at a Certainty of it till
now; that now he was fully persuaded it was so, and hoped I would do him so
much Justice as to put a Check to it.

I smiled at the weakness of his last Request, though I pitied the poor Man in
the former part of his Disaster; for says I, you know it is out of my Power: If
my Man will be wicked I have no Power to restrain him; as if your Wife will be
a Whore, you see you cannot restrain her; Liberty you know, in England, says I,
is too often claimed for a Freedom to do wickedly, and what can I do for you?

Besides says I, but what Proof is there of the Fact? for what can I pretend to
talk to him about, when upon his denying the Fact, as to be sure he will, I
should produce no Evidence; my Mouth said I, will be stopped; he owned he had no
positive Proof to produce, but he gave me such particular Discoveries, that I
was convinced it was really so, as well as he; so I told him I would talk with
the Stewart about it.

Accordingly one Morning I took the Liberty, after other Discourse of Business
was over, to tell my Steward, what Rumor was raised upon his Conversation with
such a Man's Wife, and that (they said,) he was so open, and barefaced in it,
that he kept her at such a Place, and so told him other Circumstances, which
began to put him hard to it; however he denied it very stiffly; look ye, said I,
if it is so, I am very sorry for it, and I expect you will consider of it: He
answered, after again denying it, that he had always taken Care of my Business,
and hoped I would be satisfied with that, and that I would not enter into other
Matters, and listen to the false Accusations of his Enemies, who were his
Enemies chiefly, because he took Care that they should not abuse and impose
upon me; and so in a Word, did as good as say, that if he minded my Business, I
had no Right to meddle with him any further.

I took him a little short there, and told him, that it was true, that I had no
Power to examine him, or to punish him, if he was guilty; but that if the thing
was true, it was really an Insult upon me, and my Family, the Woman's Husband,
as he knew, being a Relation to me, at some distance, though he was my Servant
too, and that as he was also entrusted and employed by me, he might depend I
should think it hard, that one who received so many Benefits from me, should
have so little Respect for me, as to debauch a Woman who was Married to one of
my Relations, and should do it, as it were, under my Nose.

He replied, though with Respect, that he hoped I would not think myself
concerned in the Clamor; that as he did not own he was guilty of any such
thing, and nobody could prove it, he desired I would not believe any thing of
it, till it was proved.

I told him, as to Proof in Law, it was none of my Business, but that I doubted
there was Proof enough to make it reasonable to believe it, and that it was not
sufferable; he told me in so many Words, that he thought it was hard to be
examined so close about it; that he took Care to mind my Business, and could
not be charged with omitting it; as to other things, he was an Englishman, and
desired to have his LIBERTY, and so my Man and I parted.

This is the Use, or rather these are some of the Uses, they make of Liberty in
this Part of the World; I Will trouble you with but one Example more, and dismiss
this Part; in the late Queen's Reign, when the Earl of Gallaway commanded the
British Troops in Spain, sent thither as Auxilliaries to King Charles, now
Emperor, the Army beginning to grow sickly, it was said the Soldiers got the
Flux by eating Grapes, and other green Fruit.

Upon this, the General published an Order, that the Soldiers should not eat
any Grapes for a certain time, upon Pain of Death; and none of the Suttlers, or
Peasants, were allowed to bring any Grapes into the Camp, upon the like
Penalties.

But as Englishmen are not famed for being the most easy to be restrained in
such Cases, so some of the English Soldiers had got out of the Camp, and not
being able to refrain the tempting Fruit, had gorged themselves with Grapes,
and three of them fell Sick of the Flux; upon which the General sent to have
them brought before him; but when the Officers came to fetch them, truly, they
were so near being dead, though not dead, that they were not in a Condition to be
stirred, and I think two of them died that Night; however one of them being
told, the General had sent for them, and being asked, if he had eaten any
Grapes, he boldly answered yes; at which the Officer asking how they durst
presume to break the General's Orders, adding, that if he recovered, he would
certainly be hanged, the Fellow answered, as for hanging, there was no need to
hang them, they were dead Men already; and as to the General's Orders, they had
obeyed him in every thing, relating to their Business as Soldiers; but as to
the rest, they were ENGLISHMEN, and thought they ought to have their LIBERTY,
and that they had a Right to kill themselves whenever they pleased

It seems they all died, and so prevented Justice; for the Excuse was of no
Weight, because the Prince has a Right to the Service of his Subjects, and no
Man can kill himself, without a Crime against his Sovereign, as well as against
Heaven: But it is apposite to my Purpose, namely, the Notion we have of Liberty
here, and the Abuse of that Liberty.

Be pleased to observe now, that when I speak of Liberty being abused in
England, I keep my Eye principally upon the Morals of the Nation, upon the
Abuse of the Laws, made for the Preservation of good Manners among Men, and the
Encouragement given by the Negligence of those who ought to punish the Breakers
of those Laws.

There are several Sorts of Liberty, which are grossly abused here, as well as
this; for Example, First, Religious Liberty; it is true, I that abhor
Persecution for Religion, do not complain of this, as if there ought not to be
a Liberty granted to conscientious Christians to worship God in the Manner
which they believe to most agreeable to his Will, and most edifying to
themselves; but I cannot but think that Liberty grossly abused, when it is made
use of to protect those who deny all Revealed Religion; who, instead of a
Liberty in Religion, claim a Liberty to be of no Religion at-all.

I observe, the Toleration of Dissenters, which is what they found their
Religious Liberties upon, is commonly called, an Act for Liberty of Conscience;
in my Opinion, that very Title explains the Meaning of the Law, that it is to
give Liberty to Tender Consciences to worship God. etc. as I say above: This
cannot import a Liberty to hardened Consciences, to worship no God at all, and
to sear neither GOD or Devil.

There are great Disputes about Religion in this Nation, as well as in other
Places, perhaps more here than any-where else; but the Dispute I take Notice
of, is not between this and that Religion, or this and that Sect or Opinion in
Religion, but betwixt GOD and Devil; a Man shall come into my Company, and
blaspheme God, deny his Redeemer, and make a Mock of all Religion, and then
tell me, he is an Englishman, and claims Liberty; that there is a Law to give
Liberty of Conscience, etc. this is unsufferable, and Liberty of Conscience has
nothing to do in the Case; the Man both by the Laws of God, and of all
Christian Nations, ought to be punished; there is, nothing of Religion or
Conscience in the Case.

There is a Parallel Case in this very same Constitution, and Government; we
have a particular Liberty here, and what we value ourselves very much upon, and
this is called, the Liberty of the PRESS, that is to say, that every Man is at
Liberty to Print and Publish what he pleases.

But notwithstanding all this Liberty of the Press, the Government frequently
take up both Authors and Printers, if they Printany thing offensive, or against
the Administration; or if they publish any Personal Reflections, the Person
injured if these Reflections are unjust and slanderous, has a Right to
prosecute the Publisher and Author, and will have his Remedy at Law.

Again, the Government claim to resent injurious Reproaches, Sarcasms, and
Satyrs, upon any foreign Prince or State in alliance with England, and may
oblige the Authors and Publishers to answer for all such Indecencies; for
Example, one Author, and a Frenchman too, who wrote a Public Paper, was taken
up here for printing that the Duke of Luxemberg was Hump-shoulder'd, and yet
you and I, that have seen him so often at the Head of the French Armies, know
very well how eminent a Truth it was.

Another in the Reign of the late Queen, was sent for upon the Complaint of the
Russian Minister, Resident here, for likening the Czar of Muscovy to a Siberian
Bear, and though he did not really call his Czarish Majesty Siberian Bear, but
only liken'd some of his Actions to the Behavior of that Northern Creature,
yet he was obliged to make his Submission, beg Pardon, and be very thankful for
being discharged so cheap.

Yet all this consists with the Liberty of the Press, which is (as all Liberty
should be) understood, a Liberty to do well, but not a Liberty to do Evil.

"Restraint from ill, is Freedom to the Wise,
"And Good Men, wicked Liberties despise.
I am, Dear Sir, Your Brother, And humble Servant,

LETTER III.
SIR,
IN my first Letter I gave you some of my Observations upon the wretched
Notions which the People here, have entertained of that glorious thing called
Liberty: and how that Liberty, which is the best of Mankind's Privileges, is
abused in the grossest Sense, and applied to the meanest and most scoundrel
Purposes; I shall now bring it all down to the Design I am upon, and let you
see how these false Notions of Liberty, getting into the Heads of the common
People, have Intoxicated their Brains, and have, in a word, destroyed all
Subordination among us, and joining with the Invasion of our Morals, of which I
am next to speak, has set the World, (as I said) with the Bottom upwar'd, and
have raised such a Devil among our Servants, as will not easily be laid.

I am therefore now to lay before you something of what I call the great
Innundation of Vice, that has thus tainted the Nation's Morals, and which in
particular, has debauched the common People.

In order to this, I desire you will take this whole Letter as a Parenthesis,
or Degresion, as it breaks in upon what went before; and after which, I shall
go on in my next where I left off in my last; so that you may at any Time
connect or join the Observations, without this Part, which is rather a History,
but which you will find so necesiary to the Understanding of the whole, that I
believe you will not think it any Interruption in your Reading.

At my very first coming into England, having not yet engaged in settled
Business, I liked both the Place and the People so well, that I resolved to
make my stated Residence here for my Life; in order to this, I began to look
upon the Place as my Native Country, and immediately applied to my Friends to
get myself Naturalized, that I might settle my Fortunes here, as Providence
should direct.

To this purpose also, I resolved for one of my first Steps, as I would advise
all Gentlemen to do, whether Natives or Foreigners, to make myself thoroughly
accquainted with the whole History of the Country, and then with its
Antiquities, so that I should be Master both of its ancient State, its present
State, and also its Government, and Laws, and of the Customs and Manners of the
People; the delightful Study of this took me up something above a Year, in
which time I read over, and that very carefully, all the best Histories of the
Island, in which are recorded the general Introduction of Laws, Rights,
Sovereignty, and civil Government in the Nation; and account of the first
Inhabitants, and with what Gallantry and Bravery they defended their Liberty
against the several Invasions of the Romans, Picts, Saxons, Danes, Normans, and
the Wars and Bloody Battles which afterward happened between those contending
Nations, for the maintaining the Conquests they had made, and keeping the
Possessions, which they had marked out to themselves in this Island.

In reading these Histories, I came to understand how the People of this Nation
came to be possessed of such unusual Privileges and Liberties, such as no
Nation enjoy but themselves, and what original Plea of Right they have to make
for them; a Plea which appears so just, and excepting some Intervals, when
their Monarchs, uneasy to be under the Restraint of Laws, and be, as it were,
governed by their People, have made Attempts to get out of those Fetters, and
free the Crown, as they called it, from popular Bondage, in which Attempts too,
they have always miscarried; I say, excepting which, their Plea of Right has
been always so demonstrably just, that their best Kings have willingly yielded
to them, and thought it a sufficient Glory to their Family, to be possessed of
a Monarchy so flourishing, even with all its Limitations.

But as I observed, there have been Intervals of this Peace, and some of their
Princes, as above, impatient of Restraint, have broken the Circle of
Government, attempted to make themselves arbitrary, assumed a despotick Right,
and trampling on the Laws and Constitution of the Kingdom, have broken out into
Oppressions and Ravages on the Properties of their Subjects, in manifest
Violation of the Laws, which even those very Princes had sworn to rule by; but
then, on the contrary, it should be observed also, that these Violations of
Right, as I call them, never failed to meet with Opposition from the Subjects;
the People, on all those Occasions, being assisted by the Nobility and Gentry,
frequently had recourse to Arms, to vindicate their just Rights, and free
themselves from Tyranny and Oppression; and it is to be observed, with some
Wonder, almost upon all these Occasions the Kings had the worst; as their
Claims were unjust, their Attempts were unsuccessful, and some of them were
compelled to undo what they had done, and restore the People to their Liberty;
as King Stephen, and King Hen. III. K. John; K. Hen. IV. and others; and last
of all, K. James II. Others were entirely ruined, deposed, and lost both Power
and Life; as King Edw. II. Richard II. etc.

These were the Rights and Liberties of Engglishmen, of which so much has been
said in the World, and of which such strange Constructions, and such simple Use
is made in these Days, of which I shall say more as I go on; and for this
Reason it is, I take this Notice of it here.

As thus I made myself Master of the History, and ancient State of England, I
resolved in the next Place, to make myself Master of its present State also;
and to this Purpose, I traveled in three or four several Tours, over the whole
Island, critically observing, and carefully informing myself of every thing
worth observing in all the Towns and Countries through which I passed.

I took with me an ancient Gentleman of my Acquaintance, who I found was
thoroughly acquainted with almost every Part of England, and who was to me as a
walking Library, or a moveable Map of the Countries and Towns through which we
passed; and we never failed to enquire of the most proper Persons in every
Place where we came, what was to be seen? what Rarities of Nature, Antiquities,
ancient Buildings were in the respective Parts? or, in short, every thing worth
the Observation of Travelers.

I have often complained, that though the English Historians, especially in their
relating Facts, have been very particular and distinct; and the Histories of
the several Wars in England are very well written, yet that they are all very
indifferent in their Geography, and that the Reader is spoken to, as supposing
he knew before where everything spoken of, was done, and how every Town or
Country mentioned, was situated; whereas I, that was a perfect Stranger to
these things, should have been greatly at a Loss: But to remedy this, I had
always the Maps of every Country before me, at the same time that I read the
History; as also, I had a Book, entitled Britannia, written by that very
learned Antiquary, Mr. Camden, and some other Books too, which treat of the
natural History, as well as the Antiquities of every County; with these Helps
in my traveling, together with my learned Companion, I was generally informed
of every thing material, wherever I came; whereas, without these I might have
gone through many, Places where valuable Antiquities, and other Curiosities of
Nature or Art were to be seen, and have known nothing of them; and he that
travels England without such Helps, may in many Cases, almost as well, stay at
Home.

But to come to that which is more particular to my present Purpose, and which
is the Reason of giving you this Account of my Travels; by this Means I became
particularly acquainted with the common People, as well as with the Country, in
every Place where I came; I observed their Language, that is, the several
Dialects of it, for they strangely disfer in their Way of expressing
themselves, though in the same Tongue; and there is as much difference between
the English Tongue, as spoken in the North of England, and the same Torgue, as
spoken in the West, as between the French spoken in Normandy, and that of
Gascogne, and Poictou I; say, I became accquainted with their Language,
Customs, Manners, Tempers, and above all with their Morals, which is the thing
I shall have most Occasion to speak of in these Letters: I shall trouble you
now with no more, relating to my Travels, I may in time satisfy the other Part
of your late Request, and give you a full account of the Country, which indeed,
is well worth a Traveller's Pains to see, and a Reader's trouble to look over;
but I have not now time to revise my Journals, and the Minutes which I took of
things every where as I passed, which are very critical I assure you, and
fruitful, of a very diverting as well as instructing variety; that Part I must
refer to another Occasion.

My Friend who went with me, was very curious also, and the more because I
requested it of him, in making Enquiries into, and Observations upon the
Customs and Manners of the People, which, as I mentioned above, are the
principal things which I am now speaking of.

I observe several of the Authors I have just now mentioned, have written
largely of the ancient Families of the Nobility and Gentry of Great Britain;
their Originals, Names, Arms, and sometimes the History of particular Men among
them, who have made themselves famous in the World, of which the Gentry of
England have produced many.

But I meet with very few that take Notice of the common People; how they live,
what their general Employment is, and what the particular Employment of them is
in the several Counties respectively, and yet I found this an Enquiry very full
of useful Observations, and attended with innumerable Incidents, which gave
Light into things of the greatest Moment, as well in History as Antiquity; and
which seemed to add a Part in the Knowledge of the Country, which a Traveller
could not be without.

To come to the Point, it is necessary to observe to you, as the Groundwork of
my whole Design, that the common People of this Country have suffered a kind of
general Revolution, or change in their Disposition, Temper and Manners, within
a certain Term of Years, ( which I shall mark out to you in its Place also,) I
say they have suffered a general change, such as I believe no Nation has
undergone but themselves; I wish I could say it was a change for the better;
but be that as it will, I shall endeavor to give you an impartial Account of
it as it is.

It is in the next Place needful to observe to you, that I took this Journey at
the unhappy Time when this Change, or Revolution in the Manners and Temper of
the common People was in the height of its Operation, namely, in the Years
1684, to 1688; for I was near four Year before I finished my Travels.

I that was then a Stranger to the People, though not altogether to the Place,
was not fully accquainted with their just Character in Times past; but my
Companion, upon whose Judgment I very much depended, and who being an
observing as well as an ancient Man, had been conversant among them for
threescore Years before; supplied me in that Part, in a Manner, which no Books
or Maps could do, for this Part is, as I have said, scarce meddl'd, with in
History.

'He told me, that he first was acquainted among the common People by his
Father's being a very great Clothier in the West-Country; in consequence of
which Business, he employed many Hundreds, I think he said Thousands, of the
Laboring Poor; that he acted under his Father for some Years, but then went
into the North and North-East Parts of England; as first, into the West Riding
of Yorkshire, bordering on Lancashire, and after that into Lincolnshire, and
Norfolk; and that his Business was chiefly buying of Lincolnshire, and
Leicestershire Wool, which by the way, is the best and fittest for
Manufacturing in England, and by this trading moving kind of Life, added he, I
came to converse among the Poorer sort of People, Farmers, and Manufacturers of
every kind, from Lancashire and Westmoreland, in the North; down to
Lincolnshire, and Leicestershire, and thence into Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex;
and especially among the Servants of all these Countries, such as Husbandmen,
Day-Labourers, and Workmen; also Servants in Gentlemen's and Tradesmen's and
Farmers Families, and the like.

I listened very carefully to his Discourse, because this was the Part that I
more particularly intended to inquire into; and often desired him to tell me
what that kind of People they were in his Time; for what they were then, and
how they behaved then, we both knew very well.

'He told me that about the Year 1634 to 38, when he began to be conversant in
the World on his own Account, the common People were plain, fair-dealing,
sober, openhearted, courteous. humble; that generally speaking, they were very
honest in their dealing, and in many Places religious and conscientious in
their Conversation; that the Servants were modest, humble, mannerly, and very
subservient to those who entertained and employed them; that the Apprentices
either to Tradesmen or Handicrafts, were quiet, dilligent, submitted cheerfully
to Family-Business, Orders, and Hours; were laborious, and worked hard for
their Masters Benefit, having their Eyes at the Time, when by the expiration of
their Terms, they should have the Benefit of their Industry, and of the Labor
of other Servants for themselves; nay, said he, even in London, the Servants
and Apprentices to Shopkeepers, Warehouse-Keepers, and to the best Merchants,
thought it not below them to stoop to the meanest needful things in their
Business; such as assisting Package of Goods; clearing, setting to Rights, and
Sweeping their Warehouses, Counting-Houses, and Shops; loading Carts, opening
and shutting Doors and Windows, etc. of which hereafter.

'The Wages of the Poor, said he, were not more then, though their Labor was
greater, but just the contrary; the Wages of hired Servants were then from 30
s. per Annum, to 50 s. for a Maidservant; 6 d. to 8 d, and 10 d. a Day to a
Laboring or Husbandman; farther in the North-West Country, not so much; the
Farmers hired their yearly Menservants, who they took into the House for 40 s,
and their Diet; the Gentlemen. had their Serving-Men or Footmen, to whom they
also gave their Diet for 30 s to 40 s. a Year; and as to Nobleman, and Persons
of Quality, they had their Footmen, as we now call them, of the Sons of their
Tennants, who thought it their Honor to be taken into the Service and Family
of the Lord of the Manor; and had a Badge of that Honor, viz. a Livery given
them of Russet-Cloth with a Badge, or Mark of his Lordship's Arms; and at
Christmas a Rose-Noble in Silver, to bless their Pockets; nor was there any
need for such as those to have more Wages, for their Lord generally preferred
them after certain Terms of Service, to be Tennants of small Farms, or made
them Cottages, and put them into a Way to get their Bread by Honest Labor, and
diligence in Husbandry, which was the utmost of their Ambition.



I looked earnestly at him, while he talked thus, and after he had done, pray
then, said I, when, and from what Causes and Beginings, came that strange
Alteration of things which we see now? for the Country People, as well as the
Trades-People in Towns and Cities, are quite another sort of Folks at this
time, than what you speak of? and as for the Servants, they move in another
kind of Circle, and do not understand the Language you talk of.

O, says he, it is a dismal and melancholy thing to tell you, how this
Alteration has happened; and you that are a Stranger, will neither have
Patience to hear it, or be able to give Credit to it, when you do.

I assured him I would convince him of the contrary; for, says I, you see I am
so desirous to know these things, that I can never be dissatisfied with the
Relation, however long; and as for giving Credit, I told him, I knew him too
well, not to depend entirely upon the Truth of whatever he related to me, as
Truth, and of his own Knowledge; for that I was assured he would not mislead me
in any thing.

He then went on with his Discourse, and beginning at the History of the late
three Reigns; First he told me, that after the Death of Queen Elizabeth, when
King James the First came to the Crown, things immediately began to take a new
turn; he told me, that during the whole Reign of that Prince, they had in
England a most dissolute Court, where the Nobility and Gentry and Courtiers,
after the Example of the King himself, delighted in Masks, Interludes,
Bacchanalian Feasts, Riots, and all manner of Luxury not, says he, to mention
the more wicked Parts of it.

'That after King Jawe's Death, his Son, though a Prince of great Personal
Temperance and Modesty, yet Vice and Immorality having gained a footing among
the Courtiers, the King could do little to abate the Riot of it; being at the
same time perplexed with the constant Difficulties of his Affairs; so that the
Flux of Riot and Luxury, which began in his Father's Reign received no other
Check in King Charles the First's time, than what a good Example in the King
might give to it, and that was not sufficient, while the Courtiers gave
themselves a Liberty to go on, as they had begun.

'But that which followed, said he, was still worse, and finished the Ruin of
the Morals of our People, especially of the Gentry throughout the Nation, and
more especially of those who took Part with the King in the Troubles which
followed; for the King, said he, being obliged by the Fate of the Day to raise
an Army against his tumultuous Subjects; and that Army being composed not of
listed Troops, as now, in which Case the Law of Subordination being rigorously
and solemnly observed, the Officers are as subject one to another, as the
meanest Soldiers; but the King's Army being raised by the generous Contribution
of the Loyal Gentry, the Officers were all Gentlemen and Volentiers, that
served upon Principles of Love and Loyalty to their Prince, and not for Pay;
and the King not having always Money to pay them if they had asked it, could
not, at the same time, tie them up to Laws of War, and Rules of Discipline, as
is now the Case; nor could he always show his Resentment, much less punish them
when they committed even the most detestable Crimes; for that so many would
interest themselves to intercede, that if the King should deny a Pardon, they
would pretend to be disobliged, talk of being illtreated, their Services
disregarded, and the like, and the next Word was quitting the Army; so that the
King was obliged to wink at all the Extravagancies, Plunderings, Rapes, nay,
and even Murders too, not being in a Condition to do that Justice which the
Law and a free Administration called for.

'If the King was thus disabl'd from punnishing Capital Crimes, says the old
Gentleman, less could he dip into lesser Mistakes; such in particular, as the
common Excesses and Extravagancies of his Officers; the Oaths and Execrations
to this Day so common among the Soldiers; and the Drunkenness, the
Debaucheries, and Violences attending them, and spreading among the Soldiers,
by the Example of their Officers; but he, the King, was obliged to satisfy
himself with verbil Reproof, Entreaties, and such Ways as might show his
dislike of the thing, without Resentment at the Person; and if he had not done
thus, he would have had but few Soldiers to Fight for him.

'It was here, said my Friend, that this dreadful unnatural Imprecation of
calling on God to Damn them, first broke out; here it was first Invented, and
first made Use of; on the other hand as for the Parliament's Army, said he,
whether it was really Religion, or a religious Policy, be that to themselves,
yet as they carried on a Pretense of Religion in their Cause, so they
maintained the Face of Religion, and more than common Sanctity in their Armies;
and as they wanted no Money to Pay all their Troops, both Officers and
Soldiers; so they had them all at command, and were under no Obligation to a
relax Discipline; and by this, they gained insensibly on the Country; to make
this difference more sensible to me, he told me a Story of the Master of
Scole-Inn, in Norfolk; the Man, whether merely keeping good Hours in his
Family, or that he had some Extraordinary Business that required his rising
early the next Morning, he could not remember; but the Man I say, was gone to
Bed one Night something sooner than usual, and locking up his Gates, and, as
was his Custom, taking the Key's up with him into his Chamber, he was but newly
in Bed, when he was raised with a Noise of rapping and thundering at the Gate;
a Servant Maid that was up about her Kitchin-Affairs, goes to the Gate, and
asks who was there? they bid G -- d D -- n her, why did she not open the Gate?
one cried, shoot her; and another Damn her cut her Throat, and the like; but
the Wench finding they were Soldiers, prayed them to be quiet, she would go up
to her Master for the Key's, and let them in presently; so she runs up to the
Master's Chamber Door, and calls to him; the Man just fallen into his first
Sleep, did not wake presently, and the Wench was almost as impatient at the
Chamber Door, as the Troopers were without, who began to knock and lay on at
the Gate again; at last, the Man waking, and hearing what was the matter,
starts out of Bed, and began to put on his Clothes; Soldiers! says he,
Troopers! who are they for? for! says the Wench, you need not ask who they are
for; they are for the King to be sure, hark how they swear.

'Here my Friend stopped, as if he had done; well but Sir, said I, what is this
to the strange Turn given to the Poor common People, and laboring Poor, the
Servants, and the like, who, you say, were so plain, so open-hearted, so quiet,
so modest, and so low-priz'd since you can remember; whence came the Change
upon them?

'Well, says he, I am coming to that, I shall Account for it, as plainly as for
the other; after the War was over, and the Royal-Family, was restored, Things
took a new Turn again; the outside of Religion, which the Parliament's People
had maintained, be it, that it was from right or wrong Principles, had had this
good Effect, namely, that it kept the World sober; but upon the return of
Monarchy at the Restoration, the Court was all Mirth and Gayety again, and the
whole Nation rejoiced with them; their Joy was, without question, just, no body
disputed that Part; but unhappy for England, they could find no way to Express
an exceeding Joy, but by an excess of Crime; and particularly, that most
brutish of all Crimes, Drunkenness, which overspread the Nation like a
Winter-Flood, and a torrent of Oaths, and Profaneness followed of course.

'He then descended to Particulars; the Families of the Nobility and Gentry,
said he, were all universally touched with these wicked doings; in particular,
said he, Drinking Healths began here; a thing, till then not known in England;
the King's Health, the Health of all the Royal-Family one after another, six
Glasies in a Hand; he that had the Victory at the Glass, was the best Subject;
Drunkenness grew a Test of Loyalty; and nothing that was sober, could keep
Company, without being affronted.

'And yet had this been all, one could hardly expect less from a Nation
overwhelmed with Joy, at the return of the Royal-Family, and the restoring the
Fortunes and Circumstances of so many ruined Families, and exiled Cavaliers;
but not content with this, the Custom of imposing Healths upon everybody that
came into Company, followed it; so that nobody could visit his Friend without
being made Drunk.

'Nor was it enough to drink the King's Health, with the Healths of all the
Royal-Family, and of General Monk, and of the Royal-Oak, and every simple mad
thing they could think of; but then, in spite of the Act of Oblivion, and the
King's exhorting the People in his Speeches to Parliament to forget all former
things, Words of Distinction, and Marks, and Names of Reproach, they must then
drink Confusion to the Rump, Damnation to Oliver Cromwell and all his Race,
Confusion to the Phanaticks, and a thousand such extravagant things; all which
had this additional Evil in the Practice, namely, that they served to pour Wine
down the Throats of the whole Company, and make Drunkenness overspread Society
in general.

'Neither was this only practiced at the beginning of the Restoration, but it
held on, even to the Death of King Charles the 2 d. at the latter-end of whose
Reign, as if it had slack'd before, and that they were afraid the Nation should
grow Sober again, the Tide of Drunkenness, which had but seemed to Ebb a
little, came on again with a surprising reflux; especially upon the Divisions
at the latter-end of the Popish Plot, between Whig and Tory, and particularly
upon the Subject of the Bill of Exclusion.

'Till then, Drunkenness had not so universally spread itself among the common
People; the Gentlemen contented themselves with being Drunk, and making one
another so, but upon that Occasion, it became a Politic Interest to make
Servants, Tennants, Tradesmen, and everybody, Poor, as well as Rich drink to
Excess; drinking the Duke of York's; Health became a new Test of Society, and
of Loyalty; drinking to the Succession in the Right-Line; Confusion to the
Presbyterians; to all those that were for the Bill of Exclusion; and the like.

'Now came on frequent Dissolutions, and Elections of Parliament, and in
consequence of that, the Bribery and Corruption, the Treating for Elections,
and all those Treatings attended with Excessive Drinking, increased to such a
Degree, that in a few Years the Habit of Drunkenness, and the Drinking of
Healths, as above, spread by the Example of the Gentlemen to the Tennants, to
the common People in the Corporations, to the Servants, and in short, to the
whole Body of the People.

'And though it was true, that there remained a great many sober, good, religious
People in the Nation, and it is to be hoped there does so still, yet here began
the Ruin of the Nation's Morals; here the Poor got a smatch of Drunkenness, and
withal a dreadful Habit of swearing, raging, and damning one another in their
Drink as well as the Rich; and with them it continues and increases every Day.

'An Instance of this, adds my Relater, is evident in the Number of Alehouses
and Publick-Houses erected in the first five Years after the Restoration, of
which says he, this is the short Detail. 26690 Licenses for new Alehouses,
where there were none before, were granted in a very little Space. 4328
Wine-Licenses for Taverns. 6325 May-Poles set up for Dancing. 326297 Barrels of
Ale. Brewed in that Space, more than was in the five foregoing Years. 287323
Barrels of Beer.



Here my Friend closed his Historical Account, as he called it, of the growth
of Debauchery in England, and the Revolution which the Temper and Disposition
of the People of England suffered in those Days; he only added these Words at
the end of it; I will not, says he, answer for the Exactness of the Account
above; as to the Increase of Victualling-Houses, May-Poles, and Brewing, though I
have great Reason to believe they are rather within Compass than beyond it; but
this I think is certain, that by those means the Morals of the Nation were
ruined: Let me only add a few of my Remarks to this Discourse; Experience shows
that it appears much easier to conquer and give a Check to this Vice thus
broken in among the Gentlemen, than it is to check it among the common People.

At the late Revolution, upon the coming of the Prince of Orange, that
scandalous Custom of imposing upon People, and obliging People to drink whether
they would or no, received a Check; with their lost Liberties, the Nation
recovered the Liberty of Drinking, that is to say, of Drinking as they pleased;
and on a sudden, from a Mode or Fashion of putting the Cup to your Neighbor's
Nose, it became the Mode to give every Man leave to Drink as he pleased,
according to the old Rule at Ahasuerus's Feast; and this was a great Point
gained too.

But alas! it was too late; the Distemper was too far gone; if the Gentlemen
would not make the Servants Drunk, the Servants would make one another so; the
Tennants now began to drink as fast as the Landlords; the Husbandman as fast as
the Employer, and as every Man in Drinking among the Gentry, had the Liberty to
Drink as little as he would, so every Man among the common People claimed the
Liberty of Drinking, as much as he would; at the same time knowing not how to
set Bounds to their Drinking-Gust.

Wonder not that I call the Drunken Vice the worst of all Brutallity; it
appears by its Consequences in this Nation, to be the Mother Sin, the Parent or
producing Cause of all Vice; the Sins of Whoreing, Gameing, Thieving, Murder,
Rapin, Couzening, and Cheating, and particularly that of Swearing, have been
its natural Progeny, and have all entered at this one Door; Drunkenness has
been the great Ancestor of them all.

That Swearing, Whoreing, and Murder, are the natural Consequences of
Drunkenness you will grant me, I believe, at first Word; neither is there any
need to debate the Point here, Experience proves it; but suffer me, I beseech
you, to look a little into it.

I. The Custom of Profane Swearing is so increased among the poor People,
Servants, Laborers, etc. that it is troublesome to sober People to go along
the Street; they hear the Mouths of the common Laboring Poor so continually
overflowing with gall: I remember, being in the Northern Parts of England,
beyond Newcastle upon Tyne, I met an English Gentleman, who was just that very
Day come out of Scotland, and it was so grievous to him, that he could not
forbear complaning of it to me; his Expression was this, 'If I was, says he, to
be brought out of Scotland into England blindfold, I would tell at the first
Town I set my Foot in, on this side the Border, that I was on English Ground,
by hearing the Name of God profaned by the very Young Children in the Street;
the grown People swearing and cursing in all their ordinary Discourse; whereas
for the Honor of Scotland, says he, I must speak it, you hear nothing, or but
very little of it there.
Everybody knows, that this horrid Custom is the ordinary Companion of
Drunkenness: Swearing and Cursing are the Brats of the Bottle, that way, and
that way only they came in; and though the Gentlemen have a little abated the
dreadful Excess; as if, their Footmen and Servants having learnt to out-swear
them, it was become a little too Vulgar for them; yet, this I may venture to
say now, that the Footmen and Servants will not so easily follow their Master's
Example in abating it, as they did follow their Example in learning it.

Besides, (as if the Devil having got hold of the Nation in this manner, was
resolved not to part with them) If the Gentlemen have left it off, the Ladies
have taken it up; and a certain Duchess is said to be famous for this, namely,
that she will out swear any of her Footmen or Chairmen.

2. Murder; in this I may appeal to the Experience of those that lived toward
the beginning of the last Century, that there was nothing known or heard-of
like what we see now: I mean Men fighting, wounding, and killing one another in
the Streets and in Taverns, and coming out of Taverns, and where one Accident
of this kind happened then, it may safely be said, that five hundred such have
happened since.
How often do we see Men come raving out of the Taverns, as void of Sense as a
Man out of Bedlam, and swear they will kill the next Man they meet? and how many
Gentlemen of good Families and Fortunes have I seen since I have been in
England, sent by the Law on that account, to make a trip to St. Tyburn, (the
Greve of this City, as the Greve at Paris is the Tyburn of that City,) that is
to say, hanged for drunken Murders? besides the Numbers who by Favor and
Intrest have obtained the Prince's Pardons and Reprieves.

Again, how many self-murthers of this kind too have we daily in our weekly and
yearly Bills of Mortallity, thus; killed himself by excessive Drinking; the
yearly Bills give us an Account of no less than one hundred and six and twenty
in the last five Years, besides such as perish by that Enemy, who are spared in
the said Bills, because they should not be known; which are, perhaps, twenty
times that Number.

It Is another Evidence of the truth of my Observation on this Head, that the
Government have found themselves obliged, to make so many new Laws for the more
effectual preventing Drunkenness and Debauchery; (1.) Obliging Victuallers and
Vintners not to keep unseasonable Hours; not to draw Drink of a Sabbath Day,
etc. Crimes scarce heard of in former Days, and which there was no Occasion to
provide against before. (2.) To oblige every Man that is fuddled, or as we call
it, in drink, to pay five Shillings to the Poor, or to be set an Hour in the
Stocks, and the like.

Indeed it has been some Obstruction to the Execution of these Laws, that the
Magistrates are so often overtaken themselves, that they cannot find in their
Hearts to punish others for what they themselves deserve Punishment for, more
than most poor Men can do.

As to the Vice of Whoring, and the near relation that has, to this of
Drunkenness, I need take up none of your time upon that Subject, only to
remark, what an infinite Number of Debauches of this kind happen every Day
among us, more than ever were before.

It occurs to me here to tell you a short Story upon this Head, of a certain
Colonel of the Army, a particular Accquaintance of mine, who had an Intriegue
with a young Lady, and could by no means compass his Design, her Virtue proving
stanch against all his Attacks; only that she had so much respect for him, that
she would have consented to Marry him, but that did not suit, it seems, with
his Convenience, or at least, with his Design.

However, he found means one time to get this Lady into his Company, and to get
a little Wine into her Head more than she could manage; and when her Head was
light, her Heels proved so to, and he had his Will of her; when she came to
herself, and was made sensible of her Wickedness, finding herself in-bed with
him, that there was no room left for Regret, she put it off, with a Jest, and
said, well, since she had let him come when she was drunk, he might even as
well come when she was sober, for it was all one now.

After this, she solicited him with all her Skill, to marry her, as he had
offered to do before, but soon found she could not Master him that way; but at
length, she resolved to try if she could not take him at the same Advantage
that he had taken her at before; she laid many Snares of this kind for him, but
was always disappointed; after some time, finding him one Evening come into her
Chamber half drunk, she took the hint, and got him to accept of a Bottle from
her, as she called it, and she sat and drank the Bottle out with him, and then
another or two; till being very drunk, he wanted to come to Bed to her, but she
pretended to refuse him, because he would not marry her; he answered, he would
marry her, and called for a Parson, tho not knowing well what he said, or did;
she, who had got a Minister ready for the Purpose, having expected what
happened, takes him at his Word, brings in the Parson, and made him repeat the
Words of Matrimony, and had good Witnesses of it, and then she went to Bed with
him.

In the Morning going to rise, he called her by Name; no, no, Colonel --, says
she, not Mrs. Mary -- now, but Mary --, Colonel -- 's Wife; what mean you by
that, said he? even just so, Sir, says she, (and told him the whole Fact) as
you served me, before, I hope you cannot be angry; well, says the Colonel, if I
have don't when I was drunk, I must stand to it when I am sober; but you have
bit me in my own Play, my Dear, says he, and made my Lord Rochester's Verses
good upon me. "A Woman's never so ruined, but she can,
"Revenge herself on her Undoer, Man.


If I was to give you the Detail of the Adventures I have met with of this
kind, I might Entertain you with Letters for a great while on no other Subject;
it is true, in the Story above, the Man was the Agressor, and deserved it; and
the Woman was not intentionally a Whore; but on the other hand, how many young
Gentlemen, Heirs to good Families and Estates, have been drawn in by the mere
Engine of the Bottle, to debauch themselves with scandalous and even
distempered Whores? to the ruin of Body, Soul, and Fortune; and how many, which
is still worse, have wheedled them in to marry them, when they have done: If I
should say that this Consequence of Drunkenness is more frequent in this
Nation, than ever I could observe it to be in France, or even in Germany
itself, I believe I should say Truth.

But still this is among the Gentry, and does not reach down to the lower Rank
of People, of whom I am principally to speak; but is not the Consequence of
Excess in Drink visible in all the lower Sorts of Men, as well as the other?
how are the very Morals and Honesty of the laboring People so ruined? that
now, as I noted in my last, you cannot with safety hire a Workman by the Day,
to almost any kind of Business, unless your Eye be upon him, not only part, but
even all the time of his Work; if you do, you are sure to have your Work either
spoiled or neglected, or done contrary to your Order.

The laboring People have their Eyes now not at your Work, but at their own
Wages, and if they can but secure the last, their Business is to cheat you in
the first as much as possible; but especially, as to Time, formerly honest Men
were to be found, who whether you were with them, or from them, would be fairly
at their Business, and made Conscience of doing their Day's Work for their
Day's Wages.

But now the Case is quite altered; I shall give you an Example of this, before
I come to speak more particularly to it: I have for some Years been concerned
in a large public Building in the Country, where we kept a great many other
Servants, as also Horses, and Carts, constantly employed; among the rest we
kept an old Servant whose Name was Wright, in constant Work, though paid by the
Week; he was a Wheel-wright by Trade, and a Carpenter also, and his Business
was to keep the Carts, and Barrows, and Working-Tools and Workhouses in
repair, and the like; it happened one Morning that a Cart being Broken-down
upon the Road, at some distance from the House, this old Man was fetched to
repair it where it lay; while he was busy at his Work, comes by a Countryman
that knew him, and at some Distance salutes him with the usual Compliment,
Good Morrow Father Wright, God speed your Labor; the old Fellow looks up at
him, for he did not see him at first, and with a kind of pleasant surlyness,
answered, I don't care whether he does or no, it is Day-Work.

I need make no Comment upon this worthy Speech, it explains itself; I shall
have occasion to mention old Father Wright again in a more particular Affair of
this kind; but I am now more properly speaking of the Effect of Drunkenness,
upon the Morals of the laboring Poor; and that leads me to observe how they
are not only become careless and Negligent of their Business, when employed by
others, but entirely negligent of themselves, and of their Families,
notwithstanding they are able by their ordinary Labor, to support them very
comfortably; I had in the same Building-Works which I mentioned above, a
Workman who during the whole Summer-season for the Work, which is about seven
or eight Months, as Weather happens, could ordinarily earn Eighteen Shillings a
Week, sometimes 20, to 22 s. per Week; this Fellow worked very hard too indeed,
and yet he would hardly save Clothes to cover his Nakedness, and his Wife and
four Children were kept by the Parish.

But even this does not fully reach the Case I am upon; it would take up more
Letters than I should be able to write you for seven Year, if I should give you
a particular of the dismal Effects of Drunkenness, upon the People of this
sober Nation; I call them so, because so they were but a few Years before, and
even since, some that are now alive can remember.

But I must shorten the Discourse now, my present Design being chiefly of
another kind, viz. to let you see what the general Behavior of Workmen, and
hired Laborers of both Sexes is; how they manage themselves, or to speak more
properly, how they manage their Masters; for things are come to that pass now,
that though Masters have the Name of Government indeed, the Servants really
govern throughout this Nation, and especially that Part of them who we hire for
daily Labor, who if but one crooked Word be spoken to them, will turn their
Backs upon you, and upon your Business, and be gone, in spite of Contracts and
Bargains, and in spite of any Damages you may suffer by it, as I shall show
you more particularly in my next; also of all the other kinds of Servants among
us, for they are the same in their Degree; such as Coachmen, Footmen, Cooks,
Maidservants, and Menservants, Apprentices, and the like, how they behave;
how their Conduct is altered of late; how terrible a Greivance their Insolence
is in the Families where they are; what Masters frequently suffer by their
Negligence and Abuses; and how hard it is to find Methods for the Regulation of
this Evil; it is, I confess, very difficult, but I shall venture at it a
little, and if possible, by searching into the bottom of these things we may
find out some Remedy, that the Nation may be delivered from one of the heaviest
Burdens that ever loaded it, and the most difficult to deal with.

I shall conclude with observing to you, that I am very just in laying the
Weight of all this upon that Flood of Wine and Strong-Drink, which this Nation
seems to be drowned in for so many Years past, because it is evident that
Drinking is still the ordinary Introduction of all the particular Disorders
which these People commit: It Is ordinary to say, such an one is a very civil
Fellow, and a very good Workman, or such a one is a very good Servant, but he
will he Drunk now and then, and when he is so, he is mad, and does not care
what he does; and the general Excuse for a saucy insolent Servant, is, why he
was in drink, and did not know what he said, you must excuse it, he will be
very sorry for it, and beg your Pardon for it when he is sober; now it may be,
all this shall be very true, and the Fellow shall come the very next Day and
beg Pardon, as was said of him, and shall the very next time he gets a little
more Drink in his Head be the same Man again, and as saucy and Insolent as
before, and beg Pardon again, and be drunk again, and so on in a kind of
rotation to the end of the Chapter.

It is remarkable also, that when such a Fellow comes to beg Pardon, he shall
have the Impudence to say to you, that he was in drink, and that therefore he
hopes you will pass it by; whereas his being Drunk is not an aggravation only,
but an Addition of Crime, and so far from a Reason why he should be Pardoned,
that it is the best Reason that can be given why he should not.

Another Case is, that this Drunkenness is certainly the Parent of Oaths, and
as our common People are addicted to Swearing in such an execrable manner, as
that no Nation in the World is like them; so it is most commonly when they are
in drink: At least, Drunkenness has been the grand Introduction to it, nay,
many that will never Swear when they are sober, will Swear in the most
outrageous manner when they are in drink, and be guilty of the most gross and
abominable Actions in their Liquor; things which they themselves would abhor
when they were themselves.

There is an unhappy kind of Swearing, which Custom has brought upon this
Nation, which is not the Effect of Drunkenness, of which I shall give you the
Trouble of a Letter by iself; and this is the Multiplication of Oaths appointed
by Authority, of which this Kingdom has more than ever I met with in any Nation
whatever; but of that hereafter.

This way of Swearing, was in its beginning a high Compliment upon the general
Integrity, and gave a great Character of the Principles of the People; arguing
that they were so conscientiously regardful of their Oaths, that what they once
swore, it might be depended on they would carefully and religiously observe.

But time, and the frequency of taking these Oaths, has made kissing the
Gospels so familiar with them, that such Oaths have lost much of their
Solemnity, and are consequently brought to be of less Importance, and to have
less Influence on the Minds of those who take them, than it was at first
believed they would have, and then indeed, they ought to have.

If Drunkenness and in consequence of it, this vile habit of Swearing have thus
possessed the generality of the poor People here, as I have observed; what then
can we expect from them as to their Morals, or Manners? you are not indeed, to
expect much from their Morals, but far less from their Manners.

What decency of Expression, what Modesty in Behavior can that Man show when
he is gorged with Drink? when his Head runs round like the Sails of a Wind
Mill? as the Vapor blows when he knows nothing what he does, or what he is to
do? when he can neither think or act?

They have a very good old Song here on the Subject of Drinking, which has in
it one Couple of Lines, that is much to my Purpose, viz. "And the Man that is
Drunk
"Is as great as a King.


It is literally true here; an Englishman, when Drink is in his Head, is a
King, an Emperor, Monarch of himself, and knows nobody, and values nobody; if
he be the meanest of your Servants, is your Master for that time; he knows
nothing about you, or about your Business; but will roar and sing, even in your
Face, and tell you, he is above all Masters, and values nobody.

To talk to him while he is in that Condiction, is to talk Gospel to a Kettle
Drum; you get nothing but saucy Language, or something worse; the best way is
to get some of the other Servants to have him to-bed, and when he has slept,
and is a little sober, he will be pretty well again; but then you have this
trouble upon your Hands again, viz. That if you do not set some honest, staid,
sober Fellow, to take care of him the next Morning, if he gets but one Mug of
Beer in his Hand, he is gone; his Head is not thoroughly cool, and he is a Madman
or a Sober Man for another Day, just as the Company he falls into, first
happens, to be loose drinking Fellows, or sober and grave, and sometimes he
goes on for the whole Week. As this is the Case with them in their Drink, it
begins to be a kind of a necessary Custom, though it be owing chiefly to the
Custom of drinking; namely, that no Notice is to be taken, no not by the Master
himself, of what a Servant either says or does, when he is in Drink.

I shall lead you into these Particulars more to your Satisfaction, by giving
you some short Histories of Cases, which come up to the Perfection of these
things, and which, I hope, will be both diverting and instructing; mean time, I
conclude for the present, and am,

Dear Sir. Your most humble Servant and affectionate Brother.

LETTER IV.
Dear Sir.
I AM now to lay down some things for your farther Admiration in the particular
Behavior of the English Poor, and give me leave, previous to what I have
farther to say upon this Head, to add that, 1. This is all, in spite of double
Pay, at the same Time that their Services are least, and their Behavior worst,
their Wages are best, their pay largest, and they have the greatest Obligation
laid upon them to be diligent.

This, one would think, should either prevent their Ill-Behaviour, or be a
means to reclaim them, when they had broken in upon their Manners; but on the
contrary, it is a general Observation at least in the Compass of my particular
Knowledge, and I scarce ever knew it fail, namely, that I never knew a Servant,
or a Workman in England, one farthing the better for the Increase of his Wages;
on the contrary, if you advance a Servant's Wages, it is so natural for him to
think he deserves it, or that else you would not do it; that instead of mending
him, it always makes him worse.

It is a kind of a Proverbial Speech among our People, when they see a dull,
heavy Fellow go slowly on in his Business, to say to him, come mend your Pace,
and I Will mend your Pay; but really the Man's return ought to be, do you but
mend my Pay first, and you shall hang me, if I mend my Pace.

2. Servants and Workmen in England, seem to act in the Case of their Master's
Bounty, as an old cunning Cart-Horse does with the Driver, and his Whip; when
the Driver smacks his Whip, the Cart-Horse shakes his Bells; the Driver makes
the Horse believe he will strike, and the Cart-Horse makes the Driver believe
he will go; but the Carter does not lash, nor does the Horse mend his Pull; so
that the Horse cheats the Driver for his Favor, in which, (by the way,) he
lets us see that Gratitude is not a natural Principle among Horses.

The Behavior of the laboring Poor in England, is something akin to this;
and we find that Gratitude is not a natural Principle among the common People;
at least, if it is, they are pleased to Sin against it in a most unnatural
Manner; in a word, their Morals being touched as before, that Part of their
Virtue, which I call Gratitude, and which is the brightest Part of an honest
Man, is in a manner quite sunk among them: But I shall have Occasion to
compliment them upon their Gratitude hereafter.

I return now to the most fatal Cause of all this Mischief; I mean the Advance
of Wages, for this indeed, is the support of all the Insolence of Servants, as
their ruined Manners is the Spring of it: Here indeed, they verify what was by
a late Author made part of their Character. "The Laboring Poor, in spite of
double Pay,
"Are saucy, mutinous, and Beggarly.


But to return to the Wages, and here I am to observe, 1. That though advancing
the Wages of Servants has not been a public thing done by the Government or
Legislature, in the, Nature of a Law. 2. Nor has it been done by a common
consent, as some public things have been done; obtaining thereby the ordinary
Sanction of a Law. 3. Nor has it after such a kind of Common Consent been
approved or confirmed by any Authority, as a thing which ought to be; no nor
lastly, 4. Has it been so much as encouraged by the Magistrates or Government;
on the contrary, it is the common received Opinion, that it ought not to be so;
and that it spoils Servants in the main, and yet guided by we know not what
Fate, everybody comes into it; the Servants encroach, and demand high Wages,
and the People generally comply with it, and so the Evil is grown insensibly
upon us, till it is become a received Custom, and is what it may be said, ever
body does, and therefore every Servant looks for; and whereas in common Charity
one would expect that this should influence the generality of Servants for the
better, and help to reclaim them, on the contrary, it is indeed, the Ruin of
them all.


Nor is this Advance of Servants Wages any Wealth to them, but as above, their
Morals being destroyed, this overplus is generally laid out, either in Luxury
or Vanity, that is to say, in Strong-Drink by the Menservants, and in gay
things by the Women-Servants; and take all that little Frugallity which is to
be found among them, and set it against the horrible increase of Pride and
Debauchery, that is, Drink, (for I must be allowed to call Drunkenness
Debauchery) I say take all that little Frugallity that is left, I believe it
will be granted, 1. That the Poor are poorer than when Labor was cheaper. 2.
Servants lay up less, take them one with another, than they did when they were
hired at half the Wages.


So that upon the whole, neither the Labourer without-Doors, or the menial
Servant within-Doors, are one jott the better in their Behavior, or the richer
in their Pockets for all the advance of Pay which they receive, which yet in
the whole Kingdom, amounts to an immense Sum by the Year.

To begin with the laboring Poor, they are indeed the Grievance of the Nation,
and there seems an absolute Necessity to bring them, by severe regulations, to
some State of immediate Subordination; their Case is briefly summed up in two
Heads. 1. Under a stop of Trade, and a general want of Work, then they are
clamorous and mutinous, run from their Families, load the Parishes with their
Wives and Children, who they leave perishing and starving, and themselves grow
ripe for all manner of Mischief, whether public Insurrection, or private
plunder and robbery, and seeing they have not Work enough, they will not work
at all, and that brings them to wander, starve, beg, steal, and be Hanged. 2.
In a Glut of Trade they grow saucy, lazy idle, and debauched; when they may
have Work, and may get Money enough to live well, and lay up for a Time of less
Business; then instead of Diligence and Good-Husbandry which might be expected
from honest Men, on the contrary they will Work but two or three Days in the
Week, or till they get Money enough to keep them the rest of the Week, and all
the other part of their Time they lie in the Alehouse to spend it.


The present Juncture of Time, while I am writing this Letter, furnishes me
with flagrant Examples of this kind; there is now, and has been, for near two
Year past, a prodigious Run of Trade for all sorts of the Woollen-Manufactures,
of which England makes so much.

This Demand for Goods makes a propotion'd Increase of Work, and an Increase of
Work, of course produces an Increase of Wages: This the Poor in France would
rejoice at, and any People indeed, that were in their Senses would take it for
a Blessing from Heaven, and it would prompt their Diligence, and make them work
the harder, that they might take the honest Advantage of it, and as we say,
make Hay while the Sun shines.

That the Increase of Trade and Wages is real, and the Fact true, you may take
it thus in a few Words, viz. The rate for spinning, weaving, and all other
Manufacturing-Work, I mean in WOOL, is so risen, that the Poor all over
England, can now earn or gain near twice as much in a Day, and in some Places,
more than twice as much as they could get for the same Work two or three Years
ago: Particularly in Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, Eastward; and in Wiltshire,
Somerset, and Devon, West; the Poor Women now get 12 d to 15 d a Day for
spinning, the Men more in proportion, and are full of Work; whereas before,
they could not get half so much, and very often not find Employment neither.

And what now is the Consequence of this? not Diligence, not Thankfulness, I
assure you; less is it enriching the Poor, or furnishing themselves with
Conveniences, Clothes, and Necessaries; least of all is it attended with a
provident laying-up for a time of Scarcity; when Work may be wanting and Wages
abate again; as it is very likely may be the Case hereafter: No, No, just the
contrary; This Prosperity introduces Sloth, Idleness, Drunkenness, and all
manner of Wickedness; instead of making Hay while the Sun shines, they slight
their Work, and bully their Employers; perhaps they will work two or three
Days, or it may be a Week, till they find a few Shillings gingle and chink in
their Pockets; but then, as if they could not bear that kind of Music, away
they go to the Alehouse, and it is imposible to bring them to work again, while
they have a Farthing of it left.

The Manufacturers are distressed for Hands; they have Workmen, but they had as
good have none, for they will not Work; the Masters beg and entreat, and with
Money in Hand, as we say, they Pray and Pay too, but it is all one, no Work can
be done as long as there is a Farthing of Money in their Pockets.

If we go out of the Manufacturing Towns into the Country-Villages, there they
feel the same thing another way; the Farmers Wives can get no Dairy-Maids,
their Husbands no Plowmen, and what is the matter? truly the Wenches answer,
they will not go to Service at 12 d or 18 d a Week, while they can get 7 s to 8 s
a Week at spinning; the Men answer they will not drudge at the Plow and Cart,
hedging and ditching, threshing and stubbing, and perhaps get 6 l. a Year, and
course Diet, when they can sit still and dry within Doors, and get 9 or 10 s. a
Week at Wool-combing, or at carding, and such Work about the Woollen
Manufacture.

Now, it is true, the Argument on their side would be very just, and some way
unanswerable, were the end really to work, and so to get as much as they could
by a Diligent Application to the Business, and then by a frugal, honest
virtuous Life, laying up what they got, for their Use in harder times.

But instead of this, we find these Wenches and Fellows run to the
Manufacturing-Towns; there perhaps, they Spin and Work, and when they have got
a little Money in their Pockets beforehand, then they turn Vagrant and Idle,
spend the little they have got in revelling, drinking, and by consequence
something worse, till the Magistrates have been called upon to rout them out,
to secure the Parishes from the charge of their Debaucheries.

From these wicked Haunts, they spread themselves about the Villages, where
they draw in other young People, (till then sober and diligent,) into the like
Wickedness; till we have seen six or seven of them in a House with big-Bellies,
to the Shame and Affliction of their poor Parents, and the Scandal of the whole
Country.

As soon as they can drop their Burden, they fly, for fear of the House of
Correction, and away they go to London to get Services.

London, like the Ocean, that receives the muddy and dirty Brooks, as well as
the clear and rapid Rivers, swallows up all the scum and filth of the Country,
and here they need not fear of getting Places; what Servants are likely to come
out of such Nurseries is not hard to suggest, nor is it any breach of Charity,
to suppose that this helps to fill the Town with a generation of Whores and
Thieves, and makes our Maidservants recommend themselves as they do: Hence
nothing is more Natural than the common Jest we put upon the Country-Girls,
when we see them come up to London in the Carriers Wagons, and on the
Pack-Horses, viz. to ask them if they have been Church'd before they came from
home; nor is there any thing unreasonable in the Question, as things go now in
the Country, when Work is so plenty and Wages so high; for who would come away
to London to go to Service, if things were all well at home?

This is one of the Grievances which we want a Law to restrain, and which if
not taken in Time, and restrained, will quickly make Servants Wages as dear in
the Country as they are now in the City; and the poor Farmers must give 6 l.
and 8 l. a Year Wages for Dairy-Maid as the Ladies here do for their
Chamber-Maids, and a proportion for Plow-Men, and Carters; of which I shall say
more hereafter.

It is true we have Laws here for regulating of Servants, and among the rest, a
Justice of Peace may oblige young People who are idle, and live, as it is
called, at their own Hands, to go to Service, and may, if they refuse it, send
them to the House of Correction; but this is a Concern which the Law takes for
Parents, whose Circumstances being but mean, and their Children lying heavy
upon them, are willing to be maintained in Idleness and Sloth, and refuse
either to Work for themselves, or go out to Service; in such a Case, the
Magistrate may oblige them to go out, as above.

But if the single Person so challenged by the Justice, answers that she worked
and maintains herself, and is able to maintain herself without being a Charge
to her Parents, or the Parish, I do not find the Magistrate can compel such a
one to go to Service.

In the next Place, as this Insolence of the laboring Poor is, in spite of
double Pay, so it is with this particular Aggravation, that at the same Time
that their Wages has been raised, the Price of Provisions has been cheaper than
it has been for many Years before; particularly Bread-Corn has been so low that
none can complain, except the poor Farmers, who cannot pay their Rents, by
reason of the Cheapness of Corn; and I am Witness to this, that when Bread,
about 16 or 17 Years ago, was sold for double the Price that it is now, the
Wages for spinning and Manufacturing, was not much above half the Price that it
is now, so that they gained less, and spent more, and yet were able to subsist,
even then.

This makes good the ordinary Remark here, viz. that the poor are always poor;
it is very plain, when Wages were cheap, or low, and Provisions high and dear,
the Poor were not poorer than they are now; and now Wages are higher, and
Provisions so much lower than it was then, yet the Poor are not richer now than
they were then; but this Riddle is easily expounded, by saying, 1. The Poor
are, (as above,) idle, proud, and saucy, and when Wages are good, they will not
work, any more than from Hand to Mouth; or if they do work, they spend it in
Riot and Luxury; so that it Turns to no Account to them.

While this, then, is the Temper of the laboring Poor, what are we to expect
from them, but that, as above, they will be mutinous when they want Employment,
and idle and saucy when they have it? Would the poor Maidservants who choose
rather to spin, while they can gain 9 s. per Week by their Labor, than go to
service at 12 d. a Week to the Farmers Houses, as before; I say, would they sit
close to their work, live near and close, as laboring and poor People ought to
do, and by their Frugality, lay up six or seven Shillings per Week, none could
object or blame them for their Choice; but while, on the contrary, they either
play half their Time, and neglect the Work they have; or if they do work, spend
it all in Drink and Debauchery, as is too much the Case, this height of Wages
is by it made a public grievance; the Poor are ruined, even by that which is
their Blessing, or would be so, were it rightly made use of; I mean plenty of
Work, and good Pay; nay the very plenty of Provisions which was always received
by reasonable People, and especially by Christians, as the Gift and Mercy of
Heaven, is cursed to them, and becomes their Ruin; for while they have Bread,
they will not work, and when they do not work, it is easy to judge what else they
do, and how they employ their Time.

Again, as soon as Trade receives a check, and there is a little discouragement
upon the Clothiers and Manufacturers, so that Work is a little stopped, and the
Masters and Employers can give no more Wool out to spin, or perhaps but a
little, and that in consequence of this; the Price abates too; what follows?
why, then they grow clamorous, noisy, and, as I said before, mutinous and saucy
another way, and in the mean time they disperse, run away, leave their
Families, and especially the numerous throng of Bastards, which, (as I hinted,)
the Wickedness of their Working-Life had produced, upon the Parishes, and
wander about in Beggary and Distress.

In consequence of this, it has been observed, that in our great populous
Manufacturing Towns, whenever a run of Trade has happened, and after it the
Poor disperse again, there is generally an Increase of Bastards, greater than
in any of the precedent Years, and I could give such particular Examples of
this in the Western and Northern Counties, as would be surprising.

Thus Gods Blessing, and the Bounty of Providence, is abused by these sorts of
People not to increase and encourage their Diligence, their frugality, and
thriftiness, to lay up in a time of plenty of Work, for a time of scarcity and
deadness of Trade; but on the contrary, to support them in their extravagant
Follies and Wickedness, prompt their Vices, and fill them with Pride and
Insolence, both against God and Man.

And so far are they from improving the Advantages of a Glut of Business, that
as soon as it stops, even the very first Week, perhaps the first Day, they are
reduced to their Original Poverty and Distress; for having not laid up a
Shilling, but just working from Hand to Mouth; as soon as the Workmaster stops,
the Workman or Workwoman starves, and it must be confessed such as these
deserve no Pity, seeing their wastefulness, and the Expense both of their Money
and their Time, was in the very Teeth of that merciful Providence, which
suppyl'd them with double Work, and double Pay, and that they had reduced
themselves by their Sloth to want when they might have been, as we call it,
beforehand in the World.

In a certain Town of Note, which I have been well acquainted with, a poor
Workman was brought before the Magistrate by his Employer, because he would not
finish his Piece of Work which he had begun, it was a Piece of Serge, or
Drugget, or some such Stuff which the Master had hired him to weave, and he had
begun it, but would not make an end of it, or at least, not in the time agreed
for, and it produced a most edifying Discourse between the Justice and the
Weaver; of which I shall give you a Part.

The Clothier told his Story first, and his complaint was as follows; that
Edmund Pratt, the Person brought before him, was a Journeyman Weaver; that he
had given him a Piece of Work to do, which he promised to finish for him out of
hand, and that now he had neglected it; that he had done part of it, but did
not finish it; that he had obliged himself to deliver it by such a Day, and
should lose the Sale of it, if it was not finished and sent to London in the
time; that he had delivered him the Warp such a time, which was about 3 Weeks
before; that he might have finished it in a Fortnight if he would work; but
that he had not above half done it, and that he lay Drunk and sotting in the
Alehouse, and would not work; that he promised him from time to time to go to
Work, and still whenever he came to look at him, he was absent, and gone to the
Alehouse; that at last, when he entreated him to go to work, he answered him
flat and plain, he would not work; that he did not want Money, and would not
work, not he; and for this Reason he came to his Worship for a Warrant to bring
Edmund before him.

The Justice answered him very sencibly; first, that as he ( Edmund) was not an
Apprentice, or a hired Covenant-Servant, bargained with for the Year, that is,
for a certain time and the like; the Case did not lie before him; and that if
the Fellow was a Knave, and would not perform his Agreement, he must sue him
for his Bargain, and would recover Damages against him at Law; but that it was
not the work of a Justice of the Peace, and that he could not make the Fellow
work unless he would do it willingly: However, says the Justice, I Will send for
him, and talk to him, I cannot well grant a Warrant for him on such an
Occasion, but pray go and tell him I would speak with him.

This I mention, because I think, if the Laws of England are deficient in any
thing, it is in this, namely, that they do not empower the Justices to compel
laboring People who undertake work, to finish it before they be Employed by
any other; it is true, the Law of Trespass, and of Right and Wrong, gives the
injured Employer a Right of Action against such a Man, and he shall upon
hearing, be condemned in such a Sum as will compensate the Damage to the Person
injured, and perhaps, do Penance in the County Jail at last; but then the Suit
is long, chargeable, and uncertain, and the Fellow perhaps poor, so that you
sue a Beggar, and catch an English Proverb; whereas could the Justice of the
Peace determine it in a summary way, and oblige him to give Bail to perform the
Work, or send him to the House of Correction till he was humble enough to go
about it, I say, if this was the Case, much of the Mischief would be remedied
that way.

But this Deficiency of the Law, it seems the Fellow knew, and this made him
not only saucy and peremptory to his Employer, but very pert, and almost
impudent before the Justice himself, as you will see.

As soon as he was told the Justice would speak with him, he answered readily,
he would wait upon the Justice immediately, and accordingly went; when he
appeared, the Justice told him the Complaint which was made against him; when
he had done, the Fellow looking something Confident, but giving no Answer, the
Justice spoke to him thus:

You hear the Charge, Edmund, what do you say to it?

Nothing, Sir, says Edmund; and so the Dialogue begun.

Just. Nothing! what do you mean by that, Sir?


Ed. And 't please your Worship, I see no Answer it requires.


Just. What! does it require no Answer?


Ed. No, I think not, he has told your Worship a fine Story, and your Worship
has heard it; what would he have more?


Just. It is plain what he would have; he would have his Work done.


Ed. I believe he would, and't please your Worship.


Just. And you promised to finish it.


Ed. And has he told your Worship so?


Just. Yes he has.


Ed. Then I suppose he has said all he has to say.


Just. Well, and what do you say to it then?


Ed. Nothing Sir,


Just. Why I find you are an impudent Fellow.


Ed. Nay, and't please your Worship, can I be impudent in saying nothing?


Just. Yes you are impudent in not answering me, when I ask you a Question.


Ed. I have answered every Question your Worship has asked me.


Just. I tell you what Mr. -- charges you with, and I ask you if it is true or
not?


Ed. Now indeed your Worship asks me that Question, but you only asked me
before, what I had to say to Mr. -- or to his Charge; and I answered, that I
had nothing to say to it.


Just. Well, you pretend to be nice in your Distinctions I see; but what do you
say to my Question now, Is the Charge he brings, true or not?


Ed. I hope your Worship will not be angry, if I answer the Question by a
Question; am I obliged to accuse myself?


Just. Why no, you are not, Edmund, that is true, I shall call him to prove it
then.


Ed. Will your Worship allow me to ask another Question?


Just. Ay, what is your Question?


Ed. Will Not your Worship be angry, if I do ask a Question you should not like?


Just. No, no, I will not be angry, if you are not rude and saucy, Edmund, I shall
not like that.


Ed. I shall not be rude, Sir, but my Question is this, if your Worship calls Mr.
-- to prove the Tale he has told you, and he should prove it, are you empowr'd
to try the Cause between us?


Just. Why thou art a subtle Rogue, Edmund; I Will be very plain with thee, I
don't know whether I am or no, but it is pity I should not, for I think you
deserve to be well handled, if what he says is true.


Ed. If I deserve it never so much, I shall have no reason to be sorry, if it
may be out of your Worship's Power to handle me.


Just. Well, it may be in my Power too, for ought I know; I shall talk with Mr.
-- again, and you shall hear farther; pray attend here again to morrow Morning.


Ed. Yes Sir, so the Follow was dismissed, and the Justice sent for the
Clothier.


The Clothier being come, says the Justice to him, well Mr. -- I have talked
with your Workman, and as I told you before, that I thought the Matter did not
lie before me, so I assure you, he has told me so too, in as merry a Manner as
I could desire, and so he recited the Discourse that had happened between his
Worship and the Journey-Man Weaver.

He Is an impudent Fellow, says the Clothier, I am sure; he ought to be sent to
the House of Correction, for his saucy Tongue.

Why, that is true, says the Justice; but yet he spoke so warily, and with a
kind of saucy Good-Manners, with your Worship, and your Worship at every word;
that though it was manifest he ridiculed the Charge, and ridiculed you, yet he
was mighty civil to me; and as he said indeed, I could not lay him by the Heels
for answering me that he had nothing to say to you.

Now the Case is this, says the Justice, it is evidient he has had some bad
Counsel, and somebody has instructed him what to say; he demands you should
prove the Charge you bring, and so indeed, you must, that is, you must prove
that he undertook your Work; bargained to finish it by such a Time; and that he
has neglected it; and that you are Damnified by his Neglect.

All this I can easily prove, Sir, says the Clothier.

Well, but when you have done all, says the Justice, as Edmund said, I do not
see that I can Try the Cause; it must be heard in the Court of the King's
Bench, or Common Pleas, and the Verdict and Damages must be given by a Jury;
it is a Breach of Covenant, or Trespass, and you must prosecute it in the
ordinary Course; so the poor Clothier went away, it was not worth his while to
sue the Fellow, and be at the Charge of a Prosecution, which, though the Fellow
was sure to be Cast, and condemned to pay the Cost and Damages, the Consequence
would be only that he would run away, or go to Jayl; neither of which would
turn to Account to the Clothier.

Well, however, the Justice had a-mind to have another Dialogue with this
Edmund, and see whether he could make any thing of him or no; so he sent for
him again the same Day, and when he came, the following merry Dialogue began
between them.

Just. Come in Edmund, I have talked with your Master --.


Ed. Not my Master, and 't please your Worship, I hope I am my own Master.


Just. Well, your Employer, Mr. E --, the Clothier; will the word Employer do?


Ed. Yes, yes, and 't please your Worship, any thing, but Master.


Just. Well, but why will you not finish the Piece of Work you began?


Ed. Does he say, I will not finish it Sir?


Just. He says you don't finish it.


Ed. There Is much Difference, and 't please you, between don't and will not.


Just. There Is no great Difference on his side, the Damage is the same, for he
wants the Goods, and that is a great loss to him.


Ed But there is a great deal of difference to me Sir; if I had refused to
finish it, perhaps he might have had some Advantage on me.


Just. All that you can say to that is, perhaps, that you have been too cunning
for him, that he did not tie you to a Time, and take it under your Hand, that
you would finish it by that Time; but Edmund, you must not neglect the Man's
Work when you have undertaken it.


Ed. It may be I should not; but as for must not, and 't please your Worship I
don't understand that.


Just. Why you must not, that is, you cannot, and be an honest Man.


Ed. Why then if I do, he may call me Knave, that is all.


Just. And it seems you do not matter that, Edmund?


Ed. Not much, indeed, and 't please your Worship.


Just. Nay, I confess he that don't matter being a Knave, may do a great many
wicked things, and yet not be liable to every Magistrate to take hold of him.


Ed. Your Worship is pleased to mistake me, I did not say I did not matter
being a Knave; but that I did not matter his calling me so; I have done no
dishonest thing by him.


Just. Why is it not dishonest, not to finish his Work according to Agreement?


Ed. Yes, if any Agreement had been made.


Just. No doubt he put it to you, expecting you would finish it in time.


Ed. That he could not do, because he knew my way of Working before.


Just. Pray what is that, Edmund, and what did he know?


Ed. Why he knew, that I never finish any piece of Work, till I please.


Just. And does he know when that is too, Edmund? pray when do you usually
please to finish the Work you undertake?


Ed. Why, and 't please your Worship, when I have finished ten -- Yards, I come
for my Money, which is ten Shillings, as by Agreement, and then I go to another
Work.


Just. What Work? what do you leave his Loom, and go and work in another,
Edmund? that would not be honest, I am sure.


Ed. No no, and 't please your Worship, I go to the Alehouse, and work hard to
spend it, and when it is all spent, then I come to work again.


Just. And not before?


Ed. No Sir, and 't please your Worship, never before.


Just. And is this honest Edmund?


Ed. I don't enquire into that; it is my way.


Just. Your way! but what is that to Mr. E --, the Clothier?


Ed. Why, and 't please your Worship, it is this to him, that he knows it is my
way; that I never did otherwise, and never shall; and he knew this before he
put the Warp into the Loom, and I did not promise I would do any otherwise, so
I am no Knave in it; if I had promised otherwise, then indeed, he had something
to say.


Just. Very well; so that as he knew your Custom, you suppose he put his Work
to you upon a supposition that you would act so.


Ed. Yes, Sir.


Just. But cannot you break your self of this wicked way, Edmund?


Ed. It would be very hard to do it, Sir, after 40 Years practice.


Just. Thou art an old Drunkard, I find Edmund; have a care, If I happen to
catch thee with a Giddy-Head, I shall cure thee of the Staggers.


Ed. O Sir, and 't please your Worship, you are very welcome; if you catch me
in the Corn, put me in the Pound; I am never fuddl'd, and 't please your
Worship.


Just. But to sit Tippling; to keep bad Hours; go to the Alehouse a-Sundays;
all those things come within my Reach, Edmund; have a care.


Ed. I am provided against all that, Sir; and 't please your Worship, I lodge
in an Alehouse, so that I am always at Home; he cannot keep bad Hours that is
at-home in good Season; nor you cannot deny me Drinking in my own Chamber, though
it be on a Sunday; I hope I am safe there?


Just. Thou art a crafty Knave, Edmund, why thou set up to be too cunning
for the Law it self.


Ed. No, no, and 't please your Worship, I am an honest Drunken Fellow.


Just. Well, but Edmund, shall I persuade thee to go and finish Mr. E -- 's
piece of Stuff, and he shall give thee thy Money beforehand.


Ed. And 't please your Worship, by no means; then I shall never do it at all,
I am sure; no it would be impossible, and 't please your Worship; by no means.


Just. Why will nothing oblige you to be Honest?


Ed. Yes, yes, want of Money, that does it; when I want Money I always go
to-work.


Just. And never but then?


Ed. No, and please your Worship, I work for nothing but Money; and why should
I work if I do not want Money? would anybody work if they had Money enough?


Just. No, not if they had enough, it may be, they would not; but what do you
call enough?


Ed. Why, if in the Morning I have enough to spend for that Day, that is enough
to me; for to Morrow I can work for more.


Just. So you lay up nothing?


Ed. Lay up, Master! what should I lay up for? I have no Wife or Children to
cry after me.


Just. Well, but hereafter, Edmund, you should consider hereafter; you may be
sick, or lame, or grow old.


Ed. I never trouble myself with hereafter, not I; alas! and please your
Worship, what should I think of hereafter for? while I can keep myself, all is
well; I trouble nobody, and when I cannot, the Parish must.


Just. So that the only way to get you to finish the Clothier's Work, is to get
you to it next time your Money is spent, and then let you have no more Money
till it is done.


Ed. That would do it effectually indeed; but then I may chance to run away, go
to Work for somebody else, and never finish it at-all.


Just. So that, in short, there is no way to deal with a Drunkard, but to let
him alone, and let him go on his own Way: Well, I think the Clothier shall try
you, Edmund, and if you do run away, I Will tell him how he shall fetch you again
without a Justice of Peace; unless you run quite away, and then the Country
will be well rid of you.


There was a great deal of farther Discourse between them, in which Edmund was
at last so saucy, that the Justice found he was half-Drunk, and set him in the
Stocks, and took care afterward to have him punished too for some other
Mis-Behaviour; but all the Justice, or the Clothier could do, could not make
him finish his Piece of Work, till he pleased, and that was a good while after.

This Story has several useful Inferences depending upon it, which is the
reason of my being so particular in a thing of so small moment. 1. As above, it
discovers a Deficiency, as I said, in the Laws here, by which it is evident,
the Insolence of our labouring-Poor cannot be so effectually governed, as it
were to be wished it might be; Edmund, should else have been humbled, and have
lain in Jail, till he had come and begged the Clothier to give him leave to
finish the Piece of Work, without any Wages; or that the Wages should have been
given to the Poor. 2. It is observable, what a perfectly thoughtless temper
possesses the Minds of the People here, that they never lay up in the Time of
Plenty for a Time of Scarcity. 3. That they are not to be obliged either by
fair means, or foul, to do their Work, if but a Pot of Strong-Beer, to which
they are Slaves, be in their way, according to the Character given them by one
of our English Writers. In Drink and drunken Company, delight,
And what they get by Day, they spend at Night,
Subjecting all their Labors to their Pots,
The greatest Artists, are the greatest Sots.



I shall conclude this Letter with adding another Observation, which I draw
from the Story above, and which I have by Experience found true also, of these
laboring Poor; namely, so little does a Sense of Justice, or of Gratitude rest
upon their Minds, that not only they are thus Insolent in spite of Double Pay,
but in spite of prompt Pay, or as some call it Pay by Advance.

Nothing is more dangerous of its Kind, than to Pay them by Advance; and it is
ten to one, as Edmund said of himself, if ever you have your Work done at all.

There is a Proverb among the working People, that there are two sorts of bad
Masters. 1. Those that Pay beforehand, 2. Those that never Pay at-all.


And both, they say, make bad Servants, and never should have their Work well,
finished.

It is true that this is the Result of a general Baseness in the Servant; but
nothing is more certain, than that to Pay beforehand, is to ruin, your
Business, and your Servant too; and that if you have your Work done at-all, it
is never well done, and always with an ill will; but of this hereafter.

I am etc.

LETTER V.
Sir,
I have given you a Sketch of the Insolence of our laboring Poor: It is but
too much Influence that this matter, however triffling it may seem, has had
upon the general Tranquillity of this Nation and is therefore well worth Notice.

They are greatly mistaken, who think that the poor People are below our
Concern, it is true, in many Cases they are below our Resentment; but it is
apparent that the many Ways which the Poor find to make themselves uneasy to
the Rich, are such, and the Advantages which they have in this Country, by the
Privileges they enjoy, are also such, that they bid fair for inverting the
Order of things; in a Word, it is already true, in a great measure, that in
England the Poor govern, and the Rich submit; the Case is, in short, that they
clamor their Masters into, and out of, every thing they please, and unless Men
will be ever contending and scolding with them, he can neither Trade with them,
or Employ them.

Nay, let me go farther; we are awed by the Poor; nothing is more frequent than
to see Gentlemen, bear the vilest Treatment from the meanest Fellows, and that
for mere fear; pardon me, I do not say they are afraid of their Hands, but
really they are afraid of their Tongues; and it is not altogether without
reason, as you shall hear at large, in its Place.

Nor is it easy for a Gentleman to live in any Place long, without suffering
the beastly Treatment of the Tongue, from the Canaille or Mobb of the Place; no
Conduct, the best, the mildest, the most prudent, can protect him.

1. If he is easy, kind, and good to them, they impose upon him, and that in
the grossest Manner; and no sooner have they done it, but they expose him,
laugh at him, and make their Boasts among their Gangs, how they cheated him;
that he is Easy, that is to say, is a Fool, and how they can impose upon him
at any time. 2. If he is sharp with them, and exact, will not be cheated, and
when he sees it, resents, exposes and detects them, and turns them off; then
they rail at him the other way, that he is hard and cruel, will let nobody
live by him; would starve the Poor, and would have a Poor Man's Labor for
nothing; and the like. 3. If he is Generous and Free, they strain that
Generosity to its utmost Extent; craving till the most bountiful Hand in the
World must stop at last, and deny, or be blind, and not see it self abused; and
then, whenever you stop, you lose all your Character (for Generosity) at one
blow: It Is too true of the Temper of these People, what one of my Neighbors
said to me, from his dearbought Experience, that if you carry an Englishman 19
Mile on your Back, and will not carry him 20, you lose all the Title to his
Favor, and cancel all Obligation; the 19 Mile is forgot, the odd Negative Mile
is only remembered: Nay, says he, if you carry him all the 20 Miles, and at
last do but set him down hard, he will curse you to your Face.
Upon the foot of this Temper, you may expect to hear of some of the rudest,
unjust, and most impudent things put upon the Gentlemen in this Country by the
common People, that you can imagine possible.

As they impose upon the Generous, so on the other-side they hate the Frugal;
if some Gentlemen live more sparingly than others, and are more near and saving
than these People like, so that they cannot make a Spoil of them, as they do of
others; if they will not suffer themselves to be imposed upon, or cheated, and
resent it when they see it offered to them; these they attack with opprobrious
Language, and revile them with Covetousness, and not living as they ought to
do; with oppressing the Poor; being cruel and barbarous to Poor Men, and the
like.

These Reproaches, especially where they are not Just, are very grievous to
Gentlemen, to such especially, whose Livesare really blameless, and who ought
to be Judges of their own way of living, as they best know what they can or
cannot expend, or is proper for them to expend, in the Port of Families; and as
these Gentlemen are loath to have such Characters among the Neighborhood
without reason, this makes them bear with a Thousand Indignities; and sometimes
see themselves imposed upon, and used scurvily, and yet take no Notice of it;
because they would not be marked for Severity, or for hard Treatment of poor
Men; this is what I call being afraid of the Poor; and they really are so
afraid of them, that they suffer themselves to be ill-us'd a thousand Ways,
when they see it plain enough, but wink, and make as if they did not see it
at-all, only for fear of being counted so and so, niggardly, cruel, hard to the
Poor, and the like.

I was going, a few Days ago, to visit a Friend in a Country Village not far
from London, and being come to the Town where my Friend lived, but not knowing
his House, I rode past it, and past two more, before I found anybody to
enquire of; but at last, I saw a Cluster, or little Crowd of young Fellows
standing together, and chatting upon their earnest Affairs, (I suppose) they
seemed to be all Servants, four or five of them had Liveries, on, of several
sorts; the other looked like Gardeners, and one or two like Bricklayers; when I
came up to them, I asked them what Gentleman lived at that House? pointing to
the first House that I had passed, and which was indeed, the Gentleman's House
who I was to go to: When I asked, what Gentleman lived there? the Rogues
grinn'd, and looked upon one another, and laughed; Gentleman! says one;
Gentleman! says another; but gave me no present Answer; I saw them a little
merry, so I smiled too, and speaking pleasantly, Well, says I, if that is not
as it should be, pray who lives at that House? Why Sir, says one of them very
civilly, but still laughing, we beg your Pardon, we did not laugh as you, but
at your mistakeing the Person that lives there, for a Gentleman; if you please
to take it in our way of talking, it is one Dog K -- d, adding the Gentleman's
Surname; well says I, and pray who lives there? pointing to the next House; why
that is such another too, says the Fellow; that is Dog E --, adding there the
Surname of another; well, says I, that is very good still; and who lives at that
House? pointing at the third House; O, says he, that is a very honest Gentleman
indeed, that is Mr. --, naming him with a great deal of Respect.

Well Gentlemen, said I, and made myself as familiar with them as I could, I
see you are very merry upon your Neighbors, pray let me ask you how you come
to distinguish thus among 'em? Why Sir, says the Fellow, Dog K -- d, is vastly
Rich, and lives like a Hog in his Stye; does nobody any good, but like a Dog,
snarles at the Rich, and bites the Poor, and therefore we think he lives more
like a Dog, than a Gentleman.

Well, says I, and what is Mr. --? He Is just such another, says the saucy Rogue,
he is worth the L -- d knows how many thousand Pounds, and he that ought to
keep a Coach and six Horses, keeps one Pair of Horses for two Coaches; makes
his Coachman work in his Garden, because he will keep but one Gardener, when he
ought to keep three; and instead of a through Livery, gives his Men nothing but
a Coat, Hat, and Stockings; and is not that a Dog of a Gentleman, Sir, says the
Fellow? and closed it all with a broad D -- n him, by way of Elegance.

I agreed to all this, that I might have the rest of it out, and it pleased
them all mightily, to see me laugh; well, says I, and what is the Gentleman at
this House? O! says another of them, that is as honest a Gentleman as any in the
Country, and he lives like himself; he keeps a better House, and more Servants,
than both those Misers, and gives a better Livery, and has more Horses in his
Stable than both of them, and yet he has not half their Estate; but it may be,
said I, he spends more than his Estate can afford; it is no matter for that,
says the first, he lives like a Gentleman, and everybody loves him; a poor
Servant gets something in his House, there is Gentlemen, and Ladies, always a
visiting there, and they are as merry as the Day's long, and when they go away,
the Servants are the better for them; the two Dog-Gentlemen are always at
London almost, a Stockjobbing, or somewhere or other, I don't know where; they
are seldom at-home, so that they have no Company, and keep no House worth a
Farthing; nobody is the better for them.

I took my Leave of this knot of Gentlemen soon after, gave 'em Sixpence to
drink my Health, and rid round another-way to come into the Street again, where
I did at first, that they might not see me go to the first Dog's House, as they
called him, where I was really going,

I took this time to think what a Liberty these Scoundrels took with the
Gentlemen, and how subject every Family is to the scurrilous Tongues of such
People as these; for when I came to consider the Circumstances of the three
Families, it stood thus: The two first were exceeding Rich, lived well, and
kept very good Equipages, Servants, Coaches, and Horses, as many as they had
Occasion for, and not very few neither; for I think the second kept twelve
Servants, and the first five or seven; but they were both what we call
managing-Men, that did not withold what was proper, as might be seen by the
Houses they lived in, which are indeed, more like Palaces than
Private-Gentlemen's Houses; but they were Men that did not make Ducks and
Drakes of their Money, and throw it away on purpose for others to pick it up,
and laugh at them.

But the third, who they called an honest Gentleman, was indeed, of a differing
kind, one that kept a good House indeed, but spent twice as much as his Revenue
brought in; kept more Horses and Servants too, than he could afford; run into
every-body's Debt; was every now and then haunted with Bailiffs, and arrested
for Triffles, and dunn'd continually by the Butchers, Bakers, and
Corn-chandlers, and such like People; and this was the honest Gentleman; and in
a few Years he was fain to take up, put off Housekeeping thereabouts, and go
into the Country to live cheaper.

But the reason of my telling this Story, is to let you see, what Treatment the
Gentlemen suffer on these Accounts, and that this is really a restraint upon
them, that they bear with a thousand Insolences from the People, as well the
Servants within-doors as the Workmen and trading People withoutdoors, because
of their Tongues, and because they would not be made the Scoff of such insolent
Rogues without Cause; and this indeed, encourages the Crime, for if they would
contemn it more, they would be insulted with it less, nothing encouraging such
ill Usage more, than the Concern the Gentlemen show about it; but to proceed.

I don't know anything can give you a more perfect Idea of the Behavior of
these sort of People, who I call the Labouring-Poor, than their Combinations in
their Business; imposing upon the Gentlemen in the way of their Employments;
though all Combinations in order to raise the Price of Goods, or Workmanship, are
against the known Laws of the Country.

One Instance of this happens just now among the same sort of People, who I
have been mentioning; I mean the Manufacturers, who in the West of England,
that is to say, the Cloathing-Counties, (which we call the West, though they are
South-West) raised a kind of Rebellion to support their Insolence against their
Masters, and Employers: The case was this, as I said before, there has been a
sudden Run of Trade, which has lasted now about two Years, and the Workmen in
the Country found that the Masters had pressing Orders for Goods.

Taking the advantage of this, they had twice before clamoured to have their
Wages raised, and the Masters had raised them, and that considerably; but
demanding a third advance of Pay, the Masters, though in very civil Terms,
refused them; nor were they able to give more Wages, without losing by their
Goods, and told the Workmen so.

Upon this, the Workmen, particularly the Weavers, formed a Combination among
themselves, not to Work for the Clothiers, unless they raised their Wages to
such a certain Rate, as they had also agreed on among themselves: They carried
on this Combination to such a height, as to gather together in a tumultuous
manner to bring all the rest of the Workmen to join with them; to this End they
troop'd about the Towns, and entering by Force into the Houses of such honest
Weavers as they found were at Work; they broke their Looms to pieces, spoiled
the Warps, and cut in pieces the Goods which they had been at Work upon,
insulting also the Masters and Employers in an outrageous manner, to make them
yield to raise the Wages, which some were obliged to do for fear of their
Lives, or for fear of having their Houses plundered: On the other-hand, many of
the quieter innocent poor Men who would have been glad to have gone on with
their Business, suffered extremely, for having Work to do, and the Wages before
being sufficent to maintain them, and their Families perhaps wanting a supply,
yet they durst not Work, for fear of being Mobb'd, as above; in short, they
carried this Game on, till the Government was obliged to send some regular
Troops down to protect the Clothiers, and keep the Peace, and reduce these mad
Fellows by Force; which was easily done, and several of them had the Favor of
being sent to Jail, as they deserved; but the Clemency of the Government spared
them as to Punishment, when it came to that Point.

The next Account I shall give, has a little more Mirth in it: In a certain
considerable Market Town in England, there was a Combination of Pump-makers,
that is, the Pumpmakers in that, and two or three considerable Towns round,
made an Agreement, that such and such Gentlemen ought to have new Pumps; upon
the Resolutions of this worthy Society, no Gentleman in the Neighborhood could
order a Pump to be mended when it was out of order, but the Pump-makers would
tell him it was good for nothing him; it could not be mended, and so his
Worship must have a new Pump; if he thought they imposed upon him, and that his
Pump might be mended, he would probably send for another Pump maker; but it was
all one, for the other would be sure to tell him the same Story, that the Tree
was rotten below; that it could not be mended; nothing could be done to it; but
(just as before) his Worship must have a new Pump; and thus several of the
Gentlemen, it seems, were ignorantly drawn in to the Expense of new Pumps,
without any manner of Necessity, only for the Gain of those Rogues the Pump
makers.

It happened that a particular Gentleman, a Justice of the Peace, and of a very
good Estate in the Neighborhood, who was a little sharper than the rest, fell
under their Management; he had a Pump which belonged to his Stable-Yard, that
happened to be out of order, and he sent a Servant to the Market Town near him,
for a Pump-maker: The Pump-maker came readily, looked upon the Pump; told the
Gentleman the Pump could not be mended, but he must have a new one, for the
Fault was in the Tree, it was rotten between Wind and Water, and there was no
Remedy.

The Gentleman told him he did not doubt but his Pump might be mended, for that
it was a new Pump but a little while before, and he would not have a new one
again, but must have it mended: Upon this the Fellow told him, he would take it
up, and look; and accordingly takes it out of the Well; the Gentleman being
present all the while the Pump was taking up, the designing Rogue was not able
to play the Prank he intended, for he purposed to have made a hole in it, if he
did not find one there; but not being able to do that, he acknowleg'd then that
it might be mended, and appointed to come the next Day to do it.

To Morrow coming, and two or three toMorrows, but no Pump-maker; the Gentleman
sent for him, and so for many Days after one-another; and still his Answer was,
he would come such or such a Day; on Tuesday he would come on Thursday; and on
Thursday he would come a Saturday; and on Saturday he would come a Tuesday; and
so from Tuesday to Saturday, he kept the Gentleman in suspense, and his Well
lying open too, for four or five Months: Upon this, the Gentleman sent to
another Town, a larger than the other, about seven Miles off, and there he met
with the same Treatment exactly; and by this time, and not before, the
Gentleman perceived it was a Trick agreed upon among them.

To confirm himself in the Opinion of its being a Trick, as above, he sends his
Servant once more, and bids him tell the Pumpmaker, that the Pump which he took
out of the Well, had met with a Disaster, and was spoiled by Accident, as it
lay in the Yard, and a great Piece burnt off of it; and that his Master desired
him to come and make an Agreement with him for a new Pump; the Pump-maker
perfectly deceived, said yes, he would wait upon Esquire --, the next Morning, and
accordingly he came; when he came, the Gentleman took no Notice of the Message
he had sent, but saluted him thus; O! Mr. L --, I am glad to see you; what you
are come to do my Pump, are n't ye? indeed you have been unkind, to be so long;
the Fellow said nothing a good-while; upon which, the Gentleman called one of
his Servants; here Tanner (his Man's name) here is Mr. L --, the Pump-maker
come, to mend the Pump; go with him, and show it him: Sir, says the Pump-maker,
I understood you had resolved to have a new Pump; a new Pump! says the
Gentleman, why you know you told me this would serve, and you could easily mend
it: Sir, says the Pump-maker, your Man told me you wanted a new Pump; upon this
the Gentleman called his Man, who he had instructed before, what to say.

Jacob, says his Master, did you bid Mr -- come over to me to make me a new
Pump? Yes, Sir, says Jacob; but who ordered you to say so Jacob? says the
Master? why, says Jacob, I had been twenty times at his House to bid him come
over to mend the old-one, and your Worship knows he never came; and I found
what he wanted, so I told him he should come to make a new-one; that I knew
would bring him presently.

The Pump-maker would have denied it at first, but Jacob told his Master
plainly, it was so, and that he had been at the other Pump-maker's, in the
Town, and he would not come at all, pretending it was the other Man's Work;
with this he laughed; No, if he bad, says the Pump-maker, I would have stuck by
his Skirts; and began to be very saucy.

Well, well, says the Gentleman, come, go about it now, and all will be well;
Sir, says the Fellow, I cannot do it now, I Will come a Tuesday and do it for you,
upon my Word.

No, no, says the Gentleman, I know you can do it now, if you please; if you
will not do it, tell me so; if not, I must send for another; at that the Fellow
laughed impudently, and said, do if you please; what do you mean by that? says
the Gentleman; you are very rude; I don't doubt but I may have my Pump mended
for my Money.

Do then if you can, Sir, says the Pump-maker, for I will not meddle with it.

Well then, go about your Business, says the Gentleman, I will find
Pump-maker's enough, I warrant ye.

Not in this County, says the Fellow, jeering, nor the next, and away he went.

The Gentleman finding it was a general Combination of the Society, but
resolving not to be imposed upon by them, waited awhile, intending, though it
should cost him the more, to send to London for a Pump-maker; but at length he
got Notice, that at a Town eight or ten Miles from him, there was a Pump-maker
newly set-up, and who, it was probable, was not got into the Knot yet, and
besides did not know the Names of the Neighboring Gentlemen yet, or know their
Faces or Dwellings; so he concluded to send for him, not to tell him what it
was for, or where he was to go.

The Servant did his Business so well, that the Pump-maker came with him, and
managed so well when he came, that in about two Hours he fully mended the Pump;
when he had done, and while the Gentleman was paying the poor Man, somebody by
accident called the Gentleman by his Name; at which the Pump-maker seemed a
little surprised, and smiled; the Gentleman took Notice of it, and asked him
what he smiled at? the Man declined it a little, but having mended the Pump,
and being well paid, he confessed at last, that if he had known the Gentleman's
Name before, he durst not have come; why so, says the Gentleman? why Sir, says
he, we had all Notice that it was resolved in the Society, that your Pump
should not be mended, and we durst not have done it; what then? says the
Gentleman, what was to be done with me? nothing Sir, says he, only that you
should be obliged to have a new Pump.

Well, says the Gentleman, I hope you will tell them you have mended it, will not
you? No indeed, Sir, says the Pump-maker, I dare not, and I hope your Worship
will not do me so much Prejudice: The Gentleman promised Silence, and away went
the Pump-maker.

But the Jest of the Story is still behind; the first Pump-maker finding he was
sent for no more, was mighty curious to know what was the reason of it; and at
length, by some means or other, come to know that the Pump was mended, and set
up again; that increased his Curiosity exceedingly, for then he wanted to know
who had done it; but that he could not come at by any means; at last, he
offered the Gentleman's Servants to give them a Bowl of Punch to tell him; upon
this, that Servant that had been so often sent to him, took the hint, and laid
a Plot for him, for he owed him a shrewd Turn for making him have so many
Winter-Journeys for nothing; so he told the Pump-maker that he would not tell
him himself, but if he would come to their Town, and give them the Punch there,
that they might be merry, he should know by one means or other.

He promised and came accordingly, and very merry they were, not at the
Gentleman's House, but at a Publick-House hard by: In their Mirth they drank
the Gentleman's Health, and at last, the Pump-maker's Health, that mended the
Pump: At length, being most of them very drunk, the unlucky Fellow that
contrived it all, proposed to the Company, that they would all go and drink the
Pump's Health in a draught of fair Water, to cool them; it was presently agreed
to, and so they jogged away to his Master's House, he being gone to London some
Weeks before; when they came to the Pump, they agreed to drink on their Knees
at the Spout of the Pump, without any Mugs or Glasses, and so they did; but
when the Pump-maker's Turn came to drink, whether they held him fast, or
whether they threw him down, or whether he being soundly drunk, fell down, and
somebody kept him there; History does not acquaint us of the Particulars, but
they pumped him so heartily, and so effectually, that never was Pick-Pocket
better pumped in the Streets of London; and it being withal, a cold Night, he
had but a very indifferent Journey home; however, being very warm within, he
got no hurt by it; nor could he ever tell who had done it for him, or how he
was managed, at-all.

In another Place I met with the following Story of a Combination of Thatchers,
and it is as material to my Purpose, as the other, though not so long a Story: A
certain Gentleman in Kent, who had the Management of some Part of his Estate in
his own Hands, and having every Year a great deal more Corn than his Barns
would hold, set up the rest in great Stacks or Reiks in his Yard, as is usual
in like Cases; a Thatcher in the Neighborhood was usually employed every Year
to thatch this Gentleman's Stacks, and his Work generally came to fifty
Shillings or three Pound every Year.

It happened one Year, that a straggling Welchman who was hired for
Harvest-work, as is common in that County, offered his Service to thatch the
Stacks, and having shown by his doing one, that he understood it very well, and
could do it much better than they were done before, and cheaper too; the
Gentleman employed him, and he thatched the Stacks so well, that he got Work in
other Places as well as there, and afterward settled in the Country, and took
a small Farm of the Gentleman, so that he became a Tennant; by which, together
with the Merit of his Workmanship, he had a kind of a Title to the thatching of
the Stacks ever after.

Some time after this, the Gentleman had a House to thatch for a Tennant, a
Storm of Wind having blown off great Part of the old Thatch, and the poor
Family being Sick, they were in great Distress to have the House covered; the
Gentleman sent for his Welchman to thatch the House, but was surpised that the
poor Man told him, he could not do it; that the thatching of a House was done
quite another way and with other Tools, than thatching Stacks of Corn or Hay,
and he did not understand it at-all.

The Gentleman then sent to his old Thatcher; but he said, no, let him that
thatched his Stacks, thatch his House; he sent to another, and he answered, no,
Goodman -- was the Esquire's Thatcher, and he would not take his Work out of
his Hand; he sent to a third, and he answered no; where was his Welsh Thatcher?
he had brought a Welchman into the Country to take poor Men's Trade away, and
he would not Work for him.

This, in short, went so far, that the poor Family was sore distressed, and the
Gentleman was obliged to remove them into an empty House for the present, and
buy Tiles to cover his House, that he might not be at the Mercy of the
Thatchers any more.

I could load you with Examples of this kind, and divert you too, with
agreeable Tales upon the Subject; but though it would make my Account as pleasant
to you as possible, yet I would not have my Letters be a mere Collection of
Story; these may intimate to you, that the Behavior of which I complain, is
not confined to one or two Classes of Men, but, in a word, a general Spirit of
Insolence and Dishonesty possesses the People I am speaking of, and the
Greivance is come now to such a height, that it calls for a speedy Remedy; for
if some Laws are not very quickly made, effectually to regulate the Conduct of
these People, the Gentlemen in England will live far less happily than in other
Parts of the World; and above all, far less than they used to do in this Part
of it.

There are two other sorts of People here, whose Insolence is so very
particular, that indeed, there is sometimes no bearing it, and these are
Hackney-Coachmen and Watermen: These are two sorts of People, who have not the
Goods, but the Lives of the People they are concerned with, in their Charge.

The first of these, have once by their overgrown Rudeness obliged the
Government to take Notice of them, and make Laws for their Regulation; and as
there are Commissioners appointed for receiving the Tax they pay to the
Public, so those Commissioners have Power to hear and determine between the
Drivers and their Fair, upon any Abuse that happens.

And yet the ordinary Coachmen abate very little of their abusive Conduct, but
not only impose in Price upon those that hire them, but refuse to go this or
that way, as they are called; whereas the Law obliges them to go wherever they
are legally required, and at reasonable Hours: This treatment and the
particular saucy impudent Behavior of the Coachmen, has been the Occasion of
innumerable Quarrels, Fighting, and Abuses; afronting Gentlemen; frighting and
insulting Women; and such Rudenesses, that no civil Government will, or indeed,
ought to suffer; and above all, has been the Occasion of the killing several
Coachmen, by Gentlemen that have been provoked by the villainous Tongues of
those Fellows, beyond the Extent of their Patience.

It was but very lately, that a Gentleman coming out of a Tavern in
Fleetstreet, called a Hackney-Coach about ten a Clock at Night; the Fellow came
immediately, which made it evident that he was not hired, or in waiting; when
he came, he asked the Gentleman where he was to go, before he opened the Door;
the Gentleman told him, he would tell him when he was in his Coach, and bade
him open the Door.

This the Gentleman did, because he suspected by his Question, that he would
not carry him, he being to go to the King's Slaughterhouse, near
East-Smithfield.

Upon the Gentleman's refusing to tell him, he said, that then he would not
carry him, and getting up into his Coach-box, drove away West to the Standing
where he was when he was called; one of the Drawers of the Tavern standing by,
tells the Gentleman, that if he pleased to tell him where he was to go, he
would bring the Fellow back, and make him carry him; so the Gentleman told him
it was to East-Smithfield.

Away goes the Boy to the Coachman, and without saying a word to him, till he
was just at the Coach-side; here Coach, says the Boy; and opening the Door
himself, jumped in, and shut the Door again, before the Fellow could get down;
when the Coachman got down, turn about, says the Boy, not giving the Coachman
time to say, where must I go: The Coachman after some grumbling, turned about,
but would then know where he was to go; I Will tell you presently, says the Boy,
drive on; when he had gone a little farther, the Boy called to him to hold,
which being just at the Tavern-Door where the Gentleman had spoken to him, the
Coachman began to see he was caught, and that it was the same Person; upon
which he drove on a good-way, the Boy still calling to him to hold, but to no
purpose, till the Fellow had hurried him down as far as Fleet-Bridge.

The Clamor the Boy made, obliged the Fellow to stop at last, so he gets down
to let the Boy out; but the Boy held the Door fast, and would not come out; but
bad him turn about again, which the Coachman refused, and offered to pull the
Boy out, but he was too strong for that; so that the Coachman was puzzled, and
knew not what to do, but offered to go back, if the Boy would tell him where he
was to go; but the Boy would not do that neither; upon this, the Coachman got
up in the Box again, and making as if he would turn again, turns half-about,
and whipping his Horses, on a sudden, drives down by the side of Fleet-Ditch,
and stops of a sudden in the Dark, whipps off the Figures from both sides of
his Coach, having observed that thev had not yet taken the Number of it, and
when he had done this, he drives on again; the Boy supposing he had Advantage
enough of him, let him go on, to see where the Fellow would drive him; but here
the Coachman was too many for him; for at the same time that he whipped off the
two Figures from his Coach, he had very dexterously hanged on a wrong Figure in
the stead of them

The Boy letting him go on, as I have said, he drove him into Leather-Lane in
Holbourn, and there would have persuaded the Boy to come out again, but to no
purpose; upon which he takes both the Horses out, leaves the Coach in the
Street, and the Boy in it, and getting up upon one of the Horses, rides away.

The Boy was not aware of this for a great-while, but after some time finding
how he was tricked, he gets out, gets a Watchman to bring his Lanthorn, and
taking the Number of the Coach, goes his way home; thinking, as indeed had it
been true, if he had gotten the right Number or Figure, that he had Advantage
enough of the Coachman.

The Coachman had set a Spy to observe what passed, who giving Notice that the
Boy was gone, he sent another Man with a Pair of Horses, and fetched away the
Coach.

The next Day the poor Coachman whose real Number this Fellow had put upon the
Coach, instead of his own, was surpised with a Summons left at his House, to
appear before the Commissioners; but as he had it seems, had no Broil upon his
Hands, nor given any Cause of Complaint that he knew of, he went frankly to the
Place, to see what was the Matter.

The Gentleman, and the Drawer, both appeared, and made a grievous Complaint,
as well they might, and then the Coachman was called; but the Gentleman and
Drawer was confounded when they saw a Man appear, which they neither of them
knew any thing of; the Boy insisted upon the Number of the Coach, and brought
the Watchman to support his Evidence, one swearing it was the Number which was
upon the Coach, in which he was driven about by Force; and the Watchman swore
it was the Number upon the Coach which was left in the Street, and which the
Boy called him to.

This put the poor innocent Coachman to prove where he was all Day, and what
People he carried, which, as it happened, he was very well able to do; so it
was concluded, that the other Coachman had got a Counterfeit Figure, and they
could make no more of it, the Coachman having been too cunning for the Boy; but
you will observe on the other-hand, that had they found the right Person, which
they would easily have done if they had had his right Figure, they would have
punished him very severely. 1. For refusing to carry the Gentleman, when he was
first called. 2. For carrying the Boy away when he called to him to hold. 3.
For leaving the Coach with the Boy in it, who, though a Boy, was actually his
Fair, and ought to have been carried where he had given Orders.


But the Coachman was too old for the Boy in that, so he escaped what he
deserved at that time, and they do indeed, often escape, and run the venture of
being punished; which makes them still so insolent, that it is grievance almost
unsufferable; many People give them just what they will have, rather than have
the trouble of prosecuting them, and this hardens them; but on the other-hand
sometimes they meet with Justice, or rather Justice meets with them, and then
they are handled as they deserve,

The next are the Watermen; and indeed the Insolence of these, though they are
under some Limitations too, is yet such, at this time, that it stands in
greater Need than any other, of severe Laws, and those Laws being put in speedy
Execution.

Some Years ago, one of these very People being Steers-man of a Passage-boat,
between London and Gravesend, drowned three and fifty People at one time: The
Boat was bound from Gravesend to London, was very full of Passengers and Goods,
and deep laden: The Wind blew very hard at South West, which being against
them, obliged them to turn to Windward; so the Seamen call it, when they tack
from side to side, to make their Voyage against the Wind, by the help of the
Tide.

The Passengers were exceedingly frighted when in one tack stretching over the
Stream, in a Place called Long-Reach, where the River is very broad, the Waves
broke in upon the Boat, and not only wetted them all, but threw a great deal of
Water into the Boat, and they all begged of the Steers-man, or Master, not to
venture again: He, saucy and impudent, mocked them, asked some of the poor
frighted Women if they were afraid of going to the Devil; bid them say their
Prayers, and the like, and then Stood-over again, as it were, in a Jest: The
Storm continuing, he shipped a great deal of Water that time also: By this
time, the rest of the Watermen begun to persuade him, and told him, in short,
that if he Stood-over again, the Boat would founder, for that she was a great
deal the deeper for the Water she had taken in, and one of them begged of him
not to venture; he swore at the Fellow, called him Fool, bade him let him alone
to his Business, and he would warrant him; then used a vulgar Sea-Proverb,
which such Fellows have in their Mouths, Blow Devil, the more Wind, the better
Boat.

The Fellow told him in so many Words, he would drown all the Passengers, and
before his Face began to strip, and so did two more, that they might be in
Condition to swim for their Lives: This extremely terrified the Passengers; who
having a Cloth, or Tilt, over them, were in no Condition to save their Lives,
so that there was a dreadful Cry among them; and some of the Men were making
way to come at the Steers-man, to make him by Force let fly the Sail, and stand
back for the shore; but before they could get to him, the Waves broke in upon
the Boat, and carried them all to the Bottom, none escaping but the three
Watermen, that were prepared to Swim.

It was but poor Satisfaction for the Loss of so many Lives, to say, the
Steers-man was drowned with them, who ought indeed to have died at the Gallows,
or on the Wheel; for he was certainly the Murderer of all the rest.

I have many times passed between London and Gravesend with these Fellows in
their smaller Boats, when I have seen them in spite of the Shrieks and Cries of
the Women, and the Persuasions of the Men-Passengers, and indeed, as if they
were the more bold, by how much the Passengers were the more afraid; I say, I
have seen them run needless Hazards, and go as it were, within an Inch of
Death, when they have been under no Necessity of it, and if not in Contempt of
the Passengers, it has been in mere Laziness to avoid their rowing; and I have
been sometimes obliged, especially when there has been more Men in the Boat of
the same Mind, so that we have been strong enough for them, to threaten to cut
their Throats, to make them hand their Sails, and keep under Shore, not to
fright as well as hazard the Passengers, when there was no Need of it.

One time, being in one of these Boats all alone, coming from Gravesend to
London, the Wind freshn'd, and it begun to blow very hard after I was come
about three or four Mile of the way; and as I said above, that I always thought
those Fellows were the more venturous, when their Passengers were the most
fearful, I resolved I would let this Fellow alone to himself; so I lay down in
the Boat, as if I was a-sleep, as is usual.

Just when I lay down, I called to the Waterman, It blows hard Waterman, said
I, can you swim? no, Sir, says he; nor cannot your Man swim neither? said I; no,
Sir, says the Servant; well then, says I, take care of yourselves, I sshall
shift as well as you, I suppose; and so down I lay: However I was not much
disposed to Sleep, but kept the Tilt which they cover their Passengers with,
open in one Place, so that I could see how things went.

The Wind was fair, but over-blow'd so much, that in those Reaches of the
River, which turned cross-way, and where the Wind by consequence was thwart the
Stream, the Water went very high, and we took so much into the Boat, that I
began to feel the Straw which lay under me at the Bottom, was wet; so I called
to the Waterman, and jesting, told him, they must go all-hands to the Pump; he
answered, he hoped I should not be wet, but it is bad Weather Master, says he,
we cannot help it: No, no, says I, it is pretty well yet, go on.

By and by I heard him say to himself, It blows very hard, and every now and
then he repeated it, and sometimes thus, 'Twill be a dirty Night, 'twill be a
terrible Night, and the like; still I lay still, and said nothing.

After some time, and his bringing out several such Speeches, as above, I
roused as if I had but just waked; well, Waterman, says I; how do you go on? very
indifferently, says he; it blows very hard; ay, so it does, says I; where are
we? a little above Erith, says he; so down I lay again, and said no more for
that time.

By and by he was at it again, it blows a Frett of Wind; and it blows very
hard, and the like; but still I said nothing; at last we shipped a dash of Water
over the Boat's-head, and the spry of it wetted me a little, and I started up
again, as if I had been asleep; Waterman, says I, what are you doing? what did
you ship a Sea? ay, says the Waterman, and a great one too; why it blows a
Frett of Wind; well, well, says I, come have a good Heart, where are we now?
almost in Gallions, says he, that is a Reach below Woolwich.

Well, when we got into the Gallions Reach, there the Water was very rough, and
I heard him say to his Man, Jack we'll keep the Weather-Shore aboard, for it
grows dark, and it blows a Storm; ay thought I, had I desired you to stand in
under shore, you would have kept off in mere Bravado; but I said nothing; by
and by his Mast broke, and gave a great Crack, and the Fellow cried out, Lord
have mercy upon us! I started up again, but still spoke cheerfully; what is the
matter now? says I; L -- d Sir, says he, how can you sleep, why my Mast is come
by the board; well, well, says I, then you must make a Goosewing; a Goose-wing!
why, says he, I cannot carry a knot of Sail, it blows a Storm; well, says I, if
you cannot carry any Sail, you must drive up under shore then, you have the Tide
under foot, and with that I lay down again: The Man did as I said, a piece of
his Mast being yet standing, he made what they call a Goosewing Sail, that is,
a little Piece of the Sail out, just to keep the Boat steady, and with this, we
got up as high as Blackwall; the Night being then come on, and very dark, and
the Storm increasing, I suffered myself to be persuaded to put in there, though
five or six Mile short of London; whereas indeed, I was resolved to venture no
farther, if the Waterman would have done it.

When I was on shore, the Man said to me, Master you have been used to the Sea,
I don't doubt; why you can sleep in a Storm without any Concern, as if you did
not value your Life; I never carried one in my Life that did so; why 'twas a
wonder we had not foundered; why, says I, Friend, for that, you know I left it
all to you; I did not doubt but you would take care of yourself; but after
that, I told him my other Reason for it; the Fellow smiled, but owned the thing
was true, and that he was the more cautious a great deal, for that I took no
thought about it; and I am still of Opinion, that the less frighted and
timorous their Passengers are, the more cautious and careful the Watermen are,
and the least apt to run into Danger; whereas if their Passengers appear
frighted, then the Watermen grow saucy and audacious, show themselves
venurous, and contemn the Dangers which they are really exposed to.

I have heard abundance of Tragical Stories of these Fellows, and I know some
of them to be true; indeed, there are very many Lives lost by their audacious
Carriage: What I have said, may give you a true Idea of their general
Behavior; and that, in a word, they are beyond Belief, abusive, insolent, and
saucy, even to the People that they get their Bread by; insomuch, that it is an
Evil so growing, and so offensive, that there is a general Cry against it, and
yet such is this glorious thing called English Liberty, that I scarce see it
probable there can be any suitable Provision made against it.

I am, etc.

LETTER VI.
Dear Brother,
I HAVE, in my last, given you a short View of the Behavior of our laboring
Poor, who I call Servants without-Doors, and perticularly, let you see that, as
I said before, they are not at-all the better for the advance of Price on their
Labor, but that on the contrary, that it is all in spite of Double-Pay.

It is hard to say it of rational Creatures, and such as we are to call
Christians, but I shall be justified from the Experience of most of the
Gentlemen that employ Workmen, and keep Servants, that the Poor are not to be
won, it is impossible to oblige them; no, not with the advance of their Wages.

I shall now give you the trouble of showing you, that it is the same thing in
its Degree with the Servants within Doors; only with this Distinction, that the
Aggravations are greatest in the latter, because their Obligations are
generally greater, and they are treated with more Distinction, of which I shall
speak at large in its Order; but I confine myself to the Particular of increase
of Wages, in which Case it is not my Opinion only, I assure you, that this
raising the Price of Wages has ruined the Servants, and made them worse; I say,
it is not my Opinion only, it is the Experience of the whole Nation; and yet
unhappily all the Masters and Mistresses in England are drawn into it by an
unaccountable Concurrence of Causes, which it is not easy to give a Reason for.

1. The general Complaint of the badness of Servants, makes those few that are
good for anything, so valuable, that Masters and Mistresses think they can
never do too much to encourage them; so they level themselves to them in their
Intimacies, load them with Gifts, with Clothes, and other Advantages, and the
mechanic Spirit not able to make a right Judgment of things, judges presently
in his own Favor; namely, that his own Merit has procured him all that; this
exalts him in his own Opinion, and, in a Word, ruins him; for Pride and a good
Servant are as inconsistent, as Darkness with Light: Thus the few good Servants
that come upon the Stage of the World, are ruined and spoiled, and that very
Bounty which is the Reward of their early good-Behaviour, and should be the
Encouragement of their Diligence and Humility, makes them unsufferable; makes
them familiar, arrogant, proud, impertinent, and at last, impudent: But I shall
give you a long Letter upon the Subject of the Usage of Servants by their
Masters; I am at present upon the Alternative, viz. the Usage of Masters by
their Servants, and that under the Obligations of advance of Wages, or, as I
call it, in the Case of Laborers Double Pay. 2. Some think that the demand for
Servants is greater in England than it used to be, and I believe it is so; not
that I will undertake to say the Nation is richer, because that might be
disputed; but that Luxury, and living is increased, that I believe nobody will
deny; that People live more profusely, keep greater Equipages, and more
Servants, than ever was done before. 3. As there is a greater Demand for
Servants, so they are not only obliged to take up with such as can be had; but
to give more Wages than usual, to procure them. 4. There may be something in
the public Circumstances of the Nation, which has been drein'd of People ( Men
especially) by a long and fatal War of near 30 Years, which carried away, if
the Judgment of those who understand that Part, may be depended upon, above
five Hundred Thousand Men out of the three Kingdoms, first and last; either
killed, or run into foreign Service, or dead of Diseases in the Service, or
otherwise removed from the general Body of the People. 5. Our Plantations carry
off every Year very great Numbers of Servants, especially of the Female Sex; of
which, they tell us, that there has, within thirty Years past, above 200000
gone away voluntarily to Virginia, and the neighboring Colonies, merely to
seek their Fortunes, as they call it, which, in a word, is the main Support of
those Colonies, as well for their Service, as for breeding and multiplying the
People there; for those do not go on the Terms of transported Felons, but they
bind themselves for five Years, more or less, and generally when their Time is
expired, sometimes before it, get married and settled; turn Planters, and by
Industry grow rich; or get to be Yearly Servants in good Families, upon Terms;
that is, to have Wages, and not to work in the Fields, as at first they did;
and these, as I am assured, make much better Servants, than those they leave
behind them in England. N.B. The chief Numbers of these Voluntier Servants, go
out of Scotland, Ireland, and the West and North of England; many more than
from London.
Now it may be true, that these things lessening the Numbers of Servants, and
on the other hand, the manner of living among the better Sort, causing a
greater Number of Servants to be wanted; both together may cause the rate of
Servants Wages to rise, as scarcity of any Goods, and the increase of the
Demand for them, raises the Value at Market.

But the Mystery of all this is, What should be the reason why the Servants
should be the worse for it? for that, I refer you to what I said before,
namely, the Error is in their Morals; the Money prompts their Vice, and their
Vice depraves their Manners; so that very Advantage which should encourage them
to Diligence, and an humble Behavior, is the ruin both of their Diligence, and
Behavior.

I have a remarkable Story to tell you, to illustrate and confirm this; in
which, not the Brutishness of one Servant is concerned, but after it the
Behavior of a great Number; and I think indeed, it may give you an Idea of the
general Temper and Conduct of Servants among us; great part of the Story I am
particularly acquainted with; and can therefore vouch the Truth of the Fact.

A Gentleman, a particular Friend of mine, (and by that means, as I have said,
I came to a true Account of the Case) had a Groom, whom he took from the
Horse-Heels, to be his particular Footman, or Serving man, to wait upon him
wherever he went; upon which Remove, he considerably augmented his Wages; and
as my Friend loved Sport, and kept a good Pack of Fox-Hounds, he took the more
Delight in this Fellow, because he was a good Horseman, loved the Game too, and
was always a keen Sportsman in the Field; and which still added to the Value he
had for him, he knew him to be a very stout Fellow of his Hands, and had often
seen him tried.

This Fellow however, as is the Fate of most Scoundrels, could not bear his
good Fortune, but believing himself advanced not in Kindness to him, but on a
pure account of his wonderful Merit, grew proud, and in the first Place uneasy
to his Fellow Servants, by his haughty Carriage; and sometimes he took upon him
to be saucy to his Master.

It was upon an Accident happening one Day in their Sport, viz. that he rid
over one of the Hounds, that his Master was, it seems, in some Passion with him
upon it; and Edward, ( so they called him) gave his Master two or three very
insolent saucy Answers, that so provoked his Master, who was angry before, that
he lifted up his Cane at him once or twice, as if he intended to lend him a
Turn or two with it, but did not strike at that time; when Edward, instead of
shifting from his Master, (as a modest Fellow would have done) fac'dabout to
him; and as his Master's Hand was lifted up as if to strike, though, as he said,
he did not intend to strike him; he said to him, with a kind of a saucy Air,
and a Grin, Sir! Sir! don't strike me, pray don't strike me: Why Sir, says the
Master, why should I not strike you? I Am sure you deserve it: But Sir, says
Edward, I desire you would not strike me, because I shall be apt to strike
again.

Say thou so, Edward, says the Gentleman his Master, smiling; (and as he
said to me, all his Passion went away that Moment) Come Edward, Thou bast a
good Stick in thy Hand, and I Am sure, a better than mine; but since it is come
to that, here is nobody by, and I give thee my Word for it, thou shall have
fair Play, and if thou art too hard for me, I forgive thee, and do thy best;
but, he added, depend upon it, Edward, if I have the better of thee, thou will
feel me a little; therefore look to thy self, Edward.

If the Fellow had been Master of the least Grain of Modesty, he would have
asked his Master's Pardon, and said, that he did not desire to engage with him;
and he might easily have seen that his Master, (who indeed was one of the
best-humour'd Gentlemen in England,) at one soft Word, would have forgiven him
all that had passed; but he was the same saucy Edward as before, and returned
in a grumbling saucy way, That he would not be can'd by never a Master in
England.

Never hereafter, it may be, Edward, says his Master; but it happens so, I
doubt, that you must now; and with that Word, he laid him home a smart Blow or
two upon the Shoulders, not striking at his Head at first; when Edward felt it
come hard, it raised his Mettle, and he struck again indeed, as he said he
would, and followed it with a strong Hand, and a good Heart, for a great while;
nay, he played his Staff so well, and his Blows came so thick, that, as his
Master said, Edward for awhile beat him a little out of his Play, and hurt one
of his Hands, at the first or second Blow.

But his Master, who understood a Staff somewhat better than Edward, took all
his Blows upon his Cane, and returned them so warmly, that at last Edward cried
Quarter; No, no, Edward, said his Master, No Quarter; Fight or Run is the Word,
and so followed him with his Blows very thick: Well, Edward was stout too, and
he could not Run, but defended himself again a little while, and then cried
Quarter again: No, Edward, says his Master, no Quarter I tell you, and laid
furiously at him, so that he broke his Head in two or three Places: Edward
seeing the Blood come, was rather enraged than daunted, and said aloud, and in
a kind of Fury, What do you intend to murder me? No, no, Edward, says his
Master, a broken Head will not kill you; Fight or Run, Edward, that is the Bargain
you know; and still they laid on a-both sides: You may kill me if you please,
says Edward, I Will never Run for the stoutest Man alive, though I die upon the
Spot; and with that he flung himself off of his Horse ( for the first of the
Fight was on Horseback) and comes up to his Master, in a Rage, and almost
unhors'd him: But his Master spurring his Horse, sprung from him a little, and
throwing himself off from his Horse also, came at him on-foot too; Edward
seeing that, strove to close-in with his Master, but could not easily do it,
yet after some time he got within his Blows, and boldly collar'd him; but his
Master being a strong Man disengaged himself, and struck up his Heels. Now
Edward (says his Master) the Fight's over; I am no more fighting with thee as
thy Equal: But now, as thy Master, I must correct thee for thy Impudence; upon
which he can'd him heartily, and very severely, and the next Day sent him to
the House of Correction, where he was soundly lashed; then sent him his Wages,
and dismissed him his Service.

Here was a Specimen of an English Servant, who, had not his Master been one of
the bravest and stoutest Gentlemen in the Kingdom, Edward had triumphed over
him; for Edward was really a bold, daring, resolute Fellow, as the whole
Encounter testifies.

When you read this Story, you will blame the Gentleman, perhaps, for engaging
thus Voluntier with his Servant, especially at such Weapons too; that many a
course brawny Fellow may be an Over-match for a Gentleman; that he ought to
have concealed his Resentment 'till he had brought him home, and then have sent
him to the House of Correction, as he did afterward; or that at first (instead
of caning him) he should have run him through, and sent him to the Devil for a
better Master.

But several Things alter the Case; first, as for killing Servants for their
Insolence, that will not do in England at all; neither would it be well, if it
were lawful, for many Reasons; the Constitution of England refers all Justice
of that Kind to the Laws, and it would have brought the Master into a Labyrinth
of Trouble, besides the Crime of it.

It is true, the Master levelled himself too much; and, as a neighboring
Gentleman afterward told him, it was a Kind of Excess of Gallantry to measure
his Staff with his Footman, who eat his Bread, and wore his Livery; but as he
scorned to be threat'ned with the Battoon of a Scoundrel, and on the other-hand
knew his own Ability to deal with him, it was a Kind of Sport to him at first;
though, as he told me in relating the Story, for I had it from his own Mouth, He
did not think he should have had his Hands so full with him as he had.

Again, as to killing him, or running him through, you are to observe, that our
English Gentlemen (when they are a hunting) do not ride with Swords or
Firearms, as you do in France, but with a single white Belt about them, and a
long Whip (which they call a Hunting-Whip) in their Hands; and it was by mere
Accident that this Gentleman had a good Cane in his Hand; for Edward had a
strong Oaken Plant, as they call it here, which is a very good Weapon in the
Hand of a stout Fellow, as Edward was.

But this is by the by; the Case was as above, and Edward was handsomely can'd,
as he deserved; and was very coursly used too afterward, as I told you, at the
House of Correction, whither his Master sent him; for as his Master was in
Commission of the Peace, he was capable of committing him to the House of
Correction, without another Magistrate.

But I have not quite done with Edward yet, for he went about the Country,
raving afterward at his Master; reporting, That he had beaten him
unmercifully, with (...) any Provocation, or Fault; that he would have
murdered him, if he had not at (...) been forced to resist him; and that now
(...) had sent him to the House of Correction because he could not have his
Will of him*

This grew into a Clamor about the ^^^^try; and it came to that Height, that
some (...) the Fellow Servants began to talk roundly about it: One said, He
would not be used so by any Master in England; and that, as they knew Edward to
be a stout Fellow, they said he was able to have defended himself, and he was a
Fool he did not; and in short, they carried it so far, that they began to be
saucy, and to insult the Gentleman as he went about the Country: Once in
particular, as he was riding on Horseback through a little Village not far from
the Place where he lived, there happened to be a Gang of Footmen, and
Gentlemen's Gardeners, and such Fellows, at an Alehouse Door, and they began to
flout him, and throw out their saucy Jests at him; and one called out to his
Man, You Ralphson (that it seems was the Fellow's Name) have a Care, you will
have a Drubbing next time, it may be: The Gentleman took no Notice of it at
all; only as he was riding before on a pretty full Trot, he checked his Pace a
little upon it, and went sostly to hear what else they said; and as they were
far from being modest in their Speech, one of them calls out to another who
stood over the Way, JACK, would you have been served so, JACK? Jack answered No
not I, and swore to it by his Maker; the first returned, No, Damn him, nor I; I
would I had been in Edward's Place, Jack, I would have shown him the Difference
of it, and then added the usual Oath, B -- G --, I would not have stood still
to be murdered; I would have let him known Servants are not Dogs; there is
never a Gentleman in England should have used me so: Ay! says a Third, Edward
was a Fool; everybody knows Edward is as stout a Fellow as any in all the
Country, and was able to have dealt with him; ay, with two such as he, says the
other! But Edward's a modest Fellow, and was loath, because it was his Master:
Loath! Says the other; if it had been the best Master that ever wore a Head, I
would not have took it of him; I would it had been my Lot, he should have
repented abusing a Servant as long as he lived, G -- Damn him.

The Gentleman stopped his Horse short at this Fellow's Words, but did not turn
about, or look behind him; nor did the Fellow baulk his Language for his being
heard; but the Gentleman, I say, stopping a little, and calling his Servant up
to him, Whose Servant is that, says he? His Man told him, Sir Edward W -- 's;
Very well, says his Master, and whose Servant is Jack, pray? And his Man told
him whose Man he was also.

One of the Gang, while the Gentleman called his Man up to him, calls out to
the First, and with the usual Oath Damn me, he knows you, Tom, says he, he asks
his Man if you are not Sir Edward W -- 's Coachman; know me, says he, Damn me
let him know me, anybody may know me, I am Sir Edward W -- 's Coachman, I
a'n't ashamed of my self; Damn me my Master's a very honest Gentleman; Damn me,
if I had such a Master as he, I would overthrow him the first time I drove him
over Chalk-hill, and break his Neck B -- G --, he should murder no more
Servants I warrant him.

All this was so loud, and with so much Insolence, that, as my Friend told me,
he had a great deal to do, to restrain his Passion; but he considered that they
were all Footmen, and Gardeners, and such Fellows, Servants among the
neighboring Gentlemen^; and that he might have better Sport with them (as he
called it) another Way; also it came into his Head, that this very Fellow, as
saucy as he was, ought to have Justice done him; for that it was certain by his
Way of talking, that Edward, or somebody for him, had told a Pack of horrid
Lies to this Fellow; and that the Story had not been handed about as it ought
to be told; so he went off, and rode immediately to the Gentleman's House,
whose Servant had treated him thus, and finding him at home, tells him the
whole Story, what his Coachman had said of him, and the Manner of it; then
desiring a Pen and Ink, and Paper, he set it all down in Writing, and called in
his own Servant, who Sir Edward examined upon Oath (for they were both
Justices) to the Particulars; and the Servant both remembering the Words
exactly, and knowing the Fellows, made Oath to the Substance of it all; his
Examination agreeing exactly with his Master's Narration of the Fact.

When he had done thus, he added, And now Sir Edward you must give me Leave to
observe to you, that I am satisfied your Coachman, and all the rest of them,
have one Thing to be said in their Favor; namely, That they have Edward's
Story wrong, and that they understand I struck and can'd my Man, either without
Cause, or without a sufficient Cause, and that I would have murdered him, and
the like; for I have been told the Fellow does make out his Story in such a
Manner, being ashamed to tell the whole Truth of it; so that I find I am
obliged by these Gentlemen (Servitors) to tell the Truth, and make the Story
public, that I may not pass for such a Master as your Coachman thinks me to
be: Pray therefore give me Leave to let you into the short History of the
Affair between my Man Edward and I.

With all my Heart, says Sir Edward, for I have been told the Story a great
many Ways already, and perhaps none of them right; upon this the Gentleman
tells him the whole Story, in the Manner as I have related it above.

Well Sir, says Sir Edward, upon my Word you have but given him Part of his
Due; though indeed you acted a Kind of Excess of Gallantry, to measure your Staff
with a Footman, who eat your Bread: I assure you Edward would have been too
hard for me, if I had done so: But after all, added Sir Edward, what had my
Rogue to do with it? I assure you I shall take him to Task for it another Way:
No Sir, says my Friend, if your Servant could but be found, I would first be
glad to hear in what Manner he has been informed of the Story; for if, as I
say, he he has been misinformed of the Thing, and that by Edward himself, then
he is not so much to blame, and I must take Care to prevent Edward's telling
his Tale any more, or I shall be mob'd by all the Gentlemen's Servants in the
Country.

Truly Sir, says Sir Edward, I think we, and all the Gentlemen in the Country,
are mob'd by our Servants already; but I promise you, Sir, I will take Care to
do you Justice upon my Servant, he shall insult you no more; upon this he
called another Servant, and sent him out to look for Thomas the Coachman.

Thomas had suspected that the Gentleman was gone to his Master's, and watched
him; and supposing he should be sent for, took care that when his Fellow
Servant came for him, he should lie for him, and carry back Word that he could
not be found; for, that Servants will always lie for one another is no new
Thing here: But as soon as ever he understood Esquire C -- was gone Home, he comes,
and takes care (though at a Distance) that his Master should see him, rather
before anybody should tell him he was come, that he might rather seem to offer
himself than be called.

As soon as his Master saw him, he, in a Manner that might let the Fellow see
he was angry, called to him, Come hither, Mister, I must speak with you a
little; on the other hand, Thomas, to let his Master see a little that he
intended to be saucy, answered very loud, Yes, Sir, and so comes on; when he
was come, What Is the Meaning, Sir, says Sir Edward, that you behave so, that
Gentlemen are obliged to come to me, and complain of your abusing them on the
Highway.

Sir, says Thomas, I abuse nobody: Says Sir Edward, Yes, you have abused an
honest Gentleman, and one that all the County knows to be so; and you have
abused him in such a Manner, as no Villain but your self could have the
Impudence to do, and as no Servant of mine shall be suffered to do, I assure
you.

As you please, Sir, for that, says Thomas; I know who you mean, Sir, Esquire C --
has been here, I suppose, and made his Complaint; I wish I had been at home,
you should have heard me say all that I said of him, to his Face, I do not
think any Servant ought to be civil to him.

What mean you by that, Sir, sayr Sir Edward? I assure you, it was well for you
then, that you was not here, for if you had said that to his Face, and in my
House too, Sir, that you have said behind his Back, I assure you, I would have
sent you to the House of Correction my self; you begin very saucily, methinks;
what a Master have I been to you, that you should give me such an Answer?

To the House of Correction! Sir, says Thomas, with a Kind of a Grin, and for
Esquire C --! I never was sent to the House of Correction yet, nor never threat'ned
with it before, and I have done nothing to deserve it now, Sir; if you don't
like my Service, Sir, you may please to provide your self, I will not be sent to
the House of Correction for talking to such a Man as Esquire C --

Very well, Sir, says Sir Edward, I Will take your Warning; but that is not to
the Purpose, I must still have Satisfaction from you, Sir, about your abusing a
very honest Gentleman, for I will have the Story out to the Bottom.

A Gentleman! Sir, he is no Gentleman, says Thomas; he does not deserve the Name
of a Gentleman, and I will affront him as often as ever I see him, let it be
where it will, though it was in the very Church, and so will all the Gentlemen's
Servants in this County.

Say you so, Sir? says Sir Edward; then, I perceive, there is a Combination
among you, is there, to abuse this Gentleman? I assure you, Sir, he is a Match
for you all, and he may chance to bring some of you to the Gallows, if you go
on.

Thomas replies, He a Match for us all! I wish I had been in Edward's Place, I
would have let him see, that Servants are not Dogs, nor to be murdered every
Time a Master pleases to be in a Passion for Nothing.

Yes, I suppose, says Sir Edward, you would have used me as that Villain
offered to use his Master, would you? I assure you, Sir, if you had offered it,
or threat'ned it, as he did, I would not have given you the Favor of a
Bastinado; I would have shot you through the Head, or the best Dog of you, that
ever wore a Livery.

Then I think it is Time any Man should quit such a Master; if you should tell
Servants so beforehand, Sir, says Thomas impudently, nobody will take your
Livery: Well that is not the Question with you, Sir, says Sir Edward; but since
you have not only abused a Gentleman, who you know is your Master's Friend, and
given him impudent Language, but threaten to do the like, and acknowledge a
Combination among you, and other Gentleman's Servants, to be saucy to this
Gentleman hereafter, I must enquire farther into it; this is a dangerous
Business, Servants are come to a height, I find, that in a little Time, they
will tell their Masters what they shall, or shall not, say to them; I Will have
none of the Society in my Service, I assure you.

Well, Sir, says Thomas, I am ready to quit your Service then, for I will be at
Liberty to speak my Mind to Esquire C -- I said Nothing of you, Sir, that are my
Master, and as for him, I value him not; if I must give an Account to you, Sir,
I shall fetch you my Livery, Sir, I hope I do you no Injury, Sir, in leaving
your Service.

No, no, not at all, Thomas, says Sir Edward calmly, bring your Clothes, and
give them the Steward, and take your Wages, it is Time to be rid of such
Servants.

Away went Thomas, hot and fiery, and saucy enough, even to his Master too, as
you may see; I say, away he went to fetch his Livery; in the mean time Sir
Edward sent not a Servant (for they seemed to be all in the Quarrel, so that he
would not trust them) but one of his Sons to fetch the Constable, and ordered
him not to meddle with Thomas, 'till they were quite parted, 'till he had his
Wages, and left his Livery, and every thing; and that then he should take him
just as he was without the Door, going away, and bring him in again, and for
this he gave him his Warrant, as a Justice of the Peace.

When the Fellow had brought down his Livery, and delivered up his Charge (as
Coachman) to the Steward, the Steward came in to let Sir Edward know it, and
asked if he should pay him his Wages, and dismiss him, or whether he would see
him again? Sir Edward said, No, no, prithee don't let me be troubled any more
with his Sauciness, I shall but be provoked, perhaps, to use him as he
deserves: In the mean-time it was easy for Sir Edward to see, that even the
Steward himself seemed to be of Thomas's side, and think he had hard Measure,
to be questioned for affronting such a Man as Esquire C --

However, Sir Edward (who had all his Measures ready, and his Son with the
Constable attending without the outer Gate) waited to see the Issue, and Thomas
was dismissed; when he had his Wages, and all was over, Thomas wanted to see
his Master; no, says the Steward, my Master says he has nothing to say any more
to you, and will not be disturbed; at this he began to be very rude, and loud, and
he would see Sir Edward; he was not his Master now, he said, but he wanted to
speak with him; and other Servants, seeing him rude, desired him to be easy,
and go about his Business, but he would not stir, and swore, and hectored, that
he would speak with Sir Edward, he did not then call him his Master, but Sir
Edward; that he had Business with him, and would speak with him; the Steward
said, Sir Edward was busy, and would not be disturbed; well, it would not do a
great while; he told the Steward, he answered for Sir Edward without his Order;
if he would go to Sir Edward, and tell him he desired to speak with him, and he
refused him, then he knew what he had to do, but he would not take an Answer
from him.

Why, says the Steward, if I do, perhaps you will not take the Answer from me
then, any more than you will now; yes, he said, if he came back, and told him
(upon his Word) what Answer Sir Edward gave, he would be satisfied; so the
Steward went in to his Master, and Sir Edward, who had heard all that passed,
stood at the Door of his Parlour, and calling aloud (but calmly) to his
Steward, that Thomas might hear, bade him tell Thomas, that if he would be
quiet, and not be saucy, he would speak with him again in an Hour, and so he
might come again in that Time; so Thomas went away.

As soon as he was out of the outer Gate, the Constable meets him, and takes
him up, telling him it was on the Complaint of Esquire C -- and that he must go in
again; the Steward, who was not parted from him, and was secretly his Friend,
but angry that he had been so rude to his own Master, said to him, You need not
have been in such Haste, I see, to speak with my Master, I find you are like to
see him sooner than he proposed to you.

Thomas gave him little Answer, but the Constable, showing his Warrant, asked
for Sir Edward, and they were ordered to come in.

When they were called in, the Constable, who had been furnished with the
Information, sworn to by Esquire C -- 's Man, and with the Account given by Esquire C
-- in Writing, presented them both to Sir Edward, as Justice of the Peace, and
told him there was Esquire C -- 's Servant at the Door, to justify all he had said:
So Sir Edward, and his late Servant, after reading the Paper, had the following
short Dialogue.

Sir Edward. Well Thomas, I find I am to be troubled with you again sooner than
I intended; you hear what Mr. C -- 's Servant has deposed, what do you say to
it?


Thomas. Say to it, Sir, what would you have me say to it? Sir, the Fellow is a
Rascal, and a Villain, to come with such a Story here; and his Master, I think,
is little better; all the Country knows the Story as well as I, and there is not
a Gentleman's Servant round, but would have said as much as I did; he must
expect it where ever he goes.


Sir Edw. Thou art very hot, Thomas, and a little impudent to me too, to answer
in this Manner; I have nothing to do with the rest, but my Business is with you
at present, and you had best not be so saucy, I advise you to it.


Tho. I was born saucy, Sir, I cannot help it.


Sir Edw. I have known many a Child be cured of Distempers they were born with,
and I think you might have been cured of it by this Time, you are old enough.


Tho. That may be, Sir, but I shall never be cured of it: But that is nothing to
the Case before your Worship; what am I brought here for?


Sir Edw. As to that, Thomas, I thought to have talked with you upon it indeed,
if you had been able to behave as become you; but I must take another Course
with you first; I Will try if I cannot cure you of being saucy first, that
Distemper which you say you were born with: Here, Constable, do you secure this
Fellow, 'till I make his Mittimus; I must send him to a Doctor, to be cured.


Tho. What you please, Sir, if you show me the Way into a Prison, Sir, I Will
find the Way out again, I can find Bail.


Sir Edw. I shall not meddle with that, Thomas; you may bring your Habeas
Corpus, if you please, but I Will make you take a little Physic first.

[To the Constable.] Here Mr. Constable, carry him to the House of Correction,
and bring him before me again to morrow Morning.


Tho. What do you mean by that, Sir? I go to the House of Correction! For what,
Sir?


Sir Edw. For your Want of Manners, Thomas.


Tho. Why Want of Manners, pray? Your Worship is not my Master now.


Sir Edw. No, Thomas, I do not talk of your Sauciness to me, while I was your
Master; I could have taken that better, as you see I did an Hour or two ago;
but as I am a Magistrate, and in the Commission of the Peace, and bear the
King's Authority, I am bound to maintain it, and not see a Justice of the Peace
insulted by an impudent Fellow, as you are, when he comes before him in a Way
of Justice.


Tho. You cannot send me to the House of Correction for any Thing I have said
now.


Sir Edw. If I do anything illegal, I Will answer it to the Law; but what I have
done, I will stand to: Constable, do you do your Duty.


[And then Sir Edward went into another Room.] As he was going into the next
Room, some of the Servants spoke to Thomas, to beg Sir Edward's Pardon; you
know your Master, Thomas, said one of them, had always a Respect for you, don't
provoke him: Damn me, Sir, says Thomas, I Will ask Pardon of no Man upon Earth;
what have I done to ask Pardon? I will not ask Pardon, by -- and swore so loud,
that his Master heard him; upon which Sir Edward returned immediately into the
Room; hold, Goodman Waters, says Sir Edward, ( meaning the Constable) I think I
heard him swear: Here, Thomas, says he, you must pay for swearing.

Tho. I Will pay Nothing, not I.


Sir Edw. Well, well, you may refuse to pay indeed, but then you must sit in
the Stocks, Thomas, you know that Law: Go, Goodman Waters, says Sir Edward, put
him in the Stocks first a little.


Thomas raged, and grumbled out a good many Oaths more, but the Justice not
hearing it, that passed over, and Thomas was carried to the Stocks.

While he sat in the Stocks, all the Footmen round about, that were near
enough, came to visit him, and there they sat, an Alehouse being just by, and
Chairs brought out for them, and there was a Consultation of Rogues, cursing
their Masters, and abusing Esquire C --, calling him all the Scoundrels, and
Rascals, that they could think of; and here they treated Thomas, and on^ drank
to him, and another drank to him, 'till Thomas was so drunk, that when he had
fulfilled his Penance, that is to say, an Hour in the Stocks, he was in no
Condition to walk to the House of Correction; but if they would have him there,
they must get a Cart to carry him.

The Justice, who had some Spies among them, and particularly some to take an
Account of their swearing, found there was an absolute Necessity to put a stop
to this new-fashion'd Behavior of the Servants, so he sends to Goodman Waters,
the Constable, to leave Thomas well guarded in the Stocks, and to come to him,
which he did; and he gave him a Warrant to take some Assistance, and bring away
five Fellows, whose Names he wrote down, and against whom he had taken
Information for swearing; four of these five were Gentlemen's Servants in the
Neighborhood, and the fifth a Farmer's Son, one of Sir Edward's own Tennants
in the Village: The four Servants were obliged to pay three, or four, or five
Shillings each for swearing; and two of them, who were very ungovernable, Sir
Edward ordered to be carried Home to their own Masters, where one of them
behaved so impudently to his Master, that he was obliged to send him to
Bridewell too, and he got there before Thomas; the other had his Livery stripped
off his Back by his Master, and he came back, hallowing through the Town, to the
Place where they all were, and got as drunk as Thomas; but some of the
Neighbors kindly got him to Bed out of the Way, or else he had been set in the
Stocks too.

All this made a great Hubbub in the Town, and two or three honest Men,
Inhabitants of the Place, came to Sir Edward, and begged for Thomas, that he
might not go to the House of Correction that Night; offering that they would be
Security for him, that he should come, and beg Pardon for his Behavior the
next Morning: But Sir Edward was positive that he should go, only, whereas his
Order was in his Mittimus, that he should have the Correction of the House that
Night, he sent a Note to the Keeper of the Prison, that he should defer that
Part 'till the next Day, and ordered the Neighbors, who had interceeded with
him, to come to him in the Morning.

Next Morning Thomas was not quite so outrageous as he was overnight; but he
would not submit to come and beg Pardon, 'till he saw a fresh Order from Sir
Edward, and three Justices more, intimating, That he should not be corrected in
the House, but should be carried to the Whipping-Post in the Town, and should
be publicly lashed there, unless he submitted himself before such a Time;
this, and the Importunity of his Friends, humbled him a little; and indeed it
was but a little, for Matters did not end here.

While this was doing, and before Thomas had his Liberty, and well it was for
him that he had not his Liberty at that time; I say, while this was doing, a
Gang of about fourteen or fifteen of the Gentlemen's Servants, and young
Fellows in the Neighborhood, swearing to one another that they would be
secret, disguised themselves; and going to Mr. C -- 's, the Gentleman who had
bastinado'd his Man Edward, resolved to insult him if they could come at him:
The first Thing they did, they met with his Park-keeper, but he a stout Fellow,
and as it happened, having a long Keeper's Staff in his Hand, armed at both
Ends, was aware of them: Indeed, the Park-keeper seeing them disguised, for
their Faces were smeared over with Soot and Grease; some of them had great
Whiskers made upon their Lips, others had false Beards, and the like, I say he
took them for Deer-stealers, come to rob his Master's Park, and talking with
them at a Distance, would not let one of them come in with him: At length, one
of them, running in to him, by main Force had collar'd him, but was immediately
fastened upon by the Keeper's Dog, which made him quit the Keeper; but to
deliver him, another came up, and the Keeper, to rescue his Dog, knocked him
down; however, the rest coming in, the Keeper, seeing so many, was forced to
fly, and called off his Dog, who would else have been killed.

During this Skirmish, the rest went up to the Gentleman's House, and two of
them asking for Sam, (as they called him) which was the Servant, who was with
his Master when Thomas bullied him in the Town; they told him they would speak
with him, so the Fellow innocently walked out with them, when immediately they
asked him, if he had not been before the Justice, and sworn to the Words that
Thomas said? and the like; the Fellow said, yes, he did, but pleaded, that it
was sore against his Will, but that his Master carried him to Sir Edward --,
and there they made him do it between them; and begged heartily for his Life at
first, for he believed they intended to murder him,

Well, they told him, they would make an Example of him to all Rogues, that
should betray any Servant to be ill used; and upon this they dragged him to a
Pond in the Park, where they duck'd him, and dragged him to-and-again in it,
'till they had almost drowned him; then took him, and tossed him in a Blanket;
then tying his Hands behind him, and a Halter about his Neck, so tied that he
could not untie it, with the long End hanging down behind upon his Back; in
this Plight they sent him Home, and bade him tell his Master, That they would
serve him just in the same Manner, the first Time they could come at him; and
that there was fifty of them had sworn to do it, for the sake of his Man Edward.

They also made the Fellow swear, that he would not fail to tell his Master all
they said; but that they need not have done, for poor Sam told his Tale as soon
as ever he came Home, that his Master might not come to any Mischief.

By this Time the Keeper was come Home too, but first he had been raising the
Parish, to look for Deer-stealers; and was got ten or twelve strong, having
picked up a Warrener or two, and their Servants, and a Gentleman's Huntsman,
and several others, enough to have given these Fellows their due, if he had met
with them: But, as their Good-luck guided them, the Keeper watching for them
among the Thickets, and Cover of the Park, where such People, as he took them
to be, might be expected, and their Business being not among the Deer; I say,
as their Good-luck guided them, the Keeper missed them, and came Home just as
Sam was come in, and had told his pitiful Story.

Their Master, with two or three neighboring Gentlemen with him, was at Home,
taking a hearty Bottle (as they call it) all this while, and knew nothing of
the Matter; but when the poor half-drown'd Fellow came in, the Noise was too
great in the House, for the Master to be long ignorant of it; and immediately
he caused the poor Young Man to come into the Parlour, and tell his Story to
all the Gentlemen.

No sooner had he told his Tale, but the Keeper came in, and told his Story
also, and the House was all in a Hubbub; every one got up, and the Gentleman
lending his Friends Firearms, and the Keeper's Men Horses, they all mounted,
and went in Pursuit of them; but it was to no Purpose, for they knew well
enough they should be pursued; so they made all clear off by contrary Ways, got
Water, and washed their Faces; and dropped (one by one) to their Masters Houses;
and nobody was missed, for they were not long about their Work, and not the
least News could be heard of them: But to return to Thomas.

Thomas, drunk, and incapable of knowing any thing of what had befallen him the
Night before, waked (you may suppose) in the Morning, in a Kind of course
Lodging, in the House of Correction, and had soon his Friends about him, as
above, who letting him know his Circumstance, and how the Justice (his late
Master) had had the Goodness to spare him the last Night at their Request; and
that they had been bound for him, that he should ask him Pardon for the
Rudeness of his Behavior; they also let him know, that he was quite in the
wrong to behave as he did to Sir Edward, who had been a good Master to him; and
that he might stand in need enough of his Friendship still in the other Case,
for that not Esquire C -- only, but almost all the Gentlemen in the Country, were
resolved to enquire fully into the Affair, and to go to the Bottom of it; for
that they found they should none of them dare to reprove a Servant, or to be
safe, if they gave them but an ill Word; and then they told him the Story of
the Fellow's Management at Esquire C -- 's House, and assured him, there would very
soon be a Publication from all the Bench of Justices, with a Reward of an
Hundred Pound to any one (or two) of the Gang, to discover the rest.

Thomas was prevailed upon by all these Demonstrances, to ask his Master, Sir
Edward, Pardon for his Rudeness the Night before; and the Neighbors had
petitioned Sir Edward to accept it, and so Thomas was ordered to be brought up
by the Keeper in the Afternoon.

But in the mean Time, for the searching farther into the Combination of
Servants, which, it was apparent by Thomas's Words, was made among them, there
was about five or six Gentlemen more assembled at Sir Edward's, all Justices of
the Peace, to take this Fellow's Examination: When he was brought in, he
kneeled down very submissively to Sir Edward, to beg his Pardon for his
Rudeness to him, and Sir Edward forgave him, and so the Fellow thought to have
been dismissed: But he was thunder-strook, when he was told by one of the other
Justices, in a solemn Manner, 'That though his Master, Sir Edward, had been so
good as to forgive him, for what he had done to offend him, and that Part was
over, yet that they were assembled there, to enquire into his abusive Carriage
to such a Gentleman (naming the Person) and the rather, because he had
intimated a Conspiracy, or Combination, of the other Servants, in the Country
about, to join in their insulting that Gentleman; and had personaliy threatened
him in his Discourse, as the Gentleman was riding through the Town; and they
said, they must know the Meaning of these things, before they quitted him; and
the rather, because this Combination had appeared to be real, by what had
happened since. At which they repeated what had happened the Night before at
Esquire C -- 's House, and told him, 'He would do well, to make a timely Discovery
of the Thing, if he knew any thing of it; otherwise, they must take such a
Course with him, as should be judged proper; as well to detect the Confederacy
it self, as to punish him, for his misusing a Gentleman, who had offered him no
Injury, and was peaceably going along the King's Highway.' Thomas was a bold
Fellow, and withal very full of Tongue; spoke much, but pretty well too, only
very apt to be fancy; had lived with several Persons of Quality, and been
Coachman to a Duke or two, and valued himself very much upon it: So, when he
began his Tale, he told them, 'That he had lived with such and such Lords, and
Dukes; and that he had driven a Coach and Six so many Years; and that he had
never been used thus by any Master in his Life; That he was but a poor Fellow,
'twas true, and they took. Advantage of his being heated with talking of that
Gentleman, etc.

Here the Justice, that spoke before, interrupted him, and told him, 'This was
all nothing to the Purpose; if he had served such noble Persons, as he said, he
ought to have learnt better Manners in their Service; that every Gentleman,
that pays a Servant Wages, has a Right not to the Service only, but the Respect
due from such Servant to him that employs him; but that however, as to his
Sauciness to his Master, that was not the Question, but he was sent to Prison
for his Rudeness to Sir Edward, not as his Master, (for he was not then his
Master) but as a Magistrate; but even as a Magistrate (upon his Submission) he
was forgiven; which he ought to be very thankful for; but he was questioned
then upon the Information of Esquire; C --, confirmed (upon Oath) by his Servant,
for insulting him on the Highway, and threatening him, not personally only, but
also with a Combination of other Fellows against him; which had in part
appeared to be a Reality by what had happened, as above.

Thomas made a long Harangue again, upon his having served so many Gentlemen,
etc. as above; but was bid let that alone, as nothing to the purpose, and speak
to the Point; he said, he knew not what Point they meant; they answered, his
insulting Mr. C -- etc. He said, he did not understand how that lay before
them; that what he had said of Mr. C -- was true; that he had abused an honest
Fellow, that was his Servant, in such a manner, that he thought no Servant
could owe him any Respect; and that all Servants were so far concerned in that
Usage, as that they could not help telling him of it, wherever they met with
him; and that he might thank himself, for that Servants were not hired to be
used like Dogs, or to be murdered upon every time their Master was pleased to
be mad; and what he had said, he believed, was no more than he ought to have
said, and he should not be afraid to say it again; and thus he run on, a little
like what he had said in Mr. C -- 's hearing, only with a little more Respect;
and added, that it was true, that he said, he wished he had been in Edward's
Place, he should not have served him so; and he hoped, he might say so again.

Why, what would you have done, says one of the Justices? Why, Sir, says he,
before I would have been beaten so like a Dog, I would have defended myself:
Ay, says one of the Justices, and have murdered your Master, it may be, if you
could.

I would have killed any Man in the World, says he, rather than he should have
killed me; the poor Fellow is not murdered indeed, that is, he is not dead
yet, but he may be soon; he was beaten so unmercifully, that he is in the
Surgeon's Hands, and nobody knows whether he will live or die; I think it is
time poor Servants should speak, when it is come to this.

Well, Thomas, and what was all this for, pray, says the Justice, was there no
Provocation given: No, says Thomas, none that required such Usage; he happened
to override one of the Hounds in their Sport, and that was not with Design
neither; the Fellow loved the Dogs as well as his Master did, and would not
have done it, if he could have helped it.

Well, Thomas, and you think this was the Occasion of it all, do you, says the
Justice? Think so, Sir, says Thomas, I know it, for I had it from his own Mouth.

Pray, Sir Edward, says one of the Justices, be pleased to let the whole Case
be read at large; not for Thomas's Satisfaction, (for he does not deserve it)
but for the Satisfaction of all the People here; for I see, half the Town are
come about us, to hear the Cause, and they are all (it seems) imposed upon as
well as he: So Sir Edward caused one of his Clerks to read the Account that Esquire
C -- had given, under his Hand, of the whole Combat at large, in the manner I
have given it you above.

At the reading this Story, there was a general Murmur among the People, in the
Hall, where they stood to hear the Cause; one said, he was a Rogue; another, a
Villain; another said, he had not half his Reward, (that is to say, meaning
Edward) some said, they never heard such a Story in their Lives; others said,
he deserved to be hanged; and in short, everybody said, the Story was told
quite another way, all over the Town; and that they had been abused in the
Relation of it.

But Thomas cried out, it was all false, not a Word of it true.

The Justices bid him have a care what he said, for this was the Account the
Gentleman gave himself, and that he was ready to make Oath of it; however, they
told him, that as he had boasted, that if he was sent to Prison, he knew the
Way out again, and that he could get Bail; they told him, they thought, the
least thing they could do was to bind him over to the next Quarter Sessions,
and in the mean time, to require Sureties of him for his good Behavior; and so
they left him with the Keeper, to detain him 'till all this was done.

It was near a Week before Thomas could get Security, but at last he did, and
got his Liberty; but as soon as the Story came abroad, and how it had really
been, all People cried shame of the Footmen; and the first thing to be heard of
(in order to a further Discovery of Things) was, that about eight Footmen, in
several Gentlemen's Families, were run away; any one might conclude they were
thoroughly frighted with Thomas's Story; besides, when it was known, that so
many were gone, it was easy to know what they were guilty of: As for Thomas,
his Fate is not determined yet.

There is a great deal more in the History of this Affair, but it is not
significant enough to trouble you with; you will see through every Part of what I
have written; an Air of uncommon Insolence, upon the Conduct of Servants all
the Country round, and that is the Reason of my giving you this Account: Before
I dismiss this Subject, I must observe to you, That this insolent Behavior is
not among the false and thievish Servants (such we may always expect to be
impudent;) but this is the Conduct of the honest Part of Servants, at least
those we call honest: I could give you an Account of Servants robbing, ay, and
murdering their Masters, and those now more than ever; but among such, nothing
is to be wondered at, and such are in all Nations as well as here; but I
confine my self to the Point in hand, namely, the insolent, unsufferable
Conduct of Servants, that is to say, of those that call themselves honest, and
value themselves upon being so.

Nor is it every Servant that will fight his Master, as Edward did, because it
is not every Servant that dares do it; but I must also add, that there is not
one Servant in twenty now, that will take a Blow from a Master, but with their
Tongues will insult them at that rate, that it is very hard for any Gentleman
to bear it; nor do I wonder at any thing more, than that there are not ten
Servants for one killed by their Masters, the Treatment which Masters receive
from them, being now such, as indeed it is very hard for any Temper to submit
to: I shall give you some Instances of this Kind in my next Letter.

LETTER VII.
Dear Brother,
MY Last gave you a kind of Tragi-Comedy, between a Friend of mine and his Man
Edward; I shall fill up my Account with some of every kind that offers.

I must acknowledge to you, that it is not the easiest thing in the World, for
a Gentleman to bear the saucy Language of a Servant, on any Account whatever;
and there are some Actions of Servants, that a Master cannot but resent, and
reprove them for, when they upon these just Reproofs, return impudent,
ungrateful Language, and insulting Behavior; as is the very Case I am upon: It
is not every Temper that (in such provoking Cases) can restrain it self; and
this has been the Occasion of sending many a Servant to the Devil, before their
Time; and as killing a Servant is not in England so light a matter as it is in
France, especially killing a Servant, in a Passion, or in drink; so some
Gentlemen, who have had the Misfortune to push their Resentments a little
farther than they ought, have been put to great Distresses, and some have been
quite ruined on that Account; and this brings to my Mind a Story, which also
happened within the Reach of my own Knowledge.

There happened, in a Country Town, within about Eleven Miles of London, a very
odd Passage of a Servant and a Master, which ended more tragical than that in
my Last: The Gentleman was a Colonel in the Militia, and of a very good Estate,
and had only two Daughters; his eldest Daughter, a fine beautiful Lady, and
very well bred, was said to be in Love with somebody, but it could never be
found out who it was with: She was so unsuspected by her Father (as to her
Virtue) that there was no need to keep any Watch over her: She often took the
Coach (or the Chariot) with her Sister, to go to London, or any where else, and
sometimes without her, but always came home in good time; and if her Father
asked her, at any time, where she had been been, she would say, she only took a
turn out upon the Forest, or upon such a Heath, or such a Way, for the Air;
which was an Answer satisfying enough; and sometimes (without the least
Suspicion in his Head) he would ask the Coachman, which Way he drove, or how
far? And he would give him the like Answer.

This passed for a great while, 'till it was observed at last, that she took
the Chariot out (for airing) without her Sister, or anybody else with her,
oftener than usual; and her Father, who had heard a Rumor, that his Daughter
had an Amor with somebody, began to suspect; upon this Suspicion (one
Evening) he examined the Coachman, in a friendly obliging manner, whether
anybody met his Daughter upon those Airings and Ridings out? The Fellow, with
a saucy Fleer at him, said, No, and laughed; this moved him a little, and he
called him saucy Fellow, or something to that purpose; Why, Sir, do you think,
says the Coachman, that if my young Mistress had any Love-Intrigue with
anybody, and trusted me to carry her, I would betray her, and tell you of it?

Very well, Sir, says the Colonel, then you may say, you will be faithful to my
Daughter, but you could not boast of much Honesty to your Master; it is no
matter for that, Sir, says be, I never betray my Trust; yes, Sir, says the
Colonel, you do in that very thing, for as you are my Servant, when you carry
her abroad, it is I trust my Daughter in your Hands: I think nothing of that,
says the Fellow, it is the Lady trusts me with herself, and that is more than you
trust me with.

Well, well, if that be your Principle, says the Colonel, then I shall trust
you no more with her, and you shall carry her out no more: However, it
happened, that about a Week after, or thereabout, the young Lady called her
Coachman (her Father being from home) and rode out as usual; the Colonel,
coming home, while they were abroad, and hearing of it, never lighted off his
Horse, but rode about, to see if he could meet her any where, and discover any
thing.

It was his Misfortune to ride round and round the Country, a great way, but
not to meet with them; but being just come back, so near, as that he was within
sight of his own Door, if it had been Daylight, he heard the Coach stop just
before him; upon this, he stopped, and got off of his Horse, and hanging his
Bridle to another Door, stepped forward on the other side (it being very dark)
believing he should see some Spark or other come home with his Daughter, to
bring her to the Door; and he was the more confirmed in his Expectation, when
he saw the Coach stop a little short of the Door.

But judge what Rage, what Horror must take hold of his Soul, when he saw the
Coachman (after opening the Coach-Door to his Daughter) take her out of the
Coach in his Arms, and holding her in his Arms a good while, kiss her several
times, and she (on the other-hand) throwing one of her Arms about his Neck,
give him leave to do it, as long as he would.

Blame not the Gentleman, if he had not Patience enough to restrain his
Passion, at this killing Sight; but, he run in upon them, Unhand her, Villain!
said he to the Coachman, or I Will this Minute send you to the Devil: The Fellow
(surpised you may suppose) set her down, but gave his Master the most impudent
Language imaginable; and which the Gentleman not able to take, gave him a large
Cut over the Face, with his Sword; I Will mark thee now, says he, for a Dog, that
I may know thee again to morrow.

The Fellow cried Murder at first, but immediately flying back, gave his
Master two or three Lashes, with his Whip, and was coming at him (in a Rage)
with the thick End of it, when, the frighted Lady having rung the Bell, other
Servants came, and opened the Door, and the Master stepped in, which put an End
to the Fray for that time.

Then the Gentleman came to the Door again, and pulled in his Daughter; Come,
Mistress, says he, Come you in, I Will take care of you, whatever I do with him:
The Lady was terribly frighted to be sure; however, the Fellow drove the Coach
round into the Stable-Yard, and having put up the Horses, sent one of the
Servants in, to tell his Master, he desired he might send for a Surgeon; his
Master sent Word, he might go to a Surgeon's, if he would, for he should sleep
no more in his House: He sent Word again, very sawcily, he would not stir in
that Condition, and at that time of Night, but that in the Morning he would let
him know more of his Mind.

However, the Gentleman was persuaded to let him stay that Night, his
Lodging-Room being over the Coach-House, and so not within the Dwelling House,
and locking up his Daughter in her Chamber, he sat up himself, to see that no
Mischief might happen: In the dead of the Night, he heard some Noise in the
Yard, and putting himself in a Posture to hear as much as he could of it, and
not to be discovered, he heard his Daughter calling out, at a little Window, to
the Coachman, to ask him how he did; and telling him, she would find some way
or other to come out, the next Day, to him, for all this, with some other
little Tendernesses between them; which, however, served to inform him how
Things were: He restrained his Passion, and did not discover himself at all,
but took care of her Chamber Door, and that she should not get out of the
Window.

The next Morning he called his Coachman to him, paid him his Wages, and
dismissed him: The Coachman said nothing to him, but looked and behaved
surlily, 'till he was paid, and was going away, as he thought, when he turned
short upon him, and told him saucily, He hoped he would give him some
Satisfaction for cutting him on the Face; his Master answered, He ought to be
thankful to him, he had not cut his Throat.

For what, says the Coachman?

For your Impudence, says the Master.

The Coachman said something very rude, upon that, about his Daughter;
intimating, that though he was but a poor Servant now, yet he was a Gentleman
born, and of as good a Family as he (meaning his Master) and 'twas no Dishonor
to his Daughter to engage with him; for, Sir, says he, I have as good Blood in
my Veins as yourself, with some other Language, which the Colonel could not
bear; upon which, he took his Sword in his Hand, which lay on the Table, and
opening the Door, said (with a little Smile) Then, Sir, if you don't immediately
get out of my House, I Will let some of your Gentlemanly Blood out for you, and
that presently too.

Sir, says the Coachman, I am none of your Servant, now, but as good a Man as
your self: This provoked the Colonel farther, and he rose up (though in his Gown
and Slippers) and thrust the Villain out of his Door, and kicked him down the
Steps.

When the Fellow was out, he faced him again; Sir, says he, go tell your
Daughter, you owe your Life to Her, and were it not for her sake, I Would trample
you under my Feet this Moment.

The Colonel was not a Match for the Brute, perhaps, at his Fist (though in
Courage infinitely superior) but flies into his Parlour for his Sword, and
comes instantly out to him again, but he was gone a little way from the Door;
he called after him, but he answered, he would go but a little way farther, and
wait on him again, by and by.

About two Hours after, the Fellow comes again, dressed up very genteely, and a
Sword by his side, and two Fellows with him.

When his Master saw them, he called one of his Servants, and bade him go to
the Stable, and fetch him two Pitchforks, for, says he, I Will deal with this Dog
in his own way; accordingly the Servant brought them, and he bade him, and his
Fellow Servants, keep in the next Room with them, and not show themselves,
unless he called them.

When this was done, he bade a Maidservant go, and desire the two Men, that
were with the Coachman, to walk in, and bid the Coachman stay without.

When they were come in, he treated them very courteously, and asked them, if
they had any particular Business with him? They answered, very civily too, that
their Business was only this; that William, his Coachman, had desired them to
come with him; that he had been wounded by him, the Evening before, in his
Passion; and that he was afraid, he might be in Danger again; and that he
desired them to come with him, to prevent any Mischief.

Pray, Gentlemen, says the Colonel, did he acquaint you with the Reason of my
being so provoked? They answered, No; only that he had said, it was without any
Provocation at all.

It Is the only obliging thing, says the Colonel, that William could do; but
depend upon it, Gentlemen, I could never be guilty of using a Servant so
hardly, as cutting him over the Face, if I had not had the greatest Provocation
in the World.

As to that, they said, they knew nothing of it, and if they had, they would
not have appeared in it, for they would not countenance any Servant in abusing
his Master.

Well but, Pray, Gentlemen, says he, what need is there to bring you to guard
him, now he is out of my Service, and has no Business with me? If he does not
come in my Reach, I can do him no Hurt, and my best Advice to him is, to keep
out of my way.

But, Sir, says one of the Men, he says, his Business now was to see, what
Satisfaction you will give him, for wounding him.

Says the Colonel, my Answer to that is plain; what the Law will give him, I Will
submit to, I shall give him no more Satisfaction; I suppose, he does not come
to to challenge me; if he thinks, he has not merited much more than I gave him,
I leave him to take any Course he pleases: Pray, what Satisfaction does he
demand, says the Colonel, have you any thing to offer in his Name? I am ready
to answer, as becomes me, in any Case, says he; and if he had been a Gentleman,
and indeed any thing but my own Servant, I knew what Answer to make.

N.B. Here the Colonel began to imagine a Challenge; but they had not any
Instructions, they said, not foreseeing they should speak with him first, or
alone.

Well then, Gentlemen, says he, tell him from me, I have no Business with him,
and I think he has none with me; if he keeps away from my House, he has nothing
to fear from me, and so needs no Guard; and with this he dismissed them.

When they were gone, he perceived, that when they came to the Door where the
Coachman waited, and gave an Account to him of the Discourse they had with his
Master, he appeared very uneasy; that he came from them twice (in a Kind of a
Passion) toward the Door, but that they called him back again: But, however,
he came on the third time; and the Colonel observed, that when he came from
them, the third time, they shook their Heads, and went away, as if they had
said, If you will go, we will have nothing to do with you: However, he came to
the Gate, and knocked (or rung) very hard; the Colonel, who had seen him,
ordered his Servants not to open the Gate, but let him knock (or ring) awhile;
at length, He ordered one of his Men, to go out at the Backdoor, and come
round, and stand in a Place in the Yard, which was on one side of the House,
where he might speak to him out at Window, and where the Fellow at the Gate
might see him too.

When the Servant was come to the Place, his Master called to him aloud, John,
what does that Fellow want, that rings at the Gate there? John answered, it is
William, Sir. Well, says his Master, I know that, what would he have? The
Coachman answered, I would speak with you, Sir: The Colonel answered nothing to
him; upon which, John, the Servant, said, He says he would speak with you, Sir,
Tell him, says his Master, I have nothing to say to him, bid him go about his
Business.

Well, William would not stir, but called to his Master aloud, Though you have
nothing to say to me, you may bear what I have to say to you: I tell thee,
FELLOW, says the Colonel, I have no Business with thee, and will have none with
thee.

Then he desired he might be admitted to speak with his Daughter; that he
rejected with Indignation, and in some harsh Terms: Why, says William, I desire
but to speak with her at the Window, and in your Hearing; I am not ashamed you
should hear what I have to say to her.

But she ought to be ashamed to speak to you, says the Colonel, or hear you
speak to her, and much more that I should hear it: Besides, I have removed her
out of your Reach, so you may go about your Business.

Remove her where you will, says William, I will speak with her, do your worst,
and have her too, if you have not murdered her.

How it came to pass, that the Daughter got so much Liberty, he could not tell;
but, in the middle of all this Discourse, she got to a Window, on the Side of
the House, and called aloud to William, and giving the Lie to her Father, as it
were, told him, she was not removed, nor would not be removed; but she would
find a Way quickly to come out, or to that Effect; and William answered her in
such Terms, as made her Father fear they were married.

This was very provoking to her Father (you may be sure) to have his Daughter
give him the LIE, in that manner as she did; and extorted some rash Words from
him to the Fellow, and he (as much inflamed) returned him very scurrilous
Language, in so many Words, and bade him, Come out into the Yard, if he was not
afraid to show his Face to an honest Man.

The Colonel, a Man of Spirit, ran to his Closet, took a Fusee in his Hand,
that was loaded with a Brace of Bullets, which he always kept so loaded, in
case of Thieves, and boldly opened the Door; but the Fellow, who was without
the Gate, seeing the Gun in his Hand, upbraided him with Cowardice, in bringing
out Firearms to a naked Man; but moving off, desired him to have Patience, and
he would wait upon him again, in a Condition fit to talk with him,
notwithstanding his Gun; so in a Quarter of an Hour, he returned with a Fusee
in his Hand also.

But by this time, the Neighbors, alarmed by some of the Colonel's Servants,
interposed, and the Fray was ended for that time, without Mischief: It is not
material to the present Purpose, how the Gentleman and his Daughter managed; he
would have sent her into the Country, but the Girl would not go; he knew not
well where to put her, but that, if she had a Mind to be miserable, and take
the Fellow, she might find Means to do it; so he thought it fafest to keep her
in his own House, where he thought his Anthority might prevent her Designs, and
his Reasoning might (in time) prevail with her, to alter her Mind.

But about five Days after, the Fellow having found Means, by flashing of Gun
Powder, and other Tokens agreed between them, to let her know, that he was
ready, and she having found Means to give him notice of her Resolution, she let
herself down from the third Story, in the Night, and he, with two more, stood
ready to carry her off, at the Bottom.

She was safe at the Bottom, and had just set her Foot upon the Ground, when
the Colonel hearing, or suspecting some Noise, started up, run to the Window
with his Gun in his Hand, and having just Light enough to see his Daughter
putting herself into the Arms of his Coachman, shot him dead upon the Spot.

The Lady, frighted almost to Death, fell flat upon the Ground, and the Father
believing he had killed his own Daughter, was for awhile in a dreadful Agony,
and run out to bring her in, but was better satisfied, when he found she was
only frighted: It cost the poor Gentleman a great-deal of Trouble and
Affliction afterward, and in a manner ruined the Family; for the Laws here are
very nice in such Cases, where there appeared a former Quarrel: But all this
had its Beginning in the Insolence of the Servant; and so far is to the purpose
I am writing about, the rest of the Story being too long to trouble you with
now.

N.B. You may note that on the Trial it was effectually proved, 1. That at one
a-Clock in the Morning (or thereabouts) three Men were seen in his Yard. 2.
That he saw them carrying off his Daughter; which was necessarily construed to
be a Robbery. 3. But suppose not, it was allowed to be an unseasonable Time of
Night, and that the Gentleman not going out of his House, had a Right to defend
his House, which he had Reason to believe was in Danger to be robbed. 4. That
he called out several times, Who Is there; but was answered by one of them (not
the Coachman) Nobody; at which he gave notice that he would fire, and bade
them stand off at their Peril: All which Particulars were, it seems,
effectually proved in his Favor.


However, it was very unhappy to the Father, and afflicted him all his Days, to
the last Degree; for the Blood of a Man (though a Villain in what he did) is very
grievous, to a Mind sensible of the World, and of the Nature of killing a
Fellow Creature, however faulty.

This Story I tell you in Confirmation of what I have said, namely, That the
Provocations, given by Servants in this Country, are such, that it is next to
impossible, that any Gentleman should bear them; and were it so in France, I
believe you will be of my Opinion, that there would be 500 Footmen in a Year,
sent into another World by their Masters own Hands; and I must add my Opinion
too in the other Part, namely, That it is because Masters in France will not
bear such Usage from their Servants, that Servants in France behave after
another manner.

I remember, when the Insolence of Servants in France caused that happy Edict
of our late Great Monarch, That no Servants, that is to say, no Footmen, or as
we call 'em, Valets should wear Swords: But even this was occasioned by their
Rudeness to other People, and sometimes to one another; but it was scarce ever
heard in France, that a Footman behaved otherwise to his Master, than with the
most profound Submission; or that if they did, they always met with the
severest Correction.

The very Name of Footman intimates, That they are bred at the Foot of their
Master; their Business is to clean his Shoes, and to be always ready at his
Foot, that is to say, for the most servile Employment; their Post is to go or
ride behind, and they ought not to come into the Master's Presence, but with
Hat in Hand, bare-headed, and with all the Tokens of an entire Submission: This
ever was the Usage, and is still in our Country, and ought to be in every
Country: But I can assure you, the Case is quite altered in England, and though
the Carriage of a Footman is seemingly submissive, their real Behavior is
quite another thing than it was.

They are now drunken, saucy, unmannerly, negligent; not only above Correction,
but even above Reproof; I shall tell you afterward what causes it; I am now
upon the Fact, and letting you know that it really is so.

A Gentleman of my particular Acquaintance, having Occasion to be in Scotland,
thought it a good Place to get a Servant in, his English Servant, that he
carried down with him, was not able, as he said, to live as Servants lived in
Scotland, and so he desired to be dismissed, which was granted; he had after
that a Fellow recommended to him, that had a great Desire to serve an English
Gentleman, for he had heard much what good Masters they were, and how well they
used their Setvants; upon this the Gentleman sent for him.

The Fellow seemed to have the Face of a good Servant, far from being
unacquainted with the lowest Submission; and when they talked of going to
England, he told my Friend, That if his Honor pleased to carry him to England,
he would run at his Horse Foot all the Way, for he should not need to buy a
Horse for him: Now my Friend thought indeed that he had been fitted; he had
Occasion to travel some short Journeys, while he remained there, being employed
in public Business, and his new Man was the most tendible Servant, that ever
Gentleman could desire.

The Master generous, like an English Gentleman, and kind, could not bear to
see the poor Fellow run on Foot, up Hill and down-Hill, over the Mountains,
through the Rivers, in the coldest Weather as well as in the hottest, while his
other Servants had Horses always to ride on; so (without his Man's
Solicitation) he furnished himself with another Horse, for his new Valet, and
mighty thankful the Fellow was.

The Gentlemen, among whom my Friend conversed, and to whom Harry (that was his
Name) was frequently sent of Errands, and on Business of great Consequence,
showed their Respect for his Master, by being very bountiful to his Servant; so
that Harry began to feel Money ring in his Pocket, which had never been his
Case before.

The first Consequence of this was, that Harry threw away his Bonnet, which was
all the Covering his Brains had ever known in Aberdeenshire (from thence he
came,) and bought himself a good Castor English Hat.

His Master had promised him his Livery, when he came to England, but was not
willing to have it made there, for many Reasons; but having Occasion to stay
some Months longer in Scotland than he expected, Harry found Ways and Means, by
the same Bounty of the Scots Gentlemen, to buy an old (or second-hand) black
Coat, which, his Master being at that Time in Mourning, was suitable enough,
and Harry began to call himself his Master's Gentleman.

It was not long, before his Master had Occasion to send Harry from Edinburgh
to Queen's-Ferry, upon Business of Consequence; and his Horses and other
Servants, being gone to Glasgow, on some other Occasion, Harry was obliged to
go on Foot, at which he showed a visible Reluctance; at length, when his Master
told him it must be so, he said, loud enough to be heard, it was a little
over-far to gang on his Foot.

Well, his Master took no Notice of it, at that time, but Harry went the long
Journey, and came back the same Day; but at Night, when his Master wanted Harry
for some Business (I know not what) truly he was gone to his Bed; and the next
Morning his Master had two or three little Rubbs of his great Weariness; upon
which, a Day or two after, he called his Man Harry, and, with good Humor in
his Face, asked him, if his Weariness was over? Harry said, Yes, but that
indeed it was a hard Journey: Why, Harry, said his Master, did not you offer to
run at my Horse-Foot to England, when I hired you.

Harry would sain have forgot, that he had said so; but his Master reminded him
of the Particulars in so plain a manner, that he could not deny it; but he came
off with saying, He was always willing to serve his Honor, so all Servants
call their Masters there, but he found he was willinger than able.

No, no, Harry, said his Master, not less able, but a little less humble (I
doubt) than you were; you and I must talk about that, Harry; pray get you
another Master: Yes, Sir, says Harry, without any Hesitation, and away he went.

However, Harry bethought himself, and made Friends to be continued in his
Service, and that he might go to England, for that was all he desired it seems,
when he came first; upon this Submission Harry was received again into Favor,
and came to England with his Master; when he had been in England a little
while, he grew like the English Servants, saucy and proud; but with this
Addition to it, that he did not like the Wages his Master gave him, but he
understood, that other Servants in England got more Wages than he did, and he
wanted more Wages: Well, his Master, being willing to have kept the Fellow,
consented to give him 40 s. a Year more Wages, than he had agreed with him for
before.

It happened, that Harry did something wrong, that his Master had set him
about, and it being something of Business, which being wrong done, was some
Disappointment to his Master; he was a little angry, and took Harry up short,
but gave him not one hard Name, or any thing of that Kind; Harry told him
impudently, He did not understand such Language, that he had not been used to
be so talked to, in that manner; and a great many Words he made of it.

Some time after, Harry took Occasion to let fall some insolent Words among the
Servants, as that he would not be talked to by any Master in Britain; that his
Relations were Men of honorable Families, and he was a Gentleman, though he
served his Master so-and-so.

His Master heard of this, but took no notice of it; but, some time after,
Harry had done another Fault, and it was a Fault, that indeed in a Servant is
intolerable; that when some Gentlemen had been to speak with his Master, who
was abroad, and had left Word with Harry, that they had been there, and told
their Names, Harry took no care to let his Master know any thing of it.

When his Master came to hear of it, he was very much provoked, as indeed he
had Reason, and calling up his Man, he examined him, if such Gentlemen had not
been there, at such a time? Harry owned they had been there, and left their
Names too: Well, says his Master, and what was the Reason that you did not give
me an Account of it, when I came home: Harry answered first, that he thought he
had told him: His Master alleged, That could not be, for then he should not
have forgot to own it to the Gentlemen, that Business being of Consequence to
himself: Then Harry would have said he forgot it; this made his Master doubly
angry: Why, then, did you not, says his Master, set it down in the Book? It
seems, his Master had given him a Minute-Book, and Pen and Ink, on purpose to
set down such Business as might happen in his Absence.

Truly, Harry, being driven to the Necessity of owning a Fault, which if he had
done, there had been an End of it, grew saucy, and after grumbling and
muttering to himself awhile, and his Master asking what he said, he told him,
in so many Words, that truly he did not give himself much Trouble to remember
such Things.

What do you mean by that, Sir, say his Master? Is it not my Business? Are you
a Servant, or are you not? Harry replied, though he was a Servant, he was not to
be talked in that manner to, as he had been, and he should not trouble himself
with Men's Business, that used him so.

Blame him not, if the Gentleman was in some Passion at this; but he turned
short upon him with a Smile; What, Harry, do you bear Malice? It Is above a
Month since I spoke to your Worship in the manner you talk of, and I am sure
you deserved it; and if any had Occasion to remember it, I should, for you were
impudent enough, and do you pretend to bear it in Mind now? Yes, he said, he
did, and he would never forgive any Man, that should talk to him in that
manner: Why then, says his Master, I am sorry I had not can'd you then, and
kicked you out of Doors, for a Rascal, as you deserved; then you had had
something to remember, and bear Malice for.

Harry had not much to say then, but still kept grumbling; at length says his
Master, It seems, I had disobliged you before, Harry, and so you neglected my
Business now on purpose to be even with me, was that the Case? Indeed, says
Harry, something of that Kind, for I do not understand such Treatment as this:
With that, his Master had indeed no more Patience, but flew at him, and giving
him a good Kick on the Backside, took up his Cane to have broke his Head, being
provoked at his Ingratitude; You ungrateful Dog, says he, did I take you to run
at my Horse Foot, and can you talk thus to me; and with that, I say, flew to
his Cane.

But Harry was as nimble as he, and though he was as saucy as Edward, yet he had
not Edward's Courage, but fled out of Doors, and walked off for that Night, and
staid two or three Days, 'till he thought his Master's Passion was over, and
then he came again, and sent in another of the Servants, to tell his Master, he
was come to ask his Pardon.

His Master was easy enough to forgive him, but ordered his Clerk to pay him
his Wages, and dismiss him, which was done; but there was another thing still
at the End of Harry's Submission, and that was, he did not design coming back
to his Duty, and Service, for the Time was not up that he was hired for, but he
was told by his Countrymen, that he might have more Wages; and he studied to
disoblige his Master, that he might be turned off; but still he wanted a
Certificate, this is what we call (in France) a Testimonial of Fidelity and
good Behavior.

His Master told him, Ay, he would give him a Certificate, such as he deserved:
Why, Sir, says Harry, in his Country Tone, Have I not been honest and just?
Yes, says his Master, but thou have been saucy and impudent too: Well but, Sir,
says Harry, and you will certify to my Honesty; you have forgiven me the rest;
please to certify the first Part.

Nay, says his Master, though I have forgigiven your Behavior, Harry, I cannot
certify, that you did not misbehave: Even certify what you like, Sir, says
Harry, and was very humble; for Harry found, that he could not get a Place,
without a Certificate; and his Master perceived it, and was willing to humble
him, so he wrote a Certificate thus, I -- -- do hereby certify, That Harry D
--, the Bearer, served me three Quarters of a Year, having been hired for a
Year; that he was honest in what Matters of Trust I committed to him, but
dismissed by me for his insolent Behavior, and saucy Language. Witness my
Hand, the 10th Day of August, 1707.

Harry heard the Contents of this with a staring Countenance, and an
inexpressible Surprise (for his Master read it to him) and when he had done,
only said, Is that the Certificate you will please to give me? And without
waiting for an Answer, turned his Back, and went off: However, Harry, like a
true Villain, that could fawn 'till his Purpose was served, and be impudent
again when it was served; I say, Harry made Friends to the Gentleman's Lady,
and she interceeded for him to his Master; and considering it might be the poor
Fellow's Ruin, at last he gave him a Certificate.

It was some time after this, that Harry being dressed mighty fine, comes to
the Gentleman's House, and his Master being not at home, sent in his Name to
his Lady: The Lady was some-how or other engaged, but bade one of the Servants
tell him, his Master was not at home; she could not imagine indeed, the
Gentleman had any Business with her, unless it had been to thank her for her
Intercession; but she ordered the Servants, to have him into the Kitchen, and
make him eat and drink; so he went away; but about three or four Days after,
sends a saucy impudent Letter to the Lady herself, full of foolish (but rude)
Language, because she was pleased to order her Servants to entertain him, but
did not wait upon him herself.

The same Gentleman, I mentioned above, had the Exercise of several such
Servants as these, and some worse; one of the principal Reasons, that I can
assign for it, was, that if the general Character of the Gentleman was just, he
was only the kindest, and most considering Master imaginable to his Servants;
always compassionate of them, easy with them, doing good to them, making their
Lives easy, and their Service pleasant.

But I must now give you an Example, where this Evil has proved tragical, both
to Master and Servant; for as I hinted before, that the Provocations, given by
Servants, are unsufferable, and that it is not always easy for Gentlemen, to
govern their Passions in such Cases; so you may reasonably suppose, that all
Gentlemen have not the same Government of themselves; Men are not equally
patient, nor equally Philosophers; and some Examples may be given, where this
insolent Behavior of Servants has provoked Masters beyond their Patience.

There was a Country Gentleman of a very good Estate, but being a single Man,
(so they call Men here, that are not married) and having no Family, he lived
privately, and only kept two Servants; one was a Groom, the other a kind of
Gentleman to him, that is to say, one that always attended his Master, dressed
him, and traveled with him, and at other times was a kind of Steward to him,
did Business for him, Received his Rents, paid Money for him, and was trusted
by him to a very considerable Degree; and as he had always appeared to be very
honest, and his Master none of the best Managers, he rather too much depended
upon this Servant, and seldom took any regular Account of his Behavior, but
left all to him.

Time and good Usage had the usual Effect upon this Servant, that is to say,
that as the Custom of most Servants is in this Country, that they soon get out
of the Knowledge of themselves, they take all the Kindness of their Masters to
be not a Favor, but a Debt to their extraordinary Merit; this Fancy of
extraordinary Merit swells them with extraordinary Pride; and from that Time
they neither know how to behave to Fellow Servants, or to Masters themselves:
So it was here; and first this Fellow began to mend his Figure, get a long Wig,
ride with a Sword, wear a Watch in his Pocket, and the like: In consequence of
this, he looked upon himself to be above the Rank of an ordinary Servant, and
at length, by his particular Interest with his Master, obtained to throw off
his Livery, and dress as a Gentleman.

From one Step to another, Pride knows no Bounds, first he learnt to insult
over his Fellow Servant, and in a little time more began to bristle up, even to
his Master himself; and that in Spite of innumerable Favors, Benefactions,
and Civilities; which he had received from a Gentleman, who, however he was
warm and passionate in extraordinary Cases, was yet to him the best-humour'd
Gentleman living.

His Master, who had showed him by a thousand Tokens, that he had an
extraordinary Respect for him, could not yet bear to have him grow upon him,
and was very nice in taking notice of it, did many Ways check, and take him
short in the Beginning of his new Behavior, and sometimes talked roundly to
him about it; but it was all-one, he grew the more pert, and short with his
Master, 'till in Time, the Evil growing upon him, and he became downright
saucy on many Occasions.

I cannot but observe here, for the Caution of all Gentlemen, on the like
Occasions, that they should (if possible) avoid such common catch-word Sayings,
as have any thing ominous in them upon themselves: This Gentleman, in reproving
his Steward, as I may call him, used this extraordinary Expression, almost upon
all Occasions, Prithee Humphry, don't be saucy; I cannot bear your insolent
Tongue; I Will kill you, you Dog, if you talk so to me, I tell you, I Will kill
you; this he often said in Jest, after he had used it pretty much; if he sent
him for Money to his Tennants, he would add jestingly, Go, and get me some
Money, I Will kill you, you Dog, if you don't bring me some Money; and the like,
upon many other Occasions.

Among the rest of this unhappy Gentletleman's Misfortunes, this was one, viz.
That he drank very hard, and sometimes this impudent Fellow would take upon him
to reprove his Master for it, and that not in a modest way, as a cautioning him
of the Mischief of it, which he had good Humor enough to have taken very
kindly; but he would laugh at him, ridicule, and expose his Master, rather than
modestly cover his Infirmity; and upon his Master's being acquainted with this,
one time, after he had been a little in Drink, he calls his Man to him, and
upbraided him with it; but he gave him saucy Language, which was the Occasion
of the first Breach between them, for his Master told him in few Words, he did
not deserve the Favors he had shown him, and so in short, turned him off.

However, in a few Days, the Fellow began to be sensible of his Loss, and went
to his Master, asked him Pardon, and was, with an Abundance of good Nature,
received into his Place again, and in as much Favor as ever.

By that time he had been in Place again, long enough to forget the Favor, and
to forget the Sense he had had of it before, he became just as saucy and
insolent as he was before.

It happened, one Night, that his Master stayed out very late, and his
Gentleman sitting up for him, was very finely gotten fast asleep, in his
Master's Parlour, and in his easy Chair, by the Fire: About four a-Clock in the
Morning, his Master rung at the Door; and the Groom, or Footman, comes running
into the Parlour, to call the Steward, believing he might be asleep; and he was
indeed so dead asleep, that he could not be presently waked; so that while the
Footman was waking him, his Master was at his Heels, and was come into the
Parlour himself: The Dialogue between the Groom and the Steward was very short,
but being much to the Purpose, it is very needful to give you the Particulars of
it, as follows.

Footman. Mr. Humphry, Mr. Humphry, my Master's come.


Mr. Humphry. Ha, what? And then Humphry snor'd again.


Footm. Nay, Mr. Humphry, wake; I tell you my Master's come.

[Pulls him.]
Mr. Humph. What? Ha! Come! Who Is come? What? And snores again.


Footm. Why, my Master's come, Mr. Humphry; he will be here this Minure; get up,
I say.

[Pulls him almost out of the Chair, and almost wakes him.]
Mr. Humph. O, O, Is he come? Is the old Dog come then? D -- him, it is very
well indeed; a fine Time of Night, D -- him; a fine Time, truly: I suppose, the
old Rogue is drunk enough; pray, who brought him home?


All the while the Sot said this last Part, his Master stood, and heard every
Word of it, for he was come in within the Parlour-Door; so when he had done,
his Master began: O, Mr. Humphry, says he, what, are you got drunk before me to
Night? And spoke it merrily enough; for it happened, to Mr. Humphry's
Misfortune, that his Master was not drunk that Night; or at most, not so drunk
as he usually was, so that he had Temper enough to manage his Gentleman Mr.
Humphry, pretty well; for he caused him to give up all his Trusts and Books,
which he usually kept, that very Night, and turned him out of Doors the next
Morning.

Mr. Humphry would fain have staid next Morning, and gave his Master very good
Words; but it would not do; his Master was warmer then, by a great deal, than
he was overnight: No, no, Humphry, says he, you and I must part; I cannot bear
such as this; adding, I shall certainly kill you, one time or other, if you
stay, therefore get you gone, I say, or I am sure I shall kill you: So Mr.
Humphry was obliged to pack up, and be gone.

Well, notwithstanding all this abominable Treatment, Mr. Humphry, upon an
Acknowledgment of his Fault, and the Intercession of some Friends, which he got
to speak to his Master in his Favor, was taken in again a third time, about
half a Year after, and was re-instated in the same Place as before.

He had, upon his Application to his Master to be restored, humbled himself
very much, acknowledged that he was in Drink, and knew not what he said; and
asking Pardon, had assured his Master of his future good Behavior, and for
some time he was a tolerable good Servant.

But there is no changing of Nature: Mr. Humphry soon forgot the Easy Chair,
and the Story of calling his Master hard Names, as above; and grew just the
same individual Mr. Humphry as he was before; and in particular, as saucy to
his Master, upon several Occasions: It happened one Night, that his Master got
so very drunk, at a neighboring Gentleman's House, that he could not get home,
but as he was riding homewards, fell off from his Horse; but it being in a
Country Village where he was known, the People at an Inn, took him up, and sent
to his House, for his Servants to come and fetch him.

He kept no Coach, nor he could not fit on Horseback; so his two Men thought
themselves obliged to carry him home in a Chair (it being near two Miles off)
and that, not a Chair (as we call it) such as ply in the Streets of London, but
a meet plain Country Chair; when they were just coming out of the Inn, comes up
Mr. Humphry, and he falls upon his Master, with a thousand insolent Reproaches;
calling him Drunken old Rogue, and the like; and in a Word, made the two Men
set him down, and get a Cart to carry him home in.

Everybody cried out against Mr. Humphry, for offering such an Affront to his
Master; told him it was a Shame, and the like: But his Master, that could just
speak, and that was all, called out, that he would have the Cart, ay, he would
have the Cart; Humphry, you Dog, says he, bring the Cart, I will have the Cart,
I tell you; and at last adds, I Will kill you, you Dog, if you don't give me the
Cart: This made the Country People quiet; and so Mr. Humphry (like himself) put
his Master into the Cart, and carried him home.

The next Day, when his Master was sober, and come to know, how he had been
used by his Man, he conceived such an irreconcilable Grudge against him, as
was never to be wiped off, and was at last fatal to them both.

That Part of the Story is tragical, and would be too long for a Letter;
neither is it to my present Purpose: But the short of it is this, that this
unhappy Gentleman being another time a little in Drink, and Humphry giving him
some provoking Language one Night, as they were going home from a Tavern, his
Master (in a Passion) run him into the Body, and laid him dead at his Foot; for
which he was tried at the Country AssIzes, and the old Grudge being proved, the
Jury brought him in guilty of wilful Murder, and it cost him his Life.

I am, etc.

LETTER VIII.
Dear Brother,
I Told you, at my Beginning to write on this flagrant Subject, I did not
intend to trouble you with an Account of the Dishonesty, the thieving, and
whoring among Servants, for that these had been frequent, not only in all Ages,
but in all Nations: There have always been Thieves and Whores, who get into
Peoples Houses, under the Characters of honest Servants, even with Design to
rob the Families, and the like; and to talk of these would be, to say nothing
new; yet you must allow me to observe, that there were never so many such as
now. I have been told, our famous Thief-taker (as they call him) has a List of
7000 Newgate-Birds, now in Services in this City, and Parts adjacent, all with
Intent to rob the Houses they are in; and the Reason of this I hinted at in one
of my last, namely, that it is certainly increased by the Pride and Insolence,
which Servants in general are now arrived to; for that (as I said then) when
once Servants are brought to contemn the Persons and Authority of their
Masters, or Mistresses, or Employers, they soon come to despise their
Interests; and at last to break into their Property; and thus they become
Thieves, in a manner insensible, and by the mere Consequence of the Thing.

But I am now to describe to you, that Sort of Thieving and Robbery, which is
practiced by those we call honest Servants in England, or at least, by those
who call themselves honest; and who, as I said in my Last, would think
themselves very much affronted, if they should be called dishonest, or be
denied Testimonials of their Honesty.

The first is Loss of Time: If I hire a Servant, or a Workman, by the Day, or
by the Week; the Meaning of the Agreement is, that my Money is their Due, when
the Hours, which they were to work, are expired; and their Time is my Due, if
they expect their Wages: He that defrauds me of any Part of the Time that he
makes me pay for, is as much a Thief, as if he broke open my Cabinet, and took
away so much Money, as those Hours (so wasted) came to: This is certainly just,
but it is impossible to persuade any Servant of this, and they so little value
it, as a Dishonesty, that (generally speaking) they scorn to acknowledge it,
either to God or Man.

A Friend of mine, in the Country, had a warm Scuffle with one of these honest
Servants, upon this Foot, a few Months ago: He had ordered his Gardener, in
particular, to make a Hot-bed, for the raising some nice Plants, which he
(being curious that way) took great Delight in, and had a Value for: The Fellow
took his Orders, and went out into the Garden, as if he went to make the
Hot-bed; but it happened, that in a Field, just without his Garden-Wall, there
was some young Fellows playing at Cricket, a Sport which the Country People, in
this Part of England, very much delight in.

Three times the Gentleman went down into his Garden, to see what Progress his
Gardener had made in the Hot-bed; at the first time he found him at the Work,
having made a Beginning, which was as much as he could expect for the Time that
he had been about it: The second time he went down, which was two or three
Hours after, and found he had not done one Stroke toward it, more than he had
done at first, and that he was not at the Work; whereupon calling him, he found
he was at the Backdoor of the Garden, looking out into the Field: As soon as
he heard his Master call him, he came in, fell to the Work, told him, that he
was but just stepped to the Door, from the Work, that Minute; which, though it was
false, yet passed well enough, and my Friend said little to him at that time;
nor did he know anything of the attractive Sport that was in the Field, which
occasioned his Gardener's idle Humor at that time; but seeing him fall to work
hard while he staid, he left him again for two or three Hours more, and then
comes again, to look at the Work; but, instead of the Work going on, his
Gardener was at the same Sport, and at the same Garden-Door as before, only
that being pretty sharp in looking out for his Master, he was so nimble as to
shut the Garden Backdoor, and sculk behind some fine trimmed Hedges, that stood
convenient for his Purpose, and so get to the Hot-bed before his Master; but as
Eyes are quicker than Feet, his Master happened to see him, though he thought he
had not.

As the Gardener thought he had not been seen, so his Master did not let him
know, at first, that he had seen him; but when he came to the Hot-bed, and
found little or nothing done, more than was done when he left him before, he
questioned him (though calmly) what was the Meaning that his Orders had not been
executed, and the Hot-bed made? he knowing that the Plants he had to set in it,
had lain out of the Ground all the while, and would be in Danger of spoiling:
The Fellow said, He had worked very hard at it, and done what he could, and he
could do no more than he had done, in that Time, and the like; grumbling a
little, as if he was not justly blamed.

His Master, still concealing that he knew anything of what was the Case,
argued with him awhile how little was done, and told him, that if an Hour's
Work or two in a Day had been missing, he might indeed not have been able to
perceive it, or at least, his Gardener might pretend to impose upon him; but
when, instead of missing an Hour or two's Work in a Day, there was not an
Hour's Work done in the Day, he could not be deceived so much; and that he
expected, when he ordered a Thing to be done, it should be dispatched, and not
the Time spent at Backdoors, and chatting with Companions, etc.

This was enough to make a Fellow, who had Manners little enough without it, to
be surly, and (perhaps) saucy: However, he began a little low at first, told
his Master, he worked as hard as he could, and he ( his Master) was never
satisfied; that he could not work harder, not he, and the like.

Perhaps you may work hard, when you are at it, says his Master, and, perhaps,
you may work as hard as you can; but then you cannot say, you have worked as
long as you can too, or as long as you ought: I was only out at the Backdoor
two Minutes in the Morning, says he, no Master in England would make so many
Words about such a Trifle, and I am sure I have setch'd it up since: The Master
smiled at him, and said nothing for awhile; but finding him still grow hot and
saucy, he told him, that in Pity to him, and to prevent his telling more Lies,
he would let him know, that he found him the second time at the Garden-Door,
and told him, how long he had been there, and how he slunk in, and which way he
went round to the Hot-bed, to avoid his seeing him.

Instead of modestly acknowledging his Fault, and asking his Master's Pardon,
he told him, he had little to do indeed, to watch a poor Servant, that he could
not stir to speak to a Friend, but he must be at his Heels; that he was a
Servant, but would not be a Slave; that he knew how to do his Work, as well as
another, without being watched: And thus the Fellow run on impudentiy, as if
his Master had injured him, in the highest Degree, by discovering him: However,
his Master commanded his Passion all this while, but when he said, he knew how
to do his Work well enough without being watched, his Master took him up, as if
with a kind of a Jest too; Well, says his Master, but you know, it is natural to
watch a THIEF.

A Thief! Says the Gardener, a Thief! And repeating it several times, flew
into, not a Passion of Sawciness, but even a Rage; told his Master, he was as
honest a Man as himself; that he scorned a Master that should call him a Thief,
and he would not take it from the best Master that evet kept a Servant; he had
robbed him of nothing, and was no Thief, and would not be called so, and he
would make him prove it, and the like.

Well, hold, says his Master, don't be so hot; if you put me to prove it, I do
insist upon it, and I shall not only prove it, but punish you for it too; I
say, you have robbed me of the Time which I pay you for, not only to Day, but
many Days; and that Servant, that robs me of my Time, and of his Work in the
time that I hire him for, robs me of my Money, and is as much a Thief, as if he
stole my Money out of my House, or out of my Pocket.

O dear! says the Gardener, is that your Thieving you charge me with? Will you
make a Man a Thief for that? I think, and know myself to be as honest a Man as
any in England for all that: Why, hark you, Sir, says his Master, do I pay you
your Wages, or do I not? Well, he said, he did not deny but he had his Wages:
And what do I give you Wages for, says his Master?

Why, for my Work, says the Gardener.

And what if you do not work, says his Master, and yet take my Money as if you
did, as is the Case to Day?

Why, he said, he did not say, but it was wrong to take his Money, and not do
his Work, but he did not do so.

Prithee, says his Master, don't tell me of its being wrong, and such Stuff as
that, I tell thee, it is Thieving, and neither better nor worse; and when you
tell me a Lie, and tell me you have been at work, when I know you have been at
the Alehouse, and out of your Business, and by that Cheat you take my Money, as
if you had been at work; I say, that is robbing me, and when you do so, you are
a Thief; there is no mincing the Matter.

Well, this Word Thief ran so in his Head, and stuck so in his Stomach, that
notwithstanding his Master talked all this very calmly to him, yet his Blood
was fired with it, and he could not work; but, as soon as his Master's Back was
turned, he stuck up his Spade, and his Fork in the Ground, and away he goes
out, at the Backdoor, to the Alehouse; gets very drunk, and came not home,
'till about one a-Clock in the Morning; when being, by his Master's Order, shut
out, he went back, and lodged as he could; and in the Morning, when he came
again, his Master ordered his other Servants, to tell him at the Door, that his
Master had no more Business for him.

He made many Attempts, and got several Persons to interceed for him, for he
had a very good Place of it; but his Master was inflexible; so he came for his
Tools, had his Wages, and was dismissed.

When he was going away, he told his Master, that as he had served him so long,
and had never differed with him before, he hoped he would give him a
Certificate: I shall explain what is meant here by a Certificate hereafter,
when I come to that Part.

A Certificate, says his Master! Yes, I Will give thee a Certificate, if thou
desire it.

Yes, says the Gardener, I desire it, if you please.

Why, says his Master, I believe thou had better take no Certificate; you
know, added his Master, you said you could have Places enough.

Well, Sir, says the Gardener, but I hope you will not scruple such a Trifile as
that.

No, says his Master, but I tell thee, thou may do better without it.

Why so, Sir, says the Gardener?

Why, says the Master, because it will do thee no Good.

Yes, he said, it would do him good to be sure, when he came to see another
Place.

Why, look you, says his Master, such a Certificate as I must give you, will do
you no good, indeed.

Why, says he, will you not give me such a Certificate as the Law directs?

Yes indeed will I, says his Master, and that is such as is according to your
Desert.

Why, said the Gardener, I have been an honest Servant.

No, hold there, says the Master, I cannot say that indeed.

Why, says the Gardener, what, will you put this little trifling Difference
into a Certificate?

I Will put in nothing but the Truth, says the Master.

What Truth, says the Gardener? And began to be saucy again.

Look you, says the Master, don't be saucy again, for I will not lie for you,
nor assist you to deceive anybody else, as you have me.

Well, says the Gardener, give me a Certificate, and put what you will into it,
say your worst, I value it not.

Say you so, says his Master, well, my Certificate shall be just and fair, and
make you your best of it; upon which he wrote his Certificate, as follows. I A
-- W -- do hereby certify, that the Bearer G -- M --. served me as my chief
Gardener, two Years and one Quarter; that he is a Person capable of discharging
the Place of a Gardener, but was dismissed by me for neglecting his Business,
robbing me of my Time, and for his saucy Tongue. Witness my Hand this twentieth
Day of August, 1721. A -- W --

I shall have Occasion to give you a farther Relation of this Affair of the
Certificate, so I say no more to it now, only this; the Fellow took it, and
went away, and had so little Wit as to show it among his Comrades, and
Fellow-Gardeners, which he did (as he thought) to expose his Master; but they
in return made it public, and the poor Fellow became so known by it, that
indeed it was an effectual Certificate to him, for no Gentleman would employ
him, and he kept out of Place, 'till he was almost starved; but of that also
hereafter.

I should have told you, that in he first Discourse between this Gentleman and
his Gardener, he asked the Fellow the Question in few Words, that I formerly
asked my Overseer, namely, Whether he did not think it a Theft to rob his
Master of his Time, if he took Wages of him for it, and did not work? He said,
as above, he owned it should not be so, and that it should not be so often: But
when his Master asked him again, and kept him to it, that it was Robbery, he
answered, no indeed, he did not think anything like it; he might say it was a
Fault, but every Fault did not make a Man a Thief.

No, no, says his Master, I suppose you count nothing Thievery but what a Man
must (or may) be hanged, or transported for.

Truly, he said, he thought it was no Theft, for the Law had not made any
Punishment for it, and if it had been Theft, there would have been a Law
against it.

Very well, says his Master, there is no Law expressly to punish a Man with
corporal Punishment for being a Bankrupt, and yet we often say, that in some
Cases a Bankrupt is no better than a Highwayman; nay, that he deserves to be
hanged a thousand times more than one that robs upon the Road.

The Gardener, however, would not yield to it on any Account whatsoever, that
robbing his Master of his Time ought to be called Robbing him at all, or Theft;
that it was but what the Spaniards call a Peccadillo, a small Fault, that there
was nothing in it, but it was what everybody did as well as he, and therefore
he might do it as well as everybody else.

This impudent barefaced robbing their Masters of their Time, and justifying
that it is no Theft, is the Foundation of almost all the impudent Carriage of
those kind of Servants, whose Service consists in Labor; for (first) it makes
them impatient of Reproof, and saucy, if they are spoken to, as if they were
injured, not their Masters; that they ought to have the Liberty to play at
their Work, when they thought fit, and that the Master had not Right to take
any Notice of it; and if they are put away for such Behavior, they take upon
them to rail plentifully at the Injustice of it.

And this brings me to a Part I have not spoken to yet, namely, the manner in
which the Servants generally behave here in England, when they are dismissed
any Service.

1. It is very seldom that a Servant can be put away by any Gentleman, but
that, as above, they are full of it, that they are injured; that they were put
away for nothing, or some Trifle; nay, it is very seldom they will own, that
they were put away at all; but that they would serve no longer; that they did
not like; and that they had come away upon some very just Discontent; and it is
very rare, but on such Occasions they will raise some scandalous Lie or other
on the Family they come from. 2. But on the other-hand, if the Crime is
notorious, and they have nothing to say to hide it, then their Behavior is
still worse, and they rail at, and abuse the whole Family, in the grossest
manner possible.
From one or both these Cases it generally happens, that whenever a Gentleman
turns away a Servant in this Country, he is sure to make an Enemy: I hinted
this before, when I told you how far this goes with the Gentlemen here, and how
patiently they submit to be bullied and insulted by their Servants, for Fear of
being railed at, and abused by them, when they are gone: But I must add also,
that it is not always so neither; sometimes an unthankful Rogue meets with a
Master that knows how to deal with him; and for your Diversion I shall here
give you a Story that has very lately been the Subject of Satisfaction to all
our Neighborhood.

A certain Citizen, who had his Country House in a Village near London, had a
Servant, who he had kept many Years, and had employed him in several matters of
Business, as well as mere Servitude; and having had him so long, that he was
(as it were) naturalized to the Family, it appeared that he had really a
Kindness for the Fellow.

Had the Man had the use of but a moderate Share of common Sense, he might have
considered, that though his Master had a Kindness for him, and did often bear
with, and pass by his Misdemeanors, yet that he might one time or other come
to be tired of him; and that it was not in human Nature to be always winking at
the Abuses, and ill Behavior of a Servant; it was easy for him to know, that
his Master did not wink, because he could not see, for he knew his Master was
no Fool; and he was himself not Fool enough to be ignorant, that whatever he
was formerly, he was now become a very unsufferable Fellow, and such as no
Master could, or indeed ought to bear with.

But whatever he might see, and know of himself, nothing could bring him (it
seems) to reform, or to mend his Manners; but he grew worse and worse; was
drunken, idle, pilfering, and withal, an intolerable Swearer: To complete it
all, he grew saucy and insolent to his Master; as I have told you, they all do;
and whenever he got Drink in his Head, was more particularly abusive to his
Master, than at other times.

His Master, whose particular Aversion was the Vice of Drunkenness, but more
especially in his Servants, had several times differed with him upon that
particular Occasion; and sometimes, as well as he loved him, had turned him
away for it, but was still prevailed with, by some Intercession or other, and
particularly by his Respect which he had for the Fellow, to take him again.

This Fellow hardened in that Part of his Carriage, which particularly merits
the Name of Ingratitude, and which rendered him most base, because offered to a
Master, and a Family, to which he was bound by infinite Obligations; such as
rating the Station he was in, namely, of a Servant, were as binding in their
Nature as he was capable of receiving; yet behaved so, that he became a Nuisance
even to the whole Family; and indeed unsufferable, for he was not only a Thief,
a Drunkard, idle, and negligent in his Business; and withal, intolerably rude,
and saucy, when reproved; but he introdu'd other Thieving into the Family,
which were at last exposed, by the very Observation of the Neighbors, who
could not see the Family so abused, without acquainting them of it.

Upon this, his Master turned him, and his Dependants off, and dismissed him
his Service; and yet even this his Master did with Calmness, and without doing
himself that Justice upon him, which the Law would have justified him in; for
the Laws here in matters of that Nature, are such, that this Fellow would have
been transported, if his Master had thought fit to have carried his Resentment
on to Extremity; but in Compassion to him and his Family he forebore that Part.

But no sooner was the Fellow dismissed, but he run about the Town, raging, and
swearing at, and damning his Master, and the whole Family, from whom he had
received so much good Usage, and so many Favors; representing his Usage as
unjust, and injurious, and as if he had done nothing to merit being turned off,
or that being put out of his Service had cancelled all the Obligation of former
Favors; a thousand scandalous Lies were raised, and spread about by him, through
the Town; and, in a Word, he failed not to give all possible Testimonies of the
utmost Spite, Malice, and Rage, against the whole Family; where he, and his
Family, had (for several Years together) been so well used, and so much obliged.

But as the Characters of the Family were placed by Providence out of his
Reach, and that all the Neighborhood knew how much better they had merited
from him, it returned all in his Face; nor did his Master, or the Family, much
mind him; for as it was below their Resentment; they took not the least Notice
of it, or of them; but the Fellow grew infamous by it, and gradually grew poor
also, which must be the Issue of such Conduct, for no Families of Note would
entertain him.

It is true, Contempt is the best, and indeed the only way to treat such
Fellows with, and it is so severe a Punishment upon them, for their Behavior,
that it exceeds either the Stocks, or the Correction-Post; but the Hardship
upon Gentlemen, even in the Practice of so much Self-denial, as that of
suppressing their own Resentments in such Cases, is very great; and there are
some Cases in Families, where the Abuses received by such People cannot be
passed by; and this leads me to some Particulars, which really good Families
are so much abused in, by the Villainy of turn'd-off Servants, both Men and
Women, that it cannot, I say, be put up, without infinite Injustice to
themselves.

Nor indeed can this Article be well omitted, because it has gone a greater
Length in Family-Mischiefs, than any Part I have yet spoken to, and has been
the Ruin of some Families of Note, within these few Years: The Fact is branched
out into two Particulars. 1. The Liberty these abusive Creatures, called
Servants, take with the Reputation of the Families they go from; and, in
particular, sacrificing the Characters of the Young-Ladies, wherever they come.
2. The Treachery of them, in betraying Young-Ladies of Fortune, into the Hands
of Villains, and Scoundrels; either to debauch them, or to Marriages, many ways
as fatal as the other would be.


That the Insults of Servants is risen up to the first Pitch of Villainy, is now
so notorious, that a thousand Instances is to be given of it, and the Remedy is
so hard to be found, that the only Hope now left us for the Evil of it, seems
to lie in the Practice, being so scandalous, that no Persons, of any tolerable
Degree of Prudence, will lay any Stress upon it: The Instances of such
Attempts, having appeared merely malicious, are innumerable: Some Examples of
this I cannot omit; it is true, they carry me a little off from the
Menservants, this Part being chiefly in the way of the Women, or
Maidservants; but the Men are not without their Share of it.

A certain eminent Family, within the Compass of my Knowledge, had a particular
Affront of this Kind put upon them, by a certain Maidservant, as she was
supposed to be: The Lady being newly dead, the Gentleman (having three or four
Children) had hired a Housekeeper to manage the Family, and kept two
Maidservants under her, besides the Cook.

The Housekeeper was a sober, grave Woman, that had a bad Husband, but he was
yet alive, and as her Family was reduced by his Extravagance, and himself got
fast by the Heels in the Fleet-Prison, she was glad to get into such a Place as
this was, for her Support; her Master, directing what Servants he intended to
keep, had left it to this Woman (his Housekeeper) to hire such as she thought
proper for his Business; and she letting her Husband know that they wanted a
Chambermaid (perhaps innocently too) that he might, if he heard of any, send
them to her, he sends her a Creature, of his own procuring, to be hired; and as
the most impudent Creatures are sometimes more than ordinarily qualified to
counterfeit that Modesty, which they are not at-all blessed with, so this Maid
appeared with the Air of a modest sober Girl, as much as could be desired, and
not only the Housekeeper, but the Master himself was very well pleased with
her.

She had not, however, been long in the Family, but, with a Subtlety beyond the
Devil, she causes a Feud in the Family, between the Housekeeper and another
Maid, who was properly called the Nursery-Maid; and this she managed with such
Dexterity, that even the two Parties themselves did not so much as suspect,
that she (the Chamber Maid) had any hand in it: This Quarrel run up to such a
Height, that, in a Word, it begin to embroil the Family; for every Day (more or
less) this Nursery Maid was affronting the Housekeeper, 'till at length, the
Cause came before the Master of the House, who seeing his Housekeeper
evidently in the right, began calmly to persuade the Maid to be quiet, and to
make no more Disturbance in the Family, but to mend what was complained of, and
do her Business as she should do.

The Maid seeing her Master, though he had spoken very little to her
Disadvantage, yet apparently against her, instead of taking quietly the Reproof
which was so much her Due, flies out in a Kind of Passion, and went raving
about the House, among the other Servants, telling them, it was easy to see
which way things went, and that the Housekeeper would be sure to trample poor
Servants under Foot, when she had her Master on her side; and, in a Word,
behaved very sawcily, and indeed impudently to her Master, intimating little
less, but that she had been told, that he was, in short, too great with his
Housekeeper.

So great is the Power of Scandal, and so greedily do the Minds of the common
People entertain any thing that savours of Reproach, that though the Master
himself, believing his Character to be out of the Reach of such Tongues,
despised it, yet he soon found, that it had got Vent in the Family, and even in
the Neighborhood also; for some, who were concerned for the Reputation of the
Gentleman himself, came and acquainted him with it.

He was a little alarmed at it then indeed, and called his Housekeeper to a
hearing, for she was alarmed at it, as well as he; the Servants were then
called together, and examined before the House-keeper's Face, and the two
Neighbors present; all the Servants gave her a Character greater than she
desired, and declared, that they never saw the least Indecency in her
Behavior, in their Lives; and it was more particularly observed, that the two
Servants, who were really the Traitors in this Wickedness, were the forwardest,
when it came thus to a hearing, to justify their Master, and the Housekeeper
also, and with the greatest Expressions of Kindness to the one, and Respect for
the other.

But this looked so ill among the rest of the Servants, that one of them, who
indeed had been suspected, took the Occasion (in order to vindicate herself) to
take the Maid short, and tell her, before her Master, and the Housekeeper,
that she had been the forwardest to talk of the Housekeeper, in a manner that
did not become her, and began to be particular with her, and seemed inclined to
enter into some Discovery.

But the subtle Wench, the Nursery-Maid, took her up short, and said, that was
only in Mirth, and jesting with one another, when she had told a Story of a
certain Gentleman, that had been a little familiar with his House keeper; but
that she had not the least Thought of what was now suggested; that her Master
had indeed been against her, in a Dispute between her and the Housekeeper, but
that was as he pleased, she thought no Harm upon that Account; and down she
falls upon her Knees, and makes loud Imprecations on herself, if ever she
entertained a Thought to the Prejudice of her Master's Reputation, or of the
House-keeper's either; and this Part of what she said was really true, for she
knew (within herself) that she did not believe what she had reported, but that
she had raised it all maliciously, and of her own Head, or at least by the
Instigation of the other Maid, mentioned above, who, she also knew, did it with
a Design to supplant the Housekeeper.

However, this Creature managed her Desence with so much Art, and faced down
the other Maid with so much Confidence, and so many Words, that they were all
dismissed; the Master was defamed, and the poor Housekeeper not only blasted in
her Reputation, but her Husband was enraged, and (though a Prisoner) was hardly
kept from insulting the Gentleman, and his Wife too; and though all this went on
to a very unhappy Length, yet still the Servants were all purged, and stood
clear of being the Instruments.

But the Master of the House, as he was made uneasy at first, was much more so,
when he found that (notwithstanding all his Servants had said) the Scandal
increased, and spread farther and farther upon him; and besides that, he had
some Intimations, that this Nursery-Maid, notwithstanding all she had said
before, and notwithstanding all her Imprecations, had still let fall some
little Reflections, and had shown, that nothing but Fear restrained her, for
she was resolved to ruin the Housekeeper, if she could, having retained an
implacable Grudge against her, from the first Quarrel, as above.

Upon this, the Gentleman ordered that Maid to be turned off, and giving her a
Month's Wages (not a Month's Warning) had her turned out of Doors that very
Night; he would not order the Housekeeper to do it, because he would not
increase the Quarrel between them; then as he found, that however innocent the
poor Woman was, the Reproach would never die, unless she was removed too, he
resolved to put her off also; though, as he was fully satisfied of the Wrong done
to her, he thought it was particularly hard upon her, as it was also upon
himself, with Respect to his Family, because she was a very useful and faithful
Servant.

The poor Woman was under a great Affliction, the Loss of her Place being a
Kind of Ruin to her, the Circumstances of herself, and of her Husband
considered; but she was confounded, and her coming from her Place made less
grievous to her, when going from her Master's House, directly to her Husband in
the Fleet Prison, instead of receiving her kindly, as he used to do, he flew
out in a Rage at her, abused her, and fell upon her with his Hands too, that
she had much a-do (and not but by crying out, and some of the Prisoners coming
in to help her) to escape with her Life, and all the while knew nothing what
the Reason of it all was; after his first Fury was over, and she could get Room
to talk with him, he charged her positively with being a Whore, and a Whore to
her Master, and showed her a Letter, which he had written to her Master,
reproaching him with abusing him in debauching his Wife, intimating, that if
his Misfortunes had not pinned him down in such a Place as he was in, he would
have come, and taken his Revenge with his own Hands.

When the poor Woman saw this Letter, and what Mischiefs had been so near her,
she was glad in her Mind, that she was come away from her Master, for that she
saw things were gone too far to have been otherwise; but she set herself with
all her Cunning, to find out (if possible) who it could be, who had carried
their Malice to such a Height.

There was a poor Woman in the Prison, whose Business it was to clean the
Rooms, run of Errands, tend sick Prisoners, and any such things as Occasion
offered, to get her Bread; this Woman was a sensible good Sort of body, and
sharp enough, and above all, had a singular Character in the Place for her
Faithfulness, and Honesty to her Trust.

This poor Creature was either in the Man's Chamber, or near it, when he fell
foul on his Wife, as is said above, and did her Endeavor to deliver the poor
Wife out of his Hands, and consequently came to know something of the Case.

After the Man's Wife (the Housekeeper) had, as I have said, got a little
farther into the Affair, and found how it stood between her and her Husband,
she took this poor Woman aside, and engaging her to Secrecy, and to assist her,
told her the whole Case, and withal (giving her something in hand, with Promise
of more) employed her to find out (if possible) who it was that could be thus
malicious, to bring such a horrid Story to her Husband.

In the mean time, to go back to the Nursery-Maid, as she was turned off with
some Resentment, so she went away full of Resentment; and she was no sooner out
of the House, but she went about, railing at the Housekeeper, and at her
Master too; openly calling the first a Whore, and not forbearing to say, she
was so to her Master; and so impolitick was she in her Discourse, that she
formed several Stories, which she pretended to say were of her own Knowledge;
particularly, that she saw the Housekeeper go into her Master's Chamber, such a
Night (naming the time) and that she sat up all Night to watch the Door, and
that she was sure, she did not come out till the next Morning; that at such a
time, she saw her Master kiss her, and several other Passages too dirty to be
repeated here; that she went another time into her Master's Chamber, presently
after he was gone down Stairs; and that there were two Pillows in the Bed, and
the plain Mark of two Bodies, as having lain in the Bed all Night.

You must take it with you as you go, that the other Servant, who, as I hinted,
had kindled this Flame from the Beginning, was the Person that privately set
all these Wheels at work, and gave this foolish Wench (the Nursery-Maid) all
her Cue; told her those Stories of the House-keeper's being in her Master's
Chamber all-Night, of the Print on the Pillows, and in the Bed; and affirmed
that she watched, and that she saw them, but brought the other Wench (who was
forward enough of herself to be revenged of the Housekeeper) to take it all to
herself, and tell the Story in her own Name, which she did, as above.

This subtle Creature also made the same hot, passionate Girl go to the
House-keeper's Husband in the Prison, and tell him all the vile Stories the
could invent, which had put him into such a Rage, and made him beat his Wife;
and to propose to him, that he should affront the Gentleman, in the manner he
intended to do by his Letter.

Nor did she fail of her Design, for everything answering her End, she got the
Housekeeper turned away, as you have heard; after which, with a Smile in her
Face, and a smooth Tongue, she went and offered her Service to her Master, to
be Housekeeper, 'till (as she pretended with a feigned Modesty) he could
provide himself more to his Mind.

In this Address to her Master, she failed not to rail plentifully at the
Rudeness of the Nursery-Maid, suggested how she had certainly wronged the poor
Housekeeper, and been the Cause of her Ruin, and how justly his Worship had
put her away; that she deserved to be punished, for that she had certainly done
it in mere Malice, on Account of the Quarrel they had with one another, when
his Worship ( so she called her Master) decided in favor of the Housekeeper;
that she had heard her say she would be revenged of her, and the like.

Thus she sacrificed the very Impliment she had made use of, and exposed her as
much as she had made her expose the Housekeeper, and all to serve her own turn,
and get into the House-keeper's Place; which, by her sawning Tongue (her
Treachery not being suspected) she brought to pass, and was accordingly made
Housekeeper, as she desired.

All this while the old Housekeeper was waiting, and using an unwearied
Diligence to find out (if possible) who had thus supplanted her, and above all,
who had used her so basely to her Husband, as to set him against her, as had
been done; and besides the honest poor Woman, who she had employed at the
Prison, she set another Woman to work, who kept a Shop, in the Town where her
Master had his Country House, and where all these wicked things were done; and
she told her Case to her, and begged of her, that if the Maid came to her Shop,
as she knew she would, she would endeavor to get some of the Particulars out
of her, if she could; for she suspected (though she could not prove it) that all
this abominable Stuff came from her, for their old Quarrel; though she could not
so much as think she had any hand in the other Part, about her Husband, for she
was satisfied, she did not so much as know she had a Husband, much less where
he was, or in what Condition.

She had not set these Wheels a working many Days, but she found the Effect of
her Diligence; for this Wench, who had been fully instructed by the other, who
was now the Housekeeper, comes in the Morning to the Prison, to the Husband,
and there she begins her Story again from the Beginning; affirmed again, that
she saw his Wife go into her Master's Chamber at Night, after he went in, to go
to Bed, and that she sat up all-Night, and was positive she never came out
'till Morning; also the visible Appearance of two having been in the Bed, and
the like; then she run on in a great many Tokens of more than ordinary Kindness
that was between them; that she did not treat him with the Distance and Respect
due from a Servant, but with a kind of Freedom more like a Wife; and that her
Master did not use her like a Servant, but with a kind of Familiarity, that
anybody might see through, and the like.

It being in the Morning, the poor Woman, I mentioned above, was in the Room,
doing necessary things, as was her Place; at first the Maid seemed a little shy
of speaking, but he encouraged her, and said, you may speak freely, that is
only a poor Woman that tends the Chambers here, she minds nothing; and so the
Wench went on with all the Freedom she would have done, if they had been alone.

The poor Woman busied herself here and there, about the Room, as usual, and
seemed to take no Notice of anything; but as she had listened very attentively
to all she had said, and (with Detestation) observed how she endeavored to
insinuate Jealousy into the Man, and exasperate him against his own Wife, she
resolved to hear a little more of it, if she could; so finding she had sully
vented her Rage, and supposing it would not be long ever she would go away; she
goes out first, and planting herself in the Way, at her going out, the Man,
when he saw her, called to her, to show her ( the Maid) the way out, and get
the Door at the Stair-foot opened.

She readily offered her Service, but when she came to the Door, she pretended
the Turnkey was not at the Door, but would come immediately; and so asked her
to go into a little Room, which she knew to be empty, and sit down; so she gets
her into the Room.

Here she falls a bemoaning her poor Master above Stairs, that he should have
such hard Luck, and be so treated by his Wife, when he was under the Affliction
of being in Prison, and so brought the Wench, who was full of it, and apt
enough to be talkative, I say, she brought her to tell all the Story
over-again, and to name the House-keeper's Name, and her Master's Name, the
Place where he lived, and all she could think of; which was what the wise poor
Woman wanted, for above she had heard the Story, but had not the Knowledge of
Persons and Names; but here the unwary Fool told her Story without any Reserve,
without the least Caution, not dreaming she was just taken in her own Snare.

The poor Woman joined with her in everything, said Ay and Yes to all that
required it, and got the Bottom of her Resentment out; and then pretending the
Turnkey was come, went with her to the Door, and let her go.

When she was rid of her, she went immediately, while it was fresh in her
Memory, and set down in Writing everything that was material, that she had
said; with the Names, and Circumstances, and Times of every Action; as well
what she had said to her below, as what she had said before to him above
Stairs; and this she did, that she might be sure to do Justice to the Man's
abused Wife, and that she might do no Wrong to the Wench.

When the Housekeeper came again, which was not 'till two or three Days after,
she stopped her, and would not let her go up to her Husband; for, said she, he
is in a Range again, for here has been an Agent with him, enough to inflame ten
Husbands; so she took her into the same Room, and told her the whole Story, as
above.

It seems, this revengeful Creature, the Nursery-Maid, being bent upon doing
all the Mischief she was able, and being heated with the Discourse she had had
here, both above Stairs and below, went directly from the Prison, up to the
Chandler's Shop, where she used to go in her Master's Neighborhood, and there
she sits down to refresh herself, it being some Distance from the City.

The Woman, who kept the Shop, expected what happened, namely, that she would
fall upon the old Story, and thinking it would not be convenient, that she
should be brought in as an Evidence against any Servant, and for what might be
said in her Shop too, for that then no Servants would care to come to her Shop,
she slipped into a Back-room, where she (as it happened) had another Woman, a
Friend, that was come from London to see her; so she brought out her Friend
into the Shop, upon some Pretense or other, and growing all familiar together,
it was not very long ever the Maid began her Story, about her being turned away
at such a House, and why her Master put her away; boldly hinting that she had
seen a little too much, and the like; then the Stranger put in her Questions,
and holding up her Hands, made an Admiration that such a thing should happen,
so-and-so, and in such a Family too, she thought the Gentleman had been quite
another Person, and the like; this drew the weak passionate Wench in, to tell
all her Tale, ay, and more than her Tale too; so that wherever she came, she
found room to add something or other to the Story.

The Housekeeper got a full Account of this also, and being thus effectually
furnished with two sufficient Evidences, besides hearing it in Pieces and
Parts, in several other Places among the Neighbors, some here, some there; I
say, being now fully satisfied who had been the Incondiary, she (upon good
Advice) causes the Creature to be arrested in the first Place, in an Action of
Slander, and left her Husband might (upon Application to him) discharge her,
she went and acquainted the Gentleman (her former Master) of the whole Story,
who carrying her before a Justice of Peace, had her bound over, and committed
to the House of Correction, 'till she should find Sureties to appear at the
Quarter Sessions. In this Pickle she found herself, the very first two or three
Days, after her having been at the Fleet Prison, with the House-keeper's
Husband.

However, she found Friends at some length of time, and giving Bail, she got
her Liberty again for awhile; and not foreseeing what was like to follow, she
was at first as saucy as ever; but her Friends, who knew better things, and who
found, that the Gentleman resolved to prosecute her very warmly, especially for
the poor Woman's Sake, and more especially when they came to know what Evidence
they had against her, warned her a little of her Danger, and so she behaved
something quieter.

She began now to find she was betrayed, and that she was in Danger to suffer
for the Rudeness of her Tongue, and as, I say, this made her a little more
humble, so in her Discourse she let some Words fall, that what she said was not
altogether of her own Head, but that she had good Authority for what she had
said.

Some of her Friends carried this to the Housekeeper that prosecuted her, but
she answered, she was a poor Woman, and she could not afford to prosecute two
or three Folks; and besides, she might say what she had said, only to slip her
own Neck out of the Collar, and when a Prosecution should be begun against the
Person she had accused she might deny it all again, or might run away, and not
appear at the Trial, and so she (the Housekeeper) might be cast for Want of
Evidence; and for these Reasons, she said, she would not run the venture of
going from one to another; but the Nursery-Maid was her Mark, she had
sufficient Evidence against her, and she would look no farther; that besides
she was the Person who had endeavored to set her (the old House-keeper's)
Husband against her, by a forged and slanderous Charge, and had made him abuse
her, as he had done, and she would have the Truth of it out, if she could; but
would look no farther for her Enemy, than where she had found her.

But this Accident of the Nursery-Maid, pretending to say she had Authors for
what she had said, had a farther Effect than what has been yet observed, and
that in two differing ways; first, the new Housekeeper, who, as I have said,
was at the Bottom of all the Mischief, and had been so from the Beginning, but
had craftily concealed herself, began to be apprehensive, that this Wench would
discover her, as the Author of all; and therefore she underhand pushed on the
old Housekeeper not to accept of the Offer of a Discovery; and put all those
Arguments into her Mouth, which I have just mentioned, and pressed her to
prosecute the Maid with the utmost Severity, and to bring her to a Trial with
all the Speed she could.

This she managed with such Dexterity, that the Trial was hastened, all her
Proposals of a farther Discovery were rejected, and she was left to expect the
worst, which indeed was bad enough for her; for, upon a full Trial, the Maid
was sentenced to pay a Fine to the Prosecutor, for her Damage in the Loss of
her Place ( I do not remember the Sum exactly) and to be whipped publicly at
the Cart's Tail, through the Town where her Master's Country. House was, and
where she had lived; which was executed on her to the utmost, as indeed she
very well deserved; she was lashed, it seems, very heartily, and nobody pitied
her, but all the Neighbors said she ought to smart for it.

But the Story does not end yet; the poor Wench (though she had been soundly
lashed) had a Fine also to pay to the Housekeeper, for Reparation of Scandal,
and Loss of Employment; this they took hold of, and she having intimated that
she could make some Discovery, the Housekeeper, willing to know who had been
her Friends, and who her Enemies in this Affair, went to her in the Prison, and
pressed her to make this Discovery, offering her good Encouragement, if she
would tell who set her on upon all those wicked things.

But the Wench was then obstinate; No, she said, they had done their worst to
her, and she had no Obligation to gratify them; if they had desired it of her,
before she had been used as she was, she might have served them, but now she
would say nothing: They argued with her, that there was still room for them to
be kind to her; that she lay under a Fine, which she was to be kept in Prison
for 'till she paid, and the Prosecutor offered to forgive her all the Money she
was to pay her for Damages, on Condition of the Discovery; No, she said, it was
below her to betray any of her Fellow Servants, and she would tell them
nothing; that as to getting out of Prison, she would do that as well as she
could, but she would make no Discovery; so they went away, concluding it was
only Talk, and she was not able to discover anything; but the old Housekeeper
would not give it over so, for she had some Reasons to believe there was
something in it, so she followed her still, and one Day pressing her very home,
and telling her first, what she would give her, namely, remit the Damages, and
gratify her besides, the Maid told her jestingly, she might go among the
Servants, and enquire there, perhaps she would hear of it in the Family without
her Help.

The Housekeeper took her short there, and told her, as for Fellow Servants,
she should not pretend anything of that Nature; for she was very well
satisfied, there was none of the Fellow Servants but were so provoked, at the
barbarous Treatment of her ( the old Housekeeper) and especially of their
Master, that they had all of them declared, she deserved what she had had; and
had been eager with her, to go on with the Prosecution.

Ay, said she, she was sure that could not be, they would not ALL say so.

Yes, says the Housekeeper, every one of them.

The Maid laughed at her again, and, with a kind of a Jest, repeated the Words,
not every one, not every one, several times.

The Housekeeper answered, she would prove it, that every one of them had
openly said so.

The Maid then fell to railing, and told her she ly'd, it could not be, and if
they had said so, it was only to blind and deceive her, and make a Jest of her.

The Housekeeper returned, yes, they had all told her so, and particularly,
the new Housekeeper had told her, she would be unjust to herself, and unkind
to her Master's Reputation, if she did not prosecute her to the utmost; and she
would bring her to say so to her Face.

The Maid soon discovered (by her Countenance) that she meant the same Person,
when she said, not every one; for upon her naming her, as above, she flew into
a greater Passion, told her it could not be, and that she was sure it was a
Lie, and the like.

Well, says the old Housekeeper, I Will go and fetch such Witness of it, as
shall convince you of the Truth of what I have said; and with that she left
her, and went out; the next Morning she went to the new Housekeeper, innocently
told her all their Discourse, and would have had her gone with her to the
Prison, to have justified what she had said; for she had spoken with such
Eagerness against the Wench, that the old Housekeeper could not imagine, but
she was hearty in it all, and would have said the same to her Face.

But she excused herself; first, she said, she did not love fending and
proving, what Advice she had given her, she had made use of, and it had
answered the End she gave it her for, namely, that she had got Reparation of
her Credit, and the Wench had been severely punished, and she thought she ought
to be satisfied with it; and so, in short, excused herself from going to the
Maid, or having any more Trouble about it; 'twas time, she said, to let it all
drop and die, that the World might not be always gossiping about the Affairs of
the Family.

But this did not satisfy the Woman, so she went to her Master, and told him,
what the Maid had said, viz. That there was somebody still in his Family, who
had been the Original of all this Scandal; that she had not raised it of
herself, but that she had it from somebody in the Family; then told him the
Reasons she had to believe it was the new Housekeeper, and what Steps she had
taken with her to bring them Face-to-Face, but that the Housekeeper declined
it; her Master bade her be easy, he would manage that Part for her, for that he
would the next Day send the new Housekeeper of an Errand to the Maid, to carry
her some Relief, for that though he was satisfied she should be punished, yet he
was not willing she should starve, and he would send her something by the
Housekeeper, as if she ( the Housekeeper) had given it of her own Accord.

She was jealous this would not do, and that the House keeper would sham it,
and not go, but send some body else; but, the Housekeeper was not so cunning,
but did come, believing that carrying Money to the Maid, and giving it to her
as her own Gift, would secure her; and this Thought made her Fool enough to go.

When she came there, the old Housekeeper, who had watched her narrowly,
followed quick after, and clapped in upon her (as if she also had come casually
to see the Maid) and she came so suddenly and unlooked for, that she could not
avoid their being all together; being thus met, they began to talk roundly of
the Matter, and after some time the old Housekeeper reminded the new one of
her formerly expressing honestly, as the old one called it, her Detestation of
the Fact, and pressing her to have her ( the Nursery-Maid) prosecuted and
punished; and told her the Nursery-Maid would not believe her, but she hoped
she would not deny it now: When she repeated that Part, she ( the new
Housekeeper) broke out in a Passion at it, told her, it was a Lie of her own
inventing, that she had persuaded her not to go on with the Prosecution, but to
pity the poor Girl, and the like.

The Housekeeper was a little surpised at first, with such a Token of
Assurance, but recovering herself, she, with a Smile, told her, she was very
glad she had found out the Firebrand of the Family; that if she had known it a
little soouer, the poor Nursery Maid should have been pardoned; that she would
not only prove she had said so to her, but that she had said the same thing to
her Master as well as to her, persuading him to prosecute the Girl in her ( the
old House-keeper's) Behalf; and to prove the Truth of it [ turning to the
Nursery-Maid] Susan, said she, has she not given you ten Shillings? Yes, says
Susan: And has she not given it you as her own Bounty, Susan? Yes, says Susan:
Well, says she, it is my Master's Money, Susan, which he sent in Pity to you;
for be said, though you were justly punished, and though you had injured him, he
would not let you starve; and, he knows, this Creature has pushed on your Trial
with him, as I said before, as well as with me, and he shall own it to her Face.

This so stunned and stupify'd the new Housekeeper, that she had not a Word to
say; at which the Maid Susan first fell acrying, then flew upon her in a
violent Rage, and fell a tearing the Clothes off of her Back and Head; what!
She said, had she served her so? And after that (for the old Housekeeper stepped
in and took her off from her) I say, after that she told the old Housekeeper
the whole Story from the Beginning; and how all the Stories of watching their
Master's Chamber Door, and the like, came from this Creature; and, in a Word,
that it was she that sent Sasan to the Fleet Prison, to rail at her ( the old
Housekeeper) to her Husband, that he might take her away, or by affronting
their Master, cause him to turn her off.

Now the Saddle was set upon the right Mare; and had not poor Susan had a
terrible Whipping on her bare Back, she might have come off free, but that Part
could not be taken off again; however, they all parted in a kind of Wrath; the
old Housekeeper went directly to her Master's House, intending to have
confronted her Adversary before her Master's Face; and the new Housekeeper
went the same way also, with Design to pack up her Clothes, quarrel with her
Master, and be gone; so to be out of the Reach of farther Mischief.

To the great Disappointment of the former, her Master was gone to London, and
it being very uncertain whether he would return at Night or no, and she so warm
and eager that she could not wait, so she resolved to go to his City House, and
speak with him there; but she missed him there too, and at last heard he was
gone to his Country House again; but then it was too late for her to go so far,
so she was obliged to defer it 'till next Morning, resolving to be there before
he was up.

But the new Housekeeper had the better Luck, and she managed it wickedly
enough, if she could have carried it afterward as she ought to have done; for
her Master coming home, and she having thereby an Advantage to tell her Tale by
herself, she boldly comes up to him, and desired to speak with him; so he went
into a Parlour by himself, and called her in.

She was cunning enough to take hold of the Advantage which the Occasion put
into her Hands, and which he knew not how to get off of; for she began with a
Shower of bold Reproaches on him, for betraying his own Secret, as she called
it, and exposing her to Susan; that he had sent to Susan by her Hands, but gave
her Order to conceal his Name, and give it her in her own Name; and that then
he had discovered it to his Favorite Mrs. --, the old House keeper, and had
sent her after, to tell Susan that it was his Money.

As I have said above, this plunged him a little, for it was so in Fact, and he
knew not what to say to it; he was heartily vexed that the old Housekeeper had
acted so foolishly, or falsely, he did not well know which; and 'till he could
see her, he scarce knew what to think of it all; but recollecting himself a
little, and remembering what the other Housekeeper had told him, he found
himself obliged to bring it out sooner than he intended, and to charge her
downright with the Fact, namely, with being the Original of all the Noise that
had been made in the House, and the Abuses both upon Mrs. -- the old
Housekeeper, and also upon himself; and yet that she had prompted both of them
to prosecute poor Susan, when she was herself the Cause of it all; that Susan
was but her Tool to kindle the Flame; and that all this was done to get the old
Housekeeper out, and to get into her Place.

She pretended to be the more enflamed at this; denied the thing with great
Asseverations (for she knew Susau, who was her Accuser, was not at-hand) but
threw back the Dirt of it in his Face with an unlucky Advantage, and impudently
told him, It seemed truly now, not so unlikely to be true, as She had thought
it had been, that he was so great with his old Housekeeper, and, for ought She
knew, there might be something in it; seeing he held so close a Correspondence
with her, that when he had entrusted her with a secret Errand, he should go and
discover it himself to that very Woman, and send such a Creature as that after
her, to expose her; and that there must be something more in it than ordinary,
that there was such a Confidence between them; that since it was so, she
thought she had staid long enough among them, and that if he pleased to order
her to be paid her Wages, she would deliver up her Charge, and be gone, for she
was resolved she would not sleep another Night in his House, and he might go to
Bed to his old Favorite as freely as ever, she would not interupt him.

The Gentleman was really out done by her, for she had such a plausible Ground
of Complaint, that he was confounded: However, though she had treated him with
most provoking Language, yet he calmly told her, he had his particular Reasons
for letting Mrs. -- know what he had done, that yet he did not bid her go, and
make it known to Susan; but if she had done so, he did not value it, and did
not doubt but Mrs. -- had some Reasons for what she had done too, which he
should know when he saw her, and he did not doubt also but she would soon let
him hear of it: It seems his Housekeeper had been so nimble upon him ( for she
was as sharp as a Hawk) that she had not given him time to hear in the Family,
that the old Housekeeper had been there to speak with him, and was gone to
London to seek him, as she had left Word.

But having calmly, I say, given her this Auswer, she continued the more saucy,
and grew insolent to the last Degree; boasted much of her being faithful and
honest, and reproached him in such an unsufferable Manner with his secret
Correspondence with the other Housekeeper; that, in short, he was almost
provoked to kick her out of Doors; but he restrained his Anger, and did not
touch her himself, but causing her Wages to be immediately paid her, and her
Boxes and Trunks, or what she had in the House, given her, he caused her also
to be turned out that very Hour, which was indeed what the cunning Jade wanted;
and thus they parted with as much Resentment, as Susan and they had done before.

But when Mrs. --, the old Housekeeper, came the next Morning, and gave the
Gentleman an Account of the whole Story, as it really was, then he found he had
been much in the wrong; that she had gained a Point of him, in letting her go
so quietly away, and that heought to have sent her immediately to the House of
Correction: He would have retrieved the Mistake, and sent to several Places in
the Town to have stopped her again, but she had been in too much Haste to get
away Overnight, to be taken hold of again in the Morning; in a word, she
provided for her own Safety, and was fled.

She had indeed, as I have said, a vast Advantage over him in the first Part of
the Story; I mean that which related to his sending the Money in the Woman's
Name, and discovering the Secret to his old House keeper; and this Creature;
who told her Tale afterward in the Street, told that Part of it so well, and so
effectually kept it separate from the Reason of the Discovery, which was the
Counter-part of the Fact, that, in short, all the Neighbors ran away with it,
and it did more toward fixing a real Reproach upon the Gentleman himself, than
all that had been done or said before; nor did the crafty Creature want
Emissaries to support the Reflection, which she so diligently plied, and so
artfully supported herself in, that it blackened the Gentleman, in a Manner
never to be effectually wiped off; though he was innocent, as an unborn Infant,
of the Charge, or of any Appearance of it.

So dreadful a thing is Slander, on the Tongue of a subtle Instrument, and so
much is the Reputation of the most innocent Person in the World at the Mercy of
an insolent Servant, when turned away, be the Occasion ever so just.

Nor was the punishing this malicious Creature able, either to wipe off the
Blot, or to stop her Mouth; some thought indeed he was in the wrong to pursue
her, but having the Evidence of the Maid Susan, and of another, which she
brought in against her, he at last taking hold of her by Accident, brought her
to Justice, and had her lashed as severely as Susan had been before her; but it
had not so good an Effect upon her, as it had upon Susan; she went raving and
railing ten times the more at him, and at the other Housekeeper too, only by
how much she had smarted for it before, she was now more wary of her Words, and
spoke, though not with less Malice, yet with more Crafr, framing her Words so as
that they could not be taken hold of, and continued implacably bent to ruin the
Reputation of the Gentleman as much as possible; and this way of abusing her
Master was as fatal and mischievous to him, though not so dangerous to her, as
the other, nor was there any Remedy for it but Patience; so vile a thing is the
Tongue of an insolent Servant, when punished for their Disorders; and this is
one of the things which we want a Law against in England, and which is one of
the Reasons of my giving you this Story; for if there is no Method taken better
to curb their insolent Tongues, when turned away, all the Masters and
Mistresses in England will in a little while stand in Awe of their Servants, or
be at the Mercy of them, which is much at one.

I am, etc.

LETTER IX.
Dear Brother,
IHIS comes to acknowledge the Favor of Yours, of the 10th, in Answer to my
Last, in which, I observe, you suggest two things as Doubts, upon the Accounts
I gave you of the Insolence, and unsufferable Pride of Servants in this
Country. 1. You say, that certainly the English must be very cruel, arbitrary,
and (which is still worse) unreasonable Masters, or 2. Surely England has no
Laws of Subordination in Force, for the particular Regulation of Servants, for
securing their Obedience, and stating what is, or is not their Duty.


I confess, it is very rational to suggest in general, that there must be
something or other uncommon, that should be the Reason of such things as these;
that it is not thus in other Nations; and that Servants are more at Command,
and more subject to their Masters, or more easily to be punished in other
Countries; and that if it is not so here, there must be some Reason to be
assigned for it, and that you think one of these must be the Case.

But as I know you will bear with my Freedom, I take the Liberty to say,
particularly as to these two things you are entirely mistaken; and, First, as
to the Behavior of Masters to Servants; I hope you will allow, (to avoid
frequent Repetitions) that when I say Masters, I should be understood to mean
Mistresses as well as Masters, for they stand in the same Place, in Point of
Argument.

And, First, the contrary is true to an Extreme, and it is partly to the
Account of this very thing I place the first Rise of the Insolence of Servants;
it is so far from being owing to the ill Usage of Servants by their Masters,
that the unseasonable Lenity, Kindness, and Tenderness to Servants in this
Country, is the very Cause of it: In a Word, as I may truly say, that the poor
know not what it is to be Servants, so the Rich, I must acknowledge, know not
how to be Masters.

I remember a Passage of the famous Colonel Kirk, who commanded a Regiment of
English Soldiers in the French Service, and was famed for his Severity of
Discipline: He had ordered a Sergeant to correct a private Sentinel for some
Error in his Exercise, when he was seeing the Regiment handle their Arms; go
and knock that Dog down, says the Colonel; the Sergeant believing the Colonel
meant, that he should cane him only, did it very severely; when he had done it,
the Colonel called the Sergeant to him; when he came, lend me your Halbert,
says the Colonel, which the Sergeant did very submissively; look here, says the
Colonel, I Will show you how to knock a Soldier down, and with the Words, knocked
the poor Fellow down with his own Halbert: It is true, Kirk was said to be too
unmerciful and severe, but on the other-hand, he had the best disciplined
Regiment in the whole English Body, which consisted of five Brigades; he was
faithfully served, and if he had commanded his Men to have jumped into the
Fire, they would certainly have done it.

They have a Proverbial Saying in this Country, which, they say, was taken from
the late Usurper Oliver Cromwell, who his worst Enemies acknowledge to be a
good Soldier; they tell us that it was his Saying, that to have a good Army you
must hang well and pay well; and his known, that his own Regiment (which wore
white Clothes and were called Cromwell's Lambs,) would follow him through Fire and
Water, never were known to turn their Backs in the Field, but had cut in Pieces
many a Regiment of the best Cavalry the King had; while at the same time, it is
said, he had first or last pistol'd three of them with his own Hand, when they
had mutiny'd upon some Occasion or other, and refused to march.

There is since that, another Proverbial Saying upon the very Subject I am
upon, namely, That the English are the best Masters, and the worst Servants in
the World: If I were to invert that Saying, I would place it thus, That the
English have the uneasiest Servants, because they are the easiest Masters in
the World: In a Word, as I hinted just now, we may say, that in England the
Rich know not how to be Masters, and therefore the Poor know not how to be
Servants.

There is a Town in Hertfordsbire, not far from London, of which they say, That
there is nobody Poor enough to keep the Town-Hogs, or Rich enough to keep a
Hog-herd: This Town is an Emblem of the Country it self, but especially of the
Poor, and it is very much to the present Purpose, for though the Poor are too low
to keep a Servant, yet they are generally too high to be Servants themselves.

I cannot say, that the English are the best Masters in the World, but that
they are the easiest, kindest, tenderest Masters to Servants, that is certainly
true, and this is certainly the true Reason of the Mischief I am speaking of;
In a Word, as a slack Rein in Government encourages Factions and Rebellions, so
easy Masters make saucy Servants; the Master that will bear to be imposed upon
shall be imposed upon; nay, I have heard some say, he that will be insulted
ought to be insulted; I will not say so, because it is an Ingratitude in the
Servant, but I must allow it is an unpardonable Folly, and Mistake in the
Master.

I have often disguiss'd myself for this purpose, and mingled in among the Mob
of such Fellows as those, who we call Footmen; I have conversed with them over
a Mug of Porter, as they call their Alehouse Beer and Ale; and there how have I
heard them boast over their Master's Kindness to them, and how they could do
anything they pleased? that they valued not their Masters a Shilling, and that
they durst not be angry with them; that if they did quarrel, d -- 'em they
would be gone, and their Master could not do without 'em.

One Fellow was talking thus, and I entered into a short Dialogue with him about
it; I asked him what his Master would say to him if he got drunk, and if at
another time he staid out all-Night, and the like?

Say to me, says he, why, he would swear at me, it may be.

Well, says I, and what then?

Why then, says he, I would swear, it may be, as fast as he, and d -- as fast
he.

And it has been so then sometimes between you, says I, has it?

Yes, very often, says he:

Well, but that was when you was drunk, says I, wa'n't it?

Yes, said he:

But next Morning, says I, how was it with you both then?

O, says he, my Master would be a little surly, and it may be, not speak for a
good while, and I would take no Notice of it, but go about my Affairs, as I use
to do; and he would come-to again in a Day or two; but if he took any Notice, I
would tell him I had got a little Drink; that I did not remember I was rude, if
I was, I was very sorry, but I was in Drink, and the like.

Well, and what then, said I?

O, said he, I knew one good Word would pacify him, and he would be pleased
presently, for my Master is the easiest good-natured Man in the World.

Very well, says I, that is to say, your Master is the easiest Fool in the
World:

Nay, says he, I cannot deny but my Master is easy, and that makes his Servants
all play upon him, as they do:

Why, says I, do you not own you are very much obliged to your Master, for
being so goodhumour'd?

Yes, says he, but I must own I don't make him a bit the better Servant for
that:

How do you mean, says I, not a bit better?

Mean! says he, why, I am the easier to be drunk again, and to swear at him
again, because I know for a Word speaking I can make it all up again; and then
be drunk again, and ask Pardon again, and so on.

Well, but, said I, Jack, you must own you are a Dog, an ungrateful Dog to him,
to impose upon his good Nature in that Manner?

I don't value that a Farthing, says Jack, if my Master is a Fool, it is the
better for me, is it not; then I can be Master when I please?

But have you a good Place too, Jack, said I?

Yes, said he, a very good Place:

Well, then, says I, why don't you behave better, Jack, that you may not lose
it?

No, no, says he, my Master does not love to change Faces, he cannot abide to
put away Servants; we may do anything, and say anything, if we do but give
him a good Word the next Day, and say we beg his Pardon, all is over with him
presently.

Well, says I, and are not you all the better Servants for that?

No, no, says he, but much the worse, for there is scarce a Day in the Week, but
one or other of us give ourselves a loose, for we know we can make it up again
with a Word.

Prithee, Jack, said I, where did you learn this Principle of Honesty and
Gratitude?

O, says he, it is not so much Ingratitude, but it is Policy; an easy Master must
be used so, and we fare never the worse for it, for we keep him at Bay by it,
he expects no other.

Well but, Jack, says I, if you were a Master, would you take it of a Servant,
would you be such an easy Master?

O, says Jack, that is quite another Case; no, no, what, do you take me for, a
Fool?

Well, but how would you act, says I?

How, says he! D -- 'em, I Would see my Business done, and have it done at a Word,
or I Would make my Cane walk among them.

Well but, says I, what if your Servant d -- as fast as you, as you said just
now, and hectored you, as you say you do your Master, what would you do then?

Do, says he! I Would make 'em fly me as a Pidgeon does a Hawk; I Would open the Door,
and kick 'em out and bid 'em go to the Devil.

Very well, and they would go, I suppose, said I, and the next would be the
same, and so on.

Why then, says he, I would turn the next away in the same Manner, and so on as
you say, 'till I bad a good Servant, if I turned off a hundred in a Year.

And do you think then, said I, that this kind treating of his Servants is a
Fault in your Master, and that you are all the worse for it?

AY, most certainly, said he, and he will never have a good Servant while he
does so; a Fool-Master always makes a Rogue-Servant; I Will tell you a Story,
says Jack, and so he begins, as follows.

'There was a poor honest Master Weaver in our Country kept several
Apprentices, and (as I suppose) being poor, and having but little House-room,
he and his Apprentices lay all in a Chamber together, though not all in a Bed;
one Night his Master being gone to Bed, in cold Winter Weather, and the Candle
out, feeling a cold Wind come in somewhere, calls to his Boy thus, Jack, says
the Master; That is the Way of Servants replying, or answering in the Country,
when they are called; as to say Sir, or Madam, is to answer a Call in these
Parts about London.
Ay, Master, says Jack: I believe that Window is open, Jack, says the Master: I
believe it is Master, says Jack; so they lay still awhile. By-and-by the Master
feeling the Cold still, calls again, Jack: Ay, Master, says Jack: The Wind
blows very cold at that Window, Jack, says the Master: Ay, so it does, Master,
says Jack: Some time after, the Master finding the Boy did not stir, calls
again; Jack, says he: Ay, Master, says Jack: Would that Window was shut, Jack;
ay, would it was Master, says Jack; but still Jack did not stir: By this time
the Master's Patience was spent, and feeling the Cold come in at the Window
still, he rouzes up himself like a Man; Why, Jack, says he? Ay, Master, says
Jack again very impudently: You lazy Son of a Whore, says the Master, why don't
you rise and shut the Window there? Must I come and rouse you? Get up you Dog,
and shut the Window, Yes, Master, says Jack, now you speak in earnest; so he
gets up, and shuts the Window, and all was well.

And this, says I, is the true Picture of you Servants, is it?

Yes, indeed, says he, it is so all over the Nation, and will be so; while
Masters act without the Authority of Masters, Servants will never show the
Submission and Obedience of their Place.

And you learnt it of Jack, did you, said I?

Yes, says he, that was my first Lesson, indeed, but I am improved since by
farther Examples.

And pray, said I, what is that you call improved?

Why, says he, to do as little Work as I can, to get into good Company as soon
as ever my Master's Back's turned.

Ay, said I, to come home drunk, and be saucy too, is that a Part of it?

Why, as to that, says he, it will happen so sometimes, but that is nothing; I
do well enough with my Master for that, for give him but a good Word again,
when I come to myself, all is over with him presently.

Ay, said I, and that encourages you to do so again, perhaps, the next
Opportunity that offers.

Why, truly, says he, in all Difficulties, when Folks come off easy, they are
the forwarder to venture again: We had a great deal of Discourse more besides
this; I feigned my self to be a Servant too, but that I had a very severe
strict Master, that would not bear with a Servant being absent from his
Business; that if any of the Servants were heard to swear, it was with the
greatest Intercession imaginable that they avoided being turned away; but if
once they got drunk, they had no more to do, but strip, and be gone; off with
their Livery, take their Wages, and out of Doors; they had as good go
voluntarily as stay to be turned out, for I assure you, said I, my Master never
gave a Servant Occasion to be drunk twice in his Service.

That Is very hard, says he; why any poor Servant may be overtaken, and not
design it.

It Is all one, says I, our Master makes it so stated a Rule in the Family, that
it is no Hardship, because all the Servants know it as soon as they come into
the House.

Well, says he, and you are all sober Dogs, ar'n't you? Pray what kind of
Servants has your Master? are they good for anything?

All very good Servants, I assure you, said I, except myself.

Nay, says he, it is certainly the only way, your Master is in the right of it,
to be sure, and none but such Masters will have good Servants; but I would not
live with him if he would give me double Wages, for all that.

Why, would you not restrain yourself to have a good Place?

Not I, says he, it is not the Way among Servants at this time; I have been used
to be Master wherever I have been, and I cannot bear those strict Orders of
Families, not I; Confinement will not do with me, I must drink with my old Friends
sometimes.

Well, so do we too, said I, for if we ask Leave, we are never denied; he is as
civil and kind that way, to us, as we can desire; only we must keep our time
when we promise to return, and not come home Drunk; and I do not see any great
Harm in that, not I.

No Harm in it! says he; why it is making a Jail of his House, such a Service
would be Bridewell to me; I would as lieu beat Hemp, says he, every jot, and
then he poured out two or three G -- d d -- mn him's at such a Master; but all
the way he owned that they were the Masters that got good Servants; only that
he would not serve any Man in England upon such Terms, not he, for he would
have his Liberty, ay that he would.

From this short Discourse between this Fellow and I, you may see the state of
the Case, in sbort, that it is the Easiness and Kindness of Masters in England
that has ruined the Servants; you will say indeed, it is a Token of a prodigious
Baseness in the Minds of the Poor of this Country, that they may be forced by
Discipline, but are not to be obliged by Kindness, and that, said he, cannot be
helped.

Among the civil Usage giveu to Servants in England, I must place the
Privileges they have in their Places: The Huntsmen have their Field-Money, and
are allowed to carry out the Hounds upon all Occasions, to gratify the
Gentlemen round, that is to say, to get their Field-Money.

The Game-keepers are trusted with Powers to take away Guns and Dogs from the
meaner People, and they abuse the Trust, as you shall hear, and the Game too.

Head-Carters and upper-Plowmen are often sent to Market, and entrusted both to
buy and to sell, and you shall hear how they improve.

Your Coachmen have Privileges of their own making, namely, of having
Compliments from the Tradesmen, that is to say, all those who supply you with
things needful to the Equigage; such as the Coachmaker, Harnessmaker,
Corn-chandler, Farrier, etc. and the like is the Case with all the Stewards,
Butlers, etc. These are Advantages which our Gentlemen in France are too wise
to put into the Hands of Mercenaries and Scoundrels, such as many times have
them here; I assure you it is far from obliging these Gentlemen, as they call
themselves, who I am talking of; far from engaging them to be more faithful to
their Masters, more careful of their Masters Interest, or more affectionate to
their Service; on the contrary, it fills their Pockets with Money, and that
ill-gotten too; so that it eats a Hole into their Consciences, and makes them
scruple no Villainy to increase it; that Money makes them proud, insolent, and
unsufferable within-Doors, and drunken and wicked without-doors: But let me
take them in their several Capacities acting to these Principles, and consider
them apart.

Your Huntsman, if you do not give him Leave to take the Hounds out when he
pleases, and can get Company, shall take care you shall have little Sport
enough when you go out your self; nay, he shall batter your Horses, baulk your
Hounds, and show you no Sport, or to be sure kill you nothing; while at the
same time, he turns Poacher for the unfair Sportsmen, and shall show them a
Hare sitting as often as they please, for the usual Bribe of a Schilling: If
you find him out, and make a Fault of it, he turns short upon you, and tells
you saucily, It is his Fees, or Vails, (as they call it here) and if you would
Hunt in Company, as other Gentlemen do, that the Huntsman might get his
Field-Money, he would not do so; Field-Money is Money given by all the
Gentlemen in the Field where they are hunting, as often as they find a Hare
fitting.
that is to say, he would have you keep a Pack of Hounds, like my Lord Mayor,
not for your self, but for your Huntsman, that he may get all the young Rakes
round the Country, and all the loose People he can, into the Field, and hunt
what, and where, and how they bid him, for the mere sake of his Field-Money,
which they call the Huntsman's Fees; till they beat out the Hounds, and hackney
them till they are good for little or nothing; and if you will not do that, you
shall, as above, go out two or three Days together perhaps, and have no Sport
your self; kill nothing, nay perhaps, find nothing, while your Huntsman, who at
the same time knows of a Brace or two of Hares sitting, shall on purpose to
miss of them, draw quite another Way; if you happen to dislike, and bid him go
this or that Way, he will tell you, he beat all that Ground in the Morning,
before you came out; or persuade you, that he knows where there is a Hare that
way that he is beating, and so draw you off from the Game that he is not
willing you should find, till you are thoroughly fatigued, and your Horses too;
and if he lets you kill one single Hare, you are to take it for a great Favor.

The next is your Ranger, or Park-keeper: It is his Business not only to range
the Park, and see that the Pale is in repair, and the Covert in order, but to
preserve the Deer; and he has several large Privileges; some, when any Deer is
killed for his Master's House; but greater, when any Presents are made of Deer
alive, or of Venison; and these Advantages make the Keeper's Place a very good
thing.

But instead of being the more faithful, unless you consider him extraordinary,
and every now-and-then give him Leave to sell a fat Buck for you, to some great
Feast, and the like, you shall feel the Consequence of it; for you shall have
the Park never fail of being robbed three or four times in every Season, and
the best Bucks carried off, four or five Brace at a time: Then to solve his own
Credit, he has the Impudence to accuse several of the young Fellows round the
Country, who know nothing at-all of the Matter; and if any of them cannot give
a good Account of themselves, they are at least, loaded with a Scandal, and
render's suspected not only there, but to all the Gentlemen in the Country;
when at the same time your Keeper has Horses sent to fetch the Venison, by his
own Order, and as punctually as his Master himself, from certain Pastry-Cooks,
and sly Merchants in London, who deal in such Goods; and perhaps you chance, if
you come to London, to give a couple of Guineas to some or other of them, for a
Haunch of your own Venison: On the other hand, if in the Country you want any
Venison for your own Table, or to make a Present of to any neighboring
Gentlemen, your Park keeeper shall tell you, there is very little fit for your
Use, and that if you kill any more 'till next Season, you will spoil your Park.

This is so known a Practice, that I need but converse with a few Gentlemen in
the Neighborhood of this City, and I might furnish you with a great many
diverting Stories upon this Subject; and two or three Park-keepers are, I
think, at this very time in Prison for such Rogueries.

This indeed may be said to be a kind of Thieving, and so not to come directly
into the Subject I am upon; but as it is one of these Sorts of Thieving, which
the Servants of this Age will not allow to be Robbery, I place it rather upon
the insolent Temper of the Men; for it is certain, those that trade with them in
this wicked Trade, call it nothing but a Love of Sport, and to have an honest
Keeper or two befriend them in it; but the Laws are of late more severe in this
Case than formerly, and we shall ('it is hoped) find some Examples made ever
long, of which I shall not fail to give you an Account.

But I return to the Villainy which more immediately respects the Persons of
their Masters: The next is the Game keeper, or as it was called formerly, the
Falconer.

Your Game keeper shall lead you about, with your Dogs and your Nets, and
hardly show you a Covey of Birds, in riding over a whole Lordship: At the same
time he is under Contract with the Higglers, for so many Dozen of Partridges in
the Season, which he supplies by going out in the Night with a Pair of
Trammels, with which he kills all the Birds about your Estate.

If you send him out with your Gun, he shall go about all the Morning, and
(perhaps) send you home a Hen Pheasaut, and at the same time send all the rest
to Market; if he shoots a Woodcock or two now and then, or a Snipe, you must
count it a Rarety, while at the same time he sets his Snares in all the springy
swampy Places in the Woods, and near you, and takes from five to ten Brace in a
Night.

In a Word, while the Gentlemen in the Parliament House are making Laws to
preserve the Game, their own Servants are the greatest Poachers in the Country;
and under Pretense of killing the Game for their Masters, they make a Property
of the Sport, and supply the Hucksters and Carriers with all kinds of Fouls,
which the Law forbids them to touch.

It was on this very Account, that the Gentlemen found it necessary to get
farther Laws made for preserving the Game, and particularly one which forbids,
upon severe Penalties, any Partridges, Pheasants, Quails, etc. being sold in
the Shops or Markets; or by any Higlers, Poulterers, or such Persons
whatsoever; but notwithstanding that, and even in Spite of Laws and Penalties,
the Trade goes on still.

By this Means all the Laws for preserving the Game are only made Laws for
raising the Price of the Game in the Poulterer's Shops; for as it is a kind of
contraband Trade, they drive it on clandestinely, and underhand; but Hares,
Partridges, Pheasants, etc. are to be bought now as easily as before, only they
make the Buyer pay double Price; and whereas a good Hare might have been bought
before for a Shilling or eighteen Pence, now they will have four or five
Shillings for it, but still the Game is as much destroyed as before.

From these very modest Fellows come we next to the Plowmen and Carters,
Husbandmen, and the like.

Suppose you now to be a Gentleman in England, that keeping Part of your Estate
in your own Hands, keep also a Head Carter, or Baily, to manage your Team of
Horse, see your Land plowed, order the Cows, the Sheep, and the like; the
Servants are all under this Man, as the Director of their Labor; he orders
them when to plow, when to sow, and in what Places; how, and where, and when
the Sheep are to be folded, the Calves and Lambs suckled, the Fat Cattle sold
off, and all such things; and sometimes he is trusted so far, as to be sent to
Market to sell what is to be disposed of: In all which he understands his
Business to be, that nobody shall cheat you but himself; while you are easy at
all he does he is easy with you too, because he makes his Market of you, but if
you straiten him, and pretend to look after him, his Manners are all vanished
on a sudden, and he is as sour and surly you scarce know how to speak to him.

If you anger him, or find Fault with his Management, he shall in his Passion
whip your Horses, starve your fatting Swine, suckle other Men's Calves with
your Cows, and carry on your Affairs with a general Neglect, 'till you give him
some kind Words again, and so make him Satisfaction, by putting it into his
Power to cheat you again (if it be possible) worse than he did before.

Every Market Day, it is supposed, you send him to Market with something or
other of the Produce of the Farm; it is not worth your while to go (perhaps) 7
or 8 Miles, to sell a Score of Sheep, or a Couple of incalv'd Cows, or a Load
of wheat or Barley; but Thomas, the Carter, goes to Market with them, and when
he returns, he very honestly tells you he sold them for so much; when it is very
ordinary to have him sell them for 40 s. in 10 l. more than he gives you an
Account of: If you dare but suppose, that they might sell for more, he begins
with you (for Thieves are always the first to cry out of being suspected) he
tells you, that he wonders your Worship will not take the Trouble to go to
Market yourself; that he would much rather you would go, and see every thing
sold to your Mind; that he would go with all his Heart, and stand in the
Market, you need but be at the Tavern hard by, and he would bring every Chapman
to you, and your Worship might make your own Bargains, take the Money yourself,
and so be satisfied that you are not cheated; that he thinks nothing of the
Trouble of going to Market, but hates the trust of it, for that if the Markets
run low, it always makes a poor Servant be suspected.

All this while going to Market is his only Aim, and he is undone if he does
not; and yet if you went yourself, unless it were without him too, he would
cheat you to your Face, and whisper a low Price to the Buyer, though he shared
the Profit with him; and so cheat you of 40 s. to get but 20 of it for himself.

I would not load innocent Men willingly, but this I may venture to say, viz.
That such is the Degeneracy of the Servants of this Country, that, in short,
except here and there an extraordinary Servant, and I scarce know where that
extraordinary Man is to be found; I say, except such an extraordinary one, no
Gentleman can send his Servant with Corn or Cattle to Market, but he shall be
cheated.

It is but the very Week these Sheets were writing that a Gentleman of my
Acquaintance, living in the Country, sent up about 50 Load of Hay to London by
Water, to sell, entrusting a Man to sell it for him, intending to send a much
greater Quantity, Hay being this Year between three and four Pound per Load, at
London Market.

His Servant gave him an Account of the first ten Load, as sold ten Shillings
per Load cheaper than (as he found by neighboring Farmers) Hay was sold for
those very Market Days; this made him Master of so much Jealousy, as to set a
more faithful Person, as a Spy, to watch his Servant at the Market, and (if
possible) to inform himself how he sold; by the means of this Intelligence he
arrived to a Discovery, that his Servant had put 10 s. per Load in his Pocket,
out of every Load of Hay of the whole Parcel, having sold it for so much more
than he gave his Master an Account of; and the doing himself Justice upon this
fraudulent Servant is now upon his Hands.

Again, come to the Plowman, and mere laboring Husbandman; if he sows in the
Field, or threshes in the Barn, he will cheat you of your Corn, even to your
Face: A Country Farmer that I knew, employed a poor Man to thresh Wheat in his
Barn, and every Evening, to prevent his being cheated, looked upon the Heap of
Corn, locked up the Barn-Doors, and sent the poor Thresher home to his Cottage,
seeing him out himself, that he might be sure he was not wronged.

But one Day, having some Suspicion of his Man, he took Occasion to send the
Thresher out in a Hurry, telling him there were Hogs gotten into a Close newly
sowed with Wheat, and which lay near the Barn; when the Man was gone, he makes
that an Opportunity to search about the Barn, and in a Corner of the Mow, he
finds hid a little leather Bag, with about half a peck of Wheat in it; he took
no Notice, nor did he remove the Bag, but cuts a little Bit out of it, with a
pair of Scissars, toward the top, so that the Corn would not run out, that he
might know his Bag again, and leaves it as he found it: At Night he dismissed
the Thresher, as usual, who walked away; but as soon as he was gone, the Master
runs a nearer way, and meets him in a narrow Field which he knew he would go
through, and finds the little Bag of Wheat upon his Head, carrying it Home, as
he supposed.

He did not appear angry, or surpised, atall, but after some other trifling
Discourse, he says to him, and art thou going home directly? Yes, says the
Thresher; and what have thou got there, Goodman Thomas? says the Farmer; I
doubt that is some of my Corn: The Fellow would have denied it a little at
first, but seeing himself discovered, Why yes, says he, it is some of the
Sweepings of the Floor, but 'twas such a little, said he, I thought you would
not scruple such a small Parcel, it is nothing but what you would have thrown to
the Poultry: Poultry! Thomas, says the Farmer, but my Poultry are my own, and
they help to pay my Rent; I assure you, I thought you would not have carried
away any of my Corn.

Here Goodman Thomas began to be surly, seeing himself detected, and said, he
never worked for any Master before, that would not give him a handful of Corn
for his Cocks and Hens: Well but Goodman Thomas, and so perhaps would l, says
the Farmer, if you had assk'd me, but I don't love to have it taken without my
Leave: The Fellow grumbl'd, and began to be saucy, and offered to go: Well,
well, Goodman Thomas, says the Farmer, I expect you will bring it back-again in
the Morning when you come to Work.

Next Morning he came to Work; but when the Farmer asked for the Bag of Corn,
Goodman Thomas made light of it, and said, he hoped he would not stand with him
for such a small Matter: No, Goodman Thomas, said the Farmer, if you will
ingenuously own how often you have done so; how often, says Thomas, why as
often as we want it at home, I always take a little for our Baking: Why Master,
says he, don't all the Threshers for you, do the same? I hope not, says the
Farmer; I assure you, they that Thresh for me, shall not, if I can help it:
Well, well, says Goodman Thomas, see where you will get a Man to Thresh for you,
that don't do it: I thought it no Crime, not I, and so laughed it off, and his
Master forgave him, but dismissed him from his Work.

But Goodman Thomas's Words were all made good, for as this made the Farmer
more jealous, and consequently more careful, the next three Threshers he hired,
he took them all in the same Fact; with this Difference only, that as Thomas
stole under half a Peck, one of them stole a Bushel at a time, and the other
Two about half as much each: So hard is it to get a Servant now, but will not
only defraud you, and cheat you, but like Goodman Thomas, grin and laugh in
your Face when they are discovered, and think it very hard to be restrained; or
huff and insult you, and tell you, it is no Crime; that it is their Fees, and
they expect it; and that they would not work with you for such Wages, if it was
not for the other Advantages they make.

And it is on this Account that I name the Behavior of these sort of Servants,
I mean Husbandmen; for it is the same Pride and and Insolence by which the
Footmen and Houshold-Servants are made saucy, that the other are made thievish
and dishonest; and this is what we must expect will follow in time, among all
the rest of our Servants; for when once they grow saucy and impudent, they will
not be long before they grow Thieves, it is a natural Consequence of the thing;
for when once Servants are arrived to a Contempt of their Masters Persons, they
can never be supposed to have a sincere Regard to their Interest; and if they
come to be regardless of their Interest, they will soon come to have the same
Disregard to their Property.

There is a kind of a Contest in England between Masters and Servants, which I
never met with any-where else, concerning Honesty, and the Servants here have
as odd a Notion of Honesty, as really they have of Liberty; and this false
Notion of Honesty is such, that, in short, it makes Thieves of half the
Servants in England, and yet at the same time, they have the Impudence to call
themselves very honest Fellows, and would think it very hard to be denied a
Character as such, when they go from you: You see Goodman Thomas thought taking
a little Wheat for his Family, for their baking, was no Dishonesty, 'twas what
everybody did, and why should not he do it as well as another?

I mentioned the honest thieving of their Time before, which they think nothing
of; their making their Masters pay for those Hours which they spend at the
Alehouse to get drunk, I need not repeat it, that is one.

Leaving their Masters, and running from their Work when there is the greatest
Necessity of their Service, is another: I knew a poor Farmer had his three
Menservants run from him in the Prime of his Harvest, being got into Company,
and drunk, and left the poor Man destitute of Hands to get in his Corn.

A Soldier deserting his Colors, especially in time of Service, is shot to
Death, without Mercy, and reason good, because the Safety of his King and
Country is betrayed by his deserting, as much as it is possible for him to
betray it.

A Servant who hires himself to a poor Farmer, to do his Business, and runs
from him in Harvest, as much as in him lies betrays him, and ruins him; and
this very thing is so notoriously practiced at this time, and is so much a
Grievance, that the Parliament, since my writing these Letters, have it under
Consideration to oblige Servants to perform their Agreement, and stay out the
Year; and to empower the Justices of Peace, and proper Officers, to punish
fugitive Servants; and I doubt not but we shall soon have a very severe Law
upon that Subject. But of this hereafter.

I am, etc.

LETTER X.
Dear Sir,
I Intended in this Letter to have entered into the great Article of the
Behavior of Women Servants, which, I assure you, is at this time grown up to
be as great a Grievance as the other; and I have by me several little Histories
of their Behavior; particularly with respect to the Havoc they make of the
Reputation of the Families they live in; their Pride, haughty and insolent
Behavior; gay dressing, and profusion of Clothing; by which it is now become
frequent in middling Families, that the Chambermaids have better Laces, and
finer Silks than the Mistresses, and it is not easy to know the Servants from
the Daughters of a Family; and some of these little Histories would have
pleased you very well: As particularly of a Gentleman in a Visit lately at a
House of good Fashion, who being recommended to one of the Gentleman's
Daughters, mistook the Chambermaid for her who was designed for his Mistress,
and unhappily stepping up to her, saluted her first, which Misfortune cost him
the loss of his Mistress, and the impudent Wench the loss of her Place.

I should also have furnished you with some very good Accounts of the Disasters
of three of four several Ladies of Fortune, sold, or rather delivered into the
Hands of Scoundrels, by their Maidservants; the Ladies wheedl'd in to marry
them, as Fortunes, and the Wenches impudently assisting the Ravishers, for they
could be called little less, to violate that Honor which was with too easy a
Confidence put into their Hands; one of which She Devils we have since seen
deservedly brought to the Gallows

I should likewise have diverted you with the over-and-above Insolence of
Female Servants in the Duty of their Family-Business, very proper for the
Information of the Senior Ladies, and for their Caution in the managing such
Creatures, and for their Conduct when it is their Lot; as whose is it not
sometimes, to be afflicted with saucy and insolent Servants?

But I am already swelled to a Bulk beyond my Expectation, and must forbear
dwelling any longer upon this Part, however entertaining it may be: The
Contents of my last Letter brings me necessarily back to that Part of your
Enquiry which respects the Laws which we have in England against this Evil, and
how those Laws are put in Execution: I remember your Words were, That surely we
are deficient in England in point of Regulation; and that we want good Laws to
secure the due Subordination of the People; you insinuate, that it could not
be, that Servants could thus set up to be Masters, and govern even the Masters
themselves, and their Families also, as it is apparent they do, if we had Laws
sufficient to enforce their Obedience, or if those Laws for enforcing
Obedience, were sufficiently observed, or duly executed.

My Answer indeed is, That our Deficiency is double. 1. That the Laws now in
Force are not sufficient; the Laws are good, but it is long since they were
made; the Circumstances of things are altered in the Nation; the way of living
is altered; the Rate of Things advanced; Wages are higher; Pride increased;
Vice grown rampant; Drunkenness (which is the Ruin of Servants) broke in like a
Flood; Good-Manners declined; and in a Word, all Sense of Subordination is lost
among us. 2. Those Laws which we have, and which are in Force, are ill
executed; Magistrates are degenerated in themselves, and Vice is crept in, even
on the Bench; so that it is not so easy to get the Drunkenness and
Debaucheries of the Poor discountenanced and punished, as it would be if the
Magistrates were untainted with the Crimes they are to punish. 3. But lastly,
which is yet worse, the very Masters and Mistresses of Families themselves, by
their Remissness in taking legal Remedies against the Insolence of Servants,
and against their refusing to serve and submit to their said Masters and
Mistresses, as the Law directs, is the great, and indeed, the chief Reason why
the Laws have not their due Effect upon the lower Class of Mankind, and why a
due Subordination is not preserved between Master and Servant, as the Law
directs.


But you will be agreeably surpised, when I shall tell you, that all this, and
not this only, but all that I have already said upon the Subject of Servants,
is confirmed by the Parliament which is now sitting, having taken this very
Matter into their Consideration, and thinking it worth their while to inspect
the Laws which are now in Being between Masters and Servants, in order to a new
Regulation, and in order to making those Laws more effectual.

It is evident that the Legislature sees the Necessity of rectifying this
Matter; they see that the Rudeness and Insolence of Servants is an unsufferable
Burden; that it is become so general, as to deserve the Name of a National
Grievance, and to call for an additional Force of Law to suppress it.

In this the Parliament acts as the ancient Romans, who, when their Slaves
rebelled, resolved to arm themselves with Whips, for their Correction, rather
than with Swords, to subdue them by Conquests, scorning to attack them on the
equal foot of Soldiers, and Men of Honor; or to let it be said, that they
stooped to the Fear of their Arms; but went out armed against them as a base
and Scoundrel Race, whose Spirits were levelled to their Condition, and knew
not how to show their Faces to those who they used to tremble at before.

Thus our Parliament here, in England, have acted in this Case; for the Law is
a Whip for the Offender; the Authority of the Lictor is armed with these Rods
and Axes, and supported by the Magistrate; and the base, rebelling, insulting
Servant is ordered to remember his proper Station, and look that he behaves
with due Obedience to his Superior, or to expect the Correction which his
Insolence deserves.

This coming at the very Juncture of my writing these Letters, gives a very
satisfactory Sanction to my Opinion, viz. That the Grievance was flagrant, and
that I was not giving you the Trouble of writing to you on a Subject which was
trifling, and not worth Notice; I shall therefore stop here for the present,
and wait awhile, till we see what sufficient Provision the Parliament will
make in this Exigence for preserving the Government of our Families from the
Encroachments and Usurpation of our Servants; for really, as things are now,
Masters, or Heads of Families, are no more Masters; Subordination seems to be
at a Crisis, and the Government is shared between the Head and the Tail, the
Master and his hired Servant; the last receives the Wages indeed, but the Work
is done when and how the hired Gentlemen please to perform; and if they think
fit, it is often not done at-all.

I shall give you here, as a Conclusion to the whole Work, a Representation
which has been prepared, for the Instruction of, and due Caution to the
Housekeepers of Great Britain, in this very needful Case; I dare say you will
be pleased with the Sight of it, because it offers something toward a Remedy
of this flagrant Mischief; and which, if the Advice is taken, we may be in
Hopes, that in Conjunction with the new Provision now making in the Parliament,
Servants may in a little time be brought to their Senses again, be made to know
themselves a little, and the Peace and due Government of Families may be again
restored.

THE CONCLUSION.
BEING AN Earnest and Moving Remonstrance TO THE Housekeepers of Great Britain,
In Order to The better Regulating the Manners of Their Servants.
Gentlemen and Ladies,
'AS the Insolence of your Servants is your great Grievance, and gives you
daily Offense, so I cannot but believe, it is very agreeable to you, to hear
that the Parliament has at length taken this Matter into their Consideration.

This is an unanswerable Testimony of not the Necessity of the Remedy only, but
also of the Weight and Oppression of the Disease; that the Complaint is not
trifling, or the Subject too mean to be concerned about: We read, that in
Athens, in Sparta, and also in Rome, but especially in the former, the due
Subjection of Servants was always thought worthy the Care of the Commonwealth;
even the Diet and the Habits of Servants were provided for in Licurgus his
Institutions; the first he provided for, that the poor might not be oppressed,
and the latter, that they might not forget that they were Servants.

I. He provided, that the Masters should feed their Servants sufficiently, that
their Strength might be supported for their Labor; and then he provided that
the Servants should wear a particular Badge of their Servitude, that they might
be known, upon all Occasions, to be what they were, namely Servants. N.B. This
was for hired Servants, not Slaves.

Whether our Parliament will think fit to go this Length, I know not; but this
I may appeal to yourselves for, that if they do not distinguish the Servants
from the Masters and Mistresses, the Masters and Mistresses must find some Ways
to distinguish themselves from their Servants, or ( as already frequently
happens) the Clark will soon be worshipped for the Justice, and the Maid be
kissed instead of the Mistress.

The ancient Laws for Regulation of Servants, and for ascertaining their Wages,
and for obliging single Persons to go to Service, are brought into Contempt;
not so much that the Reason and Necessity of such Laws are not the same as
ever, or if altered, are only greater and more pungent than ever; but because
Masters and Mistresses have slackened the Reins of Family Government, and given
a loose to the Pride and Vanity of Servants, and have by that Remissness let
them, as it were, by immemorial Custom, go lawless, 'till their Servants do not
only forget, but indeed not so much as know that any such Laws were ever in
being, much less that they are still in Force among us.

As, Gentlemen and Ladies, it is by your Lenity, and Remissness in governing
your Servants, that they have forgot to obey, it lies at your Door to retrieve
this Loss, by recovering your selves, and reassuming the Authority which you
have laid aside so long, 'till you seemed to have lost it.

In a Word, it is for you, to be Masters and Mistresses, and then you will have
Servants be Servants again; for as has been said in public, if Masters will be
trampled on, they shall be trampled on, and they that will be insulted, may
expect it: It Is an old agreed Maxim, that Good Masters make Good Servants, but
then it is to be debated what is to be understood by the Term a Good Master.

He that, being remiss in his Management, holds the Rein of his Family
Government with a slack Hand, or (as it were) throws them on the Necks of his
Servants, may be called an Easy Master, but cannot be called a Good Master: To
be a good Master is to be a Master that will do his Servant Justice, and that
will make his Servant do him Justice; he may be kind to a Servant, that will
let him sleep when he should work, but then he is not just to himself, or a
good Governor to his Family; but he is not a good, or a kind Master, no not to
the Servant himself, who will let him be drunk, when he should work, and so of
all other Vices; and therefore, in a Word, however plain and unpleasant a Truth
it may be, this is certain, it is a needful, a seasonable, and an unanswerable
Truth, that the Want of Family Government is the Ruin of Servants; and it is
since Family Discipline decayed in England, and the good Example of Masters
ceased, that Servants have got the Head and Mastership over us; and until
something of an orderly and virtuous Governing of Families comes in Fashion
again among us, I fear that no Laws, Acts of Parliament, or public
Regulations, will be effectual to this Purpose.

Laws are of no Force where Vice and Scandal ennervate the Authority of the
Master; drunken and disorderly Families will be filled with drunken and
disorderly Servants; nay indeed, they are Seminaries of such, and send them
abroad fully instructed in Wickedness, to spread the Contagion in other
Families, and ruin the Servants wherever they come.

Wherefore for God-sake, and for your own Sakes, nay, for your Servants Sakes,
let Family Government be restored; and though you should not reform yourselves,
which it may be hoped this would a little move you to, yet reform your
Families, and suffer no drunken, no swearing, disorderly Servant, to stay in
your Houses; if all Gentlemen would dismiss such, and refuse Certificates of
Behavior to them, they must reform, or starve.

I am not to dictate to Parliaments, nor I hope do they need it, but an
Overture or Proposal may be accepted from Without-Doors, without any Offense: I
would then most humbly propose, in Order to the complete Regulation of
Servants, a few Heads only, which, if duly observed, would go a great way to
humble the Servants of this Age, and make them behave after a much different
Manner than they do now. 1. That if any menial Servant swore an Oath, or cursed
any Person, or was disordered in Drink, within his Master's House, or within --
Yards of the House, or Outhouses, Walls and Gardens of the same, and his
Master or Mistress hearing, or being informed of the same, did not immediately
cause such Servant to be carried before a Justice of the Peace, or dismiss, and
turn them away, he should forfeit 10 l. Half to the Informer, and Half to the
Servant himself. 2. That if any menial Servant should swear at, or curse to his
Face, their Master or Mistress, from whom they receive Wages, or strike, or
offer to strike, or threaten their said Master or Mistress, they should, upon
legal Conviction, be transported for 21 Years, not to be in the Master's Power
to remit the Sentence, and the Master not prosecuting to forfeit 500 l. 3. That
if any Master or Mistress so turning away a Servant, for swearing or cursing,
or for being disordered in Drink, shall at (or after) their so turning the said
Servant away, give a Certificate of good Behavior to them, or any Certificate
at-all, without expressing the said Offense for which they were turned away,
the said Master to forfeit 10 l. Half to the Informer, and Half to the Poor. 4.
That if any Master or Mistress should discover, or detect any Servant of Fraud,
Theft, Breach of Trust, or other Dishonesty, to the Value of 40 s. or upwards,
and should, after such Discovery, give a Certificate of good Behavior, to such
Servant, the Master or Mistress so discovering the Fraud, should be liable to
make good all Loss or Damage which the said Servant, or Servants, should
occasion in the next Place they go to, or where they were received by Virtue of
that Certificate. The Forms of Certificates to Servants to be settled by an Act
of Parliament.

5. That any menial Servant, turned away from his Master or Mistress, for lying
out of their Houses, without Leave, or for giving saucy or insolent Language to
his Master, should not be allowed to enter into any other Service, or offer
themselves to be hired to any other Place, 'till they had been out of Place at
least six Months. 6. That no Master or Mistress shall take any menial Servant
into their House, without a full Certificate for their Behavior in the last
Places they served in; which Certificate the said Servant shall deliver to
their new Place, when hired; and if any Master or Mistress should venture to
hire a Servant without such a Certificate, they should have no Remedy by Law
against such said Servant, whatever Disorders they committed, Murder excepted.
7. That every Certificate of Behavior, given to a Servant, shall mention the
particular Reason of their being dismissed. 8. No Certificate to be refused a
Servant that dismisses himself, and on Complaint, the Justices to grant a
Certificate, if a Master unjustly declines it.


If these Conditions, or such like, were enacted by a Law, and strictly
observed by all the Heads of Families in Great Britain, I durst boldly say,
that the Great Law of Subordination would again take Place, Servants would
learn to know themselves, and Family Government would be soon restored.

One of the great Evils, which lies heavy upon Families now, in this particular
Case of taking Servants, is the going about from House to House, to take
Characters and Reports of Servants, or by Word of Mouth; and especially among
the Ladies this Usage prevails, in which the good Nature and Charity of the
Ladies to ungrateful Servants, goes so far beyond their Justice to one another,
that an ill Servant is very seldom detected, and the Ladies yet excuse
themselves by this, namely, that they are loath to take away a poor Servant's
Good-Name, which is starving them; and that they may perhaps mend, when they
come to another Family, what was amiss before, which indeed seldom happens.

This is the Reason why little is got by such Enquiries, and the Ladies often
run as much Risque in taking a Servant after such Enquiries, as if they had not
enquired at-all; and this is the Reason why so many Servants get Places again,
who have been Whores, Thieves, Drunkards, Swearers, and everything that is
vile, in the Places where they had served before; and all this while the Ladies
are cheating and abusing one another, in Charity to their Servants.

It is Time to put an End to this unseasonable Goodnature; it is time to be
just to yourselves, and not to be afraid of speaking Truth, for fear of ruining
what we call a Poor Servant: The Care of not being ruined, ought to be their
own, and they ought to consider (when they go to Service) that they are upon
their Behavior, for their Lives, and that to misbehave, is to be undone.

Nor would any of these Severities, should they be called so, make the Service
of good and well-behaving Servants at-all the more severe or difficult; because
such a Servant ill-us'd might always quit with Advantage, and might before a
Justice obtain a Certificate without any Expense, expressing the Hardship they
suffered, and the Reason of their coming off.

And after all I might appeal, even to the well-behaving Servants in England,
to put in their Requests, and to tell us, what there is for them either to fear
or desire, which the Laws of England do not provide for: It is evident the
Grievance is not of the Servants side; they do not really, and indeed cannot
complain; they would no doubt be content things should lie just as they are,
but it cannot be; the Cry is loud against them, every Part of the Nation
complains, and I humbly move the good Housekeepers of England, that they would
not now give it over, 'till they see the Reformation of Family Discipline
effectually made, which I hope these few Articles would soon bring to pass:
Laws have already been made on the Servants side, for their more easy obtaining
Justice, for the better Recovery of Wages, and for obliging Masters to perform
their Contracts and Covenants; the Justices are empowered to relieve them in
the Country, and the Chamberlains and Magistrates in the Corporations; every
poor Apprentice Boy may complain, if he has not Food and Clothes fitting, and
convenient, according to his Indentures; and every Plowman, and poor
Servant-Maid, may complain to the Justices of Peace.

Nay, in Favor of faithful and well-behaving Servants, the most favorable Law
that was ever contrived for their Encouragement, was passed here in Parliament;
namely, That every menial Servant, how remote soever from the Place of their
Birth, yet remaining but one Year at a Time in the Place they were last hired
to, is by that one Year's faithful Service entitled to a Parish Settlement in
the Place; and if any Disaster happens to them, so as that they are disabled
for Service, by Blindness, Lameness, or otherwise, the Parish is obliged to
take care of, and provide for them, as long as they live, as much as if they
had been born there: I doubt few Servants consider the Favor they enjoy by
this Law, at leastnot 'till they come to want the Help of it.

But on the other-hand, the insolent Servant, without Regard to Master or
Mistress, to Justice or Reason, packs up, and runs away when he pleases, leaves
the Husbandman in the middle of his Harvest, leaves his Garden in the Prime of
the Season, leaves the Manufactures in the middle of the Spring Trade; and
after having received his Wages in the Dead of Winter, when there was no Work
to be had, flies when the Days grow long, and his Service useful, and goes
abroad where he can get the best Pay, and for all this the Master has no Remedy.

New Laws therefore seem absolutely necessary to enforce the Obedience of
Servants. and oblige them to continue in their Places, according to the Time
they respectively agree for, when they are hired: Nothing can effectually do
this, but a strict Obliging all Persons, whether Gentlemen, or Husbandmen
Artificers, Manufacturers, or whatever they are, who employ Servants, or
Day-Labourers, neither to hire or employ any Servant, Workman, or Labourer,
without a Certificate of their being fairly discharged, and having honestly
behaved at the last Place they worked at, though it was but for one Day.

This Certificate would secure their Behavior everywhere; it would be a Pass
to them from Place to Place; it would vindicate them from all Charges on
Suspicion, either in traveling from Place to Place, or stopping in any Place
in their Way, and so it would be of Service to the traveling Poor, and prevent
their being wrongfully taken up by Hue and Cry, or other Pursuit, as is often
unavoidably their Case.

And it would be of Service to the Public Justice, for the more easy
apprehending of Thieves and Vagabonds; for in case of Robberies, and Mischief,
every honest Man being furnished to give a ready Account of his Station from
Place to Place, those who were not able to give such legal Satisfaction, would
be immediately taken hold of.

Now therefore is the time for the People of England to rescue themselves out
of the Hands of the worst Slavery they were ever yet in, since Magna Charta was
restored to them; I mean, a Bondage to their own Servants: For as they say in
Turkey, that a Renegado is worse than a Turk, and that a Slave makes the worst
Patroon, so must add, that Insolent Servants are the worst Masters.

FINIS.
Just Published,
THE Fortunate Mistress: Or a History of the Life and vast Variety of Fortunes
of Mademoiselle de Beleau, afterward called the Countess de Wintselsheim, in
Germany. Being the Person known by the Name of the LADY ROXANA, in the Time of
King Charles II.

Printed for T. Warner, at the Black-Boy in Paternoster Row; W. Meadows at the
Angel in Cornhill; W. Pepper at the Crown in Maiden-Lane, Covent Garden; S.
Harding, at the Post House in St. Martin's-Lane; and T. Edlin at the
Prince's-Arms against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand. 1724.


