LIFE; OR, THE ADVENTURES OF WILLIAM RAMBLE, ESQUIRE.

By the Author of MODERN TIMES; OR THE ADVENTURES OF GABRIEL OUTCAST.

IN THREE VOLUMES. VOL. III.

LONDON: Printed for Dr. TRUSLER, and sold at the LITERARY PRESS. No. 62,
WARDOUR-STREET, SOHO.

1793.

THE ADVENTURES OF WILL. RAMBLE, ESQUIRE.
CHAP. XXX.
RAMBLE having never seen Bridget but once or twice accidentally at Lady
Dashit's, her face was not well-known to him; she was sensible of this, and
being discarded from her place as an accomplice with Tom, was driven to her
shifts. Knowing she could not get another without a character, and that she was
not likely to obtain, being rather a pretty young woman, and not more than
twenty years of age; a scheme came into her head, which, if she could effect,
she thought might turn out as well if not better, than being a party concerned
in marrying her mistress to Tom, Mr. Dangle's valet. This was, to dress herself
up smart, and make an application to Ramble for protection, under the pretense
of being a young woman, the daughter of a ruined tradesman, turned out of
doors, not having a place to fly to; and that possibly Ramble, who was a man of
gallantry and fortune, and without attachment, might be taken with her
appearance, and grant her that protection she wanted, which was to live with
him as his mistress.

The absurdity of the scheme must be evident to every person of common sense.
She might be discovered, and if not at first, most likely would in the end,
through Flint, the Colonel's servant. This thought struck her, but those who
are set upon a scheme, seldom are deterred from it by little difficulties: she
said to herself, the Colonel is certainly not on such familiar terms with his
servant, as to let him into the secret of his amors, and should he be tempted
to catch at the bait, she flattered herself she was mistress of those charms,
that, if the matter was afterward discovered, she should be able to disarm his
anger, and keep him notwithstanding. He cannot be so ignorant, thought she, as
to expect that in a mistress, which he would look for in a wife. And where such
an object is thrown in his way, many little circumstances are overlooked, that
would be thought unsurmountable crimes, if that object was studied and sought
for.

Besides, he who is acquainted with the world, must know, that those who lay
schemes to take in the unwary, seldom plan the business so well as to put it
out of the reach of detection. There is something unthought of and unguarded
against, that interferes and defeats it. Bridget must have had but a poor
insight into things, if she could any way suppose she should have been able to
have carried her point with Lady Dashit; but, as she did suppose it, we must
consider the transaction in the light we have now viewed it; that it was a
desperate attack, and as desperately managed, and ended as those schemes
generally do, in the overthrow and ruin of the schemer.

Her design on Colonel Ramble was not less absurd or impracticable. However,
said she, nothing venture, nothing have. She followed the Colonel's method of
introducing himself to Miss Trevor, by a note, and wrote him the following:

An unfortunate young woman, under twenty, without a friend or a home, the
daughter of a respectable tradesman thrown into prison for debt, wishes for an
interview with Colonel Ramble. She trusts her appearance will plead in her
favor, and procure her that protection under his roof, which she is ambitious
to merit. The Colonel need only name the hour of his being alone, and she will
wait on him. -- The bearer waits his answers.

Ramble sent for the bearer of the letter up, and asked him some questions; but
he being only a common porter, could give no other kind of information, than,
that he was ordered to deliver the letter and bring an answer. The Colonel
wrote one in the following line: Colonel Ramble will be alone tomorrow morning
at eleven.

Ramble's general good opinion of mankind led him to put the best constructions
on this note, and, therefore, waited her coming with impatience, determining to
relieve her, if relief was in his power. Bridget dressed herself up smartly and
gayly, very much unbecoming the suitor Ramble expected to meet with, but in
that kind of wanton attire, that bespoke her own wishes, and would leave, as
she thought, very little to explain. When she first entered the room, he
received her with tenderness. She burst into affected tears, and thus addressed
him. -- You see, Sir, before you, an innocent, helpless maid, deprived of her
parents by the cruelty of creditors, her bed sold from under her, turned into
the wide world without a friend to assist, induced from necessity to seek the
protection of a stranger. Your humanity is too well known, to make any feeble
apologies of mine necessary. You are, I understand, a single man, without
attachment, and I am yet unsullied and uncorrupted; and if you can meet that
society in me, which gentlemen generally look for in women less innocent that
myself, you will find me attentive, assduous, and dutiful.

Such an address Ramble little expected; however, he desired her to be seated,
made some enquiries respecting her family and connexions; and finding when she
was off her guard, and interrogated on points she was not prepared for, that
she hesitated, prevaricated, and was confused; he began to call his
recollection to his aid; looked her full in the face, examined her countenance,
and thought he discovered in her a resemblance of Bridget, Lady Dashit's woman.
-- He was not, however, certain of this, and, being very unwilling to tax her
with it, if it should not be so, and thus wound the feelings of one, apparently
too much already wounded; began with asking her, if she did not know Lady
Dashit? Bridget's conscience immediately struck her, and her countenance
betrayed her guilt. Ramble now rose from his seat, and said, I see but too
plain, who you are, and what you are; you are, or were Lady Dashit's woman; and
I am sorry the detection in one iniquitous piece of business, has not deterred
you from attempting another. Your design upon me I am at a loss to unravel, and
happy it is for you, that I have not got to the bottom of it. Be assured, as
humane as I am, I can set my face against an impostor, and go great lengths to
punish one. Many a person has been hanged for less offenses than you have
committed, and, possibly, it may be an ill-judged lenity to suffer you to
escape.

Bridget, now a good deal frightened, burst into real tears; threw herself on
her knees before him, wrung her hands, and implored his mercy. Mercy, (cried
he, astonished) would, I fear, be ill-applied to one of your cast. -- However,
you are, as it were, selfconvicted, and I hope, If I am silent in this matter,
my silence will not be abused. Rise, and leave me, and let this lenity of mine
be a caution to you, how you behave in future. You are young enough to reform,
and for your own sake I hope you will. Upon this he rung the bell, and Flint
entered the room with his hand to his cap, saluting. Flint, (said Ramble) I
presume you know this lady, take her under your escort, and conduct her down.
-- Fait, a I do, your honor, (returned Flint) and little Flint will take as
much care of her as your honor would your own dear self. Flint then took her
by the arm, put it under his, and the left the room together.

Ramble's reflections on this business, were those natural to every benevolent
mind; that Bridget might not be desperately wicked, that she might still
possess some good principles; but, that being a woman of intrigue, those
principles are often lost in the back ground; that an enterprising spirit often
outstrips our reason, leads us into wild acts, that, at a quiet moment we
cannot but condemn; and, that whilst such a disposition is endeavoring to
improve its situation, it often misses its mark, and undoes itself, like a man
who too eager in striking, often misses his blow, loses his equilibrium, and
otherthrows himself by his impetuousity.

CHAP. XXXI.
RAMBLE now received a letter from Miss Raspe, saying, that they should leave
London for Paris the next morning, but wished him not to follow them for a day
or two, lest they should be detained at Dover, waiting for a fair wind; and, if
it so happened, they should there meet; she said, the only person that was to
go with them, was Brutus, the black. On receiving this intelligence, he
prepared also for his journey; and the fourth day after he had received Miss
Raspe's letter, with his valent and Flint, he took his way to Dover. On coming
there, he enquired what passengers had lately passed for Calais, and found
Raspe had sailed two days before. All apprehensions of falling in his way being
over, he took the first packet that sailed, and, as Raspe traveled not very
fast, was in Paris almost as soon as him. His resolution at that time was not
so firmly settled at at present, and Paris was in commotion; but, as their stay
there would be but short, it was of no great moment.

Raspe, no sooner arrived in Paris, than he placed his daughter in a convent;
for, though his intent was to stay there only a few days, he thought a convent
the safest place; this she was unacquainted with till she arrived at Paris, and
of course could not give Ramble intelligence of it; nor had she an opportunity
of sending a line to the coffee-house as proposed, as at the convent paper and
pens were forbidden her.

To avoid insult, Raspe had put a National cockade into his hat as soon as he
set his foot on French ground; and, on his arrival at Mr. English's; this
gentleman took notice of the cockade, and said, I see you are already a
volunteer in our service. -- No volunteer, (replied he) but necessity has no
law; my motive was to avoid danger. I dont' wish to be knocked of the head. --
Indeed, (replied Mr, English,) there is no medium in the people here; --
they are either all one thing or all the other. A few months since they were all
slaves; now they are all free. -- Wish to to be thought so, (said Raspe) not so
in reality. From being slaves to others they are now slaves to themselves.
Where Is you daughter; enquired Mr. English, I hope we shall have the pleasure
of seeing her. There Is too much liberty, in this country for her (returned
Raspe) We Have a little of it in England, but that little was too much for her.
-- Liberty may do very well for our sex -- it ill agrees with here is. "Where is
Miss Raspe," (said Mr. English). That Is a secret; (returned Raspe) I scarce
know myself. I am afraid of losing her in this wild country -- the people are
all wild here. I have placed her in a convent -- liberty's a good thing, but
abused liberty, a bad one. Mr. English having been called out, returned, and
said, he was sorry to be the messenger of ill news, but several of the mob
without doors have been enquiring, whether he had not a person in his house,
who had enriched himself at the expense of the freedom and liberty of men:
alluding, he presumed, to the traffic Mr. Raspe carried on. -- Raspe,
expressing signs of fear, Mr. English went on. I would not have you be alarmed;
only be cautious, and whilst you continue at Paris, be seen as little abroad as
possible, or I would not answer for the consequences. Raspe now more alarmed
than ever, said, he dreaded the fury of a mob; yet could not be shut up; he
said his very fears would betray him, and wished he had a disguise. -- Why,
(replied Mr. English) as your person has been described, a disguise would not
be amiss. If the floor had been burning under him, Raspe could not be more
restless. He could not stay one instant in a place, but jumped about as if he
had been on burning coals. Mr. English told him he had put the populace off
their scent, by saying, that he left Paris yesterday; but still recommended
some kind of disguise; said there was a Perukier in the next street, famous for
making wigs that would give any character you like, make an old man of a young
one, or a young man of an old one. Raspe, rejoiced at this, and determined to
go to him immediately, and asked if the coast was clear; and being told it was,
begged Mr. English would let his servant show him the way. He accordingly put
on his great coat, slipped out of the back door, and set off.

On Ramble's arrival, he put up at at a hotel. He and his valet had ridden in a
post-chaise; Flint rode on horseback; and as they traveled very fast, and
Flint was unused to their paved roads, he found himself uncommonly fatigued. I
don't know how, (said he to his fellow servants) the French roads may agree with
an Englishman, but, arrah by my shoul, they shake an Irishman all to shivers. I
havn't a sound bone in my skin, and these damned little galloways, are so used
to say their prayers at every cross they passed, that it was as much as he
could do to keep them on their legs. -- You're an old soldier, (said the
valet), and should not mind a little difficulty. There Is good eating and
drinking here, and this merry country will soon bring you round again. -- I
have been taught from a child, (said Flint) to consider the French as an enemy;
and as a soldier, even learnt it with my exercise: but such is the heart of
Flint, that as a change in their sentiments made England their friend, he now
calls them brothers, and wants but and opportunity of doing them a brotherly
act. -- Well, (said the valet) I must go see for my master; do you take care of
the baggage. Flint set down upon it, and a girl passing the room, Come here, my
sweet honey, (said Flint) and rub my back. -- What ails your back, (said the
girl. What ails my back, my dear? returned Flint. It has got the infection of
your country; -- fits and convulsions. -- Stiff, I suppose, (said she) with
your journey? Fait and you may say that, (replied he,) very stiff, indeed; and
pulling her upon his knee, I wish you would rub it, and supple it. Lord,
fellow, (cried the girl,) let me alone, or I Will slap your face. Any thing, my
dear wench, (returned he,) to divert the pain from my back. Your cursed French
pavements have almost shaken me to pieces. Show me to your bed, I want to lie
down. Struggling, however, she got from "him, and left him to his reflections.

CHAP. XXXII.
RASPE having found his way to the peruquier's, was shown into a room, where
there was a variety of wigs, hanging on blocks, resembling different
characters. Bag, bods, ties, majors, and brigadiers. Raspe told the peruquier
that he wanted to be disguised, and asked him whether he could furnish him with
a wig that would totally change his appearance? Certainly, (said the peruquier)
I have made it my study for many years; have of late, converted abbes, into
generals, and generals into abbes, and made gentlemen of shopkeepers; turned
coquets into prudes, and widows into virgins; nay, Sir, I have done more. I
have outstripped Time. To serve a purpose, I have made boys to look like men in
years, and old men of seventy to resemble boys of twenty. Change of character
(observed Raspe) is no new thing here. Ashamed, I presume, to wear their own
faces? Not ashamed, sir, replied the peruquier we, are ashamed of nothing;
Paris has long give law to fashion. Our modes change as often as the moon. We
are now shifting characters. An aristocrate takes that of a patriot; a fish
woman that of a soldier; a priest that of a statesman; and so on. Our
profession has hitherto been what you Englishmen call a Tory: we bear the
king's arms. In future we'll be Whigs, the application suits a peruquier best.
Once King -- now country.

Raspe desire he would show hima variety; the peruquier now called a boy, and bade
him bring the gentleman a handlooking-glass and a sponge, and take down the
Spanish Admiral. You will be surprised, sir, said he to Raspe, at the effect
produced by a wig and a piece of charcoal. The boy gave the glass to Raspe, and
the sponge to his master. Raspe looking about, said he hoped he should not be
seen; and on being told all was private, a large black Ramilee was put upon
him, and the tail suffered to hang over his shoulder; and with the charcoal the
peruquier painted on his lip a pair of mustachios. Raspe looked in the glass
and seeing that he cut too fierce a figure, took off the wig and said it would
not do, for he hated fighting. Sponge and water being given, the mustachios
were taken off. "Must be a priest then," (said the peruquier). -- A bishop's
full-bottomed gray was handed down, and put on Raspe as before, who on
examining himself again, said That would not do, for he was apt to swear. Bring
then the Judge (said the peruquier to the boy.)" This was tried, and Raspe said
It was equally bad, he not being grave enough for a judge. Reach down
Independence then -- (said the peruquier,) the wig was brought; this was a
bag-wig, curls l'ailes de pigeon, and cocked up behind fantastically. The boy
brought with him also a black puritanical head of hair. These are, (said the
peruquier,) my specimen-wigs, if either of them please, I can make you one in
twelve hours. -- Now sir, (continued he, taking the bag-wig) if any thing will
suit you, it will be this. I call it an independent bag. It is independence
here that makes a man respectable. I don't mean independence from money, but
independence from determination; a resolution to throw off all subordination
and control. It is this which has made all our great men (naming most of the
leading men in the revolution.) By fortune and character, they were
insignificant, poor as rats, trifling as harlequin, but having flown from all
authority, and ourstretched the law, they became great men; and this is the wig
they wear. (Puts the wig on Raspe as before, who, frightened at his own figure,
cries Lord! lord! this independence is the devil; and tore off the wig. --
"Perhaps this, (said the peruquier, taking from the boy the black head of hair)
Perhaps this will please you better; these are the locks worn by those who
deplore the depravity of the times, execrate the present licentiousness of the
people, and wish to hide themselves from the world. This being tried like the
rest, gave equal disatisfaction, Raspe said he liked none of them; loved his
own scratch best; would run every risk; would not venture on an assumed
character, but would get out of Paris as soon as possible. Well sir, (said the
peruquier), if none of my disguise's please you, and you wish to leave Paris,
turn your coat. They are all turn-coats here -- do this, and you may pass among
the crowd unnoticed.

Raspe was sorry for having given him so much trouble, and observed, that
assumed characters were the worst of characters; that a man had better meet the
ridicule of the world, than deceive mankind and incur their anger.

CHAP. XXXIII.
RAMBLE going into an English coffee-house at Paris, was not a little pleased
with a kind of alternate dialogue that struck his ear, in a manner very
different from what was desinged by it, but conveying a very satirical meaning.
He had no friend with him, and not mixing with other parties then in
conversation, had little to do, but to listen to what came from them, and such
words as he heard at one table added to those which came from another, so
corresponded, as to form a dialogue of themselves, something in the manner of
the cross-reading of a newspaper, where the line of one column read on in the
line of the adjoining, frequently produces a sense different from what the
writer meant. It is difficult to explain this to the eye, but I will attempt
in, that the reader, if possible, may be as well entertained as he was.
Conceive then three different tables in a public room, two Italians in
conversation at one, two Englishmen reading the English newspapers at tanother,
and two Dutchmen smoking at the third; and suppose the following dialogue to
take place between them, interrupted only occasionally by the waiter, answering
to their call and bringing them what they called for.

Italians. Is It. Ital. "The English quarrelled with America, blocked up her
ports and sent an army into the country, to cut the throats of their
fellow subjects.

2d. Ital. "They did -- but the offense given was of that nature, that called
for all their spirit and resentment. Perhaps you are ignorant of the cause, it
was no less than.... here he whispered as if unwilling to mention it publicly,
and an Englishman called out to the waiter.


Englishman. 1st Eng.... "Some tea!"


Italians. 1st Ital. goes on. They have not only exhausted their treasury, and
run themselves 250 millions in debt, but have sacrificed a million of lives,
and for what?

2nd. Ital. I Will tell you -- England could do no less -- her honor was at
stake. I will admit that in the contest the lost America, but what did she get?


Englishmen. 2nd. Englishman calling out to the "waiter.... "A dish of coffee!"

1st Eng. I see by our newspapers, that opposition intends at the next meeting
of parliament, to bring forward the ruinous state of the nation, and, between
you and me, for I would not haveour enemies hear -- the waste of....
whispering.


Dutchman. 1st. Dutch. calling out,... Bread and butter!


Englishmen. 2nd. Englishman going on The opposition certainly grows very
powerful, and the whole party combined, may now be said to be worth....
whispering.


Italians. 1st Italian asking his friend for -- A pinch of snuff.

Here, as is the custom in French coffee-houses, the conversation was
interrupted by some Savoyards that made their apperance in a gallery or kind of
orchestra above, who played to entertain the company; and a girl with a
pleasing voice, and a good deal of pathos, sung the following air. It being,
pretty and new, and having procured the music; though an episode in the work; I
trust my fair readers will find it acceptable.

I.
It may be Love, I cannot tell;
So simple is my mind;
But much I fear some magic spell,
Some wreath by Fairies twined,
Which those who wear, are doomed, by Fate,
To feel their senses fly,
To smile upon the treacherous bait,
Then weep -- they know not why.
II.
Ah me! It may be but a dream,
That with the morning rose:
Returning sleep may chase the gleam,
And lull me to repose.
Forgive me, if I wander far,
And steal me to the shade,
Where smiling shines yon blushing star,
That glitters through the glade.
III.
For there at eve a lover brings
His pipe of tender wail,
And pity there in friendship sings
To notes that suit his tale.
It must be love! -- I Have seen the youth,
And fear no magic spell,
He kissed me once. Ah! spare the truth,
'Till now I could not tell.

The song ended; the conversation went on as before.

Dutchumen. Is It Dutchman. No ship has so broad a bottom as.... He was going on,
but was interrupted by his friend asking for his tobacco-box.


Englishmen. 2nd Englishman reading the newspaper. Lady Bridget -- is going to
be married I see, to Lord.... but could not make out to whom, the printing
being smeared.


Italians. 2nd Italian calling out.... Macaroni, Waiter answering "Yes sir,"


Englishmen. Is It Englishman. What in the name of patience could induce her
ladyship to such an alliance? She has a stretching conscience, and let me tell
you, her expectations will not be answered only.... whispering to his firend.


Dutchmen 2nd Dutchman being asked by a man in a very low voice, "how often the
mail arrived from the West Indies -- Answered aloud,.... once a month.

Is It Dutchman. "Was you at the Champ de Mars?

2nd Dutchman. Yes; and I think I never saw such a collection of officers,
abbes, fiddlers, hair-dressers, ci-devant noblesse, and lacquies...

A French postillion enters the room, all splashed and dirty, and sets rudely
down by the Italian gentlemen, who were well dressed, and looking at himself,
exclaims, " Morblue. Dear be a great deal of dirt! Where there is mosh dirt, a
great deal vil stick. -- Garcon, bring me a glass of noyau!


Englishmen. 1st Englishm. "Observe!" pointing to the postillion.

2nd Englishm. Such is the blessed effect of French equality!

The reader will, by a little thought, see the effect of this medley of
conversation, where the words of one party, corresponded with those of the
other, and seemed to a bye-stander, to form one general dialogue. A mountebank
ridiculously dressed, now entered with a box of medicines for sale. Remedies,
gentlemen, (cries he) for all complaints. This is my liberty-pill: it is gilt,
because golden pills are readier swallowed. It will purge away the bile of
aristocracy, and cleanse the prima via of foul humors, and national
prejudices. Offering his medicines to the gentlemen, who were exceedingly
diverted at the fellow's humor; he went on, This is the powder of Bastile,
calcined from the very stone where the first breach was made: it has a
wonderful efficacy in purifying the brain, eradicating despotism, making a man
see with his own eyes, and bringing him to reason. This is my plaster for
every sore; it is such an emollient, that by an application to the breast, it
softens the most tyrannic heart, and by applying it to wounds of the head, it
will recover a deranged one, and will heal even a lovesick mind: it is also a
a styptic, that will stop the bleedings of the state. As the company only
laughed, the woman at the bar, cried out, Away with your nostrums, your pills,
and your powders; we are all patriots here. My coffee-room wants neither
purging nor purifying. This fellow was no sooner gone, than the conversation
went on as before.


Englislmen. 1st Englishm. it was certainly wise of the Spaniards to accede to
our terms.

2nd Englishm. I don't see that, had there been a war, she might have possessed
herself of Gibraltar, Jamaica, and.... (looking round, as if he wished not to
be overheard, whispered the rest).


Italians. 1st Ital. calling,.... A little rum and sugar!


Englishmen. 2nd Englishm. What is the faith of nations worth? -- It is no
longer preserved, than whilst it suits their convenience.

1st Englishm. Faith is one thing; Conventions are another. This Convention we
compelled the Spaniards to sign, is a jewel in the cap of the English
worth..... I cannot tell you what.


Dutchmen. 1st Dutchman calling,.... A pipe of tobacco!


Italians. 2nd Ital. There must be a certain something about opera-singers more
than their voices, that makes them so much courted in England. I should like to
know what it is.


Englishmen. 1st English. The ladies are the best judges -- why should men
interfere with the fashions.

At this instant a great noise was heard without, and a man came running in,
out of breath, crying, Insurrection! Murder! Insurrection! -- For God's sake,
Gentlemen, arm yourselves. All Paris is in an uproar; the aristocrates are
risen; Count D'Artois, is at the gates with forty thousand men; the King's off;
I have been round to all the public houses. (Drums being now heard) The drum
beats to arms; every man, who loves his country, will surely stand forth on
this occasion. Haste, haste! At this he runs out, and all the company proceed
to arm themselves. Some with one thing, some with another; spits, frying-pans,
pokers, etc. and sallied forth into the street. Ramble who had more sense and
coolness than fell to many men's share, left the room with great composure,
convinced, as it afterward happened to be, that it was only a false alarm.


CHAP. XXXIV.
RAMBLE not finding a letter at the English Coffee-house as he expected, did
not know what to make of it. He was well convinced of Miss Raspe's attachment
to him, and her inclination to acquaint him with the steps they took; of course
conceived such letter, if sent, had miscarried: or that she was, some way or
other, prevented from sending one.

He enquired at the post office, and at all the trading coffee-houses in the
city, where there was a likelihood of his hearing of Mr. Raspe: had sent to all
the auberges, and hotels, and enquired of every Valet de Place that he could
hear of, but without effect.

Whilst he was in this perplexity, running about from one room of his hotel to
another, he was accosted by an impertinent fellow, an Englishman, who lived at
Paris upon his wits, and who intruded himself upon him with I apprehend, Sir,
you are in some difficulty; I shall be happy to relieve you. Being dressed like
a coxcomb, Ramble looked down on him with a degree of contempt, but
recollecting that he might possibly have some knowledge of the arrivals, he
replied, I am, it is true, Sir, a little embarrassed, and if I thought you could
furnish me with what I want, I would accept your kind offer. -- I presume, by
your appearance, you are in a happy state of affluence and enjoyment, and
possess that which many of our countrymen search for far and wide. Damn it, I
am in a hobble here, said Lackit aside, for that was the stranger's name, who
by the by, possessed spirits, effrontery, sang froid, impudence, -- every thing
but money; then addressing himself to Ramble -- You mean, I presume, Happiness.
-- Why, Sir, I am pretty well as to that; I have a good estate, but that is
neither here nor there; -- and I have a long purse, -- but there is nothing in
that, you know. It is not land or money that constitutes happiness -- I have it
and I have it not -- hah? Friend, you understand me? -- I know every body here,
and every body knows me; -- and as I am informed you are but just arrived, I
should be gland ( strutting about) to know something of you. At this he turned
upon his heel and observed to himself, that what he said, was a good turn-off.
Ramble told him, he neither wanted his purse nor his land; he wanted merely a
little information, and as, by his own account, he was acquainted with every
one, possibly he might be able to tell him of the late arrivals at Paris. He
was in search of a party, whom he knew not where to find. -- "Male or female?"
retorts Lackit. "Both," returns Ramble. Egad, that is an hermaphrodite! Here are
plenty of hermaphrodites in this country, women with the martial spirit of men,
and men with all the effeminacy of women. Times are however a good deal
altered, petit-maitres have dropped their insignificance, and coquets thrown
off their airs, and both sexes seem now to be animated with one enthusiastic
soul! You have nothing to dread here, believe me, but from our own countrymen.
If you value your quiet and your purse, don't mix with them. I speak this enter
nous, as a friend, I love my country, and I adore and Englishman, but I hate a
shark of any nation. Here are a number of these, who follow a slave-ship for
blood, and run as to a fire, to enjoy the distress and confusion, and profit by
any thing that may fall in their way. Before you make any acquaintance, ask me.
I know but every one. If you are disposed for an intrigue, I can assist you,
married or single, demireps, reps, or no reps. I have a universal knowledge of
the women. You see'm to confound all states, Sir, (observed Ramble) and make
little or no distinction. The married ladies surely pay a little more regard to
character, and don't subject themselve's to the tongue of the calumniator. Sir
(retorts Lackit, staring in Ramble's face, with a vacant countenance) you seem
little acquainted with the world; married women are sooner to be had now then
single ones. The men have changed their system, feel themselves safer in a
connection with married women, and conceive the enjoyment to be greater. Stolen
pleasures, they fay, are sweet, and cuckoldom now is become the zest of the gay
world; the women court it, the men wink at it, and consider it as a relief from
a tiresome drudgery. Many a family has pined for an her; barren soils have been
made prolific by new dressing; the state is benefited by an increase of
population; of course the man of gallantry becomes a useful member of society,
and cuckoldom is growing into credit. It is particularly so here, and I
understand they are a getting into it in England. Ramble could not but allow
the character to be just, though he held the remarker in contempt. It was a
subject he did not relish, therefore turned the converfation, by saying, as you
profess to know every one, posbly you may be able to inform me of a late
arrival here. Certainly I can, (returned he) there is not an arrival of any
note, but I am made acquainted with it, within an hour of their entering Paris.
Have you heard then of such a person as Mr. Raspe, (says Ramble) and English
merchant lately arrived here with his daughter? Is he in the slavetrade? asks
Lackit. "He is," replies Ramble. " Heard of him?" returns Lackit, yes, almost
all Paris has heard of him ere this. -- Had it not been for me, he would have
made his exit a la lantern. Report says, he was at an English merchant's in
this city, and it being soon buzzed about that he was an enemy to Liberty and
the Rights of Man, the Sans Culottes soon gathered round the house, and would
have torn him from it; but I being well with all ranks, pushed into the crowd
and saved him, absolutely by dint of lying. I don't think I could lie (says
Ramble) to save any man. Oh, Sir, mistake me not, a gentleman never lies; he
may amuse to deceive, and deceive to amuse; he may practice the ars
dissimulandi, but he never lies. With all my faults, I am bold to say, I never
told a direct lie but in a good cause; and it is an established maxim with me
that a beneficial falsity is preferable to a destructive truth. Besides, your
friend is an Englishman, and Englishmen will not be very punctilious where a
countryman's life is to be saved. Sir, as I have told you before, I love my
country and all that belongs to it; Vive la Nation! whether France or England.
I got between the foremost of the mob and the door, swore till I was black in
the face, that he had left that house the evening before; that I saw him get
into a post-chaise and order the postillions to make the best of their way to
the first stage in the road to Lions. And did you? says Ramble. Did I? (retorts
Lackit) No; certainly I did not. -- It was all a humbug. The French are easily
humbugged. -- Brunswick has humbugged 'em, Monsieur has done the same; Louis
has humbugged them, and I have humbugged them. Then tossing himself about,
roared out the burden of the old English song,

"Sing tantarara humbug!" I only told them so (continued he), to pacify them;
it answered the purpose. I threw my purse among them, and away they went.

Ramble's philanthropy was awakened at this recital. Those who are freest from
guile, are most easily beguiled. He told Lackit that the gentleman whose life
he had saved (for he believed him implictly) was a particular friend of his,
and in whose welfare, he was more than commonly interested, and begged to know
what were the contents of his purse. The very thought of getting some money
from Ramble, raised Lackit's spirits and his art of address; he cried Oh! --
nothing, nothing, -- Some 40 or 50 Louis d'ors; but that you know, my dear Sir,
is nothing, a mere trisle in competition with the life of a countryman. Had it
contained ten times the sum, they would have had it -- they would indeed. --
Money is no object to me, when I have it my power to do a good office. I could
tell you of many such gifts -- but what I give away, is nothing to any one.

Ramble's generous heart was now roused; he drew his pursed from his pocked,
said, he believed it might contain something about the sum Lackit had given to
the populace, and begged he might re-imburse him. Lackit eyed the purse with as
much eagerness, as would a pickpocket watching an opportunity to steal it; but
at the same time refused to accept any return, with a "Positively not," and on
Ramble's urging him to take it, saying it was a sum Mr. Raspe, in fact, owed
him, and would repay him with thanks, if he knew the circumstance -- therefore
insisting on it, that he might discharge that debt for him. Sir, (said Lackit)
if you knew my heart and my liberal spirit, you would not offer me such and
affront. Of what value is money, but for such purposes? I beg your pardon,
(cries Ramble) I would not affront any man; much less one who has done my
friend so kind an office, and was in the act of returning the purse to his
pocket. This Lackit did not mean he should do, and finding he had voershot his
marks, told him, it would certainly be an affront at any other time, than a
time of commotion, when nothing was to be had without drawing one's
pursestrings; and as it might enable him to perform some such good office at
another time, he would accept it; saying however that he would take it on no
other conditions, than that he would ask his friend Raspe for it again, in
whose service it was expended, and whom he was given to understand, was a
wealthy man; and that he would also do him the honor to take part of a bottle
of Burgundy with him. These conditions being assented to, Lackit, who had not
been possessed of so much cash for a great length of time, threw the purse up
from his hand, and catching it, put it into his pocket, with a May you be as
well laid out as the last!

Ramble asked Lackit to tell him where this English merchant lived, who had
received Mr. Raspe. Lackit said he would conduct him there in the evening; at
present he must claim his promise to drink a glass with him. He had a few
English friends in the house who would be happy to join them, and if he was
disposed to trifle away the morning with a little hazard, he would find the
party a pleasant one.

Lackit being now in cash, was in hopes to take Ramble in for another fifty at
the hazard-table; but Ramble, whose thoughts were wholly on Miss Raspe, begged
to be excused joining his party that day and took his leave, saying to himself,
when alone, He has probably humbugged me; yet consoled himself with observing,
that too often with the over-cautious has a fear of being overreached or
deceived, prevented their doing many a good and generous action.

CHAP. XXXV.
RAMBLE sent for Flint, and asked him if he knew any thing of Lackit that was
in the house. Does your honor maen (said Flint) a fellow in a tinselled coat,
whose tongue runs like a jack-daw? I fancy we mean the same person (replied
Ramble), he is an Englishman, and I am sorry to say that of a countryman, but
it strikes me, that he has robbed me of 50l. -- Blood and tunder! (cries Flint,
raising his stick) I Will find him out and give him a sound bating. That (returns
Ramble) will not restore me my money; besides, it is not here, Flint, as it is
in Ireland, where a man may drub a rascal unnoticed. Pardon me, your honor,
(says Flint,) they take pleasure here in drubbing any thing that wears the
appearance of a jontleman. The poorer a man is in this country, IN my faith,
the richer he is, at least the more he is thought of, and the more power he
has; the whole city is governed by men who have no breeches to their backsides
The Sans Culottes.
and whose greatest badge of distinction, is not having a coat to their back.
-- Do, your honor, let little Flint give this rogue a bit of a bating; it will
cool his courage, and do him a great deal of good. No, no, (returns Ramble) it
is better, I believe to leave him to the scourge of his own reflection. Fait,
and you may that too (replies Flint), the word of command is in his own breast;
it is there given distinctly, and he must be a bad soldier who has been well
drilled, that does not attend to it; his own court martial will try him, and if
found guilty, that stout little drummer, Conscience, will not spare his lashes,
but lay them on heavy. Flint (returned Ramble) you are as good a philosopher as
a soldier; but go, I would have you make some enquiries about him, find him
out, tell him you belong to me, and beg him to make you ac quainted with the
place where Mr. Raspe first lodged, when he came to Paris. He then told Flint
the manner he had introduced himself and the story he had told of the mob; the
narrow escape Raspe had, and his throwing his purse among the populace. Flint's
anger was roused; he told his master, that, if report spoke truth, he was one
of those who got his livelihood by sucking the brains of others, and was sorry
to find his honor had at all contributed to feed him. By St. Patrick! (roars
he out) he is an arrant teef -- The deel burn me -- if he did trow his purse to
the mob, but there was not a tirteener in it. By the great G-d, (continued he)
I Will ferret him out -- If I find it a lie, and if I don't get the purse again,
I Will make him repent of what he has done -- he shall remember little Flint as
long as he lives. Saying this he saluted, wheeled about, and left his master,
brandishing his cudgel as he went out.

Ramble went to the English coffe-house to make some enquiries into this affair
himself, and learned part of Lackit's story to be just, but that Raspe's escape
was owing to him was as false as the rest was true. The loss of his money; did
not much trouble him; could he have got the intelligence he wished, he would
have given twice the sum. He observed that though Lackit might not tell a
direct lie, that fashionable ars dissimulandi in which he was well versed, went
very near it. Entering the coffe-house to return to his hotel, after it was
dark, Chance, as in London, befriended him.

Rafpe's petulance of temper had brought him into a squabble in the street.
Brutus, the black, who always followed his master, hearing some Savoyards
playing and singing the following song in the next street, was running to
listen to them.

Song.
(With the Music.)
Unroll the banners -- Strike the tents!
Clouds of dust announce the foe.
Advance the mortars -- Load the guns.
Keep the phalanx as you go.
What should alarm us! See they form.
Conquest eludes the impending storm.
Rush, lads, boldly; charge with spirit,
Warrious martial souls inherit.
See, see, they fly us. -- Keep the line!
Shouts of joy the foe dismays,
Sound, sound the trumpets; blow the fifes;
Beat the drums and snatch the bays.
Where Is now the danger? Where Is the dread?
The aristocratic so is fled.
Freedom triumphs! France rejoices!
Huzza sing, with endless voices!
See, see, they fly us. -- Keep the line.
Shouts of joy the foe dismays;
Sound, sound the trumpets; blow the fifes;
Beat the drums and snatch the bays.
Raspe, incensed at his fellow, called him back with anger, and struck him on
the head with his cane; the poor black roared out, and a gentleman who stood at
the door of a coffee-house and saw it, went up to him, and said You seem, Sir,
to forget where you are. -- No man dare strike his servant here -- a levelling
principle has taken place among us, and for every blow a man gives, he stands a
chance of receiving three. Peace, fellow! (replies Raspe with warmth) or I Will
level you. The gentleman told him, that being an old man, was the only excuse
for his petulance. "Here are some ladies, continued he; had they seen you, you
would have repented of your rashness." These ladies were four fish-women, who
though in petticoats were armed as musketeers, patrolling the streets, and
fifth beating a drum before them. Here (cried this gentleman, laughing,) are
the National Guard. Curse the National Guard! replied Raspe angrily. The women
hearing this, seized him and cried, Take him to the guard-house. Raspe
contending with them, bellowed out, Off, you harridans, or I Will be the death of
you! and called Brutus to assist him. A mob was now collected, and the people
laughed at the incident. The women having released him, Raspe asked them who
they were; they answered, The king's body guard. What pretense (continued he)
have you to take me? Pretense, hah! (cried one of the women) That Is pleasant
tryly -- we took the Bastille without pretense -- we took the king without
pretense -- of course, can want no pretense for taking you.

Ramble coming up at this time with an acquaintance said, Sure I must know that
man! -- It is he whom I have been seeking; ask him where he lodges. The
gentleman did so; but Raspe would not tell him; Ramble who was then in his
uniform, stepped forward, and said to the women, I must take this gentleman's
part; (then addressing himself to Raspe) I am sorry to see you, Sir, in such an
embarrassment. Raspe, looking full in his face, said with sternness I think I
know you -- it will not do -- you have lost your aim. I have lodged her in a
convent. Even this was a piece of happy intelligence to Ramble; he offered to
get Raspe released, but he, Raspe, said, I will not be released by you -- I Would
rather be in custody a month. Ramble the addressing himself to the women, said
it was only a little fracas, the effect of anger; that he was well acquainted
with the gentleman, and continued. I am an English officer -- you have done
your duty, and may release him. Raspe thinking a little money might induce them
to do it, took out of his pocket a tobacco-box, in which was a little bit of
dirty paper, folded up in two or three case equally dirty, and unfolding them
with great care, one after the other, till he came to the inner piece, said,
here is some of your current coin, your assignats -- which an Englishman
would'nt deign to stoop for. The women not liking the money, which they said
would not pass, cried, away with them! and attempted to drag them forward;
resistance being made, the drum was beat, and they called out "Guards! guards!"
Two soldiers within hearing, with bayonets fixed, ran to their assistance, and
the colonel finding the matter grew rather serious, said to one of the
soldiers, Money has been offered to release them; if you will not take money, take
my word -- I am a brother soldier, and a gentleman, and will undertake they
shall appear at the guard-house tomorrow morning. Soldier! (said the fellow)
what of that? -- You are not one of us, and though you may be a gentleman, I
shall not believe you the sooner -- we are all gentlemen here -- we know no
distinction. On which one of the soldier laid hold of Raspe, and the women, of
the black. Raspe, struggling, asked their authority, and on being told, the
National Assembly, damned their National Assembly. This was enough -- it was
leze-nation, high treason, in the eyes of these women, and they cried out, one
and all, a la lantern! -- hang him -- a la lantern! The soldiers and women
then dragged them off, but the colonel assured Raspe he would be at the
guardroom as soon as him. The mob seemed to enjoy this piece of business, and
Brutus, though a prisoner, no less so; for he was heard to say in going off,
hugging himself, Massa no better as poor negro now!

I cannot help making an observation here, on the hale constitution of the
French women. It is a fact, that a body of the fish-women, that is those who
sell fish in Paris, and who are of a stamp with our Billingsgate-ladies, did
take up arms against their king; we know the lower class of women also are
employed in very laborious offices, such as carrying of loads, ploughing of the
land, etc. Though they are not apparently stronger than the common women of
other countries, they undoubtedly are; and though they are effeminate in their
persons, they are masculine in their ideas. This remark, it is said, holds good
only with the lower order of women; but we find the same strength of
constitution in all orders. A lying-in woman of distinction in France will be
up the third day after delivery, and sleep with her husband the ninth day,
whereas an Englishwoman requires a month to recover her. What this arises from,
I will not take upon me to say. It does not appear to be climate or mode of
living; for if an Englishwoman lives twenty years in France, she is never fit
to go abroad after lying-in till nearly the expiration of a month; but a
Frenchwoman, though a long time resident in England, is generally able to get
about in nine days. It must be owing to constitution and to stamina. We find
this also in their men. An apothecary of my acquaintance formerly assured me
(he told it as fact, and he is a man of too much veracity to be doubted) that
he had a patient in London, a Frenchman, at the advanced age of 96, who was
regularly three or four times a year, injured in his health by a connection with
women of the town: That on being once sent for to cure him of the same
complaint, he found an old man with him, and, of course, entered not into the
subject till that person was gone. When alone, his patient observed, he was
glad nothing was said before that old gentleman, for it was his son. On talking
over the matter, the apothecary noticing a fine healthy young woman waiting on
him as a servant, said he wondered he was not more cautious, when he had
suffered so much, and advised him, smiling, to make his addresses to that
healthy wench that attended him. Oh, (returns his patient, tossing his head)
elle est mon pain quotidien.

It was certainly an awkward time for all parties to be at Paris during the
commotions that there took place; otherwise this change of things would have
rendered it more agreeable. There was ever a kind of settled enmity between the
French and English, which this revolution has done away; but still they cannot
forget their ancient prejudices; as a proof of it, the following laughable
story is told. A French gentleman, lately in company with an Englishman, was
boasting of the advantages arising from the local situation of his country over
England, by its having a variety of ports in Le Manche, meaning the English
channel, which a Frenchmen will never call by that name, by which means, (said
he) in time of war, we have an opportunity of watching and checking the motions
of your fleet there. For example, Nous avons Breast, un port de mer, vis-a-vis
Plymouth; nous aurions tantot Cherburg, au autre port de mer, vis-a-vis
Portsmouth; et aurions aussi Dunquerque, un port de mer, vis-a-vis la Thames.
Yes, Sir, (replied the Englishman) and the more ports you have in our channel
the better; for, when we want a man of war or two, we have not far to fetch
them.

CHAP. XXXVI.
RAMBLE went to his lodgings, put on his sword, and walked away to the
guard-room, where he was introduced to the officer on guard. I waited on you
(said Ramble) in behalf of a countryman of mine, who from an accidental dispute
in the street, has been brought here by the night-guard. I am glad (said the
officer) to find it was only a dispute. It has been happily adjusted; he and
his servant are released, and are gone home. Ramble could not help observing,
that a police was too strict that enjoined the taking gentlemen into custody
for offenses so slight. The times (replied the officer) make it necessary. This
(returned Ramble) is one of the baneful effects of your revolution, an
unbounded licentiousness of the people, followed up by as despotic measures as
the revolution was designed to overthrow. The officer did not like this, and
requested him to be a little more guarded in his expression. I am a French
soldier, (said he) and I see by your dress, you are an officer in the service
of the English. I am, (returned Ramble) and as we both serve a free country, I
should hope we are both of the same way of thinking -- of course it is a little
out of character to call upon me to guard my tongue, when it is the privilege
of a freeman to speak his mind -- I say again, your National Assembly is far
more tyrannical than ever the monarch was. On the officer's saying he did not
see in what; Ramble went on, I could mention a thousand instances. France was
once a free country, and if time and wicked measures had contrived to enslave
her, it would have been better to have reformed the old constitution than to
have overthrown it, and raised a worse upon its ruins." Worse (retorts the
officer) do you call it? Are we not now free? Far from it, (returns Ramble) you
are greater slaves now than ever. Your clergy are slaves, your nobility are
slaves, your king is a slave, and your army, which should be the support of the
constitution, are the greater slaves of all. Ramble was not a man apt to give
offense, he was rather the reverse, but having always disliked the French
revolution, and being drawn into this subject rather unexpectedly, he could not
but give way to his spirit, and therefore spoke as he thought. The officer on
guard, partaking rather of his national warmth, cried out with indignation,
This is not to be borne -- army, slaves! -- Consider, Sir, where you are, and
who you are talking to. Ramble having now gone too far to retract, and his
profession not suffering him to eat his words, replied, I mean not to be
personal, Sir, but I repeat, that your army are the greatest slaves of the
whole. There was a time when the French army was commanded by gentlemen, men of
family and fortune; your officers now are shopkeepers, and manufacturers, men
who from birth and education, can have no ideas of true honor; of course the
whole army is now dwindled into mercenary hirelings, who have betrayed their
king, and broke their oaths for a little extra-pay, and who are slaves to a
wrong-headed set of men, void of patriotism, who, whilst they were tumbling
their monarch from his throne, have sacrificed only their shoe-buckles to their
country; an army that waits only the rash order of such an assembly to lay
their country in blood. The French officer, who was one of the Paris militia
and a tradesman, was now stung to the quick. Having a command in that army, I
must (retorts he with anger) give the lie to that assertion; and if you say one
word more, I Will call the guard. Ramble taking him by the button of his coat,
and with an eye that spoke the highest resentment, replied, Giving me the lie,
Sir, is the strongest proof of my assertion. It is a proof of your low breeding
ang the dunghill you sprung from. Saying this, he shook him, as it were, from
him. The officer called out "Guard!" but Ramble stopped his mouth, and cried
Peace, reptile! -- Call the guard at your peril. You wear the French uniform --
if you have the spirit of a soldier, draw your sword in defense of your
character. If you call the guard (continues he, drawing his own sword) I Will cut
your throat. The officer drew his sword, and they exchanged a few thrusts; but
the Frenchman soon declared, by his manner, that he was little acquainted with
the use of it. Ramble seeing this scorned to take advantage of him, and cried
out, Hold, Sir, -- you had better put up your sword than lose your life -- I
see you are not master of it. What do you mean by that, coward? said the
officer, in a great rage. Coward! (retorts Ramble) -- Advance then. Now they
fought with some earnestness, but Ramble soon disarmed him, and the Frenchman
finding himself at Ramble's mercy, was silent; when Ramble spoke to him thus,
and left him: The language you have held, would justify me in delivering you
over to the fishwomen. -- However, keep your council, be your own friend, and
remember -- you met with an English soldier, who had more consideration for the
helpless, than all your National Assembly put together.

CHAP. XXXVII.
THEY say that happiness consists in the imagination only, and that if we think
ourselves wise and rich, it is as well as being so. How can I want wealth, says
a fellow at Paris who lived by fetching water from the river, -- how can I want
wealth, when all the water in the Seine is mine, and I can sell it for two sous
a turn? -- So say philosophers, that nothing exists but in imagination.

Should your the poker want, and take it,
When it is as hot as fire can make it,
And with it burn yourself or coat;
They Would quickly prove it was not hot.
The fire, they would say, has in it, it is true,
A power of raising heat in you;
But no more heat's in the fire that heats you,
Than pain is in the stick that beats you.
The gentleman my friend Ramble met with at Paris, and who was with him when
they met with Mr. Raspe in the street, is a living test of this ideal
existence. He is of noble extraction, and may have had a crowned head in the
line of his pedigree; but whether or not, he believes it firmly; he tells you
he is lineally descended from an ancient king of Ulster; never loses sight of
his genealogy, and though he has dissipated his fortune, and reduced his income
to less than three hundred per year, he still conceives himself of the
blood royal, and but one step below a throne, talks in the plural number, and
receives his friends with, Cousin, we greet you well, -- giving them his hand
to kiss. He has often pleased himself with ambitious reveries, and has often
been distressed by the force of imagination. Some persons have called this
vapouring a madness, others distrait, but those who so reason, don't know him.
He is at times a very pleasant fellow; and as rational as any man in the world,
but at others, is not to be dispossessed of his opinion. Having worked up his
ideas to a certain pitch, he sees things which no one else sees, and realizes
all the vapors of his fancy. His reverie can only be snapped, like the
fiddle-string over-wound; and I have known him, (said Ramble) break from his
company with great abruptness, tell them he had business of the utmost
importance -- fly to the other end of the town, as if his well-being depended
on being there to a quarter of an hour, and nothing could undeceive him, but
tumbling over a lamplighter's ladder that stood in his way. This, and this
only, could convince him he had nothing to do. Not long since he courted a
widow, insisted upon showing her his country house, hired a post-chaise for the
purpose, and when he had got forty miles from town, was so taken up with his
lady, that he had nearly lost his way. It was with difficulty he could direct
the driver up one lane down another; now to the right, then to the left. The
horses nearly knocked up, and the lad's patience exhausted, he had almost lost
himself. The de'el's in it, (cried he) if we don't see he house presently. And,
on the lad's saying to himself, with a degree of vexation, (though loud enough
to be heard) I don't believe you have a house to see; it brought him to
himself, with a upon my conscience, my lad, I believe you are right -- turn
about, and go back to the first inn.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
ON Ramble's return to his hotel, Flint flew into his room, with the very purse
he had given to Lackit. There it is, and please your honor, (said Flint,
throwing it down upon the table); but how much money it contains, I know not,
not having taken the liberty to open it: it is pretty heavy and pretty full, and
I hope your honor will find yourself repaid with interest. Ramble astonished,
exclaimed, "How is this!" Fait, and you say that too, (returns Flint) how is
this! I tell your honor how it was. There is a room in this house, called the
Gambling-room, where gentlemen and no gentlemen, but persons of all
descriptions are welcome to go in and lose their money. Having enquired this
Master Lackit's character, and finding him only to be a sharper, I thought
myself a better man than him, and was determined to be one of the company.
There were many in the room shaking their elbows, and throwing out some little
bits of bones out of a box, making a damned noise with their tongues; so, your
honor, do you see, some had their purses in their hands, some on the table, and
that teef, that robbed your honor, true his purse down on the table with as
much contempt, as if it contained only counters, and cried out, The best of
tree trows for all it holds. I snatched up the purse, your honor, clapped it in
my pocket, and told the jontleman, with this leave, that as he seemed to set no
value on it, I would restore it to its right owner. It occasioned a great
hubbub, and had I not stood on my guard, in this manner, your honor,
(brandishing his cudgel about) the enemy would have closed in, and I should
have been overpowered. I bawled out, however, so as to be heard: Jontlemen, I
am a soldier, and not to be intimidated. The purse I have taken, belongs to my
master, and was taken from him under false colors; and if I don't make this
appear to your satisfaction, you may tear the cockade from my hat, and treat me
as you please. Upon this, your honor, I told them the story, and it turning
out a lie that Mr. Raspe's escape was owing to Master Lackit, they were one
and all against him, and I made the best of my way off with flying colors.
Ramble smiled at the story, and observed, that as he had won the prize, he
might keep it, but recommended it to him to count the contents, and if Lackit
had been lucky and added to the fifty guineas, to return him all that was over.
This Flint promised to do, saying, Money ill got would never trive.

Ramble now proceeded in search of Miss Raspe. He had enquired at all the
nunneries in Paris except two, and the Ursulines was one of these. On knocking
at the gate of the convent, the portress asked his will; he told her that he
was in search of a young lady, whose father had said, he had placed her at a
convent; but not having mentioned which, he had enquired at most of them. He
said she was but just brought there and from London, and that her name was
Raspe. The portress told him, there was no young lady of that name, but that
there was one, that in some respect answered to the description, but her name
was Simpson. Please to enquire (said Ramble) whether her father is not from
Liverpool; if she says yes, tell her there is a gentleman at the gate that
wishes to speak with her. She went, made the enquiry, and returned; said the
young lady was from Liverpool, and begged him to come in. He was now admitted
into the parlour, and Miss Raspe soon waited on him, attended by two sisters of
the fraternity. He told the ladies he had a message to this young lady from her
relations in England, and asked if he might be indulged with leave to
communicate it in private. He was told, that if ten minutes would be
sufficient, he might command it. On this the nuns retired, and Ramble
acquainted her with the trouble he had met with in finding her out; that he
believed he should never have done it, had not he met with her father
accidentally, who told him with an angry triumph, that he put her out of his
reach by lodging her in a convent. Miss Raspe replied, that nothing but her
being there placed, unknown to her as soon as she arrived at Paris, and the
strict orders the ladies of that house had received never to trust her with a
pen and ink, prevented her from writing to him. She wished he could contrive to
get her from that place; but in case he should not be able, he must follow her
to Florence which would be the end of their journey for some time. Can you
(said he) any way get without the walls? Impossible, (returned she) my father
has given a strict charge that I should see no one nor be left alone. It was
wonderful that you gained admittance, and more so, that we are left together;
but the ladies are too much used to such interdictions to pay much regard to
them. Ramble then asked, whether a good bribe to the portress, would not bring
that woman into their measures; she was sure, she said, to the contrary. At
this time, she heard the noise of thunder. Bless me (said she) how it thunders!
You must wait till the storm is over. If it continues, I shall be called to
chapel; for they always go to prayers when it thunders much. Should I not be
able to see you again whilst at Paris, where shall I write to you? We shall not
be long here. At the English coffeehouse. (replied the colonel.) I have found
out your father's lodgings, and shall have intelligence when you quit Paris.
The storm seemed to gather, for great peals of thunder were heard, and the
chapel-bell rung That Is our summons (said Miss Raspe) to chapel. I shall
presently be called. Ramble then gave her a letter, and she gave him her hand
to kiss. The two nuns now returned to take her to chapel, and told Ramble there
was a violent storm, and hoped he would not venture out till it was over; said
it was customary for them to attend prayers on such occasions, and hoped he
would excuse them. Instead of abating, the storm seemed to increase, the
thunder rolled and the lightning flashed, and having struck one corner of the
tower, part of it fell. This so frightened the ladies, who imagined the whole
building was coming down, that the gates, were opened, and they all ran into
the street, screaming as for life. It was a lucky opportunity for Ramble and
Miss Raspe. She flew to the parlour, where he was, and the gates being open,
fled with him from the convent. Ramble took her to his lodgings, collected his
baggage, and set off with her that evening for Versailles, and the next day
sent for a priest and was married to her. The knot being now tied, their alarm
in a great measure ceased. He continued at this place till he had equipped her
with necessaries. He had sent his valet and Flint on to Lions, in their way to
Italy, in order also to elude any search; nay, indeed, he said she should not
be disappointed in seeing that part of the world; for before he returned to
England, he would take her to Naples, and show her every thing in their way
that was worth seeing.

The report in Paris that the tower of the Ursulines had been struck with
lightning, that the building had fallen, and that the nuns had taken refuge in
the town, soon reached Raspe: he flew to the place with the anxiety of a
parent, but was much more alarmed when his daughter could not be found: his
fears first led him to think she must have been buried in the ruins, but the
portress assuring him, that she saw her afterward in the parlour, a little
quieted him. He roared and stamped like a madman, and being told a gentleman
with a cockade in his hat had been to pay her a visit that morning, and had not
lest the convent when the accident happened, he was convinced this was Ramble,
and that he had in the general confusion carried her off. His business now was,
if possible, to find out where they were, and to trace them. This he knew not
how to do. However his friend Mr. English advised him to send to the city
gates, and ask the guard, what post-carriages had passed out of the city that
evening. Intelligence was the next morning brought him, that a person,
described to be Flint by his dress, was sufficiently remarkable to be noticed,
had gone the Lyons' road in a post-chaise, with some other persons. This
induced him to pursue that road; and being more confirmed at every posthouse
they came to, he followed them quite to Lions; where he overtook them, but was
more unhappy at the disappointment in not meeting with his daughter, than
perhaps he would have been, had he found her in the arms of her lover. He tried
every means to bring over Flint and his fellow servants to his interest, but
without effect. Large sums of money were offered them, but they were not to be
corrupted. He did not, however, lose sight of them, but appointed a person to
watch their motions, and follow them wherever they went. Flint, will all his
cunning, was not up to this, and it was by this means Raspe at last discovered
his daughter; for waiting at Lions for orders from their master which way to
proceed, their route was traced from city to city all through Italy, and Raspe
with his slave Brutus joined them where they met; but this was not till they
reached Naples, Ramble and his lady having taken another route.

CHAP. XXXIX.
WHEN they reached Naples, Ramble was astonished to hear from Flint, that Raspe
was in that city. He almost doubted his veracity; but on Flint's assuring him,
that he met and conversed with Brutus, he could not but believe it. Flint was
among the multitude standing to hear one of those street orators, who harangue
the people in the streets, in order to get money from them, something in the
way of our mountebanks in England: In England they sell medicines; in Naples,
crucifixes.

The following relation is from a gentleman who traveled in that part of the
world, and who, assured me, was present at the harangue. A large cluster of
men, women, and children, were entertained to the highest degree, and made
exceedingly happy, by a poor fellow that was masked and played on the guitar;
he assembled the crowd by his songs and his music, and by a thousand merry
stories he told them, with infinite drollery. The old women sat listening with
their distaffs, spinning coarse flax, and wetting their thread with their
spittle; their grandchildren sprawling at their feet, and amused with the
twisting of the spindle. The men and their wives, they youth and their
mistresses sat in a circle, with their eyes fixed on the musician, who kept
them laughing for a great part of the evening, with his stories, which he
enlivened occasionally, with tunes on the guitar. At last, when the company
were most numerous and at the highest pitch of good humor, he suddenly pulled
off his mask, laid down his guitar, and opened a little box that stood before
him, and addressed his audience thus: Ladies and gentlemen, there is a time for
all things; we have had jesting enough, innocent mirth is excellent for the
body, but other things are requisite for the health of the soul. I will now,
with your permission, my honorable masters and mistresses, entertain you with
something serious, of infinitely greater importance than fiddling and singing;
something for which all of you will have reason to bless me as long as you
live. He shook out of a bag a great number of leaden crucifixes. "I am just
come," continued he, my fellow citizens, from the holy house of Loretto, on
purpose to furnish you with these jewels, more precious than all the gold of
Peru, and all the pearls of the ocean. Now, my beloved brethren and sisters,
you are afraid, I see, that I shall demand a price for these sacred crosses,
far above your abilities, and something correspondent with their value, by way
of indemnification for the fatigue and expense of the long journey I have made,
on your account, all the way from the habitation of the blessed virgin, to this
thrice renowned city of Naples, the riches and liberality of whose inhabitants
are celebrated all over the globe. No, my generous Neapolitans, I do not wish
to take the advantage of your pious and liberal dispositions. I will not ask
for these invaluable crucifixes, (all of which, let me inform you, have touched
the foot of the holy image of the blessed virgin, which was formed by the hands
of St. Luke, and moreover each of them has been taken in the santissimo
scodella, the sacred porringer, in which the virgin made the pap for the infant
Jesus). I will not, I say, demand an ounce of gold, nor ask a crown of silver;
my regard for you is such, that I shall let you have them for a penny a piece.
This morsel of eloquence, no doubt, was a great pennyworth; and when we
recollect the sums some men are paid for their oratory in England, though it
seldom produces so pathetic a specimen, we must conclude, then, eloquence is a
much scarcer and dearer commodity in England than in Italy.

It was at such a street harangue, as I have observed, that Flint met with
Brutus. Ramble finding Raspe therefore at Naples, endeavored to make the best
of it, and said he would now take some pains to bring about a reconciliation.
He wrote to Mr. Raspe, said as things had turned out, he was not unhappy at
finding him at Naples, that he had loved his daughter from the moment he saw
her, that he loved her for her personal qualities, and not for any appendage of
fortune, that might follow her; that she was now his wife; that he was a
gentleman both by birth and education, and not a beggar; that he was the object
of his daughter's choice, waved any claim upon her supposed fortune; was
convinced he could maintain her well upon his own; and would pledge himself to
make her happy. Mrs. Ramble wrote also to her father, said every thing in her
power to obtain his pardon, exculpate her husband for any unbecoming or
unhandsome conduct, took the blame if there was any; upon herself; said no
woman on earth could be happier than she should, with her father's forgiveness;
and with his leave they would throw themselves at his feet. Raspe was of too
irrascible a disposition to listen to any terms. Revenged he would be of the
seducer; as he called it, of his child; and hearing there was a certain
description of men in most Italian cities, who, for a premium, would lie wait
for, and dispatch any one we wished to be rid of, was determined to find out
one of these men, and try to effect it. He made his Black acquainted with this
resolution, who though according to a received opinion, that negroes have not
that fellow-feeling which we naturally feel, shuddered at the idea. Raspe,
however, worked him up to be faithful in this business, by fair promises and
future rewards, and he according to his master's orders looked out for a man of
this stamp. Such men are in Italy not difficult to be met with, and Brutus
having found one, introduced him to his master, and left them together. He was
a man with a downcast look, with murder written in his countenance.

"What is your name, friend?" said Raspe. "I have no name," answered the
fellow. What are you called then? returned Raspe. "Bravo," replied he. "And
what is your profession?" says Raspe. "A murderer," retorts he, and with a
sternness that made even the unfeeling old man tremble.

Raspe, however, collected himself, and smiling replied, A very honorable
profession! You need not sneer; (said Bravo) as times go, it is a profession
equally honorable, with many truly called so. There Is your accoucheurs, I
believe they are called in your country, men-midwives. How many murders do they
commit, hired for it as we are, destroying infants in the birth; and yet
(continued he with a sneer) accoucheurs are men of honorable profession! There
are your medical practitioners, that learn experience at the expense of other
men's lives. -- What are they but murderers? And yet physic (sneering) is an
honorable profession! Then, again, there are your lawyers, the greatest
murderers of all. These murder a man's fortune, good name, and peace of mind.
The pain we give is but a flee-bite to it -- It lasts but a instant; -- whereas
their stabs smart for years, and yet the law (sneering) is an honorable
profession! So again, your slave trade merchants, that deal in human flesh....
He was going on, but Raspe feeling the force of his reasoning, cried, No more
of your remarks. -- Are you not afraid of detection? Not much for that,
(replied the Bravo) every profession has its risks, and we are well paid for
ours. Those who employ us are equally criminal, of course are always hush, lest
they should betray themselves. Besides, our business is generally done in the
dark, and a dead man tells no tales. The laws also of this country favor us;
for if a man is under prosecution, there are so many courts to go through, and
so many loop-holes in each part of the process; that it must be a very
extraordinary case indeed, if we cannot slip through some of them. -- But what
is your business with me? Raspe asked him in confidence, whether he might rely
on him. Bravo looking sternly and steadfastly in his face, and slapping his
breast, cried, "Honor!" "I want a man's throat cut," said Raspe. "I Will do it,"
returns the fellow smartly, slapping his breast again. His price was asked, and
being told 50 pistoles, half in hand, Raspe gave him the money. "You have a
black," said the fellow. I have (returned Raspe) What then? These are men
(replied he) of no conscience. You must order him to show me the man, and
assist me.

Raspe told him he would, and bid him be with him again an hour hence; but
before he left him, said, he hoped he should not be deceived; that what he
undertook would be effectually done; and that no qualms of conscience or human
feelings would prevent it. None, (said the fellow, warmly). If we had either
one or the other, we could not live by our profession. I Will give you an
instance (continued he); a gentleman hired me the other day to cut a man's
throat -- I did it -- and had 50 pistoles. His father offered me the next day
one hundred, to cut my employer's throat, and generously paid me before hand. I
did it." -- Did it! (says Raspe) as how?" -- When I returned to my first
employer (replied he) to receive my money, he was so pleased with my
expedition, that he gave me twenty more. I thanked him -- he was going to leave
me, -- but I stopped him -- told him, I had received a hundred for cutting his
throat -- he started -- said he would give me the like sum for honestly
acquainting him with it, and was going to give me the money; but I told him, as
I ever acted upon honor, and had received my reward, I must perform the deed;
so without further ceremony, I whipped out my knife, seized him by the throat,
as I may do you, (seizing Raspe by the collar) and was through his heart in a
twinkling. Then quitting his hold added, We give very little pain, Sir, we do
our business secundum artem. Raspe was out of breath at this grasp of the
fellow, and scarce knew whether he was alive or dead; but recovering himself a
little said, Well -- return to me in an hour.

CHAP. XL.
RAMBLE was invited by Prince Caraccioli to a musical piece he had got up for
the entertainment of his friends at his own private theater; and it was found
out that Ramble and his lady meant to be present. This was the evening in which
it was settled that the horrid deed was to be done. Raspe had brought over
Brutus to his purpose, and the plan was accordingly laid. Brutus and Bravo met
for this purpose, some days prior to the time fixed. Bravo asked him, if he had
received his master's orders to assist him? Brutus said, he was to show him the
colonel, as he went to the opera. "Aye," (replied the Bravo, taking the black
by the hand and looking sternly in his face) and murder him! Me no murder
colonel, (said Brutus), colonel is good man. And is not your master a bad one
(asked the fellow) to think of such a thing? Massa bad man indeed! replied
Brutus. You cannot love your master? said the assassin. Me no lose Massa,
(returned the other) Massa beat poor negro -- use poor negro ill. Is there any
harm in killing a man (asks the Bravo) who wishes to kill another? Brutus
replied, Colonel no killee Massa -- Massa killee colonel. Now suppose
(continued the Bravo) instead of killing the colonel, for which your master
would give me fifty pieces, suppose we were to kill your master? He deserves
death for meditating the death of another. It was not the principle of
retaliation that induced this fellow to this determination, but the sight of a
great box of money in Raspe's possession, when he was with him. Though Massa be
bad man and beat poor negro, (said Brutus, trembling) Me no kille Massa -- poor
negro no bad man. Did you see (said the fellow) what a quantity of money he
has? Brutus hugged himself at this thought, and answered "Yeas." Let me into
his room at night (said the Bravo) I Will kill him -- you shall not be concerned in
it, and yet you shall have half that great bag of money. What I do with money?
asked Brutus. Carry you to your own country, said the Bravo. This won over the
black at once. The idea of going back to his own country overset him. He agreed
to the measure, and it was settled, that on that very evening at twelve o'clock
at night, when he was to way-lay the colonel on his return from the theater,
that Brutus should admit him to his master's chamber, when he was asleep; for
Raspe always went to bed early, scarce was up later than ten o'clock. All the
difference (said the Bravo) well be, that he will fall by the dagger that he
would plunge into the breast of his son-in-law. Brutus promised to admit him,
but said Mind, I no hand in it. Not the least (returned the Bravo). It will
only be the old one outwitted. Brutus was pleased with this, and replied Then
Massa be outwitted indeed! -- No beat poor negro again.

This dreadful piece of business would certainly have taken place, but
Providence interposed to prevent it. Predestination is a doctrine exploded by
sensible men; but too many instances occur in these volumes, not to show that
what must be, will be. The timely discovery of the plan laid for lady Dashit;
the colonel's meeting with Raspe at the attorney's; his meeting him again also
at Paris; the escape of Miss Raspe from the convent of the Ursulines; the
overthrow of the scheme laid for the colonel's life, and that also meditating
the death of Raspe: One would be led to think that these events were studied,
and not the effects of chance. Chance, did I say? What is chance but an
interposition of Providence, tending to a purpose short-sighted man is
unacquainted with? What is luck in a lottery or at gaming? He must be an
obstinate reasoner, that will not allow it must be more than mere accident,
that shall beggar one man and enrich another. If this be attributed to luck,
and luck be no other than good fortune, brought about by chance, the same may
be said of all the fortuitous events of life. Philosophers, however, will allow
the interposition of Providence in great events, denying it only in small ones;
but these must be the philosophers of a Pagan age; they cannot be Christians,
when the Deity has declared, that not a sparrow falls to the ground without his
knowledge, and that all the hairs of our head are numbered.

Flint met Brutus a day or two after his conference with Bravo. The people had
flocked into the street after dark, to see the effect of an irruption of
Vesuvius, then pouring forth its liquid torrents of fire. Brutus and Flint were
among the rest, and the negro's mind, disturbed with the project he had engaged
in, was almost panic struck at the blazing of the mountain, which put him in
mind of the punishment awaiting upon wickedness. Hah! honey (said Flint to
Brutus, in meeting with him) look at that fire, and tremble. Brutus in fact did
tremble, and that not a little, and told Flint that he was sorry he had left
Paris "Why?" said Flint. Noting, (replied Brutus, sighing,) Oh poor Massa! and
on saying this, he looked about him as one deranged in mind. "Is your master
dead?" said Flint. Not dead yet, (cried Brutus) going to be dead, (and here he
shed tears) Massa would killee me. Me no killee Massa. Kill your Master,
(returned Flint) certainly not. -- I hope you have no such thoughts -- if you
have, a sure as you do it, the devils will chuck you into that fire. Brutus
still trembling, cried, Me no killee Massa, -- Bravo come and killee him. Flint
apprehending something in these words of the poor black, and finding him in
such a situation as to be led almost to any thing; told him he would take him
to the colonel, and the colonel should be his friend. No go to the colonel,
(cried he) colonel hang me. Phu, nonsense! said Flint, and took him with him.

Flint having brought him to his master, Brutus opened to him the horrid
scheme, and Ramble thought he could not do a better thing than get the black to
admit him privately into his master's room, and seize the villain at the moment
he was going to perpetrate the deed; thinking by this he should not only
apprehend the murderer, and bring him to justice, but that the fear of
detection, and the gratitude he must feel for this act of the colonel in saving
his life, would be the best means that could be devised to bring Raspe round;
for all the concessions he could make, or any arguments he could use would not
effect it. He, therefore, determined not to go to the opera that evening, but
proposed to Brutus, that if he would admit him into his master's chamber a
little before twelve, he would there wait till the Bravo came, and they lay
hold of him, and assured the black that if he did the business properly, he
would not only reward him, but purchase his freedom.

CHAP. XLI.
RAMBLE was now as happy as his heart could wish. He had reached the summit of
his ambition, that of obtaining the woman he loved, and had little doubt, but a
reconciliation with her father would take place, and every other difference be
made up. We are now married (said he to his wife) and he cannot take you from
me, and my business now shall be to find some method of bringing about a
reconciliation. The story he had heard from Brutus, did not alarm him; he had
contrived to turn it to his advantage. They had received a very polite
invitation from Prince Caraccioli to continue some weeks with him, and this was
the more extraordinary as the fashionable world at Naples, though they keep
splendid equipages, and a large hall of servants, are by no means hospitable.
They visit, keep up a great deal of etiquette, but a man may as well break his
neck as his fast, in one of their houses. Their servants are generally married
men, are paid by the week, and live at home with their own families, attending
their master only at certain hours of the day; and at night when the family go
to rest, out of an establishment of twenty servants there shall not be one man
that sleeps in the house, and the master after a certain hour shall have to
wait upon himself. An ingenious friend of mine, relates the following story of
a lady at Paris, where the custom of visiting is much the same as at Naples;
and will give the reader an insight into the nature of fashionable intercourse.
We are apeing the manners of the French, and are very near them in all their
points of etiquette, and a very little time will give us the following scene in
London.

A young widow of quality and great fortune, whose house was the rendezvous of
all the beaux esprits of Paris, was at her toilet one day in high consultation
with a general officer and two priggish abbes, concerning a head-dress she had
invented, and meant to establish as a fashion. She was one of those ladies who
felt her own consequence, talked loud, said a great deal, and spoke upon all
occasions very decisively. These gentlemen having passed many encomiums on her
smartness, taste, and elegance, she was in the highest spirits, and swung round
from her glass, exulting with "Allons mes enfans, a la gloire." At this moment
her servant entered, and informed her that Madame la Comtesse had accepted her
invitation to dinner, and would do herself the honor of waiting on her. This
unexpected intelligence almost petrified her. Her spirits sunk, and she was
scarce able to speak. Had notice been brought her of the death of her father,
or an only child, she could not have been more damped, and with the accents of
despair and staring eyes, drawled out Est -- il po-si-ble, qu'on puisse e-tre
si beat! She examined the servant particularly, Are you sure she said that
she would come? Very sure, madam, replied the fellow. Fresh exclamations followed.
"Did you invite her for this day?" said the general. Undoubtedly I did,
(returned the lady) that mark of politeness could be no longer delayed; and
what then? She is connected with some of my relations in the west, has been in
town a week, and I could do no less; but I could not suppose she was vulgar
enough to accept the invitation. She has, I find; and the horrid woman, with a
rudeness and ignorance of life without example, sends me word she will come.

That she should have misunderstood your ladyship's kindness so prodigiously
(said one of the abbe's) is shocking. Shocking, (returned the lady) it is a
barbarous return of civility, and will teach me to be more upon my guard in
future. As soon as I heard she was in town, I left my name at her door, she
returned my visit the next day, and having charged my Swiss never to let her
in, I have not seen her. Cela est tout simple you know and selon les regles,
for the woman is old enough to be my mother, and, of course, we must be
intolerable to each other. Had she had any ideas of good breeding, she must
have seen that my invitation was merely a matter of polite ceremony, and, of
course, should as politely have refused it, as when we press a friend to take a
dish of chocolate, we never expect it to be accepted. Had we thus understood
each other, we might have visited for years, dined and supped together, and
been on the most agreeable footing imaginable; but this instance of
grossierete, must put an end to all future connection. -- Well -- there is no
remedy. I must submit to the horrid business.

Now the reader must be told that the countess accepted the invitation to
dinner, not out of respect, or any desire to dine with that lady, but par pure
malice, and purposely to plague her whom she hated. However, she made shift to
show seeming good spirits and good humor, by a continued grin the whole time
she was with her, and all the next day complained that her face ached with the
distortion. The dinner was as great a purgatory to the countess, as it could
possibly prove to the other; and they spent together the diable of a
tete-a-tete.

CHAP. XLII.
THE whole country of Naples is a scene of hypocrisy, accompanied with
superstition. It infects all orders of men, not only the upper class, but the
lower; the gentry, the army, and the church. The military of Naples are as full
of superstition as the monks are of hypocrisy. -- The following laughable story
happened whilst Ramble was at Naples, and Flint was a party in it. A capuchin
friar, a man of infamous character, who had formerly been one of the banditti
in Silicy, and who, tired of a life of danger, fled from that island, took the
cowl, and became a monk of St. Francis, of one of the convents in Naples; and
to make some atonement for his past life, with the hopes of getting again into
credit, he put on the mask of hypocrisy, submitted to severer penance than the
rest of his fraternity, wore a larger cordon, and put on the sanctified
countenance of a saint. But he was an old sinner, and his flesh had not left
off warring against the spirit. He therefore was on the look out for a wench in
a snug corner, where he might carry on his amors unnoticed by the brotherhood.
There are not wanting females of that description in every capital, much less
in the capital of Naples; he soon fixed his eye on a lady, who lodged on a
ground floor in an obscure part of the city, paid his addresses to her, and was
admitted as an occasional lover. The monks of St. Francis carry no money; but
as the females of easy virtue in Naples, are not without their superstition; by
admitting this monk, she hoped to do away her offenses, and by parcelling out
her favors to this man among others, she was in hopes, by partaking of his
sanctity, she should lessen her sins. This lady told him, that she was in
keeping by a corporal of the life-guards, which was a Spanish regiment, that he
was a very jealous passionate man; but that if he was not afraid of the
resentment of one of six feet two inches high, with a spada of uncommon length,
and who, when angered, was as furious as a tiger, she should be glad to receive
him now and then in her keeper's absence; that he frequently attended the king,
after the opera, to Portici, and when he was out on duty, she would let him
know.

The monk, with all the impatience of a passionate lover, waited her summons.
At last it came, and he hied to her lodgings. Matters were soon adjusted, and
the parties were in bed. It so happened that the life-guard-man deserted from
duty that night, and unexpectedly returned home; finding the door locked, he
knocked hard, he thundered. Lord! (said she to the monk), Vengioza is returned;
he knocks at the door; should he find us together, he will certainly be the
death of us both. The capuchin, more alarmed for an apprehended loss of
sanctity, than fear of death or drubbing, jumped out of bed, gathered up his
clothes, and crept under it. It was so near the ground, that it was with
difficulty he could squeeze beneath it. He was no sooner concealed, than madam
rose and let her cara sposa in; he made a great noise at being kept at the door
so long, and bid her strike a light. Now the monk's heart fainted within him.
At every stroke of the flint, his spirits sunk; but the artful minx, in
searching for the tinder-box, which was under the bed, threw some of the water
from the chamber pot into it. The tinder would not kindle. She said it was wet.
The monk's spirits revived, and she desired her lover to go and light the
candle at the lamp in the next street. There are no public lamps in the streets
of Naples, but this was a lamp burning under an image of the virgin. No -- he
would rather go to bed in the dark. Down went the capuchin's spirits again. He
kept a brandy bottle also under the bed, and trying to reach it, very nearly
caught hold of the monk's head. The lady, however, relieved the capuchin from
this fright, by reaching it herself. She and Vengioza were now within the
sheets, and the weight of the two so pressed down the sacking, as almost to
stifle the priest below, who began to consider how he should escape. First he
thought of squeezing from his confinement, seizing the spada, which his rival
had laid with his clothes on the chair, and demanding capitulation for himself
and the lady. No; that might lead to a discovery. Whilst he was considering how
to act, his rival snored; all his fears, of course, vanished. With some
difficulty he edged himself by little and little from under the bed, dressed
himself in the soldier's clothes, lest he should be discovered in the streets
so late in the night, and left his own garments on the chair in the room of
those he took. He sallied thus boldly out, and madam was not unhappy he was
gone.

When without the house, he began to consider how he should repay his rival for
the fright he had put him into; at last the thought struck him, that he would
go to the guard-room and tell the officer on guard, that if he was disposed to
have some mirth at the expense of a capuchin, he could now give him an
opportunity. The capuchins being generally very severe on the conduct of the
military men at Naples, the officer was happy in the idea of a retaliation. The
monk was not discovered in his new dress, as the soldier whose clothes he had
on, wore a wig, and that wig covered the monk's bare head. It happened that
Flint, who had been shut out of his lodgings, had taken himself to the
guardroom with the officers permission, to wait the return of day, and as Flint
was a soldier, he was readily admitted. The monk assured the officer, that he
had traced a capuchin friar into the house of a woman of ill fame, that he
listened at the window, and knew they were in bed together; and that if he
would go with him, he would conduct him to the place. Flint seemed to enjoy the
idea; they took a lantern, and the officer, Flint, the monk, and two or three
of the guard, hasted to the place of rendezvous. Flint observed, how happy he
should be, if they could pop in upon them whilst the monk was upon his kness,
saying his prayers. Having reached the house, they thundered at the door, and
demanded admittance in the king's name. The soldier within, apprehensive it
might be the guard come to seize him for running from his duty, soon occupied
the place the capuchin had left, but not before he had scrambled up his
clothes, as he thought, which he took under the bed with him. Thus secure, the
lady opened the door, and was told by the officer, that he demanded the body of
a capuchin friar, that was in her room. Knowing the monk had escaped some time
before, she assured him, no capuchin was there. "Look under the bed," said the
monk, supposing him to be there concealed. He accordingly took the lantern, and
discovering him. You may always find a fox, (said he) by his smell. Fah -- how
he stinks, one may scent him a mile off. By my shoul and you may say that too,
(says Flint). He smells stronger than a pole-cat. Give me the lantern -- I Will
soon ferret him from his ambuscade. The monk now began to pull out the cowl,
and the tunic Ecce signum, (said he) first the rags, then the friar. You Will
have some trouble (said Flint) to dislodge him; let us lay a train and blow the
enemy up, battery and all. The monk having pulled out the clothes and the
cordon, next drew out the sinner. The lady in all this bustle was raving round
the room, Ah mio Dio, Siamo perduti, Siamo perduti Siamo perduto means -- Oh my
G-d! I am ruined, I am ruined.
. Charmed as you have been, (cried Flint) you must find some other priest to
perform duty now.

The soldier, who conceived this to have been a judgment on him, for visiting
his girl on a day of abstinence, and not bowing to the crucifix in his way to
Portici, stood trembling and mute before them. At last he broke silence, with
assuring them he was no capuchin. The officer observed, that he merited
castigation for denying his order, and Flint took up the cordon, which as I
have noticed, was a heavy one, and swearing by St. Patrick, said he would give
him a dozen for belying his colors. Vengioza, in stupid amazement, took it all
patiently, was dressed by them in the capuchin's garments, his hands tied
behind him, and thus conducted to the guard-room, protesting all the way that
he was no capuchin, and receiving stripes as he went, as the officer said by
the order of St. Francis, Flint called it running the gauntlet.

The monk dreading a discovery at the guard-room, excused himself to the
officer, said he was sorry that he could not accompany them, as he had to mount
guard early, and recommended it to him to take good care of the priest. --
Having left the company, he stole into his own convent, and having a second
suit of monastic clothes, put them on, and carried the suit of regimentals he
wore and laid them down at the gate of a capuchin convent far distant from his
own, with a view that when the matter came out, it might not be traced to him.

The life-guard-man, when brought to the guard-room, was known by some of his
comrades, underwent their ridicule, and for absenting himself from duty without
leave, was sentenced by a court martial to be flogged. This so exasperated the
whole Spanish regiment to which he belonged, that they determined to be
revenged of the capuchin; and it being shortly after discovered who the author
of this deep-concerted plan was, a riot ensued, several of the fraternity were
stiletto'd, and had not the inquisition taken it up, brought the monk to trial,
and ordered him flagellation in the public streets, an insurrection might have
been the consequence. As it was, matters were brought to a conclusion by the
public punishment of the friar; he was dressed by way of ridicule in a Spanish
habit, stripped naked to the waist, mounted upon an ass, carried round the city
in procession, amid the jeers of the populace and the whole Spanish regiment,
and whipped as he went, for denying his order.

CHAP. XLIII.
THE Prince, as I have observed, proposing to entertain his friends with a
musical piece, at his private theater, ordered Squallini his chapel-master to
put one up, that is, prepare some piece for the purpose. It was at a time when
there were no female performers at Naples; but that his highness might not be
disappointed, he applied to three gentlemen, whose wives sung very well, and
requested of them to let their ladies perform the women's parts, which would be
but short; and as no one would be admitted but the prince's particular friends,
and his highness would consider it as a favor done to him, he hoped they would
have no objection. They did not choose to give him an immediate answer, but
proposed giving him the meeting, and talking the matter further over; saying,
that if they liked the piece, they should have no objection, and having asked
their wives, they consented upon the same terms. The names of these gentlemen
were, Bavelli, Torriano, and Napioni. On being met for the purpose, Bavelli
asked Squallini the subject matter of his piece. What signifies the subject?
(said he) your eyes and ears will soon tell you, when the piece is performed.
Napioni insisted on knowing, for he had given his consent conditionally, and it
was necessary they should know what characters the women were to perform,
maids, wives, or widows. Squallini told them they were all to be married
ladies, and to appear with their husbands. Then I am sure (says Napioni, who
was a very jealous man) I shall not like it for one. Many improper liberties
are taken with unmarried women on the stage; and if so, I don't know what may
happen to married ones. None (said Torriano, laughing) but what they are very
well acquainted with. Be assured (replied Squallini) the strictest decorum will
be observed. It is a heavenly subject, and the scene lies among the Gods and
Goddesses. It is that of the Celestial Deities descending upon earth to
congratulate mankind on the return of Freedom. Those nations that have emerged
from despotism, as England, France, Holland, and the like, are exhibited as
triumphant; those who continue still enthralled as Spain, Turkey, Italy, and so
on, are shown in subjection. A very high-flown subject indeed, (says Bavelli)
and are your songs equal to the subject? Quite so, (answered Squallini) I would
give the public a specimen of a duet between an angel of light and an angel of
darkness; -- But I shall be obliged to leave it out, Pluto having sent the
latter on an embassy to Spain to instigate them to make war with Germany, that
he may be revenged of them for abolishing the inquisition. This occasioned a
broad laugh. But Napioni asked what parts their three wives were to act? Juno,
Proserpine, and Venus, (answered Squallini) as the wives of Jupiter, Pluto, and
Vulcan. These fellows, observed Napioni, are all very liquorish dogs, and he
should not like to trust his wife with either of them. What! not in heaven?
says Bavelli. No not in heaven (answered Napioni) -- I have heard of Jupiter's
ravishing Io in a cloud. Don't be alarmed, gentlemen, (said Squallini) there is
no harm to be feared. Their supposed husbands are all opera-singers. Besides it
will be all in public. What of that? (retorts Napioni). The more public they
say, the more private. Many an intrigue has been carried on in public. Jupiter
violated Danae's honor in form of a shower of gold; Leda in the shape of a
swan; and Europa in that of a bull. I may in future have a parcel of satyrs
instead of children. -- Horns, my good friend, have frightened many a man.
Well, Squallini, (said Torriano) you are welcome to the use of my wife. You
shall have the command of her for one night, and according to the English
proverb, as she can sing, if she will not sing, I give you full power to make her
sing. I have given my consent (says Bavelli) and shall not retract, nor do I
suppose my friend Napioni will. Pardon me (replies Napioni) you can only answer
for yourself. Sure (said Squallini) Napioni, you are not jealous? Certainly not
(returns Napioni) -- but as you will naturally introduce an entertainment for
your deities, and the nectar ambrosial will be going about, I don't know what
may be the consequence. Should my wife get a sip of this nectar between her
lips, her mouth may water for it for ever after. For master Pluto, I cannot say
much against him; but as to Jupiter and Vulcan, there are not wickeder rascals
in all the skies. Well, (said Bavelli) the majority is against you. Two to one
always carry it; so you must submit. Must! (returns Napioni), -- If I must, I
must; but take notice, Squallini, teach your gods to be well behaved; I shall
be present, and if I see them proceed to the least earthly liberty, I Will put an
end to the entertainment at once. I Will take her away in the midst of it. -- You
would not surely (says Torriano) interrupt the performance? You would be the
laugh and ridicule of the whole audience. No matter for that (returns Napioni).
Every man should be the guardian, not only of his wife's honor, but his own.
After this altercation, it was settled that the ladies were to perform the
parts assigned them, and the piece was to be performed. Colonel Ramble and his
wife, were not present at the representation. The colonel had business of
greater moment on his hands, as the following chapter will show.

CHAP. XLIV.
THE important day being now arrived, when the minds of all parties were busy
in their respective cares; when Raspe was anxious for the death of Ramble,
Bravo for the death of Raspe, and Ramble and Brutus for the life of Raspe. The
evening being come, Ramble went to Mr. Raspe's lodgings, between eleven and
twelve at night, armed with a pair of loaded pistols, and was admitted by
Brutus into the apartments. His master, whose disturbed imagination made him
very unhappy, went to his bed an hour sooner than usual, leaving strict orders
with Brutus to sit up, and come and wake him as soon as he learned that the
deed was done. Raspe had two rooms, his bedchamber was the inner one, and just
at the door entering into the inner chamber was a window with a recess, before
which a curtain was let down, so that a person could stand concealed very well
behind this curtain; nor could any one approach the inner chamber door, but
that person could lay hold of him. The colonel was let in here a few minutes
before twelve, and took his stand behind the window-curtain I have described.
-- Raspe was then asleep. -- After continuing there concealed some minutes, he
looked at his watch, and found it wanted but five minutes of the time.

Brutus, who slept always on the floor by his master's bed, did not so now --
he was more upon the look-out. Raspe who had laid down in a morning gown,
wanted no waking; his thoughts were sufficient monitors; he tossed and flung
about, and was heard to say, Dreadful slumbers! -- no quiet sleep, when the
mind's in agitation! -- hope the business will be done effectually! The clock
strikes twelve. Raspe rises from his bed, comes into the outer room, and
shudders. -- Hark! said he, This is the hour of business. My heart fails me,
I Will to my bed again. He no sooner re-entered his room, but the assassin, led
in by Brutus, and armed with a dagger, came into the other room. "Tread
softly," fays Brutus. "Which is his bed-room?" asks the fellow. "Dare,"
answered Brutus, pointing to it. "Is he asleep?" said the assassin, [all this
was in an under voice]. Yes, (replied Brutus) snoring as a hog. Know you where
the money is? says the fellow. "Yes," answered Brutus. Well then, (returned the
assassin) we'll secure him first -- then the bag. The fellow now took out the
dagger from his bosom, and passing the curtain to go into the chamber, Ramble
started on him, seized him by the wrist that held the dagger, and presenting a
pistol to his breast, said "Villain! I have thee." They struggled, the colonel
threw him down, wrested the dagger from him, and stood over him with the dagger
at his breast. Raspe hearing the noise, jumped from his bed, came to the door,
and seeing Ramble and the fellow under him, was struck motionless. Brutus on
the other hand was as much surprised; but his surprise was joy. After a pause,
Raspe advancing to Brutus, cried Satan! have thou betrayed me? Ramble answered
for him No, Sir -- he has not betrayed you, but saved your life; and bidding
Brutus call in the guard from without, with Ramble had brought with him, added,
Consider this, Sir, as the most fortunate hour of your life, prevented in the
execution of a horrid crime, and saved from the destruction that awaited you in
this world, and the miseries of a future one. Brutus now brought in two armed
men; whom he ordered to bind the arms of the assassin, and take him to the
inquisitor-general, saying he would soon follow them. The man being bound and
taken off, Brutus frisked, rejoicing and crying. Brutus be so glad! -- no
killee Massa now! -- and went after them. "Peace, varlet!" roared out Raspe;
but Ramble checked him, with Be not angry with your slave, to him you owe your
life; had he not a heart that shudders at the thought of vice, I should have
been your victim, and you would have lived a martyr to remorse. If you still
thirst for my blood, take this dagger, and drink your fill -- having saved the
life of the father of her who is next my heart, I can resign my own -- but know
that in the moment you deprive me of existence, you kill him who has saved you,
make your daughter a widow, bring her with sorrow to the grave, and leave her
unborn babe an orphan. It is not in the power of words to describe the
situation of Raspe's mind. The terror of the act he was about to perpetrate,
the uncommon generosity, of the colonel, the love he bore his daughter, with
the dread of impending justice, caused such a conflict of soul within him, as
would have unmanned the hardiest villain. He selt the force of Ramble's words,
became sensible of his own rashness, and smitten with the sincerest
compunction, held out the dagger he had taken from Ramble, blubbered like a
child, and with broken accents cried, Whatever animosity I might have had -- it
drops with this weapon; [and here he dropped it]. You have taught me, colonel,
that anger deprives a man of reason, and leads him often to such acts, as in a
moment of reflection he would tremble at -- Lead me to my child -- I Will beg her
forgiveness, and implore her kind interest with you, to forget the wrong I
meant to do you, and blot the remembrance of it from us all.

Raspe was now reconciled to his daughter. They returned to England in harmony
together. He gave her a fortune of 20,000l. and, at his death, left her near a
hundred thousand more, to her and her heirs; but in case her husband survived
her, he was to have the interest only for his life, and the principal at his
death to be divided among his next of kin. They lived many years happily, but
had no issue. The colonel survived her, but never married again.

The reader may wish to know what became of Miss Trevor and Lady Dashit. The
former married well, and the latter fearful of a second snare being laid for
her, gave the idea of marriage up, and died a widow.

FINIS.
Just published by the Author of this Work,
A fourth Edition, in 3 Vols Price 2s., sewed, OF MODERN TIMES; OR THE
ADVENTURES OF GABRIEL OUTCAST, EMBELLISHED WITH TWELVE COPPERPLATES, Designed
by that truly celebrated Artist J. IBBETSON, AND BEAUTIFULLY ENGRAVED.

This work in written in imitation of Gil Blas, is a keen satire on the times,
and penned with infinite humor; is calculated to new the rising generation the
arts, fallacies, and follies of the world, in all situations and professions of
life; of course, is a useful family-book, conveying information under the mask
of entertainment. It will teach more knowledge of life in once reading, than
twenty years experience.

Since the first edition of the work, more than a third has been added to it.

ALSO, A New Work begun with the Year, CALLED TRUSLER's MONTHLY COMMUNICATIONS;
OR Cheap and Interesting Magazine, Price 4d. only.

Six Numbers are now out, and may be had.

This work will contain a collection of valuable and entertaining tracts, many
original, some selected, on a variety of subjects, namely, Politics,
Agriculture, Physic, Surgery, Natural History and Philosophy, Law Reports,
Biography, in short, on every thing worth attention, adapted to all readers
from the scholar to the farmer. Dr. Trusler pledges himself it shall never
contain any thing but what a sensible man may peruse with pleasure; and as his
great object hereby is to diffuse knowledge among those who cannot afford to
lay out much money in books, he hopes he shall meet with the encouragement of
the reading part of mankind, to whom four shillings yearly can be no object.
Note. The news carriers will serve this.



