THE HISTORY OF TOM FOOL.

More know TOM FOOL, than TOM FOOL knows.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for T. WALLER, opposite Fetter-Lane, Fleet Street.

M DCC LX.

THE HISTORY OF TOM FOOL.
CHAP. I.
THE Report of young Fool's Marriage spread like a new Fashion. Curiosity
brought several of the neighboring Gentry to stare at the Wretch, Lady Greensy
had thrown herself away upon.

Sir Martin Fullmatt very wisely observed (as he and his Family were traveling
to pay the Wedding Visit) that there was something very dark in this Match. But
Matrimony, though it may make the Husband dim-sighted, always opens the Wife's
Eyes: Therefore Lady Ferd declared, she could see the Scheme as plain as
Noonday; but must beg to be excused from saying any more yet, -- it was Time
enough, -- let the longest Liver take Broom Field.

Sir Martin. Right, my Dear, leave it to Time, -- that is my Way; and I may say
without Vanity, in all the Affairs of Consequence, that have been on the Carpet
for 48 Years, I never once have been mistaken, -- I have always left them to
Time.


Lady. I wish Sir Martin you would not put one in Mind of Time so; -- you know
it vapors me, and therefore choose to do it. -- Lord, if Greensy's Husband
should dare --


Sir Martin. How Madam, am I?


Lady. Patience, dear Sir Martin, I Am not going to make any Comparisons: As to
the Fright she has married, he must be some odd Mortal, a strange Animal to be
sure. But her Ladyship altered her Opinion before she had been half an Hour in
Mr. Fool's Company. The Moment he went out of the Room, she addressed his Lady
with; -- by my Soul, Bella, I dote upon your Choice: Let me dye, my dear
Creature, if I don't honor your Taste; the young Gentleman is immensely
agreeable, and it must be vastly odd indeed, if you ar'nt vastly happy.


Lady Fool. Indeed, Lady Ferd, I have no Reason to complain -- as to the
Censures of the Word --


Lady Ferd. Well, now, that is vastly high indeed; What have People of Fashion
to do with the World; the vulgar Part of it I mean: Women of Quality are not to
be called to Account for what they do, so they have nothing to answer for.

Young Fullmatt, Sir Martin's eldest, swore he would not give a Fox's Brush for
all that the World said of him, one way or the other; but yet, if he sat in the
House, as his Father did, he would muzzle the Mob's Mouths though -- they shou'dn't
babble about, what their Betters did. -- He wished he was Whipper-in to'um,
that is all.


Sir Martin. Child, the Observations made by Inferiors are extrajudicial, and
politically --


Lady Ferd. Dear Sir Martin, for Heaven's Sake, no Politics, nor no Parties.


Miss. Dear Meem, that is true, I kent bear any Party, but one at Kedrill, and I
beg we may have a Pool; will not that agreeable Creater your Spouse, my Lady, make
one with us?


Lady Fool. Mr. Fool, Ladies, never plays at Cards.


Lady Ferd. My God! -- How do you do to kill Time then, when you don't see
Company? I am sure, Sir Martin and I should be the two dullest Creatures
existing, if it wa'ant for Cards, -- for he is so apt to doze after Dinner; and
I detest Reading.


Young Fullmatt. I hope my Lady, with your Leave, to have the Honor of
introducing Mr. Fool to our Sporting Club.


Lady Fool. I am obliged to you Sir; but I have heard him say, he is not fond
of Horseracing. Indeed I believe his chiefest Diversion is Books.


Young Fullmatt. Books, Books a Diversion! I Am sure I didn't think them so,
while I was at um. They are well enough indeed for Parsons, or those that deal
in um; but for a Man of Fashion to read; -- bar that throw, however; -- let his
Chaplain; What has he got else to do? -- But for Gentlemen to throw away their
Time upon such Nonsense! -- I Would as soon go of my own Messages. -- Now here is a
Dog my Lady, better than ever a Library in Europe.


Miss. Lord, now shall we be stunned with a Fox Chase, I suppose.


Young Fullmatt. That Is as good as a Fool's Chase, I suppose. -- My Sister's
never easy, without she has half a score Couple of Beaux yelping about her. --
Lady Fool, to prevent any farther Altercation, had the Card-tables brought in
immediately. Upon which all the good Company came to Order.


CHAP. II.
PAST Four o'Clock, and a Moonlight Morning; the Company broke up; and with the
Reader's Leave, as indeed it is but Good-manners, we'll see Sir Fullmatt's
Family safe Home.

Sir Martin, as he hobbled into the Hall, began by certain shooting Symptoms,
to expect a severe Attack in both Feet, therefore ordered his Bed to be warmed
immediately: Upon which, his Lady could not help observing, she thought it was
vastly odd, that ever since Sir Martin's Gout had made them lie in separate
Apartments, he was always hurrying to Bed. But I insist Sir Martin before you
do go, you shall let me know your Opinion of Greensy's Choice. For my Part,
though I detest Scandal, I wonder what some Women are made of, to brazen it out
as she does: Well, for Effrontery, she indeed does exceed any thing I ever saw.
-- As to her Husband, as she calls him; -- my God! -- I Am sick of Wedlock. --
The Fellow is really personal enough; -- but her telling us he was a Gentleman,
-- I shall never love Gentility again.

Sir Martin. It is to me a Matter of much Wonder.


Lady Ferd. Nay, my Dear, why should you wonder at what some of our Sex will
do? -- Why now you saw fine Miss Relt Today: -- She Is with Child by the Butler.


Miss. Now that to me is amazing; if a Lady did fall, her Pride should not; --
methinks her own Spirit would hinder her from sinking. If I did intrigue, it
should be with somebody of Family however. -- That Is what I blame my Brother
for; to take up with such a coarse Creature as our House-maid Bett is; -- I
wonder how he can touch her filthy Flesh.


Young Fullmatt was nettled, to be reproached for his Indelicacy of Taste; and
replied to his Sister, rather too tartly. She returned it; the Parents joined
in the Dispute, and the Quarrel might have been attended with bad Consequences,
had not the Delinquent Mrs. Betty been called for; and as soon as she entered,
my Lady ordered her out of Doors; vowing, she would not sleep under the same
Roof with a Strumpet.

The rest of the Family then prepared for Bed, all but young Fullmatt; he was
resolved to keep Betty Company, in the Hall Porch, till Daylight.

After he had every way endeavored to pacify the Maid; swearing the Loss of
her Place should be no Loss to her. -- The Girl interrupted him, sobbing --
that is not it Squire, thank God I don't fear to get my Living; but to be called
Whore so: -- I dursn't say any thing before your Father, or else it was at my
Tongue's End, when Madam called me Strumpet so, and spit in my Face: I could
have told her, ay, and Miss too; if I am one, I a'ant the only one in the
Family, no that I a'ant, for all she is your Sister.

Young Fullmatt's Curiosity was raised; he pressed the Girl very seriously to
explain herself; and whether it was owing to Revenge, or Remorse, or
Friendship, every Operation of Female Dispositions has not yet been
mathematically ascertained; but she led him (like Guy Fox, with a dark Lanthorn
in his Hand) into that Part of the House, which was thought by most of the
Family to be haunted. There lay his Mama along with the Gardener: And as fast
asleep, in an adjoining Room, the Bedcloaths all tossed off, out-spread was
Miss Fullmatt, and his Honor's Postillion.

For some Moments the Esquire stood astound, he rubbed his Eyes, looked on his
Sister, stared at the Maid: Then treading softly on Tip-toe, he took away his
Mother's, Sister's, and their Gallants Apparel; but left his own Coat in the
Lad's Room: Then fastening all the other Out-lets, he placed a Light at the Top
of an Entry, leading down into the Hall, from their Chambers, and stood under
the Windows, calling out, Fire, Fire.

This alarmed the Lovers; -- they started out of Bed; scrambled for their
Clothes; seized the first Things that came to Hand; -- and Helter-skelter,
Slip-shod, they came tumbling into the Hall together.

Young Fullmatt stood there in the Dark, like a decoy Bird. But when, by their
Voices, he found himself sure of his Prey, he called Bett to bring Candles.

The first Figure the Light discovered was Miss Fullmatt, with a Horse's Hood
on; the Postillion in her Brother's laced Frock; Lady Ferd, with the Gardener's
Apron about her Shoulders; the Gardener wrapped in a Silk Petticoat; the
Esquire in a Livery Jacket; and Betty in her Ladyship's Negligee.

How they star'd at the Maid, -- or how young Fullmatt looked at them, is now
impossible to describe: For just as their Portraits were going to be colored;
while Shame, Sorrow, and sundry other Passions, alternate flushed in their
Faces, a Footman, whom the Noise of Fire had waked, and who to save his Linen
always lay in Buff, bolted naked upon them. -- Such a Sight, sent the Women
shrieking away; the Esquire turned the Fellow to Bed again; bid Bett see the
Ladies safe to their own Rooms, and went up Stairs to quiet the Baronet, who
lay roaring and swearing in a Fit of the Gout, he should be burned in his Bed.

Next Morning the Gardener and Lad were discharged; and the Maid, who but the
Night before was not suffered to sleep in the House, took Place of all her
fellow Servants, by the Title of my Lady's Woman.

When Sir Martin heard of this, he could not account for it. -- But as my Lady
permitted him to know only as much as she thought proper of domestic
Occurrences, he satisfied himself with remarking, -- that there are sudden
Changes in private Families, as well as Kingdoms, beyond the Ken of keenest
Politicians.

CHAP III.
AMONG the many well-dress'd Visitants, Mr. Fool, on the Account of his
Marriage, had the Honor of being Gentleman Usher to, one Lady (as he offered
her his Hand) with a Sigh, tenderly looking at him in a plaintive Tone,
whispered: What, Mr. Fool, have you forgot me? Tom blushed, bowed, his Heart
beat quick; with down-cast Look, he replied, No, Madam, nor ever shall I, and
trembling, he led her into the Parlour.

The Reader may suppose this Lady to be Miss Fash; it was indeed -- the late
Miss Fash: She had given her Hand to the Right Honorable Lord Pillow: -- For
Lady Dowager -- but to preserve the Unity of our Drama, we must beg Leave to
return, To the

History of Patchwork.

In the Conclusion of the Chapter of Ghosts, Mr. Israel wrapped up in the
Roquelaure, barefooted limp'd to his Lodgings; Miss Mask took Post Chaise that
Evening for London; Esquire Singleten went to the Christopher's to drink away
his Misfortunes, and Junior and Matilda saunter'd to her Sister's

Batilda and her Dutch Merchant, in three or four Days, set out for London; and
Miss Demirep with them, unlover'd. Such an universal Dissipation then reigned
at Bath, that a Lady of her Figure, Elegance, Wit, and strong Sensations, was
neglected, for the more fascinating Exercise of the E O Table.

Junior and Matilda, who grew remarkably intimate, staid at Bath, and Esquire
Singleten with them. This last-mentioned Gentleman made strong Professions of
Friendship to Junior; and behind his Back was as eager in his Protestations of
Love to Matilda; nay, the Esquire proffered to make her a very handsome
Settlement. This she told Junior, who advised her by all Means to accept of the
Conditions; for, as he observed, Constancy was no Money-getting Virtue,
Pleasure she might keep always in waiting -- but 300 l. a Year was not an every
Day Visitor. As he spoke like a Man of Sense, and one who knew the World, and
the best Way to live in it, she was ruled by him. Therefore, with her Consent,
he borrowed for his own Use 500 Pieces of the Esquire; then, like a Man of
Honor, put the Lady into the Lender's Hands as a Security.

With that Sum Junior intending to strike a bold Stroke, set up an Equipage;
and as it was Taste then, to be waited on by foreign Servants, he hired a
Swiss, or Frenchman (its all the fame in the Greek) for his Valet. Junior
called him a Swiss; indeed as England was then at War with France, he would not
be thought so Anti-Antigallican, as to cherish an Enemy; differently thought
his Servant, he knew himself to be a Subject, and Slave of the Grand Monarch;
that it was his Duty to make Reprisals upon his King's Enemies; taking the
Advantage of his Master's coming Home late one Evening, and very much in
Liquor, he plundered him of all his Cash, Watch, Ring, etc. and with the
Dexterity common to that Nation, eluded his Pursuers. This Misfortune threw
Junior into Prison, where he met with Tom Fool, as related in the first Part,
as Reference being had thereto, will more fully appear.

CHAP. IV.
BY the Help of his faithful Amy, he gained his Liberty; but ingratefully
contracted an Acquaintance with a Dutch Jewess, who formerly had been a
celebrated Woman of the Town, but of late Years, hawk'd Trinkets about at
Coffee-houses. With this Hebrew Lady he sat forwards for Turnbridge; but as at
the first Baiting-place, he met with a Person it much behoved him to
acknowledge, we beg Leave to journalize the Particulars.

One of the Guests being rather too prolix, in saying Grace after Dinner, was
questioned by another of the Company; -- If he didn't think the Meat would
digest as well without so much Ceremony? Hoot, Hoot, ye tawk Blosphomy mon; --
replied the Preacher; and, snatching down his Hat, stroaked his Hair up behind
his Ears, and muttering some Words to himself, hurried out of the Room.

A Gentlewoman in a Vellum-holed Habit, (formerly new) observed (after taking a
large Pinch of Snuff) that there ought to be a Distinction made between the
Sinful and the Needful. But as this is the Lady we have given the Reader the
Trouble to halt for, whoever thou art, O patient Peruser of this Performance,
-- behold her Picture, as she sat to Junior; and which we beg all Face-painters
to take Notice of, both Pen, and Pencil Men.

Her Countenance had not lost all its original Brightness; for her Forehead and
Nose were abundantly enriched with purple-colour'd Pimples. The Lillies of her
Neck were sallow'd, by the immoderate Use of Snuff-taking; and the Roses of her
Cheeks, cracked, crimsoned, and peeled, by the fiery Exhalations of Juniper.
Her Teeth, like the remaining Pillars at Persepolis, stood irregularly, and
seemed decaying. The Alabaster Hue was sably sullied, as if in Mourning for
their departed Neighbors. She wore, by way of Tete, a bob Wig, once Brown;
but, by long Use, was tanned into a dingy Red. From underneath which, some
straggling gray Hairs hung down her Temples, like Icicles in dirty Thatch.

After recovering her Hand from her Snuff Box, she very emphatically insisted;
that whatever is, is right; because it was to be; for Predestination, as she
observed, was one of the Cardinal Virtues.

Landlady. Indeed, Madam, and so I have often told my Husband, it was to be;
for Women are sometimes drove to do such Things, they can no more account for,
than why our Beer is fine sometimes, and sometimes muddy.


Doctor's Spouse. In our Sex, Madam, there is an Agitation of the Senses, which
compels us to commit some Things, for which indeed we were pre-ordain'd.


Innkeeper. But, Madam, suppose I find a Man in Bed with my Wife, is that
ordained too? I Have heard Marriages were made in Heaven; but I don't believe
Whore and Rogue were.


Doctor's Spouse. The Crime, Sir, should never be laid at the Lady's Door; for,
as Mat. Prior says;


If Women chance to go astray,

Their Stars are more in Fault than they.

The Landlady clapped her Hands together, and cried out -- so they are to be
sure, Madam. -- An't please the Lord, I Will drink the Gentleman's Health that
said so: Pray, Ma'am, wa'ant he a Bishop? -- a Bishop -- no, he was too good
for one of that Sort. -- Their spirituous Court will punish a poor Girl, when a
Rogue gets her with Child; though, as you say, Madam, she was ordained to it.

Mr. Pattern, the Rider, thrusting the Points of the Fork (he had employed as a
Pick-tooth) into the Table, observed, that there was so much about Bishops, and
Religion, nowadays, the Nation's sick on it.

Doctor. But, if they would take my Antiperpendicular Catoptric Syphilicon
Elixir, it would bring Great Britain right again.


Pattern. The Nation was never so near being undone as now, nor becoming a
Province to France neither. -- English Liberty! Yes faith, fine English
Liberty, indeed; here they have put down Masquerades, without having an Act of
Parliament for it; and here is a new Tax upon Cards, and they talk of Dogs
paying Duty to. I have a Couple of Pointers, and a Leash of Greyhounds, that
always in the Season go my Rounds with me; now let me see any Body make me pay
Excise for 'um; that is all, -- any single Man. -- Dammee, if it was Jack
Broughton, if I woudn't. -- A sudden Outcry prevented him from finishing his
Harangue; he sat with Mouth open, and Eyes fixed, and aghast; the crowing of a
Cock will terrify a Lion.


Junior run up the Stairs to the Place from whence the Noise issued, and the
Women followed him.

The Doctor, Rider, and Landlord, kept their Seats -- the Innkeeper, indeed,
once said, he would go up to take care of his Wife -- but the other two
observing, he was hanged who left his Liquor behind him, the Motion was
overruled.

Junior, on bursting open the Chamber Door, discovered the Cook-maid
bare-headed; her dishevelled Locks bristling about her Ears; in one Hand she
grasped a pewter Chamber Pot, and in the other waved a Piece of Linen, which
seemed to be Part of a Shirt Sleeve; under the Bed lay the
Long-winded-grace-sayer, like a large Turtle; his Hands and Head only to be
seen.

The Landlady sharply enquired into this Confusion; the Girl, with much
blubbering, declared it was all upon Account of that Scotch Dog: For that, as
how, upon her Honor, he would have ravished her: Had not Junior took the
Delinquent's Part, they would have pulled the poor Pedlar to Pieces -- but they
were at last prevailed on to retire; which they did along with the Cook-wench,
to hear every minute Circumstance of the intended Rape.

After Mr. Macdugle was enough recovered to return Mr. Junior Thanks, thus he
delivered himself. As I have a Sol tull be saved, Ise tall ye the hale Truth,
gued Sir. Sawton got Possession of me this Afternoon, for ye ken uncowell, Sir,
how he gangs aboot, like a roaring Lion: And I stud in his Wa. Don na ye
remamber how that wacked Loon, like Tyke, tawked Blosphomy, aboot Prayer and
Grace. Oh it is aw oer wi us, when Grace gangs oot on us. Weel, weel Sir, I
gang'd my Gate, and and speerd my Prayer-buke. Than as Beelzabub wood ha it,
this Katchen Whore stepped intull my Room, to clap her Cap on her Head. --
Sawton as I tald ye before was a're strong in me, -- and mad me hold a parle wi
her; -- woe worth the Time though. Yet ken me right, it was no Art, nor Part of mine
ane, 'twas aw the Deel's doing himsel; he gang'd intull me, as he yance did,
intull the wee-porkers, when the Swene were sank in the Sea, as the Gospull
talls us. Than, Sir, I gi her a braw Silk Hankercher, sike like this, to ha my
Wull on her, and the Watch wud na let me lig her down; she gat my Gueds, and
wud na gi me a Baw-bee for um; and as I tuke a hantle o'her Hair in my Fist;
she seized my Sark wi yae Hond, and wi tither, clitter clatter'd over my Head,
wi the mamber Mugg, as if she war the Deel's Drummer.

On that Instant the tarnish'd Jacket Lady entered, and reproached the North
Britain with Indelicacy, for attempting to force the Wench. For, Sir (turning
to Junior) Women are not to be ravished, we are free Agents, and Compulsion is
incompatible with our Passions. We may be won; for, as the Duke of Marlborough,
(who was a Relation of mine) used to say, if a Town is open at Top, it may be
taken. -- So may our Sex; we are open -- we are to be taken. But, Sir, I should
be pleased, if you would retire with me, from this Scene of Confusion; for as I
hear your Name is Junior, there is something in that Name which alarms my Soul.
They withdrew, and after interchanging a few Questions, she discovered herself,
to be the identical Lady Senior, secreted among the Gypsies.

If Junior was pleased at finding his Parent, the Lady was no less rejoiced at
meeting her Son. The whole House was rejoiced, and the Evening concluded with
that exquisite Essential to English Happiness, a General Drinking Rout.

CHAP. V.
NEXT Day, after Junior had informed his Mother of the material Incidents he
had been engaged in, she, in return, began her Story as follows.

To have you torn from my Arms, to be brought up as a Gipsy, shocked me so
essentially, I resolved to quit the horrid Crew. I found an Assylum at an
elderly Gentleman's, a Bachelor, his Name was Sear, he had made a great Figure
formerly in the Beau Monde; and had enjoyed, as he often told me himself, all
the fine Women of his Age; for he was a vast Wit, and it was not then, as it is
now, impossible for a Man to be a Wit, and a fine Gentleman together. He had
been a perfect Hero in his Time; he kept the very best Company, spent two great
Estates, and was the Terror of all the London Watchmen. His Courage and
Generosity were immense; and such a Spirit, -- my God -- why he would make nothing
of betting 500 l. at a Horse-race; but such is the Fate of all sublunary
Beings; he, who used to keep three or four Coaches and Six, had now only a
Foot-walk to keep him; for when I began my Connection with him, he was only an
Exciseman; but, like Desdemona, I loved him for the Dangers he had passed.

I was indeed younger than I am now; but I had not acquired that Ease of Figure
I at present enjoy. Yet it seems, the Infancy of my Bloom made an Impression on
his Heart. In this Cohabitation I existed about half a Year; and, by way of
Amusement, I instructed an elderly Lady's Footboy (in whom I discovered a vast
Genius) to write and read.

Mr. Sear, my Spouse, having Notice that his Friend and Patron, the Collector,
would be down in a Day or two, informed me of it. I was therefore more than
ordinary assiduous about my Appearance, when I knew so great a Man as the
Collector was to wait upon us; for modern Examples, as well as ancient History,
had informed me, a handsome Wife was a Husband's Sheet-Anchor; therefore, for
my Spouse's Sake, I practiced all my Attractions. But I had been given up
beforehand -- for the Lad, whom, I observed to you, I took under Instructions,
disclosed a horrid Plot to me; it seems my present Incumbent had agreed to part
with me, provided the Collector liked me; this Proviso shocked me; I was
determined to disappoint them: -- Was I not born free? And should I be
traffick'd for? Nay, left to a Wretch's Option? No. -- Had this Gentleman, or
any other Gentleman, in a polite Way, made himself Master of my Honor; either
by surprising me from a Morning's Dream, or stealing on me in an Evening's
Solitude, it was to be forgiven: But to be offered like dead Game, as a Gift;
nay, to have the Chance of a Negative: -- No -- ( Pinch 20th) perish me, if my
Soul disdained not the Motion. -- I left him -- the Lad and I took Places in
the Wagon for London. On my Arrival there, I applied for Employment among the
Booksellers; and really picked up a very pretty Living, by writing Things
against the Government. Not Child that I was disaffected -- far from it -- but
we must eat; -- and any Thing on the other Side didn't sell so well.

The young Man whom I brought to London, my Adonis as I used to call him, soon
died of a gallopping Consumption; the foul Fogs of London were too heavy for
the Delicacy of his Frame. I was inconsolable, nay, should certainly have
followed him, had not my Landlady introduced a Jew Gentleman to my
Acquaintance. He took Lodgings for me at Hachney; and though I was under infinite
Obligation to him; yet, perish me, ( Pinch 30th) if I could ever aggregate my
Ideas to any Complacency for him. I was conscious he was an Infidel; nor
Junior, could I ever have believed, that any Existence, sprung from my Womb,
would so grossly have debased the Dignity of his Specie, as you have done, by
your Cohesion with this Jew Woman. -- For me, I would sooner go to Bed to a
Christian, supperless, than be kept by the richest Wretch in England, that did
not believe in the New Testament. -- I soon retreated from such an irreligious
Acquaintance.

A Gentleman belonging to the Law had Lodgings in the same House we were in. He
was a great Free-thinker, and talked to me concerning the Eternity of Matter,
of the Soul's Materiality, and Divisibility; and why Reason and Religion were
incompatible. I was fascinated with his Discourse, for his Tongue dropped
Manna. With him I came to London; for he was a Counselor and solicitor in
Sessions Time, at Justice Hall; and while he followed the Court, I began to
compile a Treatise, on the Absurdity of Faith without Demonstration. But my
Ideas not being sufficiently arranged, the Counselor, my Spouse, brought me
all the best Authors, such as Massey's Travels; Woolston against Miracles;
Christianity as old as the Creation; the Infallibility of human Judgment; the
Oracles of Reason; and several more of the famous Champions of the rational
Side of the Question. By their Help I tickled up as pretty a Piece of
Metaphysics, as ever laid Ax to the Root of Priestcraft. But before it was
published, some Enemies of my Husband's pretending he had forged a Seaman's
Will and Powers, had him taken up; and we wanting Money at that Time, to do
Things as we should do in respect of Evidence, contrary to the Laws of what
should be right and wrong, he suffered.

But I Will leave you to guess, my dear Son, how much I was amazed when I came to
comfort him the Evening after he was cast, to see the New Testament in his
Hand. -- He, -- even he; who had made so great a Jest of revealed Religion in
his Prosperity. -- I was frighted to hear him call out for Mercy; wringing his
Hands, and crying, What would become of him in the next World? When he used, by
mathematical Investigations, formerly to prove to me, the Impossibility of
there being one.

After his Decease, the Ordinary took me as his Housekeeper. I then suppressed
my Treatise of Materialism, and put forth a Dissertation on the Condition of
still-born Infants, in a future State; and dedicated it to the Hutchinsonians.
A Romish Gentleman, who used sometimes to visit the Prisoners under Sentence,
came often to our House; we had several logical Disputes; he fell in Love with
me, and promised me to turn Protestant, if I would go with him. -- To save a
Soul I did so. We went to York together; where Money being scarce, he was
obliged to leave England for trying to make more. He left me big of my third
Child. When I was up, having had so much Experience, I practiced Midwifery, for
my Genius was always extensive; but still I sighed for London. Conscious such a
Person as I had, and such Abilities should not be buried in the Country;
therefore Ireturn'd to Town, and resumed my Pen. But the System of writing was
altered. -- The Town from Politicians were turned Electrifiers. I soon made
myself Mistress of every atmospherical Experiment. In consequence of which, I
set about a System, wherein I formed a Process of extracting from the aetherial
Fluid, an efficient Quantity of pure inflamable Rays of Heat; which, when
collected into concave Speculums of different Diameters, placed at right
Angles, would form a Focus, strong enough to destroy any Enemy's Fleet in
Harbor -- and I presented this Project to the Sun-fire Office for their
Inspection.

I was prevented from putting my Design in Execution, by the Owners of
Saltpetre, and Gunpowder makers; -- they setting forth in their Case, that as
they had, with great Cost and Pains, and solely for the Good of their Country,
prepared Combustibles enough to destroy the whole World, or any Part thereof,
at a Week's Warning: Therefore they remonstrated, that if Lightning was once
brought into common Use, all their vast Stocks of ready-made Destruction would
lie dead upon their Hands, to the great Loss of themselves and Families.

Then I began a Compendium of Natural Philosophy; wherein I proved, beyond
Contradiction, that there never were such Things as Mermaids. I showed
demonstratively, that Vesuvius and Mount Hecla, could have no Communication. I
proved, that the Indian Way of rubbing two Sticks together, to make Fire, was
an Antediluvian Invention. Then I wrote a History of the Fly, called a Blue
Bottle; and a Dissertation proving the Antiquity of our Marrow-bones and
Cleaver Music; that they came from the Pyrrhic Dances of the Greeks, striking
their Spears and Shields together. And in a Supplement I confuted Mr.
Swammerdam; showing, that the Grubs in Lapland are no ways related to the Gnats
in Lincolnshire Fens. -- This Work, which would have made six Vol. in Folio, I
intended to have published, with several Copper Plates; but the Graving coming
dear, I laid it by, and resolved against any more being concerned in Writings
of Consequence; so, just to kill Time, I abridged the Works of the Learned.

My Printer's youngest Prentice, who used to bring me the Proof of Sheets, had
acted in several private Plays, and would often repeat Speeches to me. Now you
must know, Child, I have a strong theatrical Genius; but not so much for
Acting, as for writing Plays. -- Not but I believe, if the Managers and I could
have agreed, I should have exhibited in about half a Score of Cibber's, or
Woffington's, or Pritchard's Parts. -- But there happened at this Time to be a
Dearth of dramatic Writers, therefore I undertook to manure and fertilize the
Theaters.

Don't imagine me vain, Child, I was qualified for this Undertaking. I had read
over Aristotle, and all the French Critiques; and would have suffered
Martyrdom, sooner than wrote any Thing in Violation of the Unities. I am
conscious Shakespeare's Writings are crept into some Estimation. Yet you see no
dramatic Writer now chooses to copy him -- his Flights are bold, but very
irregular, to be sure. Indeed, considering the Time he lived in, and his being
unacquainted with the Classics, some of his Pieces are pretty enough, -- but
rude though, -- his Clowns for Instance -- they are absolutely incongruous, to
the Politesse of the French Drama; for it must be granted, that every Thing
which is quite comic, must be quite low; therefore not fit for the Delicacy of
the Boxes -- so I turned the Merry Wives of Windsor into a Tragedy, -- got a
great Man's Letter, and it was put into Rehearsal.

The first Thing I had then to do, was to insert proper Paragraphs in the
Papers; for Advertisements are as necessary to prepare the Town, as Physic is
before Inoculation. Puffing for a Thing, is as essential as the Thing itself.
-- I have, in my Time, puffed three or four Players into very good Salaries. --
I scorn to calumniate. -- But what did I ever get in Return? -- Not this Pinch
of Strasbourg, perish me. -- No matter! -- Gratitude is not a concomitant
Characteristic in theatric Breasts.

Her Majesty's Death shutting up the Houses, my Tragedy was postpon'd -- but
hold, I am premature in my Story. I was mentioning about our Printer's Prentice
rehearsing several Parts of Plays with me. One Day, by a Fatality the greatest
Metaphysician never could account for, as we were performing the Couch Scene of
Loveless and Berinthia, I granted him the last Favor. Somewhat hung over me,
impelling me, as it were, and made such Actions unavoidable. His Youth and
Eagerness made me forgive him; his Obedience and Assiduity made me dote on him.

As soon as he was out of his Time, we were lawfully married; till unluckily
taking Lodgings for the Air in Moorfeilds, he became acquainted with some of
the Tabernacle Preachers there; they thundered so much in his Head about Sin,
and such Stuff, I was forced to put him among the Incurables. I then found a
Friend, in the Gentleman with whom I am at present. He Is a Physician, -- it is
true indeed he travels: -- What then? It Is his Humanity only that wakes him
keep a Stage. People in every Town press him to settle with them; but as I and
my Husband tell them, if he was confined to one Spot, what must become of the
rest of England? For Country Doctors and Apothecaries are so ignorant, -- my
God! And yet to see the Force of Genius: The Doctor took it all himself, he was
not bred up to it: His Father is only a Ticket Porter. -- What then? The Parent
of Socrates made Barbers Blocks.

CHAP. VI.
THE next Day Junior and his Lady prepared to set forward. But as Mrs.
Slymstraat was putting up her Things, she discovered the Doctor's Wife and the
Merry Andrew in a too familiar Conversation.

When Junior heard of this, he took his Mother aside, to expostulate with her:
But she interrupted him, saying, -- Child, there is an essential Distinction
between voluntary Sin, and the Necessity of acting. As for what happened
between me and Robin, it was no more than an Accident of Matter; I was lost in
Reflection. It was not criminal in me, I was merely passive, therefore not
culpable, because not intentionally guilty: But as for that Infidel to reproach
me with want of Taste; me, -- no Junior, I love you as much as a Mother ought,
but never see my Face again, unless you part from that Unbeliever. Then
instantly bridling herself up, she stalked out of the Room with the Straddle,
Toss, and Importance of an Haymarket Signiora, after finishing a Da Capo.

Junior appeared at Tunbridge to be quite the Thing. He dressed gay, drank
deeply, played high, swore elegantly, and sung drolly. He was Master of Arts in
Sentiment-making; had all Odds ad Unguem. As for the Pedigree of a Plate Horse,
he was a critical Genealogist.

He took Care to make much Parade of his Honor, therefore was thought to be
one of very strict Principle: -- For it was his Maxim, that, according to the
first Impression which you make upon the Company, through that Medium you will be
afterward looked at.

Among the many Personages who exhibited themselves at the Wells that Season,
there was a Person, who by his Address seemed to be a Gentleman. He was allowed
to be a very sensible Man, by an Observation or two which he made at a Picture
Sale, the Day he came down. -- He was allowed to be very rich too -- Yet so
great an Oddity, he never went to the Gaming Table, rarely to the Tavern, and
then not a Word of Politics slipped from him. -- He seemed very fond of reading,
which made the very polite Company there fancy he had cracked his Brain by
Study.

The inquisitive Club had been very busy in enquiring after him. -- A Club,
where Scandal, -- but why should Spleen fall from a Poet's Pen? -- No; it is
proper some People should meddle with other Peoples Business. It is the Duty we
owe our Country, a Duty we owe our Neighbors, a Duty we own ourselves, to be
assiduous in our Questions; not only concerning Persons we don't know, but more
especially to examine into every Report that is propagated of Intrigue, or
Male-practices, in our Friends and those we do know.

Junior, whose Scheme was to make all the Acquaintance he could among moneyed
Men, judged this Gentleman well worth knowing; and soon made the Stranger's
Temper his Study. -- For like Alcibiades, Jack could be any thing, with any Man.

But what is Tom Fool doing all this while? Why, must the History of a Sharper,
-- a dull Copy of Count Fathom, be retail'd upon the Reader. Is it judgment to
suffer the principal Character in this Epic to be idle so long, and let an
Episode in Bulk exceed the grand History? When Tom Fool was in Goal, nothing
could be expected from him: But now he is married, every thing is expected --
by various People; thus has the Editor been questioned. All his reply was --
Patience. -- Mr. Fool, like other new-married Gentlemen, is waiting in his
white Gloves, Master of the Ceremonies at the Ladies Levee. -- We'll therefore
let him alone, until the visiting Week is over, and attend upon Mr. Saltern,
(that is the strange Gentleman's Name) and Junior, who were thus conversing
together.

Junior. I have met with many Disappointments, Sir.


Saltern. Disappointments are as incidental as Colds; and most Persons are
equally ready to prescribe for both. -- Be Judge, Sir, how I have been
disappointed.


When I was a Youth; by the flattery of my Tutors and Dependants, I was made to
believe my own Understanding superior to the rest of Mankind, therefore was
resolved to spare no Costs, or Pains, till I had acquired that high and mighty
self-sufficient Title; A Man of universal Knowledge.

After I had pleased myself with reflecting on my Plan, as Maidens do of
Matrimony, I began to put it in Execution. Having the Good of my Country at
Heart, I intended to get a Seat in Parliament, therefore immediately applied
myself to the Study of Eloquence. But Tully, in his Treatise upon Rhetoric,
doubting whether Oratory was more an Advantage or Detriment to the State, I
became irresolute; -- nay, soon relinquished it, despairing to excel in what
Cicero was found Fault with, both by Brutus and Quintilian.

Yet bent to pursue the Good of my Country, I attended Borough Jobbing. but a
Change in the Ministry forcing me to have all my Work to do over again, I grew
tired of so precarious an Employment; went once more to my Books, and immersed
myself in ancient Philosophy. -- What a Parcel of Absurdities did I there meet
with! Every Fellow at that time of Day, with an overheated Imagination, or
possessed of inveterate Rancour, set up for a System-maker. There required not
much Capital to begin with; they opened their Opinions, and the World at once
became their Customers. For although there is not any thing to be conceived more
ridiculous, than what the Sectarists of all Ages have in their Turns asserted;
yet such is the Weakness, Wilfulness, and Vanity of human Kind, they are sure
to find Followers, Believers, and Defenders.

Like a Town Lady, on her first Country Visit, I soon grew tired of my Company;
shifted my Quarters into the planetary System, and found the Study of Astronomy
very much to my Satisfaction. I lectured upon the Orrery, explained Attraction,
settled the Comets Routs, accounted for the Winds and Tides, pervaded through the
milky Way, assigned Causes a Priori, and boldly and technically answered for
all the Motions of the Universe.

I grew very fond of the Discoveries I made nightly in the Moon: For having
Stevelius's Map of that Planet; by that, and from what he had wrote upon it,
could by the help of my Glasses, see very plainly upon her Surface, Rivers,
Rocks, Towns, Trees, and Churches. But afterward, reading Hugenius, he
contradicted all the Moonland Discoveries; nay, proves it is not possible for
us to discover any Objects on her Disk. I confess, after weighing his
Arguments, all my former pretty Prospects vanished; -- I could not find one
Picture on the Moon's Face, I had formerly fancied there. -- Away went my
Telescopes.

Then I became eager to study History: But by their own Accounts, ancient
Authors are not much to be depended upon, and Moderns too often misled by the
Rage of Party, religious Prejudices, or Partialities to their own Country.
Determined no more to depend on what others had said, but resolved to search
into the Nature of Things myself, I erected a Laboratory. I was at first fond
of Galen, -- till meeting with the Work of Paracelsus, -- left off my first
Master: -- But I as soon grew sick of the Second; when I found even this
Paracelsus, who ridicules Galen so much, and who promised himself vast Riches
and Longevity from his rare Secrets, die insolvent between forty and fifty.
From him, I turned to Van Helmont; but reading his Process upon the four
Porters, -- I threw all my chemical Volumes into the Furnace, gave the whole
Furniture of my Laboratory to the Workhouse, and turned my Speculations to
Physic. That I did not attend long, disgusted at not being able to account for
animal Secretion.

In vain I read, and it was as much in vain for me to enquire: They told me
indeed, that the Stomach, like the Loadstone, was possessed of occult
Qualities. That I granted, but was determined not to pursue a Study, where we
could not come to a Demonstration of its first and grand Principle.

To dissipate the Chagreen, which the Insufficiency of these Pursuits had
occasioned, I undertook Music. When I heard the Compositions of the great
Masters, they transported me; I no longer wondered at the extravagant Effects
Poets ascribed to the Power of Sounds. I immediately became Consort Hunter; --
studied Compositions, and could relish no Companions, but those who understood
the Nature of Unisons; but was very much surpised to find that most musical
Performers looked with Disdain on the Professors of every Art and Science but
their own. Yet, except in their own, they are the most incurious and
unentertaining of any other Artists. Nay, even in the very Branch they excel,
you must tire yourself with requesting, before they will exhibit: But when once
they begin, they know not how to stop, but are as palling, by doing too much,
as they were disgustful before by not doing any thing. I bid adieu to the
Gamut, least it should lead me into the same Infatuation.

My next Attempt was extremely amusing. -- I studied Painting and Sculpture,
but was shocked at the unfriendly Treatment, several Men of Merit-gave their
Contemporaries.

I had like to have tumbled over Head and Ears into the Tide of Taste, and
become Picture-fancier, Auction-hunter, and Connoisseur. But as I had studied
without traveling, my Opinions were not of equal Weight, with those who had
traveled without studying.

The better to judge of Sculpture, and some parts of Painting, I found it
necessary to apply myself to Anatomy; and as that, in some Measure, is
connected with both natural and experimental Philosophy, I soon gave myself up
entirely to the Investigations of Nature. I dragged the Ditches for Embryo's,
committed Burglary upon the Habitations of half-form'd Insects, stripped Trees
of their Moss, examined Puff-balls, and searched for the Heads of Snake Stones.

I have seen, Sir, the Circulation of Blood in a Frog's Toes, Spider's Leg; and
a Shrimp's Tail. I have counted the Number of blue Animals a Sloe has upon its
Surface, and knew accurately, what Pen-feathers there were in a Butterfly's
Wing.

Many curious Observations have I made upon Duck-weed, and Dunghill-water, and
the several Animalcula in each.

I have impaled Gnats upon Pins, to try how long they could live without
eating. Have pressed Wood-lice and Silkworms to Death, to discover their
seminal Animalcula; and destroyed many Colonies of Ants, to be certain whether
they did, or did not bite off the Ends of the Corn. I have attended the
microscopical Dissections of Bugs, to resolve that grand Debate among the
Learned; whether they were or were not Hermaphrodites. I have also opened
Batts, to authenticate what Genius they should be class'd under, Birds, or
Beasts.

Junior. Do you think, Sir, these Studies benefit the Understanding.


Saltern. Yes, Sir, -- just as much as making your Fences in the Chinese Manner
would improve your Estate. -- Yet so far is Prejudice prevailing, that were we
to deride such Pursuits, all the minute Philosophers would be alarmed, and our
Treatment would be as severe, as if at Madrid, we should reason against
Saint-worshiping. -- I own, I have been astonished at beholding Millions of
Beings, smaller than the smallest Grain of Sand; skimming upon the Water,
sailing along the Air, and circulating in our finest Fluids. I asked myself
seriously what these could be for. -- That For, was my Gordian Knot.

I determined to find out a Man of Sense, to whom I could communicate my
Doubts; and by comparing our Opinions, we might come to know, why, and for what
End these Things were so. -- I related my Design to the only surviving Relation
I have, a prodigious Humourist.

When he had heard me out, -- he shook his Head, (methinks I see him now) and
replied, -- Oh, Nephew, Nephew, before you endeavor to account for the Deity's
Actions, regulate your own. Don't begin the Study of Wisdom at the wrong End;
like some of our Folks of Fashion, who are sent Abroad, before they see their
own Country. -- Receive Things as they are, use them as they should be; employ
your Talents in praiseworthy Exercises; but throw not away your Time in vain
Speculations, like the thirsty Lunatic, who, when he arrived at a River,
instead of quenching his Thirst, lost himself in looking for the Springhead.

I made him a Bow, thanked him for his Advice, promised him to consider of it,
but left the Room, and my Promise behind me; -- like a Lover, who requests his
Friend's Opinion, though he is already determined -- I set out upon my Travels
immediately, to search for a Man of Sense.

I knew Nature not partial to Birth; therefore fancied Understanding, like
Beauty, might be found among the meanest; and began my Enquiry among the
Shepherds, and Laborers; -- but found them as reasonless, as the Cattle they
tended. They possessed a low Cunning, which answered all their Ends.


Junior. Poets indeed amuse us, Sir, with fine Stories about pastorial
Simplicity, -- Innocence might go to Market in Arcadia; but in England's
Country Towns, Vice and Folly are as well received, as in any Parish within the
Bills of Mortality; except that of playing at Cards on a Sunday. Though these
Country People jump, run, ring, wrestle, and play at Football on the Eve of
the same Day.


Saltern. Then I visited their Masters; -- but I was still at Fault. --
Market Day Meetings rubbed off a little of their Rusticities; yet they were not
thoroughly humaniz'd: -- One Day every Week they were drunk; once in seven
Years, Mad; and every Year at Law. From them I took a Turn to the Country
Squires; but they are only Farmers with fine Clothes on.


All the Distinction I could make between them, was, the Man of 100 l. per Ann.
could kill Game, and they who paid him his Rent were persecuted, if they kept a
Gun in the House.

I then paid my Respects to the Country Gentlemen. Could I have been satisfied
among the last, I might have hung up my Shield; -- but I wanted something more,
-- like a nice Lady of my Acquaintance; who resolved never to marry, till she
could meet a Man without a Fault; lived single till 56, and then run away with
her Brother's humpback'd Postillion,

In the Winter, I came up to London, and took Lodgings in Pall Mall. And as my
Search had hitherto been confined to my own Sex, I resolved now to dedicate
some Time to the Ladies, since I found myself in the Neighborhood of so many
beautiful Assemblages. Scarcely had I formed a proper Acquaintance among them,
before it almost determined me to give over my Pursuit after a Man of Sense,
and fix on one of the many amiable Women I had conversed with, as a Partner for
Life; -- but I was too irresolute: -- I saw too many; and what was worse, saw
them too often. I was weaned from my Thoughts, when I beheld the most elegant
Figures, and the finest Understandings, sacrificed to the Irregularities of
Fashion. I began to think my Uncle right; and could not help confessing; that
although Women, and Wisdom, are the worthiest Objects of our Admirations; yet too
much. Speculation is ever attended with Infelicity.

I paid my Attendance to the Men in Power. But as the Ladies gave up their
Merits to the Mode, -- Jealousy jaundic'd the fair Face of the great Men's
Perfections.

I removed into the City, and directed my Inquest among the Men of Business.
Here I met many praiseworthy Acquaintance. The most of those I conversed with,
I found to be sensible, knowing and sociable: -- Yet few, very few, valued
themselves upon what they were really excellent in; or could be quiet while
they were happy. Some I say, who after accumulating large Estates, by
incredible Industry, or as incredible good Fortune, were infected by the
Epidemic of Taste, and commenced Connoisseurs: Others far gone in a Fondness
for Quality, either to be allied, or even acquainted with Nobility, would
lavish all their former Gettings: A third Sort, who had from among Dangers,
Hardships, and Hazards, gathered a happy Independance, stung by the Venom of
Party would squander it all to purchase a Seat in Parliament, although there they
never spoke, nor were ever properly spoke to.

Resolving not to give over my Search, I associated with the Men of Repartee;
but their Inattention to social Duties shocked me: They are such Enthusiasts in
Rallery, that, like Ben the Sailor, they must have their Joke thof the Ship was
sinking. Friends, as well as Foes, are sure to suffer if they come within the
way of their Wit; like the drunken Prizefighter, who cut and slashed every one
round him, to show People how finely he could flourish.

Still resolute in my Inquiry, I determined to follow Nature, though she was
eathed in a Night-cellar. I was introduced among the Choice Spirits, as they
call themselves: -- Their Spirits were choice indeed: -- They live the Life of
those Insects, who are bred, brought to Maturity, and die within 24 Hours. For
all that these sing-song, story telling, mimic Existences pretend to, is but to
eat, drink, and divert for the Day. Necessity their ruling Passion, a Tavern.
Teat their summum bonum.

Yet among these, sometimes you meet with the Glimmerings of Merit, though
sodden'd by the Dregs of Debauch.

But it often thus happens, that even real Genius shall so far debase itself,
as to prostitute the Bounties of Nature like supperless Street-walkers, to a
Set of People, whose only Qualifications are, they can pay the Reckoning.

After laughing at these, and the rest of Mankind, I began to look back on my
past Adventures, by way of Recrimination; but I was not then so much pleased as
I expected to be; I found I had been a Bubble to my own Self-sufficiency; that
I had set out to seek an Impossibility, -- expecting to meet with a Man who
should exceed me in Understanding; and yet as I was to be Judge, my own Vanity
would always prevent me from giving a true Verdict. Upon Reflection, I found I
had only taken Man in the Gross; that they had all a Sufficiency of
Understanding, to answer the Purposes they were intended for; that I was not
half the Man of Sense I imagined myself to be; and that, from a superficial
Knowledge of the World, I had despised several Persons who had a greater Right
to hold me in Contempt.

Tomorrow, Mr. Junior, I set out for an Estate I have in South Wales, and if
you are disengaged, and will waste a Month with me, a hearty Welcome shall
supply the Place of much Ceremony. In Wales, Sir, you will meet with Persons, I
dare say, worth your Acquaintance. For although they are not as much patronized
as the People of neighboring Principalities, (and their Mountains indeed
produce not Peruvian Treasure) yet the hardy Inhabitants inherit Virtues, that
would lend a Luster to the best Birthday Dress, at the most brilliant Court in
Christendom.

Junior accepted the Invitation, proposing to himself many Opportunities for
private Play, which he knew how to make beneficial. But on the second Afternoon
of their Traveling, Mr. Saltern's Horse threw him, which obliged them to lay
by for a Day or two.

CHAP. VII.
JUNIOR after seeing his Friend blooded, and put to Bed, retired; and according
to the modern Custom of solo Travelers, ordered a Room, and bid the Drawer
send in his Master and a Bottle of Claret.

As soon as they made their Appearance, Junior ordering the Landlord to be
seated, inquired if that Gentlewoman in the Bar was the Innkeeper's Spouse; who
replied in the Affirmative.

Junior. She Is a very fine Woman Landlord; will not she take a Glass with us.


Landlord. I hope Sir you will excuse her at present, she is very busy, but she
shall wait upon you at Supper, Sir.


Junior. I insist then she shall pledge us where she is. -- Waiter, carry a
Bottle of Claret, with my Compliments to your Mistress.


Landlord. I humbly thank your Honor; but why should she put your Honor to so
much Charge; though to be sure, if she does love any Liquor better than another,
it is Claret: If your Honor had been bred and born with her, as the Song says,
you could not have pleased her better.


Junior. How long have you been married, Landlord?


Landlord. Four Years come Lammas, Sir.


Junior. A Man must be vastly happy with such a Wife.


Landlord. Happy, Sir, I don't believe there is never a Gentleman in a hundred
Miles, lives happier with his Wife than I do, Sir: I give her her way in every
Thing, only just in laying out a little Money. -- We are apt to squabble about
that now and then, -- but its soon over: -- I get out of the Way, for when once
she begins scolding, there is no stopping her. -- There will be Words in all
Families, Sir; so I let her tattle, and I go and buy her some Nick-nack, and
that sweetens her, and she is as pleasant as a cool Tankard.


Junior. She looks to be very fit for a Barkeeper.


Landlord. Ay, Sir, though I say it, there would not be a better Barkeeper in the
World, if she would but give her Mind to it, and so I tell her sometimes, for
when our House is full of Company, she will gallop ye twenty Miles after a Hare
or a new Fashion, then we have a few Words indeed, or else we live as happily
as the Day is long.


Junior. She seems to be a very handy Woman.


Landlord. I cannot say as to that, Sir, she is very well in every Thing else to
be sure; but as to stirring about her Business, she hates it, she will jigg it
after a Fiddle for four and twenty Hours together; but tired to Death if she
puts out her Hand only to fold up a Table Cloth.


Junior. She looks to be very good-humored.


Landlord. Her Temper's a little uneven now and then, that is all she is to blame
for: The Servants seldom do any Thing to please her, nor I neither; but there is
nobody without their Faults, she would not have one in the World if she didn't
sulk it so. But she will sometimes go about the House for a Week together taking
the Rust, as the Jockies say; and then I say, Bett, How can you bear Ill Will
so long? That Is sure to bring her to her Tongue; for she hates to be called
Bett. So then she begins to rate me -- but I hark to cover: Faith lock myself
into the Cydercellar, and there am snugg as an eathed Fox; and so, Sir, my
Service to you.


Junior. I fancy she is a very agreeable Companion.


Landlord. Yes, Sir, she can talk indeed, and does talk to -- only she is apt to
talk a little too much, and then she let us her Tongue run about her own Town's
Folks so -- but this happens only when she gets a Glass too much; and yet I
love to see her in Company; she never baulks her Glass; it is Pity she lets it
get the better of her so.


Junior. I am afraid then that Bottle will be too much for her.


Landlord. No, Sir, begging your Honor's Pardon, she has not such a weak Head
as that comes to neither; if she would but be good-natured when she is elevated;
but the Devil on it is -- a sudden Uproar in the Street stopped the
Conversation; Junior lifting up the Sash, saw a Parish Beadle driving before
him a poor ragged Figure, with a Child swathed to her Back; the Fellow rudely
thrusting his Fist against the Infant, as he pushed the Mother along. The Cries
of the Child hurried Junior into the Street, and he enquired why the poor
Creature was used so.


She Is a Vagrant, replied the Officer, and she wanted to die in our Bounds; and
she is a Cheat, and fainted away just now, on Purpose to leave her Bastard upon
us.

Perhaps (replied Junior) she fainted through Want. Indeed I did, Sir, the poor
Sufferer replied very feebly, and turning her Head toward Junior as she spoke,
he observed something of Elegance in her Face, though it was pale; her Eye brows
were regularly arched, her Eyes black, and inexpressibly languishing. He could
not also help taking Notice of the Evenness and fine Polish of her Teeth, and
between the dishevelled Partings of her Hair, he saw a Neck of a most
extraordinary Whiteness.

Junior, though not strictly a Man of Honor, now and then had Touches of those
subordinate Virtues, Generosity and Compassion. -- He therefore determined to
relieve her, sent off the Beadle, and went with her himself to a motherly
Woman's House, called Goody Wen, to whom he was recommended by the Neighbors.

The Report of this Piece of Humanity reached the Inn before Junior's Return.
Mr. Saltern congratulated him upon it, and on the Conquest he had made; for,
continued he, I am certain, by the manner in which my Landlady related it to
me, she is fond of you. Women are more forward to admire or reward Actions of
Generosity than our Sex: She is of a very sanguine Complexion, and you see what
a Wretch she has for a Husband; for want of something better to do I made her
Maid tell me her whole History.

She was bred up in that old Hall we were admiring when my Horse threw me. The
House-keeper's Daughter, but at seventeen, having added one to the Posterity of
Adam, without asking Leave legally for it, she was discharged. Our Landlord was
Butler; he married her, and the Squire bought this House for them. She Is now
but twenty-four, and if I am not extravagant in my Guesses, Junior, she is your
own. She has been so full of your Praises, it must be so -- at least I beg
you will try, if it be only to satisfy me, how far I am right as to reading of
Womankind.

When Junior came down, he found in the fore Parlor his Landlady, with several
Town's Folks.

As he entered, she rose up smiling; and in a pretty lisping manner addressed
him, with -- dear Sir, well to be sure you will go to Heaven, I wish all
Gentlemen were like you. -- Lord, Sir, to have so much Charity upon such a
forlorn Creature.

To be sure, Sir, you are one of the best Gentlemen that ever lived, and yet to
see some Folks -- that Gentleman came to know the Truth of it; for you was
told, wa'ant you, Doctor, that the Beggar woman was the Gentleman's Wife, and
how he had left her, and plundered her of all she had, and so she lighted on
him by Chance, and so he gave her some Gold for Hush-money.

Mr. Opifer replied, he had heard so, but the Story was not properly digested;
for as the animal Spirits are more heated in the secretory Vessels of some
People, than of others, they see Things in different or adverse Mediums. Now,
Sir (turning to Junior) I am always neutral in my Judgment, until I have
analytically considered the Ingredients of every Report. For it is an
established Postulalum with me; and not only with me, but with most of the
great Men of Antiquity, never to believe any thing till we can be assured of
its Credibility; as Hypocrates observes, in his forty-ninth Aphorism.

Another of the Company (whose Inkhorn dangling from his Button-hole, denoted
his Profession) rapping his Knuckles hard against the Table; called out -- now
God forgive my Sins, if I didn't hear that this Gentleman, begging his Pardon
-- but that the Woman did pick his Pockets to be sure, -- Yes, indeed, of his
Watch, and so he did seize her coming to Town.

Mr. Illicit the Attorney declared, he had the Case stated three or four
different Ways to him; and with Submission, he could not tell what to decree in
it. -- To be sure Charity was not against the Statutes; but then to give away
such a Sum a five Guineas, merely out of Compassion! He must demur to that; it
was contrary to all Law or Equity. But however, Sir, your Health. -- I have
been in London myself, and have had all the fine Girls there; ha Landlord, you
have heard me say so before; and they have all their Ups and Downs, and so I
rest my Plea upon that. -- The Gentleman has seen her before, or else he looks
to be a Gentleman of too much Sense, to throw away such a Sum as five Guineas
to encourage Beggars, notwithstanding so many Laws to the contrary.

As when all ermin'd and embossed, glittering with foil Stones and spun Glass,
in Sultana State, the high Salary Actress is seated in the green Room, should
some inferior allowanced Lady dare to thwart her High Mightiness, with even a
Hint about Equality of Merit, sudden her Imperialness would arise, and darting
the Scowl-Theatric at the Pattin-wearing Rival, majestically more out of the
Room, like Dido's Ghost, silent and sullen.

Thus Junior gave the Lawyer the Look contemptuous; and desiring the Landlady
to bring him a Bowl of Rack up Stairs, ordered the Waiter to show him into his
own Room.

After he had slapp'd to the Door, the Company sat staring at one another, like
a Parcel of imperfect Actors. At last the Landlady declared, she was sure and
sorry that the Gentleman was so affronted; and how do we know, but he may be
some Nobleman in Disguise, of some great Man, perhaps, belonging to the
Government.

As sure as Saint Winifred, and so he is (replied the Squire of the
Square-root) and one of our Mary's Relations.

Mr. Illicit, with a Sneer, enquired if Mary's Relations were all great People?

Yes, by God's Blessing and good Grace, they are all so; ay, and have all Coats
of Arms too, as well as my Family.

Unluckily the Lawyer interrupted him; by observing, that some People pretended
to Coats of Arms, yet wanted Arms to their Coats. Flesh and Blood could not
bear this; he flung his Fist full upon Mr. Illicit's Face; the astonished
Lawyer started up like a Cock that is chained; and darting his Arms out strait,
by way of keeping off Blows, he entangled his Fingers in Mr. Aprice's Hair:
Aprice rushing forward drove Mr. Illicit into a Corner; and there the
Exciseman's Head, like a battering Ram, butted and rebutted against the
Lawyer's Chin. The Welchman springing upon his Toes at every stroke, Mr.
Illicit's Teeth gnash'd lamentably, and the hinder Part of his Skull striking
against the Wainscot, sounded dismal.

The Apothecary mounted himself by a Chair's Help on a Table, at the other End
of the Room, with two Candles in his Hands, to see, and show them fair Play. --
The Landlord stole away, to call the Exciseman's Wife; and the Landlady stood
shrieking, clasping her Arms round a large China Bowl she had snatched up.

In the Corner, where the Heat of Battle roared, happened to be a Vessel, which
for Delicacy-sake is named a Looking-glass. Whether the Combatants overset the
Vessel, or the Vessel overthrew them, is yet undetermined. Certain it is, they
were all three rolling on the Floor together; but Aprice soon got astride Mr.
Illicit; forcibly his Blows fell upon the Lawyer; when Mrs. Aprice entering,
came suddenly behind her Husband, seized his Arms, and obtained in an Instant a
Cessation of Fists.

The Doctor, who had all this while manfully maintained his Post, as
Candle-bearer to the Combatants, now descended, and proffered his Service to
Mr. Illicit, chirurgically; -- but the Lawyer swore he would not join Issue with
any of um; -- but he would have Revenge; -- He Would let them see what it was to
strike a sworn Attorney, for all his Eyes were closed at present. He was
obliged to be led Home, wet, bruised, and blinded: The Landlady went out to
obey Mr. Junior's Order; and the Gentleman of vulgar Fractions remained Master
of the Field of Battle.

The Distributer of Medicines then began to observe, how wrong-headed Mr.
Illicit was, in not suffering his Bruises to be dressed; hinting somewhat about
Inflammations, tumefy'd Flesh, Fissures, Fevers, and Phlebotomy.

Now it was said, that Mr. Opifer, and Madam Aprice, had been naught together;
but that the Doctor was inconstant, having Hopes to meet with a more agreeable
Patient in the Landlady. This Mrs. Aprice had great Suspicion of: She had long
time kept herself to herself, but now was resolved to give Vent to her
Indignation.

Her Husband had, from what sometimes his Neighbors said, great Jealousies
about his Wife; and Mr. Opifer, and he also, was then determined to have it
out. The Wife's Blood was up, the Husband's Blood was up, and after some
Altercation, they set Mr. Opifer's Blood up.

He hit Madam in the Teeth with some Particulars, which no Man could be
supposed to have known, but her Husband. -- She flew at him; -- he fled from
her: She seized the Knots of his Tie Wig; he left it in her Hands, (as a Bird
escapes with the Loss of his Tail-feathers) and run out of the Room; the
Husband and Wife after him; they overtook him in the Entry; the Exciseman began
to beat him unmercifully; -- Mrs. Aprice seconded every Blow of her Husband's,
by hitting the Wig in the Doctor's Face; who all the while was crying out
Murder, Murder, for God's Sake. The Ostler rescued him; and he run Home, like a
true Tragedy Ghost, bare-headed, with Shirt bloody, and mealy Face.

Mr. Aprice, and his Mary, went Home Arm in Arm: She comforting herself, that
though his best Neckcloth was tore, thank God her Husband had behaved himself
like a Gentleman.

CHAP. VIII.
NOW was Tranquillity reinstated below Stairs, and the Mistress of the House
ascended to Mr. Junior with a Bowl of Rack, and began her Apology for the
People's having made such an obstropulous Noise.

Though, for that Matter, I Am glad Sir Mr. Illicit met his Deserts, for
affronting such a good tempered Gentleman as you are; though to be sure our
Exciseman did thrash him vexatiously; and yet I could not help being frightened,
Sir, -- one's House being disturbed so, and then to see them all bloody, and my
best China Bowl had like to have been broke, -- and if I had not shrieked out,
Sir, and caught hold of it, Sir, my best Bowl would have tumbled all to smash,
Sir. -- Thus glib glided her Speech; she lisp'd, she laughed, her Face was
flushed, her Eyes glissen'd, sure Symptoms that she had been too busy with her
best China Bowl.

Junior observed it, and resolved to try how far his Friend was right. He put
the Glass quick about, he squeezed her Hand, he praised her Face, he kissed her
Lips, he pressed her Neck, he sighed, he strove, -- she begged he would be easy, --
she must go down; -- nay, she vowed she would -- that Moment; -- what could
such a fine Gentleman see in her, -- nay, Sir, -- pray don't pull me, --
excuse, -- dear, -- what with a Stranger too, -- if -- Sir, -- indeed, -- I Will
-- there is the Curtain Rod down, -- O Lord, -- the Door, -- well, -- nay --
Sir, -- pray, oh, oh, -- Dies.

ACT. II.
Next Morning Junior went to visit the Person he had so lately relieved. If in
her Wretchedness he discovered she was handsome, now neatly habited he could
not help loudly affirming, upon Oath, she was the most striking Figure he ever
saw.

Fixing her Eyes upon the Floor, and fetching a deep Sigh, she replied, alas,
Sir, forgive my Abruptness; but if you will condescend to hear my Story. --

Junior bowed, and seating himself by her, thus she began.

I hope Sir you will excuse me, if for the present I don't mention my Name. But
few Years are past since I was counted the Toast and great Heiress of the
County my Father represented in Parliament. As you know, Sir, it is impossible
for a young Woman of Fashion to complete her Education, but under a French
Governess. I had one, who soon gained me to think her the most polite,
friendly, and sensible Creature living. She made me despise my own Country, and
setting all those who came to pay their Addresses to me, in a contemptible
Light; and every Time she stood by me at my Dressing-table, lamented that such
Beauty, as I was possessed of, should be made a Sacrifice to some rude, coarse
English Savage.

I sighed for France, began to fancy myself choked with the foggy Air of
England; for as Mademoiselle told me, if I was at Paris, it would be a very
easy Thing for me to make a Conquest of one of the Princes of the Blood. You
must be certain my English Lovers did not meet with much Encouragement. Nay, I
disbanded them all but one, whose Name was Soil; he would take no Denial. He
had the greatest Estate in our Neighborhood, and the Relations on each Side
desired it to be a Match. Therefore they contrived it so, that sometimes I was
forced to suffer myself of sit with him. But you would have smiled to have seen
our Tete a Tete Parties; whenever he offered to speak, I met his Eyes with a
full Stare. -- He stammer'd and blushed like a Schoolboy, -- then I used to
burst into a loud Laugh, and he would hang down his Head, turn round his Dog's
Collar, putting the Butt-end of his Whip into his Mouth, (as an Infant does its
Coral) played the Lash of it against his Boots, at the same Time I was pinching
my Apron, or twirling my Watch Key.

One Day indeed he ventured so far to open his Mind, as to invite me to see him
ride a Sweepstakes. -- My reply was, I detested Horse-racing. -- He looked as
simple as a Shepherd. -- I told him, if I was ever again to be punished with
his Company, I desired he would not bring any of his Brother Brutes with him;
-- not but I assured him, (pointing to his Greyhound) I thought the Dog a much
more sensible Animal than his Master.

He started up, looked round the Room as if he had lost something, clapped his
Cap on, smack'd his Whip, whistled his Dog out, bounced the Door after him, and
got on Horsback, cursing himself if he ever opened after me again.

However, resolving not to be thrown out, as he said, by a Puss, he determined
to demand me in Form, and of myself too: But preparing himself with rather too
many Bumpers, to deliver so important a Question, he made his Attack upon my
Woman, in so boisterous a Manner, that I was forced to leave my Dressing Room
to rescue her. This Story I related in all the Places I visited, with several
Embellishments, placing him in so ridiculous a Light, that he was forced to
leave the Country, vowing Revenge against me, -- but that I thought so trifling
to take Notice of; -- my Heart was set upon France, and I soon persuaded my
Mama to spend the following Winter with me in Paris.

One Day, when every Thing was got ready for the intended Tour, Mr. Recorder's
Daughter, a young Lady about my Age, came to tell me what a Wonder was come to
Town.

A fine Gentleman, she said, an outlandish one, his Servants had Feathers in
their Hats, and himself was all over Gold Lace.

The Mention of a Foreigner alarmed me; my Heart beat impatient to make so
important a Conquest. The very Day of his Arrival was our Subscription
Assembly. He danced with me, -- and I learned, from his own Mouth, he was a
French Nobleman. -- How inimitable I thought was every Thing he did; so odd, so
out of the way, so polite, so easy; all the young Ladies were charmed with him,
as much as I was; but I had the Satisfaction of triumphing over them all; for
it was to me alone he paid his Addresses. He praised my Figure, my Dancing, my
Understanding; I could have heard him for ever. But when he waited on me Home,
judge, Sir, what such a giddy-headed Girl as I must feel, to see him kneel at
my Feet, and hear him name the Dames of the first Quality and Beauty in France,
and swear I was, in point of Person, superior to them all.

When he took his Leave, all in Rapture, I made my Governess sit with me for
two Hours, talking about him, -- while she -- begged me not to be too
credulous, -- nor fix my Affections on a Stranger. It Is true, she said, he had
the Air of Nobility, yet he might be a Sharper for all that, and begged I would
not give him the least Encouragement, till she had enquired into the Truth of
what he was.

I was charmed with this fresh Assurance, of what I thought the most sincere
Friendship; but I replied, her Care was needless; I was certain by his Address,
he must be a Man of Fashion. -- That did not signify, she answered, several
young Ladies had been ruined by Fortune-hunters, and it was her Duty to take
Care of me, and she would go that Day and be convinced.

When returned from her Enquiry, she congratulated me on the Conquest I had
made, for she knew my Lord's Gentleman in Paris, and he assured her, his Master
was violently in Love with me.

That Afternoon my Lord drank Tea with me. I shall not trouble you with our
Courtship; indeed there was not much: But, prompted by my Governess, I agreed
to go off with him, which in four Days from our first Acquaintance I did.

I had a pretty considerable Fortune independent. When we arrived at London,
that I drew out of the Bank, put into my Husband's Hands, and the next Day set
forward for France.

You may easily guess, Sir, the Catastrophe of this Amor: -- He plundered and
left me; informing me by a Letter, that he was sent down by Mr. Soil on purpose
to make his Addresses to me; and that after I had received his Visits, Soil
would come down and expose me, by discovering my Gallant, that I had preferred,
to be only a Waiter at White's. -- But this Fellow, who was really a Frenchman,
was too cunning for us both, and went off with my Governess; with whom I have
since discovered he had concerted the Plan, when she went to enquire after him.

That Instant the Beadle opening the Door, interrupted her Narration; saying,
that his Worship, Muster chief Constable, must speak with them both this
Minute. Junior desiring the Lady not to be uneasy, went with the Beadle; but
called of Mr. Saltern by the Way, to inform him of the Headborough's Message.

Mr. Saltern, who happened to know the Magistrate and his Family, begged Junior
to pay a particular Regard to the chief Constable's Sister. -- She was always
present at all Examinations, and took vast State upon her.

Junior promised him he would, and instantly went toward his Worship's; yet he
could not help wondering what the Magistrate wanted with him. -- The Reader
perhaps may have the same Curiosity: -- We will satisfy him, -- but it must be
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
MR. Illicit's Bruises not suffering him to sleep, he lay ruminating how this
Beating might be made profitable. He felt himself very sore, and would have
Smart-money: -- But in the midst of his Pains, he had the Pleasure of thinking
Aprice's Wife and five Children should come to the Parish.

But how to get Money by all this? -- He recollected the Fight began about a
strange Gentleman, -- therefore he decreed the strange Gentleman was the
Aggressor: Ay, and the strange Gentleman should pay Costs; because, if the
strange Gentleman had not been there, the Quarrel would not have happened.

But how to prove Damages? -- The Woman Junior relieved came into his Head;
something may be made of that. The Thought pleased him, he forgot his Aches,
got up, put on his Banyan, and without staying for his Breakfast, went to his
Brother-in-law's, his Worship, afore-mentioned.

Mr. Oatley, the Magistrate, had been a London Chairman, and plied at St.
James's; but marrying a Publican's Widow who kept a Night-cellar, they left off
Business, being well to pass; and came down into the Country to settle near his
Brother-in-law's: And being, as he declared, brought up at Court; which he took
care to let every body know, when he first came down in the Country, (though not
what Character he acted) was looked upon among his Neighbors, as a very
extraordinary sort of a Man, and invited to a great many rich People's Houses;
for he could tell all about St. James's and the Royal Family; knew to an Hour
how old my Lord Duke was; to the tenth of an Inch, how high my Lady Jane's
Shoes were; what colored Silk the Dutchess's Chair was lined with; when such a
Countess cut her Nails; what Snuff the Prince used, and how the King's
Shoemaker took Measure of his Majesty.

Mr. Oatly had not heard of the Fray, and was surprised to see his Brother's
Eyes black, his Face swelled, and Lip with a Patch on it. -- He began to wonder
at such a Sight, and observed such Things were never suffered at Court.

Mr. Illicit. Look ye Brother, these Things shall appear at Court, in a Court
of Law too. I had like to have been murdered by that Rascal Aprice, and two or
three more of them; but I Will do for that Excise Fellow I warrant him; -- but
that a'ant all. Here are two Sharpers come to Town, they put up at the Crown,
one of um pretends to keep his Bed by a Fall, and the other has picked up a
Mistress, and there is some Scheme in it.


Mr. Oatley. Like enough, like enough, I Have met with such Things at Court very
often.


Illicit. Now you must know, Brother, I Would have you send for this Fellow and
examine him, and the Woman too; for he gave her five Guineas Yesterday, and
this is a Case requires explaining.


Oatley. Nay, this is extraordinary; for when I was at Court, we used to
observe where Money was given, there was always some Mystery. -- Therefore the
Chief dispatched his Beadle for Junior immediately.

Just as the Messenger went out, Madam Illicit entered; and the Moment she saw
her Brother, and Husband, she points to her Spouse's Face; crying out, here is a
pretty Figure for you; -- this is keeping Company with Strumpets, -- yes,
Brother, my Husband is now always at the Crown with that brazen-face Landlady,
and so I suppose some of her Bullies beat him.

The Husband called for Silence, the Brother called for Silence, but neither
his Worship's Authority, nor the Authority of Mr. Illicit were equal in Power
to her Voice; she stamped, she roared, she scolded: -- They stood staring
motionless; as if unawares they had glanced on Medusa's Head; till her Breath,
Voice, and Spirits being exhausted, she sunk like an expiring Heroine, mute
into a Chair.

Just then, the Beadle introduced Junior, saying, that Gentleman is his
Worship, Sir, with one Eye.


Junior. Sir, I received a Message to come before you, but should be glad to
know what Right you have to send for me, or any other Gentleman, as suspicious
Persons.


Madam Illicit. Yes, Sir, my Brother has a Right, he is a Magistrate.


Mr. Chief. Pray give me Leave, Sister, -- hem, -- hem, -- Sir, -- I have had
the Honor of belonging to Court many Years; therefore do you see, I know Right
and Wrong, Sir.


Junior. By all Means, Sir, but give me Leave, Sir, first to plead my Excuse,
in not paying a proper Respect to that Lady, who I am certain I have had the
Pleasure of seeing at St. James's; for there is an Air inseparable to true
Quality, which Country Ladies may endeavor to imitate, but never can come up
to.

Madam Illicit, bridling up her Head, gave him a slow low Curtesy, winked upon
her Brother, turned up her Nose at her Husband, and with contracted Mouth,
lisp'd out, she was sorry her Brother should send for so polite a Gentleman, so
Mellopropo. -- To be sure the Town Air was to be observed with half an Eye,
both in Ladies and Gentlemen; except it was by some People, who had (a Look at
Mr. Illicit) no Taste, and could prefer low-lif't Innkeepers Wives, to Persons
who had sucked in the Court Air with their Milk.

Mr. Illicit, who sat chewing the Cud of Resentment, told his Brother; -- you
know you have a Right of Examination; I say, and insist on it, that not only
this Person be asked to give an Account of himself, but --


Junior. Pray, Sir, in which of the Statutes? --


Illicit. Pray, what do you know of the Statutes? Ha.


Mr. Chief. Hold, Brother; as you say I have a Right of Examination, why do you
pretend to examine any body before me?


Illicit. Brother, this is out of your Way.


Mr. Chief. What Is out of my Way, ha? You are a very pretty Fellow indeed, to
say Examination is out of my Way, ask my Character at Court. --


Illict. You don't understand me, Brother.


Mr. Chief. I hope, Sir, I have as much Understanding as you, and have kept
better Company.

A Note just then came from Mr. Saltern, directed to the chief Constable; the
Contents were as follows.

Mr. Oatley, I would have you be extremely cautious concerning your Proceeding
against the Gentleman at present before you. -- He is traveling in cog. and is
one of the Lord's of the Bedchamber to his present Majesty: -- I Will bail him
for Twenty-thousand Pounds.

Yours, Saltern.


Mrs. Illicit was leaning over the Back of his Worship's Chair, to read the
Note, when Mr. Oatley rising hasty, his Head met her Forehead; it whisk'd her
round, and down she sunk. This the Chief never minded, but kept bowing and
complimenting Junior, desiring him to take the armed Chair. -- The Attorney
star'd like a Man just gorged with a large Bumper: -- His Brother turning
about, told him he was sorry to say it, but he was a very impertinent Fellow --
for all you're my Brother; -- and I hope, my Lord, -- you are a very impudent
Dog, Sirrah. -- I ask ten thousand Pardons, my Lord. -- Mr. Illicit's Spouse,
who had by this Time recovered her Senses from the Blow, and was rising up to
reak her Revenge; -- but hearing the Word Lord mentioned, -- she smoothed her
Cap, -- shook her Petticoats, -- and sideling round, simpering; she asked his
Lordship's Pardon for her Husband's Ill-mannerdness; and hoped his Honor would
accept of Mr. Illicit's asking his Honor's Pardon.

Junior, who grew tired of the Farce, insisted on no more Mention to be made of
it, and took his Leave: The chief Magistrate, and Madam, the chief Magistrate's
Sister, ushering him to the Door with Bows, Curtsies, Apologies, Prayers, and
Praises; -- the Attorney walking backwards and forwards all the Time almost
frantic, like an outlawed Smuggler just taken. -- There let them rest, while we
attend the more interesting Scenes of this Miscellany.

CHAP. X.
THE Head and the Heart are distinct Organs: A Writer therefore, in his Address
to each, should vary his Manner and Matter. But as the Editor acknowledges
himself but indifferently provided with Head, he begs Leave to continue this
History in the same Style it began, and hopes the Reader will accept of an
unbellish'd Relation of what befell the Lady after Junior's Departure.

For some Moments she sat silent, her Hands crossed upon her Knees, lost in
Thought. -- A loud wrap at the Door roused her; in burst a Shoal of Ladies,
rural-bred, -- no Apology, -- for, in the Country, Familiarity is the Grammar
of good Manners.

They had all the Morning flirted from House to House, and Snow-ball like,
gathered as they went forwards, -- all agog to hear, what the two Gentlemen
were; who the Woman was; and who fathered the Child.

After they had collected the whole Troop of Female-inquisitors; it was, nem
con, agreed to pay Goody Wen a Visit, and ask her new Lodger several Questions.
They entered crowding, giggling, staring, and curtsying, all speaking together.
-- I hope no London accomplished Lady will be offended at my Supposition, that
the Female Folks of Country Hamlets may be a little in Taste.

I have heard it asserted (how true it is I know not) but that in some Country
Towns, there are broad Starers, loud Talkers, scandal Spreaders, deep
Intriguers, keen Gamesters, husband Haters, religion Scoffers, etc. etc. etc.
etc.

Indeed ye true town-bred Toasts, as ye have not a Patent for your several high
Qualifications, -- why should you wholly possess them? -- Ye do not, -- they
have found their Way into the Country, as well as flounc'd Petticoats.

Just as they had addressed the strange Lady, Junior returned, and put an End
to the scrutinizing Party. They looked a little silly, or so; begged Pardon,
made several short Curtsies, like May Day Milk-maids, huddled to the Door, each
striving to be first out, as if the House was on Fire, and tittering,
whispering, pushing, pinching, and shrieking, run into the Street, like
School-boy's in breaking-up Time, leaving the Lady to continue her Relation
uninterrupted.

Continuation of the Lady's Story.

At a Place called Chantilly, was I left without a second Necessary, and but a
single Guinea in the whole World. I acquainted the Landlady with my
Misfortunes; she endeavored to comfort me, and the next Morning came to let me
know, that there was an English Gentleman who desired to be introduced to me.

How did I rejoice to hear there was any of my own Country there; I who had so
lately despised every Person in it. So true it is, what in Prosperity we most
slight, in Adversity we first fly to for Succor.

As soon as I had sufficiently recovered myself, the Gentleman waited upon me;
offered me his Sword, his Fortune to make me easy; -- let me know he was a Man
of Fashion, and begged Leave he might have the Honor of conducting me to
England, or where else I thought fit.

There was something I thought so noble in his Manner, I accepted of his
Offers, and he attended me to Dover. From thence I wrote to an elderly Lady, an
Aunt, the only Friend I could depend upon. -- For she had in her Youth suffered
for her Fondness for your Sex, and was therefore most likely to pity my
Indiscretion.

Being obliged to wait for an Answer, the Gentleman who came over with me
begged Leave to visit me while I staid there. -- I could not refuse him; his
Behavior was most respectful, his Conversation very engaging, his Actions so
disinterested, and his Expressions so very tender, I esteemed him. -- Ah, when
once a Lady thinks highly of any of any of your Sex, it is the Gallant's Fault
if he does not receive the last Proof of it.

This, Sir, was my Case. -- Out of Gratitude I confessed to him, he was not
indifferent to me, but he wanted immediately rudely to avail himself by that
Acknowledgment. -- Thus Mankind behave generally to eager, or too insensible;
seldom knowing how to make a proper Use of our Concessions. What I intended as
a Present to his Disinterestedness, he wanted to command by an Act of Power --
he was deceived -- he lost me by the Scheme that he laid to possess me.

I escaped -- refused to see him, and the next Day he arrested me for Money
laid, out for my Use. An Answer to the Letter which I had sent arrived that
very Day, and seasonably relieved me; unexpectedly for my Creditor I paid his
Demands, and set off, without seeing him, for my Relations.

Lady Veltry was one of those very good Ladies, who dedicate most Part of their
Time to the making up and administering Medicines to the Poor; and I had not any
better Amusement, than, like a Pupil at the Hospitals, to attend upon her.

This I soon grew fatigued with -- then I used to weary myself with sauntering
backwards and forwards under a long Elm-walk Rookery. Visiters we had none, and
as to Books, all that her Ladyship would allow in her Library, treated upon
Drugs and Diseases, and the several Symptoms of each Distemper; yet even these,
for Want of Employment, I began to read over; but the Effects they had on me
were terrible, not a Disease they mentioned, but what I soon fancied I was
attacked with.

The first Volume I turned over was a Treatise upon Cancers, and the very next
Day I happened to have a Pain in my Breast, which alarmed me; a Discourse upon
Consumptions cured me of my Concer; but then I dreaded an Ulcer upon my Lungs,
those Prognostics were removed by an Account of the Gravel, which made me
expect a Fit of the Stone. A Volume of dropsical Cases fell next into my Hands,
they dissolved the Stone indeed, but fixed me in a very watery State -- but a
Book concerning the Eyes restored me to Health, though it gave me great Reasons
to fear a Gutta Serena.

I was obliged to leave off reading, for Fear of its being prejudicial to my
Sight; and just then Lady Veltry's only Son arrived from Italy. As soon as I
saw him, I felt an Uneasiness I could not account for; at first I only imagined
it to be a Compassion for his Youth.

He had a Delicacy of Figure, that I am certain would prejudice any of my Sex
that saw him in his Favor. I often pitied him in secret, to think what Dangers
from the Debaucheries of London, a Gentleman of his Rank, Fortune and Spirits
was exposed to.

But I soon was alarmed at my own Condition. Involuntary Sighs, sudden
Flushings, Palpitations of the Heart, unaccountable Anxiety and Tremors; Days
wasted without breaking my Fast, and Nights without Sleep; the Symptoms
frightened me. I flew to my Physic Books, but could not find my Case in any one
Author.

A Self Examination proved I was in Love; I thought I had been so with that
French Impostor, but found now that was only Price. I had never before suffered
those tender Sensations, those Uproars I then every Day experienced. I
delighted in the Discovery, and indulged my Distemper; consulted my Glass, and
was assured by that Oracle I should succeed; but I lost my Time; I despised
both him and myself; him for his Insensibility, me for my Want of Power.

A few Days after his Arrival, as we were sitting at Breakfast, the
Conversation happened to turn upon Love and Beauty. He very carelessly
declared, he looked upon Love, only as a poetical Rattle, invented to amuse
overgrown Boys and Girls with; and, as to beautiful Women, they were like
Dresden China, pretty Pieces of ornamental Furniture. I was choked, could
scarcely keep my Seat; but Lady Veltry, not being so immediately concerned in
the Reflection as I was, had Power to go on; desiring him to be explicit
concerning Matrimony; hoping, she told him, to see him wed before she died, to
his and her Wishes.

He fixed his Eyes full on her Face, shrugged up his Shoulders, starting from
his Seat, and turning round with such a Smile, as some Ladies express Hate by;
he replied, dear Mem, you're vastly good, and I Am immensely obliged to you. It
is become quite the Thing, to be sure, for Men of Fashion to be hummed into one
Piece of Folly or another. I am not to be out of Taste, I find; positively, my
Lady, I dote upon your Advice. And, as I find marrying and keeping a Pack of
Hounds are much practiced at present, I believe I may mortify myself so far, as
to build a Dog's Kennel -- but, as to Matrimony -- no -- I Will not come into the
Buck-basket. And turning upon his Heel left the Room, singing Part of a
Concerto.

We looked upon one another like two Travelers who had lost their Way; I began
to entertain a mighty Contempt for his Understanding, yet I admired his Figure.
I was certain he was a Fool, yet I could not help loving him. Men of many Words
may reconcile this Paradox; all I can say, is, I felt it to be true.

When I retired to my Chamber, I found a thousand Excuses for his Behavior. I
recollected an Intimacy, a very particular one, between this Gentleman, and the
Person who passed for his Valet; they dressed much alike, they were not unlike
in Figure. The Valet never sorted with the rest of the Servants; and several
Expressions his Master made use of to him, made me conclude, that this Servant
was some young Lady, whom he had stole from a Nunnery. -- I had often read of
such Things, and that it was owing to this Connection, he seemed so averse to
Marriage.

Lovers, Sir, although they may be mistaken in Point of Judgment, are generally
very quick-sighted; at least, so we are apt to flatter ourselves. As soon as I
had made this Discovery, I enjoyed greatly my Penetration. I exulted on the
Sagacity I fansied myself possessed of, I pitied the young Lady, wanted sadly
to hear her Story, and resolved generously to make a Sacrifice of my Passion to
my Rival.

With this noble Disposition I went to sleep -- Pity, indeed, we cannot be so
dispassionate, or irresolute, as we wish to be. All my fine Flights of
Disinterestedness vanished in the Morning, and, as soon as I saw the Valet, I
wished the Creature out of the House.

That very Afternoon, as I was in my Dressing Room, I heard in an adjoining
Chamber Lady Veltry's Son, and his Valet; a Division in the Wainscot gave me an
Opportunity of seeing them without their discovering it. I could not resist the
Temptation of looking through the Crevice; there I saw them embrace each other
with vast Fondness, my Conjectures were then past doubt; but, good God! -- in a
few Minutes after, excuse me, Sir, (turning my Face away) I found the Wretches
to be both of the same Sex. Shocked and trembling I hurried out of the Room,
rushed down Stairs, and, at the Bottom, I fell into a fainting Fit. One of our
Servants luckily crossing the Hall at that Moment, recovered me. Too detestable
is this Subject to dwell upon. I told what I had seen, and the Pair of
Catamites were seized. When Lady Veltry's Son came before her Ladyship -- so
far from being daunted at the Discovery, he gloried in it; pronounced it superb
Taste; and pretended to vindicate himself, by vast Fashion, and high Examples.

Lady Veltry would not hear him proceed; ordered him out of her Sight, took to
her Bed immediately, and, in four Days Time, without ever suffering her Son to
come near her, died in my Arms. -- But here the Lady was interrupted by the
following Accident.

CHAP. XI.
AFTER the Departure of Junior from the chief Constable's, Madam Illicit, whose
Penetration could never enough be admired, discovered they had affronted a
Lord; and that as how they might be all ruined, supposing he had a Mind to sue
them for Scrambulum matum.

Scandalum magnatum, you mean, my Dear, her Spouse replied, very good
naturedly; but sometimes it is unlucky to set Folks right. She began upon her
Husband, saying, it was all his doing, by following of his Whores and
Strumpets. Had not Mr. Illicit very prudently left the Room, upon the first
Prognostic of the approaching Tempest, it might have been of fatal Consequence;
fatal at least to every Thing brittle about the Room. Madam Illicit being one
of the best tempered Women in the World, but rather too hot; and she would in
her Heat of Passion throw any Thing that came in her Way -- but then it was
soon over, and she was very sorry for it afterward, as indeed all hasty People
generally are. Her Anger was ended the Moment her Spouse made his Retreat. She
begged her Brother's Pardon for being in a Passion -- but vowed she would, for
her own Family's Sake, go and wait upon my Lord's Lady, for Fear worse should
come on it.

Mr. Oatley approved her Intention.

But, first, she strictly enjoined her Brother to Secresy concerning the whole
Affair: Herein imitating some of the mighty Men, who make Laws -- not for
themselves indeed, they act ad Libitum. Thus this Lady, though she positively
insisted upon her Brother's not opening his Lips about it, yet she could not
help calling at three or four Neighbors Houses, to let them know what a
Blunderbuss her Husband had been, and as how my Lord knew her the Moment she
came into the Room; and that she was sent for to drink Tea with his Lordship
and the Lady; and that she knew who the Lady was, and all about her -- but,
thank God, she was no Blab, and how if it had not been for her knowing my Lord,
my Lord would have ruined her Brother and her Husband, for affronting his
Lordship; but, that my Lord was her intimate Acquaintance.

Just as Madam Illicit came to Goo y Wen's Door, where Junior was earnestly
attending to the fair Unfortunate's Narration, she met Mr. Seap, one of the
Parish Officers, who was coming to pay the strange Lady a Visit; but not out of
an idle, unwarrantable, or impertinent Curiosity; no, Junior's Liberality had
been mentioned all over the Town; and, according to ancient gossipping Custom,
was increased by arithmetical Progression. -- Therefore Mr. Seap, having the
Good of his Parish at Heart, came to wait upon the Gentleman, to know
concerning the Woman and the Child; not that he imagined they would increase
the Town's Poor-rates; but Accidents that might happen, ought to be provided
against; besides, as the Gentleman was known to be so generous a Gentleman, it
was doing his Duty to try, at least, if by threatening the Wench about
Security, he could not get Junior to make him a Present for the Benefit of the
Parish.

Seneca observes, doing Duty is duplex.

There is a Duty we owe our Neighbors, and a Duty we owe ourselves.

Now, to attempt one of these Duties, Mr. Seap came invested with an Authority
to punish or protect, as Justice should find it right, necessary, equitable and
best. For Justice -- but here I must beg Leave to observe, that the Symbols of
Justice and Janus are quite wrong, and that they should be shifted.

For, as every Schoolboy knows, the Temple of Janus was relative to War and
Peace; Janus should certainly be blind-folded; to show, that War is sometimes
but a Game of Blindman's-buff; and in Peacemaking, we should take Care not to
be hood-winked.

Justice should wear two Faces, one to smile at her Friends, with the other to
frown upon her Enemies.

The Utility, Erudition, and Occasion of this Digression, will be a sufficient
Atonement for its Introduction.

As the Superintendant of the Workhouse was going to lift up the Latch, the
Lawyer's Lady seized him by the Cuff of his Coat, and in a very hasty Sort of a
Tone, demanded to know what he wanted in that House.

Seap. I come, Madam, to look after some Parish Business.


Madam. Then I insist upon knowing what that Parish Business is; for I and my
Husband should know, because I and my Husband do most of the Parish Business.


Seap. But, Madam, this is concerning a Woman and a Child, and you can have no
Business.


Madam. How, Sirrah, do you think me past Childbearing? You Rascal -- I no
Business with Children -- Junior was that Instant opening the Door, to know
what was the Matter, when, at the very Moment, backwards Mr. Seap fell into the
House, driven down by a violent Blow on the Nose, given him by Madam Illicit,
for his Imporence, as she said, to contradict her in so vulgar a Manner.


Like a Corpse, ready for the Coroner's Inquest, Mr. Seap lay all at his
Length, on his Back, cross the Brick-floor, which his Head had hit hard
against. But Madam Illicit, regardless of his Fate, straddled athwart him
unconcerned, and addressed herself to Junior and the Lady, with,

I beg your Honor's Pardon, my Lord, and her Ladyship's Honor's Pardon; but
this Fellor was a coming to insult your Honor's, and your Ladyship's Honor's
Child -- She was going on, impatient to express herself, curtsying at every
other Word, to show her Breeding, when poor Seap, in one of her Sinkings,
seized her by the Gown-tail, and cut short her Compliments, by pulling her bump
upon his Breast.

He lay breathless for some Time with the Blow, and she sat speechless for some
Time upon him; staring wildly, confounded at her Disgrace; but Junior, who new
enough of her Temper, to judge what must become of the Victim underneath her,
lifted her up, and led her to her Ladyship; then assisted the Parish Officer;
and by the friendly Interposition of the strange Lady, my Lord's Authority, Mr.
Seap's Submission, and three or four Glasses of genuine Coniac, Madam Illicit
returned Home in good Humor, and Mr. Seap with her; leaving the Lady at
Leisure to go on with her Adventures.

The Story of the Lady continued.

I fear, Sir, my Tale is already grown tiresome; the Remainder of it, I doubt,
you will think more so; since I shall be obliged to mention several Facts,
wherein the Vanity and Ingratitude of Mankind are conspicuous. -- From what
already I had known of your Sex, you must not suppose they could be much in my
Esteem; and what afterward happened to me, corroborated the Contempt I
entertained for them; and was, as I then thought, a sufficient Excuse for the
Manner in which afterward they were treated by me. I wish what I have suffered
might deter others from too much indulging the strong Sallies of their
Imagination, and by my Example would remember, that they who attempt to make
others ridiculous, always lay themselves open to Revenge.

All that Lady Veltry could leave from her Son, she gave me; and after her
Decease, in Money, Bills and Jewels, I found myself worth upwards of five
thousand Pounds. As soon as the Funeral was over, I sat out for London. A Wheel
of my Chaise giving Way on the Road, I put up at Noon-time at an Inn, a single
House; upon the Bench before the Door, I saw a very neat dressed young Woman
sit crying, her Arms had some black and blue Marks on them, and her Cap and Hat
was in Disorder. I enquired of the Bystanders, what was the Reason of her
Distress? They told me, her Husband had been beating her; and just at the
Instant he came back, a black, ill-looking Fellow; I asked him, mildly, the
Reason of his using so prettya young Creature so barbarously? He replied,
surlily, she was his Wife, and no Body had any Business with her, but himself.
However, I at last, by giving him some Money, pacified him. I took such a Fancy
to the young Woman, that I brought her to Town, and kept her with me. She had
been educated by her Parents on Purpose to go into Place as an upper Servant;
her Father was a Jailor, where this Fellow of here is had been committed for
smuggling, nay, outlawed; she took-Pity of him, helped him to make his Escape,
and went off with him. They had been rambling about the Country for six Months;
he was a Tinker, and she was very ingenious; she made and sold artificial
Flowers at the Gentlemen and Farmers Houses about the Country. But in the last
Town they came from, a very rich Man wanted to be rather too familiar with her;
she repulsed him, but her Lover would not give it over, went to her Husband,
and proffered him a Sum of Money to sell his Wife. -- The Fellow consented, and
the Blows she had received, were because she would not comply. This Relation I
could not help entering in my Account Courant against your Sex; and yet I own,
Sir, I wished to meet with some Incidents, that would make me think better of
Mankind.

In the Afternoon, a Man on Horseback called to my Postillion to stop; but just
as he came up to the Chaise, his Crape dropped from his Face, and I knew him to
be one of Lady Veltry's Servants, who had been discharged about two Months
before; I then thought there was some Injustice in his Dismission; and I
remember, at his taking Leave of me, I put a Moidore in his Hand, and to his
Gratitude I imputed my not being robbed by him. The next Morning, my Servant
came to tell me, that he was sure he saw the Highwayman in the Yard, that
stopped the Chaise Yesterday, and asked my Leave to have him taken up. I was
shocked at the News, and ordered him on his Peril not to say a Word, but sent
my Woman with him down Stairs to find the poor Wretch out, and bid him get off
-- They did so, and it gave me great Ease, when they told me of it; for I
dreaded, if he was seized, that I must have taken an Oath in a Court of Justice
upon Life and Death -- That Action, I knew, would sit heavy upon my Mind as
long as I lived -- to be accessory in hanging any Person, even though they
deserved it, was what I could not reconcile to myself. It may be looked on as a
foolish Woman's Prejudice, but I can no more get over it, than several of your
Sex can their Tremblings at Cats, Cheese, and many other Antipathies.

That Evening, as I sat at Supper, I received a Letter directed to me. It
surprised me, how any Person could send me a Letter as I was upon a Journey --
but I could hardly fancy myself awake, or in my right Senses, when I found it
was from the Wretch, who, but that Morning, I cautioned to make his Escape --
and that it was a Love-letter too -- I read it over so often, it is not easy
for me to forget it. He began with hoping my Honor was not frightened when he
came up to the Chaise, for he wouldn't hurt a Hair of my Head for all the
World; hoped I would pardon his Boldness in breaking his Mind to me. That, to
be sure, he never could have had the Boldness to think, that so fine a Lady as
I was, could have liked him so very much; not but that his Fellow Servants used
to say, when he lived at Lady Veltry's, that young Madam (meaning me) took his
Part very much -- but, to be sure, Madam -- (thus the Wretch went on) when you
put the Moidore in my Hand, as I was leaving my Place, I thought you gave my
Hand a Squeeze, and you have run in my Head ever since; and when, Yesterday,
the young Woman told me, you advised me to get off, I was pretty sure you had
taken a Fancy to me; so was resolved to let you know it. Though I have wore a
Livery, Gentlewomen put up with that; and, as to my taking the Road, what can a
Man do, that has been used to live well without Working? And there is Cheating
in all Trades, and every Body allows the Highway is as much a Gentleman's
Profession, as playing at Cards.

You may suppose, Sir, the Answer I sent him -- I never saw my Lover any more
-- but I kept his Letter, as a Masterpiece of human Vanity.

As soon as I arrived in London, I began to put my intended Schemes in
Execution, of making your Sex my Dupes; I did so. I used my Lovers as some
Sportsmen do Game; lure, hunt, and toil them: But --

The Waiter from the Inn came just then, to let the Gentleman know, Mr. Saltern
desired his Company to Dinner, which was taking up, and begged Mr. Junior would
bring the Lady with him. Junior immediately went with the Waiter, the Lady
promised to follow after Dinner was over. During the Meal, Jack let his Friend
into as much of the Lady's History as he knew; and then went to Goody Wen's to
escort her to the Inn. As soon as Mr. Saltern saw her, he could not help
saying, a Beauty, indeed! -- Mr. Junior told the Lady, he had related to Mr.
Saltern all the preceding Part of her History -- upon which, as there were only
them three present, she thus concluded her Adventures.

What a Multitude of ridiculous Actions I did occasion several very wise Lovers
to commit!

I must say this in Praise of Understanding, Sapience, Knowledge, or whatever
other Title learned Folks know it by; that I found those my greatest Dupes, who
imagined themselves too mighty to be made Fools of. Your real Coxcombs, Dunces
and Impertinents, I could do nothing with -- Fowlers might as well attempt to
follow wild Geese by their Track. Yet let me do your Sex so far Justice;
Ingratitude is not solely confined to the Masculine Gender -- for my Woman, who
had been my Confident in all my Schemes, nay, my Agent in most, whom I had
rescued from the Blows of that Outlaw -- she, Gentlemen, revenged your Sex.

For when I grew to be tired of making Mankind my May Game, she advised me to
Matrimony -- I had often thought of it myself, and, upon her Recommendation,
admitted a rich West India Merchant, just arrived from Jamaica, to pay his
Addresses to me -- Oh! Gentlemen, they who will deceive, ought to be deceived
in their Turns. I was so, and not to tire you with dull, commonplace
Repetitions, I was a second Time trepanned.

Afterward, but too late indeed, I found out the Villainy. My Woman had met in
London her Fellow, whom I had rescued her from, and he persuaded her to be
concerned in this Confederacy against me. They dressed up one of their Gang in
a proper Habit, and introduced to me as a West Indian. Sure Villainy must
severely suffer in the next World, it meets with so much Success in this. We
were married; and, on my Husband's praising the Island of Jamaica to me, and
the vast Profits that were made there by English Merchandise, he persuaded me
to go with him, draw my Money out of the Stocks, and lay it out in Trade. We
went over from Park-gate to Dublin, where one of his Ships lay, as he told me.
Indeed he carried me on board a very handsome Ship, where I was treated with
the utmost Civility, and lay in the great Cabin that Night. But, Gentlemen,
think what my Surprise must be in the Morning, to find myself when I woke in
the Arms of a Stranger. After much struggling, I sprung from him, but I had no
where to shelter myself; the Ship I found was under Sail, and I was sent for a
Slave to the Plantations. The Captain of the Vessel, which was indeed a Ship
that carried such unhappy Wretches over, told me, that I was represented to him
as a common Woman of the Town; that the Gentleman I came on board with, was to
be married to a great Fortune, but I persecuted him so, there was no Way of
making two Families happy, but by contriving to get me out of the Way -- I
asked after my Trunks. He showed me a Chest which was left for me -- I had it
broke open, and instead of Clothes, it was filled with Straw, Sticks and Stones.

This, the Captain told me, opened his Eyes, and he believed that I was ill
used -- but, as the Wind was fair, should he alter his Course to set me upon
Shore, his Owners would ruin him; but he would take Care of me; he swore, and
begged Pardon for getting to Bed to me -- but since what was done could not be
undone, he supposed there was no Harm, he said, if I and he stowed in the same
Birth together.

What could I do, Gentlemen, in these most wretched Circumstances? He added,
that when I came to the West Indies, I should live like a Lady; that he would
bring me safe back again, and that if it cost him all he was worth in the
World, he would find out the Villains who had wronged me.

For the Remainder of the Voyage we lived together; and when the Ship came into
Harbor, he fulfilled his Promise of behaving to me like a Man. -- He sold me
for a three Years indented Servant; having persuaded me to sign a Paper before
he went ashore, which he said was necessary for both our Securities to his
Owners.

You may wonder, perhaps, Mr. Junior, how I had a Fortitude of Mind sufficient
to endure such Shocks as these were. Indeed, Gentlemen, I cannot boast of what
your Sex calls Stoicism -- I don't know whether I am right in the Word, or no;
but I mean that Philosophic Armor of Indifference, in which the famous Men of
former Times are said to have given Battle to the Passions.

Yet our Sex has a Shield that is our sure Defense, when we please to make Use
of it. It is Spirit -- and a Lady's Spirit, like a King's Prerogative, is
absolute, we will do what we please with it.

I was taken by a Widow Lady, a Tawny-moor, to be her Waiting Woman. I had an
easy Place of it; only now and then I was a little puzzled about choosing
Ribbands to suit her Complexion -- You smile, Gentlemen, upon my Honor it is
true. Though her Face, Neck and Arms were exactly a Copper Color, she spent
three Hours every Day at her Dressing-table; but these Mulattos are much more
affected than Europeans; at least, I fancy, if in England any ill-favored
Persons should take Pains to ornament their Faces, they would be stared at as
Prodigies of Vanity, vastly odd Creatures, and such as don't appear above once
in a Century.

My Mistress, though very old, as well as intolerably ugly, was incredibly rich;
several Persons, even of the best Families upon the Island, paid their
Addresses to her (in this too I hope we differ from them.)

One Afternoon, as I was sitting by myself in the Dining Room, a Gentleman, who
was the greatest Favorite my Mistress had, came behind me softly, and before I
was aware, throwing his Arms round my Neck, gave me three or four Kisses (the
first and the last Time he ever served me so) the old Lady entered that Moment,
and took immediately such an Antipathy to me, that she was resolved to have me
poisoned, those Things are often, and very easily done there.

Had it not been for an Englishman, one of the Overseers of her Slaves, I had
died a Victim to her Jealousy. By his Means, though it was attended with
innumerable Difficulties, I made my Escape off the Island. He took me with him
to Hispaniola, from whence we sailed for England; but on the Cornish Shore our
Ship was lost; and though we saved several Things of Value out of the Wreck, the
Country People came down, Women as well as Men, and plundered us of them all.

I wonder those Things are suffered in such a Kingdom as England is. I am no
Politician, but really believe our Legislators know not that such Things are
practiced; or if they have heard of them, fansy them to be so much exaggerated,
they are not worth attending to.

Mr. Saltern I have heard, that a Clause concerning the preserving of
Properties in the Case of Shipwrecks, is to be tacked to the Bill for
Preservation of the Game throughout England; for at present it is not only on
the Coast of Cornwall, but on every County in this Kingdom, whose Land lies
open to the Sea, where a Ship comes on Shore, the Vessel is not only plundered,
but the Sailors too often murdered.


Lady. Thus, Sir, it was they served the Person who came over with me: As he
strove to defend a Chest of valuable Effects, which he had purchased Abroad, he
received a blow on his Head by a Club, from one of the Barbarians, of which
Fracture he died. On the Day of his Death, I was brought to Bed of the Child
Mr. Junior has so generously taken Care of, and with which Infant I have
wandered ever since, in a most miserable Condition.


It is almost incredible, what a Woman's Pride can make her capable of either
doing of suffering. I don't speak Gentlemen like a Scholar, by Rote, it is only
from Practice I draw my Observations; but when once it becomes acquainted with
Want, it is sure to degenerate. Haughty Minds will suffer any Affliction, but
Poverty; at least it was so with me; Necessity beggared me of Resolution, and
my Spirit was sunk, like a decayed Prop, crushed by the Building it should
support.

CHAP XII.
IT is needless, I believe, to observe, that when a beautiful Woman relates her
Distresses, the Audience (especially if they be of the Male kind) seem to
sympathize in all her Sufferings. Each Man pretends to Pity, because he
admires; and admiring, he hopes to do as others have done: -- Though from the
fair Relater he has already heard, that Man's unwarrantable Pursuits occasioned
every Misfortune she had endured.

Oh ye high and mighty Inhabitants of many Acres, why will you class Beauty as
a Specie of Game? Destroy them accordingly, and boast of it afterward? Yearly
are many beautiful Innocents betrayed, and beggared; yet (except at the Old
Baily) seldom is Man brought to a Sense of Shame for it.

N.B. No Apology is made for the above Piece of Morality. -- It may not be
altogether thought proper for the History; although it is very proper for the
Historian. Did not we circulating Library Scribes, Imitators, and Plagiarists,
now and then, thus inform the Reader we had some Morals, they could not easily
find it out by the rest of our Writings.

Yet I hope to be allowed, observing one Thing in Behalf of us
Putters-together-of things, for the Amusement of the very indolent Part of the
Public.

That although our Enemies say we have neither Morals, Learning, Money, nor
Manners. -- As to Morals, vide the first Part of this Chapter; and our Learning
is elaborately shown, by our Quotations from the Greek Grammar; the appropos
French Phrases we have selected from Dictionaire Royal; and the many classical
Lines, which with much Trouble we have helped ourselves to out of what is
called Lilly's Sintaxis.

Thirdly; as to our Manners, since Mr. Heart has taken upon him to teach grown
Gentlemen, to be sure we are much more polished than before; we now and then
receiving a genteel Lesson for writing a proper Advertisement.

Indeed, as to Money, I have nothing to say to it, in this ungrateful,
illiberal Age: We Geniusses are no more minded than worn-out Women of the Town;
nay, not so much, for they can turn Bawds, and keep the best Company; -- but
who the Devil can we pimp for? The Muses are old Maids, and Prudes, and past
Childbearing; and we are too shabby, and shamefaced, to say any thing to
terrestial Toasts.

What an unrewarding Era this is? The World knows we have nothing to live by
but our Wits, and they are resolved we shall have nothing more substantial to
live upon. I remember, when a well-timed Pamphlet against either Party was
Bread; and an Attack upon the Administration a Suit of Clothes certain. But
there is nothing read nowadays, but such a General beats the French there, and
such an Admiral takes the French here; and this and that Island surrenders to
the English; just like the old Stories we heard at School, about the Grecians
and Romans conquering every body.

These things are so common, and Englishmen are so uncharitable, that if we
were to waste the last Drop of our Ink in the Cause of our Country; in what
part of our Country should we be taken Care of, for it? Or though we wore our
Pens to the Stumps in praise of roast Beef, we should never get a Belly-full by
it.

For my own Part, let Ignorance increase, I resolve against publishing any more
Things: I Will have my Bundle of Manuscripts buried with me, and say with Scipio,
my ungrateful Country shall have none of my Remains.

Yet benign Reader, as I have a very capacious Family, and there are several
outstanding chalk Accounts in the Neighborhood against me, let me beg you will
give this Work a good Word; if it is only for the Sake of the old Maxim, since
you have been taken in to buy it: Lend your Help to hum others; or you may
praise it upon the same humane Principle, as some Masters and Mistresses will
give Servants they Discharge (for male Practices) a good Character. Not that
the Wretches deserve to be well-mentioned, but what can the poor Creatures do,
either Authors or Footmen, if no body speaks for them?

That you may have something to praise me for, please Reader to observe the
elegant Quaintness of Style, which is interspersed up and down in several
peculiar Phrases through this Compilation. Many more Hints, Sir, have I to offer
you; but I believe, by the Help of this digressional Appendage, I have brought
this Chapter to a tolerable Length: At least it will be, when I have added in
order, that I have the Honor to be,

Friendly, though unknown Reader, your most obliged, most obedient, and most
Sincere humble Servant, The TRANSCRIBER.

CHAPT. XIII.
THE Lady's Story, with her manner of telling it, made such an Impression upon
Mr. Saltern, he offered her himself and Fortune, so genteely, she must have
been guilty of the utmost Ill-manners, not to have accepted of at least one of
them.

Junior had left them to themselves all that Evening, being entirely taken up
with pacifying the Landlady, Mrs. Belcy. Her Husband had struck her that Day;
an Action, which, as she said, was horrid to think of, and what he never before
had ever dared to attempt; but she would be revenged of him by all that was Good:
-- Vowed never more to come between a Pair of Sheets with him, nor live longer
in the same House: And letting Junior see she had five hundred Pounds in Bank
Bills and Cash, he consented to go off with her the first Opportunity. For Jack
knew by Experience, fine Women in the sporting Way, are better Tools than false
Dice; more Money is got with them, and without the Fear of Detection, which
sometimes cramps a fine-finger'd Fellow's Dexterity.

No sooner had Aurora, -- no not so soon, -- Day's Curtains had been sometime
undrawn, and the rosy-finger'd Ladyship had taken her Pinch of Snuff after
Breakfast, before the two Gentlemen and Lady met at the Tea-table.

Mr. Saltern, after making a proper Apology, informed Mr. Junior he would
postpone his intended Welsh Tour, until his Return from London; for which City
he intended instantly to set out, and with this Lady's Consent, set her down
safe there; and assist her to make an Appearance worthy her Family and
Breeding; begged Mr. Junior would meet him in Town; which Jack promised without
Hesitation.

When every Thing was concluded, off rattled the Post-chaise, with Messrs.
Saltern and Company; and at the same Instant, into the Yard came limping a
broken-knee'd Hackney, whose Sides and Shoulders looked like an ill-flea'd
Bullock; upon his Back, sat sideling, almost incrustated with Dirt, a tall thin
Figure, meagre-fac'd, whose white-paper'd Curls hanging down his bloodless
Cheeks, made him yet look more ghastly: He pitched his Voice in the proper Key
of understrapping Authority, and bawled about him, Ostler, Landlord, Cook,
Drawer, and Tapster; ordering some burned Wine for himself, warm Stables for
the Horses, and a Fire in the best Parlour for his Honor.

Away burst the Servants, hurrying here and there, like a Parcel of disturbed
Ants; when on a sudden, they heard the Horses trampling in high Trot along the
Street, and dexterously turning under the Gateway, up the Yard prancing,
appeared a nice harnessed Set of sleek-coated chestnut Geldings, rolling in
their Rear a French varnished Vis a Vis; out of which nimbly skipp'd Sir Tasty
Flash, Lady Dowager Grotto followed him, cautiously stepping down between
Landlord, Landlady, three Chambermaids, two Drawers, and Tapster, regularly
ranged at the Door of the Carriage, as a Ship's Side is manned for the Entrance
or Exit of a great Personage.

Junior was by his Profession Company for a Man of Fashion; and being intimate
with the Baronet, no wonder they were rejoiced to see each other. -- Sir Tasty
had been down to take Possession of an Estate, about fifty Miles farther to the
West. The Baronet introduced Junior to Lady Grotto. Her Ladyship received him
with a Politeness due to her Son's Recommendation; declaring she should be
proud to have the Pleasure of cultivating an Acquaintance. -- There was
something in Junior's Figure not displeasing; -- but of this more hereafter, --
or perhaps not. -- But we must mention, Sir Tasty fell in Love at first Sight
with the Landlady, -- could talk of nothing else all Dinnertime; -- smoked
the Reason of Junior's being there; -- desired Jack to take a Turn in the
Garden with him; and the Baronet then told him, he would give 500 if he had her in
London.

A sudden Scheme came into Junior's Head, on hearing Sir Tasty's Offer. -- But
the Reader must excuse me if I don't discover it; since, as Jack did not put it
in Execution, it is not proper any one else should.

Alas, what do we gain by publishing all we know. I question, if even the
indefatigable Patriot, born Ann. Dom. 1683, ever clears his Advertisements.

This Age is not the Age for Merit to set up his Equipage; Genius is paid by
the Day; Bounty turned Election-hunter, and Reward fritter'd away among
********.

Yet let me for the Honor of these Times observe; -- no, let us rather observe
Sir Tasty and Junior, -- there they are, close together; the Baronet leaning
his Elbow on a Dial, playing his Brilliant in the Sunbeams, and Junior with
folded Arms, resting himself against the Summer House.

Sir Tasty. Look ye, Junior, among Friends, I Am fond of her; she is quite the
Thing. -- I Have seen something between you and her, but mum. You know my dear
Friend I know the World; you have had her, I like her; and he who will not part
from his Woman to his Friend, has not a Drop of social Virtue about him.


Junior. What makes you, Sir Tasty, imagine such a Thing is practicable?


Sir Tasty. Come, come, don't be queer, don't hum; neither did you ever know a
Woman that would not; -- that is all. Pon Honor I Will disburse, here is a Bill for
Fifty, bring her up to London: -- I know you're an honest Fellow. Hush, here is
our Elders.


Enter Lady Dowager. Mr. Junior, my Lady, has given me his Honor, he will now
and then kill an Hour this Winter with us in London.


Lady. If Mr. Junior can find any thing there equal to his Merit. --


Sir. Tasty. You Will excuse me my Lady, -- I believe we shall have more Time to
say fine Things when we meet next. -- Will I see is ready, -- so Dr. Jack
Adieu, as the Ghost says in Hamlet. Farewell, remember me.


Junior began now to believe there was such a Thing as being in Luck, and that
he was the identical Existence, that Fortune had fixed on for her Favorite,
with the Landlady. Under Pretense of taking an Airing, he galloped off; and
after a few Days crossing the Country, to avoid Pursuit, they arrived safe in
London; of which in about a Week more he informed Sir Tasty, not forgetting to
enumerate the mighty Difficulties, and vast Expenses, which attended the
Undertaking.

Sir Tasty, all in Rapture, flew to him, caressed him in the highest Manner,
bid him command his Fortune, vowed an eternal Friendship to him, and introduced
him as his most intimate, at Lady Dowager's.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the Beginning of these Memoirs, or Collection of Paragraphs, the Editor
promised a History of the human Mind, but never declared whether it was to be a
Male or Female one. If he intended to describe a Lady's Inclinations, he
flattered himself --

For where is the scientific Page, that can lead us to unravel the whimsical
Workings of a fine Woman's Fancy?

Yet they themselves can account for the greatest seeming Inconsistencies of
their own Sex's Behavior, as easily as we form a cometary System. Nay, I heard
several of their Opinions upon Mrs. Belcy, the Landlady's Case; who, though she
went away with Mr. Junior, as we may suppose, for Love; yet, if she did grant
Sir Tasty a Favor, or so, she was not so much to blame, as People might
imagine her to be. This may, indeed (as the Lady said) seem odd to some strange
Mortals, but they must be excessively ignorant, and shockingly absurd in their
Ideas, to fansy a fine Woman could be constant. Besides, as Miss Juliet, the
great Actress, observed, Sir Tasty was a Man of Consequence, and perhaps rich
as Peruvian Mines, and generous as Woman's warmest Wishes.

Mr. Deputy's Lady presumed, that Junior might grow cold, neglect her, and not
give Madam Belcy so much of his Time as he ought, and she did it to be even
with him: For as Revenge is sweet, this must be a very sweet Revenge -- or
perhaps (Miss in her Teens, sighing, remarked) that Sir Tasty might take at
first some unbecoming Advantage, and hinted something about a Masquerade, that
terrible Auto-de-se to English Chastities.

Harry Hatzell, an Intimate of the Editor's, hit off the true Reason at once --
saying, the Landlady thought, that two Friends, like two Heads, would be better
than one; that Emulation is Vigour's Whetstone, and a Lady who has only one
Lover, is as ill served as a Town with but one Tavern in it.

To this Opinion the Transcriber signs, for she wanted as many Friends as she
could get, to secure her from her Husband's Resentment; who, presently after
her Elopement, broke up Housekeeping, advertised her, and was on his Journey to
London to search for her.

The Baronet, though very vain, had not yet talked of his Mistress either at the
Star, King's-Arms, or Shakespeare; whether out of Regard to Mrs. Belcy, or Fear
of her Husband, is undetermined. He had Subtlety enough to have every Thing
transacted in Junior's Name, and every Thing was perfectly easy with Jack, as
if he had been her Husband. Indeed, he came Home but seldom; he was eternally
at my Lady Dowager's -- he was her Ladyship's Right Hand -- And he also became
equally necessary to Miss Fash, who was but just recovered out of a Fit of
Sickness, which Tom Fool's Banishment had occasioned.

Every Day Lady Grotto was obliged to pay or return Visits, Mr. Junior stayed
at Home to divert Miss Fash at Piquet; for, since her last Illness, Cards were
ordered her, by way of Alterative.

Grief, as Mr. Vellum very slowly observes, is twofold; it is like Cinnabar,
natural and factitious; and Sorrow is dry. Drink therefore is held by some, as
a wonderful Panacea; in Catholic Countries, a Cloister is the Specific.
Hanging, drowning, and shooting are used by the good People of England; but as
they are only quack Experiments, not slaying secundem Artem, the Faculty have
not admitted them into the Dispensary.

Card-playing is the best and most proper Cure, either for Love or Despair;
provided the Patients are Persons of Condition. Miss Fash therefore applied
herself incessantly to so certain an Absorbent.

Junior did not in every Party with her act consistent with the Character of a
Gentleman; for when he wanted Luck, he made it. N. B. This is a Sort of a
Secret, and, like some Phrases in Free Masonry, only known to the fellow Craft.

By Degrees her bad Run of Cards took all her ready Money; then she played upon
Honor; next she pledged her Jewels to him; and, to redeem the Diamonds, she
was forced to leave her Honor in his Hands.

Thus we read of infatuated Victims making Compacts with the Prince of
Pandemonium, his sulphurous Majesty; and because he should allow them to
appear in Splendour at present, give up to him for always, the only precious
Thing or Part belonging to them.

O ye much reasoning Literati, Why will ye not do something more, than just
tell us, like Guide-posts, the Way we have to go? -- Why will ye not budge
yourselves? Do but once, ye Dispassionates, hold in a dozen Hands at Hazard;
take off your own Toast in a pint Bumper, or feel yourselves embraced in the
dark Hour of Assignation; then ye would judge more like Men and Women of the
World, and not expect we can become pure Philosophers on this Side Fifty.

By the Vigilance of Miss Fash's Mama this Commerce was discovered. Lady Grotto
surprising Junior and her Daughter, in what she called unlawful Trafficking;
but she resolved to prevent the Affair from being blown, therefore took the
Gentleman to herself, and ordered Miss to prepare for her Marriage with Lord
Pillow.

His Lordship was very polite, excessively good-natured, vastly complaisant,
and inestimably well bred; if any Thing, rather too easy. Seldom speaking in
Company; not but he was allowed to have a deal of Sense, only he had been often
told, nothing could be worse than to affect Wit. Neither was he very curious,
because Enquiries would have sometimes led him into Societies below his Birth;
and a Man of Fashion should never have any Thing to say to the Vulgar. He was
never guilty of any ill-mannered Contradictions; but entirely regulated by the
Advice of his Friends, Relations, and Domestics. What they told him to be
Taste, he believed to be so. Was it either to build or pull down, to clump, or
enclose, to subscribe, to furnish, to bet, to influence Elections, to buy
Pictures, breed running Horses, or address a Lady.

In Pursuance therefore of their Councils, he paid his Attendance to Lady
Dowager's Daughter; and Miss Fash not caring to disoblige her Mama, and as
Necessity, not Affection, had occasioned the Intrigue between her and Junior,
she gave his Lordship her Hand. The Wedding was solemnized with all imaginable
Magnificence.

CHAP. XV. A Return to Fool Hall.
ONCE more, my good Reader, well met at the Squire's. You see the Company are
drinking Tea in the Saloon; we will not disturb them, they will have done presently.
Here Is a fine green painted Chinese Back-bench -- excuse my Boldness, but pray,
be seated, and permit me to ask you two or three Questions.

Pray, Sir, how do you like this History?

Reader. So -- so --


Author. Why, so -- so -- be it then: A deal of Pains has been bestowed upon it.


Reader. Very likely, But, pray, to what Purpose? Would not your Industry have
answered much better, had you employed it to improve yourself in that Business
(whatever it was) to which your Parents bred you.


Author. That it what I would have done, O most friendly Monitor, has I been
brought up to any. We would no more scribble, than poor Strumpets would strole
the Streets, had we any Thing else to do.


Have you not seen Children raise Dams to stop a Kennel's filthy Current? Have
you not also observed some grown Persons cut Tables, Dressers and Sticks to
Pieces? -- Alas! Boys making mud Walls, Men whittling Wood, and our patching up
Pamphlets, are all from the same Principle; a simple Inclination to do
something.

But as it is customary for Sculptors to chizzle their Names, Architects to
make their Marks, and Painters to portrait their own Faces; so is it proper
Authors, in some Parts of their Works, should give an Account of themselves;
least, like Homer, our Patron and Preceptor, after our Deaths, seven or eight
Parishes may go to Law, or Loggerheads, about paying our burial Dues.

To begin then with my own Account.

My Father -- alas! I had a Father -- but Lady Fool's Visitants are up, ready
to promenade round the Garden. I Will postpone my own History, and go on with
their's -- This Way, gentle Reader, along that ever-green Hedge-row -- cross
'twixt those Tulip-beds, and we shall meet them in the Music-temple.

Mr. Fool and Junior are earnest in Argument; Junior is lamenting the
Insincerity of Mankind, the Depravity of Taste, Decay of Trade, Increase of
Taxes, Abuse of Power, and all the other trite Topics with which this Nation is
now and then Pamphlet-bubbled.

Mr. Fool. Excuse me, Mr. Junior, but there are Valetudinarians in the Body
politic, as well as the Body muscular; and when the Breath of Rumor blows, it
puts them out of Heart, and they believe the Nation's Constitution to be
immediately incurable.


Then there are always too many anonymous Writers, who (like Quacks) must
starve for Want of Business, had every Individual Understanding enough not to
be imposed upon by their Forgeries; but they with specious Pretense of public
Utility, like a Toad under Sage, spread their Poison unsuspected.

When Ladies and Gentlemen are upon a Visit together (in this Kingdom) the
Conversation is divided, as it was at Mr. Fool's. For while Junior and the
Squire were deeply engaged in the Business of the Nation, the Ladies were as
earnest in expatiating upon Trolly, Garnet, Trimmings, Dresden Figures,
Servants Carelessness, and French Varnish.

Lady Pillow endeavored to ingratiate herself with Lady Fool, and she
succeeded to Admiration. The City Lady was charmed to hear the late Miss Fash
repeat the Particularities of James's Parish; and then, such elegant Notions as
Lady Grotto had about fancying Furniture, and Notableness in domestic
Management. They were prevailed upon by Lady Fool to stay a Month at Fool-hall,
and Junior was included in the Party.

One Morning, after all this good Company had been there about a Week, Lady
Pillow left her lonely, uneasy Bed, much sooner than is customary with the
Delicate; her Mind was horribly disturbed; she fancied a Walk in the Garden
would be of Service. There she happened to meet Junior, who, like her, had rose
for the Benefit of Contemplation.

Her Ladyship, as they met, declared she must needs speak with him immeciately.
They came close to a many pillar'd Building, generally called the Pantheum;
they ascended the Steps, she threw herself into a Cushion-covered Window-seat;
and after three or four Sighs, which gave her animal Spirits sufficient Relief,
she was enabled to deliver intelligibly the following Words.

Lady Pillow. Mr. Junior, I find, that when a Lady has made one false Step,
she is liable to trip all her Life after -- You know the Obligations you have to
me, I know the Connections 'twixt you and Mama -- I must have Mr. Fool.


Junior. My Lady --


Lady Pillow. I don't care what becomes of all the World -- hear me out. He
cannot love this City Creature he has married: Gratitude indeed. He has a
grateful Spirit to all the World, but me -- He behaves to her like an Angel --
She loves him, but, indeed, what Lady would not? -- Oh, Mr. Junior, help me --
Mr. Fool shuns me -- be but my Friend in this, all past Actions shall be
forgiven; if not, by Heavens, though I myself sink in the Discovery, all shall be
known.


Junior. Will your Ladyship permit me to hear how I may assist you?


Lady Pillow. You must commence an Intrigue with Lady Fool.


Junior. What, Madam, when she loves her Husband?


Lady Pillow. Your Sex are not always thus diffident of succeeding with ours --
but that is no Matter -- She has not Sense enough to love -- no -- I Will assist
you, and let a Woman alone to win a Woman -- I know her Foible -- She drinks,
Mr. Junior -- Nay, you must have perceived her, since we have visited here, to
have been sometimes on the wrong-side Reason. Leave me to prepare the Way, and
be you ready to improve the Opportunity.


Junior vowed an implicit Obedience, and both well pleased, returned into the
Breakfast Parlour.

There is a famous pantomimical Entertainment, called the Contention between
Reason and Will; but though it is hourly performed by Mankind's Company of
Comedians, yet the Players are not so perfect in their Parts as they ought to
be, the Study being so very difficult.

Now on what is called the Theater, Actors and Actresses may keep up their
Consequences, just as they please, since they appear not in inferior Casts, but
only now and then like Eastern Monarchs, with all the Pride, Pomp and
Circumstance of pageant Finery.

But we on Life's real and various Stages cannot preserve the consequential
Part of our Character; because, as we are obliged every Day to make some Part
of an Appearance, it necessarily follows, that we must sometimes act out of
Character.

Thus the once amiable Miss Fash became deceitful, and the careful Lady
Greensay is metamorphosed into a Dramdrinker -- once or twice in a Century such
Things will happen. In her Husband the Baronet's Time, Lady Fool used to take a
Cordial for Lowness of Spirits; and since French Liquaeum became tip-top Taste,
she grew fashionably fond of them; and indeed looked sometimes as if she had
but a confused Notion of Things.

We don't say, though her Chaplain Mr. Rector did, that the Day she would go out
to look out for Tom Fool, her Ladyship had been sipping.

CHAP. XVI.
AN Opportunity soon offered, which Lady Pillow did not neglect. The two Ladies
had been one Afternoon Tete a Tete conversing together for two or three Hours;
when a Walk to the Indian Pavillion, at the Bottom of the Garden, was proposed
by Lady Grotto's Daughter.

Arm in Arm they tripped along; by Chance Junior was there; just when they were
seated Lady Pillow started up, she had lost one of her brilliant Drops, begged
to be excused, and hurried out to hunt for it.

Now came on the fatal Time for Lady Fool -- Always, it is said, against the
Death of noble Personages, the Universe is unshipped, Creation's Anatomy
dislocated, and the Wheels of the World put out of Order. Monstrous Births,
Multiplication of Suns, Showers of red Ink, dismal aerial Yells, and
Jack-o-Lanthorn Dances are seen, heard, and wondered at.

Ancient authentic History abounds with Omens, and modern Memorialists throw in
a Prodigy now and then, just to grace their Annals with decent Horror.

For, as Mr. Lee says, when a great Man falls (i. e. one who has sacrificed
about two Millions of Mankind, just to make himself a great Man) yet at his
Death Creation feels a Loss, and Dame Nature, like a distracted Parent, tears
herself to Pieces.

Is it then to be doubted, that at the Death of Lady Fool's Honor, the
following Portents were forthcoming.

Cross the silvery shining Moon, a broad black Cloud spread like a mourning
Veil, as it were in Sorrow for the Lady's Loss. Behind the Alcove, a Bittern
with Bill ingulphed, deep in the reedy Ditch, sounded hoarse; the whooping Own
forsook its Ivy-tangled Cell; flittering Bats fled forth, blinking Beetles
doleful hummed their nightly droneing Peal; the House-dog howled dreadful;
croaking Toads crawled cross the smooth-mown Mead; a noisome Fog spread its
unwholesome Vapor; growling Thunder rumbled over-head; the rustling Wind
whistled hollow through the Rafters of an unroofed Barn, and a fast falling
Shower rattling, pattered against the Sashes.

But in the very Honey-moon of this Intrigue -- nay, before even Lady Pillow
could reap any Advantage by it -- it was destroyed. Lady Dowager, too well
experienced not to take Notice of the slightest Neglect, discovered that Lady
Fool had clandestinely possessed herself of Lady Grotto's Property in Mr.
Junior; this the Dowager took Care to inform Mr. Fool of, nay, brought him to
be Eve-witness of his own Disgrace, unperceived either by his Lady, or her
Paramour.

Tom Fool burst into the Room, and in the Heart of Passion demanded
Satisfaction; told Junior, he should wait for him by the old Chapel, and
mounted his Horse immediately.

Jack Junior had a proper Quantity of fashionable Spirit, which empowered him
to back a bad Action with a worse, in a few Minutes followed him out of the
Room, where he was met on the Landing-place by Lady Grotto, who upbraided him
with Ingratitude, for his wronging his Host. As for my Part, continued my Lady,
your taking up with such a Person, after I have been weak enough to let you
have any Thing to say to me, does not in the least pique me -- not in the
least, I assure you, Mr. Junior; it only shows me what your Sex are, that is
all; but I congratulate your Taste, to be sure, Sir. -- Junior replied to her
somewhat penitentially, and there would have been, it is believed, a Coalition
of Parties presently; and, indeed it was what her Ladyship expected, had not
Junior recollected, that his Honor lay at Stake, therefore he left her
abruptly, went down to the Stables, enquired which Way Mr. Fool went; and
hearing the Squire had Pistols with him, Junior borrowed a Pair from the
Steward, and set forward after the much injured Mr. Fool.

Lady Fool, whom Surprise had stupefied, sat for four or five Minutes after the
Antagonists had left the Room, like Niobe, just petrified; or, to make a more
credible Simily, as when in the large Mansion, waiting the Family's Return, a
sola-sitting Housewife pores over the melancholy Page of Glanville's Witches,
the History of Hobgoblins, or some other such Daemon-raising Work; as she reads
on, her Blood more chilly circulates; an anguish Tremor agitates her Muscles;
if then the Wind chances to blow open her Doors, she seems fixed, as if froze
speechless; all her Powers cease from Motion, even her Life indicating Eye
alters not its Point.

Thus frightened, and frightful wildly staring sat Lady Fool upon the Bedside;
and as soon as she came to herself, she rung the Bell with the utmost
Vehemence. -- Susan entered on the Instant, with a Bottle of Citron Water in
her Hand, judging that was what her Ladyship was in such a Hurry for. The
Moment the Maid entered, her Ladyship wringing her Hands, cried out, oh Susan,
what will become of me? I Am ruined Susan, I Am ruined, what shall I do?

Susan. The Lord forbid Madam, but pray my Lady, how?


Lady. O Susan, here happened to be Mr. Junior in my Room, I don't know how he
came in, but I was taken with a Swimming in my Head, and he was lifting me from
my Bed, just as my Spouse opened the Door. And to be sure Mr. Fool flew into
such a jealous Passion, I don't know what may be the Consequence; if he should
speak of it Susan, I Am ruined, [Crying] My Reputation, my dear Reputation's
gone for ever.


Susan. Dear, my Lady [Maid Crying] don't weep, I Am sure you will break my Heart
to see as how your Ladyship grieves yourself. -- To be sure my Lady, my Master
his Honor has too much Sense.


Lady. O Susan, my Reputation, I shall never --


Susan. Do pray, my Lady, sip up this Spoonful, just to recover yourself: To be
sure my Lady, Reputation's very well among poor Folks, and we Servants when out
of Place; but you are a rich Lady, and a fine Lady; and great Ladies should
always be above minding Trifles. There Is my Lady Grotto, why now she would not
take on so, and yet Mr. Junior and she are greater than they should be, that I
know.


Lady. How Susan, are you sure of that.


Susan. Yes, my Lady, I Will take my corporal Oath on it. -- I saw something
Yesterday between them, made my Flesh creep upon my Bones. -- To be sure
Servants should hear, see, and say Nothing; so I resolved to do, only thought
it was my Duty to tell your Ladyship.


Lady. The Wickedness of this Age! My good God! Could I ever think Lady Grotto
would have done so. -- What, bring Fellows for her filthy Intrigues into my
House; if she had a Mind to play the Strumpet, could not she do it at Home?


Susan. Indeed, my Lady, I never liked that laced Coat Fellur Muster Junior;
and if as his Honor my Master should come to any Harm by him. --


Lady. O Susan, don't name it; -- I should never outlive it, -- he is the best
of Husbands. -- Oh, if my Lady Grotto's Fellow should kill him


Susan. Dear, my Lady, shall I go and see for his Honor? Pray my Lady don't
cry, do pray take this Tea Cup-full, -- there my Lady, I Am sure 'twill do your
Ladyship good: -- Crying spoils the Eyes; and such fine Eyes too as your
Ladyship has: For all the Gentlemen that come to our House say, Mrs. Susan,
your Lady has lovely Eyes.


Lady. Lord, how the Wench runs on.


Susan. Indeed, my Lady, Grief bringson Wrinkles, the most fastest of any thing
in the whole World; and such pure White and Red too as your Ladyship has, and
all natural too, -- and that is more nor my Lady Grotto can say, for all she
looks so Cherry-cheek'd.


Lady. Oh, don't mention her Susan, but go for Mr. Rector, bring him to me
immediately.


Susan. Pray, my Lady, don't cry again, I Will go fetch the Parson -- pray my
Lady, be composed -- I Will leave the Bottle with your Ladyship. --


Exit Susan. Now her Ladyship is left alone, her Eyes fast fixed on the Bottle,
like an Infant looking upon a Map. Her Spirits were frustrated; she would have
reflected about herself, Mr. Fool, Lady Grotto, and Junior; but a sudden Pain
shot cross her Stomach; -- she was obliged to have Recourse to her Cordial. Her
Imagination began to be abominably hurried; Crowds of complex'd Ideas disturbed
her; faltering disjointed Syllables fell from her Lips; inverted Shapes danced
before her Sight; along the Bed she sidelong sunk; then heavy Sleep Seized on
each dizzy Sense, and closed her coquer'd Eyes.

As Susan left her Lady's Room, the Maid was met by Lady Pillow; to whom the
communicative Mrs. Susan related all Lady Fool's Distresses; informing the
astonished young Lady, that whereby his Honor, her Master, had found that
Fellur Junior along with my Lady; somehow the Squire took it ill, and so they
went out in a Huff together, and God forbid there comes no Harm on it: -- To be
sure, as I told her Ladyship, Servants shou'dn't say much; but I think my Lady
is but in a Disparation way herself, or else she would never have sent me for
our Chaplain to say his Prayers by her, -- and away Mrs. Susan hastened down
the Stairs, leaving Lady Pillow to recover herself by Degrees. -- And indeed we
must do the same to attend upon the Combatants.

Tom Fool rode out, determined upon Revenge, and Junior as determined followed
him. Mr. Fool, hurried away by his Passion, spurred his Horse on, whipped,
leaped, and galloped. Persons who are very uneasy, do not choose to suffer any
thing to be at rest they have Power over. -- The Place of Appointment was about
three Miles off: He soon arrived at it; and while he was there, amused his
Expectation, by raising himself every now and then in his Stirrups, to look
after his Adversary.

On the moral Rectitude of Duelling, the Reader may consult Jacob Behmen; -- we
have now no Time to do it, being obliged, as well as the Squire, to enquire
after Junior; who, to do him Justice, rode out with a Resolution to give Mr.
Fool Gentleman-like Satisfaction. For Gamblers, like Women of the Town, must
have something of the People of Fashion about them, or they can never expect to
be introduced into Companies, where they may make their Market. Now, as no Man
can be a Man of Honor, that will not meet his Man, ergo, -- every Man is a Man of
Honor, that will; and for that sole Accomplishment, qualified to keep the best
Company.

CHAP. XVII.
TO speak, is something so self-pleasing, that we are apt to talk, until we
forget what we had to say. Thus it has happened to the Memorialist, whose
Digression almost drove the History out of his Head, or else he would in the
last Chapter have informed the Reader; that after Junior had got out of the
Park-gate, mistaking the Servants Directions, he turned to the Left, instead of
the Right; and at a Distance perceiving something upon a Hill, which he
imagined to be the old Chapel, Mr. Fool mentioned, he galloped up to it
forthwith.

As he mounted the Hill, he observed it to be a large old stone-built Barn, and
rode up in Hopes of meeting some Person to enquire his Way of. -- He found a
young Woman sitting at the Door, of whom he asked his Road; but the informed
him she was a Stranger traveling toward London, and begged he would bestow
something upon her. Some Persons when they are asked for Charity, will give
their Blessing, but no Money; others are more ready to part with their Persons
than their Cash. Junior was at this Time in a loving Disposition: The Girl
looked wanton, and wholesome, and they went in to the Barn together, hanging
his Horse at the Door, as his Girl desired him.

That was what his very yielding Mistress wished for. She knew that behind the
Barn her Man had hid himself, and was ready, as soon as the fond Couple had
retired, to mount the Gentleman's Horse, and gallop off with it, according to
the Plan they had contrived, as they saw Junior mounting the Hill. Her Fellow
had but just been cleared at York Sizes, for want of Evidence, and they were
tramping it to London; when Junior's Appearance gave them a Hint, to put in
Practice the Scheme beforementioned. It was executed with all imaginable
Success, and Jack obliged to walk in his Boots above half a dozen Miles, before
he could find an Inn to put up at; from whence he sent a Letter to Lady Pillow,
to enquire how every Thing was at the Hall.

All was Distraction there: Mr. Fool had so endeared himself to every Servant,
by his Behavior, that the whole House was in an Uproar, when it came to be
known he went out with Pistols to fight Junior. The Men went of their own
Accord several Ways to seek their Master. But before this, Mrs. Susan had
reached the Parsonage; where she found Mr. Rector deeply immersed in electrical
Experiments, endeavoring to discover an universal Nostrum.

For the Vicar, after the loss of Lady Fool, had given himself up entirely to
the Study of the sublime Sciences; saying, like some other odd Philosophers,
Women were unworthy a wise Man's Notice. As soon as Mrs. Susan saw him; she
cried, Lord, Mr. Rector, you must come to my Lady immediately, she is all out of
Sorts.

Mr. Rector. If her Ladyship is out of Sorts, she must be electrified; -- that
attenuates, that stimulates --


Mrs. Susan. It may be so, Sir, but our whole House is out of Sorts.


Mr. Rector. Then the whole House must be electrified, as we fumigate against
any epidemical Disease; or as Catholics in their Exorcisms sprinkle with holy
Water.


Mrs. Susan. I Am sure Water will not do her Ladyship any good, its too cold for
her. -- So Mr. Parson you must come and talk about your Learning to her, for
she is but in a so and so Way, I can tell you.


Mr. Rector. Is she not; -- but I assure you, Mrs. Susan, I can restore her: --
I have a Specific, -- there it is; [pointing to the Machine] with this I will
do such Things, that were the great Boil alive, he would say to me, Tu eris
mihi magnus Apollo.


Mrs. Susan. But you mustn't follow, you must go along with me; and I Will tell
you what, Doctor, bring that Thing Umbob with you; -- it is like a Show, it may
make my Lady laugh mayhap. -- Mr. Rector, not caring to trouble himself with
explaining any thing to Susan, only thought fit silently to despise her for her
Ignorance, and ordered his electrical Apparatus to be brought after him to Lady
Fool's. As Mrs. Susan and the Vicar crossed the Closes, the Maid let him into
some Part of the History, relating to Mr. Fool and Junior's going out together
to fight.


When the Vicar, with Mrs. Susan, entered her Ladyship's Apartment, Lady Fool
was dozing, -- her Woman too hastily waking her, made her Ladyship start up
affrighted; and her Eyes opening upon Mr. Rector's uncouth Appearance, added to
her Terror. Although he was a Clergyman, he had then nothing black about him but
his Face and Hands; they were crusted over by the Smoke of his Experiments, and
Dust of his Study; a true philosophic Bronze, venerable as the Rust upon
Medals. -- He was a Man of too refined Notions to mind Externals. Superior to
Form, and so much absorbed in sublime Speculations, could not consult Dress,
though he was to wait upon a Lady. -- Must Man? Prerogative possessing Man,
classically and contemplatively dignified; must he descend to think, to act, or
wear Clothes like every-day appearing Mortals? -- No, thus Mr. Rector answered
Mrs. Susan, who found Fault with his having a coarse Flannel Nightcap on his
Head, over which, Turban-like, a dirty Neckcloth was tied, and a much-worn red
Bays Banyan covered the rest of this Figure.

Lady Fool, struck with the Sight, holding up her out-spread Hands, trembling
uttered, -- My God! What Is that? Jesus! I hope you don't come to rob me? A more
cool Imagination than her Ladyship's, might have been mistaken in the
Gentleman's Profession. But convinced by Mrs. Susan of her Mistake, the Lady
asked his Pardon; and bursting into Tears, -- with -- oh, Mr. Rector, I Am
frightened out of my Wits.

Rector. I opined, indeed, your Ladyship's Understanding was insane, from the
Incongruity of Apprehension, you just now was guilty of, -- but nemo Mortalium
--


Lady. Dear, Mr. Rector, don't talk of Mortality now, I have been dreaming of
Death's Heads and Plumes of Feathers.


Rector. Give me Leave a Moment, my Lady, to consult with myself upon your
Case, -- and immediately he threw himself into a meditating Attitude. He was
like most of his book-learn'd Brethren; of an unforgiving contemptuous Spirit.
She had taken him for a Felon, -- that he could not pass over, -- but resolved
to let it rest for a while, especially as he concluded her to be delirious;
therefore he determined to sooth her by soft Persuasion, until his experimental
Engine came; then he designed to cure her by Electrification, and publish her
Case with all the concurrent Circumstances; and thus at once gratify the two
most indulged, the meanest of all the Passions, Vanity, and Revenge. Setting
one Hand by his Side, and extending the other, he made with it a Sweep from his
Nose to his Knees; at the same Time pawing forth his right Leg and Foot, nodded
his Head; his Bow finished, he stood erect again, cough'd, hemmed, and thus
oratorized.

St. Austin, Seneca, Cardan, Boethius, Plato and Epictetus, have discriminately,
my Lady, elucidated to us the Prevention of Grief; and what Tertullian tells us
upon that Head is worthy Observation. Grief is in itself, as St. Chrysostom
says, an Antithesis to Joy; therefore the Poets have defined Sorrow to be
joyless, or abstracted from Mirth. Hence, by the Constriction, as well as
Construction of the glandulous Valves, stimulated by the Diaphragma's
Suspiration, the animal Spirits are jaculated into the lachrymal Ducts, which
occasions Tears.


Lady. No, Mr. Rector, it is Fear for my dear Husband's fighting a Duel,
occasions my Tears.


Rector. Pity it is, that Duelling should be the Men of Mode's Nostrum, when
Electrifying is so much a safer Panacea. I am, my Lady, conscious of as much
innate Bravery, as it is possible for any Man to possess; but must I put my
Life upon the impelled Velocity of a Bullet? Or suffer my Heart to be a
horizontal Mark for the acute Point of a Rapier to perforate.


Lady. Oh! Mr. Rector, how can you talk about killing, when that dear Creature,
my Husband, may a be murdering this Moment.


Rector. Madam, if his Honor should be destroyed, I shall be as much concerned
for him, as a Philosopher ought to be -- the Man who kills him must be hanged,
and your Ladyship must be electrified.


Word was brought him, that his electrifying Apparatus was come; he bid it be
brought up Stairs, and began to set it in order. Her Ladyship, who had never
seen any of that Sort before, stared, and asked him if he was going to conjure;
but before he could answer her, Susan bounced into the Room, over the Machine
she tumbled, crash! the glass Globe fell to the Ground, poor Susan rolling
about among the Pieces, sprawling, kicking and shrieking; but up she soon
scrambled, and ran at Mr. Rector open-fisted; crying, Curse your Rattling
Traps-she scratched, she tore, she bit him; he calling out piteously all the
while, and at the same Time my Lady bawling herself black in the Face, with
bidding Susan leave off; but nothing could stop her Rage, but an Inability of
Breath. As soon as she was out of Wind, the suffering Vicar arose, bald-pated,
his Band torn, his Nose bit in two Places, and his Face and Breast covered with
Blood that came from Susan's cut Fingers, which she had mangled among the Bits
of broken Glass.

My Lady could not bear to look upon Mr. Rector, but begged he would go
immediately to the Surgeon's, for she vowed he looked horridly shocking, and
vastly frightful. The Chaplain at that Moment casting his Eyes upon the
Looking-Glass, gave a great Groan, and ran down Stairs, crying out, a Doctor, a
Doctor, for God's Sake. Oh, I shall bleed to Death: Consider what the Loss of
me will be; mine is no common Loss, the World will miss me. O that I had but
published my Electrics; then I should have existed to After-ages, with Bacon,
Newton, and the rest of my brother Geniusses, like me, Britons, like me,
Philosophers; but ah, unlike me in Fortune. -- What, must I die ignoted? Die
so? -- Ay, so -- that is it. -- Die scratched to Death -- What, a Death for a
Scholar? -- I feel the Venom of her Nails now in my Nose, the Poison ascends to
the Olfactories, the Cellulae of my Brain will be loaded, and I shall be
distracted; yet, bear Witness, Neighbors, I will not forgive her. -- More he
would have said, had not a Surgeon been luckily at the Hall, under whose Care
we shall leave the Vicar, and wait upon her Ladyship, who was curious as the
Reader may be, to know the Reason of Susan's abrupt Entrance.

We have already taken Notice of the Confusion all the Family was in at Mr.
Fool's being missing; and that the Servants went several Ways to seek him. Now
the Stewards happened to be at the very Inn where Junior came to.

The faithful Domestic had him seized, and carried him before a Justice for
murdering Mr. Fool; and as he could not give a very satisfactory Account about
his Horse nor himself, he was committed to Prison. -- This was the News Susan
brought in such a Hurry, which occasioned the electrical Catastrophe above
mentioned. It may be wondered at by some Readers, that Lady Grotto came not at
this Time to comfort Lady Fool; but the Dowager was all this Time employed much
more agreeably, at least, as she thought; being taken up with writing Letters
to every one of her Acquaintance round the Country, in which the History of
Lady Fool's Infidelity and Disgrace was painted in a very plain and very
particular Manner.

Not so satisfactory was her Daughter, Lady Pillow, amused. The young Lady,
after recovering herself from what Susan had related, was a sorrowful Witness
what Trouble Mr. Fool's Absence occasioned; and retired to her Chamber,
attended by that terrible Tormentor, Self-Accusation.

After some Moments Pause, thus the unfortunate Lady began.

Yes, I am the wicked Author of all this -- He Will murder that charming Fellow
-- Shoot him through the Back --

The Villain that was base enough to take such an Advantage of me, will never
give a Man fair Play -- Junior is an Assassin; Oh, my dear Tom Fool, that I
could but be by in any Shape to assist thee -- The Arrival of her Spouse, Lord
Pillow (who had been about a Month upon the Mountain's Moor shooting) put an
End to her Soliloquy. With her Mama she attended his Lordship to Tea; Lady Fool
sent her Excuse, being immensely out of Order, and not fit to see Company.

That Lord Pillow might not remain a Stranger to Lady Fool's Illness, Lady
Dowager told his Lordship, that an odd Accident happened here; you know Junior,
my Lord, my Son's great Favorite.

Lord Pillow. Intimately, my Lady, and I assure you, he has very much of the
Man of Fashion about him.


Lady Grotto. He has been one of our Party here; I cannot say it was any Desire
of mine it should be so; for, pon my Onner, the Man is a disagreeable to me, as
a Hackney Coach; however, Lady Fool is Mistress of her own House, you know, and
she insisted on it; I thought it was a little odd, whimsical, and so forth --
but as I detest Scandal, I hate to be inquisitive; -- however, Love and Murder
as they say, will out. The Affair's over, and I am sorry to say, her Ladyship's
blown; for young Fool, her Spouse (who was my Son's under Game-keeper) caught
her and Junior in Bed together this Morning. I am sorry to break off all
Acqaintance with her Ladyship so instantaneously, but it cannot be avoided; for
how can I, Lord Pillow, ever look upon Lady Fool with friendly Face again,
after she has so grossly forfeited her Honor?


Lord Pillow. You are perfectly in the Right, indeed, Lady Grotto; But, where
is Junior?


Lady Pillow. Mr. Fool challenged him upon the Spot, and they are afraid Junior
is gone after to fight him.


Lord Pillow. By all Means; or I would never have spoke to Junior henceforward,
nor would Sir Tasty, I assure you.


Lady Pillow. My Dear, dear Lord, how can you talk so? Suppose now a Thief --


Lord Pillow. No, my Dear, you must pardon me there; a Robbery is one Thing,
and an Affair of this Kind is another. With a Thief, you consider Loss of
Property, or some other mercantile View; but with Respect to a Challenge, you
are not to consider any Thing.


Lady Pillow. No?


Lord Pillow. No -- positively, no; except the Challenge itself; that, like a
Play-debt, must be paid upon Honor.


Lady Dowager. However, I insist upon going away Tomorrow. You Lordship, to be
sure, has a right Idea what belongs to your Sex's Honor; and I never yet, I
hope, was deficient in what regarded me or mine. Therefore I beg your Lordship
will make it a Point, that we may go off in the Morning; for I cannot sleep
with any Tranquillity in a House, the Mistress of which has so lately polluted
it with Adultery.


Here we would say something about Lady Pillow's Sentiments upon this Affair,
were we not this Instant interrupted by the Vicar; who, sending in his Duty to
the Right Honorable. It was immediately granted, and Mr. Rector entered; his
Band changed, Face and Hands washed, Nose plaistered, and Chin fresh shaved, in
his best Suit of Canonicals, with a fine flowing flaxen fullcurl'd Perriwig,
crowned with a high Foretop, and full-powder'd.

With a becoming Reverence he made a round-about Obeisance; then with humble
Submission, began a Petition to their Ladyships; addressing them, with
beseeching their Graciousnesses, that they would, out of the Benevolence of
their Dispositions, condescend to beam forth a Look of Compassion on that poor
lost Sinner, Lady Fool, who was now in violent Hysterics.

The Ladies immediately went to see her; and his Lordship, ordering the
Chaplain to be seated, entertained the attentive Mr. Rector for the rest of the
Evening, with his dextrous Exploits upon Heath-cocks and Country Wenches.

CHAP. XVIII.
IT is now Time to inform those who have determined to read these Volumes
through, that after Mr. Fool had waited some Hours at the Place appointed in
vain, he began to consider what could be the Reason of Junior's Absence.
Certain I am (thus Mr. Fool soliloquized) he could not mistake the Place; if he
had a Mind to have met me, he might have been here before now. Perhaps Shame
prevents him -- it must be so -- Shall I search for him? -- No -- Home I am
determined not to return; and, upon these Words, spurring on his Horse, he
gallopped across the Country.

After he had hurried along about thirty Miles, he found Night overtake him
very fast, as he entered upon a large Moor; he was quite ignorant of the
Country, and as it grew dark, Tom Fool laid the Reins loose upon his Horse's
Neck, and suffered the Beast to go which Way he pleased. The Horse, kept
without Food for the whole Day, was seeking something to eat, when his fore
Feet broke down the Earth, and he fell with his Rider into a deep Pit, from
whence Stones and Slates formerly were dug. The Beast died upon the Spot, and
Mr. Fool, with much Difficulty disengaging himself from the Carcass, too much
bruised to get up without Help, was forced to remain below till Morning, when
he was found and relieved by the greatest Accident imaginable.

One of the many elegant and innocent Amusements which young Ladies of Fashion
kill Part of their Morning Time with, is collecting and arranging curious
Shells and uncommon Pebbles.

To obey a Lady's Orders, the Morning after Mr. Fool's Fall, Mr. Borlace had
taken a Walk to the Quarry, Pebble-hunting; there he found Tom Fool, and had
him conveyed to a Farm-house, the only Dwelling for many Miles round.

This Mansion stood in the midst of a large uncultivated Common, which was
overspread with Furze, Thistles, Fern, Rushes, and Turf Pools, for want of
being properly enclosed. For as it as divided into several Lordships, the
Persons possessed of its different Manors, were not unanimous about draining,
diking and improving it.

Sir Selzy Simkrimp would not come into it, because, as he told his Spouse,
while he pointed his Finger over the Land Surveyor's Plan; only mind me, my
Dear, if I consent to this Affair, Widow Wail comes in for four Acres and two
Perch more than I have.

His Curate took the Liberty to hint, that enclosing would be a Means of
employing a Number of Poor, whose Families were now starving; that Charity was
of heavenly Birth; that he hoped the Great, the Rich, and Powerful would now
and then condescend to think, that the poorest Creatures are their fellow
Creatures; made of the same Materials, quickened by the same Spirit, and
supported by the same Elements. Then Sympathy, nay, even base Self-Love, would
dole out some Superfluities to feed the Hungry, to cloth the Naked.

Let Us have none of your Nonsense; (interrupted the Baronet) as to Poor, we
have too many already, and damned high Assessments; and if these Wretches can
get Children now they are half starved, What would they do, if they had their
Bellies full? I say, they that stand up for the Poor, only encourage Poachers,
and our Game is thin enough already, so I Will not give my Vote for it.

And, if I do, I Will be damned replied Squire Bitt, it would destroy all my
Cover for Hares.

From this modern Way of Reasoning, but one Consequence could be supposed; it
was totally neglected, except some Acres round the House, to which Mr. Fool had
been carried.

The Tenant of which Habitation, in her Youth, had been a celebrated Lady of
Pleasure, and dealt formerly with most of the Gentlemen belonging to that
County.

When she, according to the common Custom of her Profession, fell to Decay, the
neighboring Gentlemen, out of Gratitude (as they will sometimes maintain worn
out Hunters) fitted up Part of an old Hall, stocked some Ground round it, and
gave it to her for Life. It was to this House Tom Fool was carried.

About the same Time that Morning, Lady Grotto, with Lord and Lady Pillow, took
their Leaves of Lady Fool; her Ladyship immediately after retiring to her
Chamber overwhelmed with Affliction.

Here -- here -- seems to be a Stagnation of the Story, or the Business of the
Story; for the Editor, like a savage-minded Tragedy Writer, has maimed, or made
away with most of his Dramatis Personae, except Mr. Junior -- no, we have him
left to keep Attention awake, like a Dance between the Acts; for something must
be done, English People love to be busy themselves, or see others so.
Therefore, as this will be the last Time we shall have any Occasion to mention
Mr. Senior's Son, and that his Narration shall no more interrupt the Thread of
our Chronicle, we shall, like a judicious Historian, although it is a little out
of the Order of Time, put all that is to come to Hand of him in the following
Paragraphs, which we would immediately lay before the Reader; but beg Leave to
refer him to the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIX. The Conclusion of the Adventures of JUNIOR.
AT first he made slight of being seized; but Lady Fool, to clear her
Reputation, dispatched a Messenger to the Justice, with a Letter, in which she
insisted on it, the Villain should be made an Example of, for he had murdered
the best of Husbands.

Lady Grotto gave up Junior entirely, she despised him for the Absurdity of his
Taste, to neglect her for a City Lady; and indeed wished he might be punished
for his immense Ill-manners, in so abruptly leaving her at the last Interview.
Lady Pillow looked on him as an Assassin; and Sir Tasty declared pon onner, he
could have nothing to say to Mr. Junior, till he had cleared up his Character.

On his second Examination, several very creditable Persons deposed; that he
always appeared to be very much of the Gentleman, he always laid his Money very
fair, paid his play Debts punctually, no Person wore better Clothes, or gave
more Money to Servants on a Visit; but it is much more necessary for a Man at
some Times, to be really a Gentleman, than only to look like one in the Eye of
the Law; all those hi fine Accomplishments were invalid. Mr. Fool was not yet
found, an Order came for him (in Consequence of Lady Fool's Letter) to be more
closely confined.

One Misfortune seldom comes alone, for Junior found, on his Return to Prison,
an Action lodged against him by the Innkeeper, for criminal Conversation.

Finding himself pressed by the Law, and deserted by his Friends, he thought
that Things were almost over with him; however, he was resolved not to fling up
his Cards, while there seemed to be a Probability of recovering the Game,
therefore began to scheme accordingly.

Hunger will break through Stone Walls, and Money he knew to have that hungry
Quality. The next Evening, as the Jailer and he sat Tete a Tete over a large
Bowl of Punch, he, after a little Circumlocution, proffered the Prison-keeper
fifty Guineas, nay, pulled the Sum out, to show it him, to let him make his
Escape.

The Jailer replied, he could not say any thing to it. -- Junior turned off the
Discourse in an Instant, as he knew his Man, and chose, as Othello says, He
should chew upon it; pretended to be sleepy, and went early to Bed.

When the Locker-up had turned into his own Bed, he could not close his Eyes,
the Guineas seemed still before them: He began to grow very restless, tumbling
and tossing, and turning. His Spouse, whom he had not for some Years, before
that Night, disturbed by his Over-wakefulness, was scared at the Oddness of the
Thing; could not imagine what it was. She a while lay still, expecting what
would come on it; but finding him still continue insignificantly restless, began
to rate him, for disturbing her in such a manner as he did.

Jailer. Why, you must know my Dear, that the Gentleman there, our Prisoner,
proffered me fifty Guineas, if I should let him out.


Wife. Has he got the Money?


Jailer. Has he! Yes, that he has, twice as much, I saw it; but that a'ant the
Thing, I don't know what to do in it. If as how I should take the Money, and it
should be blown, why then Lord help me.


Wife. Lord help you indeed, you poor Tony, who should blow it indeed, but your
own self. Howsomdever, let me alone, I Will find a Time to talk to him about it;
Sizes will not be these two Months, and we heed nor be in a Hurry to get rid of
him; he is a special good Customer, and a Power of the right Sort come after him.


Jailer. That Is all true, my Dear.


Wife. It Is all a Fool's Head of your own, my Dear; as to the fifty Guineas,
we'll get it, and he shall not get away neither.


Jailer. No!


Wife. No.


Jailer. Lord, if that could be.


Wife. Lord, what a Wonderment you make about it; but come turn to me, and I Will
tell ye. I Will make the Bargain with him; that one Night when you are gone out
of Town (you can make believe you know about going out of Town) that I Will let
him out; -- so now do you mind me; you know the Hosier's House which is next to
ours, you have the Key of it, and the Frenchmens Chamber where they broke through
leads into that House, and you know there are only some Boards nailed against
the Hole.


Jailer. I take you, my Dear.


Wife. No, but you don't, so don't interrupt me; -- I Will tell him as how I can
let him into the empty House, and give him the Key to let himself out into the
Street, provided that he will put the fifty Guineas into my Hands, the Moment I
have let him out of Prison into the empty House: -- This mun he will agree to at
once; so then only mind me.


Jailer. So I do, Betty.


Wife. The Devil you do, why you're going to sleep, now, you are.


Jailer. No, Child, I a'nt; so you had no Occasion to have given me such a
Punch in my Side with your Elbow.


Wife. Why, then, you should answer me as you should do; for, you know, I
abominatiously hate not to be minded; so, as I was saying -- Where was I got to?


Jailer. To the fifty Guineas, my Dear.


Wife. Oh, ay, so then he will gi me the fifty Guineas into my Hand, so then I Will
give him the Key, and leave him to unlock the Street-door, where you must be
waiting, you know, with some more Help, so you will seize him at once, and bring
him back again; he cannot accuse you, you know, and I Will go out of Town to my
Uncle's, he has wanted me to come a monstrous while, and so then I will not come
Home again till the Gentleman is hanged or acquitted; so then there is the Money
all snug, and not a Soul in the varsal World never the wiser.


This Scheme, as it was really a very deep one, the Husband admired; and they
lay awake until Morning, considering how, and in what Way, they should put out
the fifty Guineas.

Jack Junior, not having the second sighted Gift, remained a Stranger to this
Plot. Observing the Husband not to take any Notice of it next Day, hinted it to
him again; but the Jailer begged him, for God's Sake, not to think of it, for
he wouldn't do such a Thing for the World.

Perseverance is as much the Property of a Gamester, as a Lover -- but it would
not do -- the Man was still obstinate -- Junior changed his Plan, sounded the
Wife, and found her very pliable; she consented, upon Consideration of Junior's
giving her sixty Guineas (she had a Mind to keep Ten to herself) she would let
Mr. Junior out of the Goal, into an empty House, and give him the Key of the
Street Door, and he might let himself out; but he must stay till the Nights
were dark, and her Husband gone out of Town.

The long expected Time came at last, her Husband was gone a Journey, or at
least pretended, in Junior's Hearing, to do so. Junior then went up with the
Goaler's Wife, into what was called the French Chamber, and there he told out
before her Face sixty Guineas; after she had taken up several and examined
them, they that were not filed or false, he re-placed them in the Bag again,
tied up the Mouth, and held it in his Hand, ready to make her a Present of it,
the Moment she had conducted him past the Prison Walls. She had a Candle and
Lanthorn along with her; when they parted, he received the Lanthorn and Candle,
she the Bag. Junior entered the one Pair of Stairs of the Hosier's House, she
went to the Goal-door, to let her Husband know (who was waiting there) that the
Gentleman was coming; and then she went to her Bureau to lock up the Money.

The most Cunning are frequently the greatest Dupes, thus it was with Junior;
he had no Suspicion of the intended Ambush; but merely by Instinct and
Experience from former Practices, he sat the Lanthorn down in a Corner, and
softly opened a Sash to look into the Street, and listen if any Persons were
passing. At that Instant Mr. Mayor's Coach happened to be going Home, with his
Worship and Family from a Visit, and a Footman carrying a lighted Flambeaux
behind, illuminated the whole Street; just as the Coach passed along, Junior
discovered underneath him several Persons with Watchmen's Bills standing round
the Door of the House he was in. He had now need of all his Fortitude; without
shutting down the Sash, softly on Tip-toe he stepped back again, took the
Lanthorn, and hurried up Stairs into the back Garrets in Search for a Trapdoor
or Casement, which opened upon the Leads; very luckily he found one quickly;
out he got, and after a Trial or two, found the Gutter would bear him; along
sideling he crept, his Hands upon the Tiles, until he was stopped by a Ladder,
which lay standing in his Way. This he conjectured might have some
Communication with others lower; and after some Time feeling about (for he had
put out his Light) he found a Bundle of scaffolding Cords, one End of which he
made fast to the uppermost Ladder, and depending on that, and in Hopes of more
Ladders, he began to descend; what with sliding and scrambling, he found
himself at last safe landed in a narrow Lane; just then he heard the Minster
Clock strike One; guided by that Sound, he walked toward the Churchyard,
where he expected to find waiting for him a Friend, and a couple of fleet
Horses.

For, unknown to the Goalor'd Lady, after he had fixed the Night and Hour in
which he was to leave his Prison, he ordered one in whom he could confide, to
be in the Minster-yard with a Brace of Geldings when the Clock struck Twelve,
and stay till Junior came. Jack rightly judging it was a Place which at that
Time of Night few People would walk through, therefore his Groom and Cattle
might secret themselves there; and also Junior could find the Place more
readily than any other.

How did the Person in Waiting rejoice, when he heard Junior whistle the
Signal! Not that it was Joy, proceeding from a Heartfelt Satisfaction, to hear
his Friend was at Liberty -- no -- he was glad he had got Company. For Mr.
Junior's Assistant, though one of the boldest Fellows living, nay, had actually
fought a Duel, yet began to be very uneasy; as he staid among the Graves and
Tomb-stones, a cold Sweat bedewed his Face and Breast, and he was at last so
far Pannic-struck, that when the Clock went Twelve, he would have left Junior
to get off alone, as well as he could, but had not Strength to get from the
Tombstone on which he had laid himself at Length upon his Breast, his Hands
cross his Eyes.

There is something so tremenduously gloomifical as Mr. *** observes, in a
Churchyard at Midnight, and only then, as must appal the stoutest among Men.
This was what the Person declared to Junior, after they had got the Town upon
their Backs; saying, Look ye, Jack Junior, though as to Religion, to be sure, I
know it all to be Priestcraft; and as to Parsons, they are no more knowing than
other Men -- How should they? You know, and every Body else knows, I a'nt
afeard of nothing; yet, damme, if ever I was so out of Sorts as I was, when I
was among them Tomb-stones; and if I could have said the Lord's Prayer by
Heart, or any Thing about the Bible, I believe I should have pattered nothing
else all the Time after the Clock struck Twelve; for, curse me, Jack Junior,
though Iv'e more Sense than to believe a Word what such Fellurs as Parsons Jaw,
yet I Will hold five Pound to a Shilling, and I say done first, that no Man in
the World can stay in a Churchyard at Midnight, without sweating for it.

Here would we give you the Answer his Companion made him; but they both began
to gallop along so fast, having found themselves on the Turnpike Road, that
they were too soon out of Ear-shot, for us to take down, even in short Hand,
the rest of their Conversation.

Now to return to the Prison-keeper, after he and his Followers had waited
themselves out of all Patience, he dispatched his Wife back, to go into the
very Place to which she had inducted Junior, and see what was become of him. As
soon as she had been all over the House, she bawled out of the Window Jack had
left open, Oh Lord! he is got out a-Top, he has got out a Top. The empty House
Street-door they could not force open, Junior had the Key in his Pocket; they
were forced to go round through the Goal, and they soon discovered the
Trap-door open, but not one would venture out; alleging, they had Families,
and who'd maintain their poor Babes, if any Thing misfortunable was to happen
to themselves.

The Alarm by this Time was spread through the Neighborhood, that the
Gentleman Murderer had made his Escape; the Mayor was informed of it, and he
sent immediately for the Goalor, to be ascertained of the Truth of the Report.

When her Spouse went to wait upon the Mayor, Madam, the Goalor's Lady retired
to her Bedchamber, opened her Chest of Drawers, took out the Bag Junior had
given her, and united it, to take Care of the ten supernumerary Pieces, which,
as she had bargained for unknown to her Husband, she was unwilling he should
come to hear of, for Fear he might be angry with her.

Out into her Lap she pours the precious Treasure -- a -- ha -- oh, my sweet
Jesus! Thus she shrieked out, started up, and down fell all the Contents of the
Bag upon the Floor, and she upon them, dashing her Hands up and down among
them; for instead of sixty Guineas good and lawful Money of Great Britain,
there was nothing but small Leads of Sleeves, thick Pieces of Glass ground
round, Pieces of Pewter, and brass Curtain Rings. There, amidst the Heap, like
the Story of Danae, done by a Signpost Painter, she lay in a violent Fit, not
one Struggle of it feigned. After burning all the Matches they could come at
under her Nose, it was as much as her Maid could do to keep her from relapsing.

Her Spouse returned from Mr. Mayor's with a very discontented Mind; his
Worship threatened him to take the Goalor's Place from him, if the Prisoner was
not forthcoming; all he comforted himself as he walked Home was, that, let the
worst come to the worst, he had fifty Guineas to begin the World with.

When he came into the Chamber, where the Maid was sat on the Ground; holding
his Wife's Head in her Lap; and all the counterfeit Pieces scattered about her,
he cried out, What the Devil, and be damned to it, is this?

Wife. O Husband, it is no Matter -- oh -- but we are ruined, that is all -- oh!
Lord -- then fell into another Fit; which, after some Trouble, they brought her
out of; and she told her Husband, that instead of the fifty Guineas, the Rascal
had given her that Stuff which lay about the Floor.


Indeed, some People are to be pitied; for after he had listened with.
Astonishment to her broken Relation, often interrupted with Sobs, and was
convinced he was undone, without making her any Reply, down Stairs he went to
look for his Horse-whip; and just as he had laid Hand on that, he was laid
Hands on by two of Mr. Mayor's Officers, and carried, by his Worship's Order,
to the black Hole, for aiding Junior's Escape; who was then with his Companion,
making the best of his Way to London, once more to cut a Figure; but whether in
the Sessions-paper as a Felon, or in the News-paper, for marrying a great
Fortune, Time only can be the Tell-tale.

It Is Odds indeed, but that he is rewarded for acting on the wrong-side of
Equity, sooner than punished for it; which makes out what Hamlet observes,
about there being more Things in Heaven and Earth, than are found out by
Philosophy; if not, we might account why Visage-wearing Roguery shall dine upon
Turtle, and open-countenanc'd Honesty starve in forma Pauperis.

CHAP XX.
MR. Fool was very hospitably received at the Mansion House, to which, by the
Order of Mr. Borlace, he was carried.

With the Lady, who we have already mentioned to be in Possession of this
Dewlling Place, there boarded a young Gentlewoman, to whom Mr. Borlace was a
great Favorite.

As soon as their Guest, Mr. Fool, was well enough recovered to see Company,
they made him a Visit, at which Time Borlace observing all their Endeavors to
dissipate his Melancholy were ineffectual (first making a proper Apology for
his Abruptness) addressed Mr. Fool as follows.

Sir, your Disorder does not seem entirely to arise from any bodily Pains; the
Mind is, I am afraid, concerned in your Case; I would not enquire into your
Story, out of a weak or ill-timed Curiosity; no, Sir, I have been unhappy
myself -- very unhappy -- this young Lady has felt the severe Grasp of
Calamity; we have all known what it has been to suffer; if you will give me
Leave, Sir, we'll relate to you our past Lives; and you know, Sir, what we are
taught at School, that it is a Comfort to the Sorrowful to have Partners in
Affliction.

Tom Fool. I am indeed, Sir, very much hurt in my Mind, yet should be grieved
to find any one so unfortunate as I am.


Mr. Borlace. That, Sir, I leave you to judge; my Name, Sir, is Witwood
Borlace, a Name, I believe, once as well known in the gay Life of London, as
Fanny Murray's. I am a Man of Family, and consequently a Man of Ambition; but
the Mode of my Mind was not constituted either for Field Sports at Home, or
Campaigns Abroad; all my Wish, Joy and Pride, centered in being called a clever
Fellow.


To be a Man of Wit and Humor, is a Character eagerly sought after, like the
great Prize in the Lottery; and the World will put in, because each Individual
thinks he may pretend to it. But that is not the Thing, every Lady is not born
to be a Toast, nor every Man to be a Genius.

One Thing that led me to aim at so pleasing a Title was, I had a prodigious
Share of Spirits, and from my Induction at College, to this present Time, they
never failed me.

I was forced, indeed, to leave the University sooner than I expected, on
Account of the first Piece of Wit I ever attempted. I put a Piece of hot Coal
on my Tutor's Shoe, as the old Fellow lay asleep; it happened to lame him
indeed, but that was more than I intended.

When I returned to my Father's, I was ordered to prepare myself to make the
grand Tour, but an Aunt of mine objecting to him, how weak it was in Parents
sending their Sons Abroad, before they had seen their own Country, I had
Liberty allowed me to go with her to Tunbridge.

I was soon take Notice of for my vast Spirits, and made Principal in most
Parties of Pleasure, until the satirical Talent which I possessed, made me be
thought too severe a Companion; and I was in Consequence of that left out of
several future Invitations.

This pleased me, for I was fond of being dreaded. I lampooned away, and
enjoyed the Anxiety which it gave to several at the Spaw, who would have
poisoned me if they dared. I had imbibed the Opinion from several Ladies of
Fashion, that to give Pain was the greatest Pleasure imaginable.

My Father had been some Years a Widower, and just as I came of Age, dying,
left me a large unincumbered Estate, with some Thousands in ready Money; then I
began to execute my Plan, which was, to be the tip-top Fellow for Fun, Frolic,
Wit and Humor upon the Town.

I gave over all Thoughts of going abroad, being conscious that my own Country
could furnish me with Curiosities enough for Entertainment; however, that I might
not be disesteemed for a Deficiency of Taste, I employed Persons, who
understood those Things, to furnish me with a proper Quantity of Pictures,
Etchings, Medals, Bronzes, Cameo's, Intaglias, Antiques and Petrifactions.

While my House, Cabinets and Curiosities were fitting up in London, I went to
an Estate I had in Cornwall, with half a Dozen excessive droll Fellows, to
practice all the Species of Wit and Humor I intended to be excellent in.

After being absent a Year, I burst on the Town a Prodigy. I was allowed to be
the greatest Genius that ever embellished an Evening's Conversation. I could
take off Ryan, and the blind Man with his Bladder and String. I could play upon
my Coat's Skirt like a Bag-pipe, and make an old Woman's Face upon my Hand. I
could make a Fiddle go like a German Flute, and grunt with my Mouth like an
Organ; could do all the London Cries, and play a Solo upon a Broomstick; sound
a Trumpet from the Corner of my Hat, and play a Voluntary by snapping my
Fingers. I was the best Hand in England upon the Saltbox, and nobody sung the
Welsh Song like me; then I could growl like Quin, and squint like Parson
Whitfield; and every Body allowed, at my own Table, I said as many good Things
as any Man in England.

There we was one Thing very remarkable about me, which was, though I had an
excessive Share of Spirits, they never hurried me into any particular
Extravagancies. I detested Gaming; as to tossing up for the Reckoning now and
then, or buying a few Lottery Tickets, just to make Presents with, those were
Trifles not worth talking of, and what would not hurt any Body; but I was
determined never to be taken in. So, though I have had all the tip-top Women of
the Town, they never had me; they loved me as a clever Fellow, but I was too
knowing to be a Keeper; I have, indeed, sometimes made one Lady a Present of a
Piece of Plate, and folded up a Bank-bill two or three Times, and flung it by
way of Frolic at another; What then? I was not scheemed out of it, though I used
to lie with them, they never had a Penny from me; as to any Thing else, who the
Devil would deny giving a fine Woman now and the forty or fifty Guineas,
provided a Man was not made their Dupe, which they honestly confessed to me I
was not; they could not finesse me.

While I was amusing myself in this Manner. I received a little Damage from a
Gentleman, whose Wife I had toasted as a Demirep; I retired into the Country a
little while to recruit both my Constitution and Circumstances; for though I had
not been very high above five Years, I had somehow or other run my Estate a
little out of Breath.

During my being rusticated, I married an Heiress with 7000 l. in her own
Hands, which she put me in Possession of on the Day of Marriage; but had she
not been one of the finest Women in England, as to Person, her Money should
never have made me trammel myself in the matrimonial Tether. I was always too
full of Spirits for a domestic sedentary Life, I could not bear Confinement,
cooped up like a tame Rabbit; no, I must run wild about the Forest like a free
bred Buck, or, as Lothario says, like the Birds, great Nature's happy Commoners.

I brought my Bride up to Town, to let the World bear Witness to my Happiness;
I showed her off at every public Place; she was not quite so fond of
Ostentation as she ought to have been; I could perceive Operas and Routs not so
infinitely agreeable to her, as I could have wished them; she was rather too
rural in her Taste; for by all that is odd, she whispered me in the Ear only at
the second Masquerade we were at, that she thought it very insipid.
Superlatively simple you must suppose her to be, not but now and then she was
well enough: In her Opinion, as far as an English Author; or, as Garrick's
acting, any Thing in the serious Way pleased her well enough.

There is something in that Garrick's Execution excessively clever; I can, I
believe, without Vanity, do as many droll Things, as all the choice Spirits put
together; but I don't know how it is, I never could get at what he does; as to
the rest of the Actors, I was at Home; but he has got a Sort of a Knack that is
past finding out, and yet he seems so easy in what he does, as if it was
natural to him. I believe, in acting, as well as free Masonry, there is a Secret
not to be divulged. I beg Pardon, Sir, for this Observation, but theatrical
Knowledge is as useful for a Man of Fortune in London, as classical Knowledge
is at the University.

My Wife, after we had been in Town about two Months, began, though in the most
tender Manner, to complain I absented myself too much from her, wished to have
a little more of my Company, begged me, since I was so very entertaining
Abroad, that I would indulge her now and then with my Conversation at Home. It
went against me, I must confess, to deny her, but I had so many Invitations,
and was so universally admired as a Companion, I could not help it; as to
pleasing one's Wife, or the Pleasure a Man can receive from her Applause, it
was not forcible enough for one of my Spirits, yet I made a secret Resolution,
although I was too much from her at present, when I grew old, she should have me
all to herself.

I have sometimes since thought, that a Man may have too great a Quantity of
Spirits; for I could not stay at Home, and I was fearful too if I had, that the
World would have given out, I had drowned my Faculties in the Cawdle-cup. The
Ambition I had to be counted the cleverest Fellow in England, forced me to
enter too much into the Spirit of Things. I sat up too late, drank too deep,
used rather too much Ridicule, and slighted the finest Woman in England, and
all often against my Inclination -- but he who has a Mind to gain a great Name,
must sacrifice his private Connections to the Opinions of the Public.

My Wife, to wean me, as she thought, from what here Country Simplicity called
dangerous Habits, told me, that most of my Friends, though she would not
particularize them, were Villains; that they had at different Times hinted Love
to her, therefore begged me to be more at Home, if it was only to protect her
from such Insults for the future.

But I saw through the Scheme; she was a good Girl, but a bad Politician. I
smiled and told her, Politeness and Sincerity were as incompatible, as Hudibras
and Algebra, or common Sense and much Ceremony; that the more Men made Love to
my Wife, only proclaimed the more the Goodness of my Taste, in fixing upon so
inestimable a Jewel. I was conscious, I told her, she loved me, bid her not be
whimsical, chucked her under the Chin, vowed I adored her, ordered a Chair, and
dined with Lucy Cooper.

I must confess, I believe the Lady I married, was not only one of the finest
Women in England, but as good a one as ever lived. I had not indeed an
Opportunity to discover all her good Qualities; but this was the Character
every Body gave her. I should not have been a Stranger to her Perfections, had
not an unlucky Accident happened, which deprived me from considering her in so
amiable a Light as I ought to have done; but Reflections are ridiculous, few
People know the Value of an Estate, till they have made away with it.

Thus it happened with me, Sir; I had not been married to her much above a
Twelvemonth, before I lost her; that was another Joke carried a little too far
too. But a Man at all Times don't know where to stop, when he is in high
Spirits.

You must know, Sir, on Afternoon, my Wife then had just been brought to Bed a
Week. I had dined that Day at Tomkyns's; I was in high Spirits, and took three
or four Friends Home with me, to hum an old Parson, a Relation of my Wife's,
whom I had promised to spend the Evening with. I knew I should undergo a
Jobation from him; but to stop his Mouth, Sir Grecian Grigg and I began a sham
Fight, in the old one's Company.

One of my Wife's foolish Maids run screaming to her Mistress, that I should be
murdered among the drawn Swords, and in spite of her Servants, my Wife was so
Headstrong, that she would come down Stairs only in her Wrapper and Slippers,
although she had not lain in above seven or eight Days.

We soon convinced her it was only a Piece of Wit and Humor; but to see how
uneven the Tempers of some Ladies are; though she tripp'd down Stairs as nimble
as a Wench at a Wake, her Spirits took such a Turn, that it was as much as all
her Maids could do to lift her up Stairs again. -- She died in three Day's
Time: I fancy she was piqued to be taken in so --

However, no Man could be more afflicted at parting from his Wife than I was: I
had lost one of the finest Figures in England. Indeed I erected a fine Monument
for her, and kept my Room a whole Week, to compose her Epitaph, and without
Vanity, I may say, that no Husband could give more unfeigned Testimonies of his
Affection than I did, in the Care I took of having her Memory celebrated.

After her Decease, I found my richest and greatest Friends discontinued their
Visits. I was in Repartee too severe, for I never would sink my Joke to save my
Friend; no wonder then they absented themselves, as they had the Laugh so often
against them, especially now they knew the only Person was gone who took their
Parts.

I had then no other Visitors but those whose Circumstances made it worth their
while to fill their Bellies at my Table, though they were sure to be roasted for
it. I soon grew tired with those to whom I gave a Dinner, only because they
wanted one; their Applauses were as insipid to me as the Caresses of a Wife,
three Months after Marriage. I left off Housekeeping, took Lodgings near
Arthur's, and was balloted into the Jockey Club.

Here was a new Field for Game; I cleared away a few Acres of Wood-land, just
to make an exercising Place, run up a rubbing House, bought a Brace of brood
Mares, got my Compliment of Colts, and just till my own Stud was risen four
Years old, I purchased three or four capital Plate Horses; for as I was
determined to be distinguished, I knew there was no doing those Things by
Halves, and to complete me for the Turf, I had several Hints from Pond, how to
lay my Money.

I began rather too late, I believe; for though no Man ever had better Horses
than myself, nor won more Plates, nor was oftener let into the Secret; yet,
damn it, let them say what they will, there is such a Thing as ^uck, ay, and
bad Luck too; for in about five Years, my Estate, my Horses and Grooms all
gallopped away to the Devil, leaving me at a dead Stand-still, in a
Spunging-house, though there I had the Satisfaction to hear the Baileys allow,
that they believed me to be one of the cleverest Gentlemen in England.

After I had recovered my Liberty, I entered into Life as droll as ever I was,
not quite so rich though: But what is Money to a Man of Spirit? I used to treat,
now I was treated; tossed into the Reckoning; but I was welcome every where,
and every Body admired my vast Sprits.

Tom Fool. Pray, Sir, did not you begin to think?


Borlace. No, Sir, when a Man of Wit and Humor begins to think, he loses all
Pretensions to those Titles, as a Beauty ceases to be a Toast, when she becomes
a married Woman. Besides, I really lived so joyous, I had no Time for
Reflection. I used to be engaged from Party to Party, that I had no Hours to
myself, nor indeed did I wish for any; I was just like a new celebrated Woman
of Pleasure, every one wished to be in Company with me.


As to the Woman of the Town, I visited all of them, and knew every Demirep,
and fresh Face; and as it was not in my Power to be as generous to them as I
had been, I resolved to be useful in helping them to several rich Bucks of my
Acquaintance, who could not so conveniently have met together, had I not
contrived it. I did it to serve my Friends, and looked upon it as a Point of
Honor, so did the Girls; for though Prudes may say what they will, those Sort of
Women have more Honor about them than People imagine. They always received me
with open Arms, but a Man may be sick with Sweetmeats; I was at last in that
sickly Condition, which the modest Part of the female Sex have no Pity for.

When I was tolerably well, an old Acquaintance of mine invited me down to his
Country Seat for the Summer. This was a real Piece of Friendship; I told him
so, when I consented to the Proposal: His Answer was, why, look ye, Borlace,
you are a damned droll Fellow, to be sure, and can keep it up as well as any
Man in England, therefore you will be quite in Character with me; for as the
general Election is coming, such a Man as you among my Friends is worth a
Thousand.

Away we went, in tip-top Spirits, Faith. I shall not tire you with the Tricks we
played upon the Road, about our humming the Parsons, or frightening old Women,
with telling them the French were landed, and our Fleets beat, nor alarming the
Country Towns at Midnight, with crying Fire. It was indeed one of the highest
Journies I ever traveled.

After we had been some Time keeping open House, the Country Gentlemen came
forty Miles round to see and hear me. I began to be so necessary to my Friend,
for I could drink when he could not, and sing; he knew no Songs, and tell
Stories, and he had no Humor; that at last he swore to me, as we sat over the
Remains of a Bowl of Arrack, every one else had left us (it was about four
o'Clock in the Morning) he swore he would settle two hundred Pounds a Year upon
me for Life, and make a Point of it; he swore, squeezing me heartily by the
Hand at the same Time, that I was the cleverest Fellow in England, and should
live independantly.

But I was out of Luck, for it was but next Evening I gave Judgment against my
Friend and Patron that was to be, about his holding a foul Card. He did hold
it, to be sure, and I was half fuddled, and said he did; immediately he flung a
Bottle at my Head, and ordered his Servants to turn me out of Doors. About four
in the Morning I was set adrift, without a single Penny in my Pocket, or
knowing where to raise one.

However, I came to a Resolution to earn the Bread I should eat for the future,
and let it be ever so mean an Employ, I was resolved to seek for a Livelihood.
There were several Ways that I could maintain myself in, for it is a very vulgar
Error to say, a Gentleman is not brought up to any Thing.

I was qualified as Coachman, or Cock-feeder, or a Game-keeper, or a
Whipper-in, or a riding Groom, but I could not get Business in any of those
Employments; because those to whom I proffered myself, objected to my being a
Gentleman, and I had no Body could give me a Character; at last, after having
put myself into a proper Dress, I got myself hired to make Hay.

In a Week's Time, I found a wonderful Alteration in myself for the better, in
Respect of Health and Quiet. I fell asleep when Night came, without being
obliged first to get drunk by way of Opiate; I waked next Morning neither sick,
sorry, nor ashamed, by the bitter Remembrance of how much like a Madman I had
behaved over Night. I soon lost a Hoarseness which long had plagued me. My Legs
fell into their proper Shape, my Wind was mended, my Eyes ceased smarting, my
Hands were steady at Breakfast Time, my Flesh grew firm, and I wanted no Wine
and Bitters to make me eat my Dinner.

Thus I lived, Sir, for a whole Twelvemonth, employed in one Part or other of
Country Business, till Providence conducted me to this House; it was fitting up
for this Gentlewoman, I was Overseer of the Workmen, and since I am employed
for her. Here we live retired, we have every Thing we wish for among ourselves;
we have seen the World, and despise, heartily despise its Vices and Follies,
and would not again be intoxicated with them, for more than ever we were
formerly worth; no, not all the Pains and Penalties of the Inquisition could
ever push me into the same Path again.

Thus Mr. Borlace entertained Mr. Fool, binding with several Oaths, his
Disapprobation of every Irregularity, and that it was impossible for him ever
again to run into the same Errors. Mr. Fool took Mr. Borlace to be indeed
reformed; nay, Mr. Borlace believed himself to be so -- Who would not? -- But
alas, How can we pretend to know and read Mankind, when we are Strangers to
ourselves? At least, this was Mr. Borlace's Case; for though he promised and
vowed so ardently against late Hours, bad Company and many Bumpers, it is not
above seven to four, or seven and a half to four at most, but if he had the
same Opportunities, Abilities and Temptations, he would do the same Things, he
had done.

Reader, be not in Wrath that our Characters are not completely good, either
after Marriage, or Repentance. We endeavor to exhibit Life, not according to
our Wishes, but Observations; and as we copy from Nature, must do as Nature has
done. Only let me beg of thee to observe the ingenious Exhibitions of Mr.
Hogarth; who is among Painters what Dean Swift was among Poets. His
Performances must please thee, according to the Abilities thou have to be
pleased. -- Yet seldom does he present us with perfect Beauties in his Figures,
the Reason is obvious; like Shakespeare, he is one of Nature's Agents, and
therefore must act according to her Commissions.

In the anatomical Figures made by Monsieur Denoue (which were not good enough
for an English Collection) every Part of Nature is laid open; he aimed not to
flatter, but instruct. Some Things indeed might shock his Pupils, but they were
Truths they ought to be acquainted with.

CHAP. XXI.
AFTER Mr. Borlace had ended his Story, the youngest of the Ladies, turning to
Tom Fool, thus began here is.

My Father, Sir, was a Baronet, his Name Sir Philpot Fool. -- We must leave it
entirely to the Reader's Imagination, to form an ideal Picture of her Brother's
Astonishment. He ran to her, threw his Arms about her Neck, and as well, and
fast as the Joy of such a Meeting would allow him to be articulate, he
discovered himself to her. The rest of the Day was spent in hearing every
particular Transaction of his Life, from his Admittance into Lady Grotto's
House, to his Delivery from the Stone Pit.

Next Morning the two Ladies begged Mr. Fool's Company into their
Dressing Room. As soon as they were all seated, the eldest Gentlewoman, to
prepare the Brother to receive calmly a Relation of his Sister's Distresses,
began by way of Preamble, to observe the vast Force of Passion; how much
Inclination was stronger than Reason, and that Woman's Will was like a
Whirlwind. -- Then hinted about Heat of Blood, Prejudice of Education, Hurry of
Youth, Deceit of Mankind, and all the other lamentable Topics, so copiously
declaimed upon by those who do err, and those who pretend to say they do not.

Tom Fool interrupted the Speaker, by taking hold of his Sister's Hand, and
pressing it tenderly betwixt both his, with the utmost Affection in his Face.
He replied, my dear Girl, do not conceal the Truth from your Brother, your
Brother is your Friend: My dear, God forbid I should hold you hard in my
Esteem, since I have been so culpable myself.

Miss Ninny 's History.

The Reason, my dear Brother, that Sir Philpot took no Notice of you, after
your being some Time at School, was owing to a great Quarrel between him and my
Mama.

A Greyhound, which was a great Favorite of my Papa's, killed her Ladyship's
Chinese Pheasant. My Mama made the Shepherd's Boy shoot the Hound directly; but
the Moment Sir Philpot heard of it, he snatched her green Parrot off his Perch,
and with his own Hands wrung the Head off.

My Mama, Brother, had a Spirit becoming a Woman of Quality. -- A noble Spirit
indeed; -- she never would forgive an Insult; but her Revenge she would have,
let the Consequence be what it would; and I own myself so much of her Mind,
that although I have sometimes suffered for it, I would show a proper Resentment;
-- ay, and will, though I was sure to lose my Life by it.

When her Ladyship saw her Parrot murdered, she flew into the Picture Gallery,
and cut Holes in all the fine Paintings; which when Sir Philpot saw, he burst
open her China Closet-door, and broke every Thing to smash in it: This was a
terrible Stroke; this my Mama could not bear, she fell into violent Hysterics;
and on the Instant she was able to crawl, knowing you to be Papa's Favorite,
she made an Affidavit that you were a Bastard.

This Action stupefied Sir Philpot; for three or four Days afterward he spoke
to no body, but sat in his own Room like a Man moped; and on Sunday Morning, it
makes me shudder, when I think on it, Papa shot himself through the Head; but what
was the cruellest of all, he carried his Resentment beyond the Grave; for he
sent a long Letter to his particular Friend, about half an Hour before he
committed the Fact, wherein he gave his Reasons for what he was about to do,
and begged the Gentleman, by their long Intimacy, and as he regarded the Words
of his dying Friend, that he would make that Letter Public, and by that prove
he was not Lunatic when he killed himself, so that his Family should not
inherit the Estate.

The Gentleman, to whom the Letter was sent, lived about twenty Miles off, and
he and Sir Philpot had been Schoolfellows together, and no two were ever more
intimate; but the Gentleman was generous enough to show this Letter to my Mama,
and me, no body else. He was a Counselor at Law; and begged her Ladyship not
to be uneasy, he would take Care of every Thing for her.

How the Affairs were managed, I cant' tell. I suppose there are some
particular Methods in the Law, which, when People know how to make use of, they
need not fear any Thing, at least I heard the Counselor tell her Ladyship so.
Sir Philpot's Letter, instead of being published, was burned. And when the
Coroner came, he was a mighty civil Man, and brought in a proper Verdict, by
which we saved the Estate.

Perhaps, Brother, you may wonder, that after my Mama had got clear of those
Difficulties, something was not done for you; but really Lady Philpot at first
would not hear a Word of Family Affairs; because, as her Ladyship observed,
they put her too much in Mind of the late unhappy Accident. And as she was, and
you must remember, Brother, a very fine Woman, she was surrounded with
Acquaintance. And to dissipate her Grief, she was hurried into so much Company,
that we had not a Moment to ourselves, or for ourselves.

For really, Brother, People of Fashion have more fatiguing Lives, than the
lower Set of Mortals would believe. Those Persons of Distinction I mean, who
are willing to appear as such; for what with receiving and returning Visits,
Auction Day's, Dressing and Undressing, Opera Nights, Routs, Assemblies,
Breakfastings, Plays, Airing in Hyde-Park, and Vauxhall, Parties once or twice
in the Seasons, I do assure you, we are in a continual Flutter of Dissipations;
and it must therefore be expected that fine Women, instead of thinking about
Home, are too much hurried to think about any thing.

But now, Brother, I am to claim the Forgiveness you have promised me: I shall
faithfully relate Matters of Fact, just as they happened. I was barely Sixteen
when we appeared Abroad again; and Lady Philpot, contrary to other Parents, was
pleased to carry me every where with her: But how unhappy are the young Part of
our Sex; who are shown into Life unaccompanied with a proper Guide, our Minds
tainted insensibly by our Intimates. -- I am sure however that mine was.

After Dinner, when the Ladies are withdrawn, Gentlemen, as I Have been told,
over their Bottle, often converse together very loosely. Our Sex, I assure you,
at sometimes, are not much behind Hand with yours, as to the Topics of their
Discourse; only we are, I fancy, more delicate in our Phrases.

I had some very intimate Acquaintances, Ladies, who were rather older than
myself, but were full as sprightly; and, to use their own Words, hated Prudery.
From them I was instructed in such Things! My God! I have heard of People whose
Brains have been turned by Pride; one Passion will intoxicate the Understanding
as much as another; I was almost mad for Enjoyment; to such a Pitch I had
heightened my Imagination.

I could think, talk, or hear of nothing else; and only the Fear of being
refused, prevented me from asking the first Man I met the Question; they had
made me imagine it must be all Elysium.

A Gentleman just at this Time (one of our Neighbors in the Country) asked my
Mama's Consent to pay his Addresses to me. Upon his bare Promise of Marriage,
which I only took to save Appearances, I admitted him to stay all Night with me
in my Bedchamber; there I gave myself up to all those promised Toys, dying
Murmers, and swimming Ecstasies I had so long and so fondly fancied.

But Enjoyment answered not at all the Idea which I had entertained of it. Next
Morning I honestly declared so to my Lover: -- Confessed to him, that it was
Curiosity which had engaged me in Intrigue; that I expected to have met with
more than I could express to him; -- but I found myself horridly disappointed;
it was to me the most momentary of all Gratifications, no sooner felt than
fled, -- troublesome and indelicate, but the Pleasure of a Dream, in a Moment
vanished.

My Gallant seemed astonished, and after he had recovered himself, as brutal
and gross enough to tell me in his Reply, I was the only Woman who had ever
found Fault with his Abilities; had I been a Man, I could have felled him to my
Foot, for the mean Opinion he had of me. I contented myself with cooly replying
to him, it was not the Actor, but the Deed which I disliked; and protested I
never more would engage in any such Affair. From thenceforth for some Time
never thought any more about it, except it was to despise those who extolled it
as the ultimate of human Happiness.

Still this Gentleman persisted in my granting him the same Favors as I had
done; I would not, he grew ten Times more importunate; I was obliged at last to
beg my Mama would forbid him the House; she did so, and added it was done at my
Request. This so far piqu'd him, that he immediately related to her what had
passed betwixt us; and not contented with that, went to the Tavern, and among
all his Acquaintance told all I had granted him.

It is impossible for me to describe the Rage I was in; my Passion was so
violent it threw me into a Fever; but my Hope of Revenge contributed more than
the Physician to my Recovery. When I was just able to walk out, a Gentleman,
who lived in the next House to Lady Fool's, met me as I was taking the Air: He
accosted me with the utmost Respect, spoke with much Warmth against the
Villainies of the Age we lived in, particularis'd the several Follies his Sex
were guilty of, and dwelt a long Time on the wicked Vanity of those Coxcombs,
who, as Horatio said, fancied Raptures that they never knew; and I was charmed
to hear him. He continued his Discourse, assuring me, that he thought it the
Duty of every Gentleman to vindicate injured Beauty, and begged my Permission
to be allowed my Champion.

By this Time we had reached our House; I begged he would alight and walk in with
me. I led him into Sir Philpot's Study, and there I confessed to him, that his
manner of Expression had w^n me to think nobly of him; that I was not so much
irritated against the Scandal, as I was at the Author of it. This Gentleman
promised he would punish the villainous Boaster in the most exemplary Way; nay,
he swore it upon the Bible, before me that Evening; and that Evening, to
encourage him in his Attempt, I generously made him a present of my Person.

Is it to be believed? Nay would it be believed? That this my second Possessor
was an Accomplice with the first. But so it was; this latter Villain had it
seems taken a Fancy to me, and with the Help of the first, laid this Scheme to
get me. I was innocently aiding this Piece of Baseness; every Day expecting to
hear of my first Gallant's Return from London. It had been agreed upon by me,
that his Punishment should be on the very Spot where he had propagated the
Report; but he kept out of Town on purpose, till the other should be tired of
me. They carried on a strict Correspondence together; this I did not discover
until I had been upwards of a Month a Slave to his Desires; I call it so, it
was so I Am sure to me.

Mrs. Vielled, the elderly Gentlewoman.

Ay, and so it is to most of us, that I insist on.

Miss Ninney. A Letter I happened to find in my Room, which dropped out of the
Confederate's Pocket, opened the whole Plot to me. I was for a Week almost
ready for Bedlam, but my Resolution to be revenged overcame my Distraction:
Just then Mr. Borlace came up to acquaint Mr. Fool there had been a Horseman at
the Door, who enquired for such a Person as you are, Sir; but continued
Witwou'd, though he described Mr. Fool exactly, and pretended to be one of his
Servants, I have seen too much of the World ever to believe what a Stranger
says, so I told him I knew nothing of you, and he galloped away in a Hurry.


Mr. Fool thanked Borlace for his Care, yet wished he could have seen the
Fellow; for then, as he observed, he must have known if he really belonged to
him, or was an Imposter.

Why, this it is, replied Borlace, to overthink one's Self: I thought of every
Scheme but that, and that as it happens was the only one I should have thought
on: But however, Reflection without the Power of Recall, is like playing a Game
of Whist at second Hand.

Come, Ladies, Dinner is upon the Table. I hope Mr. Fool will excuse this
Interruption.

Reader, we hope thou will also excuse this Interruption; but a Hackney Writer,
as well as a Hackney Horse, must bait now and then, or he never will get to the
end of his Journey.

CHAP. XXII. Conclusion of Miss Ninny's History,
THERE came down at this Time, upon a Party of Pleasure, with some more
Gentlemen, a Colonel of Horse. It was always customary for every Stranger to be
invited to Lady Fool's; for my Mama was excessively fond of Visitors. This
Officer bore the best of Characters, and his Behavior was so very engaging,
that every body courted his Company. Lady Philpot, I found, was very particular
in her Behavior to him, and he seemed to tell me by Eyes, he had rather have
half such Civilities from me.

Both Villains were now in Town, for the Week following there was to be the
Races. I could not sleep, to think how basely I had been abused, and had yet
found no Way to redress myself. After some Time deliberating, I resolved to
apply to the Officer I just now mentioned. I ingenuously related to him my
whole Story, and begged his Assistance.

The two, who had used me so basely, were Men of great Fortune; it was
therefore not any way a lessening to his Character, for him to call them to an
Account. He gave me his Honor he would do it; and the first Day in the Race
Week, at the Ordinary, he forced my first Lover to confess publicly, that
every Thing which he had said of me was purely Invention, acknowledged himself
to be a Rascal, and was ushered down Stairs accordingly.

My second Gallant, who had that Morning in the Cockpit exposed a Cypress
Handkerchief, which he took off my Dressing-table; but had told every body I
had given it him, was stealing away on Tip-toe, after he had been a Witness to
the Disgrace of his Friend; but the Colonel, who had an Eye upon him, stepping
betwixt him and the Door, stopped him; saying at the same time to him, calling
him by his Name; and you, Sir, who pretend to distinguish yourself by the Title
of a Gentleman, Where is the Trophy you have gloried in so this Morning? Here,
here, my dear Captain, replied the other, and trembling held out the
Handkerchief to him; and who, says the Colonel, when he received it, looking my
Gallant steadfastly in the Face, who gave you this Favor do you say, Sir? No,
no, no body pon my Soul Colonel, I found it in the Assembly-room last Night;
that was his Answer.

A Laugh echoed round the Room, and the Colonel ordering the Door-way to be
cleared, sent him out with the same Orders his Companion had received. This
News was brought Home to me immediately; and I hope my Brother will not give me up
entirely to Censure, if I confess I did not long hesitate how I should reward
my Hero. I was always violent in what I resolved upon, eager to indulge the
Resentment, regardless of the future, and what I once intended to gratify, I
was ever resolute to accomplish.

Mrs. Veilled. I never knew it otherways with young Persons who had Passions;
but Lord help me, I have been a long while out of the World, for I have lately
heard a Gentleman say, that there are a Set of very gay-dress'd Figures of both
Sexes about the Town now, who seem entirely divested of all Passions, and yet
they have all the Marks of Liveliness about them: They look without Expression,
they talk without Meaning, and listen without Understanding; they move
mechanically, mere Machines, like Show-images, for Tailors and Milliners to
display their Workmanship upon; he called them Expletives in Society, and
compared them to Weeds in Blossom.


Miss Ninny. Lady Fool one Day surpised the Colonel along with me, and from
that Time began to treat me with vast Severity. The Counselor, my Mama's
Friend, got all our Estate into his Hands; by one Means or other persuaded my
Mamma to sign first one Parchment, and then another; on purpose, as my Lady
thought, to prevent me from having any Share in it; for it is incredible to how
vast a Height her Hate was carried against me.


The Colonel was commanded into Flanders, where he was killed. Lady Philpot
soon after broke up Housekeeping, and went to the Counsellor's; and I with a
little Pocket-money, went to board at my Maid's Mother's. Lady Philpot
declared, I must never presume to expect any Assistance from her.

I was at a small Farm-house, where the good People who lived in it, thought
they never could do enough for me. I had indeed always been very kind to their
Daughter: So you see, Brother, though Gratitude is not to be found in fine
Houses, it may sometimes be met with under a thatched Roof. I had not been in
this Retirement above a Fortnight, before their only Son came to see them from
London. As soon as he had a Sight of me, he swore there was not such a fine
Figure upon the Town. I did not understand the Meaning of his Speech, but I
wished (as he was a well-looking young Man, and talked much of the Money he
got, and the fine Company he kept) my Person could win so far upon him, that he
would make me his Wife.

There was nothing I hope wicked in the Wish. I was drove almost to Despair,
and the only Consolation I had was, in now and then reflecting how justly the
two Villains had been punished, who betrayed me. After my Maid's Brother had
been in the Country with us for three Weeks, he paid his Addresses to me, and
proffered to marry me. The Time had been, when such a Proposal would have been
answered by a Horse-pond-ducking. But now, what could I do? Oh, Brother, if
there is one State on Earth more miserable than another, it is that of a Person
of Fashion fallen to Decay. We were lawfully married at the Parish Church, and
next Week we went up to London.

At first I was a little chagrin'd to find my Spouse was only a Waiter at a
noted Tavern in Pall Mall, and all the Noblemen he boasted of being so intimate
with, always when he spoke of them, calling them by their Christian Names of
Dick, Harry, Tom, Will, George, and so on, were his Master's Guests.

However, he hired me very genteel Lodgings, and took me to all public Places,
and often urged me to dress in a more gaudy showey Way than I had been used to,
insisting to me it was all Mode: But I, who had really been brought up as a
Gentlewoman ought, could soon see the Difference between what was really
elegant, and the Affectation of it. Continually was my Spouse praising one Man
of Title or another to me, for their Wealth and Generosity; and telling me, as
soon as they came to Town, he should bring them to see me. This Discourse at
first I could not readily comprehend: However, at last I made shift to find
out, that he married me only to make a Property of me, and like the Wine he
bottled, serve me up to some of his Men of Quality.

In a few Days, he brought Home a very gay-dress'd and very polite Gentleman,
and left us together. I am not very patient under a trifling Injury, but such
an Affront as this, was much more than I could bear. I burst into Tears; the
Gentleman my Visitor seemed much surprised, made me many Apologies, and took
his Leave of me very genteely, promising me his Protection.

When my --, I don't know what to call him, came Home; there is not in Language
a Name base enough to call him by, who would sell his Wife. When he heard how
coldly I had behaved to this his Patron, as he called him, he beat me, locked
me into a Garret, fed me for a Week upon only Bread and Water, and threatened
to have me confined in Mad-house.

But this Behavior he found was lost upon me; I inherited too much of my
Mama's Temper, to submit to such Usage. He then tried gentler Methods with me;
at last let me live as I pleased, only I was now and then obliged to bear a
Visit from the Gentleman he first introduced to me. I did neither fret
inwardly, or show any Signs of Dislike, either by my Behavior or Conversation.
Indeed I was determined to be revenged, not only upon the Wretch to whom I had
given my Hand, but also upon this Patron; he I resolved should take a Share in
my Resentment: For this very Person, the Man of great Rank, and consequently of
great Honor, had been privy, as I accidentally discovered, to all the cruel
Treatment I had received from my Barbarian. They, according to the Gamester's
Phrase, played into each other's Hands, just to make a poor helpless Woman
their Bubble. Was it not right then think you in me, if I endeavored to turn
the Tables upon them?

The Person whom I have so often mentioned, that professed himself so
strenuously my Admirer, was a married Man. I went to his Lady, related my Story
to her, and begged her Protection. Whether in telling my Story, I made her or
her Husband look Little, I cannot tell; but after having eyed me from Head to
Foot, before she spoke, her Face filled with Disdain, she replied, that she
wondered immensely at my Impertinence, how I dared to have the Vanity to be so
horribly absurd, a to imagine HER Spouse, a Man of HIS Taste, would have any
thing to say to such a Fright, to such a vulgar Creature as I was, and charged
me never to dare to under her Roof again, upon Pain of being committed to
Bridewell.

How I got Home, I can hardly describe; my Limbs trembled with Passion, I was
in such an Agony, my Speech failed me. -- But luckily recollecting I had
Revenge in my Power, I soon came to myself. My Wretch was gone to his
Drawership's Business; I dispatched a Card to the Smyrna Coffee-house, to the
very Gentleman I had just been complaining or to his Lady. He came immediately,
I told him, that as he had often promised me his Protection, I had taken the
Liberty now to demand it. He enquired in what manner he could best serve me: I
replied, my Husband was hateful to me, as indeed he was, and till I was
released from such a Wretch, I would never let any Man see my Face, but hide
myself down in the Country, where it should be impossible to find me.

The Villain, to whom I had been married, was immediately sent for; Articles of
Separation were immediately drawn: He was immediately obliged to sign them;
though he fell on his Knees, wrung his Hands, begged me for God's Sake not to
part from him. Had he behaved to me but like a Man, the World should not have
parted us, but I remembered the Usage I had received from him. Resentment kept
me silent; and although it was but a mean Revenge, I confess, I enjoyed the
Anxiety he endured, and left him without so much as saying Adieu, and found
myself once more a free Woman, in very elegant-furnish'd Lodgings at
Charing Cross.

I took Care to let the Lady, who had so scornfully threatened me, see by my
Dress and Equipage, that so vulgar a Creature as me, could be taken Notice of.
I was resolved she should know also who it was that supported me in such
Splendour; it was that on which I depended, to complete my Triumph over her. As
soon as she could be convinced I was maintained by her Husband, all her
Haughtiness vanished. She sent her own Brother to me, with a Proposition to
this effect: That if I would break off my Connection with her Spouse, I should
have an Annuity of fifty Pounds a Year settled upon me, and a hundred Guineas
down.

The Situation this Gentleman described his Sister to be in, the happy Life
they had always lived before, and the Distractions which were like to ensue
betwixt two noble Families, determined me to consent to a final Separation;
nay, I did more, for by my Means a thorough Reconciliation was made between the
Gentleman who I had parted from, and his Spouse. He has ever since been one of
the most indulgent Husbands; and at his Lady's Desire, as a Testimony of her
Opinion of me, has enlarged my annual Pension to fourscore Pounds a Year.

CHAP. XXIII.
TOM FOOL sat attentive to his Sister while she related her Distresses;
attentive as a sensible Audience which follows Mr. Garric through all the
Workings of Lear, Hamlet, etc. etc. the whole Pit seem informed with one Soul;
smile, when he smiles; weep, when he mourns; and, like a fine Instrument,
played upon by a skillful Performer, produces excellent Harmony.

Thus was Mr. Fool agitated during his Sister's Story. After she had finished,
tenderly embracing her, he thanked her for the good Opinion she had of him, in
so ingenuously relating her Misfortunes.

Than he began a fine Discourse about the Passions, and Reason, and Prudence,
and Debauch. At least if he did not say so, the Editor might do it for him. But
alas, all Self-denial Subjects are become so hacknied among Mankind, that
those very Topics, which are so eloquently expatiated in the Athenian Porticos,
are' at this Day dismally groaned out in Tottenham-Court Tabernacle.

Mute therefore be Declamation, and turn we to the Dowager Lady of the Manor,
who had been silent almost all the Time Miss had been speaking: Yet, like a
Person out out at the Whisk-table, wishing the Rubber was over.

Mrs. Veilleid bowing her Head as Mr. Fool was expressing his Sentiments upon
his Sister's Adventures, begging Pardon for interrupting him, thus the elderly
Lady held forth. The Pleasures of Life are much like the old Proverb, great Cry
and little Wool. I have seen many Scenes of Life, and am sick of all I have
seen. Unhappy Women, as your Sister very well knows, see, hear, and know more
than most Folks imagine; and were we to declare all we have experienced,
Mankind would be ashamed to look one another in the Face.

Poets pester us with Precedents of Eve, Cleopatra, and the Ephesian Matron. We
are frail, very frail, but what Man can boast of Infallibility, except the
Pope. And I don't think his Opinion is held to be Orthodox: We are accused of
ruining Mankind, of making Men mad; but I speak from Experience they are mad
before we have any Thing to do with them; mad to be with us, mad while they are
with us, and as mad to leave us, all their Lives only contrary Fits of madness.

I once was mantain'd by a Person whom the World called a great Man. He seemed
to be very fond of me, but his Desires, were indelicate, irregular, and
sometimes preposterous. He was profuse in his Expenses upon me, and raving if I
ever appeared what he called indifferent to his Favors. Yet he had one of the
best, and one of the finest Women in the World for his Spouse, and four as fine
Children; all which he despised, for the empty Ostentation of being thought the
Possessor of a Woman, whom Hundreds had had before him. You see, Sir, I Am as
ingenuous as your Sister in my Account of myself. I despised him in my Heart
for the Grossness of his Taste, in wasting Time, Fortune, and Reputation, upon
me; who was unworthy to be Scullion to the Lady he abandoned.

However, his Money was of Service to me, and Women of the Town, like any other
Trades-people, are not to quarrel with their best Customers.

I, like a Frontier Town in Time of War, often changed my Masters. The next
Person who owned me, was a Being, whom I could, properly class under no
Character; he called himself a Jemmy, had a very fine Estate, was very lavish
of it, in buying Nick-nacks, altering his Furniture, Harness, Post Charriots,
and Taverns. Jaunting with me from Inn to Inn, leaving me no other Society than
the Landlady, or the melancholy Amusement of looking through the Sashes, at the
Carriages, and Travelers that came in and out of the Place where we happened
to be. He was always boasting of the many fine Women he had enjoyed; nor would
he let a Lady of Quality escape him; indeed he took Care where he told his
Story. It was only to the Landlord's Family, who, like other Dependants, were
obliged to be silent, and seem to believe whatever their Patron was pleased to
tell them. For my Part, I believe he was Innocence itself; for in the six
Months of our dawdling together, I was a Westal to him; he conversed with me as
guiltless as my Brother. But with his all Vanity, and throwing away his Money,
he never would allow me Sixpence in my Pocket. This I could not bear, and only
staid with him till I could fix upon a better Chapman.

I was recommended to a Man of great Taste, that was the Character given me of
him, very rich, but very ugly, As to his Person, Women of our Profession have
no Business to mind Outsides. Kept Mistresses have no more to do with real
Love, than Bailies have with Compassion. I lived with him in much Splendour, and
great Uneasiness, foolishly fond of me in Public, and in private continually
thwarting me.

He was indeed, as they said, a Man of Taste, but of a very odd one; for, as he
confessed to me, Enjoyment was almost insipid to him. All his Pleasure was, to
be known, to be well with some very celebrated Lady of Pleasure; and has
several Times declared to me, that he would not give Sixpence to lay with the
most exquisite Beauty, unless she was a noted Prostitute. He was all for
public Opinion; but that Opinion could not make me dote upon him: It Is true,
he was generous enough; nay, rather pressing me sometimes to take Money; for I
am not the most mercenary of my Sex; but I could not like him; and as he really
said, he proved too, that Enjoyment was very insipid with him, nay, rather
fatiguing and disgustful.

Let those gentlemen, who are pleased to make what Remarks they think fit on
our Sex, declare, that a Woman's Person is the best Part of the Pleasure; if
her Mind or Inclination is not at all concerned in the Agreement, the Gallant,
whatever he may fancy of the Feast, has but an indifferent Share on it. I could
not entirely divest myself while he lived of all Acquaintance with him; for
after we parted, at all public Places he would haunt me like my Shadow, till I
compromised Affairs with him: He was to allow me five Guineas a Weak, upon
Condition I walked with him at Ranelagh, would let him drive me to Epsom Races,
call of him in a Chair three Mornings in the Week at the Smyrna, Slaughter's,
and the Bedford Coffee-houses, and once a Week, in the Season, sup with him in
Vauxhall Gardens under the Orchestra, while the Music played.

This Agreement I informed the Gentleman of, with whom I went next to live; but
he was too careless a Creature I found, to concern himself about our Sex; he
told me, that he kept me merely for an Amusement, he liked my Figure and
Conversation; but all he did for me was to please himself; that a Man of Sense
could not be jealous of a Woman of the Town; as to my Time, I was very welcome
to do what I would with it when he did not want me, provided I was careful of
my Health.

This strange Negligence of his made a deeper Impression on me than all the
Assiduities I had received from others; could he now and then, or would he now
and then, have behaved but commonly civil to me, I should have doated on him;
but he was quite a Hottentot, he never had an amiable Moment. There is a Time
when Tenderness takes Place of Riot, and even Savageness itself is softened;
but 'twas not so with him; he was al Hurly-burly. When I have artlessly indeed
expressed myself fondly; something like Love for a Minute stealing over my
Senses, he has interrupted my Indulgence, with pshah, don't think to make a
Fool of me, -- Hum, Boys and old Men, such as I am, are not to be caught with
Chaff.

I quitted him for a famous Fox-hunter, the finest Fellow in England; so every
body told me he was; though a great Lump of Tobacco, which swelled out his lower
Lip, the first Time he saluted me, gave me no great Opinion of his Delicacy.
However, I accepted of him, and my Acquaintance congratulated me upon my Luck,
in having so accomplished a Lover, a Man of such fine Sense; such he might
have, I believe, when sober, and a great many other princely Qualities; but I
lived with him a Month, and he was continually fuddled; I parted from
him-fearful of my Constitution.

The next Day after I had left my last Lover, I chanced to get acquainted with
one, who was really a clever Fellow; but then he had not Sixpence; that I did
not then mind, I had enough, and I resolved, since for some Time I had been a
Slave to Man's various Inclinations, I would make one of that Sex subject to
mine; and after so much Labor, resolved to have some Holidays.

For the first three or four Days that I had this Genius with me, he was the
most entertaining Person I had ever kept Company with. But he soon grew out of
Temper, he wanted to be in the wide World again; not contented to be with me,
and have every Thing elegant about him -- no -- he wanted a Ramble: Regularity
to him was a Barbary Slavery. I found him too witty to have any Sense. There
was no more fixing him than Smoke. Yet I was so bigoted to him, that I offered
to sell my fine Furniture, retire into the Country, marry him, and live honest,
I shall never forget his Answer. No, Madam (he replied) there is an Act of
Parliament against Monopolies. You belong to the Public, and I have too great a
Regard to my Country, to pretend to keep that for my own Use, which, like the
New River, has and ought to serve half the Town. Besides, should such a Thing
happen, I must banish myself from my own Sex's Society; since I never could
meet too Acquaintance, but I must be very certain one of them, at least, had
lain with my Wife.

I was mad with his Refusal, yet I own I admired his Spirit. We parted in a
Pett; and although we both, I believe, wished to come together again, neither of
us would speak first. I never after that had the least Affection for Mankind.
On the contrary, they grew more and more disagreeable to me; when a foolish
Fellow of Fortune had me, his Behavior made me loath him; when a jealous Man
was my Master, my Furniture was always in Danger. A Sot impaired my Health; a
Wit ruined me; a Gamester made a Slave of me; young Fellows fretted me; old Men
fatigued me; and with a married Man I was in continual Alarms.

I have in every Stage of Life found enough to make me miserable; and there is
not any Set of Beings so contradictorily titled as we are, by those who call us
Women of Pleasure; like Sailors, we get our Money in much Danger, and throw it
away on just the same Follies, Dresses, Midnight Riotings, Hackney Horses, and
Spunging (that is to say) on gaudy Landladies.

CHAP. XXIV.
THAT Evening Tom Fool told his Sifter the Resolution he had made, to leave
England; but this Miss Ninny vehemently opposed, desiring her Brother not to
revenge himself upon himself; that all Rashness was ridiculous. Mrs. Veillied
observed, that the World was at such a Pass at present, that it was not worth
any one's while to trouble their Heads about it. Borlace swore, that a
Gentleman of Sense should never let Passion get the better of his Reason; and
that we ought well to weigh the Consequence of every Intention, before we
committed it to Practice.

This Mr. Fool promised to do, and gave his Word and Honor, that he would not
determine in a Hurry on what he had to do. However, he observed, as the next
Day would be Sunday, and as he found himself so well healed, he would go to
Church in the Morning, to give Thanks for his Escape and Recovery.

Mrs. Veilleid, Miss Ninny, and Borlace, look's upon one another as if, they
said, we fear the Gentleman's growing light headed; they would not contradict
him, for fear of making him worse, seemed to approve his Design, but hinted it
was Bedtime. After they had seen Mr. Fool to Bed, they returned to hold a
Consultation together; they agreed nem con, that his Senses were not perfectly
sound; and yet, replied Mrs. Veilleid, you see not one Observation I made at
Supper escaped him; he has certainly a deal of Penetration: And who could
behave better than he did, (replied Miss Ninny) when he commended me so, for
the manner in which I had related my Story. Certainly, says Mr. Borlace, Mr.
Fool is a very fine Man, yet he is not the first Gentleman of extraordinary
Sense, whose Head has by Sickness been turned awry: Besides, consider, he has
only drank Water, Tea, and plain Gruel, ever since he came; his Blood must
consequently be thin, and poor, and run cold, and make him fancy strange
Megrims. You see he began about Church; we must not contradict him, but let him
go; I hope it will not make him worse though.

It was unanimously agreed, that Wit-wou'd, though it was Night, should have a
Horse saddled immediately, and set off to Mr. Fool's House, and let Lady Fool
know where her Spouse was. Miss Ninny wrote her Ladyship a Letter; then the two
Gentlewomen retired to rest, and Botlace galloped away full of Spirits.

Sunday Morning.

Mr. Fool went into the Church the instant the Doors were opened; he had
therefore Time enough to walk about according to Custom, and amuse himself by
staring at one odd Thing or another; as indeed there is in most Places of
Worship. As he sauntred about, he might gaze at the Ceiling, pore over the
painted Glass, or read the gold-letter'd Account of the several celebrated
Benefactors.

Imprimis. How a Squire left forty Shillings per Annum, for a yearly Sermon
against Drunkenness, to be preached on the Day the Mayor was chose.

Item. That his Honor left thirty-six Shillings per Annum to the Ringers, for
a Peal to be rung on the first Day of April.

Item. How that the Lady of the Manor left fifty Pounds to new Fringe the
Pulpit Cloth, and line the Family Pew.

Item. That the Reverend Vicar of the Church left two hundred Pounds, to buy a
new Set of chased Plate for the Communion Table, and twenty Pounds for two
Velvet Cushions, with Gold Tassels.

Item. The same Reverend Gentleman left twelve Shillings per Annum, to be
divided among twenty-four poor Housekeepers on Christmas Day.

Item. Dame Ursula, is Wife, left ten Pounds per Annum, for ever, to new gild
yearly, the Iron Rails round her Tomb.

There were several other Benefactions, equally as devout, essential, and
charitable. But Mr. Fool took no Notice of any of these Things; it was odd
indeed; but he did not so much as transcribe one Epitaph, to communicate it to
the Public for a Curiosity, either for the Goodness of its Puns, or the Badness
of its Spelling.

While he was at Church, a religious Awe filled his Mind, which made him solely
intent upon the Business he came about.

Oh, resentful Reader, whether you are a polite Person, or a witty one, despise
not the Hero of this History, for being so horridly out of Fashion, as to be at
Church from a Principle of unfeigned Devotion. -- Remember he is but a Fool.

Thou and I, and the rest of the joyous Class of choice Spirits, have too much
Sense to suffer ourselves so to be imposed upon.

When Morning-prayer was over; for it was not this Parish's Turn to have a
Sermon every Sunday, although the Living was worth above a hundred Pounds per
Annum, and held in Commendam with three more Pluralities, by the Reverend Mr.
****, Prebend of ****, and Chaplain to ****; yet the Incumbent was so frugal in
Church Affairs, that he hired a Cantab. out of Preferment, at ten Shillings per
Sabbath, to do Duty for him at all his inferior Spiritualities; so that the
Deputy was obliged to hurry over the Job, having no less than four more
Churches to read Prayers and Sermons at, that very Day.

Tom Fool cheerfully walked through the Churchyard, with a Mind filled with
that heaven-bestow'd Tranquillity, which always accompany true Devotion; and as
he looked on the lovely Landscapes around him, gratefully contemplated the
Wonders of Creation.

So much was he busied in Mediation, he mistook his Road; being a Stranger to
the Country, he walked until he came to four Roads; then looked round for the
Church he came from, and resolved to make up to it again, thinking from hence
he could hit upon the right Path; but like many wiser Men, only took much Pains
to be more out of the Way. He grew tired, and under a wide-branching Oak, in
the midst of a smooth-mown Grass-plat, he sat down: The Fatigue he had
undergone made him drowzy; and laying at his Length, gave himself up to the
gentle Indulgence of strength-recruiting Sleep; fast as the Ale-drinking
Alderman, who snores in his Pew after Dinner, during Sermon-time.

The Lady of the Manor had been walking that Afternoon with her Woman along the
Meadows; her House was but two Fields off from the Spot where Mr. Fool rested
himself; he could not discover it, because a thick Grove prevented on that Side
a Foot-passenger's View. When she came to the Place where Tom lay, she was
surpised; her Maid was dismally frightened, and would have run Home to call
for Help, but she was ordered to stay, Curiousity just then giving the Lady a
Twitch by the Sleeve, observing the sleepy Person to be well-dress'd; she
walked up gently toward him, and began softly to praise his Figure.

Indeed Mem, as you say, (replied Mrs. Pinner) he is the most genteelest Man I
have seen out of London, and yet you may see Mem he as been walking a good way,
by the Dust upon his Shoes and Stockings; and Mem what a white Hand he has too,
and Dresden Ruffles on: -- As sure as God made the World he is a Gentleman, Mem,
and may-hap misfortuneable in Love, for I thought as how he sighed. -- Pray Mem
let me wake him, for fear may-hap some Vermin should bite him.

Her mistress was as willing as her Woman, to know what could bring a
well-dress'd, agreeable-looking Man on Foot there; took a Pinch of Snuff, and
lightly let it fall upon his upper Lip; -- he sneez'd, -- waked, -- started up,
and beheld the lovely Miss Demirep standing before him.

Tom Fool made an unaffected Apology for his being there, hoped he had
committed no Trespass; told the Lady he was a Stranger who had lost his Way,
and begged she would permit one of her Servants to set him into the right Road.

Mr. Fool's Countenance was open and florid, the Tone of his Voice particularly
sweet, and plaintive; his Eyes were not broad-stretch'd into a rude Stare, but
he now and then lift them up while he was speaking, and his Look was tender,
modest, and sensible, yet his whole Deportment seemed to speak a Mind in Grief,
at least Miss Demirep thought so, and the Appearance of Distress is sure to
waken a delicate Sympathy in female Minds; which, to the Shame of mighty Man be
it know, all our Reading cannot make us Masters of, nor all our Writings
properly describe.

Upon Miss Demirep's Invitation, Tom Fool attended her to the Hall; where, with
a Grace peculiar to fine Women of Fashion, she requested he would let her know
how she could give her Leave to assure him, that the Laws of Hospitality
flourished under her Roof. -- To be sure it might seem odd, -- but as she was
above Disguise herself, flattered herself he was so too: -- Perhaps she might
be wrong, -- but she fancied he had lost something more than his Way.

Tom Fool was not so eager to relate his Adventures, as she was to hear them.
He told the Lady he was a Gentleman, -- had been hurt by false Friendships, and
from thence took Occasion to declaim on the Falsehoods of Mankind.

Miss Demirep, in whose Heart Compassion had a noble Dewlling Place, viewed him
with Pity; but 'twas a Pity mixed with Approbation. She took Part in all he
said, looked as he looked, sighed as he sighed; his Mind she found was manly as
his Person, his Sentiments generous and tender, his Observations judicious, yet
without either Flattery or Rancour.

Tom, who was amorous as Ovid, surveyed with Attention the Brilliancy of the
Lady's Figure, and discovered, by conversing with her, how elegant her Mind was
enriched. Thus by Degrees the Understanding, the Accomplishments, each
discovered in each, raised a reciprocal Esteem; pleased with the Entertainment,
they sat up together till Morning; and even then the Day would have been
unheeded by them, though the Sun darted his Rays cross the Room, had not Mrs.
Pinner ventured in, to beg Leave to know when Mem would please to have
Breakfast.

Next Day Mr. Fool sent one of Miss Demirep's Servants to his Sister's, to let
her know where he was, for Tom seemed not in a hurry to quit his Quarters: He
and the lovely Miss Demirep soon confessed to each other the praiseworthy
Opinions they had conceived, as none but noble Minds are capable of such
undisguis'd Sentiments, -- so none but noble Minds will believe this Passage,
-- but it was so; -- they owned a mutual -- a -- why should we be ashamed to
relate it. This Performance is designed to be a History of Nature; of Nature
actuated by honest Instinct. -- Therefore, with Submission to all abstracted
Speculatists, must acknowledge Mr. Fool's lovely Hostess, soon brought his own
Lady in less guilty; or to come nearer common Sense, Tom Fool, in the Arms of
Miss Demirep, found an universal Consolation.

His Lady indeed, met with a momentary one, on the arrival of Mr. Borlace: That
Gentleman, as we have before mentioned, set out in the Night for Fool-hall. As
soon as he had reached it, and discovered to Mrs. Susan, that he came from her
Master, and that Mr. Fool was in Health, and unhurt, the whole House was
overjoyed, and Borlace caressed in a very extraordinary Manner, as the
Messenger of glad Tidings.

Lady Fool, who had until that Time kept her Room, and whose Health was visibly
impaired, ordered her Post-chariot to be got ready immediately, and return with
Mr. Borlace, to fling herself (as she very afflictingly expressed herself) at
her dear Husband's Feet. When she alighted at Mars. Veillied's, and missed of
seeing her Spouse, she was almost distracted with the Disappointment, her
Ladyship imagining Mr. Fool shunned her, she returned Home heavy at Heart,
although Miss Ninny, whom she took with her, used every Argument imaginable to
comfort her.

As soon as her Ladyship returned Home, she sent for her Attorney; for as there
was most Part of the Estate vested in her, so as she could dispose of it
without her Husband's Consent, yet she made a Will, and left him whole and sole
Executor: And it must be allowed, she could not be too careful in an
Undertaking of such Consequence; for though the Law is the Grand Elixir for
England's Constitution, it is not amiss to be aware of Counterfeits.

CHAP. XXV.
MR. Fool had been at the amiable Miss Demirep's above a Week, before he had
Time to relate all his Adventures; he had often begun, and often had she
interrupted him, either by tenderly sympathising with his Distresses, or
bursting out into Praises of his Disinterestedness.

At the Conclusion of his Story, eagerly pressing him to her Breast, she
sighed, oh, God, what must that Woman be who could wrong you!

At that Instant Mrs. Pinner entering, acquainted Mr. Fool, that there was a
Man came on Horseback, that had a Letter, which he will deliver into nobody's
Hands, but your Honor's. And indeed, Mem (continued Mrs. Pinner) addressing
herself to Miss Demirep, as soon as Mr. Fool left the Room, I believe as how it
is from the Gentleman's House, for the Man axt for his Master.

Miss Demirep. Do you, Mrs. Pinner, see that the Man is very well entertained;
but order all my Servants not to ask the Man any Questions about the Family he
lives in, upon any Account.


Mrs. Pinner. No to be sure, Mem,


Exit Mrs. Pinner. Now my Comates, keen Tenants of the upper Story, and Fellow
Plagiarists, here is the lovely Miss Demirep alone, in a warm Room, on a soft
Settee, her Senses all in a flutter.

See how she looks: Ay, how? That is the Question; for to be free and faithful
to every good Reader, we secondhand Copyers are seldom admitted Tete a Tete
into a Woman of Fashion's Retiring-room; we cannot therefore critically say how
they look, or what they converse about: Yet, as some Painters have copied
Madonas from their Mistresses we Journeymen Journalizers often avail ourselves
of our-Acquaintance, the Women of the Town, and palm their Figures, dress Bons
mots and Behavior upon the Injudicious for illustrious Originals.

Let the Members of our pen-stumping Society make as much Parade as they please
about high Life, and so forth; we are as much unacquainted with it, as we are
with the Heathen Gods and Goddesses, that we jumble together in our jingling
Invocations.

Yet if any particular Reader (as some Readers are very particular) would be
informed what Color Miss Demirep's Eyes were, whether her Locks were fastened,
of fell loosely in flowing Curls upon her Shoulders; whether she was in full
Dress, or in Dishabille; if it was Coffee or Chocolate she had breakfasted
upon; how many shaking Mandarins nodded upon her Chimney-piece; what sort of
Paper the Room was lined with; and how broad the Turkey Carpet was that covered
the Flooring? They shall be informed immediately. Come Spirit of minute
Description inspire me. -- But I am interrupted, Mr. Fool is returned with a
Brace of Letters in his Hand; he very gracefully presents them to Miss Demirep.
Reader, we must be informed of the Contents, one way or other, every Body will
satisfy their Curiosity. The Lady has unfolded them, I know it is not good
Manners -- however, we'll give a Peep over her Shoulder.

LETTER the FIRST.
Dear Brother,
WE are all very much concerned at your not coming back to Mrs. Weilleid's that
Sunday. However, we are all rejoiced to hear you are well. I am at present
along with your Spouse, Lady Fool, at your own House. Your Lady is in a very
declining Way; she having had two Fits of Apoplexy, and her Physicians declare,
that if she has another she is a dead Woman. Therefore I beg as soon as you
have read the enclosed, you will set out, which is all at present from your
loving Sister.

N. FOOL.
P. S. Compliments to Miss Demirep.




LETTER the SECOND.
Dear injured Husband,
I Conjure you to be so merciful, as to return to me, if it be only to close
the dying Eyes of your unhappy Wife, who was betrayed, intoxicated, and undone,
by Villainy.

Yours, till Death, H. FOOL.


After Miss Demirep had read those Letters, she returned them to Mr. Fool; but
her Hand she had not withdrawn from his. In that Position, for some Moments,
they stood silent; tenderly looking at each other; at length Tom Fool, his Eyes
glissening with Compassion, thus addressed her.

Madam, had not the Hospitality Miss Demirep has shown to a poor wandering
Outcast, bound him by the strictest Ties of Gratitude, not to depart without
first, at least, acknowledging the Favors he had received, I should not
hesitate a Moment obeying the Purport of these Advices; but circumstanced as I
am, it is to you, and you only, I apply for Advice. What am I, Madam, to do?

Miss Demirep. To go. -- To go this Instant. -- I may be irregular, but am not
abandoned -- I love mightly, but not meanly. -- Therefore go, this Instant go.
It Is not my Advice alone, but my Entreaty, go. And may your Presence preserve
your Lady's Health. At the same Time she spoke this, checking a swelling Sigh,
which Passion, in Spite of Reason's Teeth, was bursting out with. Then stepped
forward to throw her Arms about his Neck, and take a parting Embrace -- but
recollecting, that her Caresses might detain him some Minutes, she checked
herself, and broke from him, saying, -- No, not a Kiss of mine shall stop you a
Moment on a Event like this -- Adieu -- And immediately rushed up Stairs into
her Dressing Room.


Just as Mr. Fool reached Home, his Lady had another Fit; and as the Faculty
had fortold, lived but two Days after her Husband's Return, leaving him in
clear Possession of full two thousand Pounds per Annum, and several Sums of
ready Money.

As soon as the Business of Burial was over, Mr. Fool sent for Mr. Borlace, and
with an Ingenuousness peculiar to the noble-minded Part of Mankind, told him;

Mr. Borlace; Providence has been pleased to favor me with a large
Independency; therefore I look upon it as my Duty to lay out the Superfluity of
my Income, in endeavoring to make those happy, I think deserve it. I will
neither mantain Race-horses, to enrich Grooms; nor make sumptuous
Entertainments, to cram Flatterers; or let my Servants learn the Way to
Profusion -- no -- I am beholding to that Being, to whom we all owe our Beings;
and how can I testify my Gratitude? He stands not in Need of any Thing I have;
but I will endeavor to copy some small Part of his Goodness, and be bountiful
in my Turn; for rich Men are, or should be, God's Agents for him to the Poor.

I am not now to be told the Disposition my Sister and you entertain for each
other -- but her Husband is living; as soon as I can legally procure a Divorce,
I will, if I can, make you happy together.

As you left your Affairs in London in Disorder, you will find in this
Pocketbook a Sufficiency, I believe, to defray your Creditors Demands; and
this I would have you do immediately; set out for Town Tomorrow Morning.
You Will excuse me Mr. Borlace; but as you have seen and suffered so much, you
are sufficiently weaned from the Weakness of Indiscretions.

Witwoud wanted to throw himself at Mr. Fool's Feet, called him his Guardian
Angel, and by several desperate Oaths, would have given Bond for his good
Behavior, but his Friend prevented him: However, nothing could hinder Borlace
from swearing he despised Debauchery, coursing the Madness of Riot, and
execrating all the Folly of Extravagance; and concluded with a very pathetic
Observation, concerning Misery and Contempt.

Thus is the Apothegm of Aristotle made out. Man may know much of every Thing
in the World except himself; for, as it was impossible for him to be in London
with Money in his Pocket, and not be found out by his Friends; so it was for
him, when found out, to avoid keeping Company with them. For that Man of Spirit
would be stigmatized with the odious Appellation of a damned sneaking Fellow?
Borlace therefore, being a Man of Spirits, willing to convince his Friends,
whatever Alterations he had undergone, were all for the better, kept it up,
indeed, was quite the Thing, ad unguem. As his Honor and Sir Thomas told him,
shaking him heartily by the Hand; damn them, if they would not back him for a
Thousand, and take him against the Field.

As we have therefore brought him to London, and left him in such good Company,
we must return to look after our other Passengers.

It is Time to bring this Bundle of many Sections to a tolerable Conclusion;
and we will immediately to it, according to the present practiced Rules of
Memoir-writing. We have taken them through Pages sufficient to swell this Work
into two Volumes. And now we have nothing to do but marry them off; like Fleet
Parsons, we must be expeditious in our Vocation: For we have many Sweet-hearts
in Pairs, who, like Country-dancing Couples, stand on Tip-toe to be at it.

In a little Time after Witwoud Borlace's Arrival in London, Miss Ninny went
up, so see every Thing was in proper Order in the late Lady Fool's Townhouse.
The Reader may easily guess who was shortly to be Mistress of it, and as soon
as Decency could allow it, Mr. Fool paid Miss Demirep a Visit.

Ye delicate Sensibilities, whose Minds are untainted by the Insipidities of
Fashion's Multitude: Ye, who nobly relish Friendship's Feasts, Fancies flow,
and every Beat of Heart distended Rapture; form to yourselves the Meeting
betwixt such a Pair as Mr. Fool and the lovely Miss Demirep.

All was Embrace, all was Rapture, all was Admiration. -- When gently leading
her to the love-receiving Settee, he thus addressed the all-attentive Lady.

Behold me now, Madam, possessed of an unincumber'd Estate of upwards of two
thousand Pounds a Year. I know the Nobleness of your Disposition too well, not
to be conscious Wealth cannot win you; yet such is the Custom of the World. I
have no other way to show myself worthy of what I wish for. Don't be offended,
Madam, let me not, by being too peremptory, shock your Delicacy. [Kneeling]
Forgive me if I too much presume, -- but thus I offer you my Hand -- to become
your Husband, is all that I wish for, to complete, to fix me happy.

The Lady was too much astonished to bid him rise; a thousand Thoughts rushed
by Turns to her Mind; for above a Minute she fat sat silent, looking with
Wonder at him; yet it was not an avaritious Hesitation, whether she should, or
should not take his Offer, -- no -- she was charmed, -- amazed, -- enraptured,
with her Lover's Behavior. As soon as she found herself settled enough to
reply, this was her Answer.

Thou Pattern of true Principle, -- I may justly glory of possessing what few
Ladies ever could boast of, -- a real Lover. But shall a Man show such Honor,
such Gratitude, to one of our Sex, and shall not that one return it? -- She
will, though to that Honor she sacrifices Happiness. -- I cannot, Sir, I must
not go with you to the Altar. -- I Am, -- I Am unworthy; -- I love you beyond
Life, -- I would wander with you in Want, and bear the World's Contempt to call
you mine, but my own Contempt I cannot endure. Had I only trangress'd with you,
I could have excused it; nay, vindicated it to myself; but to deliver my Person
to you in the sacred Tie of Wedlock, when that Person has been the Property of
others! What! Shall I demean the Man my Soul doats on? It Would distract me to
think, (for think I should) that any Man could dare to say of one so worthy as
you, -- I have had his Wife.

As your Mistress I Will be faithful, but not dishonor you as, -- heigh ho, --
perhaps I overstrain this Point; Women like me, think different from the rest
of our Sex; we are apt to refine too much, or be too regardless; -- this I feel
now I have done. Never before did I look upon what the World calls Innocence,
but as a Weakness of Understanding; never could I have thought such Anxiety
would arise in the Mind, from only reflecting on lost Reputation. -- Don't
think the worse of me, Sir, for this Confession, -- no Lady ever gave up before
me more than I, -- oh, -- God, -- what shall I say? -- I these are
Self-denials, well may those Persons be proud, who can put them in Practice.

Tom Fool. But, Madam, are we to live for the World, or ourselves?


Miss. Hush, for Heaven's Sake, don't be your own Advocate against yourself. It
is a much as all my Resolution can do, to keep the Field against Inclination;
-- and if you take its Part -- [Enter Mrs. Pinner] Whose there?


Mrs. Pinner. Beg Pardon, Mem, -- but your Company's come, Mem, and you always
ordered me to let you know to a Moment, Mem.


The abrupt Entrance of the Domestic, made this Dialogue end very
unsatisfactory. Mr. Fool took a Turn upon the Terrace, and Miss Demirep retired
for a Moment into her Dressing Room, to compose herself for the Reception of
her Visitors.

We shall name, or announce them (a better Phrase) in the Manner they alighted.

Imprimis. Madam Vander Doit, formerly the fine Batilda, for her Dutch
Merchant, had bought out Mr. Israel's Property in her, and by a License from
Doctor's-Commons, made her entirely his own.

Secondly. Sir Tasty handing Lady Pillow.

Third Couple. Were young Blood, who ushered Sir Tasty's Lady, whose Maiden
Name was Bonville; and as it is mentioned in the former part of thi^e Register,
the Baronet was about to make her a Settlement, -- he did so, -- but after some
Time they parted.

It was just before Lady Grotto and Sir Tasty came down into the Country, and
met Junior at the Inn, as beforementioned.

When the Baronet and the Inn-keeper's Wife were in London together, Miss
Bonville hearing that Sir Tasty had a new Mistress, she threw herself in his
Way, in a very advantageous Situation, appearing at Ranelagh three or four
Times, with a Star and Garter, as her Attendant Squire, and three or four more
Men of Dignity, crouding about her.

Love, like a Lease, is often renewable, and the Baronet thought her ten-times
more handsome than ever, begged Leave to wait on her, inquired her Address, and
all Lace and Feather next Day at Noon-time he waited for her in her first Floor.

She entered the Room, stately as a School-mistress; he rose to salute her; she
drew back and gave him a Look, cold as a Creditor; he was disconcerted, his
Face fell, he saluted her Hand, she begged he would be seated: The Baronet quite
amazed, bowed, squatted into a Chair, stammer'd, begged Pardon, pulled out his
Snuff Box, got up and sat down again; then rose, made a new Apology, shut up
his Snuff Box, looked through the Sash, wondered, and slid into his Chair again.

Miss Bonville, grave as a Lady Abbess at Vespers, talked about Sin, old Age,
Deathbeds, and being virtuous. Sir Tasty swore, bit his Nails, quoted Scraps
of Plays. Miss Bonville burst out into Tears.

Sir Tasty. Madam, by Heavens, you are mad, and have turned Methodist.


Miss Bonville. No, Sir, you injure me, but I have made a Vow, and that Vow is
registered in Heaven, never to hold Trust or Commerce more with Man, until
those Dealings are sanctified by matrimonial Law.


Sir Tasty. Do you expect that I should marry you Child? Something high that
faith.


Miss Bonville. No, Sir Tasty, but there is a Silk-mercer in Fleet Street, to
whom I have given my Consent.


Sir Tasty. The Devil you have, so my tow hundred Pounds a Year is to furnish
out a Cit's Shop with Silks and Sattins, is it? -- No -- Damme then -- not to
be humm'd in that manner neither; -- I Have a Scheme to stop that.


This Scheme he put in Execution the Week following, -- it was only marrying
the Lady himself, and that was saving his two hundred Pounds a Year; her
Ladyship became in an Instant a Pattern of Reformation. -- So Chaste, that at
the very Mention of a kept Mistress, she lifts up her Hands and Eyes, and
wonders how there can be such Women?

Just as they were seated, Mr. Fool ent^^'d; his being in Mourning made him
look more agreeable. The Assembly ^^^m'd to be surprised; Madam Vander ^^^t, in
a Whisper, congratulated Dem^rep, Lady Tasty stared, Lady Pillow sighed, young
Blood swore he thought he knew the Gentleman; Sir Tasty declared -- he should
be loath to give Offense, but pon his onner he could be almost tempted to back
his Opinion; two Faces might be a like to be sure, -- but -- he could like to
have five hundred on it. Miss Demirep, to cure him of Suspense (I will not say she
had any secret Satisfaction in it) undertook to be Lady Usher, and introduced
the young Widower, by Name, to all the good Company.

Mr. Fool the next Day received a Letter from Borlace, that his Presence was
very necessary just then in London, for the late Lady Fool had large Concerns
in the West Indies, left her by her first Husband, which indeed she had never
much minded; therefore Witwoud, in his Advice to Mr. Fool, desired him to come
up immediately, observing that Moneymatters in some of our Colonies, are not
transacted by Agents with that Perspicuity as we could wish.

His amiable Hostess did not indeed press him to put off his Journey; she
feared Lady Pillow, who she observed had an unusual softness in her Eyes just
at this Time, and was for ever looking at Tom Fool; his Heart Miss Demirep had
proved was all Tenderness, therefore she was alarmed, least he might be
inclined to Pity at least; and she knew by her own Disposition, wherever Pity
was taken in for a Tenant, Love soon came to be a Lodger there.

Soon after Tom Fool, and Miss Demirep having handsomely acquitted herself of
her visitants, stepped into her Post-chaise for her London Journey: How often
upon the Road did she rail at Tyrant-custom, then curse our boasting Sex, then
blame herself for her own Delicacy.

On the other Side, how would she sometimes congratulate herself upon her
Resignation, her Resolution, her Martyrdom, as she termed it.

He must love me for it, I Am conscious he must (thus she pleased herself with
reflecting) he does, he will, -- though I shall not have him for a Husband, yet
as a Husband he is mine, he will be mine; mine, and only mine; -- but all is not
Gold that looks so; -- every Reckoning is not always right. -- However, we will
so far reckon right, as here to finish the Chapter; and the next we begin, with
Joy the Editor declares it to be.

CHAP. XXVI.
WHEN Tom Fool came to London, he found Borlace had made a very had Use of the
Sum he had been entrusted with; Witwoud also had been rather too premature, in
communicating to his Companions the History of his good Fortune with Mr. Fool;
nay, to his very great Intimates, he whispered, that he had had Miss Fool; and
hinted something about patching up Reputations, and that Matrimony's Pill
should be well sweetened.

Curse on that Flippancy of Tongue; Why will you, ye maudlin Declaimers, why
will ye form such midnight Friendships? Ye Mementos of Indiscretion, who
persist, spite of Shame or Sufferings, like venom-breathing Serpents, do
discharge Infection from your Mouths.

Miss Ninny had not conducted herself with the utmost Circumspection, during
her Abode in London: Her Behavior at public Places, prejudiced the grave Part
of the World from entertaining a good Opinion, either of her Morals or
Understanding. It is not worth while to describe her Dress, or her Manner at
public Places: We see many fine Ladies, whose Actions and Appearance seem to
say (like the Founder of the Feast, when Dinner's upon the Table) Come,
Gentlemen, will not ye please to fall to.

Her Brother very mildly expostulated with her, and mentioned the Word Decency.
-- She replied, Stuff; but she spoke that Word aside, to herself. He obeserv'd
to her, that no Person should incur, if they could help it, the World's
Censures. -- That she took very ill; -- did not Answer him indeed, but begged
Leave to retire; and ready to burst with Vexation, hurried into her own
Apartment, flung herself into an armed Chair, and with Tears told her Woman, as
the Maid held out the Lavender Drops to her, -- Hannah, my Brother is become a
perfect Tyrant, that Miss Demirep has set him against me.

But to Witwoud Borlace, Tom Fool was more severe: He reproved him very
sharply; nay, was almost angry with him, for so ridiculously squandring away a
Sum of Money; which, as Mr. Fool told him, was the Property of his Creditors.

Witwoud, who not only had a great Share of Spirits, but had also a great
Spirit, could ill brook to be told of his Faults, by one much younger than
himself, and who had not seen half so much of the World neither. -- He was mad
in his Mind, -- but had Cunning enough to conceal it.

He told Tom Fool a long Story how he was made drunk, he could not tell how;
and then indeed he did, he could not tell what; that he had a great many
Enemies, and that they had raised a Parcel for Reports out of Envy against him;
that for his Part, he was fuddled at first, by the only Method that could have
made him so, which was drinking Bumpers to Mr. Fool's Health. -- However, he
would not drink any more, for he saw now it was a Plant against him, to get me
Sir out of your Favor; for I Will be doubly damned before I Would give so good a Man
as you a Offense.

But this Concession only lasted before Tom Fool, for the Moment he left the
Parlour, he flew to Miss Ninny; and after giving Vent to half-a-dozen
fullmouth'd Oaths, he declared her Brother to be a mean-spirited Fellow: What Is
his Money to me? Or where would he have had any Money if it had not been for
me? -- Damn it, is such a Man as I am to be schooled, as if I was sent like a
Servant to Market, and so must give an Account of every Penny and Twopence. I
tell you what Ninny, had he not been your Brother, I should have answered him
in another Way, I assure you.

Miss Minny. Indeed, Witwoud, I am horribly chagreen'd my Brother should behave
so; I cannot conceive what can make him so execrably in the Wrong; and must
confess, am undetermined how to behave in this Affair.


Borlace. But I am not, and I Will tell you the only Thing we have to do in this
Affair: If we don't put some Stop to this, your Brother will always be calling
us to an Account for what we do, and where we go; now that I Would not bear from
the great Mogul. I know he loves you dearly, and if you was to leave him a
little, it would bring him to a better Way of Thinking. The only Thing we have
to do, is this: We must show a proper Spirit of Resentment.


Miss Ninny. By all Means, Mr. Borlace.


Mr. Borlace. Very well, therefore let you and I take a little Journey
together. I can raise some Money I know. You shall leave a Letter for him,
wherein you shall tell him, the Severity of his Behavior to you has drove you
away. This will make him uneasy, -- he will do any Thing to bring you back again.
He Will send Post for us; but before we return, we'll come into some Agreement
with him: Let me alone with him for that, I know enough of the World to manage
your Brother, I warrant you; then we shall live just as we like, and he will
never find Fault with us again, for fear you should go away, never to return.


However ridiculous this Scheme was, Miss Fool, whose whole Life had been but a
Series of indiscreet Attachments, at once came into it; nay, she rejoiced to
think she had an Opportunity to be revenged of her Brother, for his scolding
her. On the Evening that Miss Demirep came to Town, they two took Post for
Chester.

When Mr. Fool received a Card from Miss Demirep, he was reading the mad
Epistle his Sister had left behind her. -- He enclosed it in a Letter to Miss
Demirep, and in which, after he had related Miss Ninny's Elopement, he told
her, that Folly and Ingratitude had so much shocked his Temper, he was not in a
Condition fit for Society; that he was determined to retire for some Time at
least from the World. And as he had several Affairs to settle in Jamaica, he
would go over to that Island immediately.

Miss Demirep, as soon as she had read the Contents, flew to Mr. Fool, and made
use of every Argument to dissuade him from undertaking so dangerous a Voyage.
-- But as it sometimes happens, when two Persons of different Religions
dispute, the Argumentator, who designs to make the Proselyte, becomes himself a
Convert. Thus Mr. Fool brought Miss Demirep over to his Opinion; she attended
him to Bristol, and saw him take Shipping for Port Royal.

The Editor, Transcriber, Historian, Journalists, etc. etc. begs Leave to
assure the Public, that as Miss Demirep was capable of giving the most
extraordinary Proofs of Affection to Mr. Fool, she did so; secretly contracting
with the Captain for her own and Mem Pinner's Passage, and by a handsome
Premium enjoined him Secresy.

The very next Day, when the Vessel was going briskly before the Wind, and Tom
Fool was walking upon the Quarter Deck, the Captain's Boy came to tell him his
Master wanted to speak to him in the great Cabin: We'll leave to the
Imagination of the Reader, what his Thoughts must be, when he saw coming
forward to meet him, as he entered the Room-door, the noble-minded Miss Demirep.

N. B. There is now at the Publisher's all the original Letters, which Miss
Demirep sent to Madam Vander Doit, concerning the extraordinary Adventures Mr.
Fool met with Abroad.

1st. Being drove ashore on the Coast of Florida; how they were taken Prisoners
by the Cannibals; the effects of Beauty upon Savages; how Mem Pinner was
married to the King of that Part of the Country, and her Behavior in high
Life. 2dly. The manner in which Mr. Fool, and Miss Demirep, were entertained
among the Savages; the deposing of Mem Pinner; their own Deliverance and Voyage
up the great River Amazon; the Difference of Behavior between an Indian and an
European, their Servants. 3dly. The History of their discovering, in the
interior Parts of the Country, the real Kingdom of the Amazons; the Reception
they met with among them. 4thly. A concise, but candid Account of the
Government, Religion, Parties, Elections, Duels, Intrigues, Courts of
Judicature, Universities, Theaters, Fashions, and Prize-fightings. 5thly. Mr.
Fool and Miss Demirep's safe Arrival at Jamaica, where he found his late Lady's
Agent married to his Sister, Miss Ninny; Mr. Borlace was traveling at the same
Time along the Continent, as a Merry-Andrew to a Mounteback.
FINIS.

