A TOUR Through the Whole ISLAND of GREAT BRITAIN. Divided into CIRCUITS or
JOURNEYS. GIVING A Particular and Entertaining ACCOUNT of whatever is Curious,
and worth Observation; VIZ. I. A DESCRIPTION of the Principal Cities and Towns,
their Situation, Government, and Commerce. II. The Customs, Manners, Exercises,
Diversions, and Employment of the People. III. The Produce and Improvement of
the Lands, the Trade, and Manufactures. IV. The Sea Ports and Fortifications,
the Course of Rivers, and the Inland Navigation. V. The Public Edifices,
Seats, and Palaces of the NOBILITY and GENTRY. VI. The Isles of Wight,
Portland, Jersey, Guernsey, and the other English and Scottish Isles of most
Note.
Interspersed with Useful OBSERVATIONS. Particularly fitted for the Perusal of
such as desire to Travel over the ISLAND.

By a GENTLEMAN.

The THIRD EDITION. With very great Additions, Improvements, and Corrections;
which bring it down to the Year 1742. And a Copious INDEX to each Volume.

VOL. III.

LONDON: Printed for J. OSBORN, S. BIRT, D. BROWN, J. HODGES, A. MILLAR, J.
WHISTON, and J. ROBINSON. M.DCC.XLII.

A TOUR Through the ISLAND of GREAT BRITAIN. VOL. III.
LETTER I. Containing a Description of the Counties of LINCOLN, RUTLAND,
NORTHAMPTON, HUNTINGDON, and BEDFORD.
SIR,
FROM Newark, still keeping the Fossway, which lies as strait as a Line can
mark it out, we went on to Lincoln, having a View of the great Church called
the Minster all the Way before us, the River Trent on the Left, and the Downs
called Lincoln-Heath on the Right.

Lincoln is an ancient City, governed by a Mayor, Aldermen, etc. It is so full
of the Ruins of Monasteries, and Religious Houses, that the very Barns,
Stables, Outhouses, and, as they showed me, some of the very Hog-styes, are
built Church-fashion; that is to say, with Stone-Walls, and arched Windows and
Doors. Here are 13 Churches, but the meanest to look on that are any-where to
be seen. The Cathedral indeed, and the Ruins of the old Castle, are very
venerable Pieces of Antiquity.

Lincoln was a Colony of the Romans, and by them named Lindum Colonia, which
very easily falls into the present abbreviated Appellation, Lincoln. From its
bold and noble Situation upon an high Hill, it seems a Collection of Five
Cities. For, first, below the Hill, and Westward of the City, the River throws
itself into a great Pool called Swan-pool, from the Multitude of Swans upon it.
All around this Place the Ground is moory, and full of Bogs and Islets; and the
Place is called now Carham, i. e. a Dwelling upon the Car, or Fen. Here was the
British City in the most early Times, which they used as a Fastness for
themselves and Cattle in Times of deep Distress. From this Carham is a pleasant
View of the West-Front of the Cathedral.

2. The Romans, pleased with this Eminence, placed their City upon it, which
they first built in the Form of a large Square, the Southern Wall being
sufficiently secured by the Precipice. Quite round the other Three Sides they
carried a deep Trench, which still remains, except on the Southeast Angle. This
City was divided into Four equal Parts by Two cross Streets. The Two Southern
Quarters were taken up, one by the Castle, the other by the Church which
Remigius built. But when Bishop Alexander projected a Structure of much larger
Dimensions, the Enclosure was carried beyond the Eastern Bounds of the City,
and a new Wall built farther that way, as at present, with Battlements and
Towers. The North Roman Gate of this Part of the City still remains entire,
called Newport Gate, and the noblest Remnant of this Sort in Britain. It is a
vast Semicircle of Stones laid together without Mortar, and cemented only by
their wedgelike Shape. This magnificent Arch is 16 Feet Diameter, the Stones
Four Feet thick at Bottom. From this Gate Eastward some Part of the old Roman
Wall is to be seen, made of Stone, and very strong Mortar. The West Gate
toward the Gallows was pulled down within Memory. That on the South Side still
shows one Jamb from between the Houses, and two or three Stones of the same
Make as the former: the rest has been pulled down by Mr. Houghton. On the East
Side one Postern is visible, and big enough for a Bed to stand in. By Newport
Gate is another large and curious Piece of Roman Workmanship, called the
Mint-wall. This is still 16 Feet high, and above 40 Feet long, composed of
Brick and Stone, laid alternately.

3. The Romans, finding this City well situated for Navigation, added another
to it as big as the former. This they did Southward upon the Declivity of the
Hill, and so made it parallel with the other; and the most Southern Side lay
upon the River. Eastward, the Ditch without is turned into a broad Street
called The Beast-Market, and there below Claskgate a great Part of the old
Roman Wall is left, made of Stone. One Piece of it is now 80 Feet long, and 18
high. A little of it lower down is 12 Feet long, and as much high. Between that
Gate upwards, and the old City-wall, by the Greestone-stairs, the old Ditch
called Weredyke, is to be seen. To the West the Ditch and Foundation of the
Wall are still lost though many times repaired and demolished in the frequent
Sieges this Town has sustained, especially in the Wars of the Empress Maud. At
the Bottom of it, toward the Water, is a round Tower, named Lucy-tower, much
known in her History.

4. Another great Addition to the Length of this City, Northward above the
Hill, was called Newport, or the new City, 500 Paces long. This probably was
done in the Time of the Saxon Kings. It lies on both Sides the Hermen-street,
and was fenced with a Wall and Ditch hewn out of the Rock. At the Two farther
Corners were round Towers, and a Gate, the Foundations of which remain. There
were several Churches, and religious Houses, in this Place. It was chiefly
inhabited by Jews, who had settled here in great Numbers, and grown rich by
Trade. There is a Well still named Grantham's-well, from a Child they impiously
crucified, as was said, and threw it into that Place.

5. After the Norman Conquest, when a great Part of the first City was turned
into a Castle, by King William I. it is probable they added the last Intake
Southward in the Angle of the Witham, and made a new Cut called Sinsil-dyke on
the South and East Side for its Security. It is observable, that the Normans
could not well pronounce Lincoln, but vitiated it to Nichol, as we find it
written in some old Authors: and to this Day a Part of the Swan-pool is called
Nichol-pool.

Though since those Times the City has much declined, of late it seems to revive,
and Trade and Manufactures to flourish.

In this last Part of Lincoln, on both Sides the Roman Road, were many of that
People's funeral Monuments; some of which they now dig up. There is an
Inscription of that Sort behind the House where the Lord Hussy was beheaded
for Rebellion in the Time of King Henry VIII. The great Bow-window, through which
he passed to the Scaffold, was lately taken down. It stands over against
another Stone Building, of an antique Model, which was the Palace of John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, who lived here in Royal State, and had the Privilege
of Coining. His Arms are here carved in Stone. Over Against the Castle,
Westward, is an Entrenchment made by King Stephen.

The Situation of the City, from what I have said, must appear very particular;
one Part is on the flat, and in a Bottom, so that the Witham, a little River,
that runs through the Town, flows sometimes into the Street: the other Part
lies upon the Top of a high Hill, where the Cathedral stands; and the very
steepest Part of the Ascent of the Hill, is the best Part of the City for Trade
and Business.

Nothing is more troublesome than the Communication of the upper and lower
Town; the Street is so steep and so strait, that the Coaches and Horses are
obliged to fetch a Compass another Way, as well on one Hand as on the other.

The River Witham is arched over, so that you see nothing of it as you go
through the main Street; but it makes a large Lake on the West Side, and has a
Canal, called the Poss-dike, by which it has a Communication with the Trent,
whereby the Navigation of that River is made useful for Trade to the City. This
River must have run into the Humber, had it not been broken off in the Middle
by that great Valley under Lincoln, and turned into the Salt-marshes. Hence it
is that the Stone upon this Western Cliff is full of Sea-shells. For the
Shellfish, when by the restless Motion of the Waters in the universal Delage,
they were carried into the midland Places, were hindered by the Weight of their
Shells from regaining their original Stations; and thus were confined within
the growing Stone. As a Testimony of which the Skeleton of a Crocodile, or some
such Animal, enclosed in a broad flat Stone, was sent to the Royal Society from
these Parts, by Dr. Stukeley, from whom we borrow this Observation.

There are very good Buildings in the upper City, and several Families of
Gentlemen have Houses there, besides those of the Prebendaries and other Clergy
belonging to the Cathedral.

The Cathedral is a magnificent Fabric, and is reputed the largest in Extent
of any Cathedral in England, except York. But there are in it many obvious
Blemishes, which I shall particularly take Notice of, in comparing it hereafter
with York Minster. The Situation is infinitely to its Advantage, as it stands
upon a high Hill, and is seen into five or six Counties. It has a double Cross
or Transept. The West End receives a great Addition to its Breadth, by reason
of Two Chapels on each Side of the Side-Ayles; but the Two Towers and Spires
are very mean, though not for want of Height.

This Cathedral has many Bells; and particularly the Northern Tower is filled
up, as one may say, with the finest great Bell in England, which is called Tom
of Lincoln, being probably consecrated to Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury. -- As loud as Tom of Lincoln is a Proverb. It weighs 4 Tons, 1894
Pounds, and will hold 424 Gallons Ale-measure; the Circumference is 22 Feet 8
Inches.

The Middle or Rood Tower is the highest in the whole Kingdom, and when the
Spire was standing on it, it must, in Proportion to the Height of the Tower,
have exceeded that of old St. Paul's, which was 520 Feet. The Monks were so
proud of this Structure, that they would have it, that the Devil looked upon it
with an envious Eye; whence the Proverb of a Man who looks invidious and
malignant, He looks as the Devil over Lincoln. At present there are only four
very ordinary Pinacles, one at each Corner. It has Two great Gate-houses or
Entrances from the West. The lower Part of the Fr^^t, and of the Two Towers,
are of Remigius's Building, as is easily discoverable by the Color of the
Stones, and by the Manner of Architecture: but Alexander built the Additions
upon it, as likewise the Body of the Cathedral, the Choir, and St. Mary's
Tower, which once had a very lofty Spire. St. Hugh the Burgundian built the
East End, or St. Mary's Chapel, (where he had a Shrine) and the Chapterhouse,
which is ceil'd with a beautiful Stone Roof, and one Pillar in the Middle.

The Cloisters and the Library are fine; and the latter is well furnished with
printed Books and Manuscripts.

Two Catharine-wheel Windows, as they are termed, at the Ends of the larger
Transepts, are remarkably fine for Bullion-work, and painted Glass.

Here are great Numbers of antique Brasses and Monuments.

South of the Church, upon the very Brow of the Hill, is the Bishop's Palace,
built by Robert de Chesney, who gave Two great Bells. Bishop Bek, and other
Successors, improved it into a Magnificence equal to the Cathedral. It stands
just South of the Roman Wall. It had many large Bow-windows of curious
Workmanship, looking over the lower City into Nottinghamshire. The Kitchen had
Seven Chimneys. The Hall was stately. The Gatehouse remains entire with the
A^^^ of the Founders. This Palace was ruined in the Time of the Civil Wars; but
might be rebuilt with no very great Expense. As the Church is very large, so is
the Revenue of the Bishopric, which was formerly immensely great, as may be
seen by the Monasticon, where is an astonishing Account of the Wealth of the
Place.

The Church, as it is the Seat of the Bishopric, is not so ancient as some
others; the Sea being removed, since the Norman Conquest, from Dorchester, a
little Town in Oxfordshire, on the River Thames, not far from Tame, of which I
have spoken in its Place; but the City is truly ancient, and the Ruins of it
tell us as much.

Mr. Camden says, King Vortimer, the valiant Briton, died here, and was buried
in the Church of the great Monastery.

It is certain, as I have observed, that William the Conqueror built the
Castle, to curb the potent Citizens; and the Ruins show, that it was a most
magnificent Work, well fortified, and capable of receiving a numerous Garrison.

The Bishopric of Lincoln at that Time contained all that now is comprised in
the Dioceses of Ely, Peterborough, and Oxford, besides what is now its own; and
it is still the largest Diocese in England; containing the several Counties of
Lincoln, Leicester, Huntingdon, Bedford, Bucks, and Part of Hertford; and in
them 1255 Parishes, whereof 577 are Impropriations; and there are in these
Bounds six Archdeacons, viz. Lincoln, Leicester, Bedford, Buckingham, Stow, and
Huntingdon.

Here was the famous Battle fought between the Friends of the Empress Maud,
Mother to King Henry II. and King Stephen, in which that magnanimous Prince was
overthrown and taken Prisoner.

Lincoln stands in a most rich, pleasant, and agreeable Country; for on the
North, and South-east, the noble Plain called Lincoln Heath, extends itself,
like the Plain about Salisbury, for above 50 Miles; viz. from Sleeford and
Ancaster South, to the Bank of the Humber North, though not with a Breadth equal
to the Length; for the Plain is hardly anywhere above Three or Four Miles broad.

On the West Side of this Plain, the Trent Waters make a pleasant and rich
Valley, running from New-ark to Gainsburgh, thence to Burton, and so into the
Humber.

Gainsburgh has a large and fine Market, and is very flourishing for Trade and
Business, which has increased of late Years to the Detriment of Boston and
Hull.

The Body of the Parish Church of this Place had been under a general Decay,
and the Walls, Arches, and Pillars, so shaken and declined from their proper
Position, that it was judged incapable of Repair. An Act of Parliament
therefore passed in 1735, for pulling down and rebuilding it. It is famous for
the Danes having landed here, when they came up the Trent.

Passing the Trent by a Ferry, you land in the Isle of Axholm, which is
environed by the Trent and the Dun. Littleborough is the Agelocum or Segelocum
of the Romans, a small Village Three Miles above Gainsburgh, just upon the Edge
of the Water, and in a Nook. It seems only to have been environed with a Ditch,
and was of a square Form. The Water ran quite round it; for to the West, where
White's-bridge is, a watery Valley hems it in; so that it was sufficiently
strong. The Church stands upon the highest Ground. The Trent has washed away
Part of the Eastern Side of the Town. Foundations and Pavements are visible in
the Bank. Here, an Urn, with the Coin of Domitian, was found; and great Numbers
of Coins have been taken up in ploughing and digging, which they call
Swine-pennies, because those Creatures sometimes rout them up, and the
Inhabitants take little Care to preserve them. Mr. Ella, Vicar of Rampton hard
by, has collected several, and some valuable.

In 1718. Two Altars, handsomely molded, of coarse Grit-stone, were dug up,
which are set as Piers in a Wall on the Side of the Steps, which lead from the
River to the Inn. Many very small Coins, like flatted Peace, called Mites, are
also found. Mr. Hardy has a large Urn, with a Female Face on the Outside.

In this Field, near White's-bridge, are great Foundations of Buildings. Coins
are often found at the lowest Edge of the Water, when the Tide is gone off, and
in dry Seasons. On the East Side of the River has been a Camp.

By Tilbridge-lane, upon the Top of the Heath, is a Spring, which, according to
the vulgar Report, flows and ebbs with the Trent, though at Five Miles Distance.
The like is said of several others hereabout.

Ten Miles from Lincoln Northward is Spittle, all the Way to which Place are
Milliary Stones. It Is very pleasant Riding, being wholly Champaign or Heath. Of
these Stones, I believe, some are Roman, others later Crosses to supply their
Place. This was, no doubt, a Mansion, because hard by a little Beck runs through
it. Here is an Hospital, said to be founded in the Year 1308. There are great
Foundations all around, some of which perhaps are Roman. At present the Village
consists of Two Farm-houses, a Chapel, an Inn, and a Sessions House. Upon the
latter, is this Inscription: Haecce domus dat, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Aequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, bonos. 1620.
That is, This Court does Right, loves Peace, preserves the Laws,
Detects the wrong, rewards the righteous Cause.


To the Left is Normanby, where the last but one Duke of Bucks was born, and
whence he assumed his Title of Marquis.

Half a Mile East of the present Wintringham, stood the old Roman Town, now a
Common, bounded by the Marshes upon the Humber. The City was plough'd up of
late Years, and many Antiquities found.

The present Wintringham is a dirty poor Place, but still a Corporation, and
the Mayor is chosen only out of one Street next the old Town, where was a
Chapel. The Bell of it now hangs in a wooden Frame by the Pillory. Here is a
vast Jawbone or Rib of a Whale, which has remained Time out of Mind.

As the Middle of the Country is all hilly, and the West Side low, so the East
Side is the richest, most fruitful, and best cultivated, of any County in
England, so far from London. One Part is all Fen or Marsh Grounds, and extends
itself South to the Isle of Ely. And here it is that so vast a Quantity of
Sheep are fed, as makes this County and that of Leicester an inexhaustible
Fountain of Wool for all the manufacturing Counties in England, as before
observed.

There are some good Towns on the Seacoast, but I include not Barton, which
stands on the Humber, as one of them, being a straggling mean Town, noted for
nothing but an ill-favored dangerous Passage, or Ferry, over the Humber to
Hull; where, in an open Boat, in which we had about 15 Horses, and 10 or 12
Cows, mingled with about 17 or 18 Passengers, we were about 4 Hours tossed
about on the Humber, before we could get into the Harbor at Hull.

Well may the Humber take its Name from the Noise it makes; for in a high Wind
it is incredibly great and terrible, like the Crash and Dashing together of
Ships.

Passing over Whitton Brook, a Roman Road goes directly to Aukborough, by that
People called Aquis. Their Camp is now called Countess-close, from a Countess
of Warwick, who, they say, lived there, at least owned the Estate. The Roman
Castle is square, 300 Feet each Side, very conveniently placed in the
North-west Angle of Lincolnshire, as a Watchtower over all Nottinghamshire and
Yorkshire. The Church is of good Stone, and has a square Tower; but the Choir
is ruinous, and separated from the rest of the Church by a wooden Partition.
Here are numerous Relics of the Deluge, as Sea-shells, subterraneous Trees,
etc.

In a square Plot, called The Green, is a round Labyrinth named Julian's Bower,
probably from the warlike Games in Use among the Roman and British Youth,
called Ludi Trojani, and said by Virgil to be first introduced into Italy by
Iulus the Son of Aeneas. And the Boys, to this Day, divert themselves with
running in it one after another, and eluding their Play-fellows by their
intricate Mazes. It seems that our Tournaments, so much in Fashion till Queen
Elizabeth's Time, are Remainders of these ancient Diversions.

Burton makes a pretty Prospect, has several Mills, and the Houses are
pleasantly intermixed with Trees. There are also Two Churches, one of which is
so low in respect of the Precipice under which it stands, that a Person may
almost leap from thence upon the Steeple.

At Barrow is a British Temple, vulgarly called a Castle.

A little Eastward hence is Thornton College, a great Abbey founded by William
le Gros, Earl of Albemarle, in the Year 1139. The Gatehouse is very perfect,
being a vast Tower or Castle of great Strength both for Offense and Defense.
Before it is a large Ditch, across which is laid a Bridge with Walls on each
Hand, and Arches which support a broad Battlement to keep off the Enemy. Before
it are Two round Towers. There was a Portcullis at the great Gate, and behind
it another Gate of Oak. Over the Gate are Three old clumsy Statues in the
ordinary Niches; a Woman seeming a Queen, or the Virgin Mary; to the Right a
Man with a Lamb, probably St. John Baptist; and to the Left a Bishop, or Abbat,
with a Crosier. Upon taking down an old Wall, they found a Man with a
Candlestick, Table, and Book, who was supposed to have been immured. The whole
Monastery was encompassed by a deep Ditch, and high Rampart, to secure the
Religious from Robbers because near the Sea.

A Mile East of Thornton are the Ruins of another great Castle called
Kelingholme.

In Goswel Parish Northward, is Burham, once a Chapel, which belonged to the
Monastery, now a Farm-house.

In the same Parish near the Humber is Vere-court, which belonged to the
ancient Family of that Name.

The Land hereabout is good and well-wooded, and many Roman Coins are found.

Two Miles West of Thornton are the Ruins of a great Roman Camp, called
Yarborough, which surveys the whole Hundred denominated from it. Mr. Howson of
Kenington, which is hard by, has Pecks of Roman Coins found here.

Grimsby lies also on the Humber, but lower down toward the Ocean. It is a
Mayor-town and Seaport. But its Harbor is not very safe for Ships to ride in,
as appeared at the Time of the great Storm in 1703. when all the Ships in that
Road were driven from their Anchors, and most of them lost. Here is a very
large sumptuous Church.

We took the Round of the Seacoast from hence Southward, all the Way to
Boston, and passed through Saltfleet, Burgh, and Wainfleet, besides several
Villages lying on the Seaside. The Two first are but inconsiderable
Market Towns, but Wainfleet is a well-compacted Town and neat, though situated in
the Fens. It Is noted for a fine Free School, and giving an Addition to the Name
of the Founder of it, who was called William of Wainfleet, afterward Bishop of
Winchester, and who founded also Winchester College.

The River Witham crosses the County from Lincoln to Boston, where it
disembogues: at the Source of it is a little River of the same Name.

Between this River and the Seacoast North-east, the several inland Towns of
Bolinbroke, famous for giving Birth and Title to King Henry IV. also Title to
Mr. Secretary St. John, one of the greatest Genius's of the Age, though unhappy
in some of his Politics; Spilsby, Horncastle, and Tattersal, on the South.
About the Middle of this Division made by the Witham, lie Stanton,
Market-rasen, Louth, and Binbroke; and higher up Northward, stand Kirton,
Glandsord, Brigs and Caster.

Spilsby is a pretty good Town, and has a well-frequented Market.

Horncastle is almost surrounded with Water, and is a large well built Town.
But the rest are inconsiderable except Louth and Caster; the first has Two
weekly considerable Markets, and is famous for a fine Spire Steeple, as high as
that of Grantham.

Caster is the ancient Durobrivis, though Dornford retains somewhat of the old
Name, where the Hermen-street crossed the River by a Bridge of Brass, according
to the Vulgar. At Chesterton is a large Tract of Ground, called The
Castle-field, with a Ditch and Rampart around it. The Roman Road runs directly
through it, and still retains its high Ridge. Beyond the River it extends for
some Space upon the Meadow along the Bank; then forms an Angle, and proceeds
full North. Caster is above half a Mile from it, upon the Hill. A Part of the
Foundation of the Wall of the old Roman Camp is visible in the Street to the
North-west Corner of the Church, under the Wall of the House, where the
Minister lives. It may be known by the great Strength of the Mortar, built of
the white Slab-stone of the Country. Underneath this lay the City; for below
the Churchyard the Ground is full of Foundations and Mosaics.

In the Boot Alehouse Cellar is a Piece of a Pavement; as are many at Mr.
Wright's, and in a Garden an entire one; besides great Numbers of Roman Coins,
in the Possession of Mons. Baillardeau. In the plough'd Fields between the Town
and the River, toward Fordgreen, is a Tract which runs quite through, whereon
Corn grows very scantily. This is nothing but a Road laid with a deep Bed of
Gravel, though the superstitious Country People believe it was cursed by the Lady
Kyneburg, the Abbess who built a religious House, which stood Eastward of the
Church, and some Part of which still remains. This Meadow is called Norman-gate
(or more properly, Dorman-gate) Field, from the Town, whose Foundations are
found all about this Place; and also innumerable Coins, called Dorman-pence.
Part of this is Berrystead, where Antiquities are daily dug up. Mill-field
stands higher toward Peterborough, where Mosaic Pavements, etc. are found, and
seems to have been a little Citadel belonging to the Town.

Part of the Church is an antique Building, but new-modell'd. Upon a Stone over
the Choir-door is a curious Inscription, importing that the Church was
consecrated on the 17th of April 1114. The Steeple stands in the Middle of the
Church. The Tower is a fine Piece of ancient Architecture with semicircular
Arches. The square Well by the Porch is Roman, surrounded with hewn Stone; and
though it stands on a Hill, the Water is very high. At the East End of the Church
is a very old Cross.

A little higher up the River, near Wansford Bridge, a Gold British Coin was
found, which is in the Possession of Mr. Maurice Johnson, an eminent Counselor.

The Fen Country begins about Wainfleet, which is within Twenty Miles of
Grimsby, and extends itself to the Isle of Ely South, and to the Grounds
opposite to Lynn-regis in Norfolk East.

This Part is indeed very properly called Holland; for it is a flat, level, and
often drowned Country, like the Province of the same Name in the Low Countries;
insomuch that the very Ditches are navigable, and the People pass from Town to
Town in Boats, as they do there. Here we had the uncouth Music of the Bittern,
a Bird formerly counted ominous and presaging, and which, as some say, thrusts
its Bill into a Reed, and others into a Bog, and then gives the dull, heavy
Groan or Sound, like a Sigh; which is so loud, that it is heard Two or Three
Miles Distance as some People say.

Here we first saw Boston, and making toward it, found it a Seaport Town, at
the Mouth of the Witham.

The Tower is the highest and noblest in Europe, being 100 Yards, and is seen
plainly 40 Miles round this level Country, and farther by Sea. The Octagon
Lantern on the Top is very beautiful, and admirable for the Thinness of the
Stone-work. Mariners find it particularly useful to guide them into this Port,
and even into the Mouth of the River Ouse; for in clear Weather it is seen quite
out at Sea to the Entrance of those Channels, which they call Lynn Deeps, and
Boston Deeps, which are as difficult Places as most upon the Eastern Shore of
Britain. This is particularly taken Notice of in an Act passed in the Reign of
the late Queen Anne, for enabling Assessments to be made for Repairing and
keeping in Repair this Church: in the Preamble to which it is described, as it
deserves, as an ancient, well built Fabric; that the Tower thereof is very
high, and an useful Sea-mark; and that it being situate near the Haven, a great
Sum is necessary yearly to be raised, to preserve it from a violent, constantly
ebbing and flowing Water.

There was a prodigious Clock-Bell which could be heard Six or Seven Miles
round; it had many old Verses round it, but Anno 1710. was knocked in Pieces,
and the Inscription not taken.

Twenty Yards from the Foundation of this Tower runs the rapid Witham, through a
wooden Bridge.

This Town abounded with religious Houses, whose Lands King Henry VIII. gave to
the Town.

Queen Mary I. was a great Benefactress likewise to it, and gave them Lands
called Erection Lands, to pay a Vicar, Lecturer, and Two Schoolmasters.

The Church is reckoned the largest Parish Church without cross Ails, in the
Universe; it is 100 Feet wide, and 300 long within the Walls. The Roof is
handsomely ceiled with Irish Oak, supported by 24 tall and slender Pillars.

Formerly the Town labored under the Want of fresh Water, which was a great
Discouragement to Merchants and others settling there. To remedy which
Inconvenience, John Smyth of Heath, in the County of York, Esquire procured an Act
of Parliament which passed in the Reign of Queen Anne, to enclose Two Acres of
the great Common, called The West Fen, for a Pond or Cistern, and to erect a
Water-house and Mill upon the said Common, and other proper Edifices, and to
lay Pipes from the Pond for supplying the Town.

The Town is large, populous, and well built, full of Merchants, and has a good
Share of foreign Trade, as well as Lynn. It Is built on both Sides of the River
Witham. It is a Corporation, governed by a Mayor, and 12 Aldermen. It has two
Markets weekly, and a commodious Haven. Here is held one of those annual Fairs,
which preserve the ancient Title of a Mart, whereof I remember only Four in
England of any considerable Note, viz. Lynn, Gainsburgh, Beverly, and Boston.
Its Trade of late Years has not increased.

East of Boston was a Chapel called Hiptoft, and in the Town a Church dedicated
to St. John, but both demolished. Queen Elizabeth gave the Corporation a Court
of Admiralty over all the Seacoasts hereabouts.

The Country round this Place is all Fen and Marsh Grounds, the Land is very
rich, and feeds prodigious Numbers of large Sheep, and also Oxen of the largest
Size, the best of which are driven to London Market; and from this Part, as
also from the Downs or Heath abovementioned, comes, as I have before noted, a
great Part of the Wool, known, as a creditable Distinction, because of its
Fineness, by the Name of Lincolnshire Wool; which is sent in great Quantities
into Norfolk and Suffolk, for the Manufacturers of those Countries, and indeed
to several other of the trading Counties in England.

These Fens are very considerable for their Extent; for they reach in Length,
in some Places, 50 Miles, and in Breadth above 30: and as they are so level,
that there is no Interruption to the Sight, any Building of extraordinary
Height is seen a long Way. For Example, Boston Steeple is seen upon Lincoln
Heath, near 30 Miles; Peterborough and Ely Minsters are seen almost thoughout
the whole Level; so are the Spires of Lynn, Whittlesea, and Crowland, seen at a
very great Distance, which adds some Beauty to the Country.

From Boston we came on through the Fen Country to Holbech, a little Market Town,
and so on to Spalding, which is another Seaport in the Level, but standing far
within the Land on the River Welland, which almost incloses it. Here was
nothing very remarkable to be seen as to Antiquity, but the Ruins of an old
Monastery, of which the Monasticon gives a particular Description. There is a
Bridge over the Welland, and Vessels of about 50 or 60 Tons may come up to the
Town; and that is sufficient for the Trade of Spalding, which is chiefly in
Corn and Coal.

We must not pass by Crowland, another Place of great religious Antiquity, here
being once a famous Monastery, the Remains of which are still to be seen. The
Monks of Crowland were eminent in History, and a great many Stories are told of
the Devils of Crowland also, and what Conversation they had with the Monks,
which Tales are more out of Date now, than they were formerly.

The Abbey was founded 1000 Years ago by Athelbald King of Mercia, in the midst
of Bogs and Thorns, in Honor of his Chaplain Guthlac, who chose this Place to
mortify in. The Foundation is laid on Piles of Wood, several of which have been
found in tearing up the Ruins of the Eastern Part of the Church; for what
remains is only Part of the Westend, and of that only one Corner in tolerable
Repair, which is at present their Parish Church. In the Middle of the Cross
stood once a lofty Tower, and in it was a remarkably fine Ring of Bells; the
first, as is said in the County. The Roof, which was of Irish Oak finely carved
and gilt, fell down about 40 Years ago, and Pieces of it are to be found in
almost every House. People at Pleasure dig up the monumental Stones for private
Use, and what are left in the Pavement are covered over with Shrubs. It was
made a Garrison in the late Civil Wars, and the Soldiers destroyed the painted
Glass in it. All the Eastern Part of the Body of the Church is entirely razed
to the Foundation. The monastic Buildings, Cloisters, Hall, Abbat's Lodgings,
are absolutely demolished. In the North-west Corner of the Church stands a
strong Tower, with a very obtuse Spire, and a pleasant Ring of small Bells.
Over the West Gate are the Images of diverse Kings, Abbats, etc. among the rest,
Guthlac with a Whip and Knife, his usual Symbols.

Not far from the Abbey, is the Remnant of a little Stone Cottage, called
Anchor-church-house, where was a Chapel, in which St. Guthlac was buried, and
where he lived a Hermit.

Over Against the West End of the Abbey, is the famous triangular Bridge,
hardly to be equalled in Britain, if in Europe. It being too steep for Horses
and Carriages to go over, they pass under it. It Is formed on Three Segments of
a Circle meeting in one Point; and each Base, they say, stands in a different
County. Here meet the Rivers Nine and Welland. So that the Bridge, being fixed
at the very Point where they join, stands upon a Center in the Middle of the
united Waters; and then parting into Two Bridges, lands you one to the Right on
Thorney, and one to the Left upon Holland. On one Side fits an Image of King
Athelbald, Founder of Crowland-Abbey, with a Globe in his Hand.

The Town of Spalding is not large, but pretty well built and well inhabited,
and is a handsome and large Market Town; but for the Healthiness or
Pleasantness of it, I have no more to say, than that I was very glad when I got
out of it, as well as out of the rest of the Fen Country; for it is a horrid Air
for a Stranger to breathe in.

The History of the Draining these Fens, by a Set of Gentlemen, called the
Adventurers; the several Laws for securing and preserving the Banks, and
dividing the Lands; how they were by the extraordinary Conflux of Waters from
all the Inland Counties of England frequently overflowed, and sometimes lay
under Water most Part of the Year; how all the Waters in this Part of England,
which do not run into the Thames, the Trent, or the Severn, fall together into
these low Grounds, and empty themselves into the Sea by those Drains, as through
a Sink; and how by the Skill of these Adventurers, and at a prodigious Expense,
they have cut new Channels, and even whole Rivers, with particular Drains from
one River to another, to carry off the great Flux of Waters, when Floods or
Freshes come down either on one Side or on the other; and how, notwithstanding
all that Hands could do, or Art contrive, yet sometimes the Waters do still
prevail, the Banks break, and whole Levels are overflowed together; All this,
and much more that might be said on so copious a Subject, though it would be very
useful to have it fully and geographically described, yet it would take up so
much Room, that I cannot think of entering any farther into it, than just to
mention, That an Act of Parliament lately passed to enable the Adventurers,
Owners, and Proprietors of the taxable Lands, and the Owners and Proprietors of
the free Lands in Deeping Fen, Pinchbeck, and Spalding South Fen, Therlby Fen,
Bourn South Fen, and Croyland Fen, etc. in the County of Lincoln, containing in
the Whole about 30,000 Acres, to raise a competent Sum for the effectual
Draining and future Preservation of all the said Fens, according to their
Agreement in that behalf, dated Febr. 23.1737, and to carry the said Agreement
into Execution.

We shall only observe further, that Sir John Heathcote, Bart. has made so
good a Progress in draining 366 Acres of the Therlby Fen Pastures, belonging to
him, that he is particularly exempted from paying toward the Sums levied upon
others by this Act.

These Fens of Lincolnshire are of the same Kind with, and contiguous to, those
already mentioned in the Isle of Ely, in the Counties of Cambridge and
Huntingdon; and here, as well as there, we see prodigious Numbers of Cattle,
which are fed up to an extraordinary Size by the Richness of the Soil.

Here are also an infinite Number of Wild-Fowl, such as Duck and Mallard, Teal
and Wigeon, Brand-Geese, Wild-Geese, etc. For the taking of the four first
Kinds, here are a great many Decoys, from all which the vast Number of Fowls
they take, are sent up to London.

The Accounts which the Country People give of the Numbers they sometimes take,
are such, that one scarce dares report it from them. But this I can say, of my
certain Knowledge, that some of these Decoys are of so great an Extent, and take
such great Numbers of Fowl, that they are let from 100 l. to 3, 4, and 500 l. a
Year Rent.

The Art of taking the Fowls, and especiaally of Breeding up a Set of
Creatures, called Decoy-Ducks, to entice and then betray their Fellow-Ducks
into the several Decoys, is very ingenious; and though it is not very easy to
describe it, I will give it in as few Words as I can.

The Decoy-Ducks are hatched and bred up in the Decoy Ponds; in which are
certain Places where they are constantly fed, and being made tame, they are
used to come to the Decoy-Man's Hand for their Food.

When they fly abroad, it is not known whither they go, but some conjecture
they fly quite over into Holland and Germany; where they meet with others of
their own Kind, and sorting with them, they, by some Art, unknown to us, draw
together a vast Number of the Fowls, and, in a Word, kidnap them from their own
Country; for being once brought out of their Knowledge, they follow the Decoys,
as a Dog follows the Sportsman; and it is frequent to see these subtle Creatures
return with a vast Flight of Fowls along with them, after they have been absent
several Weeks together.

When they have brought them over, the first Thing they do is to settle with
them in the Ponds, to which the Decoy-Ducks belong. Here they chatter and
gabble to them in their own Language, as if they were telling them, that here
they should soon see how well they should live.

When the Decoy-Men perceive they are come, and that they are gathering and
increasing, they go secretly to the Pond's Side, under the Cover which they
have made with Reeds, so that they cannot be seen, where they throw over the
Reeds Handfuls of Corn, in such shallow Places, as the Decoy-Ducks are usually
fed, and whither they are sure to come for it, and to bring their new Guests
with them for their Entertainment.

This they do for two or three Days together, and no Harm follows to the poor
Strangers, till throwing in this Bait one time in an open wide Place, another
time in another wide Place, the third time it is thrown in a narrower Place;
where the Trees, which hang over the Water and the Banks, stand closer
together; and then in another yet narrower, where the said Trees are over-head
like an Arbor, though at a good Height from the Water.

Here the Boughs are so artfully managed, that a large Net is spread near the
Tops of the Trees among the Branches, and fastened to Hoops which reach from
Side to Side. This is so high, and so wide, and the Room is so much below, and
the Water so open, that the Fowls do not perceive the Net above them.

Here the Decoy-Man keeping unseen, behind the Hedges of Reeds, which are made
perfectly close, goes forward, throwing Corn over the Reeds into the Water. The
Decoy-Ducks greedily fall upon it, and, calling their foreign Guests, seem to
tell them, that now they may find, how well the Ducks live in England; so
inviting, or rather wheedling them forward, 'till by degrees they are all
gotten under the Arch or Sweep of the Net, which is on the Trees, and which by
degrees, imperceptibly to them, declines lower and lower, and also narrower and
narrower, till at the farther End it comes to a Point like a Purse; though this
farther End is quite out of Sight, and perhaps two or three hundred Yards from
the first Entrance.

When the whole Flight of Ducks are thus greedily following the Decoys, and
feeding plentifully as they go; and the Decoy-Man sees they are all so far
within the Arch of the Net, as not to be able to escape, on a sudden a Dog,
which till then keeps close by him, and which is perfectly taught his Business,
rushes from behind the Reeds, and jumps into the Water, swimming directly after
the Ducks, and barks as he swims.

Immediately the frighted Ducks rise upon the Wing to make their Escape; but
are beaten down again by the arched Net, which is over their Heads. Being then
forced into the Water, they necessarily swim forward, for fear of the Dog; and
thus they crowd on, 'till by Degrees the Net growing lower and narrower, they
are hurried to the very farther End, where another Decoy-Man stands ready to
receive them, and who takes them out alive with his Hands.

As for the Traitors, that drew the poor Ducks into this Snare, they are taught
to rise but a little Way, and so not reaching to the Net, they fly back to the
Ponds, and make their Escape; or else, being used to the Decoy-Man, they go to
him fearless, and are taken out as the rest; but instead of being killed with
them, are strok'd, made much of, and put into a little Pond just by him, and
plentifully fed for their Services.

There are many Particulars in the managing and draining these Levels, throwing
off the Water by Mills and Engines, and cultivating the Grounds in an unusual
manner, which would be very useful to be described; but the needful Brevity of
this Work, will not admit of it: yet something of it may be touched upon. 1.
That here are some wonderful Engines for throwing up Water, and such as are not
to be seen any-where else; whereof one in particular threw up (as they assured
us) 1200 Tons of Water in half an Hour, and goes by Wind-Sails, 12 Wings or
Sails to a Mill. 2. Here are the greatest Improvements by Planting of Hemp,
that, I think, are to be seen in England; particularly on the Norfolk and
Cambridge Sides of the Fens, as about Wisbech, Wells, and several other Places,
where we saw many hundred Acres of Ground bearing great Crops of Hemp. 3. Here
is a particular Trade carried on with London, which is nowhere else practiced
in the whole Kingdom, that I have met with, or heard of, viz. For carrying Fish
alive by Land-Carriage; this they do by carrying great Buts filled with Water
in Wagons, as the Carriers draw other Goods. The Buts have a little square
Flap, instead of a Bung, about 10, 12, or 14 Inches square, which, being
opened, gives Air to the Fish: and every Night, when they come to the Inn, they
draw off the Water, and let more fresh and sweet Water run into them again. In
these Carriages they chiefly carry Tench and Pike, Perch and Eels, but
especially the two former, of which here are some of the largest in England.


Whittlesea and Ramsey Meres are Two Lakes, made by the River Nine, which runs
through them; the first is between Five and Six Miles long, and Three Miles
broad, and is indeed full of excellent Fish for this Trade.

The Hermen-street goes in a strait Line through great and little Stukely,
anciently written Styvecle, which Name it acquired from its stiff clay Soil. In
Great Stukely Church is a Font of a very antique Make. The Hermen-street, after
this, becomes notorious by the Name of Stangate. Near Stilton some Parts appear
still paved with Stone, which strengthens the Conjecture, that the Name
Stangate was given it from thence. It traverses great Woods between the Two
Saltries, where was a religious Foundation of Simon Silvanect, the second Earl
of Huntingdon and Northampton; among the Ruins of which lie buried Robert Brus,
Lord of Anandale in Scotland, and of Cleveland in England, with Isabel his
Consort, from whom the Scottish Branch of our Royal Family is descended. Near
the Road Side Roman Urns have been dug up.

Half a Mile out of the Road is the Seat of Sir Robert Cotton, the learned
Friend of the great Camden, where he had a choice Collection of Roman
Inscriptions from all Parts of the Kingdom. The House was built in a
magnificent manner of hewn Stone; but now lies in dismal Ruins. By it is a most
beautiful Church, with a Tower; and in the Windows is fine painted Glass. From
those Woods abovementioned, your Eye commands the whole Level of the Fens,
particularly Whitlesey-mere, where the Gentry have little Vessels to sail in
for Pleasure. Sir Robert Cotton, digging the Foundation of a House on the Hill
whence you enjoy this Prospect, found the Skeleton of a Fish, 12 Feet long.

A little to the Right lies Ramsey, famed for a rich Abbey; little of which is
now left, but a Part of the old Gate House. In the Yard I saw a neglected
Statue of the Founder Alwyn, who was called Alderman of all England, and was
Cousin to King Edgar, and Son of Duke Athelstan, surnamed Half-King. This is
one of the most ancient Pieces of English Sculpture which we know of. The Keys
and ragged Staff in his Hand denote his Office. The Abbey was dedicated to St.
Dunstan of Canterbury, and St. Oswald of York, and was a rich Foundation, and
at the Dissolution valued at 1716 l. per Annum. for the Maintenance of 60
Monks. In the Year 1721. a great Quantity of Roman Coins were found at Ramsey;
which were believed to be hid there by the Monks upon some Inroad of the Danes.

At every Mile from Grantham to Stangate are Stones set up by Mr. Boulter,
which he designed to have carried on to London, for the general Benefit.

All the Country between Huntingdon River and Peterborough River, is Clay,
Sand, and Gravel; but beyond that, to the Humber, Stone.

At Gunworth Ferry over Peterborough River is a Bridge, a few Years ago
erected, where Boats pay Toll. The People of Peterborough were a good while
averse to having their River made navigable, out of an absurd Notion, that it
would spoil their Trade. But they begin to be better informed, or, as I may
say, to have more Wit, on the Progress made in that Navigation, which I shall
mention more particularly by-and-by, when I come to Oundle.

From the Fens, longing to be delivered from Fogs, and stagnate Air, and Water
of the Color of brewed Ale, like the Rivers of the Peak, we first set Foot on
dry Land, as I called it, at Peterborough.

But before we enter it, we must not omit to take some Notice of Foderinghay
Castle, situate on a Branch of the Nine, famous for the Imprisonment and
Decollation of the unfortunate Mary Queen of Scots. It seems to have been very
strong, and it had a high Mount or Keep, environed with a deep Ditch. It Is
mostly demolished, and all the Materials carried off; some say it was destroyed
by Order of King James I. in Revenge of his Mother's Sufferings. They pretended
to show me here the Ruins of the Hall, where that Princess was beheaded. It was
the Seat of Edmund of Langley, Duke of York, whose Body was buried in the
Collegiate Church here; a very neat Building founded by Edward Duke of York,
likewise interred here. The Chancel in which they were buried, was entirely
demolished at the Suppression; but these Monuments were restored by Queen
Elizabeth. The Church Windows are filled with handsome painted Glass, saved by
a Sum of Money to the Soldiery in the late Civil War, and represent St. Denis,
St. Guthlac, Abp. Scrope, etc.

Peterborough stands in Northamptonshire, and is a little City of great
Antiquity seated on the River Nine, and indeed it is the least in England; for
Bath, or Wells, or Ely, or Carlisle, are all much bigger; yet Peterborough is
no contemptible Place neither. Here are some good Houses, a handsome
Marketplace, and the Streets are fair and well built; but the Glory of
Peterborough is the Cathedral, which is truly fine and beautiful, and the
noblest Piece of Gothic Building in England; but it appears to be more modern,
than the Story of raising this Pile implies, which was near 1050 Years ago. It
wants only, to make it complete, a fine Tower Steeple, and Spire on the Top of
it. A Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder, are the chief Magistrates here.

In this Church was buried the Body of the unhappy Mary Queen of Scots
abovementioned, but it was afterward removed by King James I. her Son, into
Westminster-Abbey, where a Monument is erected for her, in King Henry VIIth's
Chapel; though some do not stick to tell us, that though the Monument was erected,
the Body was never removed.

Here also lies interred Catharine of Spain, another unhappy Queen, and the
divorced Wife of King Henry VIII. and Mother to Queen Mary I. Her Monument is
not very magnificent, but it is far from mean. Here is an old decayed Monument
of Bishop Wulfer, the Founder of the Church; but this Church has so often been
burnt and demolished since tha^ Time, that it is doubtful, whether the Monument
be authentic or not.

In the Cathedral is the Figure of one Scarlet, a Sexton, who buried the above
named Two Queens, one 50 Years after the other, and under it the following
Inscription: You see old Scarlet 's Picture stand on high,
But at your Feet there does his Body lie.
He did interr Two Queens within this Place,
And this Town's Householders in his Life's Space
Twice over; but at length his own Turn came:
Another Man for him should do the same.
He died at 95 Years old.

The Chapel here, called St. Mary's, is a very curious Building, though now not
in Use. The Choir has been often repaired and beautified, and is now very fine;
but the West End, or great Gate, is a Prodigy for Beauty and Variety. It Is
remarkable, that as this Church, when a Monastery, was famous for its great
Revenues, so now, as reduced, it is one of the poorest Bishoprics in England.

In the Year 1720. at Thorp, the Seat of Sir Francis St. John, by Peterborough,
a Mosaic Pavement was found. This was undoubtedly a Villa of some Roman of
Distinction. In the Garden are some fine antique Marble Statues, which suffer
more from the Weather than from Age. In the Middle is a Livia of a Colossean
Proportion: in the Four Quarters, Diana, Amphion, an Orator, and a Gladiator:
upon the Terrace, an admirable Hercules killing the Hydra: in the Court, Two
Equestrian Figures in Copper, King Henry IV. of France, and Don John of
Austria. Over most of the Doors of the House, are placed Bustoes of Bassianus,
Caracalla, and others. These Antiquities were of the Arundel Collection.

As great Part of Lincolnshire, which is a vastly extended County, remained yet
unseen by me, I was obliged to turn North from Peterborough, and take a View of
the Fens again, though we kept them at some Distance too. Here we passed the
Welland at Market Deeping, an old, ill-built and dirty Town. Then we went through
Bourn to Folkingham, near which we saw two Pieces of decayed Magnificence; one
was the old demolished Monastery of Sempringham, the Seat of the Gilbertine
Nuns, famous for Austerity; and the other was the ancient House of the Lord
Clinton, Queen Elizabeth's Admiral, where that great and noble Person once
lived in the utmost Splendour. The House, though in its full Decay, shows what it
has been, and the Plaster of the Ceilings and Walls in some Rooms is so fine,
so firm, and so entire, that they break it off in large Flakes, and it will
bear Writing on with a Pencil or Steel Pen, like the Leaves of a Table Book.
This Sort of Plaster I have not seen any-where so prodigiously fine, except in
the Palace of Nonesuch in Surrey, near Epsom, before it was demolished by the
Lord Berkley.

From hence we crossed Part of the great Heath mentioned before, and came into
the high Road again at Ancaster, a small, but ancient Roman Village, called
Segeloci. It is full of Remnants of Antiquity; a sufficient Testimony of which
may be deduced from the Traffic which the Town's-people have for many Years
carried on with the Sale of them. After a Shower the Schoolboys and Shepherds
look for them on the Declivities, and never return empty.

The Town consists of one Street, running North and South along the Road. There
is a Spring at both Ends of the Town, which, no doubt, was the Reason for the
Romans pitching it at this Place; for there is no more Water from hence to
Lincoln.

On the West Side of the Town is a Road, formerly designed for the Convenience
of those who traveled when the Gates were shut. In the Churchyard are two
Priests cut in Stone.

This must have been a populous Place, from the large Quarries about it, and
the Rock lying a very little way beneath the Surface.

From Ancaster we came to Grantham, famous for a very fine Church, and its
Spire Steeple. The general Notion, that this Steeple stands leaning, is
certainly a vulgar Error: I had no Instrument indeed to judge it by, but,
according to the strictest Observation, I could not perceive it, or any thing
like it, and am much of Opinion with that excellent Poet: It Is Height makes
Grantham Steeple stand awry.
The chief Magistrate here is an Alderman, assisted by Twelve Justices. This is
a neat, pleasant, well built and populous Town, has a good Market, and the
Inhabitants are said to have a very good Trade, and to be generally rich.

It was certainly a Roman Town, and Remains of a Castle have been formerly dug
up there. The Spire Steeple is 100 Yards high, and equalled only by another in
this County at Louth, besides the Tower of Boston. Here were many Religious
Houses: Ruins of some of which still remain. In one just by the Marketplace,
is a very pretty little Chapel or Oratory adorned with Imagery. Here is a good
Freeschool, erected by Richard Fox, Bishop of Winchestor; where Sir Isaac
Newton received the first Principles of Literature, under the famous William
Walker, then Schoolmaster. This Town lying on the great Northern Road is
famous, as well as Stamford, for abundance of very good Inns, some of them fit
to entertain Persons of the greatest Quality, and their Retinues, and it is a
great Advantage to the Place.

Within a Mile of Grantham stands Belton, a late-built House belonging to the
Family of Brownlow, Lord Tyrconnel in Ireland, one of the most regular and
beautiful Seats in this County; adorned with curious Gardens, and a large Park.
But I should not omit to take some Notice, before I quit Lincolnshire, of the
Duke of Ancaster's pleasant Seat at Grimsthorpe. It is a handsome and
commodious House: the Park is large and beautiful; the Lawn there, whereon is
an annual Horse-race, is delightful. In the Middle of the Park stood Vaudy
Abbey, founded Anno 1147, some small Ruins of which are still to be seen.

From a Hill, about a Mile beyond this Town North-west, being on the great York
Road, we had a Prospect again into the Vale of Bever, or Belvoir. which I
mentioned before; and which spreads itself here into three Counties, to wit,
Lincoln, Leicester, and Rutlandshires: also here we had a distant View of
Belvoir Castle, which, it is supposed, took its Name from the Situation, from
whence there is so fine a Prospect over the Country, that you see from the Hill
into Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby, Leicester, Rutland, and Northamptonshires. The
Castle or Palace (for such it now is) of Belvoir is the Seat of the noble
Family of Manners, Dukes of Rutland, who have also a very noble Estate, equal
to the Demesnes of some Sovereign Princes, extending itself into Nottingham and
Derbyshires far and wide, and in which Estate they have an immense subterranean
Treasure, never to be exhausted; I mean the Lead-mines and Coal-pits, of which
I shall say more in their Place.

In the fine Gallery of this noble Seat are very ancient and modern Family and
other Pictures, particularly the Original one of King Charles I. as he sat at
his Trial.

At Bottesworth, on the Edge of Lincolnshire, we visited the Tombs of the
Manners noble Family, which are worth seeing.

The other Towns which lie on the South-west of the Witham in this County, not
already mentioned, are; 1. Beckingham, an inconsiderable little Place lying
North of Grantham. 2. Dunnington, a good Market Town, noted for large
Quantities of Hemp and Hemp Seed. 3. Seaford, situate in a Valley on a little
River, which is so rapid, that its Streams never freeze. It has a good Market,
and a long, square Marketplace facing Three Streets. And also, 4. Bourne,
famous for the Inauguration of Edmund King of the East Angles.


Turning Southward from hence we entered Rutlandshire, remarkable for being the
least County in England, having but Two Market Towns in it, viz. Okeham and
Uppingham.

Okeham stands in the rich Valley of Cathross. It has a Castle, in which the
Assizes are held, an Hospital for the Poor, and a Free School for the Education
of Youth. It Is a Custom in this Town, that when a Nobleman comes on Horseback
within its Precincts, he is obliged to pay Homage of a Shoe from his Horse, or
to commute for it in Money.

Uppingham is a new well built Town, standing on a Hill; and has also an
Hospital and Free School.

This County, though so small, is famous for abundance of fine Seats of the
Gentlemen, and some of first Rank; as particularly the Earls of Gainsborough
and Winchelsea. The late Earl of Nottingham, at a very great Expense, rebuilt
the ancient Seat of Burleigh on the Hill, near Oakham, and on the Edge of the
Vale of Cathross. It would take up too much of my Room to describe as I ought,
this noble House, with its curious Paintings, fine Library, and delightful
Gardens. I can only observe, that though there may be some sumptuous Palaces in
England (which abounds with so many fine ones) that excel in this or that
Particular; I do not know a House in Britain, which excels all the rest in so
many Particulars.

I cannot help mentioning here, that I was drawn to make a Visit, in my
Journey, to the Reverend Mr. Edward Roberts of Glaston, in this little County,
purely for the sake of his excellent Character; and we were received by him
with great Courtesy. This Gentleman had a very small Living in the County, the
Income of which, with the Surplus of his Estate, he devoted to the Necessitous;
and of late Years had provided himself with all Sorts of Medicines from London,
so that his Time was spent in relieving the Poor in a double Capacity, as a
Divine and a Physician. He often refused Promotions in the Church, though his
Rectorship was accounted the poorest in the County; he disapproved Pluralities,
and always looked with Love on his Parish, as his Family: but this excellent
Clergyman died a few Months after we were there, in March 1739-40, universally
lamented. His Brother, Thomas Roberts, Esquire died about Twelve Months before him,
with as good a Character for a Lawyer, as this Gentleman had for a Divine; for
he would give his Advice gratis, as well as his Practice, to all without
Exception; and though a great Friend to the present Royal Family, would never
accept of Place or Pension, and never would interfere in Elections, which he
thought should always be left free, and uninfluenced.

From hence we came to St. Martins, and stopped at the George, out of
Curiosity, because it is reckoned one of the greatest Inns in England, and
thence proceeded to Stamford. This Town is placed in a kind of an Angle of the
County of Lincoln, just upon the Edge of Three Counties, viz. Lincoln,
Northampton, and Rutland: this Town boasts greatly too of its Antiquity, and
indeed it has evident Marks of its having been a very great Place in former
Days.

History tells us it was burnt by the Danes above 1500 Years ago, being then a
flourishing City: it was also once an University, and here are still the
Remains of Two Colleges, one called Blackhall, and the other Brazen Nose; on
the Gate whereof is a great Brazen Nose, and a Ring through it, like that at
Oxford; nor could it take this from Oxford, but Oxford from that, which is as
old as Edward III. at the least, while that at Oxford was not built before
Henry VII. But the famous Camps, and Military Ways, which still appear at and
near this Town, are a more visible Testimony of its having been a very ancient
Town, and that it was considerable in the Romans Time.

It is now a very fair, well built, and wealthy Town, consisting of Six
Parishes, including that of St. Martin in Stamford-baron; that is to say, in
that Part of the Town which stands over the River, which, though it is not a Part
of the Town, critically speaking, being not in the Liberty, and in another
County, yet it is all called Stamford, and is rated with it in the Taxes.

The Government of this Town is by a Mayor and Aldermen, and not, as some
write, by an Alderman, and 12 Comburgesses.

They boast in this Town of very great Privileges, especially to their Mayor;
such as being freed from the Sheriff's Jurisdiction, and from being impanelled
on Juries out of the Town; to have the Return of all Writs, to be freed from
all Lords-Lieutenants, and from their Musters, and for having the Militia of
the Town commanded by their own Officers, the Mayor being the King's
Lord Lieutenant, and immediately under his Majesty's Command, and to be
esteemed (within the Liberties and Jurisdiction of the Town) the second Man in
the Kingdom; and the Grant of those Privileges concludes thus: Ut ab antiquo
usu fuerunt, As of ancient Time they had been accustomed: so that this Charter,
which was granted by Edward IV. Anno 1461, seems to be only a Confirmation of
former Privileges, not a Grant of new ones.

In the Church of St. Martin in Stamford-baron, is a very noble Monument of
William Cecil Lord Burleigh, who lies buried there in a large Vault just under
it; and opposite to it, on the North Side, is a more ancient (but handsome)
Monument, though not so magnificent as the former, in Memory of Richard Cecil,
Esquire and Jane his Wife, the Father and Mother of the said famous Lord Burleigh;
also a more modern Monument for the great Earl who reedify'd the House; and for
his Countess, a Sister of the late Duke of Devonshire: this is a finished
Piece, it is all of the finest Marble, and was made at Florence, and sent over.
The said Earl died on his Return from Rome, at Issy near Paris, Aug. 29. 1700.

There is a very fine Stone Bridge over the River Welland of Five Arches, and
the Town Hall is in the Upper Part of the Gate, upon or at the End of the
Bridge, which is a very handsome Building. Here are Two constant Weekly
Markets, Three annual Fairs, and a great Midlent Mart; but the latter is not
now so considerable, as it is reported to have been formerly.

But the Beauty of Stamford is the Neighborhood of the noble Palace of the
Earl of Exeter, called Burleigh-house, built by the said Lord Burleigh, Lord
High Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth.

This House is situated in Northamptonshire; it is built all of Freestone,
looks more like a Town than a House, at which Avenue soever you come to it; the
Towers and the Pinacles so high, and placed at such a Distance from one
another, look like so many distant Parish Churches in a great Town; and a large
Spire covered with Lead, over the Clock in the Center, looks like the
Cathedral, or chief Church of the Town.

The House stands on an Eminence, which rises from the North Entrance of the
Park, coming from Stamford: on the other Side, viz. South and West, the Country
lies on a Level with the House, and is a fine Plain, with Posts, and other
Marks for Horse-races. As the Entrance looks toward the flat low Grounds of
Lincolnshire, it gives the House a most extraordinary Prospect into the Fens,
so that you may see from thence near 30 Miles, without any thing to intercept
the Sight.

As you mount the Hill, you come to a fine Esplanade, before the great Gate, or
first Entrance of the House, where is a small, but very handsome Semicircle,
taken in with an Iron Balustrade; and from this, rising a few Steps, you enter
a most noble Hall, but made infinitely more noble by the invaluable Paintings,
with which it is so filled, that there is not room to place any thing between
them.

John Earl of Exeter, Grandfather of his present Lordship, had a great Genius
for Painting and Architecture, and a superior Judgment in both, as every Part
of this noble Structure will testify; for he changed the whole Face of the
Building, pulled down great Part of the Front next the Garden, and turned the
old Gothic Windows into those spacious Sashes which are now seen there; and
though the Founder, who had also an exquisite Taste, (as the Manner of Buildings
then was) had so well ordered the Situation and Avenues of the whole Fabric,
that nothing was wanting of that Kind, and had also contrived the House itself
in a most magnificent manner, the Rooms spacious, the Ceilings lofty, and the
Decorations just; yet the late Earl found Room for Alterations, infinitely to
the Advantage of the Whole; as particularly, a noble Staircase, a whole Suite
of fine Apartments, with Rooms of State, fit for the Entertainment of a Prince,
especially those on the Garden Side.

As the noble Lord abovementioned loved Paintings, so he had infinite
Advantage in procuring them; for he not only traveled Three times into Italy,
and stayed every time a considerable while at Florence; but his princely
Deportment, and fine Accomplishments, procured him the personal Esteem of the
Great Duke, who assisted him in the Purchase of many excellent Pieces, and
likewise presented him with several others of great Value.

Among the rest, there is, in the great Hall, his Lordship's Picture on
Horseback, done by the Great Duke's principal Painter, at his Highness's
Charge, and given to his Lordship, as a Mark of special Favor: there is also a
fine Piece of Seneca bleeding to Death in the warm Bath, and dictating his last
Morals to his Scholars; a Piece so excellent, that I have been told, the late
King of France offered the Earl 6000 Pistoles for it.

The Staircase, the Ceilings of all the fine Lodgings, the Chapel, the Hall,
the late Earl's Closet, are all finely painted by the celebrated VARRIO, whom
the Earl kept 12 Years in his Family, wholly employed in them, and allowed him
a Coach and Horses, an Equipage, a Table, and Servants, and a very considerable
Pension.

By the Park Wall, or, as some think, through the Park, adjoining to
Burleigh-house, passed an old Roman Highway, beginning at Caster, a little
Village near Peterborough; but which was anciently the Roman Station, or
Colony, Durobrevum, as I have said. This whole Town takes in Three Squares of
full 300 Feet each, two of which are allotted to the Castle: the third is an
Area lying to the East before it, between the Castle and the Hill, which is
still the Marketplace. From under the Castle-walls, almost quite round, rise
many quick Springs; but of these the Syfer Spring is the most noted, having now
Four Fluxes of Water from between the Joints of great Stones, laid flat like a
Wall, and joined together with Lead, probably by the Romans, being under their
Wall. It is very pleasantly overshaded with Trees. Its Name is Saxon, and
signifies pure, which Appellation it well deserves. The Roman Way is still to
be seen, and is now called The Forty-feet Way, passing from Gunworth Ferry (and
Peterborough) to Stamford: This was, as the Antiquaries are of Opinion, the
great Road into the North, which is since turned from Stilton in
Huntingdonshire, to Wandsworth or Wandsford, where is a very good Bridge over
the the River Nine; which coming down from Northampton, as I have observed
already, passed thence by Peterborough, and so into the Fen Country. But I am
of Opinion, neither this nor Wandsford was the ancient Northern Road used by
the Romans; for it is evident, that the great Roman Causway is still seen on the
Left Hand of that Road, and passing the Nine at a Place called Water Neuton,
went directly to Stamford, and passed the Welland, just above that Town, but
not in the Place where the Bridge stands now; and this Roman Way is still to be
seen, both on the South and the North Side of the Welland, stretching itself on
to Brig Casterton, a little Town upon the River Guash, about Three Miles beyond
Stamford; which was, as all Writers agree, another Roman Station, and was
called Guasennae by the Ancients, from whence the River is supposed also to
take its Name; whence it went on to Panton, another very considerable Colony,
and so to Newark, where it crossed the Fosse.

Hence the Road goes by Stretton; then leaves a little on the Left Hand
Colsterworth, highly memorable for being the Birthplace of the great
Philosopher, Sir Isaac Newton.

This Forty-foot Way then must be a Cross-road from Caster, and by that from
the Fen Country, so leading into the great Highway at Stamford: as likewise
another Cross-road went out of the said great Road at Panton, a Village of
Antiquity near Ancaster, to the Town of Ancaster, where a Roman Cohort was
stationed, and thence joined the Fosse again at Lincoln.

Near this little Village of Caster lives the Lord Fitzwilliams, of an ancient
Family, but of an Irish Title; his Lordship some Years ago built a very fine
Stone Bridge over the River Nine, near Gunworth, where formerly was the Ferry,
as I have mentioned before; for the passing of which in a Coach, we paid 2 s. 6
d.

As we pass by Burleigh-park Wall, on the great Road, we see on the West Side,
not above a Mile from it, another House, built by the same Lord Burleigh, and
which might pass for a very noble Seat, were not Burleigh by. This is called
Wathorp, and stands just on the great Roman Way, mentioned above; this is the
House of which the old Earl is reputed to have said, he built it to remove to,
and to be out of the Dust, while Burleigh-house was sweeping.

From hence we went to Oundle, being told that the famous Drum was to be heard
at that time in the Well; but though we saw the Well, we heard no Drum, or any
Noise at all. No Doubt, it is owing, if there be any thing in it, to the
Passage of the Water and Air. Here are two long Stone Bridges. Lowick Church,
on the Side of a Hill, is very fine. The Monuments of the Founder John de
Drayton, of the Veres and Staffords, Earl of Wiltshire, etc. are to be seen
here: as is that of the late Duchess of Norfolk, who, after her Divorce,
married Sir John Germayn, of Drayton-house, who in a manner entirely new built
this ancient Seat.

Oundle is almost surrounded by the River, over which it has Two handsome Stone
Bridges. It is a neat, uniform-built Town.

The Nine has a Range of eminent Towns along the Banks of it; viz. Northampton,
Wellingborough, Higham-ferris, Thrapston, Oundle, Foderinghay, Wandsford and
Peterborough, all in this County. The two first I have already mentioned.

Higham-ferris is a small neat and healthful Mayor-town, pleasantly seated on a
rising Ground, and is also an ancient Borough.

Thrapston is delightfully situated in a fine Valley, and surrounded wlth a
rich Soil, and well watered. It has a fine Bridge over the Nine; but is not
eminent either for Trade or Buildings; though it will probably soon change its
Face by virtue of an Act passed for making the Nine navigable; which has had so
good an Effect, that, when I was last there, the 17th of November 1737, on that
very Day Boats were brought up to Thrapston for the first time, which
occasioned much Joy in the Town.

Here also is a most beautiful Range of Meadows and Pastures, perhaps not to be
equalled in England for Length. They stretch, uninterrupted, from Peterborough
to Northampton, which is near 30 Miles in Length, and in some Places are near
two Miles in Breadth; the Land rich, the Grass fine, and the Cattle which feed
on them, hardly to be numbered.

North-west of this River lies Kettering, a handsome well-frequented Town upon
a rising Ground; and beyond that again is Rothwell, a pretty good Market Town.

From Oundle we traveled North-east into Yarley in Huntingdonshire, a little
Town tolerably well built. The Church has a neat lofty Spire. In our Way hither
we crossed the Watling-street Way. At Overton, now called Cherry Orton, a
Village near Gunworth Ferry, is an old Mansion House, formerly belonging to a
very ancient and almost forgotten Family of great Men, called Lovetoft. On the
other Side of the River, is the fine House I mentioned before, belonging to Sir
Francis St. John, Bart. which affords a very beautiful Prospect to Travelers,
as they pass from the Hill beyond Stilton to Wandsford Bridge. This Wandsford
has obtained an idle Addition to its Name, from a Story firmly believed by the
Country People; viz. That a great Flood coming hastily down the River Nine, in
Hay-making-time, a Country Fellow, having taken up his Lodging on a Cock of Hay
in the Meadow, was driven, on the Hay, down the Stream in the Night, while he
was fast asleep, toward Wisbech in the Fens; when being wakened, he was seen
and taken up by some Fishermen, almost in the open Sea; and being asked, Where
he lived? he answered, At Wansford in England. And we saw at the great Inn, by
the South End of the Bridge, the Sign of a Man floating on a Cock of Hay, and
over him written Wandsford in England.

Falling down Southward we come to Stilton, a Town famous for Cheese, which is
called our English Parmesan, and is brought to Table so full of Mites or
Maggots, that they use a Spoon to eat them. We came again into the Roman Way at
Stilton, which comes from Caster aforementioned, and runs all the way to
Huntingdon; which we followed through Sautery-lane, a deep Descent between two
Hills, in which is Stangate-hole, noted for being the greatest Robbing-place in
all this Part of the County, and so came to Huntingdon, anciently called
Hunters-dune, the County-town, situated on a rising Ground, on the North Side
of the Ouse. It is a great Thoroughfair on the Northern Road, and is full of
very good Inns, and is a strong Pass upon the Ouse, and in the late Civil Wars,
it was esteemed so by both Parties. It was given by King Stephen to David King
of Scots, as an Augmentation to his Estate, and taken away by King Henry II.
However, the Scottish Kings always claimed it.

It is a Mayor-town, and had anciently Fifteen Churches; of later Days, but
Four, and in the Civil Wars they were reduced to Two. The Cause of its Decay at
first, is said to be owing to a Court Minion, who procured the Passage of the
Ouse to be stopped, which had been navigable to the Town. The said River is now
made navigable for smaller Vessels to Bedford.

The Witches of Warbois, in this County, have made so much Noise, that I shall
just mention the fatal End of a Man, his Wife and Daughter, who were all Three
hanged for torturing the Children of a Gentleman in the Parish: the History of
it is kept in Queen's College Library in Cambridge; and one of their Fellows
preaches yearly, at Huntingdon, on that Occasion. The Children being sick,
their Urine was sent to Master Dr. Dorrington at Cambridge, who sent a Medicine
against Worms. That prevailing nothing, the Doctor, upon second Thoughts,
pronounced the Symptoms were from Witchcraft. It was not long before a proper
Family was suspected: the Woman and her Daughter were frequently sent for, and
kept with the Children, and the Disease remitted upon the Sight of them; but
chiefly upon a Confession, and a sort of Petition added to it. To this Effect
was the Girl's: As I am a Witch, and a greater Witch than my Mother, so I
desire, that the Pains shall go off from this Child. These Confessions were the
chief Point against the Prisoners, which they had been prevailed upon to repeat
by the Stranders-by, who had observed the Children relieved upon it, as they
imagined. And thus Three unhappy Persons were sacrificed to Ignorance and
Superstition.

I shall take farther Notice of this Subject when I come to Lancashire, a
County formerly famous for Witches, and where Persons likewise suffered for
this pretended Crime.

Here are the most beautiful Meadows on the Banks of the River Ouse, that I
think are to be seen in any Part of England; which, in the Summer Season, are
covered with such numerous Herds of Cattle, and Flocks of Sheep, as are hardly
credible.

This Town is one long continued Street, pretty well built, especially from the
Ground Plot, where the Castle stood. Here was born Oliver Cromwell, of genteel
and worthy Parents. The House is newbuilt, but the Room in which he was born is
preserved in its first State. It has a good Marketplace; but the Freestone
Bridge, or Bridges rather, and Causway over the Ouse, are a very great Ornament
as well as Benefit to the Place. Here is a good Public School.

Between Godmanchester, or Gormanchester, (a Roman Camp) and Huntingdon, is a
wooden Bridge erected over a Rivulet, upon Principles of Gratitude and public
Charity, with this Inscription: ROBERTUS COOK emergens aquis hoc viatoribus
Sacrum D.D. 1636. That is: ROBERT COOK, having escaped the Danger of Drowning,
consecrated this for the Use of Travelers, 1636.

On the West Side of this Town, and in View of the plain lower Side of the
County, is a noble, though ancient Seat of the Earl of Sandwich; the Gardens very
fine and well kept; the Situation seems a little obscured by the Town of
Huntingdon. In the same Plain we saw Bugden, a small Village, in which is a
very pleasant, though ancient House or Palace of the Bishops of Lincoln: the
House and Garden surrounded by a very large and deep Moat of Water. The Chapel
is very pretty, though small. There is an Organ painted against the Wall, in a
seeming Organloft, and so properly placed, and well painted, that we at first
believed it really to be one.

Erith is a large Town, but without a Market.

St. Ives is a pretty neat Market Town, but is lessened, and suffered greatly
by Fire. Here Cromwell, after he had prodigally wasted his paternal Estate,
rented a Farm, before he was elected Burgess for Cambridge.

Hinchinbroke-house, which gives Title of a Viscount to the eldest Son of the
Earl of Sandwich, and the Village of the same Name, lie at a small Distance
from Huntingdon. And a little Way South-west stands the Town of Kimbolton, and
that most nobly situated and pleasant Seat of the Duke of Manchester, Kimbolton
Castle, where no Pains or Cost has been spared tu improve the most beautiful
Situation in Nature with the Works and Ornaments of Art.

Kimbolton Town is the Kiniubantum of the Romans. Here Queen Catharine, after
she was divorced, resided for some time.

At Ailweston, in this County, are two Springs, one of fresh Water, good for
dim Eyes; the other brackish, of Use for curing of Scabs, Leprosy, etc.

From Huntingdon we came to St. Neots on the Ouse, over which is a good Stone
Bridge. The Church is strong and well built, and the Steeple manifests the
Skill of the Artist, much to his Advantage. The Town takes its Name from
Neotus, a learned and pious Man, who was interred here; from whom likewise St.
Neots, in Cornwall, takes its Name, where he for some time resided. Hither
Coals are brought by Water, and conveyed by Land around the Country.

Here we entered Bedfordshire, and came to Bedford, the chief Town; for it has
no City in it, though this Town is larger and more populous than several Cities
in England. It is one of the Seven Counties, which, they say, lie together, and
have not one City among them; namely, Huntingdon, Bedford, Bucks, Berks,
Hertford, Essex, and Suffolk.

It is remarkable, that though a great Part of this County, viz. the two whole
Hundreds of Stodden and Bedford, lie on the North of the Ouse; yet there is but
one Market Town in all that Side of the Ouse, beside Bedford.

It is also remarkable, that though the Ouse, by a long and winding Course, cuts
through the County, so as to make above 70 Miles between Oulney and St. Neots,
not above 20 by Land, yet in all that Course it receives only the little River
Ivel, which falls into it a little above Temsford.

Bedford is a large, populous, thriving, pleasant, and well built Mayor-town;
it has five Parish Churches, a very fine Stone Bridge over the Ouse, and the
High Street (especially) is very handsome and well built: here is also a fair
Marketplace; but it is much improved lately in new Buildings. The River has
also been made navigable, and runs through the Town. It had formerly a Castle,
and now, where it stood, is one of the most beautiful Bowling-greens in the
Kingdom. It has Two Hospitals for Lazars, and another for Eight poor People.
Here is a Free School well endowed, and a Charity-school for Forty Children,
and though the Town is not upon any of the great Roads in England, yet it is full
of very good Inns, which afford elegant Entertainment; for here is the best
Market for all Sorts of Provisions, that is to be seen at any Country Town in
all these Parts of England; and the Reason of it is, that, though it is so far
from London, yet the Higglers or Carriers buy great Quantities of Provisions
here for the London Markets; here also is a very good Trade down the River to
Lynn.

Here likewise is a great Corn-market, and vast Quantities of Grain are bought
here, and carried down by large Vessels and Barges to Lynn, where it is again
shipped, and carried by Sea to Holland. The Soil hereabouts is exceeding rich
and fertile, and particularly produces great Quantities of the best Wheat in
England, which is carried by Wagons from hence, and from the North Part of the
Country 20 Miles beyond this, to the Markets of Hitchin and Hertford, and
bought again there, and ground and carried in the Meal (still by Land) to
London.

Indeed the whole Product of this County may be said to be Wheat and Malt for
London; for here are very few Manufactures, except those of Straw Hats and Bone
Lace; of which by itself. There are but Ten Market Towns in the whole County,
which I shall recount as I took them in my Course.

Potton, which lies on the Borders of Cambridgeshire, and of no Note. Southward
stands

Biggleswade, a pleasant situated Place on the Ivel, and furnished with a great
Number of good Inns for accommodating Travelers between London and York. Still
more Southward lies

Shefford, between two Rivulets; over each of which is a Bridge.

West of this Town stands Ampthill, a pretty Town, delightfully seated between
two Hills. Near it is a large Park, with a great Mansion House in it, which
King Charles II. gave to the Noble Family of Bruce, who had their Title of
Viscount from this Town; notwithstanding which, and that they were always
Hereditary Stewards of the Manor of Ampthill, yet the present Lord Bruce lately
sold his whole Estate here to his Grace the Duke of Bedford.

Queen Catharine, after she was divorced, chose this Town as one of her
Retiring-places. Farther Southward is

Woburn, noted for having Plenty of Fullers Earth near it; and likewise another
Kind of Earth, which petrifies Wood into Stone. This Town, having been almost
demolished by a terrible Fire, which happened a few Years ago, is now rebuilt,
and makes no mean Appearance. It belongs almost all of it to his Grace the Duke
of Bedford, who finished, in Feb. 1737, a fine and commodious Marketplace here.

The Duke's House, called Woburn Abbey, is just by the Town, a good old House,
and exceedingly pleasant by its Situation, which is in a fine large Park walled
round. The Duke had once designed to have pulled down the old House, and to
rebuild it in a magnificent manner: but laid aside that Resolution, and only
repaired it. There are many noble Rooms in it, and particularly a very
capacious and long Gallery, furnished with a great Variety of fine Pictures,
chiefly of the Russel Family: the Wainscoting of this noble Apartment is
strewed, as one may say, with gilded Stars, which have a pretty Effect among
the Pictures. A Room has been laid into this Gallery at one End, where a good
Billiard-table is placed.

Before the House is a very large Basin of Water, surrounded with a fine broad
Gravel-walk, which is bounded with Posts and Iron Chains. On the Water is a
most beautiful Yacht of between 30 and 40 Tons Burden, elegantly carved and
gilt, and completely rigged, and mounts Ten Guns, which are fired on Occasion
of Entertainments, etc. given on Board her by his Grace. There is also an
elegant Boat with a fine Awning over it, a Wherry of the common Shape, and a
Skiff, which are very neat, and make a beautiful Appearance on this noble Basin
of Water.

Near Woburn is Battlesden, the Seat of Thomas Page, Esquire abounding with many
Beauties, and still daily improving by additional Works in a very fine Taste.

Dunstable is seated on a Hill, in a chalky Ground, in the County of Bedford.
It consists of Four principal Streets, answering to the Four Quarters of the
World. It is well inhabited, and furnished with many good Inns for the
Accommodation of Travelers. In the Center stood one of Queen Eleanor's
beautiful Crosses, which was demolished by the Parliament Soldiers. The
Situation of this Place being high, and no running Water near, they are forced
to draw it up from deep Wells by means of great Wheels; and they have Four
large Ponds to receive the Rainwater, which, as a Mark of the holding Quality
of the Soil, are never dry, though they have no other Supply. They have sometimes
dug 24 Fathoms deep, in Search of Springs, to no Purpose.

Kingsbury, once a Royal Seat, over against the Church, is now a Farm-house.
The Church is composed of many Pieces tacked together, as it were, some of
which are very old. It was Part of the Priory, and Archbishop Cranmer was the
last Prior, who here pronounced the Sentence of Divorce against Queen Catharine.

The Gentlemen of Bedford lately came to a laudable Resolution of levelling the
Chalk-hill near this Town, for the Benefit of the Road, which in a Frost, or
after a Snower of Rain, used to be so slippery that neither Man nor Horse could
keep their Feet, which occasioned often great Damage to both; to prevent which
for the future, they employed a Number of Hands to lower it.

Dunstable stands on the Roman Watling-street, just where it is crossed by
Icknild-street. Here have been Roman Coins frequently found; and on the Descent
of Chiltern Hills, not far from the Town, is a large round Area of Nine Acres,
surrounded with a deep Ditch and Rampire called Mardin-hour. It was burnt by
the Danes, and rebuilt by Henry I. to repress a vast Number of Robbers which
infested the Country thereabouts; and it takes its Name from Dunning, one of
the Thieves, and from Dunningcestaple it is now, by Contraction, called
Dunstable.

On the Borders of Buckinghamshire stands Leighton, famous for a great Cattle
and Horse-fair.

North-east of Dunstable, on the Edge of Hertfordshire, lies Luton, a little
pretty Town, seated very pleasantly amongst Hills, and noted for a good Market
and Marketplace.

This County is remarkable for having more Noblemens and Gentlemen's Seats in it
than any County in England. The Middle Part of the County is well stored with
Wood, which affords a great deal of Game.

Through the whole South Part of this County, as far as the Borders of
Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire, the People are taken up with the Manufacture
of Bone-lace, in which they are wonderfully increased and improved.

Also the Manufactures of Straw-work, especially Straw Hats, spreads itself
from Hertfordshire into this County, and is greatly increased within a few
Years past.

Having thus viewed this County in all its most considerable Towns, we came
from Dunstable to St. Albans, where we saw the handsome Almshouses built and
endowed by the Marlborough Family, and so returned to London.

Yours, etc.

LETTER II. CONTAINING A Description of Part of Nottinghamshire, of Derbyshire,
and Part of Yorkshire.
SIR,
HAVING finished the Account of my several Circuits, which complete the
Southern Part of Britain; I am now to begin this Circuit from the River Trent,
and to confine my Observations to the Country, which is called by some North by
Trent.

The River Trent is deemed by ancient Writers as the fourth capital River in
England, the other three being the Thames, the Severn, and the Humber.

Though the Trent is not the largest, yet it may be said to run the longest
Course, and rises nearer to the West Side of the Island than any of the others;
it is also the largest, and of the longest Course of any River in England,
which does not empty its Waters immediately into the Sea; for the Trent runs
into the Humber, and so loses its Name before it reaches the Ocean.

It rises in the Highlands of Staffordshire called the Moorlands, receiving
from the Edge of Cheshire, and toward Lancashire, a great many (some say 30,
and that thence it had its Name, for Trent in French is 30) little Rivulets
into it, very near its Head; so that it soon becomes one large River, and comes
down from the Hills with a violent Current into the flat Country; where, being
increased by several other little Rivers, it carries a deeper Chanel, and a
stiller Current; and having given its Name to Trentham, a small Market Town in
the same County, it goes on to Stone, a considerable Town on the great Road to
West Chester.

One Branch of the Trent rises within a Quarter of a Mile of the Dane, from a
Moor adjoining to a little Ridge of Hills, called Molecop Hill, near Congleton,
within 22 Miles of the Irish Sea. As the Dane runs into the Weaver, and both
into that Arm of the Sea, which the Mersee makes from Frodsham to Liverpool and
Hyle-lake; and as the Trent runs into the Humber, which opens into the great
German Ocean; these Rivers may be said to cut the Island across in the middle.

It is true, the Northern Part is much larger than the Southern, now Scotland
is united; otherwise the Country South by Trent, including Wales, is by far the
largest, as well as the richest and most populous, occasioned chiefly by the
Commerce of the City of London. As for the Towns of Bristol, Exeter, Lynn,
Norwich, Yarmouth, etc. which are large and very populous, and carry on a
prodigious Trade, as well in Merchandise as Manufacture, we shall find them
pretty near equalled by the Towns of Liverpool, Hull, Leeds, Newcastle, and
Manchester, and the Cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow.

The Trent runs a Course of near 200 Miles, through the four Counties of
Stafford, Derby, Nottingham, and Lincoln. It receives, besides lesser Waters,
the larger Rivers of the Sow from the West Side of the County, and from the
Town of Stafford; the Tame from Birmingham and Tamworth, the Soar from
Leicester, and the Dove and Derwent, two furiously rapid Streams, from the Peak
of Derby; the Idle, a gentle navigable Stream, from Rhetford and
Nottinghamshire, with part of the Witham, called the Foss-dike, from Lincoln,
also navigable; and the greatest of them all, the Dun, from Doncaster,
Rotheram, and Sheffield, after a long and rapid Course through the Moors, called
Stanecross, on the Edge of Derby, and the West Riding of Yorkshire.

The Trent is navigable by Ships of good Burden as high as Gainsborough, which
is near 40 Miles from the Humber by the River. The Barges without the Help of
Locks or Stops go as high as Nottingham; and farther by the Help of Art, to
Burton upon this River in Staffordshire. The Stream is full, the Chanel deep
and safe, and the Tide flows up to Gainsborough and Newark. The Navigation, by
these Advantages, is a great Support to the Trade of those Counties which
border upon it, especially the Cheese Trade from Cheshire and Warwickshire,
which have otherwise no Navigation but from these Parts about West Chester to
London; whereas by this River it is brought by Water to Hull, and from thence
to all the South and North Coasts on the East Side of Britain.

The only Towns of Note standing upon the North Shore of Trent, are Nottingham
and Burton, of which I shall speak in their Order.

The Counties North of Trent are Yorkshire, which may not improperly be called
three Counties, as it is divided into three Ridings, each equal to some large
Counties; Lancashire, which is very large; Derbyshire, and Nottinghamshire,
which are more Southerly. I shall begin with these two, and take them together.

Beginning at the Mouth of Trent, the first Town of Note that I met with is
Nottingham, the Capital of that Shire, and the most considerable in all that
Part of England. The County is small, but, like the Peak, full of Wonders. (1.)
It Is remarkable for its Situation, being bounded entirely by four Counties, and
those toward the four Cardinal Points, a Circumstance peculiar to this County
only. (2) For its Soil, which on the South Part is the richest and most
fruitful, and in the North Part the most wild and waste, even almost to
Barrenness, of any Part of England within many Miles of it. (3.) For the fine
Seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen, especially those of the Dukes of Norfolk,
Kingston, Rutland, Newcastle, Lord Middleton, and several others.

Nottingham is one of the most pleasant and beautiful Towns in England, from
its Situation, were its Buildings not to be named.

It is situated on the steep Ascent of a Hill or Rock, overlooking a fine Range
of Meadows of great Extent; a little Rivulet running on the North Side of them,
almost close to the Town: and the noble River Trent, parallel with both, on the
South Side of the Meadows. Over the Trent is a stately Stone Bridge of 19
Arches, where the River is very large and deep, having received the Addition of
the Dove, the Derwent, the Irwash, and the Soar, three of them very great
Rivers of themselves, which fall into it, after its passing by Burton in
Staffordshire mentioned before.

The Rock whereon the Town stands is of a sandy kind, and so soft, that it is
hewed into Vaults and Cellars, and yet so firm, as to support the Roofs of
these Cellars, two or three under one another. The Stairs which lead to these
Vaults are cut out of the Rock, two or three Stories deep, to 80 Steps
sometimes: And these Cellars are well stocked with excellent Ale, of which the
Inhabitants are very liberal among their Acquaintance, as some in our Company
experienced.

The Hill or Rock was called of old the Dolorous Hill, or Golgotha, because of
a great Slaughter of the ancient Britons there by King Humber, a piratical
Northern Monarch; who, being afterward drowned between Hull and Barton, gave
Name, as it is said, to that Arm of the Sea which is now called the Humber, and
receives the Trent, and almost all the great Rivers of Yorkshire, into it; though
others derive the Name from the dreadful Noise of its Waves.

They tell us, that these Caves and Cellars served the People for a Retreat
from their Enemies, and that from thence the Town first took its Name, which
was Snottengaham, signifying hollow Vaults in a Rock, Speluncarum Domus; and,
as Mr. Camden observes, the British Word was Tui ogo bauc, which signifies the
same as the Latin, a House of Dens, or secret Caves to hide in.

Besides the delightful Situation of Nottingham toward the River, it is
equally pleasant to the Land Side, toward the Forest on the North of the Town;
where is a fine Plain for a Horse-course, where Races used to be run once a
Year.

At the West End of the Town is a very steep Hill, and at the South Side of it
a Cliff, which falls in a Precipice down to the River. On this Hill stood a
Castle of so great Antiquity, that the Time of its first Erection could never
be traced. The first Account we read of it, is, that there was a Tower here
which the Danes obstinately defended against King Alfred, and his Brother
Aethelred.

Upon the same Situation William the Conqueror, or, as others, with greater
Probability, maintain, William Peverell, his natural Son, built another Castle;
which was afterward repaired, or rather rebuilt, by Edward IV. who added fine
Apartments to it, which Richard III. his Brother, still farther enlarged;
whereby it became in time very considerable, and so strong, that nothing could
reduce it but Famine. It Is certain it has not undergone the ordinary Fate of
other fortified Places, to be often taken and retaken; for it was never
stormed. Once indeed it was taken by Surprise in the Barons Wars by Robert Earl
Ferrers, who also plundered the Town, or City, as it was then called.

The People here tell us of one of the David's, King of Scotland, being kept
Prisoner in it; and that Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, was hid in a Vault
under Ground, which they call Mortimer's-hole, whence he was taken, and hanged
for Treason.

This Report has some Foundation in History, but is so obscured by vulgar
Tradition, that it led Mr. Camden first into some Mistakes in his Narration,
and afterward into a Disbelief of it. Mortimer, with the Queen, the Bishop of
Lincoln, and others, being possessed of the Castle, could have no Reason to
hide himself under Ground: but it was by this private Passage, which goes by
Steps through the Rock up to the Keep, that Sir William Montacute, with others, 5
Edw. III. found means, in the Dead of the Night, to seize him; and, sending him
up to the Tower, he was there beheaded.

The Castle was granted by K. James I. to Francis Earl of Rutland; and K.
Charles I. made it remarkable, by erecting there his Royal Standard, 1642; but
he soon quitted it, and the Parliament kept Possession of it till the End of
the War, when it was ordered to be demolished. Some Parts of it however were
standing at the Restoration, when George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, whose
Mother was the sole Heir of the foresaid Earl of Rutland, sold it to William
Cavendish, Marquis of Newcastle. He, in 1674, cleared the Foundations of the
old Tower, a small Part excepted, and founded the noble Structure which is now
standing; and devolved to the House of Pelham. The present Duke of Newcastle
beautified it, and wainscoted the Rooms with Cedar, and had laid out a Plan for
the finest Gardens in all that Part of England, being to contain no less than
60 Acres; but the Design is changed, and the intended Gardens are made a Park.

The Castle, built on a high perpendicular Rock, as I have hinted, seems to
have been modeled after some of the Draughts of Inigo Jones. There are many
good Pictures in it; and it commands a vast Prospect. The South Side of the
Rock is altogether inaccessible, and vast subterraneous Grottoes are cut
underneath; and a winding Staircase quite to the Bottom ends in
Mortimer's-hole, abovementioned.

This Castle at present is much neglected, being stripped of its best Furniture
and Hangings, and the Floors of some of the noblest Apartments suffered to fall
in.

St. Mary's Church is a fine lightsome Gothic Building, with a good Ring of 8
Bells; but the great Tower makes a mean Appearance. The Butchers Shambles is an
old Edifice built for a Granary.

They showed us the Gardens of Count Tallard, who, in his Confinement here,
after having been taken Prisoner by the renowned Duke of Marlborough, at the
glorious Battle of Blenheim, amused himself with making a small, but beautiful
Parterre, after the French Taste, which happens not to be the reigning one with
us at present. It Is said likewise, that this gallant Gentleman left behind him
here some living Memorandums of his great Affection and Esteem for the English
Ladies.

A handsome Townhouse upon Piazzas has been erected within these few Years,
for the transacting of the Business of the Corporation. Not many Years ago, the
Hall where the Assizes were held gave such a Crack, that the People were
exceedingly frighted, and all ran out of it, leaving Mr. Justice Powis upon the
Bench, calling out after them, Is there nobody will take care of the Judge? for
he was so aged and infirm that he could hardly walk. But, finding himself
neglected, he made shift to descend from the Bench, and hobble out at the Door,
where he denounced Vengeance against the Town, which, with a very seasonable
Piece of Justice, he fined, for neglecting to keep the Hall in Repair.

The Town has been at great Expense in making the Trent navigable here for
Vessels or Barges of Burden, by which all their heavy and bulky Goods are
brought from the Humber, and even from Hull; such as Iron, Block-tin, Salt,
Hops, Grocery, Dyers Wares, Wine, Oil, Tar, Hemp, Flax, etc. and the same
Vessels bring down Lead, Coal, Wood, and Corn; as also Cheese in great
Quantities from Warwickshire and Staffordshire, as I have already mentioned.

When I said the Bridge over Trent had nineteen Arches, I might have said also
it was a Mile long; for the Trent, the last Time I was there, being swelled
over its ordinary Bounds, reached quite up to the Town: yet a high Causeway,
with Arches at proper Distances, carried us dry over the whole Breadth of the
Meadows, which, I think, is at least a Mile, and may justly be called a Bridge,
as that at Swarston, and also that of Poul Spooder in Wales, are called.

The chief Manufacture carried on here is Framework-knitting of Stockens, the
same as at Leicester, and some Glass, and earthen Ware. The latter is much
increased by the Consumption of Tea-pots, Cups, etc. since the Increase of
Tea-drinking, as the Glass-houses, I think, are of late rather decreased. A
Proof, one would think, that the Luxury of the Males is less predominant than
that of the Females; or, rather as some would say, that the Men are brought
over by the Ladies to join with them in the Love of the Tea-table: and indeed
the latter seems pretty much the Case; whether it be owing to Gallantry and
Complaisance, or to Effeminacy and Indolence, let those concerned in the
Observation answer.

As they brew very good Liquor here, so they make the best Malt (and more of
it) of any Town in this Part of England, and send it by Land-carriage to Derby,
through all the Peak, as far as Manchester, and to other Towns in Lancashire,
Cheshire, and even into Yorkshire itself; for which Purpose all the Low Lands
of this County, and especially on the Banks of the Trent, are made to yield
prodigious Crops of Barley.

The Government of Nottingham is in a Mayor, Recorder, six Aldermen, two
Coroners, two Sheriffs, two Chamberlains, and 24 Common Council, whereof six
are called Juniors. Here they hold a Court of Pleas. They have two Sergeants at
Mace, and another Officer, which they call a Bill-bearer, and two more called
Pindars, one for the Fields, and the other for the Meadows. The first is also
the Town Woodward, and attends the Forest Courts; for this Town is within the
Jurisdiction of the Forest.

I might enter into a long Description of all the modern Buildings erected
lately at Nottingham, but that would be too great a Task; only I must take
Notice of the House of Mr. Plumtre, which is justly to be admired for its
elegant Front; and observe in general, that as the Castle has oftener been the
Residence of Kings and Queens, than any other Place so far distant from London;
so the Town has more Gentlemen's Houses, than any other of its Bigness in Great
Britain. One may easily guess Nottingham to have been an ancient Town of the
Britons. As soon as they had proper Tools, they fell to work upon the Rocks,
which everywhere offer themselves so commodiously to make Houses in; one
Instance of which, though perhaps not old enough to be formed on theirs, is a
Ledge of perpendicular Rock in the Duke of Newcastle's Park, hewn into a
Church, Houses, Chambers, Dove-houses, etc. The Church is like those in the
Rocks of Bethlehem, in the Holy Land. The Altar is natural Rock, and there has
been Painting on the Wall, a Steeple, where, perhaps, was a Bell, and regular
Pillars. The River here winding about, makes a Fortification to it; for it
comes to both Ends of the Cliff, leaving a Plain before the middle. The Way to
it was by Gates cut out of the Rock, and with an oblique Entrance for more
Safety.

Between this and the Castle is an Hermitage of like Workmanship.

Clifton, in this Neighborhood, is a good Seat, with pretty Gardens, and a
noble Prospect; and in the Church are many old Brasses of the Clifton Family.

Three Miles from Nottingham is Wallaton-hall, the Seat of my Lord Middleton,
and the noblest Building in this County, except Belvoir, which only exceeds it
in Spaciousness, but not in Beauty.

The Park, enclosed within a Brick Wall, is much finer than the great Park
adjoming to the Castle of Nottingham, being much better planted with Timber;
whereas that at Nottingham was all cut down, and sequestered in the late Wars.

There is a pretty Summer House panelled and ceiled with Looking-glass, which
produces a pleasant Effect. Underneath is a Water-house, with grotesque Work of
Shells, etc. The Hall at the first Entrance into the House, is so high, that a
Man on Horseback might exercise a Pike in it.

The Forest of Shirwood is an Addition to Nottingham for the Pleasure it
affords of Hunting. There are also some fine Parks and noble Houses in it, as
Welbeck, the late Duke of Newcastle's, now Lord Oxford's; and Thoresby, the
present noble Seat of the Pierrepoints, Dukes of Kingston, which lies at the
farthest Edge of the Forest. But this Forest is now given up, in a manner, to
Waste: even the Woods, which formerly made it famous for Thieves, are
destroyed, so that Robin Hood would now hardly find Shelter for a Week; nor is
there any Store of Deer now left, at least not worth mentioning.

From this Forest, I went purposely out of my intended Way, to take a View of
the Collegiate Church of Southwell.

Southwell is a Market Town in Nottinghamshire, its Church is both Parochial
and Collegiate; which, I think, is the Case of no other in England, except
Rippon in Yorkshire. To it belong sixteen Prebendaries or Canons, six Vicars
Choral, an Organist, six Singing Men, six Choristers, besides six Boys who
attend as Probationers, a Register to the Chapter, a Treasurer, an Auditor, a
Virger, etc.

This Church is generally supposed to be founded by Paulinus, the first
Archbishop of York, about the Year 630. It was surrendered to the King, 32d
Henry VIII. and was actually in the King's Possession, until by Act of
Parliament, 35 Henry VIII. it was refounded, and restored to its ancient
Privilege, and incorporated by the Name of The Chapter of the Collegiate Church
of the blessed Mary, the Virgin of Southwell.

Queen Elizabeth confirmed its Privileges; as did afterward, on a Trial at
Law, King James I.

The Chapter have a peculiar Jurisdiction, and there are 28 Parishes subject to
it, to most of which they have the Right of Presentation; besides some others
in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire. This Jurisdiction is exercised by a Commissary,
or Vicar General, chosen by the Chapter out of their Body, who holds
Visitations, etc. twice a Year. And besides these, there are two Synods yearly,
to which all the Clergy of the County of Nottingham pay their Attendance; and a
certain Number of the Prebendaries, and others of the considerable Clergy, are
appointed Commissioners by a Commission granted by the Archbishop of York to
preside at the Synods.

The Civil Government of the Jurisdiction of Southwell is distinct from the
County at large. It is called the Soke of Southwell cum Scrooby, which is
another Town in this County. There are about twenty Towns subject to this
Jurisdiction.

The Custos Rotulorum, and the Justices of the Peace, are nominated by the
Archbishop of York, and constituted by a Commission under the Great Seal of
England, who hold their Session both at Southwell and Scrooby, and perform all
other Justiciary Acts distinct from the County.

The Church is a strong plain Gothic Building; it has no painted Figures in
the Glass Work, nor Images, nor so much as a Niche capable of placing an Image
in. And from hence it has been conjectured, that it was probably built before
Image Worship was practiced among Christians.

On Monday the fifth of November 1711, about Ten a Clock at Night, the Top of
the Ball on one of the South Spires of this Church was fired by Lightning;
which, backed by a furious Wind, that drove it almost directly on the Body of
the Church, in a few Hours burnt down the Spire and Roof, melted the Bells, and
spared nothing which was combustible, except the other Spire, till it came to
the Choir, where, after it had consumed the Organs, it was by singular
Providence stopped and extinguished. The Damage was computed at near Four
thousand Pounds.

The Church is built in Form of a Cross; a great Tower in the Middle, in which
are eight Bells, and two Spires at the West End. There is a handsome
Chapter House on the North Side of the Choir.

The Length of the Church from East to West is 306 Feet, the Length of the
cross Isle from North to South is 121 Feet; the Breadth of the Church is 59
Feet.

There are no very remarkable Monuments in this Church, except one of
Archbishop Sands, which is within the Communion Rails, and is a fair Tomb of
Alabaster, with his Effigies lying on it at full Length, with a fine
Inscription upon it in Latin, greatly to his Honor; but which being very long,
I have not Room to insert.

Here was formerly a Palace belonging to the Archbishop of York, which stood on
the South Side of the Church, the Ruins of which still remain; by which it
appears to have been a large and stately Building. It was demolished in the
Time of the late Civil Wars. The Church escaped the Fury of those Times, by the
good Offices of one Edward Cludd, Esquire, one of the Parliament Side, who
lived at Norwood, in the Parish of Southwell, in a House belonging to the
Archbishop. Here were no less than three Parks belonging to the Archbishop,
which, though disparked, still retain the Name; one of which is Norwood Park,
in which is a good House, which, has been very much enlarged and beautified by
Mr. Burton, a Descendant of the above Edward Cludd, Esquire who lives in it some
Part of the Year.

There is a Free School adjoining to the Church, under the Care of the Chapter,
where the Choiristers are taught gratis, and other Boys belonging to the Town.
The Master is chosen by the Chapter, and is to be approved by the Archbishop of
York.

There are also two Fellowships and two Scholarships in St. John's College in
Cambridge, founded by Dr. Keton, Canon of Salisbury, in the 22d Year of King
Henry VIII. to be chosen by the Master and Fellows of the said College out of
such as have been Choiristers of the Church of Southwell.

From Southwell I turned to the Left to Newsted, to visit the ancient Seat of
the very ancient Family of the Byrons, who even in the Conqueror's Time were
wealthy. It was a small Priory founded by King Henry II. and given by King
Henry VIII to Sir John Byron; one of which Name having signalized himself very
remarkably for his Loyalty to King Charles I. was created a Baron, which Honor
still continues in the Family. Near this Place is the Head of the little River
Lin.

We came next to Ainsley, which Town gave Name to a Family that were possessed
of it from the Conquest to the Time of King Henry VI. from whence are descended
the Earls of Anglesey: but for want of Heirs Male, it came then by Marriage
into the Family of the Chaworths, who have a good Seat here, well wooded, and
watered with beautiful Fish Ponds.

We then turned again on the Right to Mansfield, which lies in the Forest, a
large well built Market Town, noted now for its Trade in Malt, and for having
been formerly the Place, to which the Kings of England used to retire for the
Pleasure of Hunting in the Forest of Shirwood; insomuch that a Manor was held
in this County by Henry Fauconberg for Shoeing the King's Horse, whenever he
came to Mansfield.

From hence we kept still to the Right North-east, and came to Taxford in the
Clays, an ordinary, dirty Market Town on the great Road to York, and of no
other Note, than being situated in a miry, clayey Country, and called by King
James I. Taxford in the T -- d.

We kept the Road North to East Retford, so called as it lies on the East Side
of the River Idle. It is an ancient Bailiwick-town, and noted for an Exemption
of all Tolls and foreign Services. It holds Pleas without Limitation of Sums,
and enjoys many other valuable Privileges and Immunities. It has a Steward who
is generally a Person of Quality.

West Retford is so called from its Situation in regard to the other, though they
seem to be but one Town, the Idle only dividing them. This is famous for a fine
Hospital, founded by Dr. Dorrel in 1666, and since incorporated. It has a
Master, 10 Brethren, a Steward, and a Nurse; and they have a Garden and Orchard
divided into 10 Shares.

Chaworth is a Village just by, noted for a fine Rectory of 200 l. a Year.

Higher up stands Blithe, which is a kind of Market Town, where are a very large
good Church, and some old Ruins of a Castle and a Priory.

We then fell down Southward, and visited the noble Seats of the Duke of
Kingston at Thoresby, of the Lord Oxford at Welbeck, and of the late Marquis of
Halifax, but now of Sir George Savil, at Rufford, or Rugford Abbey, all very
magnificent Structures though ancient, especially that at Welbeck, which is
beautified with large Additions, fine Apartments, and good Gardens; but
particularly the Park, which is well stocked with large Timber of the finest
Kind, and with great Numbers of Deer. For the late Duke of Newcastle's Delight
(whose Property it was, before it came by Marriage into the Harley Family)
being chiefly on Horseback, and in the Chase, it is not to be wondered, if he
rather made his Parks fine than his Gardens, and his Stables than his
Mansion House: yet the House is noble, large, and magnificent.

Hard by Welbeck, near the Head of the River Ryton, is Wirksop Manor, the
sometime stately Seat of the noble Family of Talbot, descended by a long Line
of Ancestors from another Family illustrious, though not innobled, of
Lovetofts; one of whom being Lord of this Place under the Normans, built a
Priory here: and John, the second Earl of Shrewsbury, being slain at the Battle
of Northampton, 38 Henry VI. was buried in it; which afterward, at the
Dissolution of Monasteries, was settled on Francis, his Great Grandson. This
House (though in its ancient Figure) is outdone by none of the best and
greatest in the County. It now belongs to the Duke of Norfolk.

Here is a good Market Town also, of the Name of Wirksop, where are the Ruins
of a Monastery to be seen in the Meadows on the East Side of it, and the West
End of the Church, which is still standing, and has Two beautiful and fair
Towers. This Place is noted for Liquorice and Malt.

From hence leaving Nottinghamshire, the West Part of which abounds with Lead
and Coal, we came to Balsover in Derbyshire, which stands on a rising Ground,
and has a Castle, and is the Property of the Duke of Newcastle, but is no
Market Town.

From hence we intended to pass directly to Derby; but being informed, that the
Moors, by reason of the Rocks and Bogs which render the Roads difficult and
hazardous, were too dangerous to travel over, we left them on the West of us;
and passing through Mansfield in Nottinghamshire, and Alfreton a small
Market Town within the Skirts of Derbyshire, we arrived at Derby the
County-town. But though we avoided the Moors, yet we had some Reason to complain
of the Roads, which we took from the North of Nottinghamshire, where we were
informed, that if we had come directly from Nottingham to this Town, and kept
the Midway between the Trent on the Left, and the Mountains on the Right, we
should have found the 12 Miles, which lie between them, as agreeable with
respect to the Situation of the Country, the Soil, and the well planting of it,
as any of the same Length in England.

The Town of Derby is situate on the West Bank of the Derwent, over which it
has a very fine Stone Bridge, well built, but ancient, and a Chapel upon the
Bridge, now converted into a Dwelling House. It is a fine, beautiful, and
pleasant Town, and has more Families of Gentlemen in it, than is usual in Towns
so remote; perhaps the more, because the Peak, which takes up the larger Part
of the County, is so inhospitable, rugged, and wild a Place, that the Gentry
choose to reside at Derby, rather than upon their Estates, as they do elsewhere.

Here is a Curiosity of a very extraordinary Nature, and the only one of the
Kind in England: I mean those Mills on the Derwent, which work the three
capital Italian Engines for making Organzine or Thrown Silk, which, before
these Mills were erected, was purchased by the English Merchants with ready
Money in Italy; by which Invention one Hand will twist as much Silk, as before
could be done by Fifty, and that in a much truer and better Manner. This Engine
contains 26,586 Wheels, and 97,746 Movements, which work 73,726 Yards of
Silk-thread, every time the Water-wheel goes round, which is three times in one
Minute, and 318,504,960 Yards in one Day and Night. One Water-wheel gives
Motion to all the rest of the Wheels and Movements, of which any one may be
stopped separately. One Fire-engine, likewise, conveys warm Air to every
individual Part of the Machine, and the whole Work is governed by one
Regulator. The House which contains this Engine is of a vast Bulk, and Five or
Six Stories high.

A Patent passed 5 George I. to secure to Sir Thomas Lombe the sole Property of
this Invention for 14 Years; but the requisite Buildings and Engines, and the
instructing of proper Persons to work them, took up so much Time, and when all
was completed, the King of Sardinia prohibiting the Importation of the Raw Silk
made by the said Engines, into his Dominions, all which rendered the
Undertaking expensive and difficult, and the Term of 14 Years being near
elapsed, without any great Benefit accruing from the useful Invention, Sir
Thomas applied for a Consideration from the Public; and the Parliament
accordingly, to preserve so useful an Undertaking for the Benefit of the
Kingdom in general, allotted 14000 l. to be paid to Sir Thomas, on Condition
that he should allow a perfect Model to be taken of his new-invented Engines,
in order to secure and perpetuate the Art of making the same. The Preamble to
this Act sets forth, That Sir Thomas Lombe did with the utmost Difficulty and
Hazard, and at a very great Expense, discover the Art of making and working the
Three Capital Engines made use of by the Italians to make their Organzine Silk,
and did introduce those Arts and Inventions into this Kingdom.

This wonderful Piece of Machinery was under the Direction of Sir Thomas Lombe,
or, as some say, of his Brother, erected by one Soracole, a Man expert in
making Mill-work, especially for raising Water to supply Towns for Family Use.

Derby, as I have said, is a Town of Gentry, rather than Trade; yet it is
populous, well built, has Five Parishes, a large Marketplace, a beautiful
Townhouse of Freestone, and very handsome Streets. But the Entrance into it
every Way is so choked up with Dirt and Mire, that it is no small Matter of
Reproach to the Inhabitants.

In the Church of All Saints is the Burial-place of the noble Cavendish Family;
and an Hospital close by the Church, built by one of that Family, for Eight
poor Men, and Four Women.

This Church is remarkable for the Architecture of its beautiful Gothic Tower,
178 Feet high; and for the Elegance of its Ornaments, as well as Height, is not
to be equalled in this, or in any of the adjacent Counties.

According to an Inscription in this Church, the Steeple was erected about
Queen Mary's Reign, at the Charge of the Maidens and Batchelors of the Town; on
which Account, whenever a Maiden, a Native of the Town, was married, the Bells
used to be rung by Batchelors. How long the Custom lasted, I have not read; but
I do not find it is now continued. This Union of the Maidens and Batchelors to
build a Steeple, reminds me of a Bell cast by a like Contribution, upon which
was this Device, Materiem Juvenes, Formam tribuere Puellae.

The Government of this Town is in a Mayor, High Steward, 9 Aldermen, a
Recorder, 14 Brothers, 14 Capital Burgesses, and a Town Clerk. What Trade there
is in the Town is chiefly in good Malt and good Ale.

Beyond Derby, along the Ricning Way, is Burton upon Trent, where is a Bridge
of 37 Arches. Here was an old Abbey, out of whose Ruins they have within these
few Years built a new Church.

A Mile below Derby, upon the Derwent, stood the old Roman Derventio, now
Little Chester. Remains of the old Walls, Vaults, Wells, Roman Coins,
Aqueducts, Human Bones, Brass Rings, and other Marks of Antiquity, have been
from time to time discovered and dug up. The River being too rapid for a Ford,
a Bridge was anciently there, the Foundations of which with a Staff they can
still feel.

A little further North, is Horreston Castle, whose Ruins on a hoary Rock, are
scarce discernible.

It is observable, that as the Trent bounds the County of Derby South, so the
Dove and the Erwash make the Bounds East and West, and the Derwent runs through
the Center, all of them beginning and ending their Course in the same County;
for they rise in the Peak, and end in the Trent. The Derwent is remarkable for
its Brownness, the Dove for its blue Transparency, from whence it probably took
its Name. It is endued with such a peculiar Fecundity, supposed to arise from a
Bed of Lime, through which it passes, that it has often been compared to the
River Nile.

It is not less swift in its Operations than effectual; for by hasty Rains,
which fall from the Hills, it sometimes strays over the Meadows, and having
impregnated them, in 12 Hours time retires into its Bed again.

It was in one of these temporary Inundations I saw it, when having gone from
Derby to Dowbridge, as it is called, I passed it with Difficulty to see Two
Market Towns, Ashbourn, and Utoxeter, the Utocetum of the Ancients.

The first lies on the East Side of the River in a very rich Soil to the
North-west of Derby, and the other, commonly called Utcester, is situate due
West of Derby, on the other Side of the River in Staffordshire, upon a
delicious rising Ground of an easy Ascent, and very fruitful, overlooking a
Track of fine, rich Meadow-grounds. The Town is very ordinarily built, but has
a good and commodious Marketplace, and an excellent Market for all sorts of
living Kine, besides Butter, Cheese, and Corn, and also all kinds of Provisions.

In our Way to the High Peak we passed an ancient Seat, large, but not very
gay, of Sir Nathanael Curson. From hence we kept the Derwent on our Right Hand,
which having overflowed its Banks, by the Accession of Floods pouring down from
the Peak Hills, rendered it so frightful, that we contented ourselves with
hearing at a Distance its shocking Roar; and so came to Quarn, or Quarnden, a
little ragged, but noted Village, where is a famous Chalybeat Spring, to which
abundance of People resort in the Season to drink the Water; as likewise a Cold
Bath. There are also several other Mineral Waters in this Part of the Country,
a hot Bath at Matlock, and another at Buxton, of which in their Places. Besides
these, there are hot Springs in several Places which run waste into the Ditches
and Brooks, and are taken no notice of, being remote among the Mountains, and
out of the Way of common Resort.

We found the Wells at Quarn pretty full of Company, the Waters good, and very
physical, but wretched Lodging and Entertainment.

From Quarnden we advanced due North, and mounting the Hills gradually for Four
or Five Miles, we soon had a most dismal View of the black Mountains of the
Peak; however, as they were at a Distance, and a good Town lay on our Left,
called Wirksworth, we turned thither for Refreshment. Here we found verified
what I had often heard before, that however dreary the Hills might appear, the
Vales were everywhere fruitful and delightful to the Eye, also well-inhabited,
and having in them good Market Towns, abounding with all necessary Provisions;
and as for the Ale, the further we went Northward, the better it seemed to be.

Wirksworth is a large well-frequented Market Town; though there is no very great
Trade carried on in it, but what relates to the Lead-works.

The Peakrills, as they are called, are a rude boorish kind of People; but
bold, daring, and even desperate in their Search into the Bowels of the Earth:
for which Reason they are often employed by our Engineers in the Wars to carry
on the Sap, when they lay Siege to strong fortified Places.

The Barmoot Court, kept at Wirksworth, to judge Controversies among the
Miners, and adjust subterranean Quarrels and Disputes, is very remarkable. It
consists of a Master and 24 Jurors, who, when any Person has found a Vein of
Ore in another's Land, (except it be in Orchards or Gardens) assign two Meres
of Ground in a Pipe (as they term it) and a Flat, the former being 29 Yards
long, and the latter 14 Yards Square, appointing to the Finder one Mere, and
the other to the Owner of the Land, half at each End of the Finder's; and
moreover, certain Fees and Perquisites for the Passage of Carts, the Use of
Timber, and the like. This Court not only prescribes Rules to the Miners, and
limits their Proceedings in the Works underground, but is Judge of all their
little Quarrels above.

The Produce of the Mines in this Hundred is very considerable: the King claims
the 13th Penny Duty, for which they compound at the Rate of 1000 l. a Year; nay,
I have been informed, that the Tithe of Wirksworth alone has been worth to the
Incumbent yearly that Sum.

Not far from hence lies Hartington, which gives Title of Marquis to the eldest
Son of the Duke of Devonshire.

Near Wirksworth, and upon the very Edge of Derwent, is a Village called
Matlock, where, as I said, are several warm Springs. One of these is secured by
a Stone Wall on every Side, by which the Water is brought to rise to a due
Height; and if it is too high, there is a Sluice to let it out as low as you
please. It has a House built over it, and room within the Building to walk
round the Bath, and so by Steps go down gradually into it. The Water is but
just Milk-warm, so that it is no less pleasant to go into, than sanative.

This Bath would be much more frequented than it is, if a sad, stony,
mountainous Road, which leads to it, and no good Accommodation when you are
there, did not hinder; for from the Bath you are to cross over the Meadows, and
then ascend a Derbyshire Hill, before you meet with a House of Refreshment.

For some Miles before you come to Matlock, you pass over barren Moors in
perpetual Danger of slipping into Coal-pits and Lead-mines, or ride for Miles
together on the Edge of a steep Hill on solid slippery Rock, or loose Stones,
with a Valley underneath, the Bottom of which you can hardly discover with your
Eye. Instead of Trees and Hedges, they fencein their poor Meadow for Arable,
with Walls made of loose Stones, picked from under their Feet. The extended
Sides of the Mountains are generally powdered over, as it were, with Rocks,
Streams of Water dribbling down every where, and sometimes bolder Cataracts
diversify the romantic Scene.

At the Smelting-mills, they melt down the Lead Ore, and run it into a Mold,
whence it becomes Pigs, as they call them. The Bellows are kept in continual
Motion by running Water. We were complimented to be let down 200 Yards deep
into the Mines, if we pleased. Over Against this warm Bath, and on the
East Side of the Derwent, we came to a monstrous Parcel of gigantick Rocks,
seemingly pil'd on one another, called the Torr. A few Inhabitants in little
Cottages trusted themselves at Bottom, under so ruinous a Shelter. I took the
Pains on Hands and Knees to clamber near the Top, and entered an Hermit's Cell
hewn in the Rock, with a most dreary Prospect before it. On one End is a
Crucifix and a little Nich, where I suppose the Anchorite placed his Saint.
Over Against it, about half a Mile off, is such another Cliff, but by the Care
of a Gentleman who lives underneath, Mr. Ash, is hewn out of the Rock an easy
Ascent by Steps, and there are abundance of Alcoves, Grotts, Summer-houses,
Cellars, Pinacles, Dials, Balustrades, Urns, etc. all of the same Materials.
And by the Help of Earth carried up to the Top, there are fine Grass Walks,
with Greens planted along them upon this hanging Terrace; whence you have a
fine View over many a craggy Mountain.

A little on the other Side of Wirksworth begins a long Plain, called
Brassington Moor, which reaches from Brassington to Buxton, full 12 Miles: from
Wirksworth it is not quite so much. The Peak People, who are mighty fond of
raising the Admiration of Strangers, told us here of another high Mountain,
where a Giant was buried, which they called the Giant's Tomb.

We rode up the Hill, which seemed to be round, with a Precipice almost on
every Side of it. While we were in quest of the Tomb of the Dead, we found the
Rock afforded an Habitation for a poor Woman and her Children. We entered into
their Mansion, divided by a Curtain into its several Offices, and a Funnel
worked through the Top to carry the Smoke out, where the celebrated Tombstone
was. Her Husband, she said, was a Miner, who, if he had good Luck, could earn
his Five Pence, and she could also earn her Three Pence a Day, were it not for
the Care of so many Children; but, she blessed God, they lived very
comfortably. An Instance of that happy Contentment oftener met with in
Habitations like this, than in gilded Palaces!

We went next, by the Direction of the good Woman, to a Valley on the Side of a
rising Hill, where were several Grooves (for so they call the Mouth of the
Shaft, or Pit, by which they go down into a Lead Mine). As we were standing
still to look at one of them, admiring how small they were, and scarce
believing a poor Man, who told us they went down those narrow Holes to a great
Depth in the Earth, we were surprised with seeing a Hand, and then an Arm, and
quickly after a Head, thrust up out of the very Groove we were looking at.

Immediately we rode closer up to the Place, where we saw the poor Wretch
working and heaving himself up gradually, as we thought, with Difficulty; but
when he showed us that it was by setting his Feet and Elbows upon Pieces of
Wood fixed cross the Angles of the Groove like a Ladder, we found the Difficulty
was not much, and that if the Groove had been larger, he could not go up and
down with so much Ease or Safety.

Those who would have a more perfect Idea of those Grooves, need only see the
square Wells in the Church of St. Paul, by which the Workmen go down from the
Top of the Church into the very Vaults under it, to place the Leaden Pipes,
which carry the Rain Water from the Flat of the Roof to the Common-sewer. They
have small Iron Bars placed cross the Angles for the Men to set their Feet on,
in the manner here represented.

When this subterranean Creature was come quite out, with all his Furniture
about him, he afforded us new matter of Wonder, which satisfied our Curiosity
without venturing down ourselves. For the Man was a most uncouth Spectacle; he
was clothed all in Leather, had a Cap of the same without Brims, some Tools in
a little Basket, which he drew up with him, not one of the Names of which we
could understand, but by the Help of an Interpreter. Nor indeed could we
understand any of the Man's Discourse, so as to make out a whole Sentence, and
yet he was pretty free of his Tongue too. He was lean as a Skeleton, pale as a
dead Corpse, his Hair and Beard a deep black; what little Flesh he had, was
lank, and, as we thought, something of the Color of the Lead itself. Besides
his Basket of Tools, he brought up with him about three Quarters of a hundred
Weight of Ore, which was no small Load, considering the Manner of his coming
up; and it was this which occasioned that Heaving and Struggling at his first
Appearance; and it seems he was at work 60 Fathoms deep, but that there were
five Men of his Party, two of whom were 11 Fathoms, and the other three 15
Fathoms deeper. The Man seemed to regret, that he was not at work with these
three; for they had a Way out at the Side of the Hill, without coming up so
high as he was obliged to do. We then looked on the Ore, and got the poor Man's
Leave to bring every one a small Piece of it away with us, for which we gave
him two Pieces of better Metal.

From hence entering upon Brassington Moor, mentioned above, we had eight Miles
smooth Green Riding to Buxton Bath, which they call One of the Seven Wonders of
the Peak, comprised in that noted Verse of Mr. Hobbs, Aedes, Mons, Barathrum,
binus Fons, Antraque bina.
House, Mountain, Depth, two Fountains, and two Caves.


This Place has some Advantages beyond what the City of Bath can pretend to.
Here is an open and healthy Country, a Variety of fine Views to entertain the
Curious, and a beautiful Down for the Ladies to take the Air in, much more
agreeable than the close City of Bath, which is very deficient in this
Particular.

And as to the Medicinal Nature of the Waters at Buxton, hear what Dr. Leigh
says of their Virtues, and the Manner of their Operation, in his Natural
History of Lancashire, and of the Peak. His Words are as follow: "The Waters
are Sulphurous and Saline, yet not fetid, but very palatable, because the
Sulphur is not united with any Vitriolic Particles, or but very few Saline; it
tinges not Silver, nor is it Purgative, because its Saline Parts are dispensed
in such small Proportions.

"If drank, they create a good Appetite, open Obstructions, and no doubt, if
mixed with the Chalybeat Waters that are there also, may answer all the
Intentions of the Bath Water in Somersetshire, and that of St. Vincent's too at
Bristol, so noted for curing the Diabetes, of which I have seen several
Instances in these Parts; and likewise for curing of Bloody Urines, of which I
saw a most noted Instance at Liverpool.

"This Bath is of a temperate Heat, and, without question, by a reverberating
Halitus might be brought to any Degree of Heat; but, I think, in its own
natural Heat, it may in general be said to be more agreeable to the
Constitution; and where the hot Baths cannot be safely used, this may. This
last Summer I saw remarkable Instances of its Effects in scorbutic Rheumatisms
in Persons, that could not go before without the Help of Crutches, who came
from thence to Manchester on Foot without them, distant from Buxton full 16
Northern Miles."



The Village where the principal Springs are, is called Buxton, though there are
several of them; for they rise unregarded in the Banks of the Enclosures, and
on the Sides of the Hill, so that their Number is hardly known.

The Duke of Devonshire, Lord of the Village, has built a large and convenient
House for the Reception of Strangers. The Bath-room is arched overhead, and the
Whole made handsome, convenient, and delightful. This Collection of tepid
Waters, exceeding clear, will receive 20 People at a time to walk and swim in.
The Temper of the Water is equal to new Milk, or Blood-warm, procuring a
moderate Perspiration. Its Effect is remarkable for giving that gentle
Relaxation of the Solids; which takes off the Weariness and Fatigue of a
Journey, and refreshes instantly. It Is physically useful in many Cases, and may
be indulged in more, than the Hot-baths of Somersetshire, which frequently do
Harm through imprudent Use. Such a one as this naturally is, was aimed at by the
sumptuous Bagnio's of the Roman Emperors.

Sir Thomas Delves, who received a Cure here, gave the Pump, and a pretty Stone
Alcove over the Drinking-spring in the Yard. The Water may be raised at
pleasure to any Height. We found in one of the Rooms these Verses written upon
the Wall by a Physician who formerly frequented the Place: Corpore debilior
Grani se proluit undis:
Quaerit aquas Aponi, quem febris atra necat:
Ut penitus renem purget; cur Psaulia tanti,
Vel, quae Lucinae gaudia, Calderiae?
Sola mihi Buxtona placet, Buxtona Britannis
Undae Grani, Aponus, Psaulia, Calderiae.
Which may be thus translated: In Gran's famed Baths the weakly Patient laves;
Whom dismal Fevers seize, in Apon's Waves.
At Psaulia shall a Purge so dear be bought?
In teeming Throes Calderiae far be sought?
When here at Buxton ( Britain's Choice) appear,
Places abroad noted for the Virtue of their Waters.
Gran, Upon, Psaulia, and Calderiae, near.


As to the Antiquity of these Baths, though there is not a King Bladud to testify
for them, as for those at Bath in Somersetshire, yet the learned Author
abovementioned observes, "That it is certain they were eminent in the Time of
the Romans. Lucan and others acquaint us, that they were extraordinary hot,
etc. and the High-road, called the Roman Bath-gate, as Mr. Camden says, farther
confirms it. But it is especially evident from a Roman Wall cemented with red
Roman Plaster, close by St. Anne's Well, where we may see the Ruins of the
ancient Bath, its Dimensions, and Length."

The Queen of Scots took her Leave of this Place with a Distich of Julius
Caesar, somewhat altered, which is still shown, written with a Diamond on a
Pane of Glass, as the last Classical Authority of Antiquity: Buxtona, quae
calidae celebrabere nomine lymphae,
Forte mihi posthac non adeunda, vale.
Buxton, whose Fame thy Baths shall ever tell,
Whom I perhaps shall see no more, farewell.


About half a Mile off is that stupendous Cavern, called Poole's-hole, at the
Foot of a great Mountain, and deemed the Second Wonder of the Peak. The
Entrance is so low and narrow, that you must stoop to get in; but immediately
it dilates into a wide and lofty Concavity, which reaches above a Quarter of a
Mile end-wise, and farther, as they say. Some old Women with lighted Candles
are Guides in this dark Way. Water drops everywhere from the Roof, and
incrusts all the Stones with long Crystals and Fluors, whence a thousand
imaginary Figures are shown you by the Name of Lions, Fonts, Lanterns, Organs,
Flitch of Bacon, etc. At length you come to the Queen of Scots Pillar, as the
Boundary of most Peoples Curiosity. It was so named by that unhappy Princess,
when she visited this Place: Nor needed she any other Monument; for, by this
Incident, she may be said to have erected one to her Memory, which will
probably last as long as the Works of Nature; though every one almost that comes
hither, carries away a Piece of it, in Memory of the Princess, or the Place. It
is a clear bright Stone like Alabaster, or rather like that kind of Spar, which
is found about Lead; and considering the Country where it grows, is probably
something of that Sort.

A Stream of Water runs along the Middle, among the falling Rocks, with a
hideous Noise, re-echo'd from all Sides of the horrid Concave. On the Left Hand
is a Sort of Chamber, where they say Poole, a famous Robber, lived, and whose
Kitchen, as well as Bedchamber, they show you, after you have crept 10 Yards
on all Fours.

The most surprising Thing you meet with in it, is the extraordinary Height of
the Arch, which however is far from what a late Author has magnified it to, a
Quarter of a Mile perpendicular. Dr. Leigh spends some Time in admiring the
spangled Roof. Cotton and Hobbes are exceedingly witty upon it. Dr. Leigh calls
it Fret-work, Organ, and Choir-work. The Whole of the Matter is this: The Rock
being everywhere moist and dropping, some of the Drops are fallen, which you
see below; some are falling, and others are pendent in the Roof. Now, as you
have Guides before you and behind, carrying every one a Candle, the Light of
the Candles, reflected by the globular Drops of Water, dazzle your Eyes like the
Dew in a Sunshine Morning; whereas, were any Part of the Arch of this Vault to
be seen by a clear Light, all this Beauty would disappear.

Let any Person therefore, who goes into Poole's Hole, and has a Mind to make
the Experiment, take a long Pole in his Hand, with a Cloth tied to the End of
it, and wipe the Drops of Water away, he will at once extinguish all those
Glories. Then let him wait till other Drops emerge, and he will find the Stars
and Spangles glittering as before.

As to the several Stones, called Cotton's Stone, Haycock's Stone, Poole's
Chair, Flitch of Bacon, and the like, they do not enough resemble what they are
said to represent, as to be the Foundation of even a Poetic Metamorphosis.

The petrifying Water indeed might have exercised Ovid's Fancy: for you see
Drops pendent like Icicles, or rising up like Pyramids, and hardening into
Stone, just the Reverse of what the Poet describes of Stones being softened
into Men.

The Third Wonder of the Peak is Mam Tor, or, as the Word in the Mountain
Jargon, or rather in the British, signifies, the Mother Rock, (for Mam is the
British Word for Mother) upon a Suggestion, that the soft crumbling Earth,
which falls from its Summit, produces several other Mountains below. The Whole
of the Wonder is this: On the South Side of this Hill is a Precipice, very
steep from the Top to the Bottom; and the Substance being of a crumbling loose
Earth mingled with small Stones, is continually falling down in small
Quantities, as the heavy Rains loosen and wash it off, or as Frosts and Thaws
operate upon it. Now, the great Hill, which is thick, as well as high, parts
with this loose Stuff, without being sensibly diminished; so the Bottom, into
which it falls, being narrow, is more easily perceived to swell. Here then is
the pretended Wonder, That the little Heap below should grow up into a Hill,
without any Decrease of the great Hill, as it should seem, notwithstanding so
much has fallen from it. But the Fact is certainly otherwise, though not
perceivable.

This Hill lies on the North Side of the Road from Buxton to Castleton, at
which Place you come to the Fourth much famed Wonder, styled The Devil's Arse
in the Peak. The short Account of it is this: On the steep Side of a Mountain
is a large Opening, almost in the Form of an old Gothic Arch, from its Center,
only that the Entrance is horizontal. It is upwards of 30 Feet perpendicular,
and twice as much broad at the Bottom at least.

It continues thus wide but a little Way, yet far enough to have several small
Cottages built on either Side of it within the Entrance, like a little Town in
a Vault. In the Middle, as it were, of the Street, is a running Stream of
Water: in poetical Descriptions it is called a River, though not the River Styx.

As you go on, the Roof descends gradually, and is now so far from having
Houses, that a Man cannot stand upright in it till stooping for a little Way,
and passing over another Rill of Water, likewise called a River, you find more
Room over your Head. But going a little farther, you come to a third Water,
which crosses your Way; and the Rock stooping, as it were, down almost to the
Surface of the Water, puts an End to the Traveller's Search.

But when we read in Scripture, that the Caves of Adullam and Macpelah were
able to receive David and his Troop of 400 Men, and what Travelers relate of a
Cave in the Apennine Mountains, near Florence, large enough to contain an Army;
and when we know, that there are many others in the Alps, and the Hills of
Dauphine and Savoy, and other Parts of the World; this surely can be thought no
Wonder, unless we credit Gervaise of Tilbury, who tells us of a Shepherd, that
ventured into the third River in this Den, and being either carried over it, or
down the Stream, he knew not whether, saw a beautiful heavenly Country beyond
it, with a spacious Plain, watered with many clear Rivers, pleasant Brooks, and
several Lakes of standing Water.

Castleton takes its Name from the Castle that lies near it, which is a very
ancient Building, and so situated as to be only one Way accessible, being
erected on an high steep Rock; and the Way, that goes to it, is so full of
Twinings and Turnings, that it is Two Miles from the Bottom to the Top.

Not far off is a little Village called Burgh, frequented by the Romans, on
account of the Baths, as appears evidently by a Causway leading from hence
thither.

The Fifth Wonder is called Tideswell, or Weedenwell, a Spring which, according
to some Writers, ebbs and flows, as the Sea does. The Basin, or Receiver for
the Water, is about Three Foot Square; the Water seems to have some other
Receiver within the Rock, which, when it fills by the Force of the original
Stream, the Air being contracted, or pent in, forces the Water out with a
bubbling Noise, and so fills the Receiver without; but when the Force is spent
within, then it stops till the Place is filled again; and, in the mean time,
the Water without runs off, till the Quantity within swells again, and then the
same Cause produces the same Effect. So that this Oceanet, as Mr. Cotton calls
it, which has been the Subject of several Philosophic Inquiries, is owing
wholly to the Figure of the Place, and is only a mere Accident in Nature; and
if any Person were to dig into the narrow Cavities, and give vent to the Air,
which is pent up within, they would soon see Tideswell turned into an ordinary
Stream.

This Spring lies near the little Market Town of Tiddeswall, wherein are a very
good Church, and a Free School.

So much for the Five fictitious Wonders: I come now to the Two real Wonders,
Elden Hole, and the Duke of Devonshire's fine House at Chatsworth; the one
natural, the other artificial.

In the Middle of a plain open Field, gently descending to the South, is this
frightful Chasm in the Earth, or rather in the Rock, called Elden Hole. The
Mouth of it is about 20 Feet over one Way, and 50 or 60 the other, descending
down perpendicular to the Earth; how deep, could never yet be discovered,
notwithstanding several Attempts have been made to find its Bottom. Mr. Cotton
says, he let down 800 Fathom of Line, which is 1600 Yards, near a Mile
perpendicular.

The Author has poetically enough described the Noise the huge massy Stones
make, which the Country People often throw down here. The Hissing of Spears and
Arrows is seldom omitted in Poetry to describe the Terror they bring: he has
here improved a similar Noise into a Mark of Fear. When one's turned off, it,
as it parts the Air,
A kind of Sighing makes; as if it were
Capable of the trembling Passion Fear;
'Till the first Hit strikes the astonished Ear,
Like Thunder under Ground: thence it invades
With louder Thunder those Tartarean Shades,
Which groan forth Horror, at each ponderous Stroke
The unnat'ral Issue gives the Parent Rock:
Whilst, as it strikes, the Sound by Turns we note,
When nearer, flat; sharper, when more remote:
When, after falling long, it seems to hiss,
Like the old Serpent in the dark Abyss.


They tell a dismal Story here of a Traveller, who inquiring his Way to
Castleton, or to Buxton, in a dark Night, two Villains offered to guide him;
but, intending to rob him, led him to the Edge of this Gulf, and either thrust
him in, or made him believe there was a little Gull of Water, and bad him take
a large Step, which he did into this Abyss, and into that of Eternity at the
same time. One of the Villains, being hanged at Derby some Years after for some
other Roguery, confessed this diabolical Action at the Gallows.

It raises an Horror in the Imagination, when one does but look into this
frightful Hole; and so I shall leave it with the Words of the forementioned
Author, who, supposing it one of the Entrances to the Infernal World, says, For
he, who, standing on the Brink of Hell,
Can carry it so unconcerned and well,
As to betray no Fear, is certainly
A better Christian, or a worse, than I.


I come now to the magnificent Seat of the Earls and Dukes of Devonshire,
called Chatsworth-house.

This glorious Fabric may be said to have had two or three different Founders,
who have all improved upon one another, in the Completion of this great Design.

The House was begun on a much narrower Plan than it now takes up, by Sir
William Cavendish of Cavendish in Suffolk, who by Marriage with the Countess
Dowager of Shrewsbury, became entitled to a noble Fortune in this Country.

Sir William died, after having done little more than build one End of the
Fabric, and lay out the Plan of the Whole. But his Lady finished it in the
magnificent manner which it appeared in, when it was was first ranked among the
Wonders of the Peak. And if it deserved to be so ranked then, how much more
does it now, with the additional Improvements made by the first Duke of
Devonshire!

One Thing is observable, That the very Disadvantages of Situation contribute
to the Beauty of the Place, and, by the most exquisite Management, are made
subservient to the Builder's Design. On the East Side, not far distant, rises a
prodigious high Mountain, which is so thick planted with beautiful Trees, that
you only see a rising Wood gradually ascending, as if the Trees crowded one
above the other to admire the stately Pile before them.

Upon the Top of this Mountain they dig Millstones; and here begins a vast
extended Moor, which for 15 or 16 Miles together due North, has neither Hedge,
House, or Tree, but a waste and houling Wilderness, over which, when Strangers
travel, it is impossible to find their Way without Guides.

Nothing can be more surprising of its Kind, to a Traveller, who comes from the
North, when, after a tedious Progress through such a dismal Desert, on a sudden
the Guide brings him to this Precipice, where he looks down from a comfortless,
barren, and, as he thought, endless Moor, into the most delightful Valley, and
sees a beautiful Palace, adorned with fine Gardens. If Contraries illustrate
each other, here they are seen in the strongest Opposition. It is really
surprising to think what a Genius it must be, that should lay out so great a
Design in such a Place, where the Mountains intercept the Clouds, and threaten,
were Earthquakes frequent here, to bury whole Towns, and, what seems equal to a
Town, this House, in their Ruins.

On the Plain, which extends from the Top of this Mountain, is a large Body of
Water, which takes up near 30 Acres, and, from the Ascents round it, receives,
as into a Cistern, all the Water that falls; which, through Pipes, supplies the
Cascades, Waterworks, Ponds, and Canals, in the Gardens.

Before the West Front of the House, which is the most beautiful, and where the
first Foundress built a very august Portal, runs the River Derwent, which, though
not many Miles here from its Source, yet is a rapid River, when, by hasty
Rains, or the melting of Snows, the Hills pour down their Waters into its
Chanel; for the Current, by reason of its many contracted Passages among the
Rocks, (Pieces of which, of an incredible Bulk, come sometimes rolling down its
Stream) on the least Motion of its Waters, above their ordinary Height, roars
like the Breaches on the Shores of the Sea.

Over this River is a stately Stone Bridge, with an ancient Tower upon it, and
in an Island in the River an ancient Fabric all of Stone, and built like a
Castle; which are the Works of the said Foundress, and show the Greatness of
the original Design; but are all, except the Bridge, eclipsed, as it were, by
the modern Glories of the late Edifice.

The Front to the Garden is a regular Piece of Architecture. The Frize under
the Cornice has the Motto of the Family upon it in gilt Letters, so large as to
take up the whole Front, though the Words are these two, CAVENDO TVTVS; which is
no less applicable to the Situation of the House, than the Name of the Family.

The Sashes of the second Story, we were told, are 17 Feet high, of polished
Looking-glass, two Feet wide; and the Wood-work double-gilt.

Under this Front lie the Gardens exquisitely fine; and, to make a clear Vista
or Prospect beyond into the flat Country, toward Hardwick, another Seat of the
same Owner, the Duke (to whom those Things which others thought impossible,
were practicable) removed a great Mountain that stood in the Way, and which
interrupted the Prospect.

In the usual Approach to this noble Fabric, it presents itself thus: First,
the River, which in calm Weather glides gently by; then a venerable Walk of
Trees, where the famous Hobbes used often to contemplate; a noble Piece of
Iron-work Gates and Balusters, expose the Front of the House and Court,
terminated at the Corners next the Road with two large Stone Pedestals of
Attick Work, curiously adorned with Trophies of War, and Utensils of all the
Sciences, in Basso Relievo. This Part of the Building is Ionick, the Whole
being a Square of a single Order, but every Side of a different Model: a Court
in the Middle with a Piazza of Dorick Columns of one Stone each, overlaid with
prodigious Architraves. The Stone is of an excellent Sort, veined like Marble,
hewn out of the neighboring Quarries, and tumbled down the adjacent Hill. In
the Ante-room to the Hall are flat Stones of 14 Feet square, laid upon the
Heads of Four Pillars, and so throughout. In the Hall-stairs the Landing-steps
are of the same Dimensions; the Doors, Chimneys, Window-cases, Stairs, etc. all
of Marble; the Ceilings and Walls of all the Apartments charged with rare
Painting of Varrio, and other famous Hands; the Bath-room, all of Marble
curiously wrought.

The Chapel is a most ravishing Place; the Altarend and Floor, Marble; the
Seats and Gallery, Cedar; the rest of the Wall and Ceiling, painted.

The Gardens abound with Green-houses, Summer-houses, Walks, Wildernesses,
Orangeries, with all the proper Furniture of Statues, Urns, Greens, etc. with
Canals, Basins, and Waterworks of various Forms and Contrivance; as
Sea-horses, Drakes, Dolphins, and other Fountains, that throw up the Water. An
artificial Willow-tree of Copper spouts dropping Water from every Leaf. A
wonderful Cascade, where from a neat House of Stone, like a Temple, out of the
Mouths of Beasts, Pipes, Urns, etc. a whole River descends, the Slope of a Hill
a Quarter of a Mile in Length, over Steps, with a terrible Noise, and broken
Appearance, till it is lost underground. Beyond the Garden, upon the Hills, is
a Park, and that overlooked by a very high and rocky Mountain. Here are some
Statues, and other Antiquities.

I should never have done, were I to say all that might be said of this august
Palace. But two historical Circumstances in its Honor must not be forgotten,
viz. That Mary, Queen of Scots, whom we had occasion to mention as a Visitant
of the Peak, was for 17 Years in Custody in this House, under the Care of the
celebrated Foundress of it. In Memory of this Royal Captive, the new Lodgings,
that are built instead of the old, are still called the Queen's of Scots
Apartment. Happy for her, could she have been allowed to have paid the same
fine Compliment to the Owner of it, which the Count de Tallard did, and is our
other historical Circumstance, when he had been entertained for a few Days by
the late Duke of Devonshire: When I return, said he, into my own Country, and
reckon up the Days of my Captivity, I shall leave out those I spent at
Chatsworth.

I will close all I have to say of this famous Palace, as I may call it, with
the following brief Extract from the Letter of an ingenious Gentleman to his
Friend: "This Place, says he, exceeds all the high Ideas and Descriptions that
were ever given me of it. The House yields to nothing in Europe; it is
prodigiously great in every Part. I never saw such a Number of fine Rooms; but
the Situation surpasses all. Nature has laid herself out, in amazing Variety of
Greatness and Prospects; a fine River below, with fine Banks, some naked and
rocky, others declining and woody, many smooth, and proper for Walking; large
Groves and Fishponds, and Canals between the River and the House, which rises
proudly upon several Terraces, and has behind it a great Lawn, intermixed with
Plantations, and great Walks, all rising one above another, at first gently,
afterward over vast Precipices, to the Top of a high Mountain, which was all
covered upon the Brows with high Trees, two or three Miles on either Side; then
breaks into a thousand Vales, and green Hills; then, resuming its former Height
and Bulk, proceeds again a mighty Mountain, covered with Rocks and Heath; its
Sides in many Places adorned with Wood; the Whole yielding a most extensive
Prospect of many Miles. Every body has heard of the great Cascade."



There are likewise other Curiosities in the Peak which I need but just
mention; as the Tottering Stones at Byrch Over, standing upon a hard Rock, one
of them said to be four Yards high, 12 round, and yet rests upon a Point so
equally poised, that it may be moved with a Finger; the Roman Causeway, called
Bath-gate; the several Minerals found in the Hills, and in the Lead Mines, as
Black Lead, Stibium, or Antimony, and Crystal.

Bakewell is the best Town in the North-west Side of the Peak: it lies on the
Banks of the Wye, and has a good Market; the Parish is exempt from Episcopal
Jurisdiction. Near this the Duke of Rutland has a very noble Palace, called
Haddon, now entirely uninhabited. It was anciently the Seat of the Vernons,
some of whom were Members of Parliament for this County as early as Edward III.
Sir George Vernon, in Queen Elizabeth's Time, was styled King of the Peak, and
his Daughter being married to Thomas, the Son of the first Earl of Rutland, it
came into the Family of the Manners.

The extended Angle of this County, which runs a great way North-west by
Chapel in the Frith, (which was formerly a Market Town) and which they call
High Peak, is perhaps the most desolate, wild, and abandoned Country in Great
Britain. The Mountains of the Peak, of which I have been speaking, seem to be
but the Beginning of Wonders to this Part of the Country; the Tops of whose
Hills seem to be as much above the Clouds, as the Clouds are above the ordinary
Hills.

Nor is this all; the Countenance of these Mountains is such, that they have no
Bounds to them but the Sea; they run on in a continued Ridge from one to
another, even to the Highlands in Scotland; so that they may be said to divide
Britain, as the Apennine Mountains divide Italy. Thus joining to Blackstone
Edge, they divide Yorkshire from Lancashire, and going on North, divide the
Bishopric of Durham from Westmorland, and so on. All the Rivers in the North
of England take their Rise from them; those on the East Side run into the
German Ocean, those on the West Side into the Irish: for instance, the Dove and
the Derwent rise both at the South End of them, and come away South to the
Trent; but all the Rivers afterward run, as above, East or West; and first,
the Mersee rises on the West Side, and the Dun on the East; the first runs to
Warrington; and into the Sea at Liverpoole; the other to Doncaster, and into
the Sea at Humber. I shall confirm this Observation as I go on; for to give an
Account of Rivers is the best Guide to the Geography of a Country. But to
return to my Progress:

We went next to Chesterfield, a handsome populous Town, situate between
Rivulets, on the South Side of a Hill, North-east from Chatsworth, well built
and well inhabited, notwithstanding it stands in the Extremity of this rocky
Country; for being on the North Side of the County next to Yorkshire, it leads
into the Hundred of Scarsdale, which is a rich fertile Part of the Country,
though surrounded with barren Moors and Mountains, for such the Name Scarsdale
signifies. It is a Mayor-town of great Antiquity, and was made a free Borough
by King John. It is now a Place of considerable Merchandice and Dealings in
Lead, Grocery, Mercery, Melting of Barley, Tanning, Stockens, Blankets,
Bedding, etc. in which they have great Intercourse to and with Yorkshire,
Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, and London; also to and with the
Towns and Places of Bakewell, Tiddeswell, Wirksworth, Ashbourne, the Peak, and
West of Derbyshire; with Chester, Manchester, Liverpoole, etc. It has a fair
Church. The Spire of its Steeple, being Timber covered with Lead, is warped all
awry. It has also a Free School, and a new large Marketplace, which is well
supplied with Lead, and with the Commodities abovementioned.

Dornfield is a small Market Town, noted only for its high Situation, just on
the Edge of the Peak.

We are now entered into the County of York, which is of larger Extent than any
two Counties in England joined together, being in Compass 360 Miles. Its Figure
is a large Square, and is adequate to the Dukedom of Wirtemburgh in Germany,
and contains more Ground than all the Seven United Provinces. I was at first
puzzled which way to direct my Course in this large County; but at last
resolved to strike through the Middle of the County, and along the North-east
Part of the West Riding, up as far as Rippon, which is about the Center of the
County.

This great County is divided into Three Ridings, North, East, and West Riding.
This last, which I choose first to speak of, is much the largest and most
populous, and has in it the greatest Number of Towns, as well as the most
considerable, and likewise the best Manufactures, and consequently the greatest
Share of Riches.

Sheffield, situated on a rising Ground, is the first Town we came to from
Derbyshire. It is famous for Whittle-making, Cutlery Wares and Iron-work, there
being a great many good Iron Mines about it, and likewise some of Alum. The
Town is very ancient, and has been always considerable, though no Corporation;
and that it was noted, in Chaucer's Time, for the same Trade, appears by those
Lines of his: -- A Miller --
With a rizzled Beard, and a hooked Nose,
And a Sheffield Whittle in his Hose.


The Town is very populous and large, and the Houses built with Stone, but look
dark and black, by the continued Smoke of the Forges, which are always at Work;
and the Streets are narrow. Here were set up the first Mills for turning
Grind-stones in England.

The Church is very large and spacious, in the Form of a Cross, and has a fine
high Spire.

Sheffield is reputed to excel Birmingham in Cutlery Wares and Files, and
Birmingham is allowed to outdo Sheffield in Locks, Hinges, Nails, and polished
Steel.

The Cutlers here are incorporated by the Style of The Cutlers of Hallamshire,
and have many Privileges. They are said to be 600 in Number, and are called
Master-cutlers; each of whom gives a particular Stamp to his Wares. The
Corporation choose a Master and other Officers yearly; and it is judged, that no
less than 40000 are employed in the Irontrade in Sheffield, and the adjacent
Tract of Land called Hallamshire.

From hence it will be judged, that the said Parish Church, the only one in
this populous Town, was not able to contain one half of the People of
Sheffield; which induced one Mr. Robert Downs, Goldsmith of this Town, to
contribute a large Sum, and to procure other Sums by Contributions, for
erecting a Chapel of Ease; and accordingly he got Leave, Anno 1719, from
William Archbishop of York, to proceed in so good a Work, and built a handsome
and stately Structure on a Piece of Ground called Shaw-close, purchased by the
said Mr. Downs, who also settled to the Value of 30 l. a Year for ever, on a
Preacher, to be elected and nominated by him, his Heirs and Assigns.

But though the Building was thus finished, and Mr. Downs had actually nominated
to it, his Nephew Joseph Downs, yet the Nomination being contested by the
Patrons of the Vicarage of Sheffield, and the Vicar also, it remained
unconsecrated till the Year 1739; when the Parties differing, coming to an
Agreement, an Act of Parliament passed, confirming the same; and it is now
consecrated by the Name of The Chapel of St. Paul in the Town of Sheffield.

Formerly here was a very fine Castle, with a noble Mansion House, the Seat of
the Dukes of Norfolk; but it is now all demolished and decayed, though the Manor
remains still in the Family.

In the great Church, in this Town, are several very ancient Monuments of the
Family of Talbots, Earls of Shrewsbury, who once had great Possessions in this
and the next County.

In particular, George, the first Earl of Shrewsbury, who died 1531. George the
second, Grandson to the first, under whose Care the Queen of Scots was here in
Custody for 16 Years, who died 1590, and Gilbert his Son, who founded the
stately Hospital in this Town, all lie buried here.

The Gift of this Hospital is perpetuated in the following Inscription: The
Hospital of the Right Honorable GILBERT Earl of Shrewsbury, erected and
settled by the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of Norwich, Earl Marshal of ENGLAND,
great Grandson of the said Earl, in pursuance of his last Will and Testament,
Anno 1673.

Here is a fine Engine for raising Water to supply the Town. Here is also a
very large and strong Bridge over the Dun, as there is another at Rotherham, a
Market Town Six Miles lower. Of late several Acts of Parliament have passed to
make this River further navigable to different Places, which will greatly
increase the Trade of those Parts.

It is in the Park here, that the great Oak-tree grew formerly, of which Mr.
Evelyn gives a long Account in his Book of Forest-trees. And what became of the
Chesnut-tree near Aderclift, mentioned by Camden's Continuator, the Body of
which could hardly be fathomed by three Men, I could hear no Account of.

The Remains of the Roman Fortification between Sheffield and Rotherham are
still to be seen, and probably will continue to the End of Time.

Here is also the famous Trench, by some called Devil's Bank, other Danes Bank;
which is said to run Five Miles in Length, and in some Places is called Kemp
Bank, in others Temple's Bank.

Rotherham is the next Market Town North-east of Sheffield. It is noted for its
fine Stone Bridge over the Dun, which is here increased by the River Rother,
from whence the Town, no doubt, took its Name.

The Church is built in the Form of a Cathedral, and is a fair Stone Building,
with a handsome Spire Steeple.

From Rotherham we turned North-west to Wentworth, on purpose to see the old
Seat of the Wentworths, who have flourished here ever since the Conquest, and
been possessed of the Estate of Woodhouse from the Time of Henry III. Among the
several noble Persons of this Family, who have resided here, was the great
Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, beheaded in the Time of King Charles I.
whose Body lies buried in this Church. His Honors were extinct in his Son; but
his Seat is still in the Possession of Sir Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Malton,
his Great Grandson, who has made such Improvements to it, that it is inferior
to few in Great Britain. It is situated on the Side of a Hill, defended from
the North and West, but opens to the South and East, toward which Quarters it
commands a very extensive Prospect over a rich and beautiful Country, which
belongs to the Family.

The Gardens are large, and adorned with Obelisks, Statues, etc. having a
Green-house and Bathing-room. On one Side there is an uninterrupted View into
the Park and Neighborhood. Here are two Beauties rarely to be met with
any-where else, a Grove of old Fir-trees, and a Mount of above 100 Feet high
perpendicularly measured. The Circumference of the Parks is about eight Miles,
and is beautified with Fish Ponds, Woods of Timber of an uncommon Size, and
with Plantations innumerable. The Turf is of a fine Verdure, and the Soil
fruitful.

The House, with the Additions lately made, and now carrying on, will extend
200 Yards in Front, and is built in Imitation of Wanstead in Essex, the Seat of
Earl Tilney. And an Improvement has been added to the Park and Fish Ponds, one
whereof, consisting of 14 Acres of Ground, receives a small Brook, which being
conducted through a winding Cut, for 600 Yards, falling down six Steps, is
brought by a Canal of 300 Yards into the Lake, and so affords a pretty Prospect
of Water for near a Mile together.

From hence we went to see Stamborough, a fine Seat now belonging to the Earl
of Strafford; the late Earl built the House here, which has an exceeding noble
Front, and adorned it with large Plantations, fine Waterworks, and Gardens; to
which if we add the Vista's, Walks, and Woods, which are large and numerous, it
may vie with most Seats in Great Britain for Elegancy.

We afterward steered our Course back again to Rotherham, and leaving that
Town, came to Sandbeck, a fine Seat of the Earl of Scarborough; which,
considering the beautiful Lawn before the House, and the Extent of the
adjoining Woods, remarkable for the Improvements of Art, as well as for the
Bigness and flourishing State of the Trees, may vie with most Seats, in respect
to Situation.

From hence we pursued a By-track, in order to see a famous Yew-tree, which
stands in a Field called Cuckolds Haven, and is a very surprising Production of
Nature, and which I shall attempt to describe: It has a strait smooth Stem,
about 10 Feet high, from which the Branches extend in Circles above each other,
like the Divisions of a Pineapple, and of that Shape, and of equal Exactness.
The Figure of the Tree is much more beautiful than could have been made by Art
of Man. The Branches from Top to Bottom are so thick, that a Bird can scarce
creep through them in any Part; and every Shoot and Fiber put out the same
Length each Year, and are of so bright and pleasant a Green in all Seasons,
that at some Distance the Clothing of the Tree appears like Velvet. There is a
Hedge planted round it for a Fence, and many People have thought it worth their
while to ride 20 Miles to view it.

Upon Sight of this Curiosity, and Thousands of other Trees of the same Species
in its Neighborhood, I could not but lament, that Avarice should so far
prevail, especially with Gentlemen, as to consent to grant what I call a dead
Warrant for the selling of many noble stately ones, in the Height of their
Glory, which for some Hundred of Years had been an Ornament to the Places where
they grew, when perhaps one of the largest of them, which in a Garden or Park
would be esteemed above any Price, is sold for no more than 20 or 30 Shillings,
to make Naves for Wheels.

Afterward we struck into a By-road, which brought us to the Ruins of Roch or
Rock Abbey, hid by a steep woody Cliff, toward the South, and by large Rocks
every other Way, except Eastward. One Side of the Nef of this Building, from
North to South, under the middle Tower, and some odd Pillars and Arches, are
all that is now left, great Part having been carried away, from time to time,
to repair adjacent Churches, or build Gentlemen's Seats, though now Care is taken,
by the present Earl of Scarborough, to preserve what remains. These Ruins,
among which large Trees are now grown up, and the contiguous Borders, make a
Picture inexpressibly charming, especially when viewed with the Lights and
Shadows they receive from a Western Sun; and its recluse Situation, still from
every Noise, except the Murmur of a limpid Rivulet, together with the Fragments
of sepulchral Monuments, and the gloomy Shades of those venerable Greens, Ivy,
and Yew, which creep up, and luxuriantly branch out and mix with the beautiful
Whiteness of the Rocks, give such a Solemnity to this Scene, as demands a
serious Reverence from the Beholder, and inspires a contemplative Melancholy,
oftentimes pleasing as well as proper to indulge.

The Stone, of which this Abbey is built, was dug out of the famous Quarry near
adjoining, and so well known to Masons by the Name of Roch Abbeystone, which
for Whiteness and Beauty is not to be equalled.

Another thing worthy of Notice in this Neighborhood, is the Tower and Spire
of the Church Laughton, which for a Delicacy and Justness of Proportion, is not
excelled by any other Gothi^ Piece of the kind. How it happened, that so
elegant and ornamental a Structure, superior by far to all others round it, was
bestowed upon a Village-church, is matter of some Wonder.

The Building stands upon a very high Hill, which appears at Distance like that
at Harrow in the County of Middlesex. The Height of the Steeple to the
Weathercock is 195 Feet, and by its Situation the most conspicuous every way,
of any perhaps in the whole Kingdom, being seen from many Places 40, 50, and 60
Miles. It has a peculiar Beauty, when viewed in the diagonal Line, the Pinacles
at the Corners of the Tower being joined by Arches to the Spire, as are others
above them, which break its Out-lines, and give, at the same time, a beautiful
Diminution; but Time will not permit it to stand much longer without
considerable Repairs.

The Duke of Leeds, whose Seat at Kiveton is at about three Miles Distance, has
cut a Vista through the Woods of his Park, to take this Steeple into his View.

About two Miles from Laughton we saw the said Seat of Kiveton: It is an
elegant House, and the Apartments and Offices are disposed with great
Convenience. The Situation is in a wholesome Air, and commands fine Prospects.
Here are pleasant Gardens, and a beautiful Park.

We omitted visiting many other Places in these Parts, which, had Time allowed,
would have answered the Trouble of riding uneven Roads, which are tiresome
hereabouts, and hastened to reach Tickhill, which is a small Market Town, and
very ancient.

Here is an old Castle, which is large, but surrounded with a single Wall only,
and an huge Mount, with a round Tower on the Top of it. it was anciently of
such Dignity, that all the Manors round about it, belonging to it, were styled
The Honor of Tickhill. The Church in this Town is very large, and a handsome
Building.

We now returned once more to Rotherham, and pursued our Course higher up on
the River Dun, to Coningsborough Castle, called in British Caer Conan, situate
on a Rock, where Matthew of Westminster says, That Aurelius Ambrosius, a
British Prince, vanquished Hengist, the Saxon General, and took him Prisoner,
where, in Revenge of his barbarous Murder of the British Nobility in cold
Blood, near Stonehenge in Wiltshire, he cut off his Head.

Before the Gate is an Agger, said to be the Burying-place of Hengist. It is
not only famous for its Antiquity, but its Situation too, upon a pleasant
Ascent, having six large Market Towns, 120 Villages, many large Woods of Oak,
some containing 100 Acres, and others beautifully cut through into Walks, six
Iron Furnaces, many Mines of Coal and Iron, Quarries of Stone for Building,
nine large Stone Bridges, 40 Water-mills, six Seats of Noblemen, 60 of
Gentlemen, 15 Parks, and two navigable Rivers. Upon the Dun also, a little Way
from Coningsborough, is a Place called Temple-brough, a Roman Fortification, of
which the North-east Corner is washed away by the River. The Area is about 200
Paces long, besides the Agger; and on the Outside of it is a large Trench, 37
Paces deep; on the other Side of it is another Trench, covered with large Trees.

Traveling North-east from hence, we came to Bantry, which stands just at the
Entrance from Nottinghamshire, into the West Riding, a Town blessed with two
great Conveniences, which contribute to its Support, and make it a very
well-frequented Place. 1. That it stands upon the great Post-road from London
to Scotland; which makes it full of very good Inns and Houses of Entertainment.
2. That the little, but pleasant River Idle runs by it, which, contrary to the
Import of its Name, is a full and quick, though not rapid and unsafe Stream, with
a deep Chanel, which carries Lighters and flat-bottom'd Vessels into the Trent,
that comes within seven Miles of it, to a Place called Stockwith, from thence
to Burton, and from thence, if the Weather be fair, to Hull; if not, it is
sufficient to go to Stockwith, where Vessels of 200 Tons Burden may come up
laden to the Town.


By this Navigation Bantry becomes the Center of all the Exportation of this
Part of the Country, especially for heavy Goods, which are brought down hither
from all the adjacent Countries, such as Lead, Millstones and Grind-stones
from Derbyshire, wrought Iron and edged Tools of all Sorts, from the Forges at
Sheffield, and from the adjacent Country called Hallamshire.

From hence to Doncaster is a pleasant Road, that never wants Repair, which is
something extraordinary in any Part of this lower Side of the Country.

Doncaster (so called from the River on which it stands, and the Castle which
is now ruined) is a noble, large, spacious Town, and exceeding populous,
governed by a Mayor, and carrying on a great Manufacture, principally for
Stockens, Gloves, and knit Waistcoats; and as it stands upon the great Northern
Post-road, is full of good Inns. There is a remarkable old Column called a
Cross, at the End of the Town, with a Norman Inscription upon it.

Here we saw the first Remains of the great Roman Highway, which, though we could
not perceive before, were eminent and remarkable just at the Entrance into the
Town, and soon after appeared in many Places. Here are also two strong Stone
Bridges over the Dun, besides a long Causeway beyond them, the Waters of the
River being dangerous to Passengers, when they swell over its Banks, as is
sometimes the Case.

This Town, Mr. Camden says, "was burnt entirely to the Ground, Anno 759; and
was hardly recovered in his Time." But it now looks more decayed by Time than
Accident, and the Houses, which seem ready to fall, might rise again to more
Advantage after another Conflagration.

It has but one Church, which is large, and its Tower of admirable Work. There
is a remarkable Epitaph on one Robert Byrk, a famous Man of Doncaster, who gave
a Place, called Rossington Wood, to the Poor. How, How, who is here?
I, Robin, of Doncastere,
And Margaret my Fere.
That I spent, that I had;
That I gave, that I have;
That I left, that I lost.
A. D. 1597.
Quoth Robertus Byrks, who in this World did reign
Threescore Years and seven, but lived not ane.


Here lies also, under a plain Gravestone in the Church, the Body of one
Thomas Ellis, memorable for having been five times Mayor of the Town, for
founding an Hospital there, called St. Thomas's the Apostle, and endowing it
plentifully.

We ought not to forget, that the celebrated Sailor, Sir Martin Frobisher, was
born in this Town. He was the first Englishman, who, in the Reign of Q.
Elizabeth, discovered the North Passage to China and Cathai, and found some
Streights, which he called after his own Name, and a Foreland after the
Queen's. At his first Voyage, one of the Company brought back some black
Stones, out of which the Refiners, it is said, extracted Gold; which encouraged
him to load his Ship with them afterward: but they were then found to be fit
for nothing, but to mend the Highways. He signalized himself against the
Spanish Armada; and received his Death Wound by a Shot at Breast in Britany: the
Surgeon, having extracted the Bullet, left the Wadding behind; by which means
the Wound mortified, and he died as soon as he had brought back the Fleet to
Plymouth.

We set forward directly West, and came to Barnesley, a little Market Town,
well built of Stone, where a Manufacture, and Iron and Steel Work, flourishes.
It has a smoaky Aspect, and is called Black-Barnesley; but whether on that
Account, or from the Moors, which look all black, like Bagshot Heath, I know
not.

After we had passed these Moors, we came through a most rich, pleasant and
populous Country to Wakefield.

Wakefield is a large Town, situate upon the River Calder, (which was made
navigable in the Year School) since which Time the Town has increased
considerably in Riches, and Number of Inhabitants. There is a handsome Stone
Bridge over the River, upon which stands a Chapel, erected by King Edward IV.
in Memory of his Father Richard, Duke of York, who was slain near this Place,
as I shall mention by-and-by. The Chapel is 10 Yards long, and six broad; and
though very much defaced by Time, it appears to have been wrought in a very
curious manner. A little above the Bridge is a Wash or Dam, over which the
Water rolling, forms an admirable Cascade of a great Length.

This Town consists of three great Streets, which meet in a Center near the
Church, where there might be formed a very spacious Marketplace, but by reason
of the great Number of Inhabitants it is so crowded with Buildings, that there
is only a small Area round the Market-cross, which is a very elegant Building,
being an open Colonnade of the Dorick Order, supporting a Dome, to which you
ascend by an open circular Pair of Stairs, in the Center of the Building. This
brings you to a Room, which receives Light from a Turret on the Top, and may be
called the Town Hall; for here they transact all their public Business.

The Church is a very large and lofty Gothic Building, the Body of which was
repaired in the Year 1724, but the Spire (which is one of the highest in the
County) remains in the same State it was.

In this Town was born John Green, the famous Pinder, who fought Robin Hood so
manfully.

From the Bridge you have an agreeable View to the South-east, where, by the
Side of the River, rises a Hill, covered with Wood, at about a Mile Distance.
This joins to an open Moor or Common called Heath-moor, upon which are several
Gentlemen's Seats, very pleasantly situated.

South between Wakefield and a Village called Sand^^, they showed us a small
square Piece of Ground, which was fenced off by itself; and on which, before
the late Civil War, stood a large Stone Cross, just upon the Spot where the
Duke of York, fighting desperately, and refusing to yield, though surrounded with
Enemies, was killed. But though Religion has suffered the Cross to fall, the
Chapel I mentioned on the Bridge at Wakefield, the other Monument of this
Battle, is still preserved by being made use of for Civil Affairs. Some say
there are more People here, than in the City of York, and yet it is no
Corporation Town.

Here is a Market every Friday for Woollen Cloths, after the manner of that at
Leeds, though not so great; yet as all the Clothing Trade is prodigiously
increased, and still increasing in this County, so this M^^ket flourishes with
the rest.

I cannot here pass by my former Observation, that all the great Rivers take
their Beginning in the Mountains of Blackstone Edge and High Peak, which, as I
have said, part the Counties of Lancaster and York, and that these Rivers all
take their Course due East. The Dun is the first; the next is the Calder, now
becoming a very large River at Wakefield; and the Air is the next, which rises
at the Foot of the Mountain Penigent, on the Edge of Lancashire, of which it is
said proverbially: Pendle-Hill and Penigent
Are the highest Hills between Scotland and Trent.


As the Calder runs by Halifax, Huthersfield, and through Wakefield; so the Air
runs by Skipton, Bradford, and through Leeds, and then both join at Castleford
Bridge, near Pontefract, three Miles from Bradford, and in an united Stream
form that Navigation from this trading Part of Yorkshire to Hull, which is of
so much Advantage to the whole County.

I went to see the ancient Town of Pontefract, with the Castle, where so much
Blood has been spilt, in different Ages; for here Henry, the great Earl of
Lancaster, who was Lord of the Castle, and whose Ancestors had beautified,
enlarged, and fortified it, was beheaded by his Nephew, King Edward II. with
three or four more of the English Barons. Here Richard II. was murdered, and,
if History may be credited, in a most cruel manner; and here Antony Earl of
Rivers, and Sir Richard Gray, the first Uncle, and the other Brother-in-law to
King Edward V. were beheaded by King Richard III. In the late Civil Wars, a
small Party of brave Fellows took this Castle by Surprise, for the King, and
desperately defended it to the last Extremity; but being at length obliged to
yield, five of them attempted to break through the Besiegers Camp, three of whom
perished in the Attempt.

The Town is large and well built, but much smaller than it has been. The
Castle lies in its Ruins, though not demolished. It is a Corporation by
Prescription, and the Mayor and 12 Aldermen are always Justices of the Peace.
It Is said, that anciently none could be arrested at the Market-cross, called
Oswald's Cross, and a free Way leading to the Cross, with about two Yards
around it was kept unpav'd in Memory of that Privilege. But in the Year 1735,
the old Cross was pulled down, and a handsome Dome, supported by a Colonnade of
Dorick Pillars, (the Charge whereof was defrayed by a Legacy left by one
Dupere, an Inhabitant of the Town) was erected for that Purpose.

The Ruins of the Castle show it to have been a noble Pile. A round Tower, yet
standing, is entire, in or near which, the Tradition is, King Richard II. was
slain. Adjoining to this Tower are Windingstairs, which descend into several
Vaults, and subterraneous Passages.

The Parish Church, which stands near the Castle, and was prodigiously large,
received so much Damage in the late Civil Wars, that no more than the Shell is
now left standing. It is a handsome Gothic Building, in the Form of a Cross,
with a Tower in the middle, which is in good Proportion, and was formerly
crowned with a magnificent Lantern, enriched with carved Work; but it received
such Damage from a Cannon Shot, during the Siege of the Castle, that it was
soon after blown down; and upon the Surrender of the Castle, the Parliament did
(by Resolution of the House, of the 27th of March, 1649) grant One thousand
Pounds, to be raised by Sale of the Materials of the said Castle, to the Town
of Pontefract, toward the repairing of their Place of public Worship, and
re-edifying an Habitation for a Minister. Part of this Grant might be applied
in erecting a plain Octagon Building upon the Tower, which finishes the Whole,
in a manner not disagreeable, though far inferior to the former. In the North
west Corner of this Tower, are two circular Flights of Stairs, winding about
the same Center, with separate Entrances below, and distinct Landings above.
The Inhabitants of the Town still continue to bury in this Churchyard, but
Divine Service is performed in a Chapel adjoining to the Marketplace, which is
very spacious.

At the Bottom of the Marketplace stands the Town Hall.

Near the Road is a noble Seat, which belonged to the late Lord Bingley. It Is a
new-built, beautiful House, with curious Gardens, though not very large.

At Pontefract the great Roman Highway, which I mentioned at Doncaster, (and is
visible from thence hither in several Places, though not in the open Road) is
plain to be discerned; and from Castleford Bridge, which crosses over the
united Rivers of Air and Calder, it goes on to Aberforth, and so through
Tadcaster to York.

In some Places, where this Causeway is broken up, the Courses appear to be of
different Materials, the Bottom of Clay, upon that is Chalk, then Gravel, and
upon the Gravel is Stone, and then Gravel upon that, and so other kinds of
Earth, where the first was not to be had.

In several Places between this Bridge and Aberforth, the Causeway being
disused for the common Road, it appears as entire as at its first making, though
a Work undoubtedly of 15 or 1600 Years old. I take notice of it here, because I
have not seen any thing like it in any other Place of England.

Castleford is a Village that stands near the Confluence of the two Rivers
above, and was formerly a Place of great Consideration, insomuch that some
Authors call it a City. There have been dug up here diverse Pieces of Roman Coin.

Aberforth is a small Market Town, a few Miles North-east of Pontefract, and is
noted for Pin-making only.

From Ferry-bridge, within a Mile of Pontefract, extends a large Stone
Causeway, about a Mile in Length, to a Village called Brotherton, where
Margaret, Wife of King Edward I. was forced to take up as she was hunting, and
was delivered of a Son, called from the Village Thomas of Brotherton. This Son
was afterward made Earl of Norfolk, and Marshal of England. Not far from the
Church is a Piece of Ground of 20 Acres, surrounded with a Trench and a Wall,
where, as Tradition informs us, stood the House in which the Queen was
delivered, and the Tenants are obliged by Tenure to keep it surrounded with a
Wall of Stone.

Brotherton is now noted for burning Limestone, which is brought from
Tadcaster in great Quantities, and carrying and dispersing it into the Southern
Parts, which turns to very good Account, and imploys a great many Hands.

A little to the South of this Village, the great Road divides in two Parts:
one goes on to the Right to York, and the other through Aberforth and Wetherby,
over Braham-moor, to Scotland.

At Braham-moor a Battle was fought between the Royalists and General Fairfax,
where he was worsted and wounded, but made so Soldier-like a Retreat, that it
gained him as great a Reputation as a Victory would have done.

But we followed neither of these two Roads, leaving the Towns that way for the
Entertainment of another Journey; so we passed directly West along the Banks of
the Air to Leeds, which is a large, wealthy and populous Town, standing on the
North Side of the River Air, with large Suburbs on the South Side, and both
joined by a stately, strong Stone Bridge, so large, and so wide, that formerly
the Cloth-market was kept upon it; and therefore the Refreshment given the
Clothiers by the Innkeepers (being a Pot of Ale, a Noggin of Pottage, and a
Trencher of broiled or roast Beef, for Twopence) is called the Brigg-shot to
this Day.

The Increase of the Manufactures, and of the Trade, soon made the Market too
great to be confined to the Brigg, so that it is now kept in the High Street,
beginning from the Bridge, and running up North almost to the Market-house,
where the ordinary Market for Provisions begins; which also is the greatest of
its kind in all the North of England. You may judge of the Plenty of it, when
500 Loads of Apples have been numbered by the Mayor's Officers in a Day.

But the Cloth Market is chiefly to be admired as a Prodigy of its Kind, and
perhaps not to be equalled in the World. The Market for Serges at Exeter is
indeed a wonderful Thing, and the Money returned very great; but it is there
but once a Week, whereas here it is every Tuesday and Saturday.

Early in the Morning, Tressels are placed in two Rows in the Street, sometimes
two Rows on a Side, cross which Boards are laid, which make a kind of temporary
Counter on either Side, from one End of the Street to the other.

The Clothiers come early in the Morning with their Cloth; and as few bring
more than one Piece, the Market-days being so frequent, they goin to the Inns
and Publick-houses with it, and there set it down.

At about Six o'Clock in the Summer, and about Seven in the Winter, the
Clothiers being all come by that Time, the Market Bell at the old Chapel by the
Bridge rings; upon which it would surprise a Stranger to see in how few
Minutes, without Hurry, Noise, or the least Disorder, the whole Market is
filled, and all the Boards upon the Tressels covered with Cloth, as close to
one another as the Pieces can lie longways, each Proprietor standing behind his
own Piece, who form a Mercantile Regiment, as it were, drawn up in a double
Line, in as great Order as a Military one.

As soon as the Bell has done Ringing, the Factors and Buyers of all Sorts
enter the Market, and walk up and down between the Rows, as their Occasions
direct. Some of them have their foreign Letters of Orders, with Patterns sealed
on them, in their Hands; the Colors of which they match, by holding them to
the Cloths they think they agree to. When they have pitched upon their Cloth,
they lean over to the Clothier, and by a Whisper, in the fewest Words
imaginable, the Price is stated; one asks, the other bids; and they agree or
disagree in a Moment.

The Reason of this prudent Silence is owing to the Clothiers standing so near
to one another; for it is not reasonable, that one Trader should know another's
Traffic.

If a Merchant has bidden a Clothier a Price, and he will not take it, he may
go after him to his House, and tell him he has considered of it, and is willing
to let him have it; but they are not to make any new Agreement for it, so as to
remove the Market from the Street to the Merchant's House.

The Buyers generally walk up and down twice on each Side of the Rows, and in
little more than an Hour all the Business is done. In less than half an Hour
you will perceive the Cloth begin to move off, the Clothier taking it up upon
his Shoulder to carry it to the Merchant's House. At about half an Hour after
Eight the Market Bell rings again, upon which the Buyers immediately disappear,
the Cloth is all sold; or if any remains, it is carried back into the Inn. By
Nine o'Clock the Boards and Tressels are removed, and the Street left at
Liberty for the Market-people of other Professions, the Linen-drapers,
Shoe-makers, Hard-ware Men, and the like.

Thus, you see 10 or 20,000 l. worth of Cloth, and sometimes much more, bought
and sold in little more than an Hour, the Laws of the Market being the most
strictly observed, that I ever saw in any Market in England.

If it be asked, How all these Goods at this Place, at Wakefield, and at
Halifax, are vended and disposed of? I would observe,

First, That there is a Home-consumption; to supply which, several considerable
Traders in Leeds go with Droves of Pack-horses, laden with those Goods, to all
the Fairs and Market Towns almost over the whole Island, not to sell by Retail,
but to the Shops by Wholesale; giving large Credit. It Is ordinary for one of
these Men to carry a thousand Pounds worth of Cloth with him at a Time, and
having sold that, to send his Horses back for as much more, and this very often
in a Summer; for they travel chiefly at that Season, because of the Badness of
the Roads.

There are others, who have Commissions from London to buy, or who give
Commissions to Factors and Warehouse-keepers in London to sell for them, who
not only supply all the Shopkeepers and Wholesale Men in London, but sell also
very great Quantities to the Merchants, as well for Exportation to the English
Colonies in America, which take off great Quantities of the coarse Goods,
especially New England, New York, Virginia, etc. as also to the Russia
Merchants, who send exceeding great Quantities to Petersburg, Riga, Dantzick,
Narva, and to Sweden and Pomerania; though of late the Manufactures of this kind
set up in Prussia, and other Northern Parts of Germany, interfere a little with
them.

The third Sorts are such as receive Commissions from abroad, to buy Cloth for
the Merchants chiefly in Hamburg, and in Holland, etc. These are not only many
in Number, but some of them very considerable in their Dealings, and correspond
with the farthest Provinces in Germany.

On account of this Trade it was, that the Rivers Air and Calder were made
navigable, under the Direction of Alderman Pickering, the celebrated Author of
the Marrow of Mathematics, and performed at the Expense of several private
Merchants, without calling in the Assistance of the Nobility and Gentry. By
this means a Communication was opened from Leeds and Wakefield to York and
Hull, so that all the Woollen Manufactures now exported, are carried by Water
to Hull, and there shipped for Holland, Bremen, Hamburgh, and the Baltic. And,
encouraged by the Success of this Act, in the Session of Parliament Anno 1740.
an Act passed for continuing the Navigation of the River Calder from Wakefield
to Ealand, and Halifax, which will be a farther Benefit to the Trade of those
Parts; and at the same time several other Acts passed for mending of Highways
around all these Parts, to Halifax, Ealand, Doncaster, York, etc. which will no
less promote the Commerce and Trade of this noble County.

There is another Trade in this Part of the Country, become very considerable
since the opening the above Navigation, which is the Carriage of Coals down
from Wakefield and Leeds, at both which Places they have inexhaustible Stores.
These are carried quite down into the Ouse, and then either go up that River to
York, or down to the Humber, where the Trent and Ouse meet together, and which
in a few Miles falls into the Sea. In this Passage abundance of large Towns are
supplied with Coal, with this Advantage too, that whereas the Newcastle Coals
pay four Shillings per Chaldron Duty to the Public, these, being only
River-borne Coal, are exempted, and pay nothing: So that the City of York,
which strenuously opposed the first Navigation of these Rivers, in this
Particular, as well as in many others, daily experiences the Benefit of it.

I need not add, that by the same Navigation all heavy Goods, imported to Hull,
are brought up these Rivers, as well as Goods brought from London, and other
Parts of the Kingdom, such as Butter, Cheese, Lead, Iron, Salt, Sugars,
Tobacco, Fruit, Spice, Hops, Oil, Wine, Brandy, Spirits, and the like.

The Antiquity of Leeds is very great, being mentioned by Venerable Bede; but
it was not incorporated till 2 Car. I. when Sir John Savile (afterward Lord
Savile) was made the first honorary Alderman, in Memory of whom the Arms of the
Town are adorned with his Supporters, and those very suitable, being the two
Athenian Birds, sacred to that Goddess who was deemed the Patroness of Spinning
and Weaving, as well as Arts in general.

At the West End of the Town formerly stood a Castle, wherein King Richard II.
was imprisoned before he was carried to Pontefract. And on the Site thereof
now stands the ancient Manor-house, with the Park, etc. lately belonging to Mr.
Richard Sy^es. Here are two magnificent Halls, both built about the Year 1714;
one for White Cloths, supported by Pillars and Arches, which form a Quadrangle
like the Royal Exchange, with a handsome Cupola, and Bell on the Top, to give
Notice when the Market for these Sort of Goods begins. The other is the Guild
or Moot Hall, the Front of which is built likewise on Arches, with rustic
Coins and Tabling; where, in a Nich, is placed a fine Statue of Queen Anne,
done by Mr. Carpenter, at the Expense of Alderman Milner.

Here are three Churches. St. Peter's, the Parish Church, is built in the Form
of a Cross, with a Tower rising from the Middle, with eight Bells in it. In the
Ceiling is the Giving of the Law, finely painted in Fresco by Parmentier, who
voluntarily gave this Specimen of his Art, in Gratitude for the Encouragement
he had met with here. St. John's was built in 1634, at the sole Expense of Mr.
Harrison, who likewise built the Almshouses adjoining, a Free School, a
Market-cross, and the Street called New-street, the Rents of which he
appropriated to pious Uses.

I must not omit the New Chapel, as it is called, erected by the Presbyterians
in 1691; which is said to have been the first, as it certainly is the
stateliest they have in the North of England.

From Leeds we advanced Northward, and came to Harwood, a pretty little Town on
the River Wherfe, over which is a very costly Bridge, and there formerly was a
strong Castle. The Church here is remarkable for several things; particularly
for the Interrment of Sir William Gascoigne, who had the Courage to commit
Prince Henry, afterward K. Henry V. to the King's Bench, for affronting him
while he was in the Seat of Justice, letting him know, that though the Son
might bear the Image of the King's Person, the Judge bore that of his Authority.

We passed the Wherfe over a fine Stone Bridge of 11 Arches. The River runs in
a Bed of Stone (which makes it look as clear as Rock Water).

The Plenty of Stone in the North is, no doubt, the Reason why there are so
many noble Bridges in that Part of England, insomuch that I don't remember to
have seen one of Timber from the Trent to the Tweed.

We traveled along the Wherfe into the Dale, that takes its Name from the
River, which reaches from York about 20 Miles, enlivened almost all the Way
with Gentlemen's Seats at a little Distance from each other; and left Ottley on
the South Side of the River, a small Market Town, no otherwise of Note than for
its Situation, which is under a large craggy Cliff. If Yorkshire owed us any
Pleasure for the Fatigues of a former Day, it was abundantly made up to us
here; for I cannot but think this one of the most delightful Parts of England,
and I have met with Travelers who have compared it to the Plain of Palermo
itself. Nor ought you to be surprised to hear some Parts of the North compared
with Italy. The Testimony of Bishop Tonstal is well known, who in his Progress
to York with King Henry VIII. in the Year 1548, declared, that the Country
North of Doncaster, and South of Haslewood, was the richest he had found in his
Travels through Europe. It would be endless to mention all the Seats we passed;
but the Motto, at least, of Mr. Ibbotson's at Denton will naturally engage the
Speculation of every Traveller: QVOD NEC IOVIS IRA, NEC IGNIS, NEC POTERIT
FERRVM.

The House, it seems, belonged once to Lord Fairfax, General of the Parliament
Forces, and was about to be demolished by Prince Rupert; but was happily saved
by the Sight of a Picture of one of the General's worthy Ancestors. It was
afterward burnt down by Accident, and rebuilt by the present Possessor; and
now, after the Rage of War, and Devastation of Fire, in a Poetical Rant, defies
them both.

Knaresborough, known among Foreigners by the Name of the Yorkshire Spaw,
stands near Ripley, a Market Town, upon the River Nyd. In the Town, and the
Lands adjacent, are no less than four different Mineral Waters. One of the
Springs is a petrifying Water, which in a little Cave drops from the Roof of
the Cavity, and, as they say, turns Wood into Stone.

The other two Springs are indeed the most valuable Rarities of the kind in
England.

The first is the Sweet Spaw, or a Vitriolick Water. It was discovered by one
Mr. Slingsby, Anno 1630; and all Physicians acknowledge it to be a very
sovereign Medicine in several particular Distempers. See Dr. Leigh' s Natural
History of Lancashire.

The other is the Stinking Spaw, or, according to the Learned, the Sulphur
Well. This Water is clear as Crystal, but so fetid and nauseous to the Smell,
that many are obliged to hold their Noses when they drink it; yet it is a
valuable Medicine in Scorbutic, Hypochondriack, and especially in Hydropick
Distempers.

The People formerly, for many Years, only drank these Waters, but they now
make use of them as a Cold Bath; and in this manner they must necessarily be
very good for Rheumatick Pains, Paralytick Numbnesses, and many other
Distempers.

These Baths were heretofore well frequented, insomuch that I have been told
200 l. per Annum Rent has been given for a Cold Bath. But now Scarborough has
the Vogue.

At Rippon are two good Stone Bridges, one of which has, I think, thirteen
Arches, or more, over the Eure, and is a very stately one. There is another
over the same River at Burrowbrigg, four Miles lower than Rippon, which has
indeed but four or five Arches, but then these Arches are near 40 Feet wide,
and one of the middlemost much more, and are high in proportion; the Ends of
the Bridge are likewise continued by high Causeways, built of Stone, to keep
the Water in its Course, which however sometimes overflows them.

From these Bridges, as well as that abovementioned at Harwood, it may be
observed, that however low these Waters are in the Summer, they are high and
furious enough in the Winter; and yet the River Air, though its Source is in the
same Ridge of Mountains as the other, is gentle and mild in its Stream, whereas
the others are raging and furious. The only Reasons I can give for it, are,
that this River runs in a thousand Windings and Turnings more than any other in
these Parts, insomuch that, as Camden expresses it, near its Head in Craven it
seems doubtful whether it should run forward to the Sea, or return to its
Spring; and from Skipton to Gargrave it is observed to be passed over eight
times within the Compass of three Miles. The next Reason is, that after it has
descended from the Mountains it has a deeper Chanel.

Rippon, the Isurium of the Romans, is a very neat, pleasant, well built Town;
and an ancient Corporation: it has not only an agreeable Situation on a rising
Ground between two Rivers, but the Buildings are good likewise, particularly
the Marketplace, which is accounted the finest and most beautiful Square of
its kind in England.

In the middle of it stands a curious Obelisk, built by Mr. Aislaby, whose Seat
at Studley is about a Mile distant. The Town is governed by a Mayor and
Aldermen.

Here is a large Collegiate Church, and though but a Deanery in the Diocese of
York, yet it is a very handsome, ancient, and venerable Pile, and shows itself
a great way in the Country. Mr. Camden says, Rippon owes its Greatness to
Religion. And that here was a famous Monastery built by Wilfrid, Archbishop of
York, in the first Ages of Christianity in this Island, is certain; but this
pious Gift of the Bishop was lost some Years after; for the Danes overrunning
Yorkshire, rifled and burnt it to the Ground, together with the whole Town of
Rippon. It afterward flourished again as a Monastery: but that, with the rest,
being given up in the Reign of King Henry VIII. the Church only was preserved.

While it was a Monastery, here was a famous Sanctuary, a Thing much abused in
foreign Countries. This Privilege was, it seems, granted to the Church of
Rippon by King Athelstan, and whoever broke the Rights of Sanctuary, which he
extended a Mile around the Church, were to forfeit Life and Estate; so that, in
short, not the Church only, but the whole Town, and a Circle of two Miles
diameter, was a Refuge for all that fled to it, where they lived safe, and out
of the Reach of all Law.

Annexed to this Monastery was an Hospital, the Purposes of which are very
remarkable, and would be worthy Imitation in our Days of Protestant Charity.
The House was called the Hospital of St. Mary Magdalene, where, according to
the Foundation, were to be maintained two Chaplains, to perform Divine Service;
and if any begging Clergyman, or other needy Person should happen to travel or
stray out of his Way, and call at the said Hospital, he should be relieved
there for one Night only, with Food and a Bed, and so be gone in the Morning;
and every poor Person that came craving an Alms on St. Mary Magdalene's Day
yearly, should have one Loaf, Value an Halfpenny, (when Corn was at the Price
of five Shillings per Quarter) and one Herring.

It Is also recorded, that one Branch of this Hospital was given to a Society of
religious Sisters to maintain a Chaplain to perform Divine Service; and to keep
all the Lepers born and bred in Hipschire; but the Sisters being in time
removed, a Brotherhood was established in their stead, which continued for a
while; and after that a Mastership. At length all, except the Church, was
demolished together, and the House with the Monastery suppressed.

The Church is an ancient Gothic Building, firm, strong, and plain; no Imagery
or Statues to be seen about it; there are three Towers, on which formerly were
Spires.

The whole Revenues were seized by King Henry VIII. so that little or nothing
remained for an officiating Clergyman. But King James I. having the Case
represented to him by his Queen, was pleased to found and endow in this Church
one Dean, and seven Prebendaries, besides Petit-canons, Singing-men, and
Choiristers, of his own Royal Bounty and Benevolence, under the Jurisdiction of
the Archbishop of York.

But I must not leave Rippon without mentioning St. Wilfrid's Needle, a Place
famous in ancient Times, being a narrow Hole in a close vaulted Room under
Ground, in which Women's Chastity was tried; and, if chaste, they passed through,
but if otherwise, the Whim was, they could not. Some Saxon Coins were found
here in the Year 1695.

In the Churchyard of this Minster lies a plain Monument, or Gravestone, over
the Remains of a generous Soul, who gave Two thousand Pounds to pious Uses, and
yet has no other Epitaph than the following: Hic jacet Zacharias Jepson, cujus
Aetas fuit 49. per paucos annos tantum vixit.

We spent a considerable Part of a Day in the celebrated Park, or rather
Garden, belonging to Mr. Aislabie, which is visited by all the Curious, and
admired as a Wonder, not only with regard to the various Beauties, which Nature
has so lavishly bestowed; but those of Art and Cultivation, wherewith it is so
liberally adorned: the latter exhibit a noble Specimen of that exquisite fine
Taste for Architecture and Gardening, in which the present worthy Owner is
allowed to excel. The Temples and Loggio's, built in many delightful Recesses,
may vie with the best Models of the Ancients; and the wide extended Plantations
are judiciously varied, as the Objects of the Landschape become new. In one
Part, the Hills gradually ascend, with Tufts of Shade interspersed over the
Verdure; in another, they precipitately rise, with Rocks projecting from their
rough Sides, and tall Woods covering their Brows. Above these, a beautiful
Gothic (but unconsecrated) Tower lifts up its Head; and below, the Skirts of
the Cliffs are watered by a River which wanders in one Place with a silent
Current, and in another falls down in Cascades: An easy Eminence commands a
Prospect of the Town and Minster of Rippon, with a large Extent of Country
beyond; and the stately Ruins of Fountain-Abbey are seen from another, besides
Gentlemen's Seats in the Center of many Views. The fine Turf of the Park is
constantly cleared of Weeds, and equal Care is taken to preserve the best Trees
from Decay: Through the whole Scene of Variety, the Improvements are adapted to
follow the luxuriant Fancy of Nature, and humor her different Propensities.
You see her decked out and enriched, where Necessity or Propriety bespeak such
Indulgence; but in the Simplicity of her own Dress, where Ornament would
disfigure her beautiful Attire.

The House is an old Building, but a noble Plan is laid down for a new one, and
in a better Situation of the Park. There are Stables built, which are very
grand.

The late Bishop of Namur, (Abbot Strickland) when he resided in England in the
Year 1734, took a Journey from London to Studley, with Intention to transplant
some of the Beauties of this Place, as near as might be, in the Disposition of
his Plantations, adjoining to a magnificent Palace he was then about to build
at his episcopal Residence.

A Mile from Rippon, or less, is a stately beautiful Seat, called Newbie, built
some Years since by Sir Edward Blacket. The Park is extended to the Bank of the
River Eure, and is sometimes in part laid under Water by the River, which,
coming down from the Western Mountains through a marly, loamy Soil, fructifies
the Earth, they say, as the River Nile does the Egyptian Fields about Grand
Cairo.

As Sir Edward spared no Cost in the Building, and Sir Christopher Wren laid
out the Design, as well as chose the Situation, I shall only say, tbat nothing
can be added to the one or the other. The Building is of Brick, the Avenues to
it are very fine, and the Gardens not only well laid out, but well planted, and
as well kept. But for want of fine Gravel, the Walks cannot show themselves, as
they would do, were they in the Southern Part of England. The House has a fine
Prospect over the Country, almost to York, with the River in View most of the
Way; and it has a very noble Appearance to the great North Road, which lies at
Burrow-bridge, within two Miles of it.

As you begin to come into the North Riding, (for the Eure parts the
West Riding from it) you find yourself in a Place noted in the North of England
for the best and largest Oxen, and the finest galloping Horses, bred either for
the light Saddle, for the Race, or the Chase, for Running or Hunting. Sir
Edward was a Grazier, and took such Delight in Breeding and Feeding large Black
Cattle, that he had two or three times an Ox out of his Park led about the
Country for a Sight, and showed as far as Newcastle, and even to Scotland, for
the biggest Bullock in England, and 'twas very seldom, if ever, he was
over-match'd.

From the Town of Rippon the North Road, and the Roman Way also, which comes
from Castleford-bridge, parting at Aberforth, leads away from the Town of
Bedal, in the North Riding, and in a strait Line called Leeming-Lane, leaving
Richmond about two Miles on the West, goes on to Piers-bridge, on the River
Tees, which are the utmost Limits of this vast County of York.

But as I proposed at my entering into this West Riding to go no further than
Rippon, which stands on the Northern Boundary of it, I must stop here, and
likewise make it the Boundary, as well of this Journey as of this Letter, since
I find it impracticable to take a Survey of this large, populous, and wealthy
Division on one Journey, without wandering to and fro, up and down, backward
and forward, on purpose, which would be exceedingly fatiguing and uneasy; and
as I was resolved to make as perfect Observations as I possibly could, of every
thing that I could find remarkable in my way, and especially of the
Manufactures of the Country, which I account as well worthy a Traveller's
Notice, as the Curiosities and Wonders of Nature, and the most refined
Operations of the Liberal Arts and Sciences, I have therefore concluded upon
another Journey into these Parts, and to enter by the Way of Lancashire; and to
coast it along the West and North-west Sides of the Country, up to the River
Tees, and the Southern Side of the Bishopric of Durham; and from thence strike
down South into the Center of the County, and so take a Trip East into the
Heart of the North Riding, to see the Towns that lie that Way; and then return
West into York, and passing thence South-east, take in such Towns as stand on
the East Side of the West Riding, till I arrive at the Fall of the Trent into
the Humber; and crossing that River, view the Towns in the East Riding; and
lastly, follow the Seacoast all the Way up into Durham, which will complete my
Tour through the whole County.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc.

LETTER III. CONTAINING A Description of Part of the West Riding of Yorkshire,
and of all the North and East-ridings, the Bishopric of Durham, and the County
of Northumberland.
SIR,
ACcording to what I proposed in my last, I am now going to enter the
West Riding of Yorkshire, from the East Side of Lancashire. I must premise to
you, that all this Part of the County is so considerable for its Trade, that
the Postmaster General has thought fit to establish a Cross-post through all
the Western Part of England into it, to maintain the Correspondence of
Merchants and Men of Business, of which all this Side of the Island is full.
This is a Confirmation of what I have so often repeated, of the Greatness of
the Trade carried on in this Part of the Island. This Cross-post begins at
Plymouth, in the South-west Part of England, and leaving the great Western
Post-road of Excester behind, comes away North to Taunton, Bridgwater, and
Bristol; from thence goes on through all the great Cities and Towns up the
Severn, such as Gloucester, Worcester, Bridgenorth, and Shrewsbury, thence by
West Chester to Liverpool and Warrington, from whence it turns away East, and
passes to Manchester, Bury, Rochdale, Halifax, Leeds, and York, and ends at
Hull.

By this Means the Merchants at Hull have immediate Advice of their Ships which
go out of the Chanel, and come in, by their Letters from Plymouth, as readily
as the Merchants of London, and without the double Charge of Postage. The
Shopkeepers and Manufacturers can correspond with their Dealers at Manchester,
Liverpool, and Bristol, nay, even with Ireland directly, without the tedious
Interruption of sending their Letters about by London.

I followed this Post-road from Liverpool to Bury, both manufacturing Towns in
Lancashire, and the last very considerable for a Sort of coarse Goods, called
Half-thicks and Kersies. The Market for them is very great, though the Town is
situated so remote, so out of the way, and at the very Foot of the Mountains,
that it would otherwise be but little frequented.

Rochdale, farther on in our Way to Black-stone Edge, is a good Market Town,
and is of late very much improved in the Woollen Manufacture, as are also the
Villages in its Neighborhood.

Here, for our great Encouragement, though it was but about the Middle of August,
and in some Places the Harvest hardly got in, we saw the Mountains covered with
Snow, and felt the Cold very acute and piercing; but we found, as in all those
Northern Countries, the People had a happy Way of mixing the Warm and the Cold
together; for the Store of good Ale, which flows plentifully in the most
mountainous Part of this Country, seems abundantly to make up for all the
Inclemencies of the Season, or Difficulties of Traveling, adding also the
Plenty of Coals for Firing, of which all those Hills are full.

We mounted the Hills, fortified with a little of this Precaution, early in the
Morning; and though the Snow, which had fallen in the Night, lay a little upon
the Ground, yet we thought it was not much; and the Morning being calm and
clear, we had no Apprehension of an uneasy Passage, neither did the People at
Rochdale, who kindly directed us the Way, and even offered to guide us over the
first Mountains, apprehend any Difficulty for us; so we complimented ourselves
out of their Assistance, which we afterward very much wanted.

For though the Sun shone when we came out of the Town of Rochdale, yet when we
began to mount the Hills about a Mile from it, we found the Wind rise, and the
higher we went, the more it increased upon us; by which I soon perceived, that
it had blown before, and perhaps all Night, upon the Hills, though it was calm
below. And so we were obliged, in a most discouraging manner, to travel through
trackless Drifts of Snow, and it continuing snowing too in our Faces, over
Blackstone Edge, we knew not whether we were wrong or right, till we perceived
some Landmarks, that the honest Rochdale Men had told us of, which gave us
great Comfort.

But after we had passed this dismal Edge, it was our constant Labor, as soon
as we were at the Top of a Hill, to come down it again on the other Side, and
then another Hill arose. I do not remember, that there was one Bottom, that had
any considerable Breadth of plain Ground in it, but always a Brook in the
Valley running from those Gulls and Deeps between the Hills; and it was
observable, that they always crossed our Way in the Bottoms from the Right Hand
to the Left, the Reason of which you shall see presently.

From Blackstone Edge to Halifax is eight Miles, and all the Way, except from
Sorby to Halifax, is thus up Hill and down; so that, I suppose, we mounted to
the Clouds, and descended to the Water-level, about eight times, in that little
Part of the Journey.

But now I must observe to you, that after we had passed the second Hill, and
come down into the Valley again, and so still the nearer we came to Halifax, we
found the Houses thicker, and the Villages greater, in every Bottom; and not
only so, but the Sides of the Hills, which were very steep every way, were
spread with Houses; for the Land being divided into small Enclosures, from two
Acres to six or seven each, seldom more, every three or four Pieces of Land had
a House belonging to them.

In short, after we had mounted the third Hill, we found the Country one
continued Village, though every way mountainous, hardly a House standing out of a
Speaking-distance from another; and as the Day cleared up, we could see at
every House a Tenter, and on almost every Tenter a Piece of Cloth, Kersie, or
Shalloon, which are the three Articles of this Country's Labor.

In the Course of our Road among the Houses, we found at every one of them a
little Rill or Gutter of running Water; if the House was above the Road, it
came from it, and crossed the Way to run to another; if the House was below us,
it crossed (...) from some other distant House above it; and at every
considerable House was a Manufactory, which not being able to be carried on
without Water, these little Streams were so parted and guided by Gutters or
Pipes, that not one of the Houses wanted its necessary Appendage of a Rivulet.

Again, as the Dying-houses, Scouring-shops, and Places where they use this
Water, emit it tinged with the Drugs of the Dying-vat, and with the Oil, the
Soap, the Tallow, and other Ingredients used by the Clothiers in Dressing and
Scouring, etc. the Lands through which it passes, which otherwise would be
exceeding barren, are enriched by it to a Degree beyond Imagination.

Then, as every Clothier must necessarily keep one Horse, at least, to fetch
home his Wool and his Provisions from the Market, to carry his Yarn to the
Spinners, his Manufacture to the Fulling-mill, and, when finished, to the
Market to be sold, and the like; so every one generally keeps a Cow or two for
his Family. By this means, the small Pieces of enclosed Land about each House
are occupied; and by being thus fed, are still farther improved from the Dung
of the Cattle. As for Corn, they scarce sow enough to feed their Cocks and Hens.

Such, it seems, has been the Bounty of Nature to this Country, that two Things
essential to Life, and more particularly to the Business followed here, are
found in it, and in such a Situation, as is not to be met with in any Part of
England, if in the World beside: I mean, Coals and running Water on the Tops of
the highest Hills. I doubt not but there are both Springs and Coals lower in
these Hills; but were they to fetch them thence, it is probable the Pits would
be too full of Water: it is easy, however, to fetch them from the upper Pits,
the Horses going light up, and coming down laden. This Place then seems to
have been designed by Providence for the very Purposes to which it is now
allotted, for carrying on a Manufacture, which can nowhere be so easily
supplied with the Conveniences necessary for it. Nor is the Industry of the
People wanting to second these Advantages. Though we met few People without
Doors, yet within we saw the Houses full of lusty Fellows, some at the Dye-vat,
some at the Loom, others dressing the Cloths; the Women and Children carding,
or spinning; all employed from the youngest to the oldest, scarce any thing
above four Years old, but its Hands were sufficient for its own Support. Not a
Beggar to be seen, not an idle Person, except here and there in an Almshouse,
built for those that are ancient and past working. The People in general live
long; they enjoy a good Air, and under such Circumstances hard Labor is
naturally attended with the Blessing of Health, if not Riches.

From this Account, you will easily imagine, that some of these remote Parts of
the North are the most populous Places of Great Britain, London and its
Neighborhood excepted.

We have all this while been in the Parish of Halifax, and before I come to the
Town, I must add a Word or two of the River Calder, to complete the Description
of the Country I passed through. As I said before, that all the Rills of Water
which we crossed, one at least in every Bottom, went away to the Left or North
Side of us, as we went Eastward, I am to add, that following those little
Brooks with our Eye, we could observe, that at some Distance to the Left there
appeared a larger Valley than the rest, into which not only all the Brooks
which we passed emptied themselves, but abundance more from the hollow deep
Bottoms among the Hills on the North-side beyond it, which emptied this way
South, as those on our Side run that way North. And at the next Village, called
Sorby, or Sowerby, we passed a considerable River (formed from those Brooks,
and the melted Snows) over a stately Stone Bridge of several great Arches. And
this was the main River Calder, which I mentioned at Wakefield, where it begins
to be navigable, and which, without any Spring, may be called the Head of it.

The same Observation will hold on most of the great Rivers in the North; there
being hardly any that have their Beginning in any public Springs or Lakes, as
the Rivers in the South of England generally have; which is the Case
particularly of the Derwent and the Don from the High Peak, and the Hills of
the same Range more South of the Edge; of the Air, the Wherfe, the Swale, the
Eure, the Nyd, the Tees, and the Were, all in the same County of York; and the
Tyne, the Cockett, the Till, and the Tweed, farther North; and even the Forth,
the Tay, the Clyde, the Nyd, in Scotland; and the Mersee, the Ribble, the
Rock, and the Lune, the West Calder, the Lowther, and the Eden, on the other
Side of these Mountains, in Lancashire, Westmorland, and Cumberland.

Having thus accounted for them all at once, I shall only mention them now as
they come in my way; for you will observe, I crossed one or other of them at
every considerable Town, all the Rivers as well in England as in Scotland,
North of this Place, running from the middle of the Country where these
Mountains rise, either East into the German, or West into the Irish Sea. None
of them run like the Severn, or the Wye, or the Rivers in South Wales, or the
Exe in Devon, or the Avon in Wilts, or the Arun in Sussex, and others North and
South. But I return to my Journey.

Having passed the Calder at Sorby Bridge, I now came to the Town of Halifax,
the most populous Parish or Vicarage in England; for it is but one, though 12
Miles in Diameter; but it has 12 or 13 Chapels of Ease, besides about 16
Meeting Houses, which they call also Chapels, being conformable in Fashion to
them, having Bells and Burying-ground to most of them, not reckoning those of
the Quakers into the Number.

In the Year 1443, there were but 30 Houses in it; but in the next Century it
was much increased: for History tells us, that Queen Elizabeth being petitioned
by the Inhabitants of Halifax, to grant them some Privileges, they set forth,
as an Instance of their Loyalty, that no less than 12000 young Men went out
armed from this one Parish, and, at her Majesty's Call, joined her Troops to
fight the Popish Army, then in Rebellion under the Earl of Westmorland.

If they then were so populous, what must they be now their Trade is so vastly
enlarged by the great Demand of Kerseys for clothing the Armies abroad? Some
maintain, that it is increased a fourth at least within these 50 Years; from
their having entered upon a Manufacture of Shalloons, which were never made in
these Parts before, at least, not in any Quantities; and it is computed, that
100,000 Pieces are worked up in this Parish only; and yet they do not make much
fewer Kerseys than they did before; for I was assured, that there was one
Dealer in the Vicarage, who traded, by Commission, for 60000 l. a Year in
Kerseys only, to Holland and Hamburgh. And of late Years it is still more
increased, by the People of a neighboring Part driving away about 4000 Irish
Manufacturers, who with about 2000 others accompanying them, settled there. As
the Vicarage is thus far extended, and so populous, what must the Market be
which supplies this vast Number of Inhabitants? And yet these are all brought
from other Parts of the Country. For as to Corn, they sow little, and they feed
very few Oxen or Sheep; and as they are surrounded with large manufacturing
Towns on every Side, all of them employed, like themselves, in the Clothing
Trade, they must necessarily have their Provisions from other more distant
Parts.

The Consequence then is plain; their Corn comes up in great Quantities out of
Lincoln, and Nottinghamshire, and the East Riding; the Black Cattle from
thence, and from Lancashire; Sheep and Mutton from the adjacent Counties every
way; Butter from the East and North-ridings; and Cheese out of Cheshire and
Warwickshire.

The Markets in the Months of September and October are prodigiously thronged,
that being the Time when the Clothiers buy up as many Oxen as will serve their
Family for the whole Year, which they used to drive Home, kill, salt, and hang
up in the Smoke to dry. This was heretofore their common Diet, but now they
live more upon fresh Meats.

Thus one trading manufacturing Part of the Country in a barren Soil, gives and
receives Support from all the Countries round it.

There is nothing extraordinary in the Town itself; but the Multitude of People
who resort to it on a Market Day, as well to sell their Manufactures, as to buy
Provisions, is prodigious: in this respect no Places equal it in all the North
Part of England, except Leeds and Wakefield.

The Church is old, but stately and venerable, and has in it many extraordinary
Monuments, but most of them of great Antiquity. Here is a very good Hospital,
and a Workhouse of an ancient Establishment; and there are several Charities
of like Sort, in different Parts of the Parish.

Halifax gave Birth to John of Halifax, or de Sacro Bosco, the chief
Mathematician of his Age, who was buried at the public Expense of the
University of Paris; and to the late Archbishop Tillotson, the Model of true
rational Preaching; though a new Sect, lately sprung up, called Methodists, with
great Pretenses to Meekness, and intolerable Conceit and Vanity, at present
seek publicly to depreciate the Memory and Works of that truly great Man.

The Course of Justice anciently made use of here to prevent the stealing of
Cloth, is very remarkable. Modern Authors pretend to say it was for all Sorts
of Felons; but I am well assured, it was first erected purely, or at least
principally, for such Thieves as were detected in stealing Cloth from the
Tenters: and it seems very reasonable to think it was so, because of the
Conditions of the Trial. The following is a brief Account of it:

The Woollen Manufacture was erected here about the Year 1480, when King Henry
VII. caused an Act to pass prohibiting the Exportation of unwrought Wool, and
to encourage foreign Manufacturers to settle in England; several of whom coming
over, established different Manufactures of Cloths in different Parts of the
Kingdom, as that of Bays at Colchester. Says at Sudbury, Broad-cloth in Wilts,
and other Counties; and the Trade of Kerseys and narrow Cloth at this Place,
and other adjacent Towns. And as, at the Time when this Trade began, nothing
was more frequent than for young Workmen to leave their Cloths out all Night
upon Tenters, which gave an Opportunity for the idle Fellows to steal them, a
severe Law was made against stealing Cloth, which gave the Power of Life and
Death into the Hands of the Magistrates of Halifax. But this Law was extended
to no other Crime; and the Conditions of it, as I have said, intimate as much:
for the Power was not given to the Magistrates to give Sentence, unless in one
of these three plain Cases: 1. Hand Napping, that is, when the Criminal was
taken in the very Fact. 2. Back Bearing, that is, when the Cloth was found upon
him. 3. Tongue Confessing, which needs no Explanation.


The Fact likewise was to be committed within the Liberties or Precincts of the
Forest of Hardwick; and the Value of the Goods stolen was to be above thirteen
Pence Halfpeny.

When the Criminal was taken, he was brought before the Magistrates of the
Town, and they judged, sentenced, and executed the Offender, or cleared him,
within so many Days; I think it was three Market Days. If the Offense was
committed out of the Vicarage, but within the Bounds of the Forest, then there
were Frith Bourgers also to judge of the Fact, who were to be summoned out of
the Forest Holders, as they are called, who were to hold of that Frith, that
is, of the Forest. If they acquitted him of the Fact, he was immediately
discharged; if they condemned him, nobody could reprieve him but the Town. The
Country People were, it seems, so terrified at the Severity of this Proceeding,
that hence came that Proverbial Litany, which was used all over Yorkshire: From
Hell, Hull, and Halifax,
Good Lord, deliver us.


Hull was included in this Petition, on account of their rigid Discipline to
Beggars; for they whipped out the foreign Poor, and set their own to work.

The Manner of Execution was very remarkable, by an Ax drawn up by a Pulley,
and fastened with a Pin to the Side of a Wooden Engine, which when pulled out,
the Axe fell swiftly down, and did its Office.

The Engine is now gone, but the Basis on which it stood still remains, being a
square Foundation of Stone, to which you go up by Steps. The Engine was
removed, as we were told, in the Year 1620, during the Reign of K. James I.

In the Reign of the same Prince, the Earl of Morton, Regent of Scotland,
passing through Halifax, and seeing one of these Executions, caused a Model to be
taken, and carried into his own Country, where it is made use of at this Day.
But his Lordship's own Head was the first that was cut off with it; and it
being many Years before that happened, the Engine got the Name of the Maiden,
before it was handselled by the Execution of the Earl; and this it retains,
though it has cut off many a Head since.

The Ways to Halifax used to be exceedingly bad, and, except at the West
Entrance, almost inaccessible; but of late Years they have been much mended;
and several Acts of Parliament have passed very lately, which will greatly
increase the Conveniences of the People thereabouts, as well as improve its
Commerce and Communication all around it, to Lancaster, as well as to Leeds,
Doncaster, and all the great trading Towns, even to the City of York itself.

Due East from Halifax, is Kirkley, a small Village, situated on the Calder,
near which is the Monument of the famous Robin Hood; and upon the Moor, his
Butts, Two little Hills, so called, about a Quarter of a Mile asunder. I have
now traced this Hero from the Forest of Shirwood, the Scene of his Exploits, to
his Grave. I before doubted whether there ever was such an one; but Epitaphs,
as great Liars as they are, I suppose, are Evidence that such a Man once
existed. His is as follows: Here undernead dislaid Stean
Lais Robert Earl of Huntingtun.
Nea areir ver az hie sa geud,
An Pipl kauld im Robin Heud:
Lick Utlawz hi an is Men
Vil England niver see again.


Near this Place is a little Town, called Burstall, where they make Broad
Cloth, so called in Distinction from Kerseys and Druggets, and the like, though
the Cloths in this Country are called Narrow, when they are spoken of in
London, and compared with the Broad Cloths made in Wilts, Gloucester, Somerset,
and Devonshire.

This Town is famed for Dying, and there are made here a sort of Cloth in
Imitation of Gloucester Whites, which, though they may not be so fine, yet their
Colors are as good.

From hence to Leeds, and every way round, the Country appears exceedingly busy
and diligent. The Houses are not scattered and dispersed, as in the Parish of
Halifax, but crowded up in large Villages, and thronged with People.

A few Miles South-west of Halifax is Huthersfield, upon the Calder, which is
the first noted Town it comes to. This Town is one of the Five, where that vast
Clothing-trade, which I have already mentioned, is carried on. They have a
Market here for Kerseys every Tuesday.

While I am speaking of their Manufactures, I must not forget that very
essential one, called Yorkshire Ale, which indeed is in its Perfection in all
this Part of the County. But I cannot pass over Huthersfield without taking
notice of its old Neighbor, Almondbury, a famous Town in the Time of the
Romans, and called Campodunum; but it is now a Village only. Mr. Camden calls it
a Royal Town; and says, it had a Cathedral Church in it, dedicated to St.
Alban, from whom it was called Albanbury, whence its present Name. The Ruins of
a Stone Castle and Rampire are still to be seen near it.

The River Calder having been made navigable to Wakefield, and great Benefit
arising from it, it is now [ Ann. 1741.] about to be made further navigable, to
the Towns of Ealand and Halifax; which will be of inexpressible Service to
those populous and improving Places, and all the Villages and Towns adjacent.
And as there have just passed new Acts to mend the Road from Selby to Leeds,
Bradford, and Halifax, and from Ealand to Leeds, which have been torn in Pieces
by the heavy Carriages passing to and fro in the carrying on the vast extended
Trade of those Parts; it is hardly to be conceived what Benefit will accrue from
these public Works.

The first Town we came to from Halifax, was Bradford. It has a Market; but is
of no other Note than having given Birth to Dr. Sharp, the good Archbishop of
York.

We soon entered Craven, which is a very hilly and craggy Country, as the Name
signifies; for Craven comes from the British Word Craig, a Rock. But, however
unpleasant,

We proceeded farther North-west, and arrived at Skipton, a good well built
Town, encompassed with Hills on every Side. The Market is well frequented and
supplied. Here is a large handsome Church, and a good Grammar School; to which
one Mr. Petyt, who had been principal of Bernard's- Inn, London, gave a
considerable Parcel of Books, and likewise erected a good Library in the
Church. We were agreeably surprised to find so handsome a Town, and such good
Accommodations in so mountainous a Country.

This is a healthy Country however, and the Inhabitants live to a great Age: a
Father and Son giving Evidence at the Assizes at York, it appeared the first
was 140, and the Son 100 Years old.

Here the Road turns almost due West, which brought us to a Town called Settle,
a much better Town than we expected in such a Country. It lies on the Road to
Lancaster, at the Foot of the Mountains which part that County from Yorkshire,
upon the River Ribble.

And a little lower, upon the same River, upon the Borders of Lancashire,
stands Gisborne, but has nothing remarkable in it.

Looking forwards, to the North-west of us, we saw nothing but high Mountains,
which had a terrible Aspect, and more frightful than any in Monmouthshire or
Derbyshire, especially Pingent Hill, which Camden derives from the British Word
Pengwin, i. e. White-head, from the Snow lying upon it: so that having no
manner of Inclination to encounter them, merely for the sake of seeing only a
few Villages, and a Parcel of wild People, we turned short North-east, and came
to the great Road leading Northward to Richmond, at a Village called Brumstal,
noted for the Birth of Sir William Craven, an Alderman of London, who was a
great Founder and Builder of Churches, Bridges, Causways, and other public
Edifices in this Country.

Having passed through some other inconsiderable Villages, we entered Midlam, a
little Market Town on the River Your, and the North Riding of Yorkshire
together, and so leaving Masham, another inconsiderable Market Town, which lay
upon the same River, to the South-east of us, we passed along to Bedal, which
is likewise of no great Note, saving that the Living is worth 500 l. a Year,
and that we met here again the Roman Causway, which leads up through Richmond
to Barnards Castle, in the Bishopric of Durham, and is called Leeming-lane for
20 Miles together. We put ourselves upon this Way, and were not long before we
arrived at Richmond.

Though I met with nothing else within the Town of Bedal worth observing, yet the
Country round it, as indeed the whole County, is more or less full of Jockies,
and Dealers in Horses; and the Breed in this, and the next County, is so well
known, that though the Pedigree of them is not preserved for a Succession of
Ages, as it is said they do in Arabia, yet are their Stallions denominated by
certain Names, that never fail to advance the Price of a Horse according to the
Reputation of the Sire he comes of.

And indeed, let Foreigners boast what they will of Barbs and Turkish Horses,
or of the Spanish Jennets from Cordoua, for which 500 l. apiece have been
given, I believe that some of the Gallopers of this County, and of the
Bishopric of Durham, which joins to it, will outdo, for Speed and Strength,
the swiftest Horse that was ever bred in Turkey or Barbary, take both
Advantages together. For though the Barb may beat Yorkshire for a Mile Course,
Yorkshire shall distance him at the End of the Four Miles; the Barb shall carry
the Day with Seven and a half, but Yorkshire with 12 and 14 Stone. In a word,
Yorkshire shall carry the Man, and the Barb a Feather. But they are universally
allowed to be the best Hunting and Road Horses in the World; and are bought up
by Foreigners on that Account.

As this Part of the Country is so much employed in Horses, the young Fellows
are bred up in the Stable, and make excellent Grooms.

Besides their Fame for Horses, they have the Reputation also of being good
Grafiers over this whole Country, and produce a large, noble Breed of Oxen, as
may be seen at North Allerton Fairs, where incredible Numbers of them are
bought Eight times every Year, and brought Southward as far as the Fens in
Lincolnshire, and the Isle of Ely, where they are fed up to the Grossness of
Fat we see in London Markets. The Market these North Country Cattle are
generally brought to, is at St. Ives, a Town between Huntingdon and Cambridge,
upon the River Ouse.

Richmond is so called from its Situation upon a Hill or Mount, fruitful, though
the Country about it is rocky and barren; and it gives the Name of
Richmondshire to the District it is in, as another, East of this, is called
Allertonshire: the former is in the Diocese of Chester, and the latter in that
of Durham.

This Town, in the Time of Richard II. was annexed to the Duchy of Lancaster,
and so still continues. Earl Edwin built a Castle here, the Tower o^ which is
still standing; as is also the Steeple of the old Priory. It is a Borough
governed by a Mayor, etc. and holds Pleas in all kinds of Action; has a good
Marketplace, and Three Gates, which lead to Three different Suburbs. It is
well built all of Stone, and some Houses of Freestone.

We were told, That in the Year 1732, Mr. Wharton of Newcastle, Agent to his
Grace the Duke of Richmond, by ordering several Places here to be dug very
deep, discovered the Drawbridge and Moat belonging to Richmond Castle, which
were of very curious Workmanship.

Here thrives a kind of Manufactory of knit Yarn Stockens for Servants, and
ordinary People. Every Family is employed that way, both great and small; and
here you may buy the smallest sized Stockens for Children for 1 s. 6 d. the
Dozen Pair, sometimes less.

This Trade extends itself also into Westmorland, or rather from Westmorland
hither: for at Kendal, Kirkby-Stephen, and such other Places in this County as
border upon Yorkshire, the chief Manufacture of Yarn Stockens is carried on,
which is indeed a very considerable one, and of late greatly increased.

We made some Excursions from this Town into the Country round it, and followed
the River Swal^ West, which runs under the Wall of the Castle of Richmond, and,
by reason of Rocks, which intercept its Passage, forms here a natural Cataract.
This River, though not extraordinary large, is noted for giving Name to the Lands
which it runs through for some Length, called Swale Dale, and to an ancient
Family of that Name; the last of whom was Sir Solomon Swale, Bart. who wrote
himself of Swale Hall, in Swale Dale, by the River Swale. This Gentleman became
unfortunate, and was supplanted by a Person not long since dead, who was a
Clerk in the Exchequer Office; and observing this Family held their Estate of
the Crown, and that they had omitted to renew for many Years, procured a Grant
from the Crown, of this Estate for himself. A great many Lawsuits ensued; but
to no other Effect than to increase the Misfortunes of this Gentleman, who died
a Prisoner in the Fleet, but, I think, not till his Adversary had first made
away with himself.

Swale Dale is a low, pleasant, and rich Valley, abounding with Grass, but very
bare of Wood; though here is a Place just by, called Swale Dale Forest: it might
have been so anciently, but there are hardly Trees enough in it now to
denominate it a Forest.

Not ^ar from this Forest lies Wensdale, a very rich and fruitful Valley, well
covered with delicate green Grass, and stocked with vast Herds of Cattle; and,
in some Places, produces Lead Ore. The Eure runs through the Midst of it, and
rises in the Western Mountains, very near the S^^rce of the Swale, which, as it
were, leaps into it from a Precipice at Myton. Both these Rivers are
plentifully stocked with Fish, and Eure has Cra^^^sh in it.

But let me stop in this ^^^ce, to take Notice of one of the greatest Ra^^es
that England ever produced; I mean Henry Jenkins, whose remarkable great Age
deserves our particular Notice: He was born in the Year 1500, and died in 1670,
being then 169 Years of Age. There are no Registers of so long a Date, and
therefore his Age must be guessed at by other Circumstances, either from his
own Account, or the probable Evidences of others. Which are these:

First, Being demanded by a Gentlewoman, who was curious to know, as exactly as
possible how old he was, What Kings he remembered; he answered, after a little
Pause, "That he thought himself about 162 or 163 Years old; and that he could
remember Plowden (meaning Floddon) Field, fought against the Scots, in King
Henry VIII.'s Reign." She then asked him: "Was the King himself there?" He
replied, "No; he was in France, and the Earl of Surrey was General." She asked
him then, "How old he was then?" He said, "About 12 Years old." That Battle was
fought September 9. 1513; King Henry being then at Tournay.

Secondly, There were Four or Five of the same Parish, at that time, of an 100
Years old or very near it, who all declared, That they never knew him any other
than an elderly Man; and that he told them he was Butler to the Lord Coniers.
The last of that Name died without Issue 3 and 4 Philip and Mary I. An. Dom.
1557. And he remembered the Abbot of Fountains, before the Dissolution in King
Henry VIII.'s Time.

Thirdly, He went often to the Assizes on Foot; and was used as a Witness in
other Courts, whose Records speak largely of his Age. In the Chancery he was
sworn, to the Remembrance of above 140 Years; and as much, often, at York
Assizes. In the King's Remembrancer's Office in the Exchequer, a Record says,
"That Henry Jenkins, Labourer, aged 157 Years, deposed, as a Witness, in 1665;
and, to confirm his Age, diverse ancient Men, who were Witnesses, swore that he
was a very old Man when they first knew him."

He was, for the last Century of his Life, a Fisherman, and used to wade and
swim in the Rivers even after he was an hundred Years old, and lived upon very
coarse Diet. In some of his last Years, being unable to work at his Trade, he
went a begging to Gentlemen's Houses, who used to relieve him cheerfully, as a
great Curiosity. And his great Age was the more to be credited, because he
could neither write nor read: and so, what he reported, was from Strength of
Memory Two Years before his Death, he was able to bind Sheaves after the
Reapers, and had his Sight and Hearing to the last.

The next Excursion we made was up to the Banks of the Tees, through Gilling,
Eggleston, and Bows, now ordinary Towns, or rather Villages; though the first
had, formerly, a great Castle; which, in the Conqueror's Time, and long
afterward, was the Seat of the Lords of that Country; whereas Richmond, which
has since rose out of the Ruins of Gilling, was but a Fort, and in
Subordination to it.

Eggleston is famous for Marble, which they dig out of the Rocks there, and
imploys a great many Hands.

Bows stands upon the Military Roman Way, and has been therefore, undoubtedly,
a Place of great Note.

In this Part of Richmondshire, and up Northward, are no less than Three
Forests, viz. Applegarth Forest, New Forest, and Lune Forest; and all these
within a Tract of Ground of no great Extent. Not far off is, besides, the
Forest of Swale Dale, beforementioned.

The Tees is famous for Salmon, and is a rapid River, and sometimes swells up
so suddenly, that a Man, in passing the Ford, in the Road to Darlington, on
Foot, whilst the Water was low, and hardly up to his Knees, was overtaken, as
he was going over, by a sudden Swell of the Stream, and carried off and
drowned. The People this way talk much of an ancient City they had formerly
hereabout. The Antiquaries agree, there was one called by the Romans,
Cataractonium, but differ as to its Situation; but, I think, Mr. Salmon has
placed it most probably upon the Confluences of the Tees and Greta, at a Place
called Merton; where indeed the Remains of it are very visible; and also about
Gretabridge, which is just by it.

We crossed the River, and entered Bernard's-castle, which lies on the North
Side of it, and consequently within the Bishopric of Durham. It was built by
the Grandfather of Baliol, King of Scotland, and is an ancient well built Town,
but not large. Here they have an excellent Art of dressing their Hides into
Leather, out of which they make the best Bridles, Reins, and Belts; as at
Rippon they were wont to furnish you with the best Spurs and Stirrups.

The Manufacture for Stockens continues thus far, and flourishes here and at
Marwood, and other little Villages on the Borders of Durham; but the
Jockey-trade extends much farther.

Between this Part of the Bishopric where this Town stands, on the East, and
Lancaster on the West, a mountainous Tract of Yorkshire runs, like a
Promontory, up Northward a great way, Hill upon upon Hill, Cliffs, Rocks, and
terrible Precipices, most astonishing to behold. This rugged Part of the
Country is called Stanmore Hills, which are desolate and solitary, excepting
one Inn, for the Entertainment of such as may be hardy enough to go among them.
As for us, we did not think it worth our while. But here are, it seems,
abundance of the Frolicks of Nature in Stone, which exactly resemble Serpents,
and other various Forms.

The West Side of the Bishopric being very mountainous too, and corresponding
with that of Stanmore, we turned North-east, to visit a little Market Town, but
a little way off, called Stainthorp; but being of no other Note than having a
stately Tomb in the Church to the Memory of one of the Nevils, and his two
Wives, we passed on to Raby Castle, which stands just by it, the ancient Seat
of that Family; but now of the Lord Vane. But it has nothing remarkable in it.

We came next to Piers-bridge, to which the Roman Causway leads, or, as they
call it, Leeming-lane. Here have been many remarkable Remains of Antiquity dug
up, and particularly an old Altarpiece. We thought to have returned by this
Bridge into Yorkshire; but were desirous to take in Darlington first, and pass
over the Tees there.

Darlington is remarkable for its dirty Situation; for a beautiful Church, with
a high Spire rising up from the Midst of it; and for a good long Stone Bridge,
over very little or no Water. It is a large considerable Market Town of great
Resort, and well supplied. The Marketplace is large and convenient. It is
noted for the Linen Manufacture, as the Water of the Skern, on which it is
situated, is exceeding good for Bleeching, insomuch that Linen has been sent
hither from Scotland, to bleech; but it particularly excels in Huggabags of Ten
Quarters wide, which are made nowhere else in England; and of which, as well
as other Linen-cloth, it sends up large Quantities to London.

A greater Rarity, I may mention in this Town, was our Landlord, at the Fleece
Inn, by Name Henry Lovell, who died in May 1739, in the 93d Year of his Age,
and had kept this Inn ever since 1688. He was never known to have one Hour's
Sickness, nor even the Headache, though a free Toper of Ale, sometimes for Days
and Nights successively, but had an Aversion to Drams of all kinds, retained
his Hearing, Sight and Memory, to his last Moments. He never made use of
Spectacles, nor ever lost a Tooth. He was esteemed in his Life, and lamented at
his Death, being of a humane Temper, and had the Deportment of a Gentleman.

At Oxehall, near this Town, we saw the famous Hell Kettles; which are Three
deep Pits full of Water; which have occasioned many fabulous Stories among the
Country People, and diverse Conjectures among the Learned; but they seem to be
nothing else but old Coal pits (and yet there is no Coal near them now) filled
by the Water of the Tees, through some subterraneous Passage, as it is said,
Bishop Tunstal experienced, by marking a Goose, and putting her into one of the
Pits; which he found next Day in the Tees. Others say, they were occasioned by
an Earthquake, which is recorded in the Chronicle of Tinmouth for the Year
1179, when the Earthquake happened.

We passed on East, and came to Yarum Bridge, where we re-crossed the Tees. It
is a very good and well built Bridge. The Town is incorporated, and but small,
lying near the Influx of the little River Levan into the Tees. It has seen much
better Days; but, however, of late Years, it is a little recovered, and carries
a pretty Trade, by Water, for Lead, Corn, and Butter, with London.

Stokesby is also but a small Market Town, and stands near the Source of the
same River, a few Miles East of Yarum, inland; which lies in a little Tract of
rich and fruitful Ground, called Allertonshire, and watered by the River Wysk.
It is a corporate Town, consisting of one Street, about half a Mile long,
well built, with a very good Market; and is noted for having the greatest
Beast-fair in England.

Here was a bloody Battle fought, in King Stephen's Time, between David King of
Scotland and Archbishop Tunstall, who was Lieutenant in these Parts for King
Stephen, which was called the Battle of the Standard; which, it seems, never
used to be erected but when the Kingdom was in imminent danger. The Bishop
prevailed, and routed the Scots, though Henry, King David's Son, kept the Field
of Battle with a Band of hardy Soldiers, after the Bulk of the Army was fled,
with their King after them; and fought valiantly, till he was overpowered, and
obliged to follow his Father.

From hence we advanced still South, and passed through Thirsk, a corporate Town,
which has but an ordinary Market, to Aldborough and Borough-brigg, which lie
within Three Miles of Rippon upon the River Eure.

These are Two Borough Towns, each sending Two Members to Parliament, which is
a Circumstance peculiar to this Place, and to Weymouth and Melcomb in
Dorsetshire.

Borough-brigg, or Bridge, seems to be the modern Town risen up out of
Aldborough, the very Names importing as much, the one being Borough at the
Bridge, and the other Old Borough, that was before it. All the Antiquaries are
agreed in this, who place on the Side of Aldborough, or Old Borough, an ancient
City, and Roman Colony, called Isurium Brigantium. At present there are not so
much as the Ruins of a City to be seen above Ground. But the Coins, Urns,
Vaults, Pavements, and the like, frequently dug up there, give Evidence to the
Thing; and some of them are so very remarkable, that I cannot choose to refer
you to Mr. Camden, and his Continuator, for farther Satisfaction: only adding
to what they have observed, that a curious Piece of Antiquity was discovered a
few Years ago; which is a Mosaic Pavement of singular Form and Beauty, brought
to light on digging the Foundation of a House, and which is now about Two Feet
from the Level of the Street.

At the Door of the College is another tesselated Pavement of a different Form
from the other, and though not above Three Yards from it, it is a Foot nearer the
Surface of the Street. The former is composed of white and black Squares, with
a Border of red; but the Stones of this are lesser Squares, and are white,
yellow, red, and blue.

Not long since more Pavements of this kind were discovered on an Eminence
called Borough-hill; as also the Foundations of a considerable Building; two
Bases of Pillars of some regular Order; large Stones of the grit Kind, with
Joints for Cramping; sacrificing Vessels; Flews for Conveyance of Smoke, or
warm Air; Bones and Horns of Beasts, mostly Stags; an Ivory Needle; and a
Copper Roman Stylus: from all which it may reasonably be supposed, that a
Temple formerly stood in this Place. I had not so much Curiosity as to go to
see the Three great pyramidal Stones in the Fields on the Left Hand, as you go
through Borough-bridge, which the Country People, being unable to comprehend how
they came there, will have to be brought by the Devil, and so call them The
Devil's Arrows. Mr. Camden describes them, as also does Mr. Drake in his
History of the Antiquities of York, to whom therefore I refer.

Borough-bridge, the latest built of the two Towns I have mentioned, is
undoubtedly very old; for here, in the Barons Wars, was a Battle; and on this
Bridge the great Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, was killed by a Soldier,
who lay concealed under the Bridge, and wounded him, by thrusting a Spear or
Pike, through a Chink, into his Body, as he was passing over it. From whence we
may conclude, with Mr. Camden, that it was a Timber Bridge then, and not built
of Stone, as it is now.

At Borough-brigg the Battle was fought between King Edward II. and his Barons,
who were defeated, and after ensued the bloody Execution at Pontefract, of the
Earl of Lancaster, and others of the Barons, as I mentioned when I spoke of
Pontefract.

These Two Borough Towns lying near the Center of this vast County, and on the
Skirts of the North and West Ridings, and there being a great many Towns about
the Middle of the first, that we could not more conveniently visit than from
hence; we therefore struck away East, and North-east, through the Towns of
Hovingham, Rydell, Hemesley, and Kirkby Moore Side; which is so called because
it lies on the Side of Blackamoore. But they were far from answering our
Trouble of going so far out of the Way, (excepting that Hemesley seemed to be
tolerably well built with Stone, and the Houses covered with Slate) the Two
first having hardly a Market. But the Situation of Rydell is pleasant, being in
a fine fruitful Vale, wherein are 23 Parish-churches.

We then turned South-east, and came to Pickering, a pretty large well built
Town, which has a well-furnished Market, and belongs to the Duchy of Lancaster,
having Jurisdiction over several neighboring Villages, and is called, The
Honor of Pickering. It has formerly been a fortified Place, as appears by the
Ruins of a Castle, which lie upon a Hill.

It is situate on the West Side of a wild hilly Country, and a Forest which is
within the Liberty of the Town, and called Pickering Forest; which we did not
care to traverse over, and so passed South-west down to Malton on the Derwent.

This Town is divided into Two Parts, by the River, which are called Old and
New Malton. The Old is the Camalodunum of the Romans, and was burnt by
Thurstan, Archbishop of York, in King Stephen's Cause, against Eustace, the
Lord of it, who had betrayed Part of this Country into the Hands of the Scots;
but Eustace, being afterward received into Favor, rebuilt it, and it has been
ever since called New Malton. Here has been a famous Abbey, and the Church of
it is still standing, but very ruinous, though the Castle is quite demolished.

This Town is well built and inhabited, and has Two well-supplied weekly
Markets, which are held by Prescription; for it is not incorporated. It is the
best Market in the County for Horses, Cattle, and Provisions; and is noted for
Utensils in Husbandry. It has likewise Three handsome Parish Churches, and a
good Stone Bridge over the Derwent. Near this Town is a Well, whose Water is
said to have the same Virtue as that of Scarborough.

We set out from hence, and for some Miles coasted along the Banks of Derwent
toward York, taking Hinderskell in our Way, where the late Earl of Carlisle
built the magnificent Seat of Castle Howard, upon the Spot of Ground where the
old Castle stood, in the middle of a Wood; but his Lordship died before it was
finished. I shall mention this again by-and-by.

But I must not omit, that on the South Side of the Derwent, we saw Auldby, a
little Village, where, it is said, stood, in the Roman Times, a City called
Derventis, where a Company named Derventienses was station'd.

The Derwent is a River very full of Water, and overflows its Banks, and all
the neighboring Meadows, always after Rain. It is likewise well-stock'd with
Fish, and runs between the East and North Ridings.

We are now entering the great City of York, the Eboracum of the Romans, and of
such Account in their Time, that no less than Three Military Ways passed through
it; and it was not only a Roman Colony, but the Seat of some of the Emperors,
and principal Generals, particularly of Severus and Constantius Chlorus, the
Father of Constantine the Great.

In our Approach to it we discovered many visible Marks of Antiquity, not
reducible to Description; and though Time and Misfortunes have so deeply effaced
all Traces of its once glorious Splendour, yet some noble Remains of Majesty are
still to be seen there, especially as we viewed it from a rising Hill at some
small Distance on the London Road: nay, after we were within the Walls, and had
Leisure to look about, we found ourselves not disappointed in the Idea we had
before conceived of it; and every Traveller, who is inquisitive in the Search
of Antiquities or Curiosities, will be tempted to make some Stay at York; there
being a very great Variety of each to detain and amuse him.

Among the former I shall only mention the Arch at Micklegate-bar, and the
multangular Tower and Wall, near a Place called the Mint-yard, both built in
the Time of the Romans. But whether the Two Statues now prostrate on the Wall
of St. Laurence Churchyard, be Roman or Saxon, is hard to determine: certain
it is, that the sepulchral Monument of the Standard Bearer to the Ninth Legion
of the Roman Army was dug up near Micklegate; and in other Parts of the City
have been found many Roman Altars, Inscriptions, Urns, Coins and the like, now
in the Possession of the Curious.

I do not include the Ruins of Abbeys, Churches and Castles, now to be seen in
this Place, among the Antiquities of it, because they are but of a late Date,
compared with the ancient Remains, of the Roman Skill and Grandeur, and because
they would take up more Time and Room than the Nature of my Work will allow.

The City of York is surrounded by a strong Wall, kept in good Repair, in which
are four Gates, and five Posterns. It is a County of itself, extending ever all
the Wapontake, called Ainsty, and is governed by a Mayor, who is styled Lord,
as at London, a Recorder, 12 Aldermen, in Commission of the Peace, two
Sheriffs, 24 Prime Common Council Men, eight Chamberlains, 72 Common Council
Men, a Town Clerk, Sword Bearer, and Common Sergeant; and the Mayor and
Aldermen have Conservation of the Rivers Ouze, Humber, Wherse, Derwent, Air,
and Dun, within certain Limits of each.

This City always gives Title to the second Prince of the Blood Royal, and the
two Citizens they return to Parliament, have a Privilege of taking their Places
in the House of Commons, next the Citizens of London, upon what is called the
Privy Counsellor's Bench; a Privilege which, if neglected to be claimed, ought
to be made known, as it appertains to the Citizens of London and York only, and
is by those of London, exercised the first Day of the Meeting of every new
Parliament.

The Situation of York is in a Plain on both Sides the River Ouse. It was
formerly very populous, and had a great Trade; but has declined since the
Reformation, and the Difuse of the Court of President of the North. In Henry
the Vth's Time there were 41 Parishes, 17 Chapels, 16 Hospitals, and nine
Abbeys, besides the Cathedral, and now there are only 17 Churches in Use.

The present Support of the City is chiefly owing to the Gentry, who make it
their Winter Residence, as there is great Plenty of Provisions of all kinds to
furnish an elegant Table at a moderate Expense, so that the Altar, which was
found there, with a Roman Inscription, is applicable to the present
Circumstances of the Place, DIS DEABUSQUE HOSPITALIBUS. And as the Inhabitants
abound with the Conveniences of Life, they likewise partake of its Diversions,
there being Plays, Assemblies, Musick-Meetings, or some Entertainments, every
Night in the Week.

The public Edifices which most deserve Mention, I shall now take Notice of,
and first of the Bridge over the Ouse. It consists of five Arches: the Diameter
of the middle Arch, which was the largest in the Kingdom, before that at
Blenheim House was built, is 81 Feet, and its Height 51 Feet. The Reason it was
built so wide, was on occasion of an Accident which once happened to it, when
upon a sudden Thaw, which occasioned a great Flood, a prodigious Weight of Ice
drove down two Arches of the old Bridge, by which 12 Houses were demolished,
and several Persons drowned.

The great Council Chamger for this City, near which the Records are kept, as
also the Exchequer and Courts of the Sheriffs, and beneath them the two City
Prisons for Debtors and Felons, are all upon this Bridge.

The Castle which stands at the Confluence of the Ouse, and the Fosse, was built
by William the Conqueror, Anno 1069; and though the Face it now wears, and the
Use made of it, are so different from that which was the primitive State of
this Fortress, yet in its present Disguise, it brought to my Memory that
Tragical Scene of Bloodshed perpetrated within its Walls, upon the 11th of
March 1189; which being to be met with in very few Historians, I shall give a
brief Account of it.

The Jews, from their first Introduction into England, growing immensly rich by
Traffic, never failed to become the Objects of Envy and Hatred, both to Prince
and People, and the slightest Pretenses were always eagerly laid hold of, to
plunder them; so that on every new Accession or Turn of Affairs, they were
forced to compound for their Safety, by large Presents to the Prince.

At the Accession of Richard I. though that Prince gave them no Disturbance, yet
he issued out an Order, that no Jew should be present at the Ceremony of his
Coronation, either at Church or at Dinner.

However the chief of the Jews, from all Parts, being summoned to London by
their Brethren there, in order to agree upon a rich Gift to the new King to
obtain his Favor and Protection, many of them, notwithstanding the Injunction,
had the Curiosity to see the Ceremony; and being discovered among the Crowd by
the Guards, they were beat, abused, and some of them killed.

The People hereupon, being possessed with a Notion, that the King had given
Orders, that the Jews (...) be destroyed, began a Massacre of them in (...),
and plundered and burnt their Houses, and (...) them many of their Wives and
Children.

And though the King immediately ordered a Proclamation to stop these
Proceedings, yet the Example at London was followed at Norwich, Lynn, and
Stamford, and with still greater Fury at York, notwithstanding the King, at his
Departure to the Holy Land, left Orders for the Protection of the Jews, and the
Punishment of such as should molest them; for, being inflamed by a wicked
Priest, certain bloody Wretches, who had resolved upon the Destruction of the
Jews, and to enrich themselves with their Pillage, set Fire to a Part of the
City of York; and while the Citizens were busy in extinguishing the Flames,
broke into the House of a principal Jew, who had been murdered at London, and
whose Wife had strengthened it for her Defense; and murdering the whole Family,
and all who had taken Refuge there, burnt the House to the Ground.

The Jews hereupon, in the utmost Terror, got Leave to convey all their Wealth
into the Castle, and obtained Shelter there for their own Persons, and for
their Wives and Children, except some few, who were sacrificed to the Rage of
the Populace; who burnt all the Houses of the Jews throughout the City.

It unluckily happened, that the Governor of the Castle having Business in the
Town, the poor Jews, being afraid he went out to agree upon delivering them up
to their Enemies, refused him Admittance into it; which incensing him, he
applied to the High Sheriff, who raising the Posse Comitatus, besieged the
Castle, and reduced the Jews to so great Extremity, that being refused Mercy,
though they offered to buy it at the Expense of immense Sums, they took the
dreadful Advice of one of their Rabbi's, come lately among them from abroad;
and first having burnt all their rich Goods, and so damnify'd even their Plate,
that their barbarous Enemies could not be much the better for their Spoils,
they set Fire to all the Towers of the Castle, and fell each Man to cutting of
the Throats of his own Family, till they had destroyed all who came into this
dreadful Scheme of their Rabbi's, who, in the last Place, followed the Advice
he had given.

In the mean time, the Fire of the Castle increasing, a Number of unhappy Jews,
who would not come into this bloody Action, (in vain endeavoring to extinguish
it) from the Walls besought the Mercy of the Besiegers, acquainting them with
what had happened; and threw over the dead Bodies of their Brethren, in
Confirmation of the Truth of what they said; and offering to become Christians,
had Hopes given them of their Lives: but no sooner did their merciless Enemies
gain Admittance, than they butchered every one of the Jews, calling aloud for
Baptism, in hopes of escaping their worse than Paganish Cruelty.

Not satisfied with this, the barbarous Robbers, as well as Murderers, ran next
to the Cathedral, where were deposited the Bonds and other Securities of the
Money owing to the Jews by the Christians, broke open the Chests, and destroyed
them all.

There were 500 Men who took Shelter in the Castle, besides Women and Children.
So that the whole Number of the Jews thus miserably slaughtered, must be
between 1000 and 1500, besides those who were massacred in the City.

We must do this Justice to the King, who was then in the Holy Land, that as
soon as he heard of this unparalleled Proceeding, he was highly incensed, and
sent Orders to the Bishop of Ely, his Chancellor and Regent, to go down in
Person to York, and execute strict Justice, without Favor or Affection, on all
Offenders. The Bishop came to the City, but the chief Authors of the Riot had
fled to Scotland. However, the Citizens were laid under a large Fine, and the
Sheriff and Governor of the Castle were removed from their Places, and
committed to Prison; and the Soldiers concerned in the Fray were punished, and
turned out of Service; but not one Man, either then or afterward, was executed
for the unheard of Villainy.

The Strength of this Castle has been often experienced in Times of War, and
become famous in History, upon Account of several memorable Events. We hope for
the future there will never be occasion to make any other Use of it than to the
same necessary Purpose, to which it is now converted, namely, a Prison; but a
Prison the most stately and complete of any in the whole Kingdom, if not in
Europe. The present Edifice was erected in the Year 1701. In the left Wing of
the Building is a handsome Chapel, neatly adorned with suitable Furniture, and
an Allowance of 40 l. a Year is settled upon a Minister, for performing Divine
Service, and Preaching to the Prisoners weekly; and such of the Debtors as
attend at Sermons, are allowed each a large Loaf of fine Bread. The Justices of
the Peace take great Care, that the Gaol shall be kept as neat within-side, as
it is noble without. The Felons are allowed Straw, and their Beds are now
raised from the Ground: and there is an Infirmary apart from the common Prison,
to which the Sick are conveyed, and a Surgeon has an appointed Salary to attend
them.

The Castle-yard is larger than the Areas of the Fleet or King's Bench in
London, and the Situation is so high, pleasant, and airy, that it is surprising
any Prisoners should remove themselves by Habeas Corpus, to either of those
Prisons, unless it be with a View of purchasing the Liberty of the Rules,
because here they are never permitted to go without the Walls. Strangers, who
visit the Inside of it, seldom depart without making a trifling Purchase of
some of the small Manufactures the Prisoners work up for Subsistence.

The next Building we come to is the Assembly-room, for the Entertainment of
the Nobility and Gentry, who reside at York during the Races. It was designed
by the Earl of Burlington. That Part which is the Egyptian Hall, taken from a
Draught of Palladio, is in Length 123 Feet, 40 broad, and rather more in
Height. This Hall communicates with the common Ball-room, in Length 66 Feet, in
Height and Breadth 22 Feet, besides other Rooms for Cards and Tea: all richly
decorated and illuminated with magnificent Lustres. The Front to the Street is
an exceeding fine Piece of Architecture; but the Egyptian Hall, if you except
the Banqueting House at Whitehall, may undoubtedly claim the Preference of any
other Room in the Kingdom, if not in Europe. The Expense of this Edifice,
amounting to several thousand Pounds, was defrayed by Subscriptions, chiefly
among the Nobility and Gentry of the County, who contributed, some 50 l. and
none less than 25 l.

In the Year 1728, a very handsome Mansion House was erected for the
Lord Mayor; the Basement is a Rustic Arcade, which supports an Ionick Order,
with a Pediment in it. There is a large Room the Length of the Front, 49 Feet
by 29, so that this City has had the Honor to begin a Precedent for the City
of London to copy after.

The Guild Hall is a Building very well deserving Notice, as likewise are
several other public Edifices, which are equally useful and ornamental to this
ancient City.

But what exceeds all others in it, is the Cathedral Church, which for
Magnificence of Structure challenges the Pre-eminence of all other Gothic
Churches, not only in this Kingdom, but throughout Europe, if I may rely upon
the Opinion of a Gentleman, with whom I viewed it, and who had seen the
Churches at Strasburgh, Milan, and Notre Dame in Paris.

The City of Lincoln indeed contends with this of York, for a Preference to its
Cathedral; and as this is a Point in which both Cities are very tenacious, I
will distinguish the Particulars wherein each of them have the Advantage over
the other, as I have promised in Page 6.

In the first Place then, Lincoln Cathedral has greatly the Advantage of York,
in the Height of its Situation; and by different Accounts given by several
Authors, of the Dimensions of both Churches, it appears Lincoln exceeds York in
Length, from East to West, either 14, or 11, or three Feet and a half: in the
middle Cross or Transept from North to South, five Feet; in the outward Breadth
of the West End, by the Addition of two Chapels, as at St. Paul's, London, 53
Feet; in the Height of the West Towers and Spires 72 Feet; and of the middle
Tower, including the Pinacles, 75 Feet.

York exceeds Lincoln in the Breadth of its middle Nef, and Side Ails,
within-side, 26 Feet; in the Height of the middle Nef to its Canopy, 17 Feet;
and in the inside Height of the middle Lantern, 64 Feet and a half.

The Breadth of the West End of Lincoln will not the least avail in this
Dispute, as it has so many egregious Defects, not to say Absurdities. The two
Steeples are crowded together, instead of being placed at the Extremities of
the Front, which by that means would have had an Appearance much more grand.
They rise up above the Body of the Church, as if behind a Screen, without the
least Affinity to any Part of the Building below. Their Ornaments are but mean,
and the Leaden Spires upon them still meaner. The whole Front, extending in a
strait Line, wants Boldness when viewed at some Distance; and there is such an
Expansion of solid Wall, without Windows, or any sort of Aperture, as gives a
Heaviness throughout. The cloistred Work, or Niches for Images, which is the
chief ornamental Part of Gothic Structures, is disposed with a shameful
Disregard to every thing like Design: in one Place, crowded with needless
Profusion; in another, wanted to fill up, where now there is nothing but a
naked and dead Space; and in the Ornaments the Fancy is so irregularly varied,
that all kind of Connection and Harmony is destroyed, so that the Building to
Appearance has the same Effect, as if it were Pieces of different Structures
patched up together.

The Plan of the Church is very irregular, the middle Transept from North to
South having no Ails on the West Side, to answer those on the East. The upper
Transept, or double Cross, can never be considered as a beautiful Addition,
especially since this, and the Eastern Parts beyond, are surrounded with
Chapels and Vestries erected without Uniformity, and the Windows of the Church
are meanly small, crowded, and out of Proportion.

It Is to be observed, there is a great Resemblance between the Ground-plat of
Lincoln, and that of Canterbury, and the one was certainly built after the
Model of the other.

The only Defect objected to York, is, that the middle Tower or Lantern wants
Height, and that the Cross or Transept, from North to South, is built in a
different Style and Manner from the rest of the Cathedral. Both these must be
admitted to be Faults; but, by the way, the middle Lantern is as lofty as the
celebrated Towers of Canterbury and Gloucester, exclusive of their Pinacles,
though not sufficiently high in proportion to its Breadth, being 70 Feet square,
or to the Height of the Church. They have a Tradition in this City, that a
Wooden Spire was once intended to have been raised upon this Tower; which in
that Case would have exceeded the Height of Salisbury Steeple, as the present
Battlements are higher by six Feet, and of a larger Square than the present
Tower at Salisbury.

I am not sorry this Project failed, because it is obvious all Wooden Spires
have a most wretched Aspect.

The only Amendment that can be made, would be to pull down the Bell-turret at
one Corner, and to raise the Battlements about 20 Feet, piercing them through
with proper Ornaments; and carry four Pinacles above them, about 20 Feet more.

However, this Building has two remarkable Beauties not to be found in any
other Gothic Edifice; which are, that the Height and Breadth of the Nef and
Side Ails of the Church, and of all the Arches and Windows come very near, if
not agree with, the Dimensions laid down by the established Rules of Roman
Architecture; that the Span of the Roof; from East to West, rises very near
equal to the modern Proportion; the excessive Height of the Roofs being the
chief Blemishes in most Cathedrals, as may be seen at Lincoln, Salisbury,
Westminster, and particularly Winchester.

The Plan of the whole Church is uniform, as well as the Superstructure,
especially from East to West: the Windows are of a Size and Distance proper to
the Magnitude of the Structure, and are admirable for their Workmanship;
neither is it crowded and encumbered on the Outside by its Butresses, but every
Part is enriched with Ornaments, which receive an additional Beauty from the
Color of the Stone, as it retains almost its original Whiteness.

Thus far what I have said of this Building in general was necessary, in
comparing it with Lincoln. I will now take some Notice of its several Parts
distinctly both within-side and without, beginning first at the Outside.

The West End, which is 124 Feet in Breadth, shows a Grandeur inexpressible;
this Front contains two uniform Towers, diminished by several Contractions, all
cloistred for Imagery, and enriched with other Ornaments. In the South Tower
hangs a deep Peal of 12 Bells, the Tenor weighing 59 hundred Weight.

Between these Towers, over the principal Entrance into the Church, is a large
Window, whose Tracery in Masons Work is of a Figure so beautiful, that it
cannot be equalled any-where. The several Windows in the Towers are large, and
their Tracery and Ornaments well fansied.

The South Entrance is ascended by several Courses of Steps, and Tradition
assures us, there was once as great an Ascent to the West Door. Here a
remarkable Spiral Turret is erected on the middle of the Pediment, and called
the Fiddlers Turret, from an Image of a Fiddler on the Top. Over the Door is a
Dial both Horary and Solar, on each Side of which two Images strike the
Quarters on two Bells.

In viewing the Building from this Part Eastward, we easily discerned it to be
much newer than that Westward, though conformable to it.

The East Front is exceeding noble, and has the finest Window in the World.

The North Side is the same as the South: only a Wall is built to prevent
Night-walkers, and other disorderly Persons, from nesting and intriguing in the
obscure Corners of the Buttresses.

The Lantern Steeple, of which I have spoken already, is ornamented in a fine
Taste, wanting nothing but a better Finishing at the Top: it has eight Windows,
two on each Side, to give Light within; these Windows from Top to Bottom are 45
Feet high.

We now entered the Inside, at the West Door, opening into the middle Nef of
the Church, under the largest Gothic Arch in Europe, which binds and supports
the two Towers. The Nef is the most spacious of any in Europe, except St.
Peter's at Rome; it exceeds the Dimensions of the Nef of St. Paul's Cathedral
four Feet six Inches in Width, and 11 Feet in Height; and that of Westminster
Abbey 16 Feet six Inches in Breadth, but its Height is two Feet less. This is
an Instance of what I took Notice of before, with regard to the Justness of the
Proportion of York Cathedral, and at the same time shows the Extravagance of
that of Westminster Abbey, in this Particular. The Canopy at Top is enriched
with curious Knots of Carving.

From thence we proceeded under the Middle Lantern, to a Stone Screen, that
parts the Choir from the Body of the Church, adorned with curious Workmanship,
among which are placed the Statues of the British Kings, from the Conquest, to
Henry VI.

Over the Entrance into the Choir stands the Organ, having a double Front; it
had before been removed from thence by King Charles I. to one Side, opposite to
the Bishop's Throne. The Reason his Majesty gave for doing it, was, That it
spoiled the Prospect of the fine East Windows from the Body of the Church.

The Choir is adorned with ancient Wood-work carved, and set up with Clusters
of knotted Pinacles of different Heights. The Ascent from the Body of the
Church, through the Choir to the Altar, is by a Gradation of 16 Steps. The Altar
has lately received a considerable Improvement as to its Situation, and the
whole Church in its Beauty, by taking away a large wooden Screen, which almost
obstructed the View of the East Window. By this means it was carried one Arch
farther back, to a Stone Screen of excellent Gothic Architecture; which now
not only shows a Beauty in itself, before hid, but opens a View to one of the
noblest Lights in the World, both for Masonry and Glazing; which is the
aforementioned East Window.

This Window is 30 Feet Nine Inches broad, and 75 Feet high: the Upper Part is
a Piece of fine Tracery, but, in my Opinion, not so beautiful as that at the
West End. Below the Tracery are 117 Partitions, wherein are represented, in
fine painted Glass, most of the History of the Bible. This Window was glazed in
1405, by one John Thornton, Glazier of Coventry; who received, for his own
Work, 4 s. a Week; and contracted to finish the Whole in Three Years.

In a circular Window, at the South End of the Church, is another fine Piece of
Masonry, in the Form of a Wheel, called The Marygold Window, from its painted
Glass, which resembles the Color of that Flower. The North End has Five noble
Lights: each constitute one large Window, and reach almost from Top to Bottom.
There is a Tradition, that Five Maiden Sisters were at the Expense of these
Lights. The Painting of the Glass represents a kind of Embroidery, or Mosaic
Needle Work; which might perhaps give Occasion to the Story.

I ought not to omit mentioning, that all the Windows of the Church, except one
or two, are adorned with painted Glass, representing the Sacred History, and
the Portraitures of eminent Persons. This Painting was preserved at the Time of
the Civil Wars, by the Lord Fairfax, General of the Parliament's Army, who, at
the Request of the Gentry and Citizens of York, placed a Guard of Soldiers
about the Church for that Purpose.

The Body of the Church has been lately new paved, the Plan of which was drawn
by that ingenious Architect Mr. Kent, under the Direction of the Earl of
Burlington: the Figure is Mosaic, and properly adapted to a Gothic Building.

The Monuments in this Church are numerous, many of them very ancient, and
several very magnificent; but to enumerate them distinctly, would take up more
Room than I can spare.

After taking this View of the Cathedral, we were conducted into the
Chapter House; a Building which, for a Gothic Piece, disdains to allow an
Equal in the Universe, and well deserves the Encomium bestowed upon it, as is
said, by a great Traveller, in an old Monkish Verse inscribed on the Wall, in
Golden Letters, as follows: Ut rosa phlos phlorum, sic est domus ista domorum.


It Is an Octagon of 63 Feet Diameter. The Height to the Middle Knot of the Roof
is 67 Feet ten Inches, unsupported by any Pillars, and entirely dependent upon
one Pin geometrically placed in the Center. The whole Roof has been richly
painted, and the Knots of carved Work, gilt; but is now defaced and sullied by
Time. Over the Roof is a Spire of Timber-work, covered with Lead, admired as a
masterly Piece of Work in the Carpenter's Art. The Eight Squares of the Octagon
have each a Window beautifully adorned, and imbellished with painted Glass.

The next Place we saw was the Vestry-room; its Dimensions 44 Feet by 22:
wherein are kept several Antiquities, particularly the famous Horn so called,
made of an Elephant's Tooth; which is indeed the greatest Piece of Antiquity
the Church can exhibit, and to which they ought to pay a high Veneration, on
Account of the Benefit they reap, from the Act that it witnessed to. The
Account Camden gives of it, is; "That Ulphus the Son of Toraldus, who governed
in the West Parts of Deira, by reason of a Difference likely to happen betwixt
his eldest Son and his youngest, about his Lordship, when he was dead,
presently took this Course: Without Delay he went to York, and taking the Horn,
wherein he was wont to drink, with him, he filled it with Wine; and kneeling
before the Altar, bestowed upon God, and the blessed St. Peter, all his Lands."

The Lands are still called de Terra Ulphi. The Horn was imagined to have been
quite lost; but Thomas Lord Fairfax was the Occasion of its being preserved.
Where it had lain, or where he got it, is uncertain; but stripped of its Golden
Ornaments, it was restored by his Successor. The Chapter thought fit to
decorate it anew, and bestowed the following Inscription, to the Memory of the
Restorer, upon it: CORNU HOC ULPHUS IN OCCIDENTALI PART

I will now conclude my Account of this noble Pile of Building, with the
Character given of it (as Mr. Camden informs us) by Aeneas Sylvius, afterward
Pope Pius II. "It is, says he, famous for its Magnificence and Workmanship, all
the World over, but especially for a fine lightsome Chapel, with shining Walls,
and small thin wasted Pillars quite round."

The South Side of the Church is enriched by a Library, to which Archbishop
Matthews's Widow was a great Benefactress. A Bishop was her Father, and an
Archbishop her Father-in-law; she had Four Bishops for her Brethren, and an
Archbishop for her second Husband.

The Bishop had a Palace in the Minster-yard, where great Hospitality was wont
to be kept; but it has been long since leased out. And to show the wondrous
Change of Times, one End of it is now converted into a Dancing-school, and the
other into a Playhouse.

In the Archbishop's Register and Prerogative Office, is a noble Repository of
ancient Ecclesiastic Records, bearing Date 93 Years earlier than any at
Lambeth or Canterbury.

The Church of All Saints in the Pavement is a beautiful old Church, with a
Gothic Steeple of exquisite Workmanship. Upon the Tower is a fine Lantern
(with Pinacles of a considerable Height) not much unlike that of Boston in
Lincolnshire.

St. Margaret's Church has one of the most extraordinary Porches I ever saw. It
is a most sumptuous and elaborate Piece of Gothic Architecture, with our
Savior on the Cross on the Top of it: but what seems still more surprising is,
that they say it did not originally belong to the Church, but was brought
hither from the dissolved Hospital of St. Nicolas.

St. Mary's in Castle-gate is admired for a pyramidical Steeple; as Christ's
Church is for a very fine modern one.

In the Month of August 1738, a Subscription was set on Foot for an Infirmary
in this City, like those begun at London, Winchester, etc. which we have
mentioned. And this excellent Charity has found much Encouragement and Support
here.

A Manufacture of Cotton is lately established in this City, and is arrived at
a very great Perfection; and I could not but be greatly pleased, when I was
there last, to see a very handsome Procession made on this Occasion, viz. on
May Day 1740, at which Time Mr. Clough, the Master of the Manufactory, together
with the several Artificers concerned therein, marched through the City in the
following manner, preceded by the City Music; viz. There were Three Stages
borne, each by Six Porters: On the first Stage were the Teazer, Carder, Rover,
Spinner, and Reeler of the Cotton-wool. On the second, the Bleecher and Winder
of the Linen-yarn. On the third, the Quill-winder and Weaver. Each Person
exercising their several Branches, from the picking of the Wool to the
finishing the Cloth. The Men, Women and Children, employed in the Manufactory,
closed the Procession, all of them clothed with Cottons, or striped and
figured Fustians of their own making, provided for them by the generous
Contributions of the Citizens.

This Manufactory being so well fixed and established in so short a time, is
principally owing to the great Encouragement given by the City, who are
determined to spare no Pains or Expenses to support it. The Bells in the
Cathedral, and in all the Parish Churches, rung the whole Time of the
Procession.

The City of York stands upon more Ground, perhaps, than any in England, except
London and Norwich; but then the Buildings are not so close as at Bristol or
Durham, nor is it so populous as either Bristol or Norwich. But as York is full
of Gentry, and Persons of Distinction, so they have Houses proportioned to
their Quality, which makes the City lie so far extended on both Sides of the
River.

While we were here, we took one Day's Time to see the fatal Field, called
Marston Moor, where Prince Rupert, a third time, by his Excess of Valor, and
Defect of Conduct, lost the Royal Army, and had a Victory wrung out of his
Hands, after he had all the Advantage he could desire.

I made another Excursion to the Duke of Leeds's House at Kiveton, then to the
Earl of Carlisle's called Castle Howard, and the Earl of Burlington's at
Lanesborough in the East Riding.

Carlisle-house, or Castle Howard, is in the Middle of a Wood, which is as
great a Wonder in its Kind* as Mr. Aislabie's Park. The House is of a vast
Extent* and though it makes a fine Appearance at a Distance* yet will it not bear
a critical Examination of the Architecture, when viewed near. There goes a
Story, That the Architect was so sensible of his Errors in one of the Fronts,
that he would fain have persuaded the late Earl of Carlisle to pull it down
again. The Whole is not yet finished.

The Earl of Burlington's in an old-built House, most advantageously situated
on a rising Ground, with a noble Prospect as well toward the Humber, as
toward the Woulds.

I passed likewise through the Forest of Galtres, a little North of the City. It
is in some Places very thick of Trees, and in others very moorish and boggy: it
formerly extended to the very Gates of the City, but now it is much lessened;
and several considerable Villages are built in it.

Having mentioned so many Forests, you will undoubtedly conclude, there is no
want of Firing in this County. It Is very true; for here is not only Wood
enough, but Coal too; which is a very great Comfort to the Poor, against the
Inclemency of this cold Northern Climate, which indeed has very great need of
Firing.

At Hambleton-down are the Races, where the King's Plate of an hundred Guineas
is run for once a Year, by Five-Year-Olds; a Gift nowhere better bestowed than
on that County, which is so famous for breeding of Horses for the rest of the
Kingdom.

From York we entered again into the West Riding, and, traveling due West, we
came to Wetherby, upon the River Air, which we omitted to take in our Course
as we passed by this River in our former Journey, being then more out of our
Way than here. It is a good Trading Town, but has nothing remarkable in it.

Some Miles farther to the South stands Tadcaster, upon the South Side of the
River Wherfe, where the Road from Chester, and that from Cambridge to York,
meet; and is consequently well provided for the Reception of Travelers. It is
principally noted for Lime-stones, and a fine Stone Bridge over the River. But
it has nothing that we could see to testify the Antiquity it boasts of, but
some old Roman Coins, which our Landlord the Postmaster showed us, among which
was one of Domitian, of the same Kind, I believe, as that which Mr. Camden
gives an Account of; but so very much defaced with Age, that we could read but
DO, and AV, at a Distance. Here is the Hospital and School still remaining,
founded by Dr. Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle, who, for want of a Protestant
Archbishop, set the Crown on the Head of Queen Elizabeth; but she afterward,
notwithstanding that Circumstance, deprived him.

Here also we saw plainly the Roman Causway, which I have beforementioned at
Aberforth; and a stately Stone Bridge over the Wherfe.

Mr. Camden gives us a Distich of a learned Passenger upon this River, and the
old Bridge at Tadcaster. I suppose he passed it in a dry Summer. Nil,
Tadcaster, habes Musis vel carmine dignum,
Praeter magnifice structum fine fiumine pontem.
In English thus: Naught, Tadcaster, can thee to Fame bequeath,
But a proud Bridge -- with never a Stream beneath.


But I can assure you to the contrary of this; for though, when I traveled this
Way, it was about the Middle of June, I found the River pretty full.

On this Road we passed over Towton, that famous Field, where a most cruel and
bloody Battle was fought between the Two Houses of Lancaster and York, in the
Reign of Edward IV. I call it most cruel and bloody, because the Animosity of
the Parties was so great, that though they were Countrymen and Neighbors, nay,
as History says, Relations (for here Fathers killed their Sons, and Sons their
Fathers) for some time they fought with such Obstinacy and Rancour, that they
gave no Quarter. It Is certain such Numbers were never slain in one Battle in
England, since that fought between King Harold and William the Conqueror, at
Battle in Sussex; for here fell in the Whole 36000 Men, and the Yorkists proved
victorious.

Tradition guided us to the very Spot; but there remain no visible Marks of the
Action. The Ploughmen indeed say, that sometimes they turn up Arrow-heads,
Spear-heads, broken Javelins, Helmets, and the like.

Farther South still, or rather South-east, on the Road to Doncaster, stands
Shirbourn, a pretty good Town, famous for a well endowed Hospital, erected by
one Hungate a Protestant, for the Maintenance at Bed, Board and Clothing, etc.
of Children from Seven till Fifteen Years old; when, according to their Genius
and Capacity, some are sent to the University, or apprenticed out to Trades;
for which there is a Provision, which, including the Maintenance of the
Hospital, amounts to 250 l. a Year. A noble and well chosen Piece of Charity.

We turned East to Selby, situate on the South Side of the Ouse, a small
Market Town, but very well inhabited, and is famous for giving Birth to our
Henry I. The Conqueror built an Abbey here,

We then fell down directly South, and came to Snath upon the Air; which is
but an inconsiderable Town; but, like Selby, has a pretty good Trade. I should
have mentioned, that there are several Merchants that live at Selby; and that
the Ouse is navigable up to the Town for large Vessels, and has a good Share of
Trade that Way.

We fell down still lower South, to Thorn on the River Dun, an indifferent
Town, of no other Not^ than its Situation within the Marshes; which is called
Marsh-land Island; for it is encompassed by the Dun, the Air, the Ouse, and
another little River, which parts it from the Isle of Axholm, on the Edge of
Lincolnshire, already spoken of; so that these Two River Islands are contiguous.

Being now come to the Banks of the Ouse, near the Influx of the Trent into the
Humber, I shall, after reminding you, that I have now accomplished another Part
of the Proposition in my last Letter, cross over the Ouse to Howdon.

Howdon lies on the Ouse North, in the Eastriding of Yorkshire. It is a pretty
large Town, and is subject to great Inundations from the River, occasioned by
the Freshes which come down from the Woulds; and has been so, it seems, ever
since 1390; when a Bishop of Durham built a very tall Steeple to the Church,
that in case of a sudden Inundation, the People might save themselves in it.
And there have been, within these few Years, several Commissions for Repairing
the Banks.

The Fair, or Mart, held here for Eight Days together, is very considerable for
Inland Trade, and several Wholesale Tradesmen come to it from London. But the
Town is more famous for the Birth or Residence of one of our ancient
Historians, Roger of Hoveden, or Howdon, a Monk of this Abbey. Mr. Camden's
Continuator is mistaken, in saying this Town stands upon the Derwent; for it is
above Three Miles South-east of it; though the Derwent was made navigable,
pursuant to Act of Parliament, 1 Annae, to the Ouse.

The Bishop of Durham has a Temporal Jurisdiction in this Part of the Country,
which is called Howdonshire.

I found nothing in this low Part of the Country but a wonderful Conflux of
great Rivers, all pouring down into the Humber, which receiving the Air, the
Ouse, the Dun, and the Trent, becomes rather a Sea than a River.

I observed, that the Middle of this Division of Yorkshire is very thin of
Towns and People, being overspread with Woulds, which are Plains and Downs,
like those of Salisbury, which feed great Numbers of Sheep, Black Cattle, and
Horses, and produce Corn. The Northern Part, especially, is more mountainous,
which makes Part of the North Riding. But the East and West Parts are populous
and rich, and full of Towns, the one lying on the Sea Coast, and the other upon
the River Derwent, as above. The Sea Coast, or South-east Side, is called
Holderness.

From hence we traveled North-east up to Wighton, being but a very little out
of the Way to Beverley. It is a small, but ancient Market Town, seated on the
Banks of a little River called Foulness. Here are some Roman as well as British
Antiquities. It Is supposed to be the Delgovitia Station of the Romans, from the
British Word Ddelw or Delgive, signifying Image. Some have conjectured, that
here has been a Temple of the Druids, and that their Groves were in the Wood of
Dierwald, which they interpret as derived from the British Word Derwen, an Oak.

On the North-west of Wighton toward the Derwent, stands the Market Town of
Pocklington, which we were told was so inconsiderable, that it would not be
worth our while to go so much out of our Way to see it. So keeping on East
under the Woulds, we arrived at Beverley, which is situate just at the Foot of
them, about a Mile from the River Hull. It is a large populous corporate Town,
under the Government of a Mayor, Aldermen, etc. It takes its Name from the
great Number of Beavers, with which that River abounded. It had formerly a
considerable Trade, by means of a Creek, or Cut, commonly called Beverley-beck,
of old made from the Town to the River Hull, which runs into the Humber, for
the Passage of Ships and Boats, Keels, Wherries, Hoys, etc. to and from the
said Town; and as it had likewise diverse Staiths or Landing-places adjoining to
the said Beech, for the Lading and Unlading of all sorts of Merchandise, the
Town was wont to receive no small Advantage from this Cut or River. But there
being no settled Fund for keeping it open, and cleansing it, and the Expense of
doing it being beyond the Ability of the Corporation, the said Beck was, in
time, choked up, and the Staiths grew out of Repair; whence an Act passed,
Anno 1727, for Cleansing, Deepening and Widening the Creek, and for Repairing
the Staiths, and for Mending the Roads leading from the said Cut to the Town;
and at the same time providing for the Cleansing of the Town itself: all which
has had a very good Effect; for before, the Creek lying in the lower Part of
the Town, the Filth, Dirt, and Soil of the Town was washed into it, which very
much contributed to choke it up.

Beverley is the chief Town of the East Riding, and began to be of great Note
from the Time that John of Beverly, Archbishop of York, the first Doctor of
Divinity in Oxford, and Preceptor to Venerable Bede, built a Monastery here,
and afterward retired into it himself, where he died A. D. 721. King
Athelstan, having made a Vow at the Altar of St. John, before he proceeded
against the Scots, in his Return, A. D. ^30. instituted a new College of
Secular Canons, and granted to the Town many Immunities; particularly, to the
Freemen of it, an Exemption from all manner of Tolls, which was afterward
confirmed by King Henry I. and by all or most of the Kings and Queens of this
Realm to this Time, as the Mayor's Certificate expresses it; which he gives to
such Freemen as apply for it, in the Form following: Villa de Beverley in Com'
Ebor. ss. To all Persons to whom these Presents shall come, A. B. Esquire Mayor of
the aforesaid Town of Beverley, sends greeting.
KNow ye that King Athelstan, of famous Memory, did grant, and also King Henry
the First did grant and confirm to the Men of the said Town of Beverley, and
afterward to them, by the Name of the Governors, or Keepers and Burgesses of
Beverley, an Exemption of all manner of Imposts, Toll, Tallage, Stallage,
Tunnage, Lastage, Pickage, Wharsage, and of and from all and every the like
Exactions, Payments and Duties, throughout and in all Places whatsoever, by Sea
and Land, within all their Dominions of England and Wales. Which said Grants
were confirmed by all or most of the succeeding Kings and Queens, to the Time
of Queen Elizabeth, who confirmed the same to them by the Name of the Mayor,
Governors and Burgesses of Beverley, with several Grants, which have been also
confirmed by all or most of the Kings and Queens of this Realm, till this Time;
as by many and sundry Charters under their Great Seals, more at large may
appear. These are therefore to certify, that C. D. is a Burgess of the said
Town of Beverley, and is therefore discharged of and from all and every the
said Exactions, Payments and Duties. In Testimony whereof the said Mayor has
hereunto subscribed his Name, and caused the Common Seal of the said Town, used
in this Behalf, to be affixed this -- Day, etc.




By these, and the like Privileges, the Town keeps up its flourishing
Condition, notwithstanding it is within Six Miles of so powerful a Rival as
Hull. It has all the Advantage, indeed, of a good Situation, to invite
Gentlemen to reside in it; and being the nearest Town of Note to the Center of
this Riding, the Sessions are always held here, in a spacious and beautiful
Hall, which has a public Garden and Walks, not inferior to any of their kind
in England. In this Hall-garth, as it is called, is a handsome Register-office
for Deeds and Wills within this Division; which is the only County in England,
besides Middlesex, which has such a Registry; to the great Reproach of the
Nation be it said, especially when it shall be remembered, that no less than
two Bills (one for a Registry for the County of Surrey, and another, after
that, for a General Registry over the whole Kingdom) were respectively opposed,
and miscarried very lately in Parliament.

Here are Two weekly Markets; one on Wednesdays, for Cattle; the other on
Saturdays, for Corn. The Marketplace is as large as most, having a beautiful
Cross, supported by Eight Freestone Columns, of one entire Stone each, erected
at the Charge of Sir Charles Hotham, and Sir Michael Wharton; upon which was
this Inscription: HAEC SEEDS LAPIDEA FREED-STOOLE DICITUR, i. e. PACIS
CATHEDRA, AD QUAM REVS FVGIENDO PERVENIENS OMNIMODAM HABET SECVRITATEM. That
is: This Stone Seat is called Freed-Stoole, or Chair of Peace; to which, if any
Criminal flee, he shall have full Protection.

The Common Gaol has been lately re-edified at a considerable Expense, the
Windows well sashed; and, as if Works of Piety were more peculiarly adapted to
this Place, there are Seven Almshouses in the Town, and Legacies left for Two
more; besides a Workhouse, which has cost 700 l. It has a Free School, to the
Scholars of which are appropriated Two Fellowships at St. John's College in
Cambridge, and Nine Exhibitions.

Here were formerly Four Churches, now only Two, but the largest and finest
Parochial ones in the Kingdom: viz. the late Collegiate Church of St. John the
Evangelist, still called the Minster, and St. Mary's. The Minster being very
ruinous, a Brief was procured for the Repair of it in the Year 1710; the
Produce of which, and the Subscription Money, being placed in the public
Funds, was farther augmented by the Rise of South Sea Stock, which enabled the
prudent Managers to complete their pious Design in the most beautiful manner,
assisted by the Advice of that noted Architect Nicolas Hawksmore, Esquire King
George I. encouraged this Work not only by a liberal Donation of Money, but of
Stone likewise from the dissolved Monastery of St. Mary's in York. Sir Michael
Wharton gave in his Lifetime 500 l. and by Will 4000 l. as a perpetual Fund
toward keeping it in Repair.

The Choir is paved with Marble of Four different Colors, Lozenge-wise,
appearing cubical to the Eye. Over the Altar is a large and magnificent wooden
Arch curiously engraven, standing upon Eight fluted Columns of the Corinthian
Order. The Altar-table is one entire Stone of white Marble, finely polished;
the Gift of Mr. Moyser. The East Window is of painted Glass, collected out of
the several Windows about the Church; but so artfully joined, that they make
throughout one regular and entire Figure. The Screen between the Choir and the
Nef has been lately rebuilt of Roch-abbey Stone in the Gothic Style, and is
deservedly esteemed one of the chief Ornaments of the Church. The Body of the
Church is paved with the said Stone intermixed with black Marble. The Pulpit,
Reading-desk, and Cover of the Font, are all new, and of excellent Workmanship:
the Galleries also are new, and beautifully finished, supported by Columns of
the Dorick Order. But not the least surprising Thing in this Pile, is the North
End Wall of the great cross Ayle, which hung over Three Feet and a half, but
was screwed up to its proper Level by the ingenious Contrivance of Mr. Thornton
of York, who prepared an admirable Machine for the Purpose.

On the 13th of September, Anno 1664, upon opening a Grave, they met with a
Vault of square Free Stone 15 Feet long, and Two Feet broad: within it was a
Sheet of Lead Four Feet long, and in that the Ashes, and Six Beads, (whereof
Three crumbled to Dust with a Touch; of the Three remaining, Two were supposed
to be Cornelian) with Three great Brass Pins, and Four large Iron Nails. Upon
the Sheet lay a leaden Plate, with this Inscription, in Capital Letters: Anno
ab Incarnatione Domini MCLXXXVIII. com^^^ fuit haec Ecclesia in mense
Septembri, in sequenti (...) post festum sancti Matthaei apostoli. Et in Anno
MCXCVII. sexto idus Martii, facta fuit inquisitio retiquiarum beati Joannis in
hoc loco; et inventa sunt haec ossa in orientali part sepulchri, et hic
recondita, et pulvis cemento mixtus ibidem inventus est et reconditus. Thus
Englished: In the Year of the Lord's Incarnation 1188, in September, the Night
after the Festival of St. Matthew the Apostle, this Church was consumed by
Fire: and in the Year 1197, on the 10th of March, Search was made for the
Relics of St. John in this Place; and these Bones were found in the Eastern
Part of the Sepulcher, and here deposited; and a Mixture of Dust and Mortar was
found in the same Place, and deposited.

Over this lay a Box of Lead about Seven Inches long, Six broad. and Five deep,
wherein were several Pieces of Bones mixed with a little Dust, and yielding a
sweet Smell. All these Things were carefully re-interred in the Middle Ayle of
the Body of the Minster, with this Inscription added, in Capital Letters:
Reliquiae eaedem effossae, et ibidem compositae, fornice lateritio dignabantur
XXVI. die mensis Martii, Anno Domini MDCCXXVI; quando v. tesselatum ecclesiae
hujus pavimentum primo fuit instauratum. Thus Englished: The same Relics
which were dug up, and replaced, were adorned with an Arch of Brick-work, on
the 26th Day of March 1726; when the Fifth tesselated Pavement of this Church
was first repaired.

Over it, directly upon the Roof, is an Inscription, to show where the Relics
are interred.

In this Church are several Monuments of the Piercies, Earls of Northumberland,
who have added a little Chapel to the Choir. On the Right Side of the
Altar-place stands the Freed-stool, mentioned above, made of one entire Stone,
and said to have been removed from Dunbar in Scotland, with a Well of Water
behind it. At the upper End of the Body of the Church, next the Choir, hangs an
ancient Table with the Picture of St. John the Evangelist, (from whom the
Church is named) and of King Athelstan, the Founder of it, and between them
this Distich: Als free make I thee,
As Heart can wish, or Egh can see.


In the Body of the Church stands an ancient Monument, which they call the
Virgins Tomb; because Two Virgin Sisters lay buried there, who gave the Town a
Piece of Land, into which any Freeman may put Three Milch Kine from Lady Day to
Michaelmas. At the lower End of the Body of the Church, stands a fair large
Font of Agat Stone.

The principal Trade of the Town is making Malt, Oat-meal, and tanned Leather;
but the poor People mostly support themselves by working Bone-lace, which of
late has met with particular Encouragement, the Children being maintained at
School to learn to read, and to work this Sort of Lace. The Clothing-trade was
formerly followed in this Town; but Leland tells us, that even in his Time it
was very much decayed.

They have several Fairs, but one more especially remarkable, called the Mart,
beginning about Nine Days before Ascension-day, and kept in a Street leading to
the Minster Garth, called Londoners-street; for the Londoners bring down their
Wares, and furnish the Country Tradesmen by Wholesale.

About a Mile from Beverly to the East, in a Pasture belonging to the Town, is
a kind of Spaw, though they say it cannot be judged by the Taste, whether it
comes from any Mineral, or not; yet taken inwardly, it is a great Drier, and
bathed in, dries scorbutic Scurf, and all Sorts of Scabs, and also very much
helps against the King's Evil.

From Beverley I came to Hull (properly called Kingston upon Hull) Distance Six
Miles. If you would have an Idea of Hamburgh, Dantzick, Rotterdam, or any of
the second Cities abroad, which are famed for their Commerce, you may visit
this Town. It is not indeed so large as those; but, in proportion to the
Dimensions of it, I believe more Business is done in Hull, than in any Town in
Europe. Liverpoole of late comes very near it; but it has not the Advantage of
a London Trade, which Hull has.

In the last War, the Fleets from Hull to London were frequently 100 Sail;
sometimes, including the other Creeks in the Humber, 160 Sail at a time; and to
Holland their Trade was so considerable, that the Dutch always employed Two Men
of War to convoy the Merchantmen to and from Hull, and those were as many as
they sent to London.

In a word, all the Trade at Leeds, Wakefield, and Halifax, of which I have
spoken so particularly, is negotiated here. All the Lead Trade of Derbyshire
and Nottinghamshire, from Bautry Wharf; the Butter of the East and North Riding
brought down the Ouse to York; the Cheese down the Trent from Stafford,
Warwick, and Cheshire; and the Corn, from all the Counties adjacent, are
shipped off here.

So again, they supply all these Countries with foreign Goods, for which they
trade to all Parts of the known World; nor have the Merchants of any Port in
Britain greater Credit, or a fairer Character, than the Merchants of Hull, as
well for the Justice of their Dealings, as the Greatness of their Substance.
From Norway, and the Baltic, Dantzick, Riga, Narva, and Petersburg, they make
large Returns in Iron, Copper, Hemp, Flax, Canvas, Muscovy Linen and Yarn, and
other Things; all which they get Vend for in the Country in prodigious
Quantities. They have also a great Importation of Wine, Linen, Oil, Fruit, etc.
from Holland, France, and Spain. The Trade of Tobacco and Sugars from the
West Indies, they chiefly manage by the Way of London. But besides all this,
their Export of Corn, as well to London as to Holland and France, exceeds all
of the Kind that is or can be at any Port in England, London excepted.

Their Shipping is a great Article, in which they exceed all the Towns and
Ports on that Coast, except Yarmouth, saving that their Shipping consists
chiefly in smaller Vessels than the Coal-trade is supplied with, though they have
a great many large Vessels too, which are employed in their foreign Trade.

The Town is situated at the Mouth of the River Hull, where it falls into the
Humber, and where the Humber opens into the German Ocean; so that one Side of
the Town lies upon the Sea, the other upon the Land. This makes the Situation
naturally very strong; and, were there occasion, it is capable of being made
impregnable, by reason of the low Grounds round it.

The Advantages of this Situation struck King Edward I. as he was riding a
hunting, after his Return from the Defeat of the Scots in the Year 1296. Upon
which he immediately granted several Privileges and Immunities to those who
would build and settle here, erected a Manor-hall himself, and fitted up an
Harbor, from whence it received the Name of Kings-town. It held out against
King Charles I. who went in Person to demand it, when Sir John Hotham told his
Majesty, "He kept it for the Parliament against him." Yet both the Hothams.
viz. Father and Son, lost their Heads by that very Parliament.

King Charles II. on occasion of the frequent Dutch Wars in his Reign, had once
resolved to appoint a Station for a Squadron of Men of War here, with a Yard
and Dock for building Ships; and on this Occasion, resolved to make the Place
strong in proportion to what those Affairs required: upon which a large Citadel
was marked out on the other Side of the River; but it was never finished.

The Town is exceeding close built, and populous, even to an Inconvenience,
having really no room to extend itself by Buildings. There are but Two
Churches, Trinity and St. Mary's; the former is very large, in which is a fine
Altar-piece by Parmentier; the latter is thought to have been once larger than
it is. King Henry VIII. used it as his Chapel Royal, and with the same Freedom;
for this Defender of the Faith, and Protector of the Church, pulled down the
Steeple, because it stood opposite to the Place where he resided. The
Inhabitants afterward built it up again at their own Expense.

They show us still, in their Town Hall, the Figure of a Northern Fisherman,
supposed to be of Greenland. He was taken up at Sea in a Leathern Boat, which
he sat in, and was covered with Skins, which drew together about his Waist, so
that the Boat could not take in Water, and he could not sink. The Creature
would neither feed, nor speak, and so died.

They have a very handsome Exchange here, where the Merchants from foreign
Countries, and others from the different Parts of the Kingdom, meet, as at
London. The Business arising from the Navigation of all the great Rivers which
fall into the Humber, is transacted here. There is also a fine Free School
founded by John Alcock, Bishop of Worcester, afterward of Ely, who was born at
Beverley, but chose to extend his Liberality to this Place. Over the School is
the Merchant's Hall.

But the Trinity House here is the Glory of the Town. It is a Corporation of
itself, composed of a Society of Merchants. It was begun by voluntary
Contribution for Relief of distressed and aged Seamen, and their Wives or
Widows; but was afterward improved by the Government, and incorporated. They
have a very good Revenue, which increases every Day by Charities.

They maintain 30 Sisters now actually in the House, Widows of Seamen. They
have a Government by 12 Elder Brethern and Six Assistants. Out of the 12 they
choose annually Two Wardens, (but the whole 18 vote in electing them) and Two
Stewards. These have a Power to decide Disputes between Masters of Ships and
their Crews, in Matters relating to Sea Affairs; and with this Limitation, that
their Judgment be not contrary to the Laws of the Land; but so great Deference
is paid to it, that in Trials at Law in such Affairs, they are often called to
give their Opinions.

Here is a noble Stone Bridge over the River Hull, consisting of 14 Arches. A
Greenland Fishery, set up in this Town, went on with Success for a while, but
it decayed in the Time of the Dutch Wars; and the House built by the Greenland
Merchants is now turned into Granaries for Corn, and Warehouses for other Goods.

The old Hospital, called GOD'S HOUSE, stands near it, with a Chapel; both
which were pulled down in the Civil Wars 1643, but were rebuilt in 1673; and
the Arms of the de la Poles, being found among the Ruins, were placed over the
Door of the Hospital, with this Inscription: DEO ET PAVPERIBVS POSVIT

This Michael was the Son of William de la Pole, sometime a Merchant at
Ravenspurn, formerly a flourishing Town of Trade at the Mouth of the Humber;
but being removed to this new Town of Kingston, in the Time of Edward III. gave
that King a magnificent Entertainment, when, in the Sixth Year of his Reign, he
came to take a View of the Place; upon which our Merchant was knighted. The
King afterward, going into Flanders against the French, met Sir William at
Antwerp, where he supplied him with several Thousands of Pounds, and even
mortgaged his Estate for his Royal Master's Use. Such Services could not go
unrewarded from so generous, and so successful a Prince. He made him Knight
Banneret in the Field, settled on him and his Heirs Lands at Kingston to the
Value of 500 Marks a Year, and upon his Return into England increased them to
1000, and advanced him in Time to be Chief Baron of the Exchequer.

Sir William died about 1356, after he had begun a Monastery here for the
Carthusians. His Son, Sir Michael, who, 6 Richard II. was made Lord Chancellor,
not only finished it, but founded likewise the Hospital called GOD'S HOUSE,
abovementioned. He built moreover a stately Palace, called the Duke of
Suffolk's, which Honor he obtained in Right of his Wife Elizabeth, eldest
Daughter of Sir John Wingfield, who married the Heiress of Gilbert Granville,
Earl of Suffolk. But the Happiness of him, and his Family, being now arrived to
the Height, set in Misfortunes; for in the Year 1388, he was impeached of High
Treason, and fled for his Life into France, where he died. William de la Pole
was Prime Minister to King Henry VI. and suspected to be too familiar with his
heroic Queen. He was impeached by the Commons, Anno 1450, and banished; but
his Head was struck off by the Management of his Enemies, as soon as he set his
Foot on the French Shore.

John de la Pole married the Sister of King Edward IV. and so became allied to
Royal Blood, and, by that means, exposed to various Misfortunes; and the famous
Cardinal Pole, who flourished in the Reign of Queen Mary I. descended from that
Marriage.

Here are a great many other Hospitals besides, and likewise a Workhouse, and
a good Free School.

Though this Town, and a small adjacent Territory, be generally reckoned in
Yorkshire, yet it is really a distinct Liberty and County of itself, governed by
a Mayor, a Sheriff, 12 Aldermen, etc. The Corporation has Two Swords, one a
Present from King Richard II. and the other from King Henry VIII. one of which
is, on public Occasions, carried before the Mayor, and a Cap of Maintenance,
and Oar of Lignum-vitae, as Ensigns of Honor, the last being also a Badge of
his Admiralty within the Limits of the Humber.

Farther East from Hull is a little pleasant Corporate and Mayor-town, called
Heydon; it is handsome, well built, and has a little Haven from the Sea, which
increases daily.

The Sea incroaches much upon the Land on all the Shore about this Town; and
it is said, that many large Fields, as well as Towns, which have been formerly
known to have been there, have been washed away and lost.

History tells us, that a Town called Ravensburgh stood somewhere this way; and
it is memorable for Baliol King of Scotland having set out thence to recover his
Kingdom against Bruce; and also for the Landing of Henry IV. when Duke of
Hereford, and the Reception he met with there from the English Nobility,
against Richard II. and yet there are no Vestigia or Traces of this Town to be
now met with.

The Spurn Head, a long Promontory thrusting out into the Sea, and making the
North Point of Humber, is very remarkable. But I leave that till I come to the
Description of the Sea Coasts. I can only observe, that there is nothing worth
Observation upon this Side for above 30 Miles together, not a Port, not a
Gentleman's Seat, not a Town of any Note, except Patrington, which is a very
ancient corporate Town, and very pleasantly seated within the Promontory, and
had likewise formerly a good Harbor: on one Side it looks into the Humber, and
on the other over sweet delicious green Fields, which renders its Situation
very agreeable. It is supposed to be the Praetorium of Ptolemy. The Roman Way
from the Picts Wall ends here, as indeed it can hardly go further, unless it
should extend to Kelnsey, a little Village standing at the Head of the
Promontory.

Spurnhead is likewise supposed to be the Occellum of Ptolemy, derived from the
British Word Y^hell, which signifies a high Place on the East Side of this
Promontory, on the German Sea. The Villages lie very thick, but I met with
nothing of Note till we came up to Hornsey, which is almost surrounded with a
little Arm of the Sea. The Steeple here is a notable Sea-mark, but is much
fallen into Ruin. Here was a whole Street washed away by the Sea, as, it is
said, a Village called Hide was, a little to the North, as well as many other
Villages on this Coast.

North-west of Hornsey, some Distance from the Sea, stands Kilham, a
Market Town in the Woulds, but of no Note.

We next come to Burlington, or Birdlington, a good large Market Town, situate
on a Creek of the Sea. It is a Place of good Trade, and has a safe Harbor for
Ships, and a good Quay to load and unload them. It is much frequented by the
Colliers. The Harbor is made still better, and yet improving, by virtue of
several Acts of Parliament passed for Repair of its Piers, the last of which,
enforcing the former, and supplying Defects, was in 1723. Here William of
Newborough, (a Village just by) one of our Historians, was a Canon Regular, and
resided, when he fell so violently upon Geoffrey of Monmouth's History, and
treated him very abusively, which Leland blames him very much for, as
irreverent and uncharitable to a Bishop after his Death. It seems there was a
personal Enmity between William and some of Geoffrey's Family; though the last is
in no wise to be justified in some of his fictitious Assertions, no more than
the other is for absolutely denying there was such a Man as King Arthur, and
that the Ground at Battle Abbey, where Harold was slain in fighting against the
Conqueror, always sweats Blood after Rain.

The Country People told us a Story here of Gypsies, which visit them often in
a surprising Manner. We were strangely amused with their Discourse at first,
forming our Ideas from the Word, which, in ordinary Signification with us,
denotes a Sort of str^lling Vagabonds. But we were soon made to understand,
that the People meant by them certain Streams of Water, which at different
Seasons (for none knows when they will happen) gush out of the Earth with great
Violence and Noise, spouting up to a great Height, being natural Jette d' Eaux,
or Fountains, which afterward joining together, form little Rivers, and so
hasten to the Sea. I had not time to examine into the Particulars; and as the
Irruption was not just then to be seen, we could say little to it. That which
was most observable to us, was, that the Country People have a Notion, that
whenever those Gypsies, or, as some call them, Vipsies, break out, there will
certainly ensue either Famine or Plague. This puts me in mind, that the very
same thing is said to happen at Swintham Bottom in Surrey, beyond Croydon, and
that the Water gushing out of the chalky Hills about eight Miles from Croydon,
on the Road to Ryegate, fills the whole Bottom, and makes a large River,
running just to the Town's End of Croydon; and then turning to the Left, runs
into the River, which rises in the Town, and so to Cashalton. I mention it,
because the Country People here have exactly the same Notion, that this Water
never breaks out but against a Famine; and as I am sure it has not now broken
out for more than 60 Years, it may, for aught I know, be true.

Near Burlington stands Flamborough-head, a little Promontory, which bends a
little into the Sea, and forms the Bay of Burlington. It takes its Name from
Flam, a British Word for a Fire-light; and not far from this Promontory is a
very large Ditch, which some of the ancient Earls of Holderness threw up as a
Boundary to their Jurisdiction and Estate. It is called Earls Dyke.

Humanby stands next, but is so inconsiderable, that it has lost the Privilege
of its Market, if it ever had any.

At Lebberston, a little Village, a small Way from the Sea, the famous River
Derwent takes its Rise, and makes its Way West, instead of running into the Sea
here. And here I take Leave of the East Riding, which is in no wise so fruitful
as the other two Ridings, by reason that the middle Part of it is overrun with
the Woulds; which are high Grounds, barren and moorish; but are however
well-stock'd with Sheep: yet the Eastern Part upon the Sea is fruitful and
pleasant, which, as well as the Southern Part, produces all Sort of Grain and
Grass. But then, if you take in its Trade and Traffic, it excels both the
other Ridings.

Scarborough is the first Town we come to upon the Coast in the North Riding:
it is a Borough Bailiwick Town, the Situation of which is perfectly romantic;
bending in the Form of a Crescent to the main Ocean, of which you have almost
an unbounded Prospect from all Parts, it being built on a steep Rock, and the
Declivity of a lofty Hill, on the Top of which stood an ancient Castle, founded
by William le Gros, in the Time of King Stephen, and repaired and enlarged
afterward by King Henry II. but demolished in the late Civil Wars. The Summit
of this Hill contains no less than 18 or 20 Acres of Meadow-ground. The Town is
populous, almost encompassed by the Sea, and walled where it joins not to the
Castle, or is more strongly defended by the Sea. It has one of the best
Harbors in the Kingdom, especially since the passing of an Act of Parliament,
Anno 1732, to enlarge its Piers and Harbor, by which they have gained 6 Feet
Depth of Water, which enables the Harbor to receive Vessels of greater Burden
than it could do before. And it is the best Place, between Newcastle and the
Humber capable of receiving in Distress of Weather Ships coming from the
Eastern Seas along our Northern Coast.

The Spaw Waters (whose admirable Virtues yearly occasion a great Concourse of
the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom) were first discovered by Mrs. Ferrow
about 120 Years ago, then an Inhabitant of the Place.

They are reckoned Cathartick and Diuretic, much in their Nature like those of
Pyrmont in Germany, and are apparently tinged with a Collection of Mineral
Salts, as of Vitriol, Alum, Iron, and perhaps Sulphur; but being deemed of the
same Nature as those of Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, before described, I
refer to them.

Scarborough may be said even to rival the Bath itself, and, on several
Accounts, is more eligible and inviting to Strangers. It is well for the Bath,
that its Seasons interfere not with theirs; for it is frequented chiefly in the
hot Months of the Summer.

There are many new Buildings in it; and more going forward, so that there is
now good Accommodation for great Numbers even of the highest Quality; and they
have Assemblies and Public Balls, in long Rooms built on purpose.

The unfortunate Accident that happened in December 1737, whereby this famous
Spaw had like to have been lost, deserves to be mentioned here. Take then the
Account as follows:

The Spaw, as to its Situation, lay South from the Town, on the Sands, and
fronting the Sea to the East, under a high Cliff on the Back of it, West; the
Top of the Cliff being above the High Water Level, 54 Yards; and all about a
Quarter of a Mile from the Town.

The Staith or Wharf adjoining to the Spaw-house, was a large Body of Stone,
bound by Timbers, and was a Fence against the Sea, for the Security of the
House; it was 76 Feet long, and 14 Feet high, and in Weight by Computation 2463
Tons. The House and Buildings were upon a Level with the Staith; at the North
End of which, and near adjoining to it, upon a small Rise above the level
Sands, and at the Foot of the Stairs that lead up to the Top of the said
Staith, and to the House, were the Spaw Wells.

On Wednesday, December 28, in the Morning, a great Crack was heard from the
Cellar of the Spaw House, and upon Search, the Cellar was found rent; but at
the Time, no farther Notice was taken of it.

The Night following, another Crack was heard; and in the Morning, the
Inhabitants were surprised to see the strange Posture it stood in, and got
several Gentlemen to view it, who being of Opinion the House could not stand
long, advised them to get out their Goods; but they still continued in it.

On Thursday following, between Two and Three in the Afternoon, another Crack
was heard, and the Top of the Cliff behind it rent 224 Yards in Length, and 36
in Breadth, and was all in Motion, slowly descending; and so continued till
dark. The Ground thus rent, contained about an Acre of Pasture-land, and had
Cattle then feeding upon it, and was on a Level with the main Land, but sunk
near 17 Yards perpendicular. The Sides of the Cliff nearest the Spaw stood as
before, but were rent and broken in many Places, and forced forwards to the
Sea. The Ground, when sunk, lay upon a Level, and the Cattle next Morning were
still feeding on it, the main Land being as a Wall on the West, and some Part
of the Side of the Cliff as a Wall to the East; but the Whole, to View, gave
such a confused Prospect, as could hardly be described.

The Rent of the Top of the Cliff aforesaid, from the main Land, was 224 Yards.
The Rent continued from each End, down the Side of the Cliff, to the Sands, was
measured on the Sands from one End to the other, 168 Yards; viz. 143 South of
the Staith and Spaw Wells, and 100 to the North of the Spaw.

As the Ground sunk, the Earth, or Sand, on which the People used to walk under
the Cliff, rose upwards out of its natural Position, for above 100 Yards in
Length, on each Side of the Staith, North and South; and was in some Places
six, and in others seven Yards above its former Level. The Spaw Wells rose with
it; but as soon as it began to rise, the Water at the Spaw Well ceased running,
and was gone.

The Ground thus risen was 26 Yards broad; the Staith, which was computed at
2463 Tons, rose entire and whole, 12 Feet higher than its former Position, (but
rent a little in the Front) and was forced forwards toward the Sea, 20 Yards.

The most reasonable Account then given for this Phenomenon, and the Occasion
of the Destruction of the Staith, and Spaw House, and the Loss for some time of
the Spaw Spring, is as follows:

When this Staith, or Wharf, was lately rebuilt, (it being thrown down by the
Violence of the Sea) Mr. Vincent, Engineer for the building of the new Pier at
Scarborough, was desired to rebuild this Staith at the Spaw; and digging a
Trench to lay the Foundation thereof, with great Difficulty cleared it of
Water; and when he had done it, could, at several Parts thereof, very easily
thrust his Stick or Cane up to the Handle; from whence it is concluded, that
all the Earth under the Staith was of a porous, spongy, swampy Nature, and was
much the same below the Foundation of the Spaw House, and all under the Sides
of the Cliff adjoining, as well North as South.

Allowing this to be Fact, the solid Earth sinking on the Top of the Cliff, as
afore-mentioned, (which was of so vast a Weight, as by Computation to amount to
261, 360 Tons) pressing gradually upon and into the swampy, boggy Earth beneath
it, would of course, and did, raise the Earth and Sands as before noticed, and
so effected the Mischief we have particularized.

But, very luckily for the Town, after a diligent Search, and clearing away the
Ruins, as we may say, they found again the Spaw Spring; and on Trial, had the
Pleasure to find the Water rather bettered than impaired by the Disaster. And
now the Whole is in a more flourishing Condition than ever.

Here is such plenty of all Sorts of Fish, that I have hardly seen the like. To
describe the Herring, the Cod, the Whiting, is only to repeat what is said in
other Places, and what we shall have occasion to repeat, more than once, now we
begin to go far North.

We traveled a long Way from Scarborough, before we came to the next
Market Town, which is Whitby, situate at the Influx of the little River Esk,
into the Sea. It has an excellent Harbor, and a good Trade by Sea, and it is
said to have above 200 Ships belonging to it. Here are built a great Number of
good Ships for the Coal Trade. It has a good Custom-house. The Market is well
furnished, and supplied with all Sorts of Provisions.

The Harbor and Piers being somewhat decayed they were repaired by virtue of
Two Acts of Parliament, in the First and Seventh Years of Queen Anne; and in
1733, an Act passed to preserve, continue, and keep the said Piers in Repair
for ever.

By means of these several Acts of Parliament, the Piers of Whitby have been
rebuilt and completed; but yet for some Years past the Entrance into the Port
has been rendered very narrow and difficult, by reason of a Bank of Sand, which
has been gathering about the Head of the West Pier, insomuch that it bid fair
to choke up the Harbor; nor could this Inconvenience be redressed in the
Opinion of the best Judges, but by lengthening and extending the West Pier, and
its Head, about 100 Yards farther into the Sea. For this Reason another Act
passed in the Eighth of King George II. for lengthening the West Pier, and for
improving the Harbor.

At the Foot of some Rocks, at this Town, have been found Stones naturally as
round as a Bullet, which when broken, stony Serpents are found in them, for the
most part headless, looked upon as a Lusus Naturae.

This Place was anciently called Streanshall, and Oswy King of Northumberland
held a Council here, in 663, to determine the Controversy between those who
kept Easter after the British manner, and those who kept it after the Roman
manner, which Augustine the Monk had lately introduced. After the Party for the
first had spoken, the other answering, insisted they kept Easter after the
manner of St. Peter, on whom Christ promised to build his Church, and had the
Keys of Heaven. Upon which the King asked, If it was true, that Christ had
spoken so to St. Peter? Which the adverse Party allowing, the King swore a
great Oath, That he would not disoblige this Porter of Heaven, lest, when he
came to the Gates, he should remember him: and so established the Celebration
of Easter after the Roman Manner.

Near this Place are some Alum Mines, belonging to her Grace the Duchess of
Bucks, in which there is carried on a very considerable Trade.

We inquired as to that strange and wonderful Phenomenon relating to the Air
here, which, as the wild Geese fly over a Piece of Ground near this Place, in
hard Winters, to the Lakes in the Southern Countries, makes them drop down all
of a sudden to the Ground; and had it assured to us for Truth, though none
could assign any Reason for it.

There are Spaw Waters at Whitby, which have had great Reputation. Several
curious and antique Coins have been dug up in this Neighborhood; and a
Monastery was founded here by St. Hilda, about the Year 650; and being
destroyed by the Danes, was afterward rebuilt: the Ruins of which (very
considerable) are still to be seen. In the Month of November 1710, such a
dreadful Storm happened here, that the Damage to the Shipping, etc. was
computed at 40,000 l.

Here the Coast inclines North-west, and we followed it till we came to
Gisborough, a Market Town pretty well built, a little way from the Sea, upon a
small nameless River. It is a fine and delicious Situation, endued with such a
grateful Variety and Advantages of Nature, as renders it most delightfully
pleasant: a fine Scene of Verdure overspreads all the Grounds about it, which
are decked with Plenty of Field-flowers, almost all the Year round. Some
compare it to Puteoli in Italy, but allow that it exceeds it in Healthiness. It
stands high, and would have been incommoded with cold Breezes (as it stands so
Northerly) from the Sea, but that some Hills conveniently interfere, so as to
qualify the Cold.

The Behavior of the Inhabitants too participates of the Pleasantness of the
Place; for they are very courteous, well-bred, and obliging, and very neat and
cleanly in their Houses.

Here are likewise some Alum Mines, but not so considerable and easy wrought as
those of Whitby, which has taken off a great Part of that Trade from hence.

This pleasant Town is the last on the East Side toward the Sea, in this
North Riding, in our Way to Durham. It made so delightful an Impression on my
Mind, that I left the whole County in general, but this Place, and truly
pleasurable Country about it, in particular, with Regret.

And thus have I accomplished the third and last Part of my Proposition, with
respect to my Circuit through this large and far extended County: and though I
have been not a little circumstantial in my Accounts of it, yet there are many
curious Matters, that still remain untouched, and could not be brought within
the Compass of an Epistolary Correspondence of this kind.

But as I have given you only a Description of the County above Ground, take
the following Memorandums of the Treasures which are contained in its Bowels:

Alum, Jet, or Black Amber, Copperas, Marble, Pit-coal, Lead, Copper,
Limestone, and Kelp.

The first Market Town we come to in the Bishopric of Durham, on the
East Side, is Stockton, which lies on the North-side of the Teis. It has risen,
at the Expense of Yarum, from a poor pitiful Village, with Clay Walls and Straw
Covering to the Houses, to a well built Corporate Town, of great Resort and
Business, governed by a Mayor, etc. It Is famous for its Ale, and a good Trade,
which it carries on in Lead and Butter, by the Teis, with London, which
formerly was altogether at Yarum. But this Town lying nearer the Sea, and
consequently more convenient, has almost engrossed the whole Trade to itself.

Coasting along the Seaside, we come next to Hartlepool, which is a famous
corporate Mayor-town, and seated on a little Promontory, which juts out into
the Sea, with which it is encompassed on all Sides, except the West. The Market
was much more considerable formerly than now; and its chief Subsistence rises
only from its good Harbor, which frequently receives the Coal-fleet from
Newcastle, in bad Weather.

We turned from hence to the Left North-west, and came to Durham next, which is
a fine City, pretty large, compact, well-contriv'd, and well situated, high,
pleasant, and healthy, and surrounded almost with the River Were, over which
are two good Stone Bridges. The Castle stands on an Eminence, with which the
River incloses the City; as the Castle does also the Cathedral, the Bishop's
Palace, and the fine Houses of the Clergy, where they live in great Splendour
and Magnificence. All Sorts of Provisions and other Necessaries and
Conveniences for Life, are very cheap, as well as very good, here, though it has
but one weekly Market, which is kept in a large spacious Area in the Town. It
is governed by a Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, and Sheriffs, and has six Parish
Churches, besides the Cathedral, which is very noble and magnificent, adorned
with a high Tower, which rises from the Midst of it, and two Spires at the West
End.

Thus from a poor Oratory of wreathen Wands and Hurdles, with which the
indigent Monks of Landisfarn had first built it, it is become one of the most
sumptuous Buildings of the Kind in England, and was erected out of the
Offerings which were made by the superstitious Multitude at the Shrine of St.
Cuthbert. And yet, notwithstanding the Residence of so many dignified
Protestant Clergy, it is said, there are still great Numbers of Roman Catholics
in this City.

I need not tell you, that the Bishop of Durham is a Temporal Prince, that he
keeps a Court of Equity, and also Courts of Justice in ordinary Causes, within
himself. He is still Earl of Sadberg, and takes Place as Bishop immediately
after the Bishop of London. As the Country about Rome is called St. Peter's
Patrimony, so that about Durham is St. Cuthbert's, to whom the Church is
dedicated, as it is said it was founded by the Monks of Landisfarn. David King
of Scots laying all Waste with Fire and Sword, while King Edward III. was at
Calais, Zouch, the valiant Bishop, fought the Scots at Nevil's Cross, where
they were cut in Pieces, and their King taken Prisoner. He was the sixth Bishop
of Landisfarn, or Holy Island, from whence the Sea was removed hither.

The Bishopric is esteemed one of the best in England; and the Prebends, and
other Church Livings, in the Gift of the Bishop, are the richest in the
Kingdom. They told me there, that the Bishop had thirteen Livings in his Gift,
from 300 l. to 800 l. a Year; and the Living of the little Town of Sedgfield, a
few Miles South of the City, is said to be worth 700 l. a Year, besides the
small Tithes, which maintain a Curate, or might do so.

This Church is very rich: they have excellent Music. The old Vestments, which
the Clergy before the Reformation wore, are still used on Sundays and other
Holy Days, by the Residents. They are so rich with Embroidery and embossed Work
of Silver, as must needs make it uneasy for the Wearers to sustain. In this
Cathedral lies the Body of the V^^^rable Bid.

One of the old Bishops of Durham purchased for a round Sum of Money all the
Rights of the Palatinate, and other Jurisdiction in this County from King
Richard I. and, by his last Will, left them to the succeeding Bishops. But King
Henry VIII. by Act of Parliament, greatly abridged the Temporal Power and
Jurisdiction of this Bishopric; and King Edward VI. (or rather his Uncle
Somerset) by Act of Parliament dissolved the Bishopric entirely; but it was
restored by Queen Mary. Neither City nor County ever sent Members to the House
of Commons, till the Vacancy of the Sea, by the Death of Bishop Cosins, Anno
1672; and since they return each of them Two, which is all that the County send.

We took a Trip from Durham, South, to see Bishops Auckland, which is a
Market Town, pleasantly seated upon a Hill, in a very good Air, and is noted
for a most noble Palace, beautified with Turrets, belonging to the Bishop, and
also a fine Chapel, founded and built by Bishop Cosins, who re-edified the
Palace, after the Enthusiastic Rage of the late Civil Wars had ruined it.

Here we turned West, and following the Were, passed through Wolsingham, a little
Town of no Note, to Stanhop, a little Town also, which had once a Market, but
it is now discontinued. It is only noted for a very good Park, which lies near
it, where King Edward III. besieging the Scots in their Camp, had like to have
been surprised in his Tent by one Douglas, an adventurous Scot, had not the
King's Chaplain defended him with the Loss of his own Life.

These Western Parts of the County, all to the upper Part of it, are very hilly
and mountainous, and the Fields near them look naked and barren; but the Iron
Mines they produce within their Bowels, make ample Amends for the Barrenness of
the Surface.

We returned from these inhospitable Parts to Durham; from whence we kept the
common Road to Chester in the Street, an old, dirty, thoroughfare Town, void of
all Remains of the Greatness, which Antiquaries say were to be seen there, when
it was a Roman Colony. Here is a Stone Bridge, but instead of riding over it,
we rode under it, through one of the Arches, the Stream not being over the Horses
Hoofs in Water; yet, on Inquiry, we found, that sometimes they have Use enough
for it.

Lumley-castle, belonging to the Earl of Scarborough, is just on the other Side
of the Road, as you pass between Durham and Chester, pleasantly seated in a
fine Park, near the East Bank of the River Were. The Park, besides the
Pleasantness of it, has this much more valuable Circumstance to recommend it,
that it is full of excellent Veins of the best Coal in the Country (for the
Lumley Coals are known for their Goodness at London, as well as there). This,
with a sometimes navigable River just at hand, by which the Coals are carried
down to Sunderland to the Ships, makes Lumley Park an inexhaustible Treasure to
the Family.

They tell us, that King James I. lodged in this Castle, at his Entrance into
England to take Possession of the Throne; and seeing a fine Picture of the
ancient Pedigree of the Family, which carried it very far beyond what his
Majesty thought credible, turned this good Jest upon it to the Bishop of
Durham, who showed it him, That indeed he did not know, that Adam 's Surname
was Lumley, before.

Here we turned from the Road, and crossing the Were, followed it East to
Sunderland, a Corporate Seaport Town in the County Palatine of Durham,
populous and well built, with a very handsome Church in it; and though the River
be not large, it carries on a great Trade in Coals, at high Water. It is a
Peninsula, almost surrounded by the Sea. It has a very fine Church; and its
Rector, the Rev. and worthy Mr. Daniel Newcome, was the principal Architect in
the building of it. This Gentleman spent the greatest Part of his Income in
beautifying and adorning it. He began by building a Dome, adjoining to the
East End, into which he removed the Altar, placing it under a Canopy of inlaid
Work, supported in Front by Two fluted Pillars of the Corinthian Order, with
proper Capitals. His Benevolence and Charity were equally extensive to all who
were proper Objects of them; and he delighted in doing Good. This worthy Man,
however, lived not to see his new Works to the Church quite completed, dying
very much lamented, on 5 Jan. 1738.

The Eastern Side of the County, along the Sea Coast, and indeed the Southern
Side, along the Banks of the Teis, is very fertile and delightful, thick of
little Towns and Villages, which are very populous; and as the Mountains on the
West produce Iron Mines, this Side is full of those of Coals, which lie so very
near the Surface of the Ground, that the Cart Wheels press into them.

And indeed from Durham, the Road to Newcastle gives a View of the inexhausted
Store of Coals and Coal Pits, from whence not London only, but all the South
Part of England is continually supplied; and though at London, when we see the
prodigious Fleets of Ships which come constantly in with Coals, we are apt to
wonder how it is possible for them to be supplied, and that they do not bring
the whole Coal Country away; yet, when in this Country we see the prodigious
Heaps, I might say Mountains of Coals, which are dug up at every Pit, and how
many of those Pits there are, we are filled with equal Wonder to consider where
the People should live that consume them.

At the Mouth of the Tyne, which parts Durham from Northumberland, stands the
Village of Sheals, the Station of the Sea Coal Fleets, where there have been
some Marks of Roman Antiquity discovered not many Years since.

Yarrow, noted for the Birthplace of the Venerable Bede, stands a little
higher upon the same River; and upon the other Side of the Tyne stands
Gateshead, the Receptacle of the Coal-pit Men, just over against Newcastle; and
is supposed to have been anciently Part of it, though divided by the River, over
which there is a stately Stone Bridge, with an Irongate in the Middle, which
serves as a Boundary between the Bishopric and the County of Northumberland.

The Air in this Bishopric is pretty cold and piercing; and it is well for the
Poor, that Nature has supplied them so abundantly with Fuel for Firing; and
indeed all other Provisions and Necessaries are very cheap here. It seems as if
the whole County had been originally appropriated to Religion and War; for it
is full of the Ruins of Religious Houses and Castles.

We are now entering into the large and extensive County of Northumberland,
which for many Ages was the Bone of Contention, and Seat of War between England
and Scotland.

Newcastle is a large and exceeding populous Town, under the Government of a
Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, etc. and is situate between the Wall of Severus and
the Tyne, which becomes here a fine deep and noble River, insomuch that Ships
of a middling Burden may come safely up to the very Town, though the large
Colliery Ships are station'd at Sheals. It may be considered as divided into
Two Parts, whereof Gateshead, before spoken of on Durham Side, is one. They are
both joined by the Bridge, which consists of Seven Arches, as large, at least,
as those of London Bridge, and support a Street of Houses, as that does.

The Liberty of the Town, as it is a Corporation, extends no farther than the
Gate upon the Bridge; which, some Years since, was the Preservation of it, by
stopping a terrible Fire, that otherwise had, perhaps, burnt the whole Street
of Houses on the City Side of the Bridge, as it did those beyond it. On the
East Side of this Gate the Arms of the Bishop of Durham are carved, as those of
the Town of Newcastle are on the West Side.

There is also a very noble Exchange here; and the Wall of the Town runs
parallel from it with the River, leaving a spacious Piece of Ground before it
between the Water and the Wall; which being well wharfed up, and faced with
Freestone, makes the longest and largest Quay for landing and lading Goods,
that is to be seen in England, except that at Yarmouth in Norfolk, it being
much longer than that at Bristol.

Here is a large Hospital built by Contribution of the Keel Men, by way of
Friendly Society, for the Maintenance of the Poor of their Fraternity, and
which, had it not met with Discouragements from those who ought rather to have
assisted so good a Work, might have been a noble Provision for that numerous
and laborious People. The Keel Men are those who manage the Lighters, which
they call Keels, by which the Coals are taken from the Staiths, or Wharfs, and
carried on board the Ships at Sheals to load them for London.

Here are several large public Buildings also; particularly a House of State
for the Mayor of the Town (for the Time being) to remove to, and dwell in
during his Mayoralty. Here is also a Hall for the Surgeons to meet in, where
they have Two Skeletons of human Bodies, one a Man, and the other a Woman, and
some other Rarities.

And since this Work went to the Press, I am informed, that the Rev. Dr. Robert
Thomlinson, Rector of Whickham in the County of Durham, and Prebendary of St.
Paul's, gave to this Corporation a valuable Collection of Books, consisting of
upwards of 6000 Volumes; and also settled a Rentcharge of Five Pounds per
Annum for ever, for buying new Books. And Walter Blackett, Esquire one of their
Representatives in Parliament, has, at his own Expense, built a handsome
Fabric for the Reception of those Books, and settled in Mortmain a Rentcharge
of 25 l. per Annum for ever for a Librarian.

The Town is defended by an exceeding strong Wall, wherein are Seven Gates, and
as many Turrets, The Castle, though old and ruinous, overlooks the whole Town.
The worst is, that the Situation of the Town b^ing on the Declivity of Two high
Hills, and the Buildings being very close and old, render it incommodious, to
which the Smoke of the Coals contributes not a little; and consequently
excludes such who seek a Residence of Pleasure: but then as the River which
runs between the Two Hills, makes it a Place of great Trade and Business, that
Inconvenience is abundantly recompensed.

They have Two Articles of Trade here, which are particularly owing to the
Coals, viz. Glasshouses and Salt-pans; the first are in the Town, the last are
at Sheals, Seven Miles below it; but their Coals are brought chiefly from the
Town. Prodigious are the Quantities of Coals which those Salt Works consume;
and the Fires make such a Smoke, that we saw it ascend in huge Clouds over the
Hills, Four Miles before we came to Durham, which is at least 16 Miles from the
Place. In short, the Town is almost surrounded with Coal-pits; and London is
reckoned to take off upwards of 600,000 Chaldrons yearly, at Thirty-six Bushels
to the Chaldron.

Here I met with a Remark which was quite new to me, and will be so, I suppose,
to many others. You well know, we receive at London every Year a great Quantity
of Salmon pickled or cured, and sent up in the Pickle in Kits or Tubs, which we
call Newcastle Salmon. In consequence of this, when I came to Newcastle, I
expected to see great Plenty of Salmon there; but was surprised to find it, on
the contrary, so scarce, that a good large fresh Salmon was not to be had under
Five or Six Shillings. Upon Inquiry I learnt, that really this Salmon, which we
call Newcastle Salmon, is taken as far off as the Tweed, which is near 50 Miles
further, and is brought by Land on Horses to Sheals, where it is cured,
pickled, and sent to London, as above; so that it is more properly Berwick
Salmon than Newcastle.

There is but one Parochial Church, called St. Nicolas, built by St. David,
King of Scotland, but several Chapels as large as Churches. Here are likewise
some Meeting Houses, and a great many well-endowed Charity-schools. It is not
only enriched by the Coal Trade, but there are also very considerable Merchants
in it, who carry on Traffic to diverse Parts of the World, especially to
Holland, Hamburgh, Norway, and the Baltic.

They build Ships here to Perfection as to Strength and Firmness, and to bear
the Sea, as the Coal Trade requires. This gives an Addition to the Merchants
Business, it requiring a Supply of all Sorts of Naval Stores to fit out those
Ships.

Here is also a considerable Manufacture of Hard Ware, or Wrought Iron, of late
Years erected after the manner of Sheffield, which is very helpful for
employing the Poor, of which the Town has always a prodigious Number.

This Town was taken and plundered by the Scots in the Beginning of the late
Civil Wars; and here it was, (to their eternal Reproach be it remembered) that
the Scots perfidiously sold their King for 2000 l. in hand, and Security for
2000 l. more, after he had in Confidence entrusted himself in their Hands, and
without any Conditions made for him: a Transaction equally detestable with that
of cutting off his Head; or more, if possible, as those who did the last were
his avowed and implacable Enemies, whereas the others received him as his
Friends and Protectors.

On the 12th of January, 1738-9, Part of the ancient Gate, leading to the
Castle-Garth, fell down; and though several Shops joined to it, yet nobody
received any Hurt.

The Town was formerly fortified with a great Castle, the Walls of which are
still standing. Its ancient Name was Monk-Chester; but on the building of a new
Castle in the Time of William the Conqueror, it obtained its present Name. It
enjoys great Privileges by the Favor of Queen Elizabeth, and being one of
those which are called County-towns, governs itself independently of the Lord
Lieutenant.

West from Newcastle lies the Bailiwick-Town of Hexham, (the Axelodunum of the
Romans) a Pass upon the Tyne, famous, or rather infamous, for having the first
Blood drawn near it in the late Civil War; and where a Detachment of English,
though advantageously posted, were scandalously defeated by the Scots, who gained
the Pass, fought through the River, and killed about 400 Men, the rest basely
running away; after which, the Town of Newcastle was as easily seized upon,
without striking a Stroke.

The Country round this Town is vulgarly called Hexhamshire. It was formerly
the Seat of a Bishop, till Henry VIII. annexed it to that of Durham. Its
Cathedral was stately, before the Scots ruined the greatest Part of it in one
of their Excursions. On the other Side of the Tyne from Hexhamshire, you see a
House very beautifully situated, belonging to the Family of Errington, called
Bifront; and within Two Miles of Hexham is a fine House built by the late
unfortunate Earl of Derwentwater, called Dilston.

I was greatly tempted here to trace the famous Wall built by the Romans, or
rather rebuilt by them, from hence to Carlisle, the Particulats of which, and
the Remains of Antiquity seen upon it, our Histories are full of. I went to
several Places in the Fields through which it passed, where I saw the Remains of
it, some almost lost, and some very visible. But of this more in another Place.

Northumberland is a long coasting County, lying chiefly on the Sea to the
East, and bounded by the Mountains of Stainmore on the West, which are in some
Places inaccessible, but in many others unpassable.

Here is abundant Business for an Antiquary; every Place shows you ruined
Castles, Roman Altars, Inscriptions, Monuments of Battles, of Heroes killed,
Armies routed, and the like. The Towns of Morpeth, Alnwick, Warkworth, Tickill,
and many others, show their old Castles, and some of them still in tolerable
Repair, Alnwick in particular, and Warkworth; others, as Bambrough, Norham,
Chillingham, Horton, Dunstar, Wark, and a great many more, are sunk in their
own Ruins, by mere Length of Time.

We had Cheviot Hills so plain in view, that we could not but inquire of the
Inhabitants everywhere, whether they had heard of the Fight at Chevy-Chace:
they not only told us they had heard of it, but had all the Account of it at
their Fingers End; whereupon taking a Guide at Wooller, a small Town, lying, as
it were, under the Hills, he led us on toward the Top of the Hill; for, by the
way, although there are many Hills and Reachings for many Miles, which bear the
Name of Cheviot Hills, yet there is one of them a great deal higher than the
rest, which, at a Distance, looks like the Pico-Teneriffe in the Canaries, and
is so high, that it is plainly seen from the Rosemary Top in the East Riding of
Yorkshire, which is near 60 Miles off.

We were preparing to clamber up this Hill on Foot, when our Guide told us, he
would find a Way for us to get up on Horseback. He then very artfully led us
round to a Part of the Hill, where, in the Winter-season, great Streams of
Water come pouring down from it in several Channels, which were pretty broad,
and overgrown on each Side with Alder-trees so close and thick, that we rode
under them as in an Arbor. In one of these Channels we mounted the Hill, as
Besiegers approach a fortified Town by Trenches, and were got a great way up,
before we were well aware of it; for we were already so far advanced, that we
could see some of the Hills, which before we thought very high, lying under us,
as if they were a Part of the Plain below. As we mounted higher, we found the
Hill steeper than at first; and our Horses being very much fatigued, we
alighted, and proceeded on Foot. When we had gained the Top, we were agreeably
surprised to see a smooth and pleasant Plain half a Mile in Diameter, with a
large Pond in the middle of it; for we had a Notion, when at Bottom, that the
Hill narrow'd to a Point, and that when we came to the Top, we should be as
upon a Pinnacle, with a Precipice every Way round us.

The Day, to our great Satisfaction, happened to be very calm, and so clear,
that we could plainly see the Smoke of the Salt-pans at Sheals, at the Mouth of
the Tyne, which was about 40 Miles South from this. We saw likewise several
Hills, which our Guide told us were in England, and others in the West of
Scotland, the Names of which I have forgot. Eastward we saw Berwick, and to the
North the Hills called Soutra Hills, which are in Sight of Edinburgh. In short,
we had a surprising View of the united Kingdom; and though all the Country round
us looked very well, yet, it must be owned, the Scots Side seemed the
pleasantest, and had the best Ground.

Satisfied with this Prospect, and not thinking our Time or Pains ill bestowed,
we came down the Hill by the same Rout we went up. Our Guide afterward carried
us to a single House, called Wooller Haugh-head, a much better Inn than we
expected to meet with thereabouts.

At this Inn, we inquired after the Particulars of the famous Story of Chevy
Chase, and found that the People had the following Notion of it; That it was an
Inroad of the Earl of Douglas into England, in order to ravage, burn, and
plunder the Country, as was usual in those Days: That Piercy, Earl of
Northumberland, marched with his Friends and Followers, to meet the Scots; both
Parties encountered at the Foot of Cheviot Hills, and a bloody Battle ensued,
wherein both the Earls were slain, desperately fighting at the Head of their
Troops; and so many fell on both Sides, that it could not be determined which
had the Victory.

They showed us the Place where this Battle was fought, which, if their
Tradition does not mislead them, is on the Side of the Hill near the Road. It
is said, the Scots were mostly Horse, and therefore the English Archers placed
themselves on the Side of a steep Ascent, that they might not be broken in upon
by them. The Spots of Ground where the Two Earls are said to have fallen, are
distinguished by Two Stones to this Day. The Fight the Scots call the Battle of
Otterburn, and make a very famous Story of it, to the Honor of their Nation.

About Six or Seven Miles from hence we saw the ever memorable Flodden-field,
where James IV. King of Scotland, invading England with a great Army, when
Henry VIII. was engaged abroad in the Siege of Tournay, was met by the gallant
Earl of Surrey, in which, after a bloody Battle, the Scots were totally
defeated, and their King, fighting valiantly at the Head of his Nobility, was
slain.

The River Till, which our Historians call a deep and swift River, where many
of the Scots were drowned in their Flight, seemed to me everywhere passable
with great Ease; but perhaps it might at that time be swelled with some sudden
Rain, which the Historians ought to have taken notice of.

I must not quit Northumberland without taking notice, that the Natives of this
Country, of the ancient original Race or Families, are distinguished by a
Shibboleth upon their Tongues in pronouncing the Letter R, which they cannot
utter without a hollow Jarring in the Throat, by which they are as plainly
known, as a Foreigner is in pronouncing the Th: this they call the
Northumberland R, or Wharle; and the Natives value themselves upon that
Imperfection, because, forsooth, it shows the Antiquity of their Blood.

From hence lay a Road into Scotland, by the Town of Kelso, which I afterward
passed through; but at present inclining to see Berwick upon Tweed, we turned to
the West, and visited that old Frontier, where is a fine Bridge over the Tweed,
built by Queen Elizabeth; a noble, stately Work, consisting of 16 Arches, and
joining, as may be said, the Two Kingdoms. The chief Trade I found here was in
Corn and Salmon.

I am now on the Borders of Scotland, and must call to mind, that I have not
yet gone over the Western Coast of England, viz. Lancaster, Westmorland, and
Cumberland.

I must needs own, that since I entered upon the View of these Northern
Counties, I have many times regretted, that my Limits forbid me often to
decline the delightful View of Antiquity, of which there is so great and so
surprising a Variety every Day discovered; for the religious, as well as
military Remains of the Britons, Romans, Saxons, and Normans, like Wounds
hastily healed up, appear presently when the Callus, which was spread over
them, is removed; and though the Earth has defaced the Figures and Inscriptions
upon most of these Curiosities, yet they are beautiful, even in their Decay;
and the venerable Face of Antiquity has something so pleasing, so surprising,
so satisfactory in it, especially to those who have, with any Attention, read
the Histories of past Ages, that I know nothing which renders Traveling more
pleasant and more agreeable.

The Description of the other Three Counties will be the Subject of my next
Letter. Mean time, I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant.

LETTER IV. CONTAINING A Description of the Counties of Lancaster, Westmorland,
and Cumberland.
SIR,
I Entered Lancashire at the remotest Western Point of that County, having been
at West Chester upon a particular Occasion, and from thence ferry'd over from
the Cestrian Chersonesus, as I have already called it, to Liverpoole. This
narrow Slip of Land, rich, fertile, and full of Inhabitants, though formerly, as
Authors say, a mere waste and desolate Forest, is called Wirall, or by some
Wirehall. Here is a Ferry over the Mersee, which, at full Sea, is more than two
Miles over. You land on the flat Shore on the other Side, and must be content
to ride through the Water for some Length, not on Horseback, but on the Shoulders
of some Lancashire Clown, who comes Knee-deep to the Boat's Side, to truss one
up; and then runs away more nimbly than one desires to ride, unless his Trot
were easier.

Liverpoole is one of the Wonders of Britain, because of its prodigious
Increase of Trade and Buildings, within the Compass of a very few Years;
rivalling Bristol in the Trade to Virginia, and the English Colonies in
America. They trade also round the whole Island, send Ships to Norway, to
Hamburg, and to the Baltic, as also to Holland and Flanders; so that, they are
almost become, like the Londoners, universal Merchants.

The Trade of Liverpoole consists not only in Merchandising and
Correspondencies beyond Seas; but as they import almost all Kinds of foreign
Goods, they have consequently a large Inland Trade, and a great Correspondence
with Ireland and Scotland for Consumption of their Goods, exactly as it is with
Bristol; and they really divide the Trade with Bristol upon very remarkable
Equalities.

Bristol lies upon the Irish Sea; so does Liverpoole: Bristol trades chiefly to
the South and West Parts of Ireland, from Dublin in the East to Galloway West;
Liverpoole has all the Trade of the East Shore and the North, from the Harbor
of Dublin to Londonderry: Bristol has the Trade of South Wales; Liverpoole
great Part of the Trade of North Wales: Bristol has the South-west Counties of
England, and some North of it, as high as Bridge-North, and perhaps to
Shrewsbury; Liverpoole has all the Northern Counties; and a large Consumption
of Goods in Cheshire and Staffordshire is supplied from thence.

Ireland is also shared between both; and for the Northern Coast of it, if the
Liverpoole Men have not the whole Fishery, or, at least, in Company with the
Merchants of Londonderry, the Fault is their own. The Situation of Liverpoole
is very advantageous toward improving its Commerce, and extending it into the
Northern Inland Counties of England, particularly into Cheshire and
Staffordshire, by the new Navigation of the Rivers Mersee, the Weaver, and the
Dane. By the last the Merchants come so near the Trent with their Goods, that
they make no Difficulty to carry them by Land to Burton, and from thence
correspond quite through the Kingdom, even to Hull; and they begin to be very
sensible of the Profit of such a Commerce.

It is some Advantage to the growing Commerce of this Town, that the Freemen of
it are, in consequence of that Freedom, free also of Bristol; as they are of
the Corporations of Waterford and Wexford in the Kingdom of Ireland. Not that
these Corporation Privileges are of any great Value to Liverpoole in its
foreign Trade; but in particular Cases, it may be some Advantage, as in Town
Duties, in admitting them to set up Trades in those Corporations, and the like.

The Town has no Fortifications either to the Land or the Sea; though when the
late Northern Insurrection reached to Preston, the Inhabitants would have been
glad of Walls and Gates; and indeed, had the Rebel Party had time to have
advanced to Warrington, seized the Pass there, and taken Manchester, as they
would certainly have done in three Days more, it would have fared but very ill
with Liverpoole, which could have made but little Resistance against an armed
and desperate Body of Men: besides, the Rebels would have not only found the
Sweets of Plunder here, but Arms, Ammunition, Powder, and Lead, all which they
extremely wanted. They would have had Ships also to have facilitated a
Communication with Ireland, from whence Numbers would have landed, if it had
been only in hopes of Plunder. But, happy for Liverpoole, as well as the whole
Kingdom! the Rebels were defeated, before they proceeded so far.

The Situation of Liverpoole being on the North Bank of the River, with the
Disadvantage of a flat Shore, the Merchants were laid under great Difficulties
in their Business; for though the Harbor was good, and the Ships rode well in
the Offing, yet they were obliged to ride there as in a Road, rather than a
Harbor. Here was no Mole or Haven to bring in their Ships, and lay them up (as
the Seamen call it) for the Winter, nor any Quay for the delivering their
Goods, as at Bristol, Biddiford, Newcastle, Hull, and other Sea Ports. Upon
this, the Inhabitants and Merchants, by the Aid of an Act of Parliament passed
in the Eighth Year of the Reign of the late Queen Anne, which was prolonged by
another, passed in the Third Year of his Majesty King George I. made a large
Basin, or wet Dock, at the East End of the Town, where, at a very great Charge,
the Place considered, they have brought the Tide from the Mersee, to flow up by
an Opening, that looks to the South, and the Ships go in North; so that the
Town shelters it from the Westerly and Northerly Winds, the Hills from the
Easterly, and the Ships lie, as in a Mill-pond, with the utmost Safety and
Convenience. As this is so great a Benefit to the Town, the like of which is
not to be seen in any Place of England, for the Merchants Service, London
excepted, it is well worth the Imitation of many other tradeing Places in
Britain, who for want of such a Convenience, lose their Trade; for indeed the
Inhabitants of Liverpoole suffered not a little for want of it in the great
Storm, Anno 1703. This Dock is capable of holding 100 Sail of Ships.

But though these new Works have been of such Advantage to this flourishing Town,
yet something more appeared wanting to crown the Work; for, it seems, the
Entrance into the Dock or Basin, from the open Harbor, was so straight, that
Ships and Vessels lying in the Dock were often hindered from getting out to
Sea; and those without the Dock, in the open Harbor, were frequently forced
ashore and lost. To remedy this Inconvenience, an Act passed, Anno 1738, for
enlarging the said Entrance, and for erecting a Pier in the open Harbor, on
the North and South Sides of the said Entrance. And as the Lives of diverse
Persons were endangered and lost, and Goods often run and smuggled, for want of
keeping proper and sufficient Lights in the Nightime, about the said Wet-dock
or Basin, the same Act impowers the Corporation to set up such a Number of
Lamps to enlighten the Dock, as they shall think requisite: all which must be
of the highest Benefit to this fine Town, and a great Furtherance to its Trade
and Navigation.

The Custom-house adjoining to the Dock is also but the Work of a few Years
past, and is not only a commodious, but an elegant Piece of Building.

Liverpoole had formerly but one Church, dedicated to our Lady, and St.
Nicolas, and that dependent on the Parish of Walton; but upon the Increase of
Inhabitants, and of new Buildings, in so extraordinary a manner, an Act of
Parliament passed in the Tenth Year of King William III. enabling the
Corporation to build and endow a new one, and to make Liverpoole independent of
Walton. Anno 1704, the Church of St. Peter's on the East Side of the Town,
which had been built at the Charge of the Parish to which it was appropriated,
was consecrated. But this being still not sufficient for this flourishing Town,
her late Majesty Queen Anne, in the Third Year of her Reign, granted to the
Corporation for 50 Years a Lease of the Site of Liverpoole Castle, which had
long lain in Ruins, whereon to erect a third Church, and other Edifices, under
the yearly Rent of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. together with Liberty to use the Materials
of the old Castle for that Purpose. And his late Majesty King George I. by Act
of Parliament, was pleased to make over to the Corporation for ever, on a
Reserve of the same annual Rent, the said Site of the old Castle; whereon the
Inhabitants erected the said third Church, and in Honor to that Prince,
dedicated it to St. George. It was finished in the Year 1734, from the Revenues
arising from the Corporation-Lands, and the Duty on Merchandise, which are
estimated at 200 l. per Ann. These Churches are very handsome and capacious
Buildings. That on the North of the Town has in it a fine Font of Marble,
placed in the Body of the Church, surrounded with a beautiful Iron Palisado;
the Gift of the late Mr. Heysham, a Merchant of London, but considerably
concerned in Trade on this Side, and for many Years Member of Parliament for
Lancaster. There is a beautiful Tower to this Church, and a new Ring of eight
Bells.

The Townhouse is a fine modern Building, standing all upon Pillars of
Freestone; the Place under it is their Tolsey, or Exchange, for the Meeting of
their Merchants; but they begin to want more Room, and talk of enlarging it, or
removing the Exchange to the other part of the Town, where the Ships and
Merchants Business is nearer at hand.

Here is also a good Free School, well endowed, and likewise a very noble
Charity-school, which was built, and is supported, by the generous
Contributions of the Inhabitants, for 50 Boys and 12 Girls, who are maintained
with Clothes, Meat, and Lodging, and have proper Education bestowed upon them.

Here are also several Almshouses for the Support of Sailors Widows, and other
old and indigent People: and since the Year 1730, a Workhouse for the Poor has
also been erected, which, by good Management, has reduced the Poor's Rate from
two Shillings in the Pound to Ten-pence; and they made no Doubt, when I was
there last, that in a Year or two it would be brought under Sixpence in the
Pound.

It is a Corporate Town, governed by a Mayor and Aldermen. The Harbor is
defended on the South Side by a Castle, and the West by a Tower on the River
Mersee.

In a Word, there is no Town in England, except London, that can equal
Liverpoole for the Fineness of the Streets, and Beauty of the Buildings. Many
of the Houses are built of Freestone, and completely finished; and all the
rest (of the new Part I mean) of Brick, as handsomely built as London itself.

Formerly Liverpoole was but indifferently supplied with fresh Water; but they
have been for many Years well accommodated in that respect, by virtue of an Act
of Parliament passed for that Purpose, in the Eighth Year of the Reign of her
late Majesty Queen Anne.

I shall only add, that some of the Streets are named from their Relation to
the Family of the Mores of Blank-hall, formerly chief Lords and Owners of the
greatest Part of Liverpoole, and who first began to beautify and adorn it with
fine Stone Buildings.

From hence the Mersee opening into the Irish Sea, we could see the great and
famous Road of Hile Lake, remarkable for the shipping off, or rather Rendezvous
of the Army and Fleet under King William, for the Conquest of Ireland, Anno
1689; for here the Men of War rode as our Ships do in the Downs, till the
Transports came to them from Chester and this Town.

Going East, we passed through Prescot, a large Market Town, but thinly
inhabited; and came to Warrington.

This is a large old-built Market Town upon the River Mersee, over which is
erected a stately Stone Bridge, which is the only Bridge of Communication for
the whole County with that of Chester. It is on the great Road from London
leading to Carlisle and Scotland, and, in case of War, has always been esteemed
a Pass of the utmost Importance. It was found to be so upon several Occasions
in the Time of the late Civil War; and had the Rebel Scots advanced thus far in
the late Preston Affair, so as to have made themselves Masters of it, it would
have been so again; and, on that Account, the King's Forces took special Care,
by a speedy Advance, to secure it.

Warrington is populous and rich, and full of good Country Tradesmen. Here is
particularly a weekly Market for Linen, as I saw at Wrexham in Wales a Market
for Flanel. The Linen sold at this Market, is, generally speaking, a Sort of
Table Linen, called Huk-a-buk. It is likewise noted for excellent Malt. I was
told there are generally as many Pieces of this Linen sold here every
Market Day, as amount to 500 l. sometimes much more, and all made in the
Neighborhood of the Place.

Not far off is the Village of Winick, famed for its Rectory, worth about 800
l. a Year.

From hence, on the Road to Manchester, we passed the great Bog or Waste,
called Chat-moss, the first of that Kind that we saw in England, from any of
the South Parts hither. It extends on the Leftside of the Road for five or six
Miles East and West, and they told us it was, in some Places, seven or eight
Miles from North to South. There are many of these Mosses in this County: take
this for a Description of all the rest.

The Surface, at a Distance, looks black and dirty, and is indeed frightful to
think of; for it will bear neither Horse nor Man, unless in an exceeding dry
Season, and then so as not to be traveled over with Safety.

The Surface seems to be a Collection of the small Roots of innumerable
Vegetables matted together, interwoven so thick, as well the larger Roots as
the smaller Fibers, that it makes a Substance hard enough to cut out into Turf
or Peat, which, in some Places, the People pile up in the Sun, and dry for
their Fuel. The Roots I speak of are in general small and soft, not unlike the
Roots of Asparagus, or of Bearbind, and have no Earth among them, except what
they contract from the Air, and Dust flying in it; but the Rain keeps them, as
it were, always growing, though not much increasing.

In some Places the Surface of this is very thick, in others less. We saw it
sometimes eight or nine Feet thick, and the Water that drained from it looked
clear, but of a deep brown, like stale Beer. What Nature meant by such an
useless Production, is hard to imagine; but the Land is entirely waste, except,
as above, for the poor Cottagers Fuel, and the Quantity used for that is very
small.

Under the Moss, or rather in the very Body of it, and not here only, but in
several like Places, perhaps in all of them, those ancient Fir-trees are found,
which are so unaccountable, that much Learning has been shown to very little
Purpose on this Subject; for after all, whatever has been said, must be mere
Conjecture and Uncertainty: but in my weak Judgment, it may be thus accounted
for; That Nature, whose Works are all directed by a superior Hand, has been
guided to produce Trees here under Ground, as she does in other Places above
Ground: that as the Trees above the Surface grow erect and high, these lie
prone and horizontal: those shoot forth Branches and Leaves; these shoot forth
none, yet have a Vegetation by Methods directed by Nature, and particular to
that Kind; and it is remarkable, that if they lie buried, they will grow and
increase; but if you take them up, and plant them in the Air, they will wither
and die.

It is observable, that these Trees are a Kind of Fir, and are very full of
Turpentine. Whether there is any Tar in them, I am not positive, but I suppose
there is; and yet I do not see, that for this Reason they should not be a
natural ordinary Product, as other Vegetables are.

As to their being brought hither by the general Convulsion of the Globe at the
Deluge, the Thought is so repugnant to common Sense, that I think it neither
needs nor deserves any other Notice.

From hence we came on to Manchester, one of the greatest, if not really, the
greatest mere Village in England. It is neither a Town, City, nor Corporation,
nor sends Members to Parliament. The highest Magistrate is a Constable, or
Headborough; and yet it has a Collegiate Church, takes up a large Space of
Ground, and, including the Suburbs, or that Part of the Town on the other Side
of the Bridge, it is said to contain above 50,000 People.

The Increase of Buildings at Manchester within these few Years, is a
Confirmation of the Increase of People; for here, as at Liverpoole, and as at
Froom in Somersetshire, the Town is extended in a surprising Manner; abundance
of new-built Streets are added, as also a new Church, dedicated to St. Anne;
and they talk of founding another, and a fine new Square; by which means the
Town is almost double to what it was some Years ago.

So that you have here an open Village, which is greater and more populous than
many, nay, than most Cities in England. Neither York, Lincoln, Chester,
Salisbury, Winchester, Worcester, Gloucester, nor Norwich itself, can come up
to it; and for lesser Cities, two or three put together, would not equal it,
such as Peterborough, Ely, and Carlisle, or such as Bath, Wells, and
Litchfield, and some others.

The Town of Manchester boasts of Four extraordinary Foundations, a College, an
Hospital, a Freeschool, and a Library, all very well supported.

The College was the Charity of Thomas West, Lord Delaware, who being but the
Cadet of the Family, was bred a Scholar, took Orders, and became Rector of the
Parish, which he enjoyed many Years: but, by the Decease of his elder Brother
without Heirs, succeeding to his Honor and Estate, he founded the College in
the Year 1421. The Pope, in Consideration that the Family was likely to be
extinct, is said to have allowed him to marry, on his performing so beneficial
a Penance. It was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and the two Patron Saints of
France and England, St. Denis and St. George.

This Foundation escaping the general Ruin, under Henry VIII. was dissolved
1547. in the first Year of King Edward VI. After this, it was refounded by
Queen Mary; and then anew by Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1578, by the Name of
Christ's Church in Manchester; and last of all it was refounded by King Charles
I. Anno 1636, consisting then of one Warden, four Fellows, two Chaplains, four
Singing Men, and four Choristers, incorporating them, as they were by Queen
Elizabeth, by the Name of the Wardens and Fellows of Christ's Church in
Manchester, the Statutes for the same being drawn up by Archbishop Laud.

The Visitor of this Collegiate Church is the Bishop of Chester, and his late
Majesty King George I. having made Dr. Peploe Bishop of Chester, who at the
same time was Warden of the Church, the Visitatorial Power and the Wardenship
being incompatible, an Act passed Anno 1729, impowering his Majesty to be the
Visitor, whenever the Warden of Manchester happened to be Bishop of Chester.

The Hospital was founded by Humphrey Chetham, Esquire and incorporated by King
Charles II. designed by the said bountiful Benefactor for the Maintenance of 40
poor Boys out of the Town and Parish of Manchester, and some other neighboring
Parishes; but it is enlarged since to the Number of 60, by the Governors of the
said Hospital, who have improved the Revenues of it.

The said Founder also erected a very fair and spacious Library, which is
furnished with a competent Stock of choice and valuable Books, and daily
increasing, with the Income of 116 l. per Annum, settled to buy Books for ever,
and to afford a competent Salary for a Library Keeper. There is also a large
School for the Hospital Boys, where they are daily instructed, and taught to
read and write.

The Public School was founded, A. D. 1519, by Hugh Oldham, D. D. Bishop of
Exeter; and the Revenues left by him are, of late, very much increased, and the
School has been suitably improved from them.

Besides these public Benefactions and Endowments, there have been several
other considerable Sums of Money, and annual Revenues, left and bequeathed to
the Poor of the said Town, who are thereby, with the Kindness and Charity of
the present Inhabitants, competently provided for, without starving at Home, or
being forced to seek Relief Abroad.

As for the Antiquity of the Place, it is the Mancunium of the Romans; and what
is now called Knockcastle, was the Site of the Roman Castrum; and many
Antiquities have been found here. The Foundation of the Castle Wall and Ditch
still remain in Castlefield, as some time called.

The new Church I have mentioned, was finished about the Year 1723, by
voluntary Subscriptions: the Choir is Alcove-fashion, and the Pilasters painted
of Lapis Lazuli Color. The old Church is very large, and has Three Rows of
neat Pillars. They have Looms that work 24 Laces at a time, an Invention they
borrowed from the Dutch. For the Space of Three Miles upwards, they have no
less than 60 Water-mills. The Town stands chiefly on a Rock, and across the
River, the large Town, as it may be called, is named Salthorp.

The Antiquity of the Manufacture is, indeed, worth taking notice of, which,
though we cannot trace it by History, we have reason to believe began something
earlier than the Woollen Manufactures in other Parts of England, of which I
have spoken so often; because the Cotton might itself come from the
Mediterranean, and be known by Correspondents in those Counties, when that of
Wool was not pushed at, because our Neighbors wrought the Goods; and though they
bought the Wool from England, yet we did not want the Goods: whereas, without
making the Cotton Goods at Home, our People could not have them at all; and
that Necessity, which is the Mother of Invention, might put them upon this; and
without such Necessity, Ignorance and Necessity prevented the other.

The River Irwell runs close by Manchester, and receives the little River Irke
just above on the North and North-east Side. There is a very firm, but ancient
Stone Bridge over the Irwell, which is built exceeding high, because this
River, though not great, yet coming from the mountainous Part of the Country,
swells sometimes so suddenly, that in one Night's time they told me Waters
would frequently rise Four or Five Yards, and the next Day fall as hastily as
they rose.

About Eight Miles from Manchester, North-west, lies Bolton. We saw nothing
remarkable in it, but that the Cotton Manufacture reached hither, though the
Place did not, like Manchester, seem increasing.

Here the old Earl of Derby was beheaded, Oct. 15. 1651, for proclaiming King
Charles II.

As I have noted above, we turned East here, and came to Bury, a small
Market Town on the River Roch, which is the utmost Bound of the Cotton
Manufacture, which flourishes so well at Manchester, etc. And here the Woollen
Manufacture of coarse Sorts, called Half-thicks and Kersies, begins, which
imploys this, and all the Villages about it.

From thence we went to Rochdale, a Market Town of good Traffic, a larger, and
more populous Town than Bury; it lies under the Hills called Blackstone Edge;
which having mentioned, at my Entrance this Way into Yorkshire, I must now go
back again to the Sea Coast; for I took my Course that Way up to Preston and
Lancaster in this Journey, having traveled thus far from Liverpoole, in my
former Journey to Halifax, etc. But must first observe, that there are on this
Eastern Side of the County, Northward of Rochdale, the Towns of Haslington,
Burnley and Coln, which lie just under the Mountains; and likewise Blackburn
and Clithero, a little West of them: all which being merely Market Towns, and
of no other Note, I shall say no more of them, other than that Clithero stands
upon the Ribble, and is the most considerable; and that at Coln and Burnley
have been discovered a great many Roman Coins.

I take Wigan first, in my Way back to the Sea Coast: it lies on the high
Post-road to Lancaster. This Town has a good Market, and is noted for its
Manufacture in Coverlids, Rugs, Blankets, and other Sort of Bedding Furniture;
and likewise for Pit-coal, and Iron-work.

Between Wigan and Bolton, in the Estate of Sir Roger Bradshaw, is found great
Plenty of what they call Canel or Candle Coal, the like of which is not to be
seen in Britain, or perhaps in the World. By putting a lighted Candle to them,
they are presently in a Flame, and yet hold Fire as long as any Coals whatever,
and burn more or less as they are placed in the Grate flat or edgewise. They
are smooth and sleek, when the Pieces part from one another, and will polish
like Alabaster. A Lady may take them up in a Cambrick Hankerchief, and they
will not soil it, though they are as black as the deepest Jet. They are the most
pleasant and agreeable Fuel that can be found; but are so remote from London,
that the Carriage makes them too dear for common Use. We saw some of them at
Warrington too; but all from the same Pits.

I must not pass over the Burning Well, as it is called, near Wigan; the
Account of which take in the Words of Mr. Camden's Continuator: "Within a Mile
and a half of Wigan is a Well, which does not appear to be a Spring, but rather
Rainwater, at first Sight. There is nothing about it that seems extraordinary;
but, upon emptying it, there presently breaks out a sulphurous Vapor, which
makes the Water bubble up as if it boiled: a Candle being put to it, it
presently takes Fire, and burns like Brandy; the Flame in a calm Season will
continue a whole Day; by the Heat whereof they can boil Eggs, Meat, etc. though
the Water itself be cold. By this Bubbling the Water does not increase, but is
only kept in Motion by the sudden Halitus of the Vapors breaking out. The same
Water, taken out of the Well, will not burn; as neither the Mud upon which the
Halitus has beat."



Dr. Leigh, in his Natural History of Lancashire, not only describes it, but
accounts very judiciously for the Thing itself, and by it for the Warmth of all
hot Baths.

On the same Road, a little South, stands Newton, which had once a Market, but
is now difused. It is only noted for a very eminent Charity-school, founded in
1707, by one Hornby, a Yeoman of the same Place. The poorer Sort of Children
are taught to read, write, and cast Accounts, and have Dinners every School-day
besides. There are also Ten Boys and Ten Girls, who lodge in an Hospital
contiguous to the School, where they are provided with all other Necessaries
till 14 Years old. The Fund for this Charity was 2000 l. A large Sum for a
Yeoman to give!

From hence we passed to Ormskirk West, toward the Seacoast. It is a
Market Town that has a good Inland-trade; but we saw nothing remarkable here,
but the Monuments of some of the ancient Family of the Stanleys, before they
were ennobled. And here they still continue to bury the Family, whose Seat is
called Latham, not far from this Town; to which belongs a very large Estate,
and a fine Park. Latham House is noted for having been gallantly defended in
the late Civil Wars by a Woman, the Lady Charlotte, Countess of Derby, who held
it to the last Extremity against the Parliament Forces, which could never
reduce her to capitulate; but kept the Place gloriously, till she was relieved
by Prince Rupert. It was, however, ruined in a second Siege, and is now sold
out of the Family, and in Possession of Thomas Bootle, Esquire who is building a
magnificent House there.

Fernby, a Village, lies near the Seaside, in the marshy Grounds, where they
dig Turf, that serves both for Fire and Candle. These marshy Grounds extend a
great Way North up, beyond Eccleston, and almost up to Preston. On the Edge of
it Eastward is Marton Mere, which has been very large; but much of it is now
drained.

Eccleston is a Market Town, where nothing remarkable is to be seen: Nor at
Charley, a Town of the same Kind; which lies a little North-east of it.

Preston stands next, a corporate Mayor Town, having Three weekly Markets, well
supplied and frequented. It is a large fine Town, situated on the Ribble: it is
pretty full of People, but not like Liverpoole or Manchester; for we now come
beyond the trading Part of the County. But though there is no Manufacture, the
Town being honored with the Court of Chancery, and the Officers of Justices
for Lancaster, is full of Gentlemen, Attorneys, Proctors, and Notaries, the
Process of Law being here of a different Nature from that in other Places, by
reason that it is a Duchy and County Palatine, and has particular Privileges of
its own. The People are gay here, though not perhaps the richer for that; but it
has, on this Account, obtained the Name of Proud Preston. Here is a great deal
of good Company, but not so much, they say, as was before the late bloody
Action with the Northern Rebels; not that the Battle hurt many of the immediate
Inhabitants, but the Consequences of it so severely affected many Families
thereabout, that they still retain the Remembrance of it.

Not far from Preston is Ribchester, supposed to be the Bretonomacum of the
Ancients; a Town which in its flourishing State was said to be the richest in
Christendom. So many Pieces of Antiquity have been dug up in its Neighborhood,
that it was most probably a Place of great Importance among the ancient Romans.

Between the Ribble, and a little River some Miles South of Lancaster, the Land
elbows out, in the Form of a Semicircle, into the Sea; and this Tract they
call the Field-lands, in which is a small Market Town, called Kirkham; only
remarkable for a good Free School which has Three Masters.

Poulton is another Market Town in the same Tract, very convenient in its
Situation for Trade, being near the Mouth of the River Wire. We followed the
Postroad, and passed through Garstang, which stands upon it, about Midway
between Preston and Lancaster, and is of no other Note than having a Market;
and so leaving Wiredale Forest on our Right, we arrived at

Lancaster, the County Town, situate near the Mouth of the River Lone, or Lune.
The Town is ancient, and has little else to recommend it than that, and to have
given Title to many Branches of the Royal Family of England. It has a decayed
Castle, and a more decayed Port, not capable of receiving Ships of any
considerable Burden. The Bridge has Five Arches, and is handsome and strong;
but here is little or no Trade, and few People. It surprised me to hear, that
there are not above 60 Parishes in all this large County; but many of them are
consequently very large, and there are above 120 Chapels of Ease, no less than
16 of which are in one Parish.

The Castle of Lancaster is now the County Gaol, and the Assizes are held in
it. The Town has only one Parish Church, which is fair and spacious.

It is governed by a Mayor, etc. to whom Edw. III. granted the Privilege, That
Pleas and Sessions in the County should be held nowhere but at Lancaster. It
is the Longovicum of the Romans, who have had a Station here. On the steepest
Side of the Hill below the Church hangs a Piece of a Roman Wall called
Wery-wall, derived, as Camden thinks, from the British Word Caerwirdd, a green
City, from the Verdure of the Hills.

As we came along the Seaside, we observed a Kind of strange Crows, whose
Bodies are blue, and Heads and Wings black.

Not far from Lancaster, at the Foot of a high Hill called Warton Crag, (on the
Top of which is a Beacon) stands an agreeable little obscure Town named Warton,
upon the Side of a Lake, where is a good Grammar School, with Accommodations,
and a Library for the Benefit of the Masters; which, together with an Hospital
for Six poor Men, was founded and endowed by Dr. Hutton, then Bishop of Durham,
in 1594, who was afterward translated to York; which certainly must have been
then a Bishopric of very great Value, to have induced him to quit Durham for
it, notwithstanding its being an Archbishopric, and the Title of Grace annexed
to its Prelate. Here is also a very neat-built Church.

Higher up North, toward the Extremity of the County, next Westmorland, is
Hornby Castle, upon the River L^n; which is an excellent Building, the Seat of
the Lords of Monteagle, a Branch of the Stanleys, and since of the Parkers, one
of whom, marrying into that Family, had, in King James I.'s Time, the same
Title conferred on him; and 'twas this Nobleman who discovered the Powder Plot.

This Part of the Country seemed very strange and dismal to us, after coming
from the South Side, which is so rich and fertile, that it is noted for showing
the largest Breed of Cows and Oxen in the Kingdom, whose Bulk, as well as
Horns, are of such a Magnitude as is very astonishing; besides their fine
spotted Deer, which are said to be peculiar to that Part of the County.

Here, among the Mountains, our Curiosity was frequently moved to inquire what
high Hill this was, or that; and we soon were saluted with that old Verse in
Camden, Ingleborough, Pendle-hill, and Penigent,
Are the highest Hills between Scotland and Trent.
Indeed they were all, in my Judgment, of a stupendous Height; but in a Country
all mountainous and full of high Hills, it was not easy for a Traveller to
judge which was highest.

As these Hills were lofty, so they had an Aspect of Terror. Here were no rich
pleasant Valleys between them, as among the Alps; no Lead Mines and Veins of
rich Ore, as in the Peak; no Coal-pits, as in the Hills about Halifax; but all
barren and wild, and of no Use either to Man or Beast. Indeed here were
formerly, as far back as the Time of Queen Elizabeth, some Copper Mines, and
they wrought them to good Advantage; but whether the Vein of Ore failed, or
what else was the Reason, we know not, but they are all given over long since,
and this Part of the Country yields little or nothing at all.

West of Hornby Castle is a considerable Tract of Ground, which is Part of this
County, and runs North, parallel with the West Side of Westmorland, and the
West Side of Cumberland, and on the South it runs out in a Promontory into the
Sea; it is called Fourness. We passed over the Sands into it, which are very
dangerous, and unpassable without Guides, who are kept here for that Purpose,
at the Expense of the Government. It contains, besides Villages, Four
Market Towns, called Cartmel, Dalton, Ulverston, and Howkshead, but are of no
great Note. It is very mountainous, and full of Lakes or Meres; the largest is
Winander Mere, which makes the utmost Northern Bound of this Tract of Ground,
as of this Shire. It is famous for producing the Char-fish, seldom found,
unless it be at Ulles-water, bordering on Westmorland, and in North Wales, as I
have mentioned before. It is a curious Fish, and, as a Dainty, is potted, and
sent far and near by way of Present. It must needs be a great Rarity, since the
Quantity they take, even here, is but small. Mr. Camden's Continuator calls it
very happily the Golden Alpine Trout. This Mere is 18 Miles in Circumference,
10 in Length, and Two in Diameter, and the Bottom is paved, as it were, with
one continued Rock.

Lancashire, as has been said, is a County Palatine; and was wont to give Title
of Duke to a Branch of the Royal Family; and till the Two Roses, the White and
Red, were united in the Marriage of Henry VII. of the Lancaster Line, with
Elizabeth, Heiress of the House of York, these Two Branches of the Royal
Family, by their different Pretensions to the Crown, gave Occasion to the Wars
and Confusions, which for many Years made England a Scene of Blood and
Desolation. Three successive Princes, Hen. IV. V. and VI. were of the Lancaster
Line; and the latter lost his Crown and Life, as did his princely Son, to
Edward IV. of the House of York, whose Two Sons being murdered by their Uncle
Richard III. and he himself killed at Bosworth-field, the Lancaster Line was
again restored in Henry VII. who married the Heiress of the House of York, as
has been said.

Lancashire Witches are so much a Phrase, that I have reserved to this Place,
to mention, that an Act passed the 9th of his present Majesty, King George II.
to rescue those poor old Creatures, who, by the Ignorance and Superstition of
the rustic Rabble, were styled Witches, from the Terror of the Laws, which
though in some sort looked upon as obsolete, were nevertheless in Force against
them, and had given too much Occasion (till within these few Years past, that
the Trial and Acquittal of Jane Wenman, as I have mentioned in p. 185. Vol. II.
discouraged the wild Fury and superstitious Ignorance of the Vulgar) for
persecuting poor Wretches, whose Age and Infirmities, as well as miserable
Poverty, were enough, one would have thought, to entitle them to Pity, rather
than to the barbarous Usage they were wont to meet with.

This Act repeals the Statute made in the First Year of the Reign of that
Witch-making Prince It Is well known, that this Act was ^^ssed in Compliment to
the King's Opinion of Devils and Witch^^ and to the Book he wrote, entitled
Demonology.
, King James I. (who showed himself no more in this, than in other Actions of
his Life, a Conjurer) entitled, An Act against Conjuration, Witchcraft, and
dealing with evil and wicked Spirits; and also repeals an Act of the Parliament
of Scotland, Anents Witchcrafts, etc.

And here we may be allowed to give a Caution to many of our fair Readers, as
well as to the lower Class of Fortune-casters, by Coffee-grounds, etc. For by
this Act, Persons pretending to tell Fortunes, and to discover lost or stolen
Goods, by virtue of any occult Art or Science, shall be imprisoned a Year; and
once every Quarter of that Year, be pillory'd; and obliged to find Security for
their good Behavior, at the Pleasure of the Court in which Conviction shall
pass. And here let me be further indulged to observe, that certain married
Ladies, who may incur the Penalty of this Act, may be still worse off than
Maidens, because perhaps their Husbands can, the least of all others, be
expected to be bound for their requisite good Behavior.

I now entered Westmorland, a County eminent only for being the wildest, most
barren, and frightful of any that I have passed over in England, or in Wales.
The West Side, which borders on Cumberland, is indeed bounded by a Chain of
almost unpassable Mountains, which, in the Language of the Country, are called
Fells, and these are called Fourness Fells, from the Promontory which I just
mentioned, and an Abbey built also in ancient Times, called Fourness. The whole
County is divided into the Barony of Kendal, which is very mountainous, and in
the Diocese of Chester; and the Barony of Westmorland, a large champaign
Country, in the Diocese of Carlisle.

It must be owned, however, that here are some very pleasant manufacturing
Towns, and consequently populous.

The Manufacture in which the People are employed, are chiefly Woollen Cloths,
especially at Kirkby-Lonsdale, and Kendal.

Kendal is a rich and populous Town, has a Free School well endowed, and drives
a great Trade in Woollen Cloth, Cottons, Druggets, Serges, Hats, and Stockens.

Over the River Ken, whereon Kendal stands, are Two Bridges of Stone, and
another of Wood. At some small Distance from the last, are to be seen the Ruins
of a Castle; which was the Birthplace of Catharine Parr, the Sixth Wife of
Henry VIII. The Church is fair and spacious, and there are Two Chapels of Ease
to it. Near the Churchyard stands a fair public School, whence a certain
Number of Scholars are elected to Queen's-college, Oxon. It gives Title of
Duchess to Erengard Schulemberg, a Lady of prime Consequence in the Reign of
King George I.

Lonsdale or Kirkby-Lonsdale, is a large Town, has a fair Church, Stone Bridge,
and a good Trade for Cloth; and gives Title of Viscount to the noble Family of
Louther.

The Upper, or Northern Part of the County, has Two manufacturing Towns, called
Kirkby-Stephen, and Appleby; the last is the Capital of the County, has a
Free School and Hospital, and is the only Town in the County that sends Members
to Parliament. A great Manufacture of Yarn Stockens is carried on at
Kirkby-Stephen.

My Lord Lonsdale, of the Family of Louther, had a very noble and ancient Seat
at Louther, and upon the River Louther, which all together add a Dignity to the
Family, and are Tests of its Antiquity. The House was beautiful, but the
Stables were the Wonder of England, being esteemed the largest and finest that
any Nobleman or Gentleman in Britain is Master of: and his Lordship breeds as
good Running Horses, and Hunters, as most in England. But the House was of late
unfortunately burnt down, and all its fine Pictures and Furniture consumed, and
is not yet rebuilt.

Near the River Louther is a Spring, which ebbs and flows several times in a
Day.

In this County the noble Family of Wharton had their Seat in a Place of the
same Name.

When we entered at the South Part of this County, I began indeed to think of
Merionethshire, and the Mountains of Snowden in North Wales, seeing nothing
round me, in many Places, but unpassable Hills, whose Tops, covered with Snow,
seemed to tell us, all the pleasant Part of England was at an End. The great
Winander Mere, extending itself like a Sea, on the West Side, from North Bridge
on the South, where it contracts itself again into a River, up to Gresemere
North, and is the Boundary of the County, as I have said, on that Side; and the
English Apennines, as Mr. Camden calls the Mountains of Yorkshire North Riding,
lie like a Wall of Brass on the other; and indeed in the most literal Sense
they are so: for it is the Opinion of the most skilful and knowing People in
the County, that they are full of inexhaustible Mines of Copper, which is
convertible into Brass, and a Quantity of Gold in them also: nay, of late
Years, they worked at some Copper Mines here; but the Ore lies so deep, and is
so hard to come at, that they did not seem to go cheerfully on.

But notwithstanding the terrible Aspect of the Hills, when we had passed by
Kendal, and descended from the frightful Mountains, the flat Country began to
show itself; and we soon found the North and Northeast Part of the County to be
pleasant, rich, fruitful, and, if compared to the other Part, may be said to be
populous. The River Eden, the last River of England on this Side, as the Tyne
is on the other, rises in this Part out of the Side of a prodigious high
Mountain, called Mowill Hill, or Wildbore Fell, which you please; after which,
it runs through the Middle of this Vale, which, as I said before, is a very
agreeable and pleasant Country, or, perhaps, seems to be so the more, in
Comparison with the horrid Height and Narrowness of the Eastern and Southern
Parts. An Act passed some Years ago to make this River navigable, in which the
neighboring Country find great Advantage.

In the Vale, and on the Bank of this River, stands Appleby, or Apulby, the
Abalaba of the Ancients, once a flourishing City, now a scattering, decayed,
and half-demolished Town, the fatal Effects of the ancient Inroads of the
Scots, who used to make frequent Incursions on this County, and became several
times Masters of this Town, and at length burnt it to the Ground; a Blow it has
not yet recovered.

There are not many Seats of the Nobility in this Part, though several ancient
Families receive their Names from hence, as Strickland from the Lands of
Strickland, Wharton (now extinct) from Wharton-hall, Louther from the River
Louther, Warcop of Warcop, Langdale of Langdale, Musgrave from Musgrave, etc.

The Roman Highway, which I have so often mentioned, and which, in my last
Letter, I left at Leeming-lane and Peers-bridge in the North Riding of York,
enters this County from Rear-cross, or Ree-cross, upon Stanmore, and crossing
it almost due East and West, goes through Appleby, passing the Eden a little
North from Perith, at an ancient Roman Station called Brovoniacum, where was a
large and stately Stone Bridge; but now the great Road leads to the Left Hand
to Perith; in going to which, we first pass the Eden at a very good Stone
Bridge, called Louther Bridge, and then the Elnot over another.

Perith, or Penrith, called by the Romans Verterae, is a handsome Market Town,
populous and well built, and, for an Inland Town, has a very good Share of
Trade. It was unhappily possessed by the late Party of Scots Highland Rebels,
when they made that desperate Push into England, which ended at Preston. In the
Moor, or Heath, on the North Part of this Town, the Militia of the County,
making a brave Appearance, and infinitely outnumbering the Highlanders, were
drawn up; yet, with their usual Bravery, they ran away as soon as the Scots
began to advance to charge them, and never fired a Gun, leaving the Town at
their Mercy. However, to do Justice to the Rebels, they offered no Injury to
the Town, only quartered in it one Night, took what Arms and Ammunition they
could find, and advanced toward Kendal.

In Westmorland, not far from the River Louther, is a Row of Pyramidal Stones,
Eight or Nine Feet high, pitched directly in a Row for a Mile together, and
placed at equal Distances from each other.

From hence, in one Stage, through a Country full of Castles, (for almost every
Gentleman's House is a Castle) we came to Carlisle, a small, but well fortified
City, the Frontier Place and Key of England on the West Sea, as Berwick upon
Tweed is on the East; in both which there have been, for many Years, I might
say Ages, strong Garrisons kept to check the invading Scots. From below this
Town the famous Picts Wall began, which crossed the whole Island to Newcastle
upon Tyne, which was built upon the following Occasion:

When the Romans settled here by Force of Arms, they were always harassed by
the Picts, on the Side of Scotland. To stop their Inroads, the Emperor Adrian
caused a Wall of Earth to be built, extending from the German to the Irish Sea,
the Space of 80 Miles, or 27 French Leagues, and caused it to be palisado'd,
Anno 123. Severus, the Emperor, built it up of Stone, with Turrets from Mile to
Mile, and kept a Garrison therein. But the Picts, nevertheless, broke in through
this Wall more than once. At last, Aetius, a Roman General, rebuilt it of
Brick, in 430; but 'twas not long before it was pulled down by the Picts. It
was Eight Feet thick, and 12 Feet high from the Ground: some Part of it is
still to be seen, both in Northumberland and Cumberland.

Here also the great Roman Highway, just before named, has its End, this being
the utmost Station of the Roman Soldiers on this Side.

But before I go on to speak of Carlisle, I must return to the Sea Coast,
which, in this Northern County, is more remarkable than that of Lancashire,
though the other is extended much farther in length; for here are some Towns of
good Trade: whereas in Lancashire, Liverpoole excepted, there is nothing of
Trade to be seen upon the Coast.

The first Place I shall mention is Ravenglass, in the South End of the County,
which runs between Fourness and the Sea. It Is a well built Sea Port, and
Market Town, upon the River Esk, and on each Side of it run down to the Sea two
other small Rivers, which, together with the Sea, make a good Harbor for
Ships, and surrounds three Parts of the Town, which occasions a pretty good
Trade to it.

The Cape or Head-land of St. Bees (derived from St. Bega, an Irish Female
Saint) still preserves its Name.

In the Town is a very good Free School, founded by Archbishop Grindal, who was
born here. It was very well endowed by him, and the Charity much increased by
the late Dr. Lamplugh, Archbishop of York, Dr. Smith, Bishop of Carlisle, Sir
John Louther, and others.

The Library annexed to this Foundation is very valuable, and still increasing
by several Gifts daily added to it. Though the Parish is vastly large, the
Vicarage is very poorly endowed.

Near St. Bees stands a little Market Town, called Egremont, noted only for its
ancient Castle and Barons, and for losing their Privilege of returning Members.

Under this Shore, higher up North, and near the Cape, is the Town of
Whitehaven, grown up by the Encouragement of the Louther Family, from a small
Place, to be very considerable by the Coal Trade, which is so much increased of
late, that it is the most eminent Port in England for it, next Newcastle; for
the City of Dublin, and all the Towns of Ireland on that Coast, and some Parts
of Scotland, and the Isle of Man, are wholly supplied from hence. It Is frequent
in time of War, or upon Occasion of cross Winds, to have 200 Sail of Ships at a
time go from this Place to Dublin laden with Coals. And Sir James Louther,
particularly, is said to send from hence to Ireland annually, as many Coals as
bring him in near 20,000 l. a Year.

This Increase of Shipping has led them on to Merchandising; but the Town is
but of few Years standing in Trade: for Mr. Camden does not so much as name the
Place, and his Continuator says very little of it.

And indeed the Town must be allowed to owe principally its flourishing
Condition to Two Acts of Parliament, one of the 7th, the other of the 11th of
Queen Anne, by virtue of which the Harbor was so considerably deepened and
improved, and such strong and substantial Moles and Bulwarks erected, that
Ships, which before were liable to be driven and cast away on the Rocks and
Shoals on that Coast, could lie in Safety, and be secure from the Violence of
the Sea. The happy Success of these Works encouraged the Town to apply to
Parliament for Powers still farther to improve the good Design, that so, by
enlarging the Moles and Works, and extending them to Low Water Mark, such Depth
might be obtained, that the largest Ships belonging to the Town might sail in
and out of the Harbor at Neap Tides, and that other Ships frequenting these
Seas, might sail in at Half-flood. And accordingly an Act passed for this
laudable Purpose, in the Self. 1739-40, which will prebably effectuate these
good Ends, and not only preserve the Lives of many Mariners, but still further
improve the Trade and Navigation of this already flourishing Town. The same Act
provides likewise for the Repair of the Roads about and leading to Whitehaven,
which were become ruinous and bad, by the great Use made of them since the
Improvements made in the Harbor; for before that they were very narrow, and
seldom made use of by Carts and Wheel-carriages. All these Advantages and
Increase of Trade have occasioned a new Church to be lately built at
Whitehaven. Here is likewise a good Trade for Salt.

Still a little higher to the North is Moresby, where it is supposed has been a
Roman Fort, there appearing a great many Ruins of Fortifications along the Sea
Coast, and other Antiquities.

About ten Miles North-east from Whitehaven lies Cockermouth, between two
Hills, upon the little River Cocker, just where it falls into the Derwent; and
is almost encompassed by the Two Rivers. The former runs through it, and is
joined again by Two Bridges. It is a Town of good Trade, and well built. It has
a Castle on one Hill, and a fair Church on the other. It is about 12 Miles from
the Sea, and Vessels of good Burden may securely come up to it. The Derwent is
famous for its springing out of those Hills called Derwent Fells, where the
ancient Copper Mines were found in Queen Elizabeth's Time, and in which, it was
said, there was a large Quantity of Gold. But they are discontinued since, some
say, because Gold being found among the Ore, the Queen claimed the Royalty, and
so nobody would work them: but this is rather a Reason why they should have
applied to the Search with more Vigor; therefore the more probable Cause is,
that the Charge of working them was too great for the Profits.

A little East of Cockermouth stands Keswick, a little Market Town, in Decay,
inhabited chiefly by Miners, who have their Smelting-houses here, there being
near this Place Mines of Black-lead, which turn to very good Account, and I
think are the only Mines of the kind in Britain.

Here we saw Skiddaw, which is there reported to be the highest Hill in
England. It seems the higher, because it is not surrounded with other
Mountains, like most of other Counties, as at Cheviot, Penigent, and other
Places. From the Top of Skiddaw one sees plainly into Scotland, and quite into
Dumfriesshire, and farther.

The Duke of Somerset is chief Lord of Cockermouth, in Right of his late
Duchess, the only Heiress of the ancient Family of the Piercies, Earls of
Northumberland.

The Castles and great Houses of this Estate fall to Ruin, as indeed all the
Castles in this County do; for the two Kingdoms being now united into one,
strong Holds are of no more Use here, than in any other Part of the Kingdom. I
think they told us, the Duke has no less than 13 Castles in this County, and in
Northumberland.

This Derwent is noted for Trout, and also for very good Salmon; which from
Workington, a Fishing-town at the Mouth of this River, they carry, fresh as
they take them, up to London, upon Horses, which, changing often, go Night and
Day without Intermission, and, as they say, out-go the Post; so that the Fish
come very sweet and good to London, where the extraordinary Price they yield,
from two Shillings and Sixpence to four Shillings per Pound, pays very well for
the Carriage. They do the same from Carlisle.

Jerby, now a considerable Market Town, stands North-east of Cockermouth. It is
supposed to be the Arbeia of the Ancients.

From the Mouth of the Derwent to that of the Elen is supposed to have been
fortified by the Romans, to prevent the Landing of the Scots and Irish, who
infested these Coasts; for here have been several Ruins of Fortifications
discovered, and some of them since Camden's Time. At Elenborough, it is said,
the first Cohort of Dalmatians were garrisoned, where are great Remains of them
still to be seen, old Vaults opened, Altars, Stones, and Statues, with
Inscriptions dug up, on them. And at Wigton, a small Market Town, further North
in the Forest of Allerdale, are several Altars pitched, which they say were
brought from Elenborough, and old Carlisle. But if I was to dwell upon
Antiquities, I should find Work enough in this County; and therefore must refer
you to such Writers as have treated of them.

In Whitfield Park, at the Borders of this County, they show you a Hawthorn
Tree, against which the Heads of a Stag and a Dog were formerly nailed up, in
Memory of a famous Chase. It seems the Dog (not a Greyhound, as Mr. Camden's
Continuator calls it, but a stanch Buckhound) singly chased a Stag from this
Park, as far as the Red Kirk in Scotland, which, they say, is sixty Miles at
least, and back again to the same Place; where, being both spent, the Stag,
exerting his last Force, leaped the Park Pales, and died on the Inside; the
Hound, attempting to leap after him, had not Strength enough to get over, and
fell back, and died on the Outside just opposite. The Heads of both were nailed
upon the Tree, and underneath this Distich on them. The Hound's Name, it seems,
was Hercules: Hercules killed Hart-a-Greese,
And Hart-a-Greese killed Hercules.


In the same Park were three Oak Trees, which were called the Three Brether,
the least of which was 13 Yards about; but two of them being quite gone, and
only the Stump of the other remaining, I did not think it worth my Time to
visit such a decayed Curiosity.

West of the Hawthorn Tree, and upon the old Roman Way, is the famous Column,
called the Countess Pillar, the best and most beautiful Piece of its Kind in
Britain. It is a fine Column of Freestone, curiously wrought and enchas'd, and
in some Places painted. It has an Obelisk on the Top, several Coats of Arms,
and other Ornaments in proper Places all over it, with Dials also on every
Side, and a Brass Plate with the following Inscription, in Capital Letters.
This Pillar was erected Anno 1656, by the Right Honorable ANNE Countess
Dowager of Pembroke, and sole Heir of the Right Honorable George Earl of
Cumberland, etc. for a Memorial of her last parting in this Place with her good
and pious Mother, the Right Honorable Margaret Countess Dowager of Cumberland,
the Second of April 1616: in Memory whereof she also left an Annuity of Four
Pounds, to be distributed to the Poor within this Parish of Brougham, every
Second Day of April for ever, upon the Stone Table here by.

This Countess of Pembroke had a noble and great Estate in this County, and a
great many fine old Seats, all which she repaired and beautified, and dwelt
sometimes at one, and sometimes at another, for the Benefit of her Tenants, and
of the Poor, whom she always made desirous of her Presence, constantly
relieving them by her Bounty and Hospitality. But those Estates are since that
Time gone into other Families, particularly into that of the Earl of Thanet,
who has great Estates in Westmorland.

This Lady was of the Family of Clifford; she had no less than Four Castles in
this County, of which Pendragon Castle was the chief, which is a fine Building
to this Day.

Penrith is accounted the second Town in the County for Wealth and Trade. It is
large and well built, has a very good Market for all Sorts of Commodities and
Beasts. The Market-house is convenient and spacious, the Church is large and
noble; the West Side was defended with a Royal Castle, though now in Ruins. In
the Churchyard we saw Two Pillars 14 or 15 Feet asunder, and the lowest of
them 12 Feet high, though they seem equal. The People told us, that they were the
Monument of Sir Owen Caesar; but there is no Inscription upon them. This Sir
Owen, they tell us, was a Champion of mighty Strength, and of gigantick
Stature; and so he was, to be sure, if, as they say, he was as tall as one of
the Columns, and could touch both Pillars with his Hands at the same time. They
relate no other great Actions of him, but that he killed Robbers, and destroyed
wild Boars.

On the North-side of the Vestry of this Church is erected in the Wall an
ancient square Stone, with a Memorial, intimating, that in the Year 1598, there
was a dreadful Plague in those Parts, in which there died in Kendal 2500
Persons; in Penrith 2266; in Richmond 2200; in Carlisle 1196.

By this Account it should seem, that every one of those Towns had separately
more People than the City of Carlisle, or else the Distemper was not so
pestilential there; and that Kendal, which is the only manufacturing Town of
them, was the most populous.

We did not go into the Grotto on the Bank of the River Eden, of which mention
is made by Camden's Continuator, the People informing us, that the Passage was
blocked up with Earth; so I must be content with telling you, that it seems to
have been a Lurking-place for Robbers, in old Time. A Place of Strength it
could not be; for its Security seems to have consisted solely in its Secrecy.
It had certainly been worth seeing, had it been passable. The Entry is long and
dark, but whether strait or crooked, I cannot say. The Iron Gates leading to it
are gone, nor is there any Sign of them, or what they were hung to.

Higher up on the Eden, the East Side of the County, is Kirk-Oswald, an
indifferent Market Town, that has nothing of Note; and Brampton stands N. E. of
Carlisle, on the River Itching, about a Mile beyond the Picts Wall, which has
likewise nothing worth remarking, saving an Hospital built by the Lady
Carlisle, Grandmother to the present Earl, for Six poor Men, and as many Women.

At Burgh upon the Sands, a little Distance from Carlisle, is the Monument of
our victorious Prince Edward I. who having so far subdued the Scots, as to
bring away the sacred Stone at Scone Abbey, whereon their Kings used to be
crowned, died here in his Camp, on his March against them, like a true Soldier,
guarding his Frontiers with his latest Breath. In Memory of him there was
afterward erected a fair square Pillar nine Yards and a half high, with these
Inscriptions on Three Sides.

On the West Side: Memoriae aeternae EDVARDI I. Regis Angliae long clarissimi,
qui in belli apparatu contra Scotos occupatus, hic in castris obiit 7. Julii A.
D. 1^07. On the South Side: Nobilissimus Princeps HENRICUS HOWARD, dux
Norfolciae, comes Marshall. Angliae, comes Arund. etc...... ab EDVARDO I. Rege
Angliae oriundus, P. 1685. On the North Side: JOHANNES AGLIONBY, J. C. F.
Beneath, THO. LANGSTONE fecit, 1685.

Caerlisle, the Lugo-vallum, or rather Brovoniacum of the Romans, is situated
exceedingly pleasant by the Picts Wall, and guarded by Three Rivers; by the
Eden on the North, by the Peterel on the East, and on the West by the Caude. It
is a Place of great Antiquity, being first builtby an ancient British Prince
named Luel, and from him called Caer Luel, i. e. Luel's Town, to which it
retains an Affinity of Sound to this Day. It has suffered the Fate of most
Frontier Towns; been taken, retaken, burnt, and destroyed several times by the
Scots, Danes, and Norwegians; and lay once in its Ruins for near 200 Years,
till William Rufus rebuilt it, who sent a Colony of Southern Englishmen to it,
and who is said likewise to have built the Castle. Henry I. dignified it with
an Episcopal See, and fortified it as a proper Barrier against the Scots.

The Cathedral Church is a venerable old Pile, but seems to have been built at
Two different times, or, as it were, rebuilt, the upper Part being much more
modern than the lower. A great Part of it was built by St. David, King of
Scotland, who held this County, together with Westmorland and Northumberland,
in Vassalage from the Crown of England. He, and many of his Successors, were
great Benefactors to it, and nominated several of the Bishops; but almost the
whole Nave, or West Part of it, was demolished by the Scots, in the Civil Wars.
There is another Church called St. Cuthbert's.

King Henry VIII. fortified this City against the Scots, and built an
additional Castle to it on the East Side, which Camden calls a Citadel. On the
Northwest is a Garrison. The City has Three Gates, and the Walls round it are so
thick, that Three Men may walk abreast on them, within the Parapet. Over the
Eden is a Bridge which soon lets you into Scotland, the Limits not being above
Six Miles off; for the South Part of it on this Side comes at least 50 Miles
farther into England than at Berwick.

Carlisle is a wealthy and populous Place, and the Houses are well built, but
it is not very large. Here flourishes a good Trade in Fustians.

I made a Trip, when I was in these Parts, to Parton, in this County, which I
the rather mention because of the Improvements made in its Harbor of late
Years, by virtue of Acts of Parliament made for that Purpose.

For in the fourth and fifth of the late Queen Anne, an Act had passed for
enlarging the Piers and Harbor of that Town; but by the Negligence or Death of
Trustees, the Works intended by the Act, were not carried to Effect. This
proving a great Disappointment to the Inhabitants, who had built Houses on a
Prospect of a considerable Trade in Exportation of Coals, and other Commodities
of the County; in the Year 1724, another Act passed for Rebuilding the said
Piers and Harbor. In Consequence of this Act, the Pier was rebuilt, and the
Harbor made capable of receiving several small Ships, and a Trade for Coals to
Ireland and other Parts commenced. This gave Encouragement for another Act,
which passed Anno 1732, to enlarge the Term for 21 Years after the Expiration
of the former, in order to make the Harbor still more complete, for the
Reception of Ships of greater Burden, and to enlarge the River, cleanse the
Harbor, and to bring into it a small Brook, called Maresby-beck, which runs
near it. All which will be of great Use to the Place, as well as to Trade and
Navigation in general.

In this Northern County are more noted Roman Antiquities found, than almost in
any other. It has a Lake called Ulles-water, noted for producing the excellent
Fish called Char, almost peculiar to it, and to Winander-mere. Wry-nose, one of
its highest Hills, is remarkable for its Three Shire Stones, a Foot Distance
each, one in Cumberland, one in Westmorland, and the third in Lancashire.

Near Salkeld in this County is a Trophy erected, vulgarly called Long Meg and
her Daughters, consisting of 77 Stones; Long Meg 15 Feet above Ground, and the
rest but 10.

This having been a Frontier County, the ancient Houses of the Nobility and
Gentry are built for the most part Castle-wise, and are called Castles. Thus
Grey-stock Castle and Drumbough Castle belong to the Duke of Norfolk;
Cockermouth Castle to the Duke of Somerset; Naworth Castle to the Earl of
Carlisle; Dacre Castle to the late Earl of Sussex; Corby Castle, Mr. Howard's.
And here I must be a little more particular on the last, which deserves the
Observation of the Curious. Corby Castle is situated about Four Miles S. E. of
Carlisle, and is the Seat of the said Mr. Howard, a Descendant from the Duke of
Norfolk's Family. The Building is of Stone, neat, but plain. The Entrance to
this House is by a large square Courtyard. On the Right Hand are the Gardens,
and on the Left Offices for the Servants, and Stabling for Horses. It is
plentifully watered by Springs in several large Reservoirs made about the
House, which stands on the Precipice of a high Rock, which is in the Backpart
about 100 Feet high. In this Rock is cut a regular Pair of Stairs of about Six
Feet wide, with all their Ornaments down to the Bottom. As you descend these
Stairs, you pass by several Rooms hewn out of the Rock, of about 16 Feet
square, which have no other Furniture than Tables, and Seats made out of the
Stone. At the Bottom of those Stairs you ascend another Pair about 10 Feet
high, which leads to a Terrace made in Form of a Semicircle, by the Side of
which runs the River Eden, having a Pair of Stairs to take Water at. The
Terrace presents a fine View of another Part of the Rock, of equal Height with
the former; from the Top of which is placed a Cascade so wonderfully curious,
that I know nothing like it. It is at least 100 Feet high, and the Water is
broken by the pointed Ridges of the Rock into so many various Shapes, and the
Springs fly about you in so delightfully rude a manner, as to entertain you
with a great Instance of the Power of Art in imbellishing Nature, which is
further heightened by a natural Cascade, (effected by this artificial one) of
which you have a distinct Prospect, when you arrive at the Landing-stairs.

From hence you have another View, of half a Mile long, of the River on the
Right Hand; and a hanging Grove of Trees, just as Nature has placed them, on
the Left. As you pass along a Gravelwalk, you see several Figures placed there
for Ornament; at the End of the Walk is a small Banqueting-room, with a Portico
in the Front, facing this Walk: it is called Tempe-alter'. In this River is a
Weir, well-stock'd with Salmon and other Fish. On the other Side of the River,
over against the House, are the Remains of an old Castle, which is called
Weatheral-Tower, under which is an Hermit's Cave.

Westward of Lancashire and Cumberland lies the Isle of Man; of which I shall
take Notice among the Western Isles of Scotland. [See VOL. IV. p. 253.]

Cumberland gives Title of Duke to his Royal Highness Prince William, his
Majesty's second Son; as it did before to his Royal Highness George Prince of
Denmark, Consort of the late Queen Anne.

Being now at the utmost Extent of England this Way, I shall conclude my Letter
with a few Observations upon the ROADS of this Part of the United Kingdom in
general. And first of the natural Soil in many Places, where not mended by
Turnpikes.

The Soil of all the Midland Part of England, even from Sea to Sea, is of a
deep stiff Clay, or marly Earth; and it carries a Breadth of near 50 Miles at
least, in some Places much more; nor is it possible to go from London to any
Part of Britain, North, without crossing this clayey dirty Part. For Example:

1. Suppose we had been to take the great Northern Post Road from London to
York, and so into Scotland; you have tolerable good Ways, and hard Ground, till
you reach Royston, about 32 Miles, and to Kneesworth, a Mile farther: but from
thence you used to enter upon the Clays, which beginning at the famous
Arrington-Lanes, and going on to Caxton, Huntingdon, Stilton, Stamford,
Grantham, Newark, Tuxford, (called for its Deepness, Tuxford in the Clays) hold
on till we come almost to Bautree, which is the first Town in Yorkshire, and
there the Country is naturally hard and sound, being Part of Shirwood Forest.

2. Suppose you had been to take the other Northern Road, by St. Albans,
Dunstable, Hockley, Newport-Pagnel, Northampton, Leicester, and Nottingham, or
Derby: After you are passed Dunstable, which is about 30 Miles, you used to
enter the deep Clays, which were so surprisingly soft, that it was perfectly
frightful to Travelers, and had been the Wonder of Foreigners, how,
considering the great Numbers of Carriages which are continually passing with
heavy Loads, those Ways have been made practicable. From Hockley to
Northampton, thence to Harborough and Leicester, and thence to the very Banks
of Trent, these terrible Clays continue; at Nottingham you are past them; and
the Forest of Shirwood naturally yields a hard and pleasant Road for 30 Miles
together.

3. Take the same Road as it leads to Coventry, and from thence to
West-Chester, the deep Clays reach through all the Towns of Brickhill, Fenny
and Stony Stratford, Towcester, Daventry, Hill-Morton, or Dunchurch, Coventry,
Coleshill, and even to Birmingham, for near 80 Miles.

4. If we took the Road to Worcester, it used to be the same through the Vale
of Ailesbury to Buckingham, and Westward to Banbury, Keynton, and the Vale of
Evesham, where the Clays reach, with some Intermissions, even to the Bank of
Severn, as they do more Northerly quite to West-Chester.

This natural Difficulty of the Soil through all the midland Country, where the
Carriage at the same time was so prodigious, and made some of the Highways in a
manner impassable, necessarily brought the Country to apply to Parliament; and
the Consequence has been, that Turnpikes or Toll-bars have been set up on the
several great Roads of England, beginning at London, and proceeding through
almost all those dirty deep Roads, in the Midland Counties especially; at which
Turnpikes all Carriages, Droves of Cattle, and Travelers on Horseback, are
obliged to pay an easy Toll; which bears no Comparison with the Benefit reaped
thereby: and it is well worth recording, for the Honor of the present Age, that
this Work has been begun, and is in an extraordinary manner carried on, and
perhaps may, in a great measure, be completed within our Memory, as to the
worst and most dangerous Roads in the Kingdom. And this is a Work of so much
general Good, that certainly no public Edifice, Almshouse, Hospital, or
Nobleman's Palace, can be of equal Value to the Country with this, nor at the
same time more an Honor and Ornament to it.

The Benefit of these Turnpikes appears now to be so great, and the People in
all Places begin to be so sensible of it, that it is incredible what Effect it
has already had upon Trade in the Counties where the Roads are completely
finished; even the Carriage of Goods is abated, in some Places, 6 d. per
hundred Weight; in others, 12 d. per Hundred; which is abundantly more
Advantage to Commerce, than the Charge paid amounts to; and yet at the same
time the Expense is paid by the Carriers too, who make the Abatement; so that
the Benefit in abating the Rate of Carriage is wholly and simply the
Tradesmens, not the Carriers.

Yet the Advantage is evident to the latter also another way; for they can
bring more Weight with the same Number of Horses, nor are their Horses so
hard-work'd and fatigued with their Labor as they were before; in which one
Particular it is acknowleged by the Carriers, they perform their Work with more
Ease, and the Masters are at less Expense.

The Advantage is also inexpressible to all other kinds of Traveling; such as
the Safety and Ease to Gentlemen journeying up to London on all Occasions,
whether to the Term, to Parliament, to Court, or on any other necessary
Occasion.

Also the Riding Post, as well for the ordinary carrying of the Mails, as for
Gentlemen, when their Occasions require Speed, is made extremely easy, safe and
pleasant, by this Alteration of the Roads.

The Safety of Traveling on this Occasion is the more to be insisted on,
because the Commissioners for these Repairs of the Highways do daily order
Bridges to be repaired and enlarged, and new ones built, where they find
Occasion; which not only serve to carry the Water off, where it otherwise often
spreads, and lies, as it were, damm'd up upon the Road, and spoils the Way, but
where it rises sometimes by sudden Rains to a dangerous Height; for it is to be
observed, that there is more Hazard, and more Lives lost, in passing, or
attempting to pass, little Brooks and Streams, which are swelled by sudden
Showers of Rain, and where Passengers expect no Stoppage, than in passing great
Rivers, where the Danger is known, and therefore more carefully avoided.

In many of these Places the Commissioners have not only built large and
substantial Bridges, but have set up Sluices to stop, and open Channels to carry
off the Waters, where they used to swell into the Highway: and I have been
told, Years ago, that the several Commissioners, in the respective Districts,
where they are concerned, had then built between 300 and 400 new Bridges, where
there were none before, or where the former were small, and insufficient to
carry the Traveller safe over the Waters. Many of these are within a few Miles
of London, especially, for Example, on the great Road from London to Edgeworth,
from London to Enfield, from London to St. Albans, from London to Croydon, etc.

Besides the Benefits accruing from this laudable Method, we may add, the
Convenience to those who bring fat Cattle, especially Sheep, to London in the
Winter, from the remoter Counties of Leicester and Lincoln, where they are
bred: for, before, the Country Graziers were obliged to sell their Stocks off
in September and October, when the Roads began to be bad, and when they
generally sell cheap; and the Butchers and Farmers near London used to engross
them, and keep them till December and January, and then sell them, though not an
Ounce fatter than before, for an advanced Price, to the Citizens of London;
whereas now the Roads are in a Way to be made everywhere passable, the City
will be served with Mutton almost as cheap in the Winter as in the Summer, or
the Profit of the Advance will be to the Country Graziers, who are the original
Breeders, and take all the Pains.

This is evidenced to a Demonstration in the Counties where the Roads are
already repaired, from whence they bring their fat Cattle, and particularly
their Mutton, in Droves, from Sixty, Seventy, or Eighty Miles, without
fatiguing, harassing, or sinking the Flesh of the Creatures, even in the Depth
of Winter.

I might give Examples of other Branches of Inland Commerce, which are, and
still will be further altered for the better, by this Repairing the Roads, and
particularly that of carrying Cheese; a Species of Provision so considerable,
that nothing, except that of live Cattle, can exceed it.

This is chiefly made in the Three North-west Counties of England, viz.
Cheshire, Gloucestershire, and Warwickshire, and the Parts adjacent, from
whence the Nation used to be very meanly supplied, by reason of the great
Distance of the Country where the Cheese is made, from those where it is
chiefly expended.

The Cheshire Men indeed carry great Quantities about by long Sea, as they call
it, to London; a terrible long, and sometimes dangerous, Voyage, being through
the Irish Chanel, round all Wales, cross the Bristol Chanel, round the Land's
End of Cornwall, and up the English Chanel to the Mouth of the Thames, and so
up to London; or else by Land to Burton upon Trent, and so down that River to
Gainsborough and Hull, and so by Sea to London.

Again, the Gloucestershire Men carry all by Land-Carriage to Lechlade and
Cricklade on the Thames, and so carry it down the River to London.

But the Warwickshire Men have no Water-Carriage at all, or at least not till
they have carried it a long Way by Land to Oxford; but as their Quantity is
exceeding great, and they supply not only the City of London, but also the
Counties of Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Huntingdon, Hertford, Bedford,
and Northampton, the Gross of their Carriage is by mere dead Draught; and they
carry it either to London by Land, which is full 100 Miles, and so the London
Cheesemongers supply the said Counties of Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, besides
Kent, and Sussex, and Surrey, by Sea and River Navigation; or the Warwickshire
Men carry it by Land once a Year to Sturbridge Fair, whence the Shopkeepers of
all the Inland Country above-named come to buy it; in all which Cases
Land-Carriage being long, when the Ways were generally bad, it made it very
dear to the Poor, who are the chief Consumers.

I could also enlarge here upon the Convenience that accrues to the Trade in
fresh Fish, from the Sea Coasts to the Inner Parts of the Kingdom, whither,
when the Ways are bad, they cannot carry them sweet. This of course must
greatly increase the Consumption of Fish in its Season, and employ a
considerable Number of Horses and Men, as well as increase the Shipping by that
Consumption.

By this I do not only mean the carrying of Herrings and Mackerel to London, as
is practiced on the Coasts of Sussex and Kent in particular, and bringing
Salmon from the remote Rivers of Severn and Trent; but the carrying of
Herrings, Mackerel, and Sprats in their Season, and Whitings and flat Fish at
other times, from the Coasts of Yarmouth, Swole, Ipswich, Colchester, Malden,
etc. and supplying all the Inland Counties with them sweet and good, even as
far as Northampton and Coventry, etc.

I might give Examples where the Herrings, which are not the best Fish to keep,
used, even before these Reparations were set on foot, to be carried to those
Towns, and up to Warwick, Birmingham, Tamworth and Stafford; and though they
frequently stunk before they got thither, yet the People were so eager for
them, that they bought them up at a dear Rate; whereas when the Roads are
everywhere good, they will come in less Time, by at least Two Days in Six of
what they used to do, and 100 times the Quantity will be consumed.

These, and many others, are the Advantages to our Inland Commerce, which we
may have room to hope for upon the general Repair of the Roads, and which I
shall have great Occasion to speak of again in my Northern Circuit.

Nor are the laudable Undertakings which have of late Years been set on foot
for rendering many of the Inland Rivers of this Kingdom navigable, a less
profitable Improvement to the Public, many of which have been completed, and
others are completing, according to Acts of Parliament already passed for that
Purpose; many of which I have taken notice of, in the Course of my Letters. And
hardly a Session passes, but Bills are still continued to be brought in for
making others navigable. All which must greatly tend, with the repairing of the
public Roads, as above, to increase the Trade of this Nation.

But it is time to conclude this Letter; which I shall do, with the following
Transcription from the famous Milton, which, not unsuitably to the Subject I
have just been upon, thus enumerates the principal Rivers of England, with
their distinguishing Characters: Rivers, arise; whether thou be the Son
Of utmost TWEED, or OUSE, or gulphy DUN;
Or TRENT, who, like some earth-born Giant, spreads
His thirty Arms along the indented Meads;
Or sullen MOLE, that runs, underneath;
Or SEVERN swift, guilty of Maidens Death;
Or rocky AVON, or of s^^gy LEE.
Or coaly TYNE, or anti^^ hallowed DEE;
Or HUMBER loud that keeps the Scvthians Name;
Or MEDWAY smooth, or Royal-tower'd THEM.


I am, SIR, Your humble S^^^ant.

LETTER V. GIVING A brief Account of the Isles of Jersey, Guernsey, Alderney,
and Sarke.
SIR,
THAT nothing may be wanting to complete this Work, I shall briefly in this
Place touch upon the Isles of Jersey, Guernsey, Alderney and Sarke, which are
the only Remains of the Dukedom of Normandy, now in Possession of the English
Crown. And, first, of JERSEY.

Various Names have been affixed to this Island: in the Time of the Romans it
was named Caesarea, probably from the Dictator, who subdued several Nations
along this Tract: which Conjecture is confirmed by the present Name of one of
its Forts, which is Le Fort de Caesar. In the North of the Island, at Rosel, is
an Intrenchment preserving the Name of La petite Cesaree. That the Romans were
here, is plain from the Remains of an ancient Camp near the Manor of Dilament;
as also from Coins which have been found in different Parts of the Island,
particularly One of Commodus, and Two of Probus and Posthumus, all in the
Parish of St. Oven. Its modern Appellation is no more than a Corruption of its
old one, Jer being a Contraction of Caesar, and Ey signifying Island, q. d.
Caesar's Island. Augia was a Name still elder than the Time when the Romans
were acquainted with the Place; and supposed to be the original one.

The Island has sustained several Revolutions: first, by Rollo, Duke of
Normandy. 2. By the French. 3. By the Normans restored. 4. By the Uniting of it
to the Crown of England. The Inhabitants behaved very valiantly in Defense of
Charles I. and his Son Charles II. but were at last reduced by the irresistible
Power of the English Parliament, although they are supposed to have been the last
who submitted to the common Fate of the Times, by a Capitulation equally
advantageous and honorable.

We shall now proceed to give as clear an Account of the Situation and
remarkable Places of this Island as the Narrowness of our Limits will admit.

Jersey is computed to be 49 10 N. L. and 2 20 W. L. from the Meridian of
London. Its Length is 12 Miles; its utmost Breadth between Six and Seven. Its
North-side, from its lofty Cliffs, is 40 or 50 Fathoms perpendicular from the
Sea; which renders it inaccessible that way; but the South is much lower, and
almost level with the Water. Its Form seems to resemble a Wedge, or a
rectangular Triangle.

The higher Lands are diversified by gritty and gravelly, stony and rocky, fine
and sweet Mould; the lower by heavy, deep and rich Soil. All kinds of Forest
and Fruit Trees, Shrubs, Roots, Flowers and Herbs, flourish here, with Pulse
and Corn, though their Wheat is smaller than English.

The Decay of Tillage (so evident in this Isle) is owing to three Causes: 1.
The Increase of the Stocken Manufacture; which naturally inclined the People to
slight the more laborious Employment of Agriculture. 2. The Improvement of
Navigation, and Foreign Traffic, which had the same Effect. 3. The Culture of
Cider, by converting the Arable Lands into Orchards for that Purpose; which
Commodity is the ordinary Drink of the Inhabitants, who are now over-stock'd
with it; so that there is Hope of their returning to the Plough, and to their
former Industry. 4. The Increase of Enclosures and Highways; of the latter
whereof here are three Sorts; the first called Le Chemin du Roy, or The King's
Highway, sixteen Feet in Breadth; the second, Le Chemin de huit Pieds, or The
Eight-foot way, which with its Sides makes up 12 Feet; and the third, Le Chemin
de quatre Pieds, or the Four-foot Way, for Horse-carriages.

On the Rocks about the Island, Sea-weed grows plentifully, which is an
Equivalent for the Deficiency of other Things useful in Husbandry, and is the
common Manure of the Land in Jersey.

Here is Plenty of good Water from the inexhaustible Stores of Springs gushing
from the numerous Strata of Rocks everywhere conspicuous. Meat also and Butter
are equally good and sweet here, though the Cattle are inferior in Size to those
elsewhere.

The Ewes of this Isle had four Horns, but the Rams six, in Camden's Time, though
rarely now to be seen. Fowl of all Kinds are here in great Quantities. But none
of the volatile Tribe exceed in Beauty the Jersey Partridge, having the bright
Eyes natural to that Bird, red Legs, and variegated Feathers. The Flesh however
is not much preferable to that of the common Partridge.

This Island abounds with Fish, the Species of which we may range thus: 1.
Rough-coated Fish, such as Rousses, Haus, etc. the coarsest of all. 2. Shell
and Rock-fish, among which is the Ormer, supposed peculiar to these Parts, and
deriving its Name, which is French, from its Resemblance, to a human Ear. The
Inside of the Shell is made use of in inlaid Works, as Mother of Pearl, to the
bright Color of which it approaches. There is no Under-shell; but the Fish
adheres to the Rock with its Back, and is a solid Mass of white Pulp, very
grateful to the Taste, which it regales like the Flesh of Land Animals. In
great Spring Tides, at low water Mark, it is found. 3. Flat-fish, as Rays,
Thornbacks, Soles, Plaise, large Turbots, etc. 4. Scale-fish. Of these, one
Draught of Base has equaled a Cart-load. Besides which here is the Mullet, red
and gray, the Vrac, or Sea-carp, and the Bar, an exquisite Fish, sometimes two
Feet in Length. Other Fish here are, which for their Singularity we cannot pass
by in Silence.

The Gronnard is so called from its grunting Noise, when taken. Its Head is
almost as big as the Body, and its Color is a deep Scarlet, resembling Blood.

The Lancon (or little Lance, from its Shape) is never found in the Water, but
in some moving Sandbank deserted by the Sea; when the Sand being moved with an
iron Hook, the Fish spring up, and are caught by Handfuls. The young Men and
Maids take great Delight, during the warm Summer Nights, in this Sport; which
is rendered easy to them by the Glistering of the Prey above the Sand. This
they term aller au Lancon. It is prepared as an Anchovy, and, well-dress'd,
gives an agreeable Relish.

Another odd Fish is the Sirene, which is furnished with Teats like a Woman's.

The ugly, but harmless, and perhaps wholesome Animal the Toad, abounds here, as
do innoxious Creatures of the Serpentine Kind, particularly Lizards, which gaze
on Passengers, as they lie basking in the Sun. But the worst of the reptile
Kind are Moles, which damage the Corn and Grass, though they compensate that
Detriment by affording a freer Passage to the Rain through their Latibula.

The Climate here is in general wholesome; though as Luxury has gained Ground,
Diseases unknown to former Ages have been its constant Attendants: so that it
cannot now boast of that Character given it by Camden, That here was no Room
for the Physicians.

The Rocks are vast and terrible, the Tides rapid and strong; as an Evidence of
which, here is no Still-water at any time, as in other Parts of the British
Chanel.

The whole Island consists of 12 Parishes, which are divided into Vintaines,
from the 20 Houses which formerly, as is said, constituted each Parish; though
now some Parishes vastly exceed that Number. Cueillettes is the Name for these
Divisions in the Parish of St. Oven alone.

But to be more particular: 1. The Parish just mentioned contains six
Cueillettes, namely, De Vincheles, des Milles, de Leoville, des Grontes, Grande
Cueillette, and Petite Cueillette. The Seigneur de St. Oven has a large Pond in
the West of the Island, containing about 20 Acres of Land, wherein are Carp of
so extraordinary a Size, as scarce to be equalled in Europe; some of them being
four Feet four Inches in Length. Part of the great Bay of St. Oven had been a
rich Vale, which was swallowed up by the Sea.

2. St. Peter contains six Vintaines; which are, Des Angueres, du Coin Varin,
du Doet, de St. Nicolas, de la Vallee, and Grande Vintaine.

3. In St. Brelade are four Vintaines; called Des Quenves, de la Moye, du Coin,
and de Noirmont. In this Parish stands the Town of St. Aubin, the second of the
Island; and from it the Bay adjoining derives its Name; which consists of white
Sand, level and firm; and thence the Traveling from this Town to St. Helier,
the Capital, is rendered smooth and easy. And as the Church is at a Distance,
and intercepted by a bleak Hill, the Inhabitants, who are in plentiful
Circumstances, were building, when I was there, a convenient Chapel by way of
Contribution. The Port, which is the best and most frequented in Jersey, has a
strong Pier, carried into the Sea, which receives and affords a safe Harbor
for Ships. Here a Sixth-rate just floats at a dead Neap, and a Ship of 200 Tons
at all times. At Half-flood a Vessel of 130 Tons may find Entrance. Larger
Ships indeed, and Men of War, must remain in the Road, where is good Anchorage.
The Pier joins to the Fort of St. Aubin, which renders the Place very
defensible. These Advantages have brought hither many Merchants and Masters of
Ships: and every Monday is held what is improperly called a Market; for it is
rather an Exchange, where Merchants and others meet for transacting Affairs of
Navigation and Traffic. The Houses are mostly new.

4. St. Mary has two Vintaines, Du Nord, and du Sud. In this Parish was
discovered a Spring strongly impregnated with a purging Mineral; the Water of
which was approved of by Dr. Charleton, an eminent English Physician.

5. St. Laurence contains four Vintaines; viz. Du Coin Motier, du Coin Tourgis,
du Coin es Hastains, and de la Vallee.

6. St. John has three Vintaines; which are Du Nord, du Doet, de Herupe. In
this Parish is a Hill called Mont-mado, whereon is a rich Quarry of excellent
Stone, capable of being cut into regular Squares, like Portland Stone.

7. In Trinity are five Vintaines, namely, De la Ville a l' Evesque, du Rondin,
de Rosel, des Augres, and de la Croizerie.

8. St. Helier comprehends four Vintaines, which are, Du Mont a l' Abbee, du
Mont au Pretre, du Mont Cochon, and de la Ville. The Situation of St. Helier is
pleasant as well as commodious, having on the South-west the Sea, with a full
Prospect of Elizabeth Castle, and of the Road for Ships. To the North are
Hills, which are an excellent Defense against the Cold: and at their Feet a
Flat of Meadows inliven'd by a pure Stream, which from hence enters the
Streets, and even the Houses; so that the Water is easily brought up by
Buckets, let down through a Trap-door, or from the Reservoirs of Wells and Pumps.
Another huge Hill projects, in a manner, over the Town; and being a Common,
affords to the Cattle Herbage, and to Gentlemen and Ladies an agreeable Walk,
with the Advantage of an extensive Prospect. The usual Name of this Hill is Le
Mont de la Ville. The unfortunate Duke of Somerset, Protector of the King and
Kingdom, had probably intended to protect himself from the Malice of his
Enemies, by building a new Town here, as he did a Citadel at Alderney; both
which Designs became abortive by his Death. In St. Helier, at present, are
about 400 Houses, disposed into diverse wide and well-pav'd Streets. La Cohue
Royale, or the Seat of Justice, stands in a large Quadrangle, on each Side of
which are handsome Structures. Here is held every Saturday a Market, or rather
a Fair, whither People flock from all Parts of the Island to enjoy their
Friends, or transact Business. In the Town live few landed Gentlemen, but many
Shopkeepers, Artificers, and Retailers of Liquor. Scarce any thing is wanting
to the Uses of Necessity or Convenience. La Halle, la Boucherie, or the
Shambles, is a large Room enclosed, so that the Sight and Smell of Carcases do
not here annoy the Eyes and Nostrils of People, as they do in most Country
Towns. The Number of Inhabitants, exclusive of some Hundreds in the
Out-Vintaines, who are Parishioners, though not Townsmen, is supposed to amount
to Two thousand. And the Church, though very capacious by the Accession of
Galleries, when I was there, was crowded with them.

9. St. Savior has six Vintaines, of the following Denominations: De Maufant,
de sous la Hogue, des Pigneaux, de sous l' Eglise, de le Grande Longueville,
and de la Petite Longueville.

10. Under St. Martin are comprehended these five Vintaines: De Rosel, de la
Queruee, de sous l' Eglise, du Fief du Roy, and de Faldoit.

11. Gronville comprises four Vintaines, De la Rue, des Marais, de Longueville,
and de la Roque.

12. In St. Clement are three Vintaines, by Name, Du Mont Roquier, de Samarez,
and Grand Vintaine. In the Canal called Samarez are great Numbers of Carp and
Eel, the only fresh water Fish in the Island.

The Cueillettes and Vintaines are in all 52. The Buildings are all of Stone,
as may well be supposed, in a Country which is nothing but a huge Rock, covered
with Strata of Earth. The common Sort is Rag-stone. The Stone on Mont-mado,
mentioned above, is of a reddish White, the whiter the better, of a fine Grain,
and may be wrought almost as sleek as polished Marble. The Churches and finest
Edifices are covered with blue Slate; the ordinary Houses are thatched with
long Wheat-straw.

The principal Trade is that to Newfoundland, whither, in the Year 1732, were
sent 27 Ships, from thence to proceed to the Mediterranean, in order to dispose
of their Fish. Another Branch of Trade is that of knit Hose, or Stockens, which
are every Saturday sold at St. Helier, to the Merchants; and many thousand
Pairs are made weekly in the Island.

The Language, as you may guess from the Names of Places, is French, though
obsolete, and thence to be esteemed barbarous. This Remark, however, is not to
be extended to their Religious Worship, Judicatures, or even the Conversation
of the more polite, in all which the pure French is used. Though this is the
original Language, yet one may observe a pretty good Smattering of English,
even among the lower Class of People, owing to the Intermixture of the Soldiers
in the Garrison at St. Helier; in the Church of which Town Prayers are
alternately in French and English.

The chief Officer, who represents the King's Person, is the Governor. His
Excellency, at the Time when I was there, was the Right Honorable the Lord
Viscount Cobham.

Harliston Tower was so called from Sir Richard Harliston, Governor of the
Island in the Time of King Henry VII. who built it in Mont Orgueil Castle. The
great Sir Walter Ralegh bore this high Office, to which his Name does Honor.

Mont-Orgueil is of so great Antiquity, that no Record subsists, old enough to
determine its Origin. It Is at present slighted, and in a ruinous Condition; and
what it was formerly, Elizabeth-Castle now is, equal to any Fortress within the
British Dominions. It is named Le Chateau de l' Islet, or simply L' Islet, from
its Situation on a small Island. In Circuit it is little less than a Mile. In
1551 all the Bells in Jersey, excepting one to each Church, were sold toward
defraying the Expense of the Building. In 1586 the Upper Ward was erected,
which is properly Queen Elizabeth's Castle, every House in the Island
furnishing four Days Work. The Lower Ward is King Charles I.'s Castle, and was
begun in 1626. During the Civil War Charles-Fort was added; and in 1665, the
French threatening the Place, the Green was enclosed within a Wall.

The Fort of St. Aubin is of good Use toward clearing the Road, and for a
Safeguard to Ships within the Pier, which it secures by its Cannon planted on
the Bastions; though in ancient Times it was no more than a great Tower on a
Rock, thence named La Tour.

There are five Regiments of regular Forces on the Island, which are reviewed
every 29th of May, the Anniversary of the Restoration.

The Civil Government is administered by a Bailly, assisted by 12 Jurats.

Here are diverse Monuments of the Druidical Superstitions, which are flat
Rag-stones, of vast Size and Weight, raised three or four Feet from the Ground,
and sustained by others of less Bulk. These the Natives call Poquelayes; and
are the Altars, on which Sacrifices, often human, were immolated, particularly,
in the Parish of St. Helier, three of them contiguous to each other; and on the
Summit of a Place called Le Rouge Bouillon, another; besides one on St.
Helier's Hill. Another larger, near Mont-Orgueil Castle; and near Rosel-haven,
on a Cliff named Le Couperon, an Antiquity seeming to be a little Temple of
theirs. At a Place called Les Lands Pallot, in the Parish of St. Savior, was
a Rocking-stone, like that I shall mention in Scotland, destroyed by the
Cromwellians; erected by the Druids, probably to awe the People into a Belief
of their Miracles. This also has been demolished.

Here are also Monuments of the Popish Superstition; two more particularly: The
first called La Chapelle de notre Dame des Pas, from the Blessed Virgin, who is
said to have left the Print of her Steps on the very Spot of the Rock, whereon
the Chapel is erected, and this too after her Body was moulder'd into Dust. The
second is termed Hoguebie, a Chapel over a Tomb, built, according to Tradition,
by the disconsolate Widow of the Seigneur de Hambie, a Norman, who fell by
Treachery in this Island, and whose Loss was so afflicting to his Lady, that
she erected it on Purpose to have the melancholy Pleasure of seeing the Place
where her Lord's Corpse was interred, from her Window in Normandy; and to
procure his Soul the great Benefit of Masses. Afterward one Mabon, who had
been a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, took a Fancy to lengthen the Chapel toward the
East, and to hollow a Place under the Altar, in order to represent our Lord's
Sepulcher. This Place was made the chief Seat of the Popish Delusion.

Notwithstanding the prevailing Terrors of the Papal Empire in the Days of
Queen Mary, the Magistrates of Jersey had the Courage to put to Death Richard
Averty, a Priest, and furious Prosecutor of the married Clergy, for murdering
his Bastard Child, which he effected without the Mother's Knowledge.

The Mace, borne before the Bailly and Magistrates, at the Convention of the
States, etc. has this Inscription: -- Tali haud omnes dignatur honor.
CAROLUS Secundus, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex serenissimus,
affectum regium erga insulam de JERSEY (in qua bis habuit receptum, dum
caeteris ditionibus excluderetur) hocce monumento vere regio posteris
consecratum voluit: jussitque ut deinceps Balivis praeferatur, in perpetuam
memoriam fidei tum augustissimo parenti CAROLO I. tum suae majestati,
saevientibus bellis civilibus, servatae a viris clarissimis Philippo and
Georgio de Carteret, equitibus auratis, hujus insulae Baliv. and Reg. Prefect.
Of which this is the Translation: -- Not all are with such Honor graced.
CHARLES the Second, the most serene King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, has resolved, that his Royal Favor toward the Isle of JERSEY, (in
which he twice met with a Place of Refuge, while he was excluded from the rest
of his Dominions) should be consecrated to Posterity by this truly Royal
Monument: And commanded, that thenceforward it should be borne before the
Baillies, in perpetual Memory of the Loyalty preserved both to his most August
Father CHARLES I. and to his Majesty, during the Rage of the Civil Wars, by the
most excellent Men Sir Philip and Sir George de Carteret, Knights, Baillies and
Chief Governors of this Island.

St. Magloire, the Apostle of Jersey, lies buried in a little Chapel near a
Free School, corruptly called from him L' Ecole de St. Magloire, and founded,
with another named St. Anastase, by King Henry VII. who granted a Charter for
that useful Purpose.

This Place gives Title of Earl to the Lord Viscount Villiers, the second who
has enjoyed that Dignity.

II. The next Isle I am to speak of is GUERNSEY, the ancient Name of which was
Sarnia. From Jersey it is distant 20 Miles to the North-west; yet equals not
the former, either in point of Fruitfulness, or Extent of Territory; for it has
but 10 Parishes. This Advantage however it enjoys above Jersey, That here no
venomous Creatures can subsist. It is also naturally better fortified from
Invasion, by craggy Rocks and Precipices. On the contrary, its Situation,
compared with that of Jersey, renders this inferior; for whereas the North of
Jersey is much higher than the South, as we have said, the South Side of
Guernsey is high, and the North low; which produces a double Obliquity of the
Sun and Land; and hence the Difference in the Soil and Air of each.
Notwithstanding this they both agree as to their Original, their Productions,
and the Civil, Military and Ecclesiastical Government. Among the circumjacent
Rocks is found the sharp and hard Stone called Smyris, or Emeril, and used by
Glaziers for cutting Glass, as well as by Jewellers for polishing their Work.

In Trade it is superior to its Neighbor Jersey, by having a more convenient
Port at its Eastern Extremity, adjoining to the South; where the Shore retiring
inward in the Form of a Crescent, makes the Place capable of holding large
Vessels. The Foundation of its Pier was laid in the Beginning of Edward I.'s
Reign by prodigious Stones, heaped on each other to a considerable Height, and
regularly cemented. The Shipping here is not only safe, and may be brought
close up to the Town, which we shall presently mention; but the Pier itself is
adorned with large smooth Flags, and guarded by Parapets; so that being of
sufficient Length and Breadth, it is used as the chief Place for Rendezvouses
on Parties of Pleasure by the fashionable People of the Town, as well as for
its noble Prospect over the Sea, and adjacent Isles.

On the Right-side of the Port stands Cornet-Castle, which at high Tides is
surrounded by the Sea. Sir Leonard Chamberlan, who was Governor of Guernsey, in
Mary I.'s Time, and his Successor, Sir Thomas Leighton, improved it with
Fortifications. In the Year 1672, the Governor Lord Viscount Hatton lost his
Lady, and himself escaped with great Difficulty, from a prodigious Storm of
Lightning, which, catching the Powder-store, blew up the lofty Tower with the
Standard; so that the Castle must have formerly made a much more grand
Appearance than at present. However, what it wants in Beauty, it makes up in
real Usefulness; for it has the Command of the Town and Harbor; and its
Situation alone renders it strong, being divided from the Land by an Arm of the
Sea about 600 Yards wide, except in great Spring-tides, when it is fordable.

On the Left-side too is a mean old Castle.

The only Town is called St. Peter's, has a free Trade, (which is however
rendered ineffectual by Privateering) has a Market, is well stored with
Implements of War, and consists of one long Street, which is narrow, being
confined between the Sea and the impending Hills. The Market is always
plentifully supplied with Fish.

To the North, joins a Peninsula named Le Val, where once was a Priory. And

To the West, near the Sea, is a Lake, a Mile and a half in Circumference,
stocked with Fish, especially a kind of Carp of extraordinary Size, and
delicious to the Taste.

The Governor of Guernsey was (when I was on the Spot) the late Marquis of
Montandre; and his Lieutenant, John Graham, Esquire

From hence the Second Son of Heneage, late Earl of Nottingham, and Lord High
Chancellor, by Name Heneage Finch, was promoted to the Dignity of a Peer of
England, by the Style of Baron of Guernsey.

In Guernsey there are Eight Ministers to its Ten Parishes, Four of them being
united.

I cannot take Leave of this Island without a short Recital of a flagrant
Instance of Popish Inhumanity, which, not content to roll in Seas of Blood, all
over England, extended itself to this remote Corner. The Fact was thus: In the
Days of that Firebrand of her Country, Mary I. a poor Widow, and her Two
Daughters, one the Wife of Perrotine Massey, a Minister, who had happily
escaped the impending Fate by leaving his native Soil, were sentenced to the
Stake for what was called Heresy. The married Woman's Body, during the
Execution, bursting, by the Violence of the Flames, discharged the Pledge of
her conjugal Affection, a beautiful Male Infant, which was hastily caught up by
the Ministers of Justice, and carried before the Magistrates, whose tender
Mercies commanded, That it should be thrown in with the Mother, which was
accordingly done. Hoc fera religio potuit suadere malorum* How far the
Practices of this Sect may have been changed by the Illumination of Truth,
instead of Faggots, notwithstanding their obstinate Perseverance in their
former Principles, I will not pretend to determine: but sure I am, That from
bad Principles to bad Practices the Transition is extremely easy; and
Experience has more than once, especially within the British Dominions,
testified the Truth of this Observation. I now proceed to mention (though very
briefly) an Isle dependent on the Government of Guernsey. This is,

III. ALDERNEY, supposed by Camden, to be the Arica of Antoninus; by others the
Ebodia or Evodia of P. Diaconus. It is situated about a League and a half from
Cape la Hogue in Normandy; is in Circumference about Eight Miles; and contains
One Church with a Town, in which are about 200 Houses, which lodge to the
Number of 1000 Inhabitants. The Soil is good for Pasture or Arable. And I was
shown one Field here of about 500 Acres, which, as I was told, had not once
lain fallow for 100 Years before. Their Manure is Sea-weed, called Vraic, of
which we have taken notice above. The Land lies high; and to the South is a
Harbor, admitting only small Vessels.

The Straight which divides this Isle from France, termed Le Ras de Blanchart,
or The Race of Alderney, is esteemed a dangerous Passage in stormy Weather,
when the Winds happen to encounter with the strong Currents. In calm Seasons it
is very safe, and the largest Ships may ride here with Ease. Nay, in 1692-3,
Part of the French Fleet escaped this Way, after the Blow they had met with at
la Hogue. The last Place I shall mention in this Letter, is the Isle of,

IV. SARKE, which, as well as Alderney, is dependent on the Government of
Guernsey. It is no more than Two Miles in Length, and is situated in the midst
of all the others, and guarded with steep Rocks. Its Corn is excellent, the
Land very high, which, together with its Situation, renders it one of the
strongest Places in the World. Its Water is very good. Formerly here was no Way
for Draughts and Carriages from the Sea, till Philip de Carteret, Seigneur ae
St. Oven, (who had a Grant of the Island from Queen Elizabeth, and in whose
Descendants the Property is vested) caused one to be cut through the impending
Cliff, which for some Space is carried on in subterranean Darkness, till it
emerges within the Island, and is fortified with Cannon, and by a Gate. In the
Reign of Edward III. was standing the Convent of St. Magloire, with a Pension
from the Exchequer, where that holy Person is said to have resided.

The Island fell into the Hands of the French, but in the Reign of Queen Mary
I. was recovered; and the Inhabitants have ever since enjoyed the mild
Influence of the British Government, equally approving of their present happy
Condition, and detesting the Fetters of French Slavery. Their Number amounts to
about 300; and one Minister performs their divine Offices. Thus, having
completed what I promised, I rest from my TOUR, and am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant.

APPENDIX.
WE have purposely reserved the Account of several material Things and Places
to the Conclusion of this Volume, for the Sake of being more perfect in the
Description of them, than we had Opportunity to be at the Time of printing the
several Letters. And we shall now insert the following Articles under this
Title; but which, however, may be incorporated in their proper Places, in
future Editions of this Work.

We shall begin with a brief Description of the famous Gardens of the Right
Hon. the Lord Viscount Cobham, at Stow in Buckinghamshire.

VOL. II. p. 105.
WE entered on the South Side of the Garden, between Two square Pavilions of
the Dorick Order, the Work of Sir John Vanbrugh; and were struck with the
surprising Grandeur and Variety of the Objects that presented themselves to our
View, of which I shall give a brief Account in Order, as we passed them.

First, then, in the Middle of a large Octagon Piece of Water, stands an
Obelisk of near 70 Feet, which is designed for a Jet-d' Eau to cascade from the
Top of it. At a good Distance we beheld Two beautiful Rivers, which join, and
enter the Octagon in One Stream. Over One of the Rivers is a Palladian Bridge,
which is an agreeable Object. A Gothic Building, 70 Feet high, presents itself
on the Summit of a fine Hill; which, we were told, is intended to be dedicated
to Liberty.

Here we had likewise a View of the South Front of the House, up an Avenue of
stately Trees; but great Objections have been made to the Narrowness of it,
which is, no doubt, an essential Fault. However, since every Tree may be deemed
a sort of Obelisk to the Honor of the noble Planter, it makes a good Excuse
for their standing; and the rather, as, if they were taken away, it would
create an Evil, which could not be remedied in 40 Years.

As the Gothic Building is on the Right Hand, so on the Lest appears an
Egyptian Pyramid, dedicated to the Memory of Sir John Vanbrugh.

In short, here is such a Scene of Magnificence and Nature displayed, the
Fields abounding with Cattle, the Trees and Water so delightfully intermingled,
and such a charming Verdure, Symmetry, and Proportion, everywhere presenting
to the Eye, that the Judgment is agreeably puzzled, which singly to prefer of
so many collected Beauties.

Leaving this Point, and on the Left Hand passing by Three Statues, we came to
the Cold-bath, from whence we beheld a natural Cascade falling down from the
beforementioned Octagon, in Three different Sheets of Water, into a large
Lake. One of the Sheets glides through an Arch, or Piece of Ruin, which is mostly
hid by a Clump of Ever-greens; but his Lordship, as we are told, designs to
make a good deal of Amendment to it, though at present it has a very natural and
agreeable Appearance.

From hence we proceeded to the Hermitage, which is agreeably situated in a
rising Wood, and by the Side of the Lake; and passing through the Wood, we came
to the Statues of Cain and Abel, fronting the Veneris Hortus, a very neat
Structure, designed by Mr. Kent, the Inside of it painted by Mr. Sleats; and on
the Frize is the following Motto, alluding to the Painting in the Cave: Nunc
amet, qui nondum amavit;
Quique amavit, nunc amet.
Which is, He who never loved, a Lover grow;
And he who has -- continue so.


Here is likewise a Sophia. Each Way, from the Entrance of the Room, is a
handsome Colonnade, leading to square Tabernacles or Pavilions. Here are also
Four venerable antique Bustoes, of Vespasian, Nero, Cleopatra, and Faustina.

Hence to the Head of the Lake we had a pleasant View of the Cascade; and from
hence to Gibbs's Building, or the Belvidere, which is placed on the Top of the
Mount, is a noble Prospect of the House, the Church, the Effigies of his
present Majesty, and the late Queen; the Rotonda; the Castle, which a Farmer
now inhabits, and was built for that Purpose; but on account of its being
seated on the Side of a fine rising Hill, makes a beautiful Appearance as well
from hence, as from many other Places.

In the Garden is likewise the Temple of Friendship, from which the Pavilion at
the Entrance, the Cascade, the Lake, one of the Fields that is enclosed in the
Garden, all together afford a Scene truly charming.

From hence to Boycoat Buildings, passing through a pleasant Wood with several
agreeable Prospects into the Country, we saw on our Right Hand a noble Terrace.
One of the Buildings is a very good habitable House; the other stands on a
square Bottom in the Garden; and in the Inside of it are Four Statues, at full
Length, in Niches; viz. Cicero, Faustina, Marcus Aurelius, and Livia. The
Buildings are both finished with pyramidical Tops, by Gibbs. Betwixt them is a
very handsome Gate-way, which is the second Entrance to the House, from which
leads up a noble Avenue, planted with double Lines of thriving Trees.

From hence to the Egyptian Pyramid mentioned before, which is 60 Feet high,
and about half Way up, is this Inscription in very large Characters: Inter
plurima hortorum horum aedificia a JOHANNE VANBRUGH, equite, designata, hanc
pyramidem illius memoriae sacram esse voluit COBHAM. In English thus: Among a
very great Number of Structures in these Gardens, designed by Sir JOHN
VANBRUGH, Knight, COBHAM thought fit, that this Pyramid should be sacred to his
Memory.

And in the Inside of the Building is the following Inscription: Lusisti satis,
edisti satis, atque bibisti:
Tempus abire tibi est; ne potum largius aequo
Rideat and pulset lasciva decentius aetas.
Which may be thus translated: Enough you have sported, quaff'd the Bowl, and eat:
It Is Time that from the Banquet you retreat;
Lest Youth, more fitly frolicksome, may join
To push you, reeling under Loads of Wine.


From hence going along a sort of Fortification Walk on our Left Hand, the Wood
on the other Hand, we entered the Field, which is enclosed in a military Way,
with a staked Fence. At the first Angle, on the middle of the Gravel-walk, are
the Statues of Hercules and Anteus. Hence we proceeded to St. Augustine's Cave,
which is a Building of Roots of Trees and Moss; and in it a Straw Couch with
Three Inscriptions in Monkish Latin Verse. It is placed in a natural Wood, and
from the Oddness of the Fabric, and the agreeable Simplicity which is round
it, makes a very entertaining Variety.

Leaving this Place, we approached a Building of a very different Nature -- the
Temple of Bacchus, built of Brick, with Paintings in the Inside alluding to the
Name. Here we had a fine distant Prospect toward Aylesbury and Wendover Hills,
etc. In the Garden we had in full View the Temple of Venus: and between the Two
is an Obelisk erected to the Memory of a Clergyman, with this Inscription: To
the Memory of ROBIN COUCHER.

We proceeded from hence to the Saxon Temple, which is a solemn Grove with the
Seven Saxon Deities presiding over the several Days of the Week, placed in
Niches; and in the Middle of them stands an Altar, as for Sacrifice. All the
Statues are extremely good, and this Scene agreeably strikes the Mind with
Serenity and Composure.

Our Eye, after being confined in the Wood, breaking at once out of it, we were
surprised with a fine open Country on the North: on the South, the Rotonda
appears: on the West, the Boycoat Buildings: on the East, the Equestrian Statue
of the late King, which stands in the Front of the House. These Objects present
themselves from Nelson's Seat, which is an oblong square Recess in a Clump of
Ever-greens. To the South-east is a View of the Mansion House, which is an
extraordinary good one; but, his Lordship annually adding to and improving it,
one may safely say, that it will not be much inferior to the best House in
England, if his Lordship's Design be finished.

The Offices on the North-side are all enclosed within a most elegant Wall,
with Niches, and grand Gate-ways into the Offices and Gardens. The House and
Offices, when perfected, will be about 640 Feet in Length, fronting North and
South. As Nelson's Seat lies to the North-west from the Portico of the House,
there is on the North-east a new Bastion building to answer it; and some grand
Walks are now making by the Side of a fine Lawn, from which we see numerous
Herds of Deer. A Semicircle of fine Timber appears at some Miles Distance with
an agreeable Country between.

On the South Front of the House is a very handsome Parterre, decorated with
Apollo and the Muses, gilt Vessels, and Two Orangeries: but it is likely this
will be entirely altered; for if the lower End is laid open, there will appear
a noble Scene, where Nature and Art are curiously blended.

The next Object of our View was a Corinthian Column, on which is the Statue of
his present Majesty, with this Inscription: GEORGIO AVGVSTO.

Here we had a most delightful Prospect over the Country; and in the Garden
several of the Buildings present themselves with great Pomp. The Lake, whose
Bounds are beautifully concealed, adds much to the general Agreeableness of the
Place.

Dido's Cave was the next Subject of our Attention: this is a Stone Building,
in a Wood, and raised on a sort of Amphitheatre, with this Inscription:
Speluncam Dido, dux and Trojanus, eandem
Deveniunt --.
In English thus: Repairing to the same dark Cave are seen,
The Trojan Hero, and the Tyrian Queen.


From hence we advanced to the Rotonda, which is a neat airy Building by Sir
John Vanbrugh. The Dome of it supported on Ten Dorick Columns; and in the
Center, standing on a circular Pedestal, a Venus a Medicis. From this Place we
had a View of Part of the Octagon; the Lake, the Fields, and several of the
Buildings, presenting themselves alternately as we turned ourselves round.

As we went from hence to the late Queen's Statue, by the Side of a Canal, we
were delighted with an Alteration of his Lordship's; viz. On each Side the
Ground is broken, and planted with Clumps of various kinds of Trees, intermixed
with Statues, which are promiscuously placed. Her late Majesty's Effigies is
erected on Four Ionick Columns, which are placed on a large Pedestal, with this
Inscription in Golden Letters: Honori, Laudi, Virtuti Divae CAROLINAE. To the
Honor, Praise, and Virtue of the Divine CAROLINE.

It is situated on a neat Amphitheatre of Slopes, with pastoral Figures each
Way from it. Nature and Art here, joining together, make an agreeable Contraste.

Next we were led into the Sleeping Parlour, which is a square Building placed
in a Wood with Six Walks centring in it. Within, are painted the Caesar's Heads,
with several Festons of Fruit, etc. On the Frize is this Inscription: Cum omnia
sint in incerto, save tibi. Which is, Since all Things are uncertain, indulge
thyself.

Leaving this Place, and crossing the Avenue beforementioned, from the
Pavilions we came to the Witch-house, a square Building, the Inside of which is
painted by my Lord's Gentleman, with several Devices alluding to the Name.

We arrived next at the Temple of Ancient Virtue, a Rotonda of the Dorick
Order, by Mr. Kent: and in Four Niches, standing at full Lengths, are the Four
following Statues; viz.

I. EPAMINONDAS, with this Inscription over his Head: Cujus a virtute,
prudentia, verecundia, That is, From whose Valor, Prudence, and Moderation,
the Republic of Thebes received both Liberty and Empire, its military, civil,
and domestic Discipline; and, with him, lost them.

II. LYCURGUS, with this: Qui summo cum consilio inventis legibus, Thus
translated: Who having invented Laws with the greatest Wisdom, and most
excellently fenced them against all Corruption, as a Father of his Country,
instituted for his Countrymen the firmest Liberty, and the soundest Morality,
which endured for many Ages, he having, together with Riches, banished Avarice,
Luxury, and Lust.

III. SOCRATES, Qui corruptissima in civitate innocens, That is, Who being
innocent in a most corrupt State, an Encourager of the Good, a Worshipper of
One only GOD, as the wisest of Men, reduced Philosophy from useless Indolence,
and vain Disputations, to the Duties of Life, and the Advantages of Society.

IV. HOMERUS, Qui poetarum princeps, idem and maximus, Thus rendered: Who being
the First of Poets, as he was the greatest, the Herald of Virtue, and Bestower
of Immortality, known to all Nations, incites all, in a Divine Poem, honorably
to dare, and resolutely to suffer.

Over one Door is this Inscription: Charum esse civem, been de republica
mereri, laudari, coli, diligi, gloriosum est: metui vero, and in odio esse,
invidiosum, detestabile, imbecillum, caducum. Which is: To be dear to our
Country, to deserve well of the State, to be praised, honored, and beloved, is
glorious: but to be dreaded, and hated, is matter of Ill Will, detestable,
weak, ruinous.

Over the other Door this: Justitiam cole and pietatem, quae cum sit magna in
parentibus and propinquis, tum in patria maxima est. Ea vita via est in coelum,
and in hunc coetum eorum, qui jam vixerunt. In English thus: Maintain Justice,
and thy relative Duty; which, as it is great, when exercised toward our Parents
and Kindred, so is greatest toward our Country. That Life is the Way to Heaven,
and to this Assembly of those, who have already lived.

From this Place we had no distant Prospect, but, notwithstanding that, it
abounds with lasting Beauties: it is really placed in a sort of Paradise; and,
Things rising adequate to that Name, you see Friendship flourishing in immortal
Youth; in the Elysian Fields are many great and virtuous Men's Names
perpetuated, who have distinguished themselves in this World by answering the
End of their Creation. Near this Place also is a good Emblem of those who have
deviated from it, in the Ruin. Here are sweet purling Streams, resembling the
melodious Sounds of Birds, etc.

We were now not far from the Parish Church, which is so closely surrounded
with a Wood, as not to be seen. From hence we came to the Side of a River,
where Unpolished Nature cannot boast a Part;
For Chance too regular, too rude for Art.


And by its winding Banks we were led up to a Grotto, which is to be decorated
with Shells, Pebbles, and Minerals. Here is likewise a Shell-pavilion, the Dome
of which is supported by Six wreathed Columns. The Inside of it has several
Marks performed from Shells, and diverse other Imbellishments. On the opposite
Side is to be another of Pebbles.

Hence we proceeded to the Three-arch'd Building, which is a pleasant Recess,
by the Banks of the River; and in passing we saw Ancient Virtue peeping on the
South Side of us. The Church we had in full View on the West. To the East is
situated the Chinese House, a Building in the Pond, the Outside of it painted
very ingeniously, in the Chinese Taste, by the celebrated Mr. Sleats. The
Inside of it is Indian Japan.

The Shell Bridge led us from hence into the Elysian Fields, the most charming
Place that ever Eyes beheld. It may not be improper here to give the following
Lines, which were left by an unknown Gentleman, on his Entrance into them: To
Lord COBHAM.
Charmed with the Sight, my ravished Breast is fired
With Hints like those, which ancient Bards inspired.
All the feigned Tales, by Superstition told,
All the bright Train of fabled Nymphs of old,
The enthusiastic Muse believes, are true;
Thinks the Spot sacred, and its Genius YOU.
Lost in wild Rapture, would she fain disclose,
How by Degrees the pleasing Wonder rose,
Industrious in a faithful Verse to trace
The various Beauties of the lovely Place;
And while she keeps the glowing Work in View,
Through every Maze your artful Hand pursue, etc.


We are now come to the Monuments of British Worthies; the First of which is
Mr. POPE, with no Inscription.

The next is Sir THOMAS GRESHAM, with this Inscription: Who, by the honorable
Profession of Merchant, having enriched himself, and his Country; for carrying
on the Commerce of the World, built the ROYAL EXCHANGE.

INIGO JONES, Who, to adorn his Country, introduced and rivalled the Greek and
Roman Architecture.

JOHN MILTON, Whose sublime and unbounded Genius equalled a Subject that
carried him beyond the Limits of this World.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, Whose excellent Genius opened to him the whole Heart of
Man, all the Stores of Nature; and gave him Power, beyond all other Writers, to
move, astonish, and delight Mankind.

Sir ISAAC NEWTON, Whom the GOD of Nature made to comprehend all his Works; and
from simple Principles to discover the Laws never known, and to explain the
Appearances never understood, of this stupendous Universe.

Sir FRANCIS BACON, Lord VERULAM, Who, by the Strength of a superior Genius,
rejecting vain Speculation, and fallacious Theory, taught to pursue and improve
Philosophy by the certain Method of Experiment.

In the Niche of a Pyramid is placed a Mercury, with these Words subscribed: --
CAMPOS DUCIT AD ELYSIOS.
-- Leads to the Elysian Fields.


And below this Figure is fixed a Square of black Marble, with the following
Lines: Hic manus ob patriam pugnando vulnera passi,
Quique pii vates, and Phoebo digna locuti,
Inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per arts,
Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo.
Thus translated: Here are the Bands, who for their Country bled;
And Bards whose pure and sacred Verse is read:
Those who, by Arts invented, Life improved;
And by their Merits made their Mem'ries loved.


King ALFRED, The mildest, justest, most beneficent of Kings, who drove out the
Danes, secured the Seas, supported Learning, established Juries, crushed
Corruption, guarded Liberty, and was the Founder of the English Constitution.

EDWARD Prince of Wales, The Terror of Europe, and Delight of England; who
preserved unaltered, in the Height of Glory, his natural Gentleness and Modesty.

Queen ELIZABETH, Who confounded the Projects, and destroyed the Designs of
Spain, who threatened to oppress the Liberty of Europe; took off the Yoke of
Ecclesiastical Tyranny; restored Religion from the Corruptions of Popery; and
by a wise, a moderate, and a popular Government, gave Wealth, Health, Security
to England.

King WILLIAM the Third, Who by his Virtue and Constancy having saved his
Country from a foreign Master, by a bold and generous Enterprise, preserved the
Liberty and Religion of Great Britain.

Sir WALTER RALEGH, A valiant Soldier, and an able Statesman; who, endeavoring
to rouse the Spirit of his Master, for the Honor of his Country, against the
Ambition of Spain, fell a Sacrifice to that Court, whose Arms he had
vanquished, and whose Designs he had opposed.

Sir FRANCIS DRAKE, Who, through many Perils, was the First of Britons, that
adventured to sail round the Globe, and carry into unknown Seas the Knowledge
and Glory of the English Name.

JOHN HAMPDEN, Who with great Spirit and consummate Ability, began a noble
Opposition to an arbitrary Court, in Defense of the Liberties of his Country;
supported them in Parliament, and died for them in the Field.

Sir JOHN BARNARD, With no Inscription.

Leaving this incomparably sweet Place with great Regret, as every one who sees
it, must, we came to a Monument, with this Inscription:

Signor FIDO, An Italian of good Extraction, who came into England, not to bite
us, like most of his Countrymen, but to gain an honorable Livelihood: he
hunted not after Fame; yet acquired it: regardless of the Praise of his
Friends, but most sensible of their Love. Though he lived amongst the Great, he
neither learnt nor flattered any Vice. He was no Bigot, nor doubted he of any
of the XXXIX. Articles: and if to follow Nature, and respect the Laws of
Society, be Philosophy, he was a perfect Philosopher; a faithful Friend, and an
agreeable Companion, a loving Husband, and distinguished by a numerous
Offspring, all which he lived to see take good Courses; and in his Old Age
retired to the House of a Clergyman in the Country, where he finished his
earthly Race, and died an Honor and Example to the whole Species. Reader, this
Stone is guiltless of Flattery; for he, to whom it was inscribed, was not a
Man, but a --

Crossing the Field to the Gothic Building before described, we had a
boundless Prospect round the Building. From hence we descended a fine Hill; and
on our Left Hand saw a Plantation of Evergreens; on our Right the Well
designed, and Rivers described from the Pavilion. This Walk led us down to a
very handsome Bridge over one of the Rivers. The Roof on the Side facing the
Water is supported by Ionick Columns; the Backside of it by an Alto-Relievo of
the Four Quarters of the World, bringing their Products to Britannia. Here are
likewise painted by Mr. Sleats, Sir Walter Ralegh, with a Map of Virginia in
his Hand; and Sir William Penn, holding a Book styled The Laws of Pensylvania.
Here are, besides, a great many modern and antique Bustoes of Marble.

We now visited the Imperial Closet, which is a Room very near the Form of a
Cube; and in it are the three following Figures, painted at full Length by Mr.
Sleats: IMP. TITUS CAES. VESPASIAN. With his Saying over his Head, Diem
perdidi, I have lost a Day. IMP. TRAJAN. CAES. With his Saying, Pro me: si
merear, in me. For me: but if I deserve it, against me. IMP. MARCUS AURELIUS
CAESAR ANTONINUS, With his Saying, Ita regas imperator, ut privatus regi velis.
So govern when an Emperor, as, if a private Person, you would desire to be
governed.


Passing a noble Iron Gate, at the End of a fine Terrace, of 1990 Feet in
Length, and Breadth proportionable, which leads to the Veneris Hortus, we came
to the Temple of Friendship, a lofty square Building, of the Dorick Order, with
Three noble Porticoes on the Sides, which appear to the Garden. The Cave and
Ceiling are painted with History-pieces, by Mr. Sleats. At the Bottom of the
Room are placed Ten Pedestals, which are designed for the Bustoes of his
Lordship, and Nine of his select Friends. Those of his Royal Highness the
Prince of Wales, the Earl of Chesterfield, Lord Cobham, and Mr. William Pit,
are already erected; but who the other are to be, is not yet known.

The Pebble Alcove is a neat Recess, and very artfully imbellished with
Pebbles. His Lordship's Arms are performed with the same, and displayed in
proper Colors.

Congreve's Monument is an Urn, which with great Art expresses the Genius of
the Man; and at the Top of it is placed a Monkey, beholding himself in a
Mirror, and under him this Writing: Vitae imitatio, That is, Comedy is the
Imitation of Life, and the Glass of Fashion.

The Poet's Effigies, lying in a careless Posture, has the following
Inscription: Ingenio Hoc COBHAM. Thus translated: In the Year 1736. COBHAM
erected this poor Consolation for, as well as Monument of, his Loss of the
piercing, elegant, polished Wit, and civilized, candid, most unaffected
Manners, of WILLIAM CONGREVE.

We were now very near the Pavilions, and in going to them, walked by the Side
of the River and Octagon, passing, on our Left Hand, Three Satyrs, and a
Dancing Venus.

I have now gone round, giving you a faint Description of an unparalleled Chain
of artificial and natural Beauty: and, to make use of Mr. Pope's Lines, Here
Order in Variety you see,
Where all things differ, yet where all agree.


His Lordship's Judgment, and refined Taste, are not less conspicuous in his
Woods and Park.

Vol. II. p. 161.
Instead of what is there said, of the Earl of Burlington's Seat at Chiswick,
insert the following.

BUT I must not pass over so slightly the noble Seat of the Right Honorable
the Earl of Burlington; which was a plain, useful House, with a Number of good
Offices about it: but as a Part of the old House was destroyed some Years ago,
by Fire, his Lordship erected a most beautiful Villa, near to the old House;
which for Elegance of Taste surpasses every thing of its kind in England, if
not in Europe. The Court in Front of the House is of a proportionable Size to
the Building, which is gravelled, and kept always very neat. On each Side are
Yew Hedges, in Panels, with Termini, placed at proper Distance; in Front of
which are planted two Rows of Cedars of Libanus, which at present have a fine
Effect to the Eye, at a small Distance from the House; for the dark Shade of
these solemn ever-green Trees occasions a fine Contraste with the elegant white
Building which appears between them.

The Ascent to the House is by a noble Flight of Stone Steps, on one Side of
which is the Statue of Inigo Jones, and on the other that of Palladio. The
Portico is supported by fine fluted Pillars of the Corinthian Order, and the
Cornice, Frize, and Architrave are as rich as possible; so that the Front of
this Building strikes every Person (though not a nice Judge of Architecture) with
uncommon Pleasure.

The other Front toward the Garden is plainer, but yet is very bold and grand,
having a pleasing Simplicity, as has also the Side-Front, toward the
Serpentine River, which is different from the other Two.

The Inside of the House is finished in the highest Taste, the Ceilings being
richly gilt and painted; and the Rooms are filled with some of the best
Pictures in Europe; and though the House is small, yet it would take up more Room
than can be allowed here, to describe the particular Beauties of it.

The Gardens are also laid out in an elegant Taste. When you descend from the
House, you enter on a Lawn of Grass, planted with Clumps of ever-green Trees,
between which are two Rows of large Stone Vases. At the Ends next the House are
two fine Wolves in Stone, cut by Mr. Sceidmaker the famous Statuary: and at the
farther End are two large Lions; and to terminate this View are three fine
antique Statues, which were dug up in Adrian's Garden at Rome, with Stone Seats
between each; and on the Back of the Statues is a close Plantation of
Ever-greens, which terminates the Prospect.

On the Right Hand, as you go from the House, you look through an open Grove of
Forest-trees, to the Orangery; which is separated from the Lawn by a Faussee,
to secure the Orange Trees from being injured by Persons who are admitted to
walk in the Garden; so that they are seen as perfectly, and when the
Orange Trees are in Flower, the Scent is diffused over the whole Lawn to the
House, as if the Trees were placed on the Lawn.

On the Left Hand you have an easy Slope of Grass down to the Serpentine River,
on the Side of which are Clumps of Ever-greens, which make agreeable Breaks to
the Eye, between which the Water is seen; and at the farther End is a Peep into
an Enclosure, where are an Obelisk and a Roman Temple, with Grass Slopes, and a
circular Piece of Water in the Middle.

From this Lawn you are led to the Wilderness, through which are three strait
Avenues, terminated by three different Buildings; and within the Quarters are
Serpentine Walks, through which you may walk near a Mile in constant Shade.

On each Side the Serpentine River is a Grass Walk, which follow the Turns of
the River; and on the Right Hand of the River is a Building, which is the exact
Model of the Portico of Covent Garden Church; and on the Left is a Wilderness,
which is laid out in regular Walks, with clipped Hedges on each Side, which is
too mean for the other Parts of the Garden; and it is much to be wondered his
Lordship should suffer them to remain in the present Form.

Over the River, in the middle Part, is a Palladian Bridge of Wood, which his
Lordship crosses in his Coach to come round to the House; for there is a Coach
Road through the Garden, by which his Lordship passes when he comes from London,
so that the Earl seldom goes through the Town of Chiswick to his House.

At the End of the River, next the Road, is a fine Cascade lately erected,
which by an Engine to raise the Water, his Lordship proposed to have a constant
Fall into the River; but the Engine failing, it is but seldom the Cascade can
play, and then but for a short time.

Next the Road his Lordship has raised a Terrace, (with the Earth which came
out of the River) from whence you have a Prospect of the adjacent Country; and
when the Tide is up, you see the Water of the Thames, with the Boats and Barges
passing, which greatly enlivens the Prospect. In a Word, there is more Variety
in this Garden, than can be found in any other of the same Size in England, or
perhaps in Europe.

To the preceding Account of the Lord Burlington's Seat at Chiswick, I shall
subjoin the following Description of Gunnersbury-House.

IT is situated near Ealing, between the two great Western Roads, and stands on
an Eminence, the Ground falling gradually from it to the Brentford Road; so
that from the Portico in the Back-front of the House, you have an exceeding
fine Prospect of the County of Surrey, the River of Thames, and all the Meadows
on the Borders for some Miles, as also a good Prospect of London, in clear
Weather. This House was built by Mr. Web, who was Son-in-law to the famous
Inigo Jones; and indeed the Architecture shows it was contrived by him, or at
least by a Scholar of his; for although the Building is as plain on the Outside
as possible, yet there is a simple Boldness in it, which graces all the
Buildings of Inigo Jones, rarely to be found in the Works of other Architects.
The Apartments in the House are extremely convenient, and well contrived. The
Hall is very large, having Rows of Columns on each Side. From thence you ascend
by a noble Flight of Stairs, to a Salon, which is a double Cube of Twentyfive
Feet. This Room the present Possessor Henry Furness, Esquire is fitting up in a
most elegant Taste, and he is possessed of a fine Collection of capital
Pictures: so he proposes to hang this Room entirely with them; which, when
finished, will render it one of the finest Rooms in England.

From this Room is the Entrance to the Portico on the Back-front of the House,
which is supported by Columns, and is a delightful Place to sit in, in the
Afternoon, during the Summer Season; for as it faces the South-east, so the Sun
is gone from it by two of the Clock, and shining on the Country, which is open
to the View, renders the Prospect very delightful.

Upon going out of the House into the Garden, you come upon a noble Terrace,
the whole Width of the Garden, from whence you have a fine Prospect of the
neighboring Country, and on which you may walk dry after the greatest Rains;
from this Terrace you descend to the Garden by a noble Flight of Stone Steps,
the upper Part of which is concave, and the lower unequal, with a noble Stone
Balustrade on each Side, as also upon the Coping of the Wall, the Length of the
House, which makes a fine Appearance from the Road; but the Gardens are laid
out too plain, having the Walls in View on every Side; and at present the
Offices are too mean for the House, which I hear the present Possessor intends
to alter, in a most elegant Taste, which will render it the finest Seat near
London.

Vol. I. p. 233.
AT Peckham is the Seat of the late Lord Trevor, which was built in the Reign
of King James II. by Sir Thomas Bond, who was deeply engaged with that
unfortunate Prince in his Schemes, and was obliged to quit the Kingdom with
him; so the House was plundered by the Populace, and became a Forfeit to the
Crown. In the Building and the Gardens, large Sums of Money were expended; for
the Whole was executed according to the politest Taste of those Times. The
Front of the House stands to the North, having Two Rows of large Elm-trees of a
considerable Length before it, through which the Tower of London appears as a
Termination to the Prospect; but on each Side of this Avenue you have a View of
London, from Westminster to Greenwich; and at high Water the Masts of the
Vessels on the River of Thames appear over the Trees and Houses like a Wood,
which greatly improves the Prospect. The Fields in Front, and on each Side of
the House, being well cultivated, render them very agreeable; and the Town of
Peckham lies on the Backside of the Gardens, but is shut out from the View by
Plantations. The Wilderness indeed was planted too regular, having diagonal
Walks intersecting each other, with Hedges on each Side; but this was the Taste
which prevailed, when those Gardens were laid out. The Kitchen-garden and the
Walls were planted with the choicest Fruit Trees from France, and an
experienced Fruit-gardener was sent for from Paris, to have the Management of
them; so that the Collection of Fruits in this Garden has been accounted one of
the best in England.

A private Gentleman purchased this Seat soon after the Death of the late Lord
Trevor, and had begun to make very great Alterations, particularly in cutting
down Hedges, removing Walls and Buildings, which intercepted the Prospect of
the neighboring Fields; and had the Gentleman lived a few Years longer, he
would have entirely altered it to the modern Taste of Gardening, and rendered it
a sweet Retirement, considering its Vicinity to London.

Vol. I. p. 317.
after Line 6. add, as follows:

IN the Year 1740, on the Promotion of Dr. Gilbert, Dean of this Church, to the
Bishopric of Llandaff, his Majesty was pleased to confer the Deanery on Dr.
Alured Clarke, who was installed in the Month of January, in that Year; and if
we may be allowed to judge from the pious Acts he began with in that Station, a
more worthy Man could not have been preferred thereto.

The House, an ancient Building, belonging to that Dignity, had, through the
Remissness of its former Possessors, been too long neglected; wherefore his
First Work was to set about altering and repairing that, which he did within
Nine Months of his Installment, at an Expense of about 800 l.

Before this was perfected, viz. in the Spring 1741, he drew up and published
Proposals for founding an Hospital in this City, for Lodging, Dieting, and
Curing the Sick and Lame Poor thereof, and of the County of Devon, on the like
Plan of that which he had before founded at Winchester, for the Benefit of that
City, and County of Hants. A Design so good, recommended by the pious Eloquence
of a Divine so learned and judicious, on Views so visibly disinterested, and so
clearly abstracted from all Party Schemes or Intentions, met with the general
Applause and Assistance of the Gentry and Clergy of all Parties, Sects and
Denominations; who, however different in Religion and Politics, unanimously
joined in this pious Undertaking: and a Subscription being opened in March,
has already ( November 1741) brought in about 2000 l. of which near 1500 l.
are annual Engagements, which it is highly probable will be not only continued,
but much augmented, so that it is hoped, that 200 Patients at a time may be
provided for. John Tuckfield, of Raddon, Esquire was pleased to accommodate the
Governors with a Plot of Ground near Southernhay, without the City-walls, at a
very moderate Price, and to give 100 l. toward carrying on the Building for
the intended Hospital, the Plan of which was commodiously designed by the
Direction of the Dean, and the First Stone thereof laid by him, assisted by the
Bishop of Exon, Sir William Courtenay, Knight of the Shire, Sir Henry
Northcote, and Humphry Sydenham, Esquire the Citizens in Parliament, the Honorable
Henry Roll, and John Tuckfield, Esquire attended by a great Number of Clergy and
Gentry, that are Subscribers, and Thousands of joyful Spectators, on the 27th
of August 1741. The Building contains upwards of 300 Feet in Length, and is
already in a good Forwardness. In digging the Ground for the Foundation the
Workmen found a Roman Coin of Nerva, and another of Constantine.

The Charity-schools founded here by the pious Bishop Blackall, in the Year
1709, the good Dean not only bountifully subscribed to, but preached a Sermon
before a large Assembly of Governors and Contributors; and after the Sermon, at
a Court held for that Purpose, inspected the Rules, inquired into the Causes of
Complaint, and prevailed on the Governors to visit the Schools oftener, and
diligently endeavor to render that Charity as useful as possible.

Vol. I. p. 216.
AT Painshill near Cobham in Surrey, is the Seat of the Hon. Charles Hamilton,
where is a great Improvement making by enclosing a large Tract of Land designed
for a Park, which was most of it so poor as not to produce any thing but Heath
and Broom; but by burning of the Heath, and spreading of the Ashes on the
Ground, a Crop of Turnips was obtained; and by feeding Sheep on the Turnips,
their Dung become a good Manure to the Land, so that a good Sward of Grass is
now upon the Land, where it was judged by most People impossible to get any
Herbage. This is the sort of Improvement which was mentioned in Norfolk, where
Land has been raised from Five Shillings an Acre per Ann. to Thirty or Forty
Shillings: and were this sort of Husbandry practiced in many other Parts of
England, it would be of great Service to the Public, and greatly increase the
Value of the Lands to the Proprietor.

And this leads me to a Reflection on the present advanced Price of Butter and
Cheese, ( Anno 1742.) which many People attribute entirely to the Two last hard
Winters, and the succeeding dry Summers; which must be allowed have greatly
contributed toward it; yet these are not the only Causes of it; but there has
of late Years been a great Neglect of the Dairy-farms, either from the Poverty
of the Farmers, who could not keep up their Stock of Cows, or by ploughing too
much of their Grass-ground for raising of Corn. And many Landlords (it is to be
feared) have permitted their Tenants to break up too much of their Land for
Corn, because of the great Demand there has been for it abroad of late Years;
and this has enabled their Tenants to pay their Rent better than otherwise they
could have done.

But the Consequence will be severely felt for some Years; for as the Farmers
Stock of Cattle has been reduced greatly by this Alteration in the Husbandry,
so it will be impossible for them to get Manure enough to keep their Land in
Heart; and when this fresh Ground is worn out by Crops, the yearly Value of it
will be reduced to less than one Third of what it has produced: so that it is
greatly to be feared most of the Estates in England will be lessened in their
Rent; and unless the Owners will be at some Expense to lay down properly a
Proportion of their Lands for Grass, they can hardly expect ever to see a
proper Sward on their Estates; for the Farmers in general have not the least
Skill in this particular Branch of Husbandry.

But to return from this Digression: The Lands which Mr. Hamilton has enclosed,
have fine Inequalities; for every 100 Yards there are great Hollows, then
rising Grounds again, so that the Prospect is continually changing, as you walk
over it; and (if we may guess by what this Gentleman has already done) the
Whole will be laid out conformable to the natural Situation of the Ground; and
when the Plantations, which are already made, are grown up, it will be a
delightful Place; and this upon a Spot of Ground, which lay almost neglected,
before this Gentleman became possessed of it; so that whatever is here laid
cut, will be entirely an Improvement, since without it the Land would have
produced very little Rent to the Proprietor. And would the Gentlemen who
enclose large Tracts of Land into Parks, follow this Gentleman's Method, of
enclosing such Land as is of little Value, and improve it, by making a good
Sward upon it, their Estates would be greatly benefited by it.

The House which at present is on this Spot, is very small, being what Mr.
Hamilton found built on it by his Predecessor; to which he has only added one
handsome Room on the Backside, which is elegantly fitted up, and completely
furnished with good Pictures: but as there are so many better Situations for a
House in the middle of the Park, so it is supposed this Gentleman will erect a
new Mansion House, answerable to the Design of his Plantations.

The River Mole, which rises near Darking, passes along by the Side of this
Park, and in its Course serpents about in so pretty a manner, as that you
frequently lose the Sight of it; and by its Windings make the Course almost
Four Miles within the Compass of this Enclosure. Indeed this River is very
narrow, and in dry Weather the Current is exceeding slow, and the Water not
well colored, which, it must be allowed, takes off from its Beauty; yet there
is room for great Improvements, by sloping off the Banks, so as to have a
better View of the Water; and in many Places by taking away some of the little
Projection of the Banks, it may be widened so as to appear considerable at some
Distance: which, if done, will add much to the Beauty of the Place.

Near this Place is the House of Mr. Bridges, which is built in a very singular
Taste, something after the Model of an Italian Villa, but very plain on the
Outside. The Apartments within seem very commodious, and the principal Rooms
are elegantly fitted up, the Ceilings being gilt, and all the Members are
richly ornamented: the Offices below are very convenient, and judiciously
contrived to answer the Purposes for which they were designed. But what chiefly
struck my Curiosity on seeing it, was a false Story contrived on each Side of
the House, taken from the Difference in the Height of the Side-rooms, from
those principal Apartments: and these are converted into long Galleries with a
small Apartment at one End, which affords a Communication between them. In the
Attick Story there are very good Lodging-rooms, which are well laid together:
so that for the Size of this House, there is hardly any other near London,
which has more useful and elegant Apartments.

The Situation of the House is on an Eminence, so that it commands the Prospect
of the adjacent Fields, which are kept in very exact Order; and there is a
Declivity from the House to the River Mole, which passes along by the Side of
this Gentleman's Garden: and here it appears much more considerable than in any
other Part of its Course; for Mr. Bridges has taken away so much of the Earth
of the Banks, as to make the River, in some Places, Four or Five times broader
than it was naturally, so that it makes a handsome Appearance. And by the Side
of the Water, he has disposed the Earth into a natural Slope, with a broad
Grass-walk, planted with sweet Shrubs on each Side; and at the End of the Walk
is a fine Room, which has a View of the Water lengthwise, and is a sweet
Retreat in hot Weather, being shaded by large Elm-trees on the South Side, and
having the Water on the North and East-sides, which renders it very cool and
pleasant. This House is situated about half a Mile from the public Road to
Portsmouth, and is so much hid by the Trees near it, as not to be seen until
you rise on the Common or Heath beyond Cobham, where in several Parts of the
Road between that and Ripley, you have a fine View of it.

Vol. I. p. 301.
FROM Blandford I took a Turn to view one of the largest and most stately new
Fabrics in the Kingdom, I mean the House, or rather Palace, belonging to the
Right Hon. George Dodington, Esquire It is situated in the Parish of Gunville, Four
Miles from Blandford, and Six from Shaftesbury and Cranborn. The House, Gardens
and Park, containing in all about Eight Miles in Circumference, are now named
Eastbury.

It is a vast and magnificent Structure, its very Offices, at a Distance,
resembling no inconsiderable Parish. You approach it through one of the most
beautiful Lawns which the Imagination can conceive; and passing through the
grand Court, on each Side of which the Offices are ranged in treble Rows, from
four Bass Courts, a most stately Portico presents itself, supported by large
and beautiful Pillars. Here you ascend by many Steps between the Statues of Two
Sphinxes; and having passed the Area of the Portico, you enter a most
magnificent Hall, adorned with many Statues and Bustoes, and its Roof painted
in a most delicate Taste.

Hence you proceed to the Salon; one of the noblest Rooms in Europe, and which,
with its fine Proportion, no less than the Splendour of its Gilding, cannot but
strike the most indifferent Beholder.

At one End of this Salon is a princely Apartment, consisting of Three large
Rooms furnished, one with Crimson, another with flowered Velvet, and the third
with Satin, all richly laced with Gold. At the other End of the Salon is a
Drawing Room, and very large Dining Room, both magnificently gilt, as is indeed
every Room in this Floor, except only the Hall.

The First Floor above Stairs is distributed into several grand Apartments: but
as it is not our Intention, nor have we Room to describe it minutely, we shall
pass to the Gardens, which are laid out with surprising Art: but what is most
remarkable in them is the vast Collection of foreign Trees of various Kinds,
the beautiful Verdure of the Walks, in the midst of a Country whose Turf is of
another Color, especially in Summer. This House was begun by the late Mr.
Dodington, and finished by the present. The Architect was Sir John Vanbrugh.

THE following is a comparative Account of the several Cathedral Churches in
England and Wales, and of diverse other remarkable Churches and Chapels.

LENGTH BREADTH HEIGHT of the Number of Bells in each Church. From East to
West. Of the Transept from North to South. Of the Nave and Side Ails. Nave
from the Area to the Canopy. Middle Towers, Lanterns, or Spires. West Towers or
Spires. ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. St. Albans 550 ^17 70
65 144 6 St. Asaph 179 108 68 6 60 93 2 Bangor 214 2 95 10 60 33 10 60 5 Bath
210 126 72 162 8 Beverley 334 4 167 6 64 3 67 166 Bristol 175 128 73 73 128 5
Cambr. King's Coll. Chapter 284 70 70 Canterbury 514 154 upp. Trans. 74 80 130
within 100 N.W. Tower 6 Carlisle 219 124 71 71 1^3 5 Chefter 348 ^80 73 6 73
127 5 Chichester 401 8 ^31 91 in 1 Part 61 6 260 106 9 6 St. David's 300 ^30 72
54 127 3 Dorchester Cathedr. Oxf. 189 69 Durham 411 70 78 69 6 162 within 138 8
Ely 518 ^82 76 76 150 within 266 5 -- St. Mary's Chapter N. Side 100 50 Exeter 390
140 74 74 N. Tower 130 10 Gloucester 420 144 84 66 222 8 Hereford 370 140 68 64
240 130 10 Landaff 263 6 65 65 105 N.W. Tower 5 Litchfield 411 154 66 66 240
188 10 Lincoln 498 within 201 upp. Trans. 88 83 124 6 within 270 6 -- By
another Account 487 within 192 upp. Trans. 82 83 124 within 270 8 London, St.
Paul's 500 248 98 88 340 208 Norwich 400 178 71 315 Oxford 150 120 54 41 6 in 1
Part 144 10 Peterborough 479 10 203 91 4 78 136 within 186 4 N.W. Sp. 10
Rochester 306 122 65 156 6 Selby 3^0 130 130 Salisbury 478 210 76 80 410 8
Southwell 306 121 59 8 Tewkesbury 300 120 70 55 210 8 Wells 371 135 67 67 160
130 5 Westminster, St. Peter's 390 189 75 101 6 -- K. Henry VII's Chapter 99 66 54
Winchester 491 186 87 87 150 8 -- Lady's Chapel 54 Worcester 394 126 74 74 or
87 162 8 York 524 280 109 99 in one Part 192 within 198 12 -- By another
Account 497 222 105 96 in one Part 1 188 within 196 12

INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME.
A
ABalaba p. 234 Aberforth p. 107 Agelorum p. 9 Ailweston p. 45 Ainsley p. 64
Air, River p. 105, 112 Aislabie, Mr. his Park p. 119, 120 Alcock, Bishop p.
181 Aldborough p. 145, 146 Alderman of all England, who thus called p. 26
Alderney, Island p. 269, 270 Alexander, Bishop p. 2, 6 Almondbury p. 135 Alwyn,
Founder of Ramsey Abbey p. 26 Ampthill p. 47 Ancaster p. 30 Anglesey, Earls of,
whence descended p. 64 Appendix p. 271 to 298 Appleby p. 232, 234 Arbera p.
239. Arica p. 269 Ashbourn p. 70 Athelbald, King p. 19 Aukborough p. 11 Auldby
p. 149 Axelodunum p. 204 Axholm p. 9
B
Bakewell p. 90 Balsover p. 66 Bantry p. 100, 101 Barmoot Court, what p. 72
Barnesley p. 103 Barrow p. 12 Barton Ferry p. 11 Battle, Town p. 8 Battle of
Chevy Chase, p. 207, 208 Battlesden p. 49 Beck, Bishop p. 7 Beckingham p. 33
Bedal p. 137 Bid, where born And buried p. 200. 196 Bedford p. 46, 47
Bedfordshire, without a City 46. Great Number of Gentlemen's Seats in it p. 50
St. Bees p. 236 Belton-house p. 31 Belvoir Castle p. 32 Bernard' s Castle p.
142 Beverley 172, 173. The Immunities granted to the Freemen thereof 172. Its
Minster p. 175, 176 Biggleswade p. 47 Bishop's Auckland p. 197 Bittern, a Bird
p. 16 Blackall, Bishop, his Charity-Schools p. 294 Blackhall p. 35 Blithe p. 65
Bolinbroke p. 14 Bolton p. 222 Bond, Sir Thomas p. 292 Borough-Brigg p. 141
Boston p. 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 31 Boston Deeps p. 16 Bottesworth p. 32 Boulter'
s Mile-stones p. 27 Bourne p. 30, 33 Bows p. 142 Bradford p. 136 Bradshaw, Sir
Roger p. 223 Braham-Moor p. 108 Brampton p. 243 Brasington Moor p. 74
Brazen-nose College at St. Martins, more ancient than that at Oxford p. 35
Bretonomacum p. 226 Bridges, Mr. his House p. 297 Brigg-shot, what p. 109
Brotherton, Village p. 108 Brovoniacum p. 244 Brownlow Family p. 31 Brus,
Robert p. 26 Bugden p. 45 Bullion-work, remarkable p. 7 Burgh, a Village p. 83
Burgh upon the Sands p. 243 Burham p. 13 Burleigh on the Hill p. 33, 34
Burleigh House p. 36 to 38 Burlington p. 185 Burlington, Earl of, his noble
Seat at Chiswick p. 287, etc. Burning Well p. 224 Burstall p. 134 Burton p. 12
Burton upon Trent p. 69 Bury p. 222 Buxton Bath p. 76 to 79 Byrons, the Family
of, p. 64
C
Caesar, Sir Owen p. 242 Caesa ea p. 255 Calder, River p. 103, 105, 112, 129,
135 Camalodunum p. 148 Campodunum p. 135 Candle Coal p. 223, 224 Carham p. 2
Carlisle City p. 235, and 244, 245 Carlisle, Earl of, his noble Seat p. 166,
167 Carps of extraordinary Size p. 259 Caster 14. The old Roman Highway there
p. 38, 39 Castleford p. 107 Castle Howard p. 166, 167 Castleton p. 13
Cataractonium p. 142 Catharine of Spain, Queen p. 28, 45, 49 Cathedral of
Lincoln the largest, except York 6. Its Faults p. 157, 158 Cathedral of
Peterborough, the noblest Gothic Building in England p. 28 Cathedral of York,
the most magnificent Gothic Church in Europe p. 156 Cathedrals of England
compared, etc. p. 300, 301 Cavendish Family, their Burial-place p. 68, 69
Cecil, Lord Burleigh, his noble Monument p. 36 Chase, a famous p. 240
Char-fish, where produced p. 229, 245 Charity School, founded by a Yeoman p.
224 Charles I. his Picture p. 32 Charley p. 225 Chat-moss p. 219 Chatsworth
House p. 85, 90 Chaworth Village p. 65 Chaworth Family p. 64 Chesney, Robert de
p. 7 Chester in the Street p. 198 Chesterfield p. 91 Cheviot-hill, and the
Battle there p. 206 to 208 Chiswick, Earl of Burlington 's noble Seat there p.
287, etc. Clarke, Dr. Alured, Dean of Exon, his Character, and pious
Undertakings p. 293 Clifton Family p. 60 Clinton House p. 30 Coals, how many
consumed in London p. 203 Cobham, Lord Viscount, his famous Gardens at Stow p.
271 to 287 Cockermouth p. 238 Coningsborough Castle p. 100 Corby Castle p. 246,
247 Cotton, Sir Robert p. 26 Countess Pillar p. 240, 241 Cows and Oxen the
large^, where p. 228 Craven, Sir William p. 137 Craven, a hilly Country p. 136
Crocodile, a Skeleton of one p. 5 Cromwell, Oliver, where born 44. His Farm p.
45 Crowland 19. The famous Bridge there p. 20 St. Cuthbert 's Patrimony p. 196
D
Danes, where they landed p. 9 Darlington, what remarkable for p. 144 Dearness
of Butter and Cheese, (Anno 1742) to what owing p. 295, 296 Decoy-ducks, how
brought up p. 22 to 24 Denton, a Seat p. 115 Derby Town, and Curiosities there
p. 67, 68 Derby, the Earl of, beheaded p. 222 Derby, Countess of, defends
Latham House p. 225 Derventio p. 69 Derventis p. 149 Derwent, River p. 70, 71,
86, 91, 149, 187, 238, 239 Devil looks over Lincoln, whence derived p. 6 Devil
's Arrows p. 147 Devil's Arse in the Peak p. 82 Devon^^ire, Duke of, his Seat
p. 85, 90 Dodington, George, Esquire his House p. 298, 299. Domitian, an Urn with
his Coin p. 9 Doncaster p. 101 Dorman Pence p. 15 Dornfield p. 92 Dove, River,
compared to the Nile 70. Its Rise p. 91 Downs p. 1 Dun, River 9. Its Rise p. 91
Dunington p. 33 Dunstable p. 49, 50 Durham 195. The Bishop of, a Temporal
Prince 196, 197. Has thirteen Livings in his Gift p. 196 Durobrivis p. 14, 38
E
East Retford p. 64 Easter, a Controversy about its Celebration p. 192 Ebodia
p. 269 Eboracum p. 149 Eccleston p. 225 Eden, River p. 233 Edmund, where
inaugurated p. 33 Edward I. Place of his Death p. 243 Eggleston p. 142 Egremont
p. 236 Elden Hole in the Peak p. 84, 85 Elenborough p. 239, 240 Emeril, where
found p. 267 Entrenchment, by King Stephen p. 5 Epitaph, a remarkable one 102.
Robin Hood 's p. 134 Erection Lands p. 17 Erith Town p. 45 Eure, River p. 140
F
Fells, what they are p. 231 Fernby p. 225 Figures in Lord Cobham's Gardens at
Stow p. 285 Fish, bow brought to London alive, from Lincolnshire p. 25
Fitz-Williams, Lord p. 40 Flamborough-head, a Promontory p. 187 Flodden-field
208. The Defeat of the Scots there ibid. Foderinghay Castle p. 27 Folkingham p.
30 Fortune Tellers, how to be punished p. 230, 231 Forty-feet-way p. 39
Fourness, a Tract of Ground p. 229 Fox, Richard, Bishop p. 31 Frobisher, Sir
Martin p. 102, 103 Furness, Henry, Esquire p. 291
G
Gainsburgh p. 8 Gascoigne, Sir William p. 114 Gateshead p. 200 Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster p. 5 Giant's-tomb, a high Mountain p. 74 Gilling p. 141, 142 Gypsies,
Streams of Water so called p. 186 Gisborough p. 193, 194 Glass-painting
remarkable p. 7 Grantham p. 31 Green, John, the famous Pinder p. 104 Grimsby p.
13, 16 Grimsthorpe p. 32 Gronnard, a Fish p. 258 Guash, River p. 39 Guernsey,
Island p. 266 to 269 Gunnersbury House p. 290, 291 Guthlac, a Chaplain p. 19,
20, 28
H
Haddon, a Palace p. 90 Halifax, the most populous Parish in Engl. p. 129 to
134 Hallamshire, Cutlers of p. 93 Hambleton-down p. 167 Hamilton, the
Honorable Charles, his Seat p. 295, 296 Hartington p. 72 Hartlepool p. 195
Harwood Town p. 114 Haughton p. 3 Heathcote, Sir John p. 21 Hell Kettles p. 144
Henry IV. Birth and Title p. 14 Henry V. committed to the King's B. when Prince
p. 114 Herman-street p. 25, 26 Hexham 204. The first Blood in the Civil War
drawn near it ibid. Higham-ferris p. 41 Hile, Lake p. 216 Hinchinbroke-house p.
45 Holbech p. 18 Holland, in Lincolnshire p. 16 Horn, a famous one p. 163, 164
Horn-castle p. 14 Hornby-castle p. 228 Hornsey p. 185 Horses, the best for
Hunting, etc. where p. 138 Howdon p. 170 Hugh, the Burgundian p. 7 Hull p. 178,
184 Humber River, whence its Name p. 11, 15 Huntingdon Town 42, 43. Given to
King David of Scotland p. 43 Hussy, Lord, beheaded p. 4 Huthersfield p. 135
I
James I. his Jest on the Lumley Family p. 198 Jenkins, Henry, his remarkable
great Age p. 140, 141 Jerby p. 239 Jersey, Island p. 255 to 266 Jews crucify a
Child 4. Are most furiously massacred p. 152 to 154 Inn, one of the greatest in
England p. 34 Inscription upon a Sessions House 10. On a Sexton who buried Two
Queens 29. On a Bridge 44. On a Bell 69. At Buxton-Bath 78, 79. On an Hospital
94. On a Roman Altar 151. On a Horn 164. On Beverley-cross 174. In Beverley
Minster 176, 177. In Memory of Michael de la Pole 182. On the Countess Pillar
241. In Memory of King Edward I. 243. On a Mace p. 265 Inscriptions in the
famous Gardens of Lord Cob ham at Stow, on several Heroes, Great Men, etc. p.
282 to 287 St. John Evangelist, his Relics, where buried p. 176 Johnson,
Counselor p. 15 Irwell, River p. 222 Isurium p. 117 Isurium Brigantium p. 146
Ivel, River p. 46 St. Ives p. 45 Julian 's Bower p. 12
K
Keel-men, who p. 201 Kelingholme-castle p. 13 Kendal p. 231, 232 Keswick p.
238 Kettering p. 41 Kimbolton castle p. 45 Kiniobantum ibid. Kinsbury p. 49
Kirk-Oswald p. 243 Kiveton p. 99 Knaresborough p. 115, 116 Kyneburg, Abbess p.
15
L
Lancashire Witches p. 230 Lancaster 226, 227. The successive Princes of that
House p. 229, 230 Lancon, a Fish p. 238 Lanesborough, a Seat p. 167
Latham-house gallantly defended by a Lady p. 225 Laughton Church p. 98 Leathern
Boat p. 181 Lebberston p. 187 Leeds p. 108, 109 Leighton p. 50 Lincoln City 2
to 8. The Diocese the largest in England p. 8 Lincoln Heath or Downs p. 1, 8
Lindum Colonia p. 2 Little Chester p. 69 Littleborough p. 9 Liverpoole, its
impaired Condition p. 210, 211, 212, 216 Lombe, Sir Thomas, his Engine for
throwing Silk 67. Rewarded by Parliament p. 68 Long Meg and her Three
Daughters, a Trophy p. 246 Longovicum p. 227 Lonsdale p. 232 Lovetofts p. 42
Louth p. 14, 31 Louther Family, great Benefactors to Whitehaven 236. Sir John
's great Dealings in Coals p. 237 Louther, River p. 232 Lowick Church, and
Monuments there p. 40 Ludi Trojani p. 12 Lugovallum p. 244 Lumley-castle p. 298
Lusus Naturae p. 192 Lutan p. 50 Lyn p. 47 Lyn Deeps p. 16
M
Maiden, an Engine so called p. 134 Mam Tor, in the Peak p. 81 Malton p. 148
Manchester p. 219 to 222 Mancunium p. 221 Mansfield p. 64 Market Deeping p. 30
Marston Moor p. 166 St. Martin ^s Bay p. 34 Marts, only Four Fairs so called in
England p. 17 Mary I. Queen p. ibid. Mary, Queen of Scots, her Monument p. 28
Matlock, its warm Springs, etc. p. 72, 73 Maud, Empress p. 3 Memorial of a
Plague p. 242 Mersee, River p. 91, 210 Methodists depreciate the Works of
Arcbhishop Tillotson p. 131 Minster of Lincoln p. 1 Mites, Coins so called p. 9
Mole, River p. 297, 298 Monmouth, Geoffrey, his History treated abusively p.
185, 186 Monuments of British Worthies in Lord Cobham 's Gardens at Stow p. 281
to 284 -- of Druidical Superstitions p. 264 -- of Popish Superstitions p. 264,
265 Moresby p. 238 Mortimer's-hole p. 57 Mosses, what they are p. 217 to 219
N
St. Neots on the Ouse p. 45 Newbie, a stately Seat p. 120, 121 Newcastle p.
200, and seq. Newcome, Daniel, his Improvements of the Church in Sunderland p.
199 Newport-gate, the noblest Remnant of this Sort in Britain p. 3 Newsted p.
64 Newton p. 224 Newton, Sir Isaac, where born 40. Where he received his first
Principles of Literature p. 31 Northumberland p. 205 Northumberland Wharle p.
208 Nottingham, and its Vaults p. 54, 55 Nottingham castle p. 56, 57
Nottinghamshire p. 54 Nine, River p. 25, 28, 39, 41
O
Ocellum p. 185 Okeham Town and Castle p. 33 Ormer, a Fish p. 258 Oundle, and
its famous Drumming-well p. 40 Ouse, River p. 16, 44
P
Painshill, the Seats of the Honorable Charles Hamilton, and Mr. Bridges,
there p. 295 to 298 Parmesan, English, p. 42 Parton p. 245 Partridge, exceeding
beautiful, where p. 257 Patrington p. 184, 185 Peakrills p. 71 Peckham, Lord
Trevor 's Seat p. 292 Pendragon-castle p. 241 Penrith p. 241, 242 Perith p. 234
Peterborough p. 28, 29 Pickering p. 148 Picts Wall p. 235 Pingent-hill p. 136,
137 Plaster prodigiously fine p. 30 Plumtree, Mr. his House p. 59 Pocklington
p. 171 Pontefract Town and Castle p. 105 to 107 Poole's-hole, in the Peak p. 79
to 81 Popish Inhumanity, an Instance of it p. 268, 269 Potton p. 47 Poulton p.
226 Powder Plot, by whom discovered p. 228 Powis, Judge, exceedingly frighted
p. 58 Praetorium p. 185 Preston 225. Whence the Name of Proud p. 226
Q.
Quarn, Village p. 71
R
R, the Northumberland Shibboleth p. 208 Ramsey p. 26 Ravenglass p. 236
Raversburgh p. 184 Register Offices, only Two in England p. 174 Remigius p. 2,
6 Ribble, River p. 225 Ribchester p. 226 Richmond p. 138, 139 Rippon p. 116,
117 Rivers in England, the principal, enumerated p. 254 Rivers in the North p.
129 Roads of England, Observations upon them p. 247 to 254 Roberts, the
Reverend Mr. Edward, his and his Brother's excellent Characters p. 34 Robin
Hood, his Epitaph p. 134 Rochdale p. 124, 125, 223 Rock Abbey p. 98 Rock hewn
into a Church, etc. p. 60 Rotherham p. 95 Rothwell p. 41 Rufford p. 65
Rutlandshire p. 33
S.
Sacred Stone, by whom brought from Scotland p. 243 Sadberg, Earl of p. 196
Salkeld p. 246 Salmon, Newcastle, from whence brought to London p. 203
Saltfleet p. 13 Sampringham, a Monastery p. 30 Sandbeck p. 97 Sands,
Archbishop, his Monument p. 63 Sandwich, Earl of, his Seat p. 44 Sarnia p. 266
Scarborough 187. An Account of the Accident that happened to the Spaw there p.
188, 191 Schulemberg, Duchess of Kendal p. 232 Scottish Branch of the Royal
Family, whence descended p. 26 Scots perfidiously sell their King, where, and
for how much p. 204 Sculpture, English, ancient Piece p. 26 Seaford p. 33
Segeloci, full of Remnants of Antiquities p. 30 Selby p. 169 Serpents, stony p.
192 Settle p. 136 Sharp, Archbishop, where born p. 136 Sheals or Shields p. 200
Sheffield p. 93, 95 Shefford p. 47 Shirbourn p. 169 Shirwood Forest, and
several noble Houses there p. 61 Skiddaw, the highest Hill in England p. 239
Skipton p. 136 Smyris, where found p. 267 Snath p. 169 Southwell Town and
Church p. 61 to 63 Spalding p. 18, 20 Spaw at Scarborough. See Scarborough p.
188 Spilsby p. 14 Spurn-head, a Promontory p. 184 Stainthorp p. 143 Stamborough
p. 96 Stamford, Inns p. 31, and seq. Stangate-hole p. 42 Stanmore Hills p. 143
Stanhope p. 197 Stephen, King, taken Prisoner p. 8 Stilton, famous for Cheese
p. 42 Stockton p. 194 Stokesby 145. A bloody Battle fought there ibid. Stow,
the famous Gardens of Lord Cobham there p. 271 to 287 Strenshall p. 192
Stukely, Little and Great p. 25 Sunderland p. 198 Swale Dale p. 140 Swale,
River p. 139 Swan Pool p. 2, 4 Swine-penies, a Coin so called p. 9 Swintham
Bottom filled by Gypsies p. 186
T
Tadcaster p. 167, 168 Talbot Family, whence descended 65. Ancient Monuments of
them p. 94 Tallard, Count, his Gardens and Gallantries p. 57 Taxford in the
Clays p. 64 Tees, River p. 142 Thomlinson, Dr. Robert p. 202 Thoresby p. 65
Thorn p. 169 Thornton-college p. 12, 13 Thorp 29. Statues there ibid. Thrapston
p. 41 Three Brethren, famous Oaks p. 240 Tickhill p. 99 Tideswell, one of the
Wonders of the Peak p. 83 Till, River p. 208 Tillotson, Archbishop, his
Birthplace p. 131 Tom of Lincoln, the great Bell so called p. 6 Tower, the
highest in England p. 6 Towton, and the bloody Battle fought there p. 168, 189
Trench, a famous one p. 95 Trent, River p. 1, 8, 9, 51, 53, 58 Trevor, late
Lord, his Seat at Peckham 292. See also Vol. I. p. 233. Tuckfield, John, Esquire p.
294 Tyne, River p. 233
V.
Vere-court p. 13 Vipsies, what p. 186 Vortimer, King, where he died p. 8
Uppingham p. 33 Utcester p. 70 Utocetum ibid.
W
Wainfleet p. 13, 16 Wakefield p. 103 Walker, William p. 31 Wallaton-hall p. 60
Wandsford p. 42 Warbois p. 43 Warrington p. 216, 217 Warton p. 227
Wathorp-house p. 40 Web, the Architect p. 290 Welbeck p. 65 Well, burning p.
224 Welland, River p. 18, 19, 30, 36, 39 Wensdale p. 140 Wentworth, an old Seat
p. 95, 96 Were, River p. 195 Were-dyke p. 3 Westmorland Militia, their Bravery
p. 234, 235 West Retford p. 65 Wetherby p. 167 Whale, a vast Rib of one p. 11
Wharle of the Northumberland People p. 208 Wherfe, River p. 114 Whitby p. 191
to 193 Whitlesea Mere p. 25, 26 Wigan p. 223 Whitehaven p. 236, 237 Wighton p.
171 Wild Geese p. 193 St. Wilfrid 's Needle p. 119 William I. curbs the Lincoln
Citizens p. 8 Winchester College p. 13 Winick p. 217 Wintringham p. 11 Wirksop
Manor p. 64 Wirk^worth, the remarkable Court there p. 72 Witches at Warbois p.
43 Witches in Lancashire 230. Act against them repealed ibid. Witham, River p.
5, 14, 16, 17, 33 Woburn Town p. 48 Woburn Abbey ibid. Walsingham p. 197
Woulds, what p. 171 Wry-nose, a high Hill p. 245
Y.
Yarborough p. 13 Yarley p. 41, 42 Yarrow p. 200 Yarum p. 145 Yew-tree, a
famous one p. 97 York City, its Antiquities and Curiosities p. 149 to 156, 166
York, Duke of, where killed p. 104 Yorkshire, its Extent, etc. p. 92 Yorkshire
Ale, where in its Perfection p. 135
Z
Zouch, Bishop, defeats the Scots p. 196
END of VOL. III.

