J. Cole Sculp


THE VOYAGES, Dangerous ADVENTURES And imminent ESCAPES OF Captain Richard
Falconer: Containing The Laws, Customs, and Manners of the Indians in America;
his Shipwrecks; his Marrying an Indian Wife; his narrow Escape from the Island
of Dominico, etc. Intermixed with The VOYAGES and ADVENTURES of THOMAS RANDAL,
of Cork, Pilot; with his Shipwreck in the Baltic, being the only Man that
escaped: His being taken by the Indians of Virginia, etc. Written by Himself,
now alive.

Bold were the Men who on the Ocean first
Spread their New Sails, when Shipwreck was the worst.
More Danger now from Man alone we find,
Than from the Rocks, the Billows, or the Wind.
WALLER. LONDON, Printed for W. CHETWOOD, at Cato's Head, in Russel Street,
Covent Garden; T. JAUNCY, at the Angel without Temple Bar; A. BETTESWORTH, in
Paternoster Row; J. BROTHERTON, and W. MEADOWS in Cornhill; and J. GRAVES, in
St. James's- street. 1720.

TO Sir Thomas Hanmer.
MY Father having the Honor to owe his Education and good Fortune to the happy
Influence of your Ancestors; I cannot but, as a grateful Tribute, pay these
following Sheets to the Worthy Son of so Worthy a Father.

I have this as the greatest Misfortune attending me, that I have not the
Honor to be Personally known to you: Yet nothing could have hindered my
waiting on you to have paid those Acknowledgments that are owing to your
Family, but the Service of my King and Country that commands me away, which if
I fall in, will be a sufficient Recompense for all the Hazards and Dangers I
have run, which you will find in the succeeding Pages. But if Providence (which
I need not doubt from the many imminent Escapes I have had) returns me safe to
my Native Country, I hope you will excuse my Boldness, if I endeavor to let
you know the Obligations that are incumbent upon

Your most Obedient Humble Servant, R Falconer.

PREFACE.
I Am told, that a Book without a Preface, is like a New Play without a
Prologue, or a French Dinner without Soup; and though I cannot tell what to say,
yet I am resolved to say something, though perhaps not any thing to the Purpose.
So far I hope you will allow me to be an Author. I shall give you, gentle Reader,
(if you are so) Three of my Reasons why I publish these following Pages; which,
I must confess, are not so well polished as I could wish, but Truth is amiable
though in Rags. The first and chiefest, to get Money; for though I have a
considerable Income, yet I can never bring both points together at the Year's
End; but however, don't blame my Economy, since I owe you nothing, and if I am
beholden to any Body, it is to Honest Chetwood, my Bookseller; (I beg his
Pardon if I miscall him, though I don't believe it will anger him in the least,
for all Men love to be termed so, whether they deserve it or no) being he will
run the greatest Risque if my Book does not sell. Second, to save my Lungs, and
a great deal of Trouble in repeating to my Friends these following Adventures,
for now they may at a small Expense get 'em by Heart, if they will endeavor to
stretch their Memories. Third and lastly, to appear in Print, which was, I
assure you, a great Motive with me as well as with a great many others of the
same Rank, that make Work for many Printers, though as little to the Purpose as
my self. I could give a Catalogue of some of 'em, but that would be making my
Preface exceed the Bulk of my Book. Though I could put the Booksellers in a Way
to save Money in their Pockets, and that is to persuade a great many Authors to
print their Lucubrations at their own Charge, and that might make some of the
poorest to desist; but for the richer Sort of Authors, there is no Help, it is
like the Itch, and they must write to be scratched though the Blood comes. The
following Sheets, however extraordinary they appear, I assure you upon the Word
of a Man are Truth, and I hope they will entertain you; but if they don't, and
you should chance to slight 'em, you will not anger

Your Servant, R. Falconer.
Canterbury, Nov. 7. 1719.
THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES OF Capt. RICHARD FALCONER. BOOK I.
I WAS born at a Town called Bruton, in Somersetshire, of Parents tolerably
well to pass in the World; my Mother died when I was very young: My Father,
Richard Falconer, had been a great Traveller in his Days, and his frequently
repeating his Adventures abroad, made me have a great Desire to follow his
Steps: I often begged he would let me go to Sea with some Captain of his
Acquaintance; but he would often say, Dick, stay where you are, you know not
the Hazard and Dangers attend a maritime Life: You shall have a good Trade in
your Belly, and that will keep you from a Desire of rambling; therefore tell me
what Calling you like best, that I may immediately put you out in Order to your
living hereafter: You know, continued he, that my Fortune is but small, and I
living to the extent of it, it will not be possible for me to leave you
wherewithal to support you without some Employment. Therefore, (replied I) as
you have a Daughter, you may leave your Substance to her, she must be provided
for; as for our Sex, we can best take Care for our selves, and if you please
but to fit me out to Sea, even in what Station you think convenient, it shall
be all I will desire. Son, (says my Father) think no more of going to Sea, for
I Will not have it so; I know it is only a Desire of Youth, prone to change: If I
should give you leave, I am assured one Week's Voyage would make you wish to be
at home again. I used all the Arguments my young Sense prompted me with, but
all to no purpose, my Father was not to be moved, and thus I lived two Years
longer with him in Expectation of his Mind altering. At last an Accident
happened that farther'd my Desires, and though it was the Ruin of our Family, I
must confess, I was not much concerned.

My Father was Supervisor of a Tax laid upon the burning of Pipes, and he
having gathered a Sum of Money, amounting to 3800 l. in order to pay in to the
Government for the King's Use, was by an under Excise-man, robbed of the whole
Sum, who made his Escape. My Father used all possible Means to apprehend him
without Noise, but all his Endeavors were fruitless: so finding his Affairs in
a desperate Condition, resolved to retire to some Part of the World, where he
might be safe from the griping Hands of the Law. One Morning just before his
voluntary Exile, he called me to him: Dick (says he) you have been often
desirous of going to Sea, and I have always used Arguments to dissuade you from
it; but now since what has happened, it being impossible for me to continue
upon the Place of my Birth, the Patrimony of my Ancestors, I must even
recommend that way of Life to you which I should never have chose, but that the
Exigency of my Affairs will not permit me to provide any other Way for you.
Here (continued he) take this 100 l* which I can ill spare out of my little
Fortune, but since it is all I can do for you, take it, and may Heaven prosper
thy Undertakings; may the Blessing of a Father always live with you, whose
Prayers shall ever be sent to our Almighty Creator for thy Welfare. Here (added
he) is a Letter of Recommendation for you to Captain Pultney, of Bristol, whose
Friendship I am sure will be of service to you. With that, he embraced me with
Tears in his Eyes, gave me his Blessing, kissed me and took his leave for ever,
for never have my Eyes beheld him since.

This Parting, I think, was the greatest Grief my Thoughts had ever known 'till
then; (for nothing could be fonder, or show more paternal Affection, than my
dear Father at his last Farewell) but the Joy of my being at Liberty to follow
my own Desires, soon drowned my Sorrow for parting with so good a Parent.

I had now nothing to do but to provide my little Equipage in order to go to
Bristol to my Father's Friend; I packed up my Things in a Portmantua, and gave
them to an old Servant of my Father's, who would see me as far as Bristol, for
his sake. We set out in the Morning, and reached it by Noon: I inquired for
Captain Pultney, and by good Fortune found him at his Dwelling House, in
Ratcliff Street, he having removed himself from another Street, which caused
some Difficulty in the finding. I acquainted him who I was, and gave him my
Father's Letter. He read it, and received me very kindly: It was to this Effect.

Dear Pultney,
I Hope you will forgive this Trouble of your Friend. I have sent my Son to you,
in order to get him some Post by Sea, I know it is in your Power to do it:
something has happened that hinders my providing for him as I ought. I would
have waited on you in Person, but a Gap has happened in my Affairs that I shall
never close again. Dick will tell you all. Let me conjure you by our old
Friendship to take all the Care you can of him; and whenever he comes to
England, let him come to you, for as yet I know not where to lead my wretched
Life; so that I shall confide in you, and let you know by a Letter, or
Messenger, as soon as possible, where I shall settle;

Your most Faithful Friend and Servant, R. Falconer.


Mr. Falconer, (says the Captain) I am heartily sorry for your Father's
Misfortunes, which he tells me in his Letter you will inform me of. After I had
given him the whole Story, he told me he would provide for me as soon as
possible, and till then I should be as welcome to him as his own Son: In the
mean time, says he, I would have you verse your self in the Mathematics, which
may be of use to you: I Will take Care to provide you a Master, and Instruments;
which accordingly he did; and as I had a great Desire to be abroad, and had
some small Knowledge of it which I learned at School, apart from my other
Studies, I soon attained to the Theory of it.

After I had run through the Course of Mathematics, and the Captain was
informed I was capable, he got me to be Mate (or rather Assistant) on board the
Albion Frigate, Captain Wase Commander; and on the 2 d of May, 1699, we set
sail, (bound for Jamaica) with a fair Wind. As soon as we lost sight of Land, I
began to be extremely Sea-sick, and bore the Jests of the Sailors but
indifferently; who cried, There Is an excellent Master's-Mate, he will hit Jamaica
to a Hair, if the Island were no bigger than the Bung-hole of a Cask. I must
confess, I believe my self to be the only Person who ever set out on his first
Voyage, as Master's-Mate, without having seen a River that was navigable. But
in a Day or two I was perfectly well, and was never troubled with any Sickness
afterward.

We had nothing material happened to us 'till we entered the Bay of Biscay,
where we were encountered with a dreadful Storm; the Billows ran Mountains
high, and our Vessel seemed to be the Sport of the Waves: A Ship that overtook
us the Day before, and accompanied us, though it were not at Half a Furlong
distance, was sometimes lost, by reason of the Height of the Waves. The Storm
continued with this Violence three Days, and at last abated something of its
Fierceness, but still blew very hard. The other Vessel by firing a Gun, and
making a Signal, made it appear she was in distress, but the Sea ran so high it
was impossible to give them any Assistance, yet we bore down to them (being to
windward) as nigh as we could without Danger to our selves; we inquired into
the Matter, and found she had sprung a Leak; they had all Hands to pump by
turns, but yet the Water gained on them. They begged of us to hoist out our
Boat (their own being stav'd) to give them Succor upon occasion: Accordingly
we put out our Longboat, with two of our Men in it, but the Rope that held her
to the Ship broke by the Violence of the Waves, and drove away with the two
unfortunate Men in her, and what became of them we could never learn; but
undoubtedly they perished by the Sea, or Hunger, we being 70 Leagues from any
Shore. The Ship, after prodigious Labor of the Sailors, and in less than ten
Minutes, sunk to the Bottom; out of Fifty seven Men, but Four were saved, and
they, by good Fortune, laid hold on Ropes we threw out for that Purpose; but it
had not been possible to save any, if we had not bore down to Leeward when we
saw them in the last Extremity. And here we ought to admire at Providence; For
this very Vessel was a Pyrate, one Captain Jones, Commander, who in an open
large Boat set out from Dover, and near Ostend stole upon a French Vessel in
the Night, murdered the Captain and some others, and set all the Sailors
ashore that would not embrace their Designs, and had resolved to attack us as
soon as the Storm was over. The Four Men that were saved, were three English
Men, and one French Man, who said they were forced, with several others, by the
above mentioned Captain Jones, to take to that Course of Life; but whether true
or false, I cannot tell; indeed they behaved themselves very well with us all
the Voyage, and were entered into our Books as Four of the Ship's Crew, instead
of Two we left on Shore, who were not to be found when we set sail, and the two
poor Wretches that were lost in the Boat. The Storm still continued, but the
Wind fair, so we ran it away with a riv'd Foresail all Night, and the next
Morning we had a violent Storm of Rain, and some Thunder, but about Noon the
Sky cleared up, the Rain ceased, and the Tempest was laid; the Wind however
continuing fair, with a midling Gale.

May the 28th. we discovered the Canaries and the Pike of Teneriff, and passed
this Island, or rather Rock, of a prodigious Height. At Night the Wind rose
again, and continued to blow very hard for two Days. As I was walking on the
Deck one Morning, my Chops were saluted with a Fish which dropped down; I took
it up, panting at the Gills for Life; it proved to be a flying Fish, pursued
(as I suppose) by some Dolphin, or Albecore; the Manner of these Fishes
avoiding their Enemies, is jumping out of the Water, and flying 'till their
Wings are dry, then fall down again into the Sea. The Dolphin that chases them
is one of the finest colored Fish that swims. I have observed our Painters
draw them bending like a Bow; but I think it is as strait a Fish as any in the
Sea. We caught one of them with a Fizgig, an Instrument made of several Rows of
iron Spikes, bearded like Hooks, and a Staff four or five Foot long to it; to
this they tie a Cord of a great length, and dart it with all their Strength;
the wounded Fish immediately flownces downward many Fathoms, and up again,
which the Darter observes, giving him Rope and Play 'till his Weakness makes
him more tame; then they draw him up the Ship's-side, and cut him in Pieces.
The first we caught in this Manner was about six Foot long, which we dressed,
and part of it served the whole Ship's Company for Dinner; as soon as it was
caught it lost that beautiful Color it had in the Water; as for my own Part,
notwithstanding their praising it, I had rather eat a Herring or a Mackrel than
this rare Fish. I don't know whether these Fish can hear, or love Music, but
this I am sure of, we had an excellent Trumpet on board, which diverted us in
good Weather, and I have observed, that at the Sound of it the Number of these
Dolphins seemed to increase, and swim within two Foot of our Vessel; but that
may be pure Accident; yet I fancy there is something in it, that occasioned the
Fable of Amphion and the Dolphin. Sharks are taken as we take common Fish, only
the Hook is about two Foot long, and an iron Chain above that about four Foot
long, and a long Rope to that; they generally bait the Hook with a Piece of
Beef of three or four Pounds, which the voracious Fish swallows immediately,
Hook and all; then they give him play a while, and when he is pretty well
spent, they draw him in with a Tackle: There Is always one stands ready with an
Axe to make a Divorce between his Tail and his Body, otherwise he would give
such large Thumps with it that might do the Ship Damage: I my self was thrown
down but with a Touch of it. This that we took, had in his Paunch the
Collarbone of a Man, and a Boatswain's silver Whistle, with a red Ribbon in it,
entire, not so much as bruised, which was given to me as a Present, to make me
amends for the Fall I received; it may be seen at my Bookseller's, if any one
has the Curiosity to ask for it; as to the Collar-bone, not any one would
accept of it, so I returned it to the watery Element again.

We past the Tropic, attended by the Tropick-Birds, a Fowl something bigger
than a Pidgeon; but one would think, as it flies, it had an unlighted Candle
fixed in its Tail. I cannot let go the Ceremony of passing this Tropic: When
you are in the Latitude, the old Sailors ask the rest of the Ship's Crew,
Whether they were ever that way before? If not, they must either pay a Bottle
and Pound, (as they call it) or be duck'd: They that don't pay, are fixed to a
Rope at the Main-Yard-Arm, and duck'd three Times in the Sea; at which the rest
of the Crew Huzza! and fire a Volley of Small-shot.

When Admiral Benbow went with his Squadron of Men of War, the whole Fleet
duck'd, but the Admiral gave 'em Notice, by first firing a Gun, which was
immediately followed with a Volley of Muskets, and Huzzaing, by every Ship in
the Fleet. A Day or two before our Account is out, we send a Man to the
Topmast-head, in order to discover Land, where he stays an Hour, and looks
about him: He that discovers it first, is rewarded with a Bottle and Pound;
that is, a Bottle of Rum, and a Pound of Sugar, which is demanded as soon as
the Anchor is cast in a Place where such Commodities are to be had. Now the
Bottles and Pounds that accrue from the People that are not willing to be
duck'd, in passing the Tropic, are reserved by the old Sailors for a merry
Bout, when safe in Harbor; which must not be touched by the fresh Men, as they
call 'em.

July the 3d, our Man at the Topmast-head, instead of crying, Land, (as we
expected) called out, A Sail! a Sail! which in a quarter of an Hour we
discovered plainly upon Deck. We did not know what to think of it, we knew we
were near Land, and consequently in fear of those Pirates, or Buccaniers, that
infest those Coasts: Our Captain called all Hands aloft; and told us,
Gentlemen, It Is One to One, but this Vessel we see may be a Pyrate, if so, how
must we behave our selves? If you are resolved to stand it, I Will stand it to
the last; if not, we'll surrender without firing a Gun, which may induce 'em to
be civil to us. The Sailors cried, Let Us fight 'em, let us fight 'em. With that,
we put our Chests in the Hold, and brought up our Hammocks, to place 'em in the
Netting on the Quarter Deck; we cleared our Guns, which were Twelve, and
mustered our Men, which amounted to Thirty-eight, Passengers and all, who were
as willing to fight as any of us, they having something on Board that was
valuable; and some of 'em, perhaps, all their Fortune. We kept our Way, and the
Ship bore up to us, with all the Sail she could make. Night coming upon us, our
Man at the Topmast-head discovered Land, and another Ship to the Windward of
us. With that, we called another Council, and persisted in our first Opinion of
fighting; but yet to use all Means possible of making to Shore, (which was
Barbados:) But for all our Endeavors, the first Ship got up with us, and
about Twelve a Clock at Night hailed us, and commanded us to hoist out our
Boat, and come on Board him, with our Captain. We answered, We had never a
Boat, (as indeed we had not) but we told him, if he would stay till Morning,
something might be done. At last he threatened to sink us, if we would not send
our Captain aboard immediately; and thereupon fired a Gun, which struck our
Vessel on her Quarter. With that, we fired our Broadside upon him, accompanied
with some small Arms; which they little expecting, (I believe) did some Damage,
and put 'em in Confusion. Whereupon we tacked about, and with our other six
Guns raked her fore and aft; but was immediately seconded with a Broadside
from them, which killed us two Men, and wounded a third. Upon which, with loud
Huzza's and Firing, they immediately boarded us on our Starboard-Quarter, and
poured into us at least fourscore Men: We resisted 'em with all the Force we
had, but all to no purpose; they drove us into the Fore-castle, where, by good
Chance, we made shift to barricade our selves; but they threatened to turn our
own Guns upon us, if we did not surrender immediately: But our Captain being
resolute, ordered us to fire upon 'em with our small Arms. Now we had under the
Greatings, close to our Steerage, a large Cistern, lined with Tin, where we had
unwittingly placed several Cartriges of Powder, but happily for us, whether it
was our Firing, or in the Bustle some Match dropped in, I know not, but the
Powder took fire, blew up the Greatings, with some part of the Quarter Deck,
and thirty of the Enemy, at least, into the Air. Upon that, we sallied out, and
drove the rest, with our Cutlashes, into their own Vessel again, with the loss
of several. But this signified little, for with the Fall and Breach of our
Quarter Deck, the Powder-Room was entirely stopped up; nor could we, without
great Difficulty, clear it from the Lumber, so that we had not any Powder, but
what was in the Men's Cartriges, for their Muskets: However, we fired briskly
with 'em; yet nevertheless they prepared to Board us again, with all the
Menaces imaginable. This Fight continued at least four Hours, and the Dawn
began to break upon us, which discovered to us the other Ship we saw over
Night, and we distinguished English Colors; with that we gave a great Shout,
and fired our small Arms again. The Enemy no sooner saw the Ship with English
Colors, but they cut off their Grappling-Irons, and did their Endeavor to
make off, but their Rigging was so shattered, that their Sails could not be
hoisted. In the mean Time the other Ship came up to us, and, without hailing,
poured a Broadside into the Pyrate, and there followed a desperate Fight
between them. As for our Ship, it was of little Use, so we steered off, and
cleared our Gun-Room, and in half an Hour (the Fight continuing all that while)
we had charged our Great Guns, and returned to the Fight; but upon the Instant
we saw the Pyrate sinking, the English Ship had tore a Hole between Wind and
Water, that she sunk in a Moment, and but eight Men saved, who told us their
Captain was a Pyrate, from Guadalupe; that when they were sinking, they had not
above twenty Men left, out of an Hundred and sixty; and most of them wounded.
The Ship that gave us this seasonable Rescue was the Guernsey Frigate, whose
Station was Barbados. We lay by for an Hour or two, to repair our Rigging,
etc. and hailed her, desiring 'em to send a Boat on Board for our Captain,
because we were without one; which accordingly they did. Captain Wase and I
went immediately on Board, to pay our Respects to their Commander, who received
us with all imaginable Civility. We had, on Board our Ship, seven Sailors, and
two Passengers, killd; the one, Joseph Ridge of Barbados, and the other,
Daniel Thompson of Mevis, Merchant; and four wounded. The Guernsey had sixteen
Men killed, and three wounded; among which was the Lieutenant, who died the
same Day of a Wound he received in his Thigh, with a Musket Ball chewed, which
made the Wound mortal. The Captain invited us to dine with him, which we did;
where we were treated with a new Dish, (at least to me) a Pollo, that is, Fowls
boiled with Rice and salt Pork; which was very palatable. We took our Leaves of
the Captain, and went on Board of our own Vessel, and at five a Clock in the
Evening, (July the 4th,) after saluting the Town, cast Anchor in Carlisle Bay.

Barbados, for its bigness, is the richest and best peopled Island in all
America; it is seated in thirteen Degrees, twenty Minutes; in length, twenty
four measured Miles, and in the broadest Part about sixteen: It resembles a Leg
of Mutton, with the Knuckle off. The North and East Sides are fortified by
Nature, from any Harm from Ships of War, by reason there is no Anchoring Place.
On the South-East and Westerly Part, are four excellent, commodious,
well-fortify'd Harbors: The chief is that where we now ride, which will
contain a Thousand Sail of Ships, free from the Danger of any Winds. At the
bottom of this Harbor, stands the Capitol of the Island, called St. Michael's;
with a Fort at each End, and a Platform in the middle; which makes it of
Strength sufficient to oppose*a Royal Navy: It Is a neat large Town, with two
Churches, one with a handsome Organ: For Largeness, I think this Town may
compare with our City of Salisbury, but better inhabited. As for the other
three, which are, 1. Charles Town. 2. St. James's Town. 3. Little Bristol in
Spright's Bay, I can give no manner of Account of: But for my Reader's
Satisfaction, if he will consult Ligon's History of Barbados, he may come to
the best Knowledge of the whole Island. They are governed by the same Laws as
we in England. A Native of Barbados told me, the whole Island contained at
least 120000 Inhabitants, Slaves included.

July the 20th. (after our Captain had left his Passengers, and part of his
Cargo) we set sail for Jamaica: Here you must note, that from Barbados to
Jamaica, you always have the Wind in your Stern. We passed Martinico, Dominica,
Guadalupe, and Antegoa, and the first of August anchored at Mevis, where we had
immediately the Friends of Mr. Daniel Thompson, Merchant, on Board us, to
unlade the Goods; for they had heard of his Death, by a Vessel from Barbados a
Week before.

Mevis, or Nevis, lies in seven Degrees, nineteen Minutes; it is six Leagues in
Circumference: There is but one Harbor in the whole Island, which some call
Mevis Harbor, or Bath Bay, where lies the Town, under the former Denomination.
It is pretty well secured with a Fort and Platform of Great Guns. I was
informed by one of the Inhabitants, that there is a Mineral Water, very good to
bathe in, which cures the same Distempers with our Bath in Somersetshire.

The English settled here, Ann. Dom. 1628. and have increased from One hundred
and forty, to Five thousand and upwards. They send abroad as much Sugar,
Ginger, Cotton, and Tobacco, as any Island of its Bigness in the Caribbees.
They are very regular in their Government here, they neither allow of
Drunkenness, nor Whoring, (I mean in common, as in Barbados, Jamaica, etc.)
Here I was first saluted with a little Fly, called a Musketo, and though it is
small, yet it has a devilish sharp Sting with it. They get into our Stockings,
and are so very troublesome to new Comers, that there is hardly any bearing of
'em. If you scratch the Places stung by 'em till the Blood comes, it may prove
dangerous; I my self kept a sore Leg three Months upon that account. I was also
informed there was a Flea they call Chigos, which breed in Dust, or Ashes; and
of all the Insects in the Caribbees, this is the most dangerous: They get into
the Nails of the Toes imperceptibly, and from thence run over all the Body;
though they chiefly fix themselves in the bottom of the Feet: Which occasions an
itching, followed with Holes in the Skin. They make Blisters as big as Peace in
the Flesh, where their young ones breeding, cause Ulcers and rotten Flesh,
which there is no Remedy for, but to eat away the Parts affected, with
Aquafortis and Burnt-Alum. While we lay here, there was a Sword Fish ran
himself ashore, (which was supposed to be done in eagerly chasing some other
Fish:) It had no Scales, but a dusky Skin, and a white Belly, rough like a
Smith's File, a flat Head, two Fins on each side, two on the Back, and one
instead of a Tail. It is a Fish of prodigious Swiftness: The Sword (which is
fixed in the Head) is six, seven, and sometimes eight Foot long: Near his Eyes
are two Nostrils, out of which he throws the Water a great height into the
Air. This Fish often encounters with the Whale, and proves too hard for him;
for with his Sword he rips up the Whale. I bought one of these Swords of a poor
Inhabitant, for four Bottles of English Beer, (which is a great Rarity with
them) that he got in a Piece of a Wreck, but thrust in so far, that the End, in
getting out, was broke three Inches.

Next to Mevis, lies St. Christophers, (or, as we generally call it, St. Kit's)
in seventeen Degrees, and twenty five Minutes, Northward of the Equinoctial. It
is twenty five Leagues in Circumference, the Soil light and sandy, and produces
Fruit common with us in England. In the middle of this Island rises a high
Mountain, from which runs Streams of fresh Water, that sometimes swell so high
with sudden Rains, that they drown all the Country near 'em. This Island is
inhabited by both English and French, who even in the Time of War live very
friendly together. There was formerly discovered a Silver Mine here, which the
English and French claim an equal Title to; but neither make any Use of it, by
reason of the want of Miners. The English Liberties are better peopled than the
French, but the French have more Conveniences, and better fortified Places
than the English. An English Friar belonging to the French Jesuits, (who gave
me this Description) told me, that the French had built a Town, called, Basse
Terre (in a Harbor of the same Name, and chief in the Island) full as big as
Gravesend, with very handsome Houses, for the Merchants, and Trades People,
which are many; where there is also an Hospital to maintain their indigent
sick, together with a handsome Free School, with large Endowments, for the
Children of the Island. But what they mostly brag of, is their Castle, which is
built about a Furlong from the Sea, at the Foot of a high Mountain, shadowed
with great Trees: In the Way thither, stand the Houses of the Governor, and
other Officers, for more Security; seated in a Walk of Orange and Lemon Trees,
from the Brow of the Sea up to the Castle; which is three Story high, built
with Freestone and Brick: The Halls and Chambers are very lightsome and high,
and the Walls are adorned with Cedar: On the Top is a flat Terrace, which
yields a delightful Prospect all over the Country. The Winds which blow from
the Hills, so tempers the Heat, that it makes it more pleasant than any other
Island of the Caribbees. As to the English Plantations, they are not much
inferior to the French; they have six Churches, and two Chapels, for Divine
Service. This Island was planted jointly by English and French, in 1625.
Captain Thomas Warner, for the English, and one Desnambuc, for the French. The
Natives made a vigorous Resistance, but to little Purpose. With this Success,
they returned back to their several Countries, and went again and settled
there; but the English having more Supplies from London, daily increased; when
on the contrary, the Merchants at Paris grew weary, seeing no Return for all
the Charges they had been at. But whilst this Business seemed to go on with
Success, an Accident happened, which ruined all at once. The King of Spain set
out a Fleet the same Year, of thirty one Galloons, three Galleases, and four
Pinnaces, with four thousand Men, under the Command and Direction of Frederick
de Toledo, from Cadiz, Antonio Nunnez Barrico, and Francisco de Almeida,
Commanders of twenty Galleys, from Portugal; these joined with the
abovementioned, with a Resolution to drive the English, French, and Dutch
entirely out of the American Islands. Coming before Mevis, they took nine
English Vessels: After that they sailed to St. Christophers, where Captain
Desnambuc (although not prepared for Defense, because their Fortifications were
not finished) drew all his Forces near the Shore, to hinder their Landing: But
Captain Rossey, who commanded another Port, suffered 'em to land without the
least Resistance. Whereupon young Desnambuc, Lieutenant of a Company under
Rossey, sallied out, and fell valiantly on the first Company of Spaniards,
killing many of 'em, and put 'em to the Rout; but the Spaniards being seconded
by another Battalion, he was slain, after having made a stout Resistance, and
forsaken by all his Men. Rossey, upon this, abandons his Intrenchments, and
flies to the Hills, and high Grounds: Whereupon the Spaniards became Masters of
the Forts, but durst not follow Rossey, for fear of an Ambuscade; which Fear
proved true: For Desnambuc undermining the Fort, retired on Board some Vessel,
prepared for that Purpose, and made off. In the mean time, the Powder taking
Fire, blew up the Fort, and six hundred Spaniards, into the Air. The English
relying upon the League between Spain and England, made no Resistance, but sent
Agents to Toledo, etc. to put him in mind of the League between their Masters:
To which he replied, That St. Christophers being part of the Western World, was
given by the Pope to his Master Philip. Nevertheless he gave 'em six of the
nine Vessels they took at Mevis, to imbark themselves, on Condition they would
sail immediately for England; which they agreed to: But the six Vessels not
holding all, the rest were left on the Island, for another Opportunity. No
sooner was Toledo out of sight, but the remaining part of the English
Inhabitants took fresh Courage, and rebuilt several Forts, and made every thing
ready for Defense, if Occasion should be. In the mean Time Desnambuc suffered a
great deal of Hardship, through ill Weather, and want of Provision; having been
at several Islands, intending to settle, with his little Company, but not
liking any of 'em, and hearing that the Enemy were gone to the Havana, and the
English were busy tilling their Grounds, he returned to his former Station,
where they suffered many Hardships; till some Vessels from the Netherlands
arrived, and furnished 'em with Provisions, Ammunition, and Clothes, upon
Credit: But in a few Years they paid all, and grew rich, from their plentiful
Stock of Tobacco, Sugars, Ginger, and Indigo, till they brought it to the rich
and flourishing State it now remains in.

Having ended our Affairs, we set Sail for Jamaica, the 21st of August, 1699;
and on the 7th of September, anchored safe in Port Royal Harbor, in the great
and flourishing Island of Jamaica, without any Accident. This was our last
Station: Here we were to unlade the remaining part of our Goods, and take in
its Return, Rum, Sugar, and Spice.

This Island of Jamaica is the only Mart of all America for the English, which
drive a large Trade here; but Wickedness is in its full Perfection: I remember
Captain Wase asked one of our Men, that had spent some Money ashore, what was
his Opinion of the Honesty of the Women of Port Royal? Why truly, says Tarr
very bluntly, if there is one honest Woman should happen to tumble down, I
believe there is never another to take her up. Provision is prodigious dear
here; two or three of us went on shore to Dinner, one Day, at Port Royal, where
we had only a roasted Turkey, wretchedly lean, and nothing nigh so well tasted
as our English Turkeys, and our Eating came to Thirty Shillings; but then, to
make amends, Money is plenty enough. We had a Sailor on Board, that had been a
Tailor by Trade; this Fellow got Leave of the Captain to go on shore for a
Month, where he cleared, by working Journey-Work, twelve Pound for that Month:
But then he had the Ship's Provision carried on shore to him two or three times
a Week; had he been to have paid for his Diet, he had saved but a small Matter.
I was mightily surpised to see a Market for Turtle, in the same Manner as our
Butchers. This is a Meat, or rather Fish, of an odd Nature, but of an excellent
Taste; the Lean looks like the Flesh of Pork, but something of a deeper red;
the Fat is a sort of a light green, but very luscious; this is the common Diet
of the Slaves, or meaner sort of People; but if Strangers eat too much of it,
it is apt to give 'em the Bloody Flux. This is a very reigning Distemper here,
and carries off abundance of new Comers. The Island of Jamaica lies -- Leagues
North from the Southern Continent of America, in the Sea called Mare del Nor;
and South from the Isle of Cuba, about twelve Leagues; and twenty West from
Hispaniola, in eighteen Degrees Northern Latitude; and bears from Rio de
Hach, North-West, a hundred and fifty Leagues; from Santa Martha, N. N. W. a
hundred and thirty-five; from Carthagena, N. a hundred and fourteen; from
Portobello, N. E. and by N. a hundred and ninety; from the Isthmus of Darien,
N. and by E. a hundred and seventy; and from the Bay of Mexico, a hundred and
fifty. Its Form is almost oval; being in Length, from East to West, about fifty
four Leagues; from North to South, in the broadest part, twenty three Leagues,
going narrower toward each End, like a Rowling-Pin, (a good Comparison.) In
Circumference, one hundred and fifty Leagues. The Air of this Island is more
temperate, and the Heat more tolerable, than any of the other Islands, by
reason of the cool Breezes which constantly blow from the East, with frequent
Showers of Rain, and Dews that fall in the Night. These Dews are very
pernicious to careless drunken People, that lie exposed all Night to 'em. This
is also the only Isle of the Barloventi, which is not subject to violent
Storms, and Hurricanes, as the other Islands are. And the Diseases that are
predominant here, are only bred by Intemperance; as Surfeits, Bloody Flux,
Fevers, and Agues; or occasioned by ill Diet, or Slothfulness. This Island is
well watered with Springs and Rivulets of fresh Water, (with many handsome
Rivers stored with several sorts of Fish;) and is all over (especially in the
Western Parts) full of high Mountains and Hills: It is also well wooded; for
the North and South Parts chiefly abound with large and tall Woods. Neither is
there wanting Savanna's, or Plains. The Commodities of this Island are very
many; and first, for Vegetables; the Sugars are so good, that they now out sell
those of Barbados, 5 s. per Cent. Tobacco is so excellent, that it is bought
up faster than the Planters can cure it: The Indigo is also here very good: The
Cotton is much the best of all the neighboring Islands: Tortoise-shell is very
plenty here. Here are also great Variety of Dyewood, as Fust-wick, Red-wood, a
kind of Log-wood, Cedar, Mohogeny, Lignum-vitae, Ebony, Granadille, and many
others. Nay, there is many Mines, both of Silver, Copper, and Gold; but that the
Inhabitants think it would be dangerous to break 'em up, for fear of drawing
the Spanish and French Buccaniers upon 'em. There are several Fishermen who
have found pieces of Ambergrease upon the Surface of the Water, near the Shore.
Ginger grows better here than in any other Part of America; and Cod-Pepper very
plentifully: And also, a certain Kind of Spice called, Piemete, in Form of
East India Pepper, of a very aromatical and curious Taste, partaking, as it
were, of several Species together: It grows wild among the Mountains, and is
highly valued among the Inhabitants. Of Medicinal Plants I have seen several,
as Guaiacum, China-root, Cassia, Fistula Veuillard, Achiotes, Tamarines,
Contrayerva, Ciperas, Adiantum-nigrum, Aloes, Cucumis Agristis, Sumach, Acacia,
Misselto, with many other Drugs and Balsams. The ingenious Sir Hans Sloan has
wrote an elaborate Book of the Plants of this Island. Cochineal is produced by
a Plant that grows in this Country, but not brought to Perfection, without much
Care and Industry. This Island is also very well stocked with Cattle, as
Horses, Cows, and Asses; there have been many Mules, but the Inhabitants made
so little Use of 'em, that now there are but few. Sheep are large and tall, and
their Meat indifferently good, but their Fleece worth nothing. Goats (or
Cabirates) are without Number, being a Beast peculiar to the Country. Hogs,
both wild and tame, in abundance. I have been hunting the wild Hog in Porta
Morant Bay, and it gives good Diversion, though sometimes dangerous: You go
with some Ten or a Dozen in Company, armed with a Musket and a Cutlash; as soon
as ever (with your Dogs) you have found 'em out, you all take Aim, and fire as
quick as you can; but if you don't kill 'em immediately with your Shot, they
set upon you open-mouthed, so that you must either hew 'em down with your
Cutlashes, or club your Muskets. Generally as soon as you have 'em, you flay
'em, as you do Mutton, and barbicue 'em, even in the very Place where you kill
'em; that is, you dig a square Hole in the Earth, then clap four Stakes at each
Corner, and on 'em put your Meat, so make a Fire under it, and when one side is
done enough, you turn the other. For tame Fowls, they have of all the Kinds
that we have in England; besides Guinea Hens, Parrots, Parachites, Machaws, and
Boobies, (which are Boobies indeed, for they will sit upon a Tree, or Post,
till you come and take 'em.) They have three Crops a Year, in this Island, and
the Trees are always green. They have three sorts of Bread, one of English
Corn, another of Guinea Wheat, and the third of a Root they call Casavi, which
is rank Poison, till pressed and baked in an Oven; it is very white, but
tasteless, and the Bread made of it, the Size of our thin Oat-Cakes. But of all
the Fruit this Island produces, the Pineapple is the best, which grows very
low, with Leaves something like the Indicus Ficus that I have seen in Gardens
here in England; the Taste is so excellent, that I know not what to compare it
to, it having the Relish of all fineflavour'd Fruits. There Is a Fruit that
grows upon a low Bush, called the Prickle-Pear, the inside of which is red, and
on the top is a little thorny Thing like a Star, which if you do not take away,
before you eat it, may prove pernicious. If you eat but two of this Fruit, it
will make your Urine as red as Blood. Plantins are a very good Fruit, which is,
when baked in the Ashes, used by the Slaves instead of Bread: It Is a Fruit with
a Skin on it, like our Beans, which is taken off, and then the Fruit appears,
about the size of a Bolognia Sausage. Bannanas is another Fruit something of
the same Kind, but shorter, and more luscious: Both these Fruits are ripe all
the Year, for when some are fit to gather, others are green, and some in Bud.
The Oranges and Lemons, are neither of 'em good, in my Opinion: but their Limes
are wonderful, they grow upon a Tree full of Thorns, where you must be sure to
prick your Fingers, if you will gather 'em. These, with Spring Water and Sugar,
was the chief of my Liquor, while we staid there. The Potatoes are very fine
here, exceeding, in my Opinion, even those of Ireland. Then there is another
Root called Jams, something like a Jerusalem-Artichoak, but larger and stringy.
The Onions of Jamaica, are much milder, and better tasted than our English
Onions, and very wholesome: They used to make a great Addition to our Crogick
Brewis; that is, Biscuit soaked in fair Water, for some Time, then the Water
thrown away, and the Biscuit strewn over with Salt, Oil, and Lime-Juice,
together with Onions; and so eaten as a dainty Dish. There is a sensitive Plant
in this Island; the Stalk, surrounded with Leaves full of dark red Spots, bears
a sweet smelling violet-colour'd Flower; the Leaves, as soon as touched, close
up together, and die; and accordingly as they are held in the Hand a shorter or
a longer Time, this Alteration continues. Ginger grows plentiful here; the Male
Plant (for there is Sexes) has generally bigger Leaves than the Female: The
Stalks, which are without Knots, have more Leaves upwards than downwards, and
spreads along the Earth, still taking Root anew. When the Leaves wither, then
the Ginger is commonly ripe, but it has not that Poinancy whilst green, as when
dried. The Cotton of this Place (of which the Clothes and Hammocks are made,
are vended in most Parts of the Westeru World) grows on a Tree about the
Height of a Peach-Tree, with a strait Stem, or Body, out of which shoot Boughs
of an equal Length, and at equal Distance: Between the Leaves, which are narrow
and long, grow red Flowers, and from 'em, oval Cods, which, when ripe, enclose
the Cotton, and a Seed like Pepper. Of hurtful Creatures, there is the
Crocodile, or Alligator, which infest many Rivers and Ponds; this is a Creature
of a monstrous Size; I have seen one twenty six Foot long; it moves swiftly and
strongly forward, but turns slow; they are impenetrable every where but in the
Eye, or Belly; they have four Feet, or Fins, with which they go, or swim; their
usual Course of getting their Food is to lie on their Backs as dead, then with
a sudden Onset they spring upon their Prey, whether Man or Beast: But it is
easily avoided by a Man, by reason of an Aromatic Smell that comes from the
Body, which may be smelt five Hundred Yards; but if a Man has got a Cold, and
cannot smell, if he has Eyes they are easily avoided; for if they run right
forward, it is but slipping on one side, for they are as long in turning as a
Coach. The Oil that is made from these Creatures, is good for several
Distempers. They lay their Eggs (about the size of a Turkey's) and cover 'em
with Sand, which heated by the Beams of the Sun, hatches the young ones, who
naturally creep into the Water. One of these Creatures swam after us fifty
Yards in Porto Morant Bay, and raised his Head upon the Edge of our Longboat,
which was deeply laden with Casks of Water; our Carpenter, who had been felling
of Timber to Wood the Ship, struck him a very great Blow on the Nose with his
Hatchet, that I am sure hurt him, for he gave a sort of Shriek, which no Body
ever heard before, and swam to shore; where I observed him to run his Head into
the Mud, as if it pained him, which makes me think that their Heads are not
invulnerable, as is reported. The Guana is another Creature amphibious as the
Alligator, but nothing nigh so large: There Is an Island near Jamaica, called
Guana Island, inhabited by nothing else; our Seamen eat of these latter, but
much Good may it do 'em, for the Flesh looks like a piece of a Black-a-more's
Arm; but how it tastes I cannot tell, neither do I ever design to try. The Cocoa
Nut is a Fruit that is both Meat, Drink, and Clothing to the Natives, (I mean
the Blacks) the Rind serves for weaving of Clothes, nay, and rigging their
Canoes, before they knew the Europeans; and when you have taken off the Bark,
you must be beholding to a Saw to cut off the Monkey's Face, which is the top,
with three Marks that makes it something resemble that Animal; then the Inside
contains, first a liquid Substance, like Whey, but very sweet; after you have
taken out this Liquor, round the Nut is a Substance a quarter of an Inch thick,
which you cut out, and that is the Meat, which is very delicious and grateful to
the Taste, but not wholesome, if eat of too much: There Is another Thing that is
very remarkable, and that is the Phisick-Nut, much of the Taste of our
Pig-nuts, but one or two of 'em will do your Business, upwards or downwards, as
well as Dr. Annodyne-Necklace's Sugar-Plumbs. As I was going one Day to dine
with Captain Kendal, (a Gentleman Inhabitant within a Mile of the Bay in Porto
Morant) attended by a Black, a Servant of his, I saw in the Hedge a fair Apple
growing on a Bush, which I readily gathered, and was conveying to my Mouth, but
prevented by the Black's giving me a Blow on the Hand, which struck it from me;
I immediately, with my Sword in the Scabbard, fell to belabour the poor Fellow
for his Insolence, for I having been familiar with him, and talked to him along
the Road, thought he made our old English Proverb true, If you give an Inch
they will take an Ell; but it seems the Fellow saved my Life by it, for this
Fruit, which was called a Mangineel Apple, was rank Poison, but what I had
never seen or heard of before; I was so concerned for the Blows I had given the
poor Fellow, that I gave him a Dollar to make him amends. I remember I was
afterward washing my self at a River, in the same Bay, and it raining very
hard, I went under a Tree, to save my Clothes from being wet, and in placing
them together in a Cavity of the Shore, the Drops of Rain fell on a Mangineel
Tree, and so on my Back, but in less than half an Hour my Flesh burned very
hot, and white Blisters appeared upon my Skin, insomuch that I was in a high
Fever; but a Native of the Place being with me, ran for salt Water, and washed
me all over, and afterward got some Oil and dipped my Shirt in it, and put it
on my Back, which gave me Ease immediately; but the Spots remained upon my Skin
several Years afterward. I don't doubt but my Readers will laugh at me for
thus running from one Thing to another, but I relate 'em just as my Memory
prompts me. This Island was first discovered by Columbus, Anno Dom. 1499. After
he had conquered the Natives, and built a City, called Sevilla, (afterward St.
Jago de la Vega) consisting of about seventeen Hundred Houses, two Churches,
two Chapels, and an Abbey, he made his Son Diego Columbus Governor of the whole
Island, for his Master Ferdinand King of Spain. The first Attempt made upon
this Island by the English, was A. D. 1592, under the Command of Mr. Antony
Shirley, but after vanquishing the Spaniards, they deserted it, as not thinking
it worth their keeping, and returned home. The Spaniards again possessing it,
remained unmolested, till Anno Dom. 1654, when Oliver Cromwell, then Lord
Protector, rigged out a Fleet of Ships to make a Descent on Hispaniola, under
the Command of Colonel Venables; but being disappointed of their Hopes, and
meeting with ill Success, steered away for Jamaica, and on the 10th of May
(after a stout Resistance) made themselves Masters of it. The Island is
supposed to contain two hundred and fifty thousand Inhabitants, Slaves
included. The chief Towns are, 1st, St. Jago, about six Miles up the Country. 2
dly, Passage-Town, six Miles from that. 3 dly, (And indeed the largest, before
the Earthquake destroyed it) Port Royal, it contained a thousand Houses, many
of them eminent Buildings; but as it is now built on a small Neck of Land,
which forms the Harbor, I take it to be about the bigness of Deptford. At both
Ends of the Town is a large Fort, known by the Name of the square and round
Fort: the square Fort, or Castle, contains a hundred Pieces of Ordnance, and
the other about thirty, besides several Canon on the Platform, which reaches
from one Fort to the other; so that, without Treachery, they need not fear an
Attack either by Land or Sea. About a Mile farther, is another small Fort,
called Landward Fort, which secures the Town from any Attempt by Land: Off the
Mouth of the Harbor, toward the Sea, lie several small Islands, upon the most
Western of which (lying within half a League of the Town, and by which all the
Vessels must pass) they have erected a Fort which contains eight Guns. The
chief Harbor, after Port Royal, is Port St. Antony, on the North; a very safe,
commodious, landlock'd Harbor, only the coming in is something difficult, the
Channel being narrow'd by a little Island that lies off the Mouth of the Port.
2 d, Portomorant, a very capacious Harbor, where Ships do conveniently Wood
and Water, and ride safe from all Winds. 3 d, On the South is Port Gagway,
which is much the largest of all that has been mentioned, it being five Leagues
over, in some Places; it is land-lock'd by a Point of Land that runs S. W. from
the main of the Island: The Road is so deep that a Ship of a thousand Tun may
lay her Side to the Shore of the Point, and lade or unlade at Pleasure, with
Planks afloat.

Now finding our Affairs would detain us half a Year longer, I got Leave of the
Captain to go in a Sloop, with some of my Acquaintance, to get Logwood, and on
September the 25th we set sail for the Bay of Campeche, with a fair Wind. The
old Manner of getting this Wood is as follows; a Company of desperate Fellows
get together in a Sloop, well armed, and Land by stealth, but in Case of any
Resistance, the whole Crew attends on the Cutters, ready armed to defend 'em;
(indeed there is a Colony of English that sells this Logwood, but many choose the
other Way; all this was strange to me, for I knew nothing of the matter, till
we were out to Sea. There was one Fellow there that told me, that about ten
Years before he went with a Vessel, and they took the same Method as usual, in
getting it, and landed all their Men but six, that they left on Board to look
after the Vessel; in the mean time the Spaniards having Intelligence of their
Descent, sent a hundred Men, in several Canoes, to seize their Vessel; which
accordingly they did, without any Resistance from the six Men on Board: After
they had clapped these Men under Hatches, they searched and ransacked the
Vessel, sending every thing on shore that was of any Value; then they prepared
to trepan the Crew, as they came on board, which happened the very next Night,
when some of the Men coming on board with a Load of Logwood, the Spaniards
caused the six Men to stand upon Deck, and on Pain of Death, not to discover
the Truth of the Matter, which happened as they desired, for the Men coming on
Board carelessly without their Arms, were all seized immediately, and clapped in
Irons. The rest that were on shore wondering at the stay of the Boat, sent a
Canoe with six Men, to know the Reason of their Delay, which were likewise
taken in the same Trap with the former. The Man that told me this Story, was
one of these last six, who found means secretly in the middle of the Night to
slip into the Water, and swam ashore, though a League off, where he happily
informed the rest of the Crew (which were forty three) of the Misfortune that
had happened to their Companions: Whereupon they consulted what they had best
do; where it was unanimously agreed, to seize upon three large Canoes, that lay
at the bottom of the Bay, that belonged to some French Hunters that were on
shore; which was done accordingly: On Board they immediately got, well armed,
and steered away for their Sloop: But as they designed to trick them the same
way as the others had done their Companions, they consulted what to do if they
should be discovered before they could get on Board, which was probable enough.
At length it was agreed to carry on the Plot in order to deceive them, and as
soon as ever they could get over the Ship's side to assault the Enemy with all
the Vigor imaginable, appointing two or three to release their Companions, and
put Arms into their Hands, to be assistant in recovering their Liberties. Every
thing happened as was suggested, for when they came within half a Furlong of
the Vessel, they were hailed by some of their own Men, as it is usual in such
Cases; which was answered by them in the Canoes, with swearing and cursing at
'em, for not coming ashore with their Longboat, as ordered, but to force 'em to
bring their Wood aboard in Canoes. They asked from on Board, how many were come
with 'em? All (answered they in the Boat) but three, that we left ashore to
look after our Arms, and a small Remainder of Log-wood, which you must go and
fetch immediately with the Longboat, (which they pretended could not go to 'em
before, by reason she had a Hole broke in her Bow, against a piece of Rock,
that gave 'em a great deal of Trouble in getting her to the Vessel.) Our People
smiled to themselves to hear they had got their Lesson so ready. In asking and
answering these Questions, they had reached the Vessel, and getting nimbly up
the Side, they drew from under their Watch-Coats, their Pistols and Cutlashes,
and first fired upon the Spaniards, who were running to seize 'em, half
unarmed, as not suspecting any Resistance: Those whose Office it was to release
the Prisoners under Hatches, did it immediately, by killing the two Centuries
that watched over 'em; and then coming up with this fresh Recruit soon overcame
the Spaniards, and made 'em call for Quarter: Which was not granted till they
had thrown down their Arms. When they had surrendered, they chained 'em all
under Hatches; and so the Conquerors became Prisoners, and the Prisoners
Conquerors. After the Action was over, they looked after the Dead, which was
found to be nine Spaniards, and one Englishman, who was supposed to be killed
by our own Men, in the first Fire.

Upon this good Success, they having notice that there lay a rich Ship in the
Harbor before the Town of Campeche, they resolved to try their good Fortune
farther, which they contrived as follows: they hoisted Spanish Colors, and
sailed away immediately for the Port of Campeche, where they arrived by next
Morning, saluted the Castle and Town with seven Guns, as Friends, and were paid
back the Complement. The Shore was filled with Numbers of People, to see the
Englishmen brought ashore Prisoners; but they were mistaken. The Ship which
they had a Design upon lay about a League from the Town, as having arrived but
two Days before, but was to put farther in that very Evening, before the Sea
Breeze failed; our Men boarded her on the Starboard-side, which lay from the
Town, and took her, without firing a Gun; cut her Cables, and made out to Sea,
before the Town knew what was the matter: But as soon as ever they smelt the
Trick, a Spanish Man of War of thirty Guns (being all that was in the Harbor)
slipped her Cables, and crowded all the Sail she could, to come up with us; we
finding she gained upon us, called a Council, and at last resolved to bring up
most of our Spanish Prisoners bound, and expose 'em to the whole Fire of the
Enemy. Which succeeded accordingly, for the Ship coming close up to us,
(without any firing on either side) commanded us to strike. Upon that we
ordered the Spanish Captain to lay before 'em their Condition; which profited
little at first, but after many Entreaties from them, and Threatenings from us,
the others were prevailed upon to sheer off, and make toward the Town, while
we made the best of our Way. But the Spaniard making up to the Town again, was
met by several armed Boats, with the Governor himself in one of them, who gave
a strict Command not to regard any Thing, but use all possible Means to retake
the Ship, and the Pirates (as they termed us.) When we perceived the Boats
making up to the Ship, and observed her tack about to give us Chase, we guessed
at the Matter, and finding she gained upon us, we put our selves into a Posture
of Defense, and proposed to engage her in the Prize we took last, which carried
twenty Guns: We mustered our Men, and found we had seventy one; but then we had
two hundred Spanish Prisoners, who, we feared, if by any Accident they should
get loose, might prove our Ruin; whereupon a Consult was immediately held to
put most of them to Death. Upon which the Captain of the first Prize stood up,
and said, (in pretty good English) Gentlemen, you have taken us fairly, and
done no more than we our selves did to you; now seeing that Ship which pursues
us, and gains upon us every Moment, is coming in order to fight you, we shall
run a more certain Danger by it, by being your Prisoners, if you expose us to
the Fire of their Canon, as you did before; and if they do really fire, I may
as well take them for an Enemy, as you, since we are sure to receive the most
Damage. But to make the Matter short, being the Time is so, I propose to you,
that if the Vessel fires at you, we may reasonably conclude, they have no
manner of Regard for us, so we shall not have any for them, and, if you will give
us that Liberty, we will freely fight under your Command, and endeavor, as far
as in us lies, to defend your Vessel, as much as if it was our own. This Speech
of the Captain's was approved of by the rest of the Prisoners; so that at last
we agreed to set sixty of them at Liberty, and the rest fast bound under
Hatches, where we put two Centuries, with two Patareroes fixed, charged with
small Shot, with Orders, that if there seemed to be any thing like Disturbance,
to fire in upon 'em. The sixty we chose out to be assistant to us, were ordered
to the Great Guns, so that we still had the Command over 'em, because they had
no Arms. After we had settled every thing, we lay by, (seeing it impossible to
escape without fighting) in order for their coming up to us, which they did in
a short time, and coming within Hail, they ordered us to strike immediately,
and make no Resistance, or else they would have no Regard to their Friends on
Board us, but sink or take us, and put every Man of us to Death. Upon which the
Spanish Captain that was our Prisoner, made Answer. That if they offered to
fire a Gun, every Spaniard on Board us resolved to fight against 'em as
Enemies. Which was answered, They must obey the Governor's Orders, who had just
left 'em, and was returned on shore. Upon this they fired a Broadside upon us,
but we returned it immediately with our small Arms, and great Guns, which were
well plied by our Spanish Prisoners. The Fight continued half an Hour with all
the Fierceness imaginable; at last the Spaniard prepared to board us with his
Boats at the same Time, but were received so briskly, and so damaged by our
Hand-Granado's, that they were obliged to make to the Ship with great Loss. The
Hand-Granado's stood us in great stead, for we dispatched three or four of our
Men into the Main-Top, who from thence discharged several Granado's, that by
their own Report killed and wounded above thirty Men. They attempted to board
us once again, and came on briskly with firing and loud Shouts, to terrify us;
but we returned 'em their Shouts and firing with Interest, for with a lucky
Shot we drove away their Mainmast, which put 'em into strange Confusion: This
Accident (if we would have laid hold on it) might have given us an Opportunity
of out-sailing 'em; but that was not once thought of, for Desire of Revenge
made us fight like Furies. The next Broadside we gave 'em, struck away their
Rudder, which rendered 'em incapable of steering their Vessel, or tacking
about: Upon which we perceiving what had happened, tacked about, and with a
Broadside that racked her fore and aft, killed 'em, by their own Confession,
sixteen Men, for it split two of their Guns, whose Splinters did most of the
Execution. Now what we call to rake fore and aft, is to lay the Side of our
Ship against the Enemy's Head or Stern, and fire into 'em, so that every Shot
goes from one End of the Ship to the other, instead of going across, so that of
Consequence one Shot that way will do more Damage than ten directly side to
side. The Heat of the Spaniard now began to abate, but yet he hectored as much
as ever; at last a lucky Shot entered her Powder-Room, and blew up her main
Deck, with several Spaniards, into the Air; upon which was heard such Groans
and Yelling, from wounded and dying Men, that were enough to frighten Men less
inured to such Encounters: With this Success we prepared, in the Confusion, to
board them in our turn, but was prevented, by seeing their Vessel sinking;
whereupon they struck down their Colors, and asked for Quarter, and Help;
which we immediately gave 'em, by putting out our Boats, which together with
their own, saved all the Men they had left, which were ninety five, out of four
hundred and odd.

This Success flushed us mightily with Hopes of succeeding in any Enterprise.
We lost out of our Spaniards twenty six, and of English nine killed, and two
wounded, who died the next Day. The Spaniards were of signal Service to us, and
fought bravely, even to Desparation; well knowing, if they should be taken
(after fighting on our side) they must all inevitably suffer Death: Which
proved happy for us; for it had been impossible for us to have escaped 'em,
even if all the Spaniards on Board us had stood neuter.

After we had cleared our Vessel of the Blood and dead Men, and refreshed our
selves, we called up our Spanish Prisoners, that they might refresh themselves
likewise, and returned the others (who had fought so bravely in our Defense)
our hearty Thanks; and the Spanish Captain expressed himself so handsomely, that
our Master freely offered him our Sloop, victual'd and ready fitted up, to do
what he thought fit with. Upon this kind Offer the Captain smiled, and told him
he would not take it without buying: And as for Money, I have none, (pursued
he) but if you will listen to a Stratagem of mine, I Will engage to furnish you
with Money for your Vessel, and something over and above. With that he proposed
to take six of the Spaniards that had fought for us, and in our Longboat to go
on shore to the Governor, and demand a Ransom for the Prisoners we had taken;
which was agreed to: accordingly they went ashore, and told the Governor, if he
did not immediately send fifty Dollars a Man, for two hundred and twenty, they
would be every Soul tied Back to Back, and thrown into the Sea. Upon which
there was a Gathering made through the Town, and the Money raised immediately,
and in twelve Hours the Captain returned with 11000 Dollars, gave our Captain
5000, distributed 3000 among the Sailors, and kept the rest for himself. The
next Day we set the Spaniards that were saved from the Man of War on shore, and
as many more that were willing, out of the other Ship, and of our own Sloop; so
that Captain Fernando, our friendly Spaniard, took his leave of us, with eighty
of his Countrymen with Intention for the South Sea; and we steered our Course,
in our rich Prize, for Jamaica, where we shared it: Every common Sailor had to
his Share 800 l. Moreover the Captain ordered me in particular, 200 l. more,
for the Service I did in swimming ashore unperceived, to give 'em Notice.

After ending his Story, I asked him how he had improved his Money from that
Time? Psha! (says he) that, and five times as much, is gone since then. And
this is no wonder, for Sailors are such Fools, that what they get with the
utmost Danger, they spend as the meanest Trifles. We sailed before the Wind six
Days together, toward the Bay, but on the seventh, the Clouds darkened, and
the Welkin seemed all on fire, by Times, with Lightning, and the Thunder roared
louder than ever I heard it in my Life; in short, a dreadful Hurricane
approached, which was suspected by a deceitful Calm, and Showers of Rain. Which
the inimitable Shakespeare very justly describes.

We often see against some Storm,
A Silence in the Heavens, the Rack stand still;
The bold Winds speechless, and the Orb below
As hush as Death.
The Sailors had furled their Sails, and lowr'd their Topmasts, (waiting for it
under a double riv'd Fore-sail:) Which at last came with most extreme Violence.

Either Tropic now
Began Thunder: at both Ends of Heaven the Clouds
From many a horrid Rift abortive poured
Fierce Rain, with Lightning mixed, Water with Fire,
In Ruin reconciled. Dreadful was the Rack,
As Earth and Sky would mingle.
Milton. In vain the Master issues out Commands,
In vain the trembling Sailors ply their Hands,
The giddy Ship, between the Winds and Tides,
Forced back, and forwards, in a Circle rides,
Stunned with the different Blows; then shoots amain,
Till counterbuff'd, she stops, and sleeps again.
The Face of Things a frightful Image bears,
And present Death in various forms appears.
Dryden. The Storm lasted with all its Violence three Hours, and at last
insensibly abated, till it was stark calm, and not one Breath of Wind was
stirring, nor any sign of one, but a little Froth on the Surface.

The Tempest is o'erblown, the Skies are clear,
And the Sea charmed into a Calm so still,
That not a Wrinkle ruffles her smooth Face.
Dryden. After the Storm was over, we loosed our Sails, in Expectation of the
Wind, which in half an Hour stole out again, as frightened at the violent
Storm, or (if you will grant me to make a Simile) like a poor Debtor that steals
out of his lurking-place, when the blustering Bailiffs are gone out of sight.
About six in the Evening, we saw a Water-Spout: This is an Aerial Engine, or
Limbeck, that draws up the salt Water of the Sea, and distills it into fresh
Showers of Rain: This Cloud comes down in Form of a Pipe of Lead of a vast
Thickness, and by the Force of the Sun sucks up a great Quantity of Water. I
stood an Hour to observe it; after it had continued about half an Hour in the
Water, it drew up insensibly, by Degrees, till it was lost in the Clouds; but
in the closing of the same, it shut out some of the Water, which fell into the
Sea again, with a Noise like that of Thunder, and occasioned a Smoke in the
Water, that lasted for a considerable Time. The Sailors told me, that these
Water-Spouts sometimes did great Damage to Ships that by Calms were too near
'em when they fell. One Fellow told me, that he saw a Bark of sixty Tun sucked
out of the Water by one of 'em, which caused the breaking of the Spout, and
sunk the Vessel with the Fall of the Waters. In the Streights, when Ships
approach these airy Engines, they fire off a Gun, and that breaks 'em before
they come too near. The Person told me, that at the Fall of Water, the Sea was
curled as much as if you had thrown a large Stone into a standing Pond of
Water. We have sometimes at a Distance seen fourteen or fifteen at a Time at
Work, but I never saw one so large as this.

In the Evening we caught a small Shark, with two sucking Fishes that stuck
close to her till laid on the Deck, and then dropped down of their own Accord.
This is allowed the Remora of the Ancients: It is about the Bigness of a
Mackrel, with a flat Head, and is of a gristly Substance. These stick to the
sides of Vessels very frequently, and sometimes swim upon the Surface of the
Water, and are even caught with a naked Hook. I have sometimes seen these
Fishes sticking to a Log of Wood, in the Water. When we hog'd our Ship, (a Hog
is an Instrument of six Foot square, something like a Harrow, and Stumps of old
Brooms fixed close in the middle part) this is put to the bottom of the Ship,
with a Rope before and another aft, fixed to the Capstorn, which cleans the
Vessel from all sorts of Filth. I have seen many of 'em in the Hog together,
with Barnicles and Oysters, and several other Shellfish.

October the 6th, we anchored at Trist Island, in the Bay of Campeachy, and
sent our Men ashore at Logwood Creek, to seek for the Logwood-Cutters, who
immediately came on Board. The Bargain was soon struck, and in Exchange for our
Rum and Sugar, and a little Money, we got in our Lading in eight Days, and set
sail for Jamaica the 15th Day of October.

Now in getting up to Jamaica again, generally takes us up two Months, because
we are obliged to ply it all the way to Windward. One Day it being stark calm,
I went into the Water to wash my self, though I was dissuaded by all the
Sailors, by reason of that Coast being infested with Sharks, which sometimes
meet with People, and bite off a Limb: But being there had not been any seen
that Day, I would venture, but tied a Rope about me, for fear of any Accident
that might happen, or the Wind striking up of a sudden. But I had not been long
in the Water, before they cried from the Gunnel, A Shark! a Shark! but I
thinking they had only banter'd, as sometimes they do, when any one is in the
Water, did not mind 'em, till at last they pulled me by main Force, up the side
of the Ship; when looking into the Water, I saw a swinging large Shark, with
his white Belly turned up in order to bite at me. Upon which I thanked God and
good Friends that had prevented him, by swiftly pulling me up; though the Rope
had rubbed off the Skin, and some part of my Flesh, with the Force. Now a Shark
cannot get his Prey, without first turning himself upon his Back, because their
upper Jaw is much larger than their under: Which often prevents Accidents.

I one Day went down into the Hold, to bottle off a small Parcel of Wine that I
had there, for fear 'twou'd sour, which made me in a filthy Pickle: Coming
upon Deck again, I wanted to clean my self, but did not care to go into the
Water, as before, so went into the Boat astern, that we hoisted overboard in
the Morning, to look after a Wreck that we discovered upon the Water: Being in
the Boat, I began to wash my self, and when I had dressed my self again, I
pulled a Book out of my Pocket, and sat reading in the Boat; when, before I
was aware, a Storm began to rise, so that I could not get up the Ship-side, as
usual, but called for the Ladder of Ropes, that hangs over the Ship's Quarter,
in order to get up that way; but whether it was not fastened above, or whether
it broke through Rottenness, as being seldom used, I cannot tell, but down I
fell into the Sea; and though the Ship (as they told me afterward) tacked
about to take me up, if it was possible; yet I lost sight of 'em, through the
Duskiness of the Evening, and the Storm together. Now I had the most dismal
Fears that could ever possess any one in my Condition: I was forced to drive
with the Wind, which sat (by good Fortune) with the Current, and having kept
my self above Water, as near as I could guess in this Fright, four Hours, I
felt my Feet every now and then touch Ground; and at last, by a great Wave* was
thrown and left upon the Sand; yet it being dark, I knew not what to do; but I
got up and walked, as well as my tired Limbs would let me; and every now and
then was overtaken by the Waves, but not high enough to wash me away.

When I had got far enough, as I thought, to be out of Danger, I could not
discover any thing of Land, and I immediately conjectured that it was but some
Bank of Sand, that the Sea would overflow at high Tide: Whereupon I sat down
to rest my weary Limbs, and fit my self for Death, for that was all I could
expect, in my own Opinion. Then all my Sins came flying in my Face, which I
repented of with all the Sincerity imaginable: I offered up my fervent Prayers
to our Almighty Creator, not for my Safety (because I did not expect any such
Thing) but for all my past Offenses; and I may really say, I expected my
Dissolution with a Calmness that made me think I had made my Peace with Heaven.
At last I fell asleep, (though I tried all I could against it, by rising up and
walking, till I was obliged to lie down again.) In the Morning when I awaked, I
was amazed to find my self among four or five very low sandy Islands, but all
separated half a Mile or more (as I guessed) by the Sea. With that I began to
be a little cheerful, and walked about to see if I could find any thing that
was eatable, but to my great Grief I found nothing but a few Eggs, that I was
obliged to eat raw; this laid my Condition before my Eyes in a most horrid
Manner, and the Fear of starving seemed to me to be worse than that of
drowning; and often did I wish that the Sea had swallowed me, rather than thrown
me on this desolate Island; for I could perceive by the Evenness of 'em, that
they were not inhabited either by Man, or Beast, or any Thing else, but Rats,
and several sorts of Fowl.

Upon this Island there was some few Bushes of a Wood they called Burton Wood,
which used to be my Shelter at Night; but to complete my Misery, there was not
to be found one drop of fresh Water on the Island; so that I was forced to
drink my own Urine for two or three Days together; which made my Skin come off
like the Peal of a boiled Codlin. At last my Misery so increased, that I was
often in the Mind to put an end to my wretched Life, but desisted, on the
Opinion that I had of some Alligator, or other voracious Creature, coming to do
it for me. Strange Circumstances indeed! to wish to be devoured alive, as a
Mitigation of my Misfortunes.

I had lived a Week here upon Eggs only, when, by good Fortune, upon a Bush I
discovered a Booby sitting; I ran immediately, as fast as I could, and with a
Stick knocked him down: I never considered whether it was proper to eat or no,
but I sucked the Blood, and eat the Flesh, with such a Pleasure as none can
express, but them that have felt the Pain of Hunger to the same Degree as my
self. After I had devoured this Banquet, I walked about, and discovered many
more of these Birds, which I slew.

Now my Stomach being pretty well appeased, I began to consider whether I could
not, with two Sticks, make a Fire, as I had seen Blacks in Jamaica: I tried
with all the Wood I could get, and at last happily did it. This done, I
gathered some Sticks, and made a Fire, picked several of my Boobies, and
broiled 'em, as well as I could; and now I resolved to come to an Allowance.
This Bird is a Water Fowl, about the bigness of a large Crow; of gray Color;
it has a long strong Bill, and Feet like a Duck, and its Flesh seemed to me to
taste something like a Duck's, but stronger, and a little Fishy: And it is such
a Booby, that it will not get out of your Way without beating.

At Night I and the rest of my Fellow-Inhabitants, had a great Storm of Rain
and Thunder, with the redest Lightning I had ever seen, which well washed us
all, I believe; as for my self, my Clothes (which were only a pair of thin
Shoes and Thread Stockings, and a Cotton Wastcoat and Breeches) were soundly
wet; but I had this Happiness, to find in the Morning several Cavities of
Rainwater, which put in my Head a Thought of making a deep Well, or hollow
Place, that I might have Water continually by me; which I brought to Perfection
in this Manner: I took a Piece of Wood I found on the Island, and pitched upon
a Place under a Burton-Tree, where with my Hands and the Stick together, I dug
a Hole, or Well, big enough to contain a Hogshead of Water, then put in Stones
and pa v'd it, and got in and stamped 'em down ha rd all round, and with my
Stick beat th e sides close, so that I made it capable of holding Water for a
long Time.

But now the Difficulty was, how to get the Water there, which at last I
contrived very well, for with my Shirt (which was pretty fine) I effected it,
by soaking it in Water for some Time, and then afterward it would bear it very
well; so with this Holland-Bucket I could carry two Gallons of Water at a Time,
which would not leak out above a Pint, in two hundred Yards; so in two Days
Time I had filled my Well.

Now I began to think of Life again for a while, for I had ready broiled forty
of these Boobies, designing to allow my self half a one a Day. I also made my
self a Cu pboard of Earth, by mixing Water with it, which was four Foot in
Length, three in Height, and two in Breadth, though it lasted but four Days,
the Sun drying it so fast, that it cracked, and afterward fell in pieces. What
most amazed me, and pleased me together, was, that my Boobies continued sweet
without the least Taint. I had a small Ovid printed by Elziver, which I had by
good Fortune put in my Breeches Pocket, when I was going up the Ladder of
Ropes, and by being pressed close in my Pocket, was not quite spoiled, but only
the Cover off, and stained a little with the Wet. This was a great Mitigation
of my Misfortunes, for I could entertain my self in this Book, under a
Burton-Bush, till I fell asleep. I remained always in good Health, only a
little troubled with the Headache, for want of a Hat, which I lost in the
Water, in falling down from the Ladder of Ropes. But I remedied this as well a
I could, by gathering a Parcel of Chicken-Weed (which grows there in Plenty)
and strewing it over the Burton-Bushes, under which I sat. Nay, at last,
finding my Time might be longer there than I expected, I tore off one of the
Sleeves of my Shirt, and lined a wooden Cap, that I had made of green sprigs,
and twisted with the green Bark that I peeled off, so that if I had been seen
in this Figure, I should have appeared like a Madman with the Basket of a
Cudgel upon his Head.

One Day coming from washing my self, (which I used often to do to cool me) I
heard a flouncing in the Water, and turning my Head, to see from whence the
Noise came, I saw the oddest Fish, I believe* that ever was known. It had (as I
suppose) chased some other Fish very eagerly, and run it self too far on the
Sand, and the Tide being almost at the lowest, it had left it there. It was (as
near as I could guess) about fifteen Foot long; it had a Head like a Horse, and
out of the Mouth came two Horns curled like a Ram's Horn, only twice as large;
it had but one Eye, and that was at the Extremity of the Nose; it seemed, as it
flounc'd, to be something of a changeable Ash Color, with a Tail that taper'd
to the End in a sharp Point: it looked so terrible to me, that I was afraid to
approach it; as it labored it seemed to groan; it lay in this Hole of Water
half an Hour, with its Body in, and its Tail out; and as soon as the Tide came
up to it, it shak'd its Tail to and fro, as a Dog does when he seems pleased,
all the while it felt the Water; it struggled but now and then, and at last,
when the Water was pretty high, it turned its Head, and made a Noise something
like the Clucking of a Hen with Chickens, but louder; and when it had Water
enough to swim away, it lay moving up and down a quarter of an Hour, being as I
suppose hurt with its struggling. A Gentleman of my Acquaintance advised me to
leave this Description out; for, says he, No Body will believe it. I replied, I
did not care for that, as I was satisfied in my self it was true.

I had been here now a Month, by my Reckoning, and in that Time my Skin looked
as if it had been rubbed over with Walnut-shells. I had a Mind several Times to
have swam to one of the other Islands; but as they looked only like Heaps of
Sand, I thought I had got the best Birth, so contented my self with my own
Station. Boobies I could get enough, (who build on the Ground) and another Bird
that lays the Eggs which I used to eat, but I never ventured to taste of 'em,
though as their Eggs were good, we may suppose their Flesh was so too: But
however, I was so well satisfied with my Boobies, that I did not care to try
Experiments.

This Island which I was upon, seemed to me to be about two Miles in
Circumference, and was almost round, and on the West side there is a good
Anchoring-place, for the Water is very deep, within two Fathom of the Shore.
God forgive me, but I often wished to have had Companions in my Misfortune, and
hoped every Day either to have seen some Vessel come that way, or a Wreck,
where, perhaps, I might have found some Necessaries which I wanted: But I would
often check my self in these Cogitations, as not becoming a Christian; yet they
would as often awake in my Mind, in spite of all my Devotion and other good
Thoughts; it being natural to desire Company. I used to fancy, that if I should
be forced to stay there long, I should forget my Speech; so I used to talk
aloud, ask my self Questions, and answer 'em; but if any Body had been by to
have heard me, they would certainly have thought me bewitched, I used to ask my
self such odd Questions. All this while I could not inform my self where I was,
or how near any inhabited Place.

One Morning (which I took to be the 8th of November) a violent Storm arose,
which continued till Noon, when in the mean time I observed a Bark laboring
with the Waves for several Hours, and at last, with the Violence of the
Tempest, was perfectly thrown out of the Water upon the shore, within a quarter
of a Mile from the Place where I observed 'em. I ran to see if there was any
Body I could be assisting to, where I found four Men (being all that was in the
Vessel) busy about saving what they could out of her: When I came up with 'em,
and hailed 'em in English, they seemed mightily surpised; they asked me how I
came there, and how long I had been there? When I told 'em my Story, they were
all mightily concerned for themselves, as well as for me, for they found there
was no Possibility of getting their Bark off the Sands, being the Wind had
forced her so far: With that we began to bemoan one another's Misfortunes; but
I must confess to you, without lying, I was never more rejoiced in my whole
Life; for they had on Board plenty of every thing for a Twelvemonth, and not
any thing spoiled. Their Lading (which was Logwood) they had thrown over board
to lighten their Ship; which was the Occasion of the Wind forcing her so far:
Had they kept in their Lading, they would have bulg'd in the Sands half a
quarter a Mile from the Place where they did, and the Sea flying over 'em,
would not only have spoiled their Provisions, but perhaps been the Death of 'em
all. By these Men I understood where we were, viz. upon one of the Isles of
Alcranes, which are five Islands, or rather large Banks of Sand; (for there is
not a Tree, nor Bush, upon any but that where we were) they lie in the Latitude
of twenty two Degrees North, twenty five Leagues from Jucatan, and about sixty
from Campeachy Town. We worked as fast as we could, and got out every Thing
that would be useful to us, before Night. We had six Barrels of salt Beef,
three of Pork, two of Pease, and two of Flower, and eleven Barrels of Biscuit; a
small Copper, and an Iron Pot; several wearing Clothes, and a spare Hat, which
I wanted mightily: We had besides, several Cags of Rum, and one of Brandy, and
a Chest of Sugar, with many other Things of Use: some Gunpowder, and one
Fowling-piece. We took off the Sails from the Yards, and with some pieces of
Timber erected a Tent big enough to hold twenty Men, under which we put their
Beds, that we got from the Bark. It Is true we had no Shelter from the Weather,
for the Trees were so low that they were of no Use to us. I now thought my self
in a Palace, and was as merry, as if I had been at Jamaica, or even at home in
my own Country: I could joak now and then, and tell a merry Tale. In short,
when we had been there some Time, we began to be very easy, and to wait
contentedly, till Providence should fetch us out of this Island. The Bark lay
upon the Sands, fifty Yards from the Water when at the highest, so that I used
to lie in her Cabin, by reason there was no more Beds ashore, than was for my
four Companions, viz. Thomas Randal, of Cork in Ireland, (whose Bed was
largest, which he did me the Favor to spare a part of now and then, when the
Wind was high, and I did not care to lie on Board) Richard White, of Port
Royal, William Musgrave, of Kingston in Jamaica, and Ralph Middleton, of --
These Men, with eight others, set out of Port Royal about a Month after us,
bound for the same Place: But those others lying ashore, and wandering too far
up in the Country, were met, as it is supposed, by some Spaniards and Indians,
who set upon 'em: Yet by all Appearance they fought desperately, for when Mr.
Randal and Mr. Middleton went to seek for 'em, they found all the eight dead,
with fifteen Indians, and two Spaniards; all the Englishmen had several Cuts in
their Heads, Arms, Breasts, etc. that made it very plainly appear, they had
sold their Lives dearly. They were too far up in the Country, to bring down
their Dead; so they were obliged to dig a Hole in the Earth, and put 'em in, as
they lay in their Clothes. As for the Indians and Spaniards, they stripped 'em,
and left 'em above Ground, as they found 'em, and made all the haste they could
to imbark, for fear of any other unlucky Accident that might happen. They set
sail as soon as ever they came on board, and made the best of their way for
Jamaica, till they were overtaken by the Storm that shipwrecked 'em on Make
Shift Island (as I had named it.) When I told them of the strange Fish I had
seen, there was not any of 'em, but Mr. Musgrave, that had seen it, and he told
me, when he was a Prisoner in Mexico, he had seen one there, and they called it
the Ram Fish; but he told me I was mistaken concerning the Eyes, for they were
on the top of the Head, but very small, not bigger than a Musket-ball; and that
which I took for an Eye, was a Hole that they sometimes spouted Water through.
This that he saw at Mexico, was carried about for a Show in a Cart, but it was
but eight Foot and a half in Length, and was by Order of the Viceroy sent two
Leagues into the Bay, to be buried, for it stunk so intolerably, they were
afraid it would breed a Plague.

Now we had all Manner of Fishing-Tackle with us, but we wanted a Boat to go a
little way from Shore to catch Fish, therefore we set our Wits to work, in
order to make some manner of Engine, and at last we pitched upon this odd
Project: We took six Casks, and tarr'd 'em all over, then stopped up the Bungs
with Cork, and nailed 'em close down with a piece of tarr'd Canvas, these six
Casks we tied together with some of the Cords of the Vessel, and upon them we
placed the Skuttles of the Deck, and fixed them, and made it so strong, that
two Men might easily sit upon 'em, but for fear a Storm should happen, we tied
to one end of her a Coil or two of small Rope, of five hundred Fathom long,
which we fixed to a Stake on the Shore: Then two of 'em went out, (as for my
part, I was no Fisherman) in order to see what Success they should have, but
returned with only one Nurse, a Fish so called, about two Foot long, something
like a Shark, only its Skin is very rough, and, when dry, will do the same
Office as a Seal-skin. The same boiled in Lemonjuice, is the only Remedy in the
World for the Scurvy, by applying some of the Skin to the Calves of your Legs,
and rubbing your Body with some of the Liquor, once or twice. We sent out our
Fishermen the next Day again, and they returned with two old Wives, and a young
Shark, about two Foot long; which we dressed for Dinner, and they proved
excellent Eating. In the Morning following, we killed a young Seal, with our
Fowling-Piece; but first she was so kind to give me a Blow on the Forehead,
that cut the Skin, and bled very much; which was done with her Fins, for as
they run toward the Water, they throw backwards the Gravel, as Horses do when
they gallop hard; this we salted, and it eat very well, after lying two or
three Days in the Brine.

The End of the first Book.
THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES OF Capt. Richard Falconer. BOOK II.
WE past our Time in this Makeshift Island as well as we could; we invented
several Games to divert our selves: One Day, when we had been merry, Sorrow (as
after Gaiety often happens) stole insensibly on us all. I, as being the
youngest, began to reflect on my sad Condition, in spending my Youth on a
Barren Land, without Hopes of being ever redeemed. Whereupon, Mr. Randal, being
the Eldest, rose up and made the following Speech, as nigh as I can remember.

Mr. Falconer, and my Fellow Sufferers; but it is to you (pointing at me) that I
chiefly address my Speech, being you seem to despair of a Redemption from this
Place, (as you call it) more than any other of the same Condition. Is not the
Providence of a Power Supreme shown in every Accident in the Life of Man; even
you your self, how much better is your Condition now, than you could have
imagined it would have been a Month ago? There is a Virtue in manly Suffering,
and to repine, seems to doubt of the All-seeing Power, which regulates our
Actions. If you seem conscious of your deserving (as a Punishment for any Crime
you have committed) what has happened, why do you not with a contrite Heart,
lift up your Voice to Heaven, and sincerely ask Forgiveness of all your past
Offenses, and that Way free your self of those gross Errors that are crept into
your weak Faith. Think you that the Divine Providence that cast Jonas from the
Bowels of the Whale, has not that Retentive Power still left, to aid and fetch
us from this Place?

I must confess, though touched with what he said, I could not forbear smiling at
the Word Retentive, which brought to my Mind an Image very diverting in an
Accident that happened once to me in England, since my Sea Adventures, and
perhaps one Time or other I may communicate to my Friends, which I Am sure will
divert 'em; for my living on Shore for these six Years last past, has been as
extraordinary as my Adventures at Sea.

Here (pursued he) we have every Thing that can be required to satisfy Nature;
we have Beds to lie on, and a Covering from the Weather; we have Provisions for
a Twelvemonth, and if we should continue here a longer Time, we need not fear
starving, the very Island producing wherewithal to support Nature, as Eggs and
Fowls; and though there is no River or Rivulet of fresh Water, yet it rains so
frequently, we need not fear even that, being we have Vessels enough to save it
in: You have the least Reason to spurn at Providence of any one here, that had
only a Hole in the Earth to save your Water, which had not lasted two Days
longer, before we (very happily for you) were thrown on Shore. Is there not a
Providence in being thrown on Land, when you expected Drowning before the
Morning dawned, which happened otherwise? Is there not a Providence in getting
Food, when you expected to starve? Is there not a Providence in getting Fire by
rubbing two Sticks, which you know you could not effect since, though we have all
endeavored at it? Was it not a Providence, that your Boobies remained sweet,
even till the Day that we came here? And was it not a Providence that we were
thrown here, which brought you all Sorts of Provisions, (I mean all that is
necessary) with Flint, and Steel, and other Utensils? And can you then doubt of
a farther Providence, that have had all these? Besides, even Company is some
Allay to Sorrow, you were alone before, and had only your self to talk too. Our
Bark is strong and firm, and by Degrees, I don't doubt but with Time and much
Labor, to get her into the Water again. I have been a Board her this Morning
when you were all asleep, and examined her carefully Inside and Out, and fancy
our Liberty may soon be effected; I only wonder we have never thought before of
clearing the Sand from our Vessel, which once done, I believe we may Launch her
out into deep Water; we have all our Tackling, Sails and Masts entire, without
Damage; I don't despair of the Mercy of God in working our Deliverance, whose
Ways are past the Knowledge of us poor insignificant Mortals. I my self have
more than once been in the same, or worse Condition.

In a Voyage I made twelve Years ago, I suffered Shipwreck, and not one Person
saved but my self: I set out from the City of Cork in Ireland, on Board a Bark
bound for the Baltic, we past the Straits of Elsenor and Helsinburgh, without
meeting any thing material; when one Evening it began to Thunder, Lighten and
Rain prodigiously; the Storm was so violent, that we expected every Moment when
we should be drove on Shore on the Coast of Sweedland, or Norway, and be dashed
to Pieces. The Storm continued so long, that all our Masts came by the Board,
our Vessel sprung a Leak, and the Water gained upon us every Moment; at last it
overpowered us so much, that we left Pumping, as believing it impossible to
save ourselves, and recommended our Souls to the Mercy of the Lord. At last our
Ship sunk downright, and most of our Men with it; but I and two more had the
good Fortune to lay hold of the Mainmast, (that had been cut above Deck, being
it was sprung below, and thrown Overboard to prevent any Danger) which was
tangled in some of the Cordage; but the Ship sinking downright, with the Rope
that was turned to the Mainmast, gave it such a Tug, that pulled it under
Water; but afterward loosing or slipping off by good Fortune, it rose with two
of us again, but the third was never seen after. The other that saved himself
upon the Mast, was the Master, a Man about Sixty Years old, who held pretty
well for about an Hour, but at last through Weakness and Age (recommending his
Soul to God) fell off; but yet called for Help, and I being willing to give,
laid hold of him, which I had no sooner done, but he grasped at me, and laying
fast hold of the Skirt of my Wastcoat, (having never a Coat on) pulled me off
the Mast; but with his Weight and some Struggling I made to save my self, my
Skirt ripped off, and the Master sunk to the Bottom, and I by good Fortune laid
hold of the Riging that hung to the Mast; so once more got on stride it, but
with little Hopes of Life: yet doing my Endeavor to save my self, but with a
Resignation to the Will of Heaven. At last, after being tossed about for two or
three Hours more, the End of the Mast rushed with such Violence against a Rock,
(as I supposed) that with the Shock I was thrown off; but laid hold of some of
the Cordage again, and held fast till it fixed it self in some of the craggy
Cliffs of the Rock.

By this Time the Tempest was very much abated, and the Waves not dashing so
often, nor so fierce, I found that the Mast hung on the craggy Clifts of the
Rock, which I climbed up as fast as I could, least another Wave should dash me
against it, and beat my Brains out. After I had got as high as I could, and out
of Danger of the Waves, I kneeled down and returned Thanks to the Almighty for
my wonderful Deliverance; which was wonderful indeed! For though the Mast beat so
often against the Rock, yet I escaped without being so much as bruised. When I
had poured out the Fullness of my Soul to the All-seeing Power, that had
protected me from such an imminent Danger, I composed my self to sleep, but
with a Calmness wonderful, (even to my self) wonderful in every Circumstance,
that the Almighty Providence should choose me out of thirty poor Souls that
perished in the stormy Deep, for a Monument of his Mercy. I slept, but yet my
Dreams were troubled; I thought in my Sleep, I was cast on Shore upon a Barren
Rock, where there was not a Creature but my self, no Food, nor any Thing to
sustain Nature; which proved too true. I was awaked by something that licked my
Face, which in my Fright I laid hold on, but soon let it go again upon finding
it hairy, which startled me very much; and though it was still dark, I could not
go to sleep again for the Concern I was in, for fear of some devouring Creature
should come and seize me. I listened, and observed the Storm was laid, and the
Dawn approaching, I began to compose my Mind, and to put my Trust in him, that
had hitherto preserved me.

When it came to be light enough to perceive any Object, I rose up and began to
view the Place; when, to my great Surprise, I found it to be only a large Rock,
about half a Mile in Circumference as near as I could guess; but the North Part
so inaccessible, there was no getting to the Top of it: Looking about me, I saw
coming fawning toward me, a large Bitch, which was the Creature had awaked me
by licking my Face. I must confess I was surprised and pleased, and made much
of my new Companion. I hoped from it I should find some humane Creatures; but
searching about and not meeting with any, I was more grieved than before; yet
still I resigned my self to the Will of him that sees all Things, and knew it
was in his Power to fetch me out of Darkness and the Shadow of Death. In
walking up and down in a little Cavity of the Rock, I met with seven young
sucking Puppies, that I found belonged to the Bitch my Companion, for she gave
them suck, which I stayed a little while to observe. Then a Thought came into
my Head, that this might be some resort for Fishermen, and I should very
shortly see some that would take me from this desolate Place.

I began to search about for something to sustain Nature, but could find
nothing but some Perriwinkles, and other little Shellfish, which I ventured to
feed upon, for now I began to be very hungry. I wondered mightily at my poor
Bitch, how she got Food to support her self, and her seven young Ones. I
observed she used to leave me two or three times a Day, but returned in a
quarter of an Hour. One Day I had the Curiosity to watch her, but she went so
fast, that I could not come up to her; but still I followed, and at last came
to the Point of a Rock where she went down, and looking below, saw her feeding
upon a dead Seal; but how it came there I could not suppose, neither could I go
down the Rock to see farther, it being so dangerous a Place: When she had eat
her fill, she came up again, and went to give her young Ones suck. I was
mightily put to it for Water, though there was good Quantities in several
Cavities of the Rock, but so hard to come at, that sometimes I ventured
breaking my Neck to get it; besides, I could not expect that would always last,
for the Sun was pretty warm, though not intolerable. I had in my Pocket a Knife
and Fork and a Case of Lancets, but they were rusted by being wet, and of no
use to me, for I could get nothing to exercise 'em on; indeed my Fork served me
to twist out my Perriwinkles.

I had been here now fifteen Days, and nothing to feed on but these sort of
Shellfish; yet still my Strength and Health continued to a Miracle: I slep'd
well, though my Bed was something hard: It was composed of part of the Rigging
that came on Shore with the Mast, which I had untwisted, and pulled into
Oakham, and laid it under an hollow Part of the Rock, where no Rain or Wind
could hurt me, unless it blew hard South, which when it did, would force a
little into my Bedchamber.

Looking out one Day I saw a Boat coming toward my Rocky Island, the sight
raised my Spirits wonderfully, but observing her narrowly, I found she was only
driving, by the Wind and Tide, without any one in her: However I got down my
Rock, and waited for her coming on Shore, which she did within twenty Yards of
me; I immediately got in her to rumage her, and, suprizing Providence! found
twenty dried Fish, a Salt-Box filled with Biscuit, and about half a Pint of
Brandy in a Bottle. After giving God Thanks with great Sincerity of Soul, I
fell to, and eat heartily. There were two Oars in the Boat, a Boat-Hook, a
small Fisher-Net, and a Tinder-Box, with a Grapling Iron and Rope for a Cable:
Upon this I began to be exceeding easy, and thought my self to be in a happy
Condition: I brought my Fish on Shore, and stowed it in my Bedchamber, and
over it, (for fear of my Bitch,) put several Pieces of Ropes. I had a Tinder
Box, and could strike a Light, but had no Candle to burn nor any Provision to
dress.

After I had settled every Thing as I would have it, I resolved to take my Boat
and go round the Rock, to see if I could discover any Thing on the other side
of the inaccessible Part. Whereupon I took two of my dried Fish, and Half a
Dozen Biskets, and put my self on Board; but my poor Bitch came to the Shore
Side, and took on so mightily, that I went and took her in. I rowed half round,
(as near as I could guess) the first Day; but what made me so long was, that in
some Places, I was obliged to row half a League from Shore, to avoid some
Shallows which lay out toward the North East side. I ventured to lie in my
Boat all Night, and the next Morning went onward in my Voyage, and at last came
to that Part of the Rock that I could not get over when I was a Shore. Here I
found upon the Ground a Nest of Eggs, about the Bigness of a Duck Egg, yet I
could not discover what Fowl owned them; but I took 'em all away, and ventured
to suck one of them, which I found as pleasant as a new laid Hen Egg. Here the
Bitch grew very uneasy, and by her whining and fruitless Endeavors to pass the
Rock, (which was Perpendicular) let me understand she wanted to be with her
Puppies. Finding nothing here for my Benefit, but my Eggs, I got on Board, and
endeavored to go round, which I did, till I came to the Place where the Seal
lay that my Bitch found, but it stunk abominably; yet she fell to, and after
having eat, ran up the Rock, and so (as I suppose,) to her Puppies. I went on
Board again; but there arose such a Fog of a sudden, that I could hardly see
the Length of the Boat, so rather chose to go back again than venture farther
out of my Knowledge, which I did in a little time, the Sea being higher over
the Sand, and arrived at my own Habitation.

I pulled up my Boat as high as I could, and went on Shore, and coming to visit
my young Companions found the weakest dead for want of the Dam, which I
immediately took, cut open and flayed off the Skin, when after being dried, I
made me a Cap of, by cutting it in form, and sewing it together with some fine
Rope Yarn that I twisted on pupose, and my Fork I used instead of a Needle. The
Fat served me to make Candles in this Manner, by pulling to Pieces some Rope
Yarn and twisting it hard; then I struck a Light, and with an Egg-Shell heated
my Fat, and drew the Rope Yarn through it, so I provided my self with a new sort
of Candle. But then I had but a small Piece of Match, and when that should be
gone, I should be at a strange loss how to light my Candle.

Finding my Provision decrease, I came to an Allowance of a Quarter of a Fish a
Day, and Half a Biscuit, and not to touch that if I could get any Shellfish,
which began to be scarce too, for some Days I could not find above Ten or
Twelve, and when I came first there, I used to take 'em up by Handfuls. Upon
this I began to reflect, that Winter was approaching, and consequently very
cold Weather; and then perhaps I should not get any Food; I resolved within my
self to venture in my Boat, and sail which way the Wind should direct me, but
then I was put to it for a Sail, (for we had cut off the Yards and Sails of the
Main Mast, before we threw it over Board) but at last I thought of a White
Dimitty Wastcoat that I wore, which was lined with Linen, this I unript and
sewed together again, so pieced the Lining to the Outsides, and made me a
tolerable Sail. But in the mean time the Wind blew so high, that I durst not
venture out; and continued so long, that my Provision was diminished to two
Fish, which almost put me to my Wits End. Shellfish were not to be had. So at
last I resolved to kill one of my Bitch's Whelps; which I did, made a Fire with
some Boards I found at the Bottom of my Boat, and roasted it; 'twas palatable
and eat wonderfully well, they being not two Months old.

I don't question but you will all laugh at me, when I shall tell you that it
went very much against me to kill this harmless Creature; but my Necessity had
no Law; besides, I had observed but two Days before, that the Seal, which was
the Dam's Food, was gnawed to the Bones. In short, after some Strugglings with
my self, I killed five of the six, and salted two of 'em; for after eating my
Biskets out of the Salt-Box, I found a Handful or two of Salt at the Bottom,
which I made use of in that Manner. The Intrails I boiled, and gave to the Dam
and other Puppy, who eat of it heartily, making no Scruple though their own Flesh
and Blood. The sixth and last Puppy I resolved not to kill at all if I could
help it, it being so like the Dam, and would always be with me if it could,
when the others would only play about the Hole where they lay.

In short, I began to find the Weather cold, and so resolved to set sail in my
Boat, with my two Companions, my Bitch and Puppy; and on the 1st of September,
after being on the Rock from May the 30th, I set sail with the Wind about N. E.
a middling Gale, and steering with my other Oar; for you must know my Boat-Hook
was my Mast, and a piece of slit Wood that I saved from the Fire was my Yard;
so that I could make shift to ply it to Windward upon Occasion, but was
resolved to sail before the Wind till I discovered Land; but my Boat being
pretty large, and my Sail but small, I could not make my Way as I might have
done with a Sail fitted to the Boat, so that I could not discover Land that
Night, but sailed on till about Midnight; then I was so fatigued, that in Spite
of my self, I was obliged to lie along in the Boat, and fell asleep, and slept
till I was awakened by a Fisherman in a Boat, whom I understood not; but found
by his Dialect to be a Dane. I gave him to understand my Condition, by speaking
and Signs together, which he seemed to be sorry for by beating his Breast, and
shaking his Head.

He carried me Ashore to a Village, where they made very much of me, and gave
me Clothes; but I would not stir without my Dogs. My Boat was sold, and the
Money gave me, for my own Use. After I had stayed at the Village three Days, I
was carried to Copenhagen, to Mr. Bridgwater, the Factor for several English
Merchants, who made a Gathering for me which amounted to twenty seven Pounds in
English Money. The King of Denmark sent a Person to me, who understood English
very well, and took down the Particulars of my Voyage in the Danish Language,
that I saw afterward printed there; but no one could ever fix upon the Rock
that I lived on. One said it was such a One, another such a One; and some
conjectured it to be a Part of the Main Land of Sweden, which I should have
found if I had ventured further when hindered by the Fog.

But I forgot to tell you, that by Printing this Account, a Man came to demand
his Boat, that he said he had lost by the Carelessness of a Boy, to whom he had
given it in Charge; who neglecting to fasten it on Shore, it drove out to Sea,
and came where I had the good Fortune to meet with it, or rather guided by the
Eye of Providence, to be the Means or Instrument of saving my Life; which, but
for that, I must have inevitably lost. The Fisherman that owned the Boat, had a
New One given him in the Room on it, and to the Value of five Pounds for the
Things it contained.

The Gentleman that was ordered to take the Notes mentioned above, brought me a
Hundred English Guineas, collected from Merchants and Gentlemen of the City.
The King likewise ordered me a Hundred more from his Privy Purse; so that in
November the 18th, I went on Board an English Ship, called the Happy, Captain
John Gibson Commander. We immediately set sail for London, and arrived at
Debtford, December the 25th, being Christmass-Day, 1688; but finding Things out
of Order in England, I thought it was no Place to settle in. So January the 1st
I took Horse for Bristol, and from thence embarked for Cork, where I had some
small Effects, and happily arrived there, January the 14th; where I was
welcomed from Death, by all my Friends.

But I forgot one Thing which happened to me at Copenhagen. Dining with the
Gentleman that spoke English very well, and several other Danes, I happened to
drink to him in English, with, Sir, My humble Service to you, and asked him if
he would Pledge me: Upon which, he told me, I must never mention Pledging among
Danes; for, added he, it is the greatest Affront you can put upon 'em. How so,
Sir, says I? Why, says he, I know it is your Custom in England, but if you all
knew the Meaning of it, you would surely abolish it. Whereupon, I pressed him
to tell me the Foundation of that Custom, according to his Notion. Why says he,
when the Danes invaded England, and got the Better of the Natives, they used
often to eat and drink together; but still allowing the Danes to be their
Masters: And very often, upon some Pique or Interest, they used even to stab
'em when they were lifting the Cup to their Mouths. Upon the English being
frequently murdered in this Manner, they contrived at last when they were at
Meals, or drinking with the Danes, to say to their next Neighbor, Here Is to
you; upon which, the other cried, I Will pledge you: Which was as much as to say,
he would be his Surety, or Pledge, while the other drank; and accordingly the
other would guard him while he drank. When done, the other would drink; and
then he that drank before, was to stand his Pledge likewise. Nay, it came to be
such a Custom at last, that when one Englishman came into the Company of
several Danes, he would say in taking up his Cup, to his next Neighbor, Will
you Pledge me, with an Emphasis; upon the others answ'ring he would, he might
drink without Fear.

After staying the Winter at Cork, I designed to embark with Captain Clarke, on
Board the Ship Gilliflower, and accordingly we set out from Cork, April the
23d, 1689. for Boston in New England, and so for Virginia; we arrived at Boston
June the 3d, having a quick Passage. After having done our Business there, we
set sail for Virginia. We doubled Cape-Cod without any Danger; but one Night a
Storm rose, that flung us on Shore upon the Main, within six Leagues of
Cape-Charles, where our Men were all saved, but in a poor Condition. Our Ship
lying upon the Sands a Furlong from Shore, fourteen out of twenty of our Men
that could swim, went into the Longboat, and went on Board the Ship, to get
some Necessaries; as soon as they had got what they wanted, they came toward
the Shore again; but the Boat being deeply Laden, could not come nigh enough to
Shore to unload, so that they resolved to go farther to seek for deeper Water,
and bid us follow along the Shore, which we did; but they doubling a Point of
Land, we lost Sight of 'em: However we followed on still, when going over a
little Swamp, we perceived several Indidians in a Wood on our Right Hand.
Whereupon we began to be in a desperate Fright, but still we marched on; when
coming to the Skirt of the Wood, they let fly their Arrows at us, which killed
one of our Companions, and wounded two more, one in the Arm, and the other in
the Side of the Neck; as for my part, I still remained unhurt, but had an Arrow
sticking in the Sleeve of my Watch-coat. After the Indians had fired, they ran
to us with incredible Swiftness, whereupon (having no Weapons) we kneeled down
to 'em, and implored their Mercy. One among 'em spoke English pretty well, who
said, You Englishmen, White-Men, we will kill you to be revenged of your
Brothers at I amestown, who kill us many Indians; we will take you to our
Werowance, (i. e. King,) and he will order us to burn you, where we will drink
your Blood, and feed upon your Flesh. They hurried us along that Night at least
twenty Miles up in the Country, and next Morning brought us to their Village,
where was their Werowance, sick in his Cabin; but hearing of our coming, he
rose up, and with several of his Officers (who are called Cockorooses) came
toward us. After he had examined the Indians (as we suppose) how we were
taken, he ordered a great Fire to be made, and had us all tied to one Stake
fixed in the Earth; but we were no sooner tied, and the Signal given for firing
the Wood about us, but we were untied and brought back to the Tent, to stay, as
we were informed, till the next Day, till more Indians could come to be
Spectators of our Tragedy. They had stripped us Naked, and in my Breeches-Pocket
had found my Box of Instruments, which they examined very narrowly, and asked
which of us it belonged to? When they were informed it was mine, I was
immediately sent for before the Werowance, who asked me by his Interpreter, the
Name and Use of every Instrument, which I informed him: When he came to my
Lancets, and being informed they were to Bleed, he asked in a great Passion, if
I was the Murderer of the Indians that were taken by the English? But when I
let him know it was to let Blood in many Distempers, for Ease for the Body, and
that we were Strangers to those English that killed their Indians, he abated of
his Anger, and asked me if I could show how I let Blood, which I told him I
could, if any one wanted it, and was not well. Whereupon the Werowance said he
was not very well; but he would have me try upon one of my Companions, before
he would let me Bleed him. I told his Interpreter that he should tell him I
would feel his Pulse, that I might know whether 'twas proper to let him Blood
or no; Feel his Pulse! what is that? says the Interpreter, and thought I meant
something else; whereupon I took him by the Hand, and showed him what I meant.
When the Interpreter had satisfied him with what I said, he beckoned me to him,
and held out his Hand, which I felt, and found he was in a high Fever; I told
the Interpreter that he must be let Blood, for his Indisposition was a Fever,
and explained his Distemper, which he finding to agree with his Condition,
seemed to be mightily pleased; but he would have me Bleed some one of my
Companions before him; I pitched upon one that it would not injure, and Bled
him upon the Ground till he had Bled enough, and then tied up his Arm. The
Werowance and the rest of the Indians were amazed to see him Bleed such a
Quantity, and asked me if he must Bleed as much? I told 'em, yes, or rather
more; but that I would have something to save the Blood, because I could make a
better Judgment of the Cause of his Distemper. Whereupon they brought me a
Callibash, which I supposed might hold a Quart; and upon this, I tied up his
Arm, and let him Bleed till I had taken about Sixteen Ounces from him, so tied
up his Arm again. When I had done, he wanted to go into his Hammock to sleep;
but I told him he must not go to rest till Night, which he complied with. The
next Day he was much better, and sent for me again, from the Place where they
had kept us waking all Night, by Singing and Dancing round us; and if any of us
offered to sleep, they would jogg us and hinder us. When I came to him I
unbound his Arm, and he looking at the Orifice, and finding it closed, was more
amazed than before; then he made his Interpreter ask me concerning his Blood,
which was corrupted; and when I told him if I had not Bled him, he would soon
have died, he got up, and made me sit down upon a Mat which lay in his Cabin,
and told me by his Interpreter, if I would stay with him, he would save both me
and my Companions; if we would Fight against the Whites, and Marry Indian
Women, that should be allotted us. I told him I would ask my Companions, who
rejoiced at the Proposals; (and though all married before) yet they made no
Scruple of having another Wife. As for my self, (though not married,) I did not
much care for such a tawny Rib, therefore told the Werowance, none of our
Profession ever married; he being well satisfied with this Answer, spared all
our Lives. For my part I had a House allotted me to my self, that is a Place
about the Height of one Story with us, and covered with the Barks of Trees; the
Fireplace is in the Middle of the House, and all the Chimney is the Door. The
Country is generally pretty even, and agrees very well with an English
Constitution. I need not describe the Climate, being I suppose you all know the
Nature of it as well as I. All the Indians that ever I saw, were well Limbed,
and near Six Foot high.

The Marriages were made the next Day without much Ceremony, they were only
joined by their Priests, without any Question on either Side, and so carried
Home to their several Tents. All the while I was here, they were making
Preparations to go against the English. One Day I was sent for, and ordered to
feel the Pulse of the King; after I had done, he asked me if I could tell any
thing of the Affairs of the English by feeling the Pulse; but I told him, that
was impossible, without I was with 'em in Person: Whereupon, the King asked me
if I would go to the English, and come to him again, and give him a true
Account of 'em, but says he, you must leave your Sagamore, (meaning my Box of
Instruments) behind you. I told him I would make it my Business to inform my
self in every Particular, but that I did not know the Way; he told me I should
have a Canoe and Four Indians that should carry me within a League of the
English. I must confess I went with Joy and Sorrow; with Joy to leave such a
cursed Place, where Death threatened me every Day; with Sorrow to go without my
Companions: We went into our Canoe, which lay about six Miles from the Place
where the King lived, but took no Provisions with us; because my Indians were
to provide for me by catching of Fish, in which they are very dexterous. We
went down the River that the Indians called Kuskarra River, till we came to
Chesapeack-Bay; then we rowed in our Canoe past Russels Islands, and made
toward Cape, or Poynt-Comfort; but coming about a League or thereabouts near
the Island, a Boat came down the River, and upon what Account I cannot tell; but
they fired a Musket, which being heard by the Indians, they immediately jumped
Overboard, and swam back again to Shore. I was not much concerned I must own,
for there was no Danger of their being drowned; for most Indians swim like
Fishes. I took the Paddles and made the best of my Way to Poynt-Comfort, which
I passed, and entered Powhattan River, (being directed by my Indians so to do,)
and directed my Way to Lamestown, where I arrived very late, and was mightily
rejoiced to find my Companions all well in Health, and ready to embark the next
Day for Boston, in a Vessel bound for that Place. After refreshing my self, and
selling my Canoe, I with the rest of the Company set sail the next Day, and
after various Adventures am arrived where you see me.

Now think with your self, Mr. Falconer, whether we need doubt the Providence
of God in helping us from this Island? There Is nothing here like the Hardships
I have undergone, and yet have been happily freed from; and therefore you need
not despair. Despair is the Frenzy of the Mind, and ought to be avoided, by
having a true Notion of the Power we serve. Upon this I happened to smile, but
was mightily checked by Mr. Randal, who asked me with a clouded Countenance,
what I smiled at? I replied his Story might have had the same Effect upon some
old Women, (if it were in Print) that the Sufferings of our Savior had upon a
Person in Years. What mean you by that, said Mr. Randal? Why, Ill tell you, but
I would not have you angry at it, for I really believe every thing you have
said to me. But a Reverend Divine once at Stamford in Lincolnshire, was
preaching a Sermon upon Christ's Passion, where he expatiated on the many
Sufferings, and what our Savior underwent to redeem us Mortals from the Curse
that was laid upon us: An old Woman (one of the Auditors) took the Parson by
the Sleeve as he went out of the Church, and said to him, Indeed, Sir, you have
made a very feeling Sermon, which has moved me very much, and more especially
to ask you a Question, or two. Say on, good Woman, says the Parson. Pray then,
Sir, (says she) how long is it ago since this Matter happened? Almost Seventeen
Hundred Years ago. And how far off? (added the old Gentlewoman.) A great Way
off, some Three or Four Thousand Miles from hence. Alack aday! cried the Woman,
I Am glad on it; Why so, says the Parson? Because (added she) it is so long ago,
and so far off, I hope in God it is not true. As to your own Belief, (Mr.
Falconer, said he,) I leave it to your self; but I don't like jesting with
Sacred Things: The old Woman's Ignorance was Compassion; your Knowledge seems
to be profane. I have known a great many airy young Fellows that have talked
idly on such Things, to make People have an Opinion of their Wit; but yet, I
believe, even in the very Time of their Utterance, their Conscience told 'em,
the very doing what was not pleasing to God or Man. I really took Mr. Randal's
Way of expressing himself very kindly, and as I ought; for there appeared so
much Sincerity and Candor in all that he said, that it would move any one that
had a Sense of Heaven or Humane Nature. Therefore I begged his Pardon, and was
heartily sorry if I had said ought that might any ways offend him; which he
freely forgave. After we had spent the Night in Reflection of what had past;
the next Morning, we (after imploring the Assistance of the Almighty) went to
Work to clear the Sand from our Vessel: which we continued working on, for 16
Days together, resting only on Sunday, which at last we effected. We had thrown
up the Sand on each side, down from our Vessel quite to the Surface of the
Water, when it was lowest. Now the next Thing we had to do, was to get Poles to
put under our Vessel to Launch her out, which we got from the Burton Wood, but
with much difficulty, being we were forced to cut a great many before we could
get them that were fit for our Purpose. After we had done this, we returned God
Thanks for our Success hitherto, and on the Day foling, resolved (God willing)
to thrust off our Vessel into the Water, but was prevented by Mr. Randal's
being taken Ill of a Fever, occasioned (as we suppose) by his great Fatigue in
working to free our Ship from the Sand, wherein he spared no Pains, for to
encourage us as much by his Actions as his Words, even beyond his Strength. The
Concern we were all in upon this, occasioned our delay in not getting our
Vessel out, besides one Hand out of Five, was a weakening our Strength. Mr
Randal never thought of his Instruments, till now, which he wanted to let
himself Blood, but not feeling them about his Clothes, we supposed they might
have been overlooked in the Vessel, so I ran immediately to see if I could find
them; and getting up the Side, my very Weight pulled her down to the Sand;
which had certainly bruised me to Death, if I had not by the Appointment of
divine Providence sunk into the Hollow that we had made by throwing the Sand
from the Ship. I crept out in a great Fright, and ran to my Companions, who
with much ado got her upright, and afterward we fixed some spare Oars on each
side, to keep her up from falling again. For the Pieces of Wood that we had
placed under her were greased to facilitate her sliping into the Water, and we
had dig'd the the Sand so entirely from her, that she rested only on 'em, which
occasioned her leaning to one side with my Weight only, which had not happened,
I believe, if I had endeavored to have got on Board on the other side, which
was highest, but choosing the lowest for my more easy Entrance, was the Cause of
the Accident, that happened to me. When we were entered into the Vessel, and
found our Endeavors to find the Box of Instruments fruitless, we were all
mightily concerned, for we verily believed that bleeding would have cured him;
nay even he himself said, that if he could be let Blood, he was certain his
Fever would abate, and he should be easier; yet to see with what a perfect
Resignation he submitted to the Will of Heaven, it would have inspired one with
a true Knowledge of the Being good Men enjoy after a Dissolution from this
painful Life. He was still worse and worse; but yet so Patient in his
Sufferings, that perfectly amazed us all. He continued in this Manner a whole
Week, without tasting any Thing but Water Gruel ill made, for what little
Oatmeal we had, was sower. When we saw by the Course of Nature, it was
impossible he should last long, we all were very much grieved; as for my own
Part, I could not forbear shedding Tears, for I had taken such an Affection to
him, that almost equaled a Child's Love to a Parent. He seeing me weep, called
me with a faint Voice toward him; and when I was near him, he made me sit down
by him. After several kind Expressions, which made my Tears flow more
plentifully, he said to me, Mr. Falconer, if you grieve for me, dry your Tears,
I desire nothing but your Prayers. I am going to pay a Debt incumbent on me by
Nature, and a Debt that must be paid, which was contracted at my Birth, and
Death will not admit of any Evasion; all Mortals owe the same Acknowledgment,
but some squander away that Substance which should be freely paid when called
for. How happy are they that provide against such a Creditor, that may come at
any Hour of Day or Night, and lawfully demand his due? Here is no Shuffling as
in worldly Matters, no putting off the important Visiter; therefore as we are
sure he will call upon us, it is good to be always provided against the Time.
How happy are honest Minds, when they have provided to satisfy their worldly
Creditors; they then live in a Contentment of Mind, peculiar to an honest
Heart: But what must be said for the last Debt, upon which depends the Welfare
of the Soul, our doing well or ill hereafter, is it not of the utmost
Importance? Therefore as I am endeavoring to pay that Debt, whose utmost Limit
will soon expire, help me by your Prayers to finish what I hope I have well
begun, and as Friend's Advice, prepare to make up your Accounts to Heaven, for
you know not how soon they may be called for; besides you will have one less to
eat of the Provision is left. After this, being tired with speaking so much
together, he turned to rest himself, but his Fever was so violent, he could
take no ease in Body, though tranquil in Mind. So finding we could not expect his
Life, we prayed for a speedy and a painless Release from it. After this we gave
him some Water (which he often begged for in vain) to cool his Mouth. When he
had drank it, he said he found himself a little easier, and the Pain and
Burning something abated, which we took as a lightning before Death, or as the
Spirits collected together to make their last fruitless Efforts.

When he found himself just upon the Point of expiring, he made this short
Prayer, which was so imprinted in my Memory, that I shall never forget it: O
Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth, whose all-seeing Eye looks into the
inmost Corner of the Heart! pardon my Offenses, which I heartily repent of, and
rely upon the infinite Grace of thy wonted Mercy to absolve me of all my past
Crimes, through the Merits of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Then lifting up
his Hands and Eyes to Heaven expired, with the Happiness of continuing in his
right Senses in such a Fever, which is almost always attended with a Frenzy.

After our Sorrow for his Death was something abated, we consulted how to bury
him. Mr. Middleton and Mr. Musgrave were for sewing him in his Hammock and
throwing him into the Sea; But Mr. White and my self were for burying him on
the Land, which they agreed to; so we dig'd the Hole which I designed for my
Well, Seven Foot long and Seven deep, and returned him to Earth from whence he
came. Upon the Bark of the Tree that shaded his Grave, I wrote this Epitaph.

Under this Tree lies the Body of Thomas Randal, Gent. born in the City of
Cork, Anno Domini 1641. who was thrown ashore with Richard White, William
Musgrave, and Ralph Middleton, both of Jamaica, to the Consolation of Richard
Falconer of Bruton in Somersetshire, who was unfortunately cast on Shore before
them on the 18th of of September 1699. yet received from their Conversation a
Mitigation of his own Misfortune. Whose Chance it is ever to read these Lines,
pay a Tear to the Memory of Thomas Randal, and endeavor to make as good an End
as he did, who died a Natural Death on Friday December the 21st 1699, in his
perfect Mind, and a true Notion of the Power of God to pardon all his Faults,
whose Failings were corrected by a sincere Penitence, dying every Day he lived.
This took me up a whole Tree. Mr. Randal made no Will; yet I claimed his Dog,
being the Whelp of the Bitch he found upon the Rock which he was thrown upon in
the Baltic, the Bitch being Dead some Years before. We were forced to tie him
up after we had buried Mr. Randal, for with his Feet he would scrape Holes in
the Grave two Foot deep, and howl prodigiously.

After this we prepared once more to Launch our Vessel; but first we put on
Board what Provision we had left, and all the Things that we took from thence.
Mr. Randal's Death gave me (with the others Permission) a Title to a Bed, which
I wanted before. So that I took up the Cabin which was alloted me, and laid on
Board every Night: And now we bent our Thoughts entirely on our Vessel, and on
Monday the 31st of December launched her out into the Sea, and designed to set
Sail the next Day. After we had fixed her fast with two Anchors, and a Halser
on Shore, we went on Board to Dine and make ourselves Merry, which we did very
heartily, and to add to our Mirth, we made a large Can of Punch, which we never
attempted to do before, being we had but one Bottle of Lime Juice in all, and
was what (indeed) we designed for this Occasion; in short the Punch ran down so
merrily, that we were all in a drunken Condition; but when it was all gone, we
resolved to go to rest: But all I could do, could not persuade 'em to lie on
Board that Night in their Cabins, (yet without a Bed;) but they would venture,
though they were obliged to swim a hundred Yards before they could wade to Shore,
but however they got safe, which I knew by their hollowing and rejoicing.

Having brought my Bed on Board, I went to rest very contentedly, which I did
till next Morning: But oh! Horror! when I had dressed my self, and going on Deck,
to call my Companions to come on Board to Dine, which was intended over Night,
and afterward to go on Shore, and bring our Sails and Yards on Board, and make
to Sea as fast as we could, I could not see any Land, which so overcame me on
the Sudden, that I sunk down on the Deck, without Sense or Motion: How long I
continued so, I cannot tell, but I awaked full of the Sense of my lamentable
Condition, and ten thousand Times (spite of my Resolution to forbear) cursed
my unhappy Stars, that had brought me to that deplorable State. O Wretch that I
am! what will my unhappy Fate do with me, is any one's Condition equal to mine?
(I would cry) But it is a just Punishment, in not rendering to God the Tribute
due for his Mercies, that we had hitherto known. Instead of coming on Board to
be Frolicksome and Merry, we should have given Thanks to him, that gave us the
Blessing of thinking we were no longer subject to such Hardships, that we might
probably have undergone, if we had been detained longer on that Island. If poor
Mr. Randal had remained among us, this Misfortune had not happened. He by his
wise and prudent Care and Conduct, would have prevented this unlucky Accident.
What must my poor Companions think that are left in a more miserable Condition
than my self, if it be possible. I have no Compass, neither am I of my self
capable of ruling the Vessel in a Calm, much less if there should a Storm
happen, which are too frequent in this Climate.

After I had vented my Grief in a Torrent of Words and Tears, I began to think
how the Vessel should have gone to Sea without my Knowledge; and by Remembrance
of the Matter the Night before, found by our Eagerness and fatal Carelessness,
we had forgot to fasten our Cables to the Geers, and pulling up the Halser that
we had fastened to one of the Burton Trees on Shore, perceived that the Force
of the Vessel had pulled the Tree out of the Earth. Then I too late found that
a Hurricane had rose when I was sound asleep, and stupify'd by too much Liquor,
and carried off the Vessel. This Reflection wounded me deeper than before,
which I followed with Curses on that Liquor that steals away our Senses, and
makes worse than Beasts of Humane Creatures.

Now I began to call upon him that hears us in the Time of Trouble, even when
the Wind blows loudest, whose Nod can shake the Frame of Earth from off its
Basis; and with a Heart sincere, and vicious Thoughts corrected, I sent my Soul
in Penitential Words and Tears before his Throne of Mercy, imploring a speedy
Ending of my Life or Troubles; when I began to be something better contented in
my Mind, and thought of sustaining Nature almost spent, with the Fatigue and
Grieving: One great Comfort I had of my Side, which my poor (former) wretched
Companions wanted, that was Provision in Plenty, and fresh Water; so that when
I began to consider coolly, I found I had not that Cause to complain which they
had, who were left on a Barren Island, without any other Provision than that
very same Diet which I was forced to take up with, when first thrown on Shore;
that is, the Boobies, whose Numbers were mightily diminished, before we
designed to leave the Island.

What made me most uneasy, was to think what my Companions could judge of me,
whether they should take it for Design or Chance; but then I stilled that
Thought, by knowing they must needs see that the Tree was forced away with
Violence beyond the Strength of Man. Besides, I had another small Comfort, that
was the Company of my Dog, which lay on Board with me, which I used to talk to
as if he were a rational Creature; and the poor Creature would stand and stare
me in the Face, as if he were sensible of what I said to him. It was a very
handsome Creature, of the Danish Kind; but very good-natured, and would often
go to the Cabin where I lay, which was that of his old Master's, and whine
mightily.

I remained tossed upon the Sea for a Fortnight without discovering Land; for
the Weather continued very calm, but yet so hazy that I could not perceive the
Sun for several Days. One Day searching for some Linen that I had dropped under
the Sacking of my Bed, (for I did not lie in a Hammock) I found an old Glove
with 75 Pieces of Eight in it, which I took and sewed in the Waste-Band of my
Breeches, for fear I should want it some time or other. I made no Scruple of
taking it, for I was well assured it did belong to poor Mr. Randal. Beside I
had heard the other People say, that they were sure he had Money somewhere; and
after his Death we searched for it, but could not find any.

January the 20th I discovered a Sail to Leeward of me, but she bore away so
fast, that there was not any Hope of Succor from her, and I had not any Thing
to distinguish me; and I supposed though I could see them, yet they could not see
me by Reason of my want of Sail, which would have made me the more conspicuous.
The next Day I discovered Land, about six Leagues to the S. W. of me, which I
observed my Vessel did not come nigh, but coasted along Shore; but I was well
assured it was the Province of Jucatan, belonging to the Spaniards, and was the
Place we came from; now all my Fear was that I should fall into their Hands,
who would make me do the Work of a Slave; but even that I thought was better
than to live in continual Fear of Storms and Tempests, or Shipwreck.

I coasted along in this Manner for two or three Days, and at last discovered
Land right ahead, which I was very glad of; but yet mixed with some Fear, in
not knowing what Treatment I should have. I began now to think of some Evasion,
and not to tell 'em the Truth, of belonging to the Logwood Vessel, but resolved
to tell 'em that we were taken by a French Privateer, and after being rumag'd,
were turned off as useless.

January the 30th, I made the Bay and Town of Francisco di Campeche, as it
proved afterward, and was almost upon it before I was met by any Thing of a
Ship, or a Boat; but at last two Canoes came on Board with one Spaniard and six
Indians, who were much surpised when they understood my Condition by speaking
broken French, which the Spaniard understood. They immediately carried me on
Shore, and from thence to the Governor, who was at Dinner; they would have had
me staid till he had dined; but he hearing of me, commanded me to come in,
where he was at Dinner with several Gentlemen, and two Ladies; and though it is
very rare any one sees the Women, yet they did not offer to Veil themselves. I
was ordered to sit down by my self at a little Table placed for that Purpose,
where I had sent me of what composed their Dinner, which was some fresh Fish,
and Fowls, and excellent Wine of several Sorts.

The Chief Town of the Province of Jucatan, lies twelve Leagues from the Sea on
either Side, which is a Bishop's See, and the Resident of the Governor of this
Province. Valladolid is the second City; and Campeche the third; yet though but
the third reckoned, it far exceeds the rest, for Riches and Magnificence. It is
a well situated neat built Town, and by Computation contains near Two Thousand
Houses. It is well fortified both by Art and Nature: By the former in a strong,
well built, neat Castle, that contains a Hundred Brass Cannon, and several
Mortars; and the latter by a Ridge of Hills, that runs all along the Side of
the City. There is in the Castle a very neat Piazza, consisting of about Thirty
high Arches. This Town has the chiefest Trade; for from this Place, the other
Cities and Towns are furnished with all Necessaries that come from the Havana
and other Places in America; and likewise from Old Spain. Yet for all their
Power, Riches and Strength, Capt Parker, an Englishman, with one Ship, and a
small Bark, and whose whole Crew contained but a Hundred and Forty Men, Landed
in the Middle of the Day, and in Spite of all their Forces, which were Two
Hundred Horse, and Five Hundred Foot, took the Place, with the Governor and
several other Persons of Quality; together with a rich Ship laden with Ingots
and several other valuable Ladings, before they knew of the City's being taken.
This Province of Jucatan, contains in Compass Nine Hundred Miles, and is
situated between Eighteen and Twenty Degrees, Northern Latitude. The Air is
very hot, and not altogether so Wholesome as some other Parts of America are.
The Distempers that reign here, are mostly Fluxes and Fevers, which carry off
Abundance of New Comers. This Province was first discovered by Ferdinando
Cortez, among his Conquests of New Spain; and though not altogether so Fruitful,
yet by the Industry of the Inhabitants, it is as Rich as any of the other
Provinces of New Spain; for they are most either Merchants or Tradesmen: And
it is the Vulgar Opinion, that these People are more hard and barbarous than any
other Part of the Spanish West Indies; yet, for my own part, I received more
Civility by 'em, than if I had been among my own Friends in England.

There is a Tradition here among the Inhabitants, that they used a Ceremony
much like our Baptism, and which had in their Language, the Term of
Regeneration, or Second Birth; which they thought to be the Seed or Groundwork
of all good and just Things; and after being initiated, they were certain it
was not in the Power of the Evil Spirit to hurt 'em in Body or Goods: Neither
were they permitted to Marry, without first taking that Order upon 'em, which
they used to distinguish by an Ostriche's Feather, larger and longer than any
other they us*d to wear for Ornaments upon their Heads.

They have another Tradition, that this Province of Jucatan was first
Inhabited, and Cultivated by a White-Bearded People, that came from the East;
after being tossed many Moons upon the Sea, and suffering many Hardships for
Want of Food and Fresh Water, and other Necessaries; yet relieved from Want and
their Enemies, through the Power of the Deity they Worshipped, who even
commanded the Sun to Shine, or not Shine; who made it Rain or dry Weather; who
could heal Sickness, or send Distempers; in short, a God that kept all the
other petty Deities in Awe.

This Story, if true, seems to confirm an old Tradition of our Welsh
Chronicles, that tell us of one Madoc ap Owen, Son to Guineth, a Prince of that
Country, who was drove by some Disgust, from his own Country, with several
Companions, who after various Adventures at Sea, were driven on an unknown Land
to the West, many Hundred Leagues, where they had Communication in a friendly
Manner, with the Indians, and made a Settlement. Whereupon Madoc ap Owen
returned for Britain again, and got to the Number of Two Thousand Men and
Women, besides Children, which mixed with the Natives, and left among 'em
several of their Opinions and Manners; which they retained till the last, when
Cortez subdued 'em; but now, by the Cruelty of the Spaniards, the Natives are
almost extinguished.

After they had feasted me for two or three Days, they sent me about with
several Officers appointed by the Governor, to make a Gathering, which we did
with Success; for in Three Days we had got Seven Hundred and odd Pieces of
Eight: And Two Merchants there, were at the Charge of fitting up my Bark, in
Order to send it for my poor Companions. When it was finished, they gave me
several Necessaries for my self and Companions, to hearten us up; as some
Bottles of fine Wines; Two Bottles of Citron-Water, for a Cordial; Chocolate,
and several other useful Things: But the Difficulty was to get Seamen to go
with me: At last they remembered they had Five Englishmen that were Prisoners
there, and taken in the Bay of Campeche, upon Suspicion of Piracy, but nothing
could be proved against 'em; which they Freed without any Ransom: This did not
look like Barbarity or Ill Nature; for I received as much Humanity among 'em,
as could be expected from any of the most Civilized Nations: But they have a
greater Kindness for the English, than they have for their Neighbors the
French, being the English are more open and generous, (they say) and don't use
Stratagems to deceive 'em, as the French do frequently; though they only pay 'em
in their own Coin, for there is no Nation under the Sun more fruitful than the
Spaniards in Plottings and Ambuscades, (as they call 'em) to deceive their
Enemies; which yet they think lawful.

On February the 15th, 1700. we set sail from Campeche Bay, after paying my
Acknowledgment to the generous Governor, etc. but having nothing to present
him with worth Acceptance, but my Ovid, I gave him that, which he took very
kindly, and said he would prize it mightily, not only in having never a one,
but in Remembrance of me and my Misfortunes.

We plied it to Windward very briskly, and in Fifteen Days discovered the Isles
of the Alcranes; but we durst not go in within the Shoals, because we were all
ignorant of the Channel. So we cast Anchor, and hoisted out our Boat, with Two
Men and my self, and made to Shore, where we found my Three Companions, but in
a miserable Condition, and Mr. Musgrave so faint and weak, that they expected
he could not live long.

When they awaked the next Day, after I was drove off in the Dark, they were
all in Despair, to find the Vessel gone, which they perceived was occasioned by
a Hurricane, that they were assured was violent, because it had blown down
their Tent, though without awaking 'em. But when they began to consider they had
no Food, nor but very little fresh Water, which was left in a Barrel without a
Head in the Tent, their Despair increased; but as no Passion can last long
that is violent, it wore off with their Care for Sustenance, which they
diligently searched for; but not finding any Quantity of Eggs, or Boobies, the
dreadful Fear of Starving came into their Minds, with all its horrid
Attendance. Now they imagined that all that happened to 'em, was, as I had
thought, a Judgment of Divine Providence for the vile Sin of Drunkenness, when
they should have rather implored Heaven's Assistance, in furthering 'em in
their Delivery from the Place where they were.

They had been now Five Days without Eating or Drinking, not for Want of
Stomachs, but Food, which they endeavored to get, but all to no Purpose; for
the Boobies were retired, either out of Fear, or Custom, to some other Place*
Neither could they find one Egg more, and Weakness came so fast upon 'em, with
Hunger and Drought, that they were hardly able to crawl, so they thought of
nothing but dying; when at last they remembered the Body of good Mr. Randal,
that had been buried a Week, which they dug up, without being putrified; and
that poor Wretch that helped to support our Misfortunes when alive with his
sage Advice, now was a Means of preserving their Lives, tho dead. They had by
good Fortune left 'em a Tinder-Box in the Tent, (we having two) with which they
struck a Light, and made a Fire, then cut off several pieces of Flesh of the
Brawn of his Arms and Thighs, broiled 'em on the Coals, though with a great deal
of Reluctance; which was the Means of keeping Life and Soul together, till we
came to relieve 'em from that deplorable Condition. Mr. Musgrave we brought to
a little Life and Strength, by giving him some Citron-Water in small
Quantities. When I saw the Carcass of my poor good Monitor lie for Food for
Humane Creatures, my Horror at the Sight overcame my Reason, and I believe I
said Things shocking enough; however when I had calmly considered their
Condition, I was very sorry for what I had said, and begged their Pardon. After
we had refreshed our selves, we once more laid him in the Earth, having sewed
his poor Bones in one of the Hammocks.

I must confess, I never think of that good Man, but Tears come into my Eyes,
and Melancholy clouds all my Thoughts: For he was one whose Character came up
to all we could desire in frail Men. Honest, without Interest; Friendly,
without Design; Religious, attended with Reason, and not swadled up so tite as
to make it deformed: Pleasant in Conversation, Courteous to All, Hating nothing
but Vice: Gentle in Reproving; Bold in All Dangers, in being armed with an
Innocence that inspired him with Success; in short, he was a Miracle of a Man,
when we consider his Life had been always at Sea, among a Crew prone to all
manner of Vices, and where it was not possible to find a Pattern to follow of
any Goodness.

He was a single Man, or rather indeed, a Bachelor; for he had often told me,
he could not bear to Marry a Woman, to put her into Frights and Fears when the
Wind blew hard, as every good Wife must certainly be concerned for the Danger
of her Husband. Besides, as it was his Fortune to lead a Seafaring Life, he
could not think of Marrying, to be absent from his other self so long; (as he
termed it) not but if he had had a sufficient Competency, he said, he believed
he should have entered into the Marriage State in the latter Part of Life, that
he might have settled his Mind; and free from the Hazard and Turmoils of the
Sea, slipped into his Shroud with Content, among his Friends and Acquaintance at
Home.

He was an excellent Sailor, and knew most Parts of the World perfectly well;
understood French and Spanish, and seemed to have a pretty good Knowledge in
the Latin Tongue. His Journals were mostly taken in Shorthand. But he had one
small Manuscript, containing about Twenty Leaves, Spanish on one Side, and
English on the other, all in his own Hand; which I suppose he had Translated
for his Diversion, or to pass away his Leisure Hours. It was a Treatise of
Herbs and Flowers, with other Rarities, to be found in the West Indies: Which
being but short, I shall give my Readers at the latter End of this Piece. On
the Flat of his Book, he had writ in a large Hand these Words. This Manuscript
in Spanish, I have Transcribed from the Original of the Reverend Father Pedero
di Riberia, of the Order of Jesus, when I was Pilot in Mexico. The Translation
I have made at my Leisure Hours; and the Cures by the Simples, etc. mentioned
in the said Book, I have been an Eyewitness to many of, and some were
practiced on my self. But more of this hereafter.

We now were got on Board once again, in order to sail as soon as the Wind
would rise, it being stark Calm, and continued so two Days; but at last it blew
a little, and we weighed Anchor, and stood out to Sea; but made but little Way.
I now was Master, or Captain of a Ship, and began to take upon me; we were in
all Nine Men, all English; that is, My self first, Richard White, W. Musgrave,
and Ralph Middleton, my old Companions: John Stone, W. Keater, Francis Hood, W.
Warren, and Joseph Meadows, (All of England) the Five Men given me by Don
Antonio; who, as I said before, were taken on Suspicion of Pyracy. Whereupon a
Thought came into my Head, that had escaped me before: I considered if these
were really Pirates, being Five to Four, they might be too powerful for us, and
perhaps murder us. Franc Hood we had made our Cook, to dress our Provision,
which he understood a little. One Day we All Dined together upon Deck, under
our Awning, it being very calm Weather; an Awning is only a Sail fixed at the
Quarter Deck, and carried over the Booms (that is, spare Masts that lie along
from Quarter to Forecastle) to the Forecastle, to keep the Sun from our Heads:
in Men of War, and great Ships, they have one made of several Kinds of handsome
Stuff, for the Officers on the Quarter Deck; besides another on the Main Deck,
for the Common Sailors. One Day, as I said before, being at Dinner, for we All
eat together; I asked the five Men, what was the Reason they were taken by the
Spaniards for Pirates? Upon this they seemed nonplus'd, but Warren soon
recovered himself, as well as the rest, and spoke for the others, in this
Manner: We embarked on Board the Ship Bonaventure, in the Thames, bound for
Jamaica, where we made a prosperous Voyage; but after taking in our Lading in
our Way Home, we were overtaken by a Storm, in which our Ship was lost, and all
the Men perished, but my self and Four Companions; who were saved in the
Longboat: But the Reason we were taken for Pirates was, that making to Shore
to save our selves, we saw a Bark riding at Anchor, without the Port of
Campeche, which we made to, in order to enquire whereabouts we were, and to beg
some Provisions, our own being gone, and entering the Vessel, found but two
People in it; the third, jumping into the Water, swam on Shore, and brought
three Boats filled with Spanish Soldiers, which entered the Vessel before we
could make off. Make off! said I, what did you design to run away with the
Vessel? No; answered Warren, with some Confusion, but we did design to weigh
Anchor, and go farther in Shore, that we might land in the Morning, it being
late at Night; but we were prevented by their coming on Board us, where we were
found, being armed, which we had taken Care of, when we went into our Boat, to
defend ourselves, if we were obliged to land among the Savages: And indeed they
had their Arms restored 'em, when they were freed and sent on Board with me.

I must confess, I did not like the Fellow's being nonplus'd now and then, in
not knowing what to say; but upon Consideration, thought it might be for Want
of Words to express himself better, which is the Occasion very often of People
of common Understanding Stammering, and Humming, and Hawing, to put their Words
in better Order; so for that Time I took no more Notice, not weighing it in my
Mind. But in the Evening Mr. Middleton came to me, with a Face of Concern, and
told me he did not like these Fellows Tale. Why so? says I. Because I observe
they herd together, answered he, and are always whispering and speaking low to
one another. Oh! says I, there cannot be any Danger in 'em; for if they had any
Inclination to run away with our Vessel, they might have done it when they were
five to one, before we took you in. I know not, replied Middleton, I have a
Heart forebodes something. Pshaw, old Women's Fears; (said I) for, as I said
before, they would have don't when they had more Power; before I landed on
Despair Island, (as I called it) if they had any such Intentions. There is a
Providence that rules over all our Actions, (answered Middleton) that we can no
more see into, than the Book of Fate; but if a foreboding Heart may speak, I am
sure something we shall suffer from these Fellows, that will be of Danger to
us. If so, replied I, there is no resisting the Will of Providence; for what
will come, will come, and there is no Fending against it: But, added he, this
seems something like Fore*knowledge; and to resist against that, seems like
struggling against the Will of Heaven; that warns us by these Forebodings to
prevent these Accidents of Life. I believe God, pursued he, has fixed a Period
to our Breath; but Accidents that happen in this Pilgrimage of Life, may be
avoided by a timely Notice: As we are all Partakers of free Will, and from
that, form our own Happiness, or Misery, it cannot be said but that the Actions
of Life may be regulated by that free Will. Our Maker never formed a Villain!
neither does their external Parts differ from a virtuous Man's; if they did,
they were to be easily avoided: But as an old Poet says, There Is no Art to find
the Mind's Construction in the Face.

Upon this Discourse, I began to stagger in my Opinion of their Honesty, and
therefore we resolved to stand upon our Guard. We took no Notice of our
Conference then to our two other Companions, but resolved to stay till Night,
we having a better Opportunity, being we lay together in the Cabin Aft; (which
is as much as to say, in the Stern, or behind) when we were to go to Supper, we
called one another to come, but five of the Sailors excused themselves, by
saying they had Dined so lately, that they had no Stomach as yet; whereupon we
had an Opportunity sooner to converse together than we designed. For being at
Supper, we opened the Matter to our other two Companions, and they agreed
immediately that we were in some Danger; so we resolved in the middle Watch of
the Night, to seize 'em in their Sleep. We were to have the first Watch, which
we set at Eight of the Clock; then they were to Watch till Twelve; and then in
their third Watch, between One and Two, we had concluded to seize upon 'em as
they slept; that is, Four of 'em, for One of them watched with us, which was
Franck Hood, the Cook; whom we agreed to seize and bind fast, toward the
latter End of the Watch, and to threaten him with Death if he offered to make
the least Noise.

As soon as ever our first Watch was set, we sent Mr. Musgrave to prepare our
Arms; in about a Half an Hour, or thereabouts Warren, called to Hood upon Deck,
(they lying below) to get him a little Water, for he was bloody dry, he said:
Whereupon the other went down immediately with some Water in a Can to him. As
soon as he was gone down, I had the Curiosity to draw as near the Scuttle as I
could to hear the Discourse. Now, you must know, Hood, our Cook, had been
employed that Day about searching our Provisions, our Beef Casks, and Pork, to
see what Quantity we had, that we might know how long it would last; so that
the others had not an Opportunity to disclose the Design to him. As soon as he
was got down, I could hear Will Warren say to him G -- d D -- n ye, Franck, we
had like to have been smoked to Day; and though we had contrived the Story that
I told 'em, yet I was a little surpised at their asking me, because then I did
not expect it; but we design to be even with 'em in a very little Time: For,
hark ye, says he, and spoke so low that I could not hear him; upon which, the
other said there is no Difficulty in the Matter; but we need not be in such
Haste, for you know, as we ply it to Windward, a Day or two can break no
Squares, and we can soon (after the Effecting our Design) bear down to Leeward
to our Comrades that we left on Shore; for I fancy, added he, that they have
some small Suspicion of you now, (which in Time will sleep) and may be on their
Guard; therefore it is better to wait a Day or two: No, G -- d Z -- ds, we'll do
it too Night, when they are asleep, replied Warren; whereupon there were many
Arguments, Pro and Con; (as I fancied) but they spoke so low, that I could only
hear a G -- d D -- n ye, now and then, and something of that Kind.

A little while after, Hood came up again, and after walking up and down, and
fixing his Eyes often upon me, who in the mean Time was provided with a Couple
of Pistols under my Watch-Coat, and indeed were their own, that we hung up
ready charged in our Cabin; which was one Reason of their Design to seize on
us in our Sleep, being they had no Arms till they could seize on 'em where they
hung; or else, they were such desperate Fellows, they would have don't in the
open Day. Hood, as I said before, seemed to fix his Eyes frequently upon me,
for till now I never watched in the Night; at last, said he very softly, if you
please, Mr. Falconer, I have a Word or two to say to you, that much concerns
you All. What is it? says I. Why, answered He, I would have the rest of your
Companions, Ear Witnesses too; with that I called 'em together; but, says he,
let us retire as far from the Scuttle as we can, that we may not be heard by any
below Deck; so we went into the Cabin, and opened the Scuttle above, that Mr.
Musgrave, who steered, might hear what was said. When we were sat down upon the
Floor, Mr. Hood began as follows. My four Companions below have a wicked Design
upon you; that is, to seize you, and put you into the Boat, and run away with
your Vessel: But I thinking it an inhuman Action, not only to any one, but to
you in particular, that have been the Means of their Freedom; therefore, I
hope, appointed by Providence, I come to let you know it, that we may think of
some Means to prevent it. Upon this, (finding his Sincerity,) I told him that
we were provided against it already; and with the Consent of my Companions,
told him our Design of seizing 'em in the third Watch; but, says he, they
intend to put their Project in Practice, their next Watch; therefore I think
'twill be more proper for us to Counter-plot 'em, and seize 'em this; but as
they have no Arms, says I, and we have, we need not fear 'em.

We had several Debates about this, which took up too much Time to our Sorrow.
For Warren mistrusting Hood, it seems, got up and listened, and when he found
that we retired all of us to the Cabin, he got upon Deck, and stealing softly,
came so close, that he overheard every thing we said, which as soon as he
understood, he went immediately to his Companions, who waited impatiently, (as
they told us afterward) and let 'em know all our Discourse; whereupon, without
pausing, they resolved to seize us immediately, in the Midst of our
Consultation; which was no sooner resolved upon, but done: For we were
immediately surpised with their seizing us, which they did with that
Quickness, and so unperceivably, that we were all confounded and amazed; they
had whipped off two Pistols in our Consternation, which they clapped to our
Breasts. In this Confusion, I had forgot mine that were at my Girdle, (or else
we might have been hard enough for 'em;) neither did I remember 'em till they
found 'em about me. They had shut the Cabin Door on the Inside, till they had
bound us, and never minded Mr. Musgrave knocking and making a Noise, till they
had secured us. Which done, they opened the Door, and seized him, who came to
know what the Matter was, for we had no Candle in the Cabin, and he hearing a
Noise amongst us, thought we were seizing Hood, and called to us to forbear,
(as he said afterward) and make Haste, for he was going to tack about, though we
did not hear him; on which he clapped the Helm a Lee, and came down to fetch us
out, to haul off the Sheets, etc. and was seized, and bound with us; for they
left us immediately, being the Sails fluttered in the Wind, by Reason she was
veering round, when the Helm was a Lee.

After they had fixed the Vessel, and it was broad Day, they came and unbound
our Legs, and gave us Leave to walk upon Deck; whereupon I began to expostulate
with 'em, particularly Mr. Warren, being he seemed to have a sort of Command
over the others. Pray, says I to him, for what Reason have you seized upon us,
and bound us in this Manner? Have we done you any Injury? Why, says he,
Self-preservation; I found you were a going to do the like by us, therefore you
are but served in your Kind. And what do you design to do with us, now you have
your Desire? Do with you! why, by and by we design to put you in the Boat, and
turn you a-drift; but for that Son of a B -- h, Hood, we'll murder him without
Mercy; a Dog, to betray us! How, betray you! replied I? Yes! for I overheard
All; then related the Manner of it as mentioned above. But as you have not so
much injured us, we'll put you immediately in the Boat, with a Week's
Provisions, and a small Sail, and you shall seek your Fortune, as I suppose you
would have done by us. No, answered I, we only designed to confine you till we
came to Jamaica, and there to have given you your Liberty to go where you had
thought fit. Ay, ay, says Warren, shaking his Head, this is easily said, nor
are we bound to believe you. Why, it is plain, said I, that our consulting to
seize you, was but to prevent what has happened. We are not to enquire into the
Matter, answered Warren, and now we have you in our Power, we'll do as we think
fit. Why then* says I, put us ashore at any Land that belongs to the English,
and we shall think you have not done us any Injury. No, says he, we must go to
meet our Captain and Fifty Men upon the Main Land of Jucatan, where our Vessel
was stranded not to be gotten off. Our first Design when we were taken in our
Boat, was to get us a Vessel to go a Buccaneering, which we had done at
Campeche, if it had not been for the Indian that swam a Shore unknown to us,
and brought Succors too soon; which we could not avoid, the Sea Breeze blowing
very strong all Night; so we seeing our Danger, were forced to form the Lie we
told the Governor, which had some Appearance of Truth, for we did not use any
Violence to the two old Spaniards, being by good Words we thought to make 'em
assisting to work our Bark back again to our Men. Now, pursued he, if you will
all resolve to go a Buccaneering with us, we'll venture to carry you to our
Captain and Men; if not, we'll do as we have proposed. We looking one upon
another, as if it were to know each other's Resolutions; he cried, nay, if you
pause, you shall not have that Grace, if you desire it: Therefore prepare every
Thing, pursued he, to one of his Companions, that they may be going, they will not
be long before they come to their Journey's End.

When they had got every Thing ready, that is to say, a Barrel of Biscuit,
another of Water, about half a Dozen Pieces of Beef, and as much Pork, a small
Kettle, and a Tinder-Box; we were better provided than we expected, by much.
Besides, they granted us Four Cutlasses, and a Fowling-Piece, with about Four
Pound of Powder, and a sufficient Quantity of Shot; together with all poor Mr.
Randal's Journals, after their perusing 'em, and finding 'em of no Use to them:
When this was done, he ordered 'em to tie Hood to the Mast of the Vessel, and
was charging a Pistol to shoot him through* the Head, not considering it was
charged before, for it was one of them I had at my Girdle, and which they took
from me; but in his Eagerness and Heat of Passion did not mind it. We all
entreated for the poor Fellow, and he himself fell upon his Knees, and begged
with all the Eloquence he had, to spare him, and let him go with us; but Warren
swore bitterly, nothing should save him. Says I, Mr. Warren, if you believe
there is a Power that formed this Globe, and sees every Action of Mankind,
think what a Crime you commit by wounding of him, by murdering his Image: But
if you're an Atheist, and believe in no Power Supernatural, yet consider what a
Conquest you will have gained over your self by overcoming this headstrong
Passion. It may be your own Case another Time; and Murder you know is punished
with Death. What the Devil have we got here, a preaching Puppy? Why, do think
that I mind thy ridiculous Cant! prithee mind thy own Business, and get thee
gone, or perhaps I may begin with you, and send you to the Devil before your
Time. With that, he cocked his Pistol, and levelled it at Hood; but firing, it
split into several Pieces, and one struck Warren into the Skull so deep, that
he was breathing his last upon Deck; one of the Bullets grazed upon the Side of
my Temple, and did but just break the Skin; as for Hood, he was not hurt; but
with the Fright and Noise of the Pistol, (as we supposed) labored with such an
Agony of Spirit, that he broke the Cords that tied him by the Arms, though as
thick as a Middle Finger, and fell down; but rose immediately, and not finding
himself hurt, ran to us, and unbound our Arms, not perceived by the other two,
who were busy about unfortunate Warren; and though they were called to by him
that steered, (who ran immediately to prevent it) yet they did not mind it,
they were so concerned about Warren. And before he that steered came, Hood had
unbound me, and stopped the Fellow (Meadows) by giving him a Blow with his Fist
that knocked him down. In the mean Time, I had unbound White, Musgrave and
Middleton; and we went and seized upon the other two Pirates, for now we called
'em nothing else. After we had bound 'em in our Turn, we went to see what
Assistance could be given to Warren, where we found that a Piece of the Barrel
of the Pistol had sunk into his Skull, and that he was just expiring; but yet,
he sat upon his Breech with great Resolution; says he, I see you have
overpowered us, and I likewise see the Hand of Heaven is in it. I now with
Horror find (added he) that what you intimated to me about Heaven, to be true;
I see it more in this one Accident, than in all the Preachings of the Fathers.
I was bred a Roman, had good Honest Parents, Romans, whose Steps, if I had
followed, would have made my Conscience easy to me at this Time; but I forsook
all Religion in general, and now too late, I find, that to dally with Heaven is
fooling ones self; but yet, in this one Moment of my Life, that is left, I
heartily repent of all my past Crimes, and rely upon the Savior of the World,
that died for our Sins, to pardon mine. With that, he crossed himself, and
expired.

I must confess, I was very sorry for the unhappy Accident of his Death; but
yet, glad that we were at Liberty; and was something easy that the poor Soul
repented before his Expiration; not doubting but the piercing Eye of
Providence, saw that if he had survived, he would have lived a good Christian.
And sure the Almighty's infinite Stock of Bounty, has enough Mercy to save the
repenting Soul, though late before his Repentance comes.

After we had secured our Tartars, we threw Mr. Warren Overboard, and bore up
to the Wind; for after our first tacking about in the Morning, when the Bustle
happened, they bore away with Tack at Cat-head, as being for their Purpose. The
three Men that were left, desired us to let 'em have the Boat, and go seek
their Companions; which we refused, as not having Hands enough to carry our
Vessel to Jamaica. But we promised 'em, if they would freely work in the
Voyage, they should have their entire Liberty to go where they thought fit,
without any Complaints against them. Upon this, we began to be a little
sociable as before, and they all declared, that what they did was by the
Instigation of Warren.

The next Day we discovered a Ship to Windward of us, that bore down upon us
with crowded Sails. We filled all the Sails we had, and endeavored to get away
from her as fast as we could, but all to no Purpose; we saw they gained upon us
every Moment, and therefore seeing it was not possible for us to escape, we
backed our Sails and laid by for 'em, that they might be more civil if they
were Enemies. As soon as ever they came up with us, they hailed us, and ordered
us to come on Board, which we durst not deny; when Mr. Musgrave and I, with
Hood and White for Rowers, went on Board 'em. We found by Hood's knowing 'em,
that they were his Captain and Comrades. Now, as Hood said, we did not know how
we should behave our selves, or what we should say about Warren; but we only
told the Captain how we met with his Men, and that they were redeemed upon my
Account. He never asked particularly for Warren, but how they All did; but when
they sent on Board to search our Vessel, they soon came to the Truth on it; for
the other three told 'em the Story, though not with aggravating Circumstances:
Upon which, poor Hood was tied to their Mainmast, lashed with a Cat of
Nine-Tails most abominably; and after that pickled in Brine, which was more
Pain than the Whipping; but it kept his Back from festering, which it might
otherwise have done; because they flea the Skin off at every Stroke, and to
prevent it, they wash it with Brine; which is called Whipping and Pickeling.
After this they would not keep him among 'em; but sent for the other three Men
from our Vessel, and ordered us all on Board, with another of their Men that
was ill of a dangerous Fever, which they feared might prove infectious. They
did not take any Thing from us, as we expected at first, only gave us this sick
Man to look after, which we were very well contented with. So we parted with
'em very well satisfied, but much better when we were out of Sight, fearing
they had forgot themselves, and would send for us back, and take our Provision
from us, or one Mischief or another; for Pirates do not often use to be so
courteous.

Our sick Man mended apace, for we took great Care of him, and by keeping him
low, only with Water Gruel, his Fever left him; when I began to keep up his
Spirits with my Cordials that I had by me, and in a Week's Time he was pretty
hoddy, (as we call it at Sea). Now we began to converse with him, and he seemed
to be a sensible goodhumour'd Fellow.

Among other Discourse, we asked him how Captain M -- ll and his Crew got a
Ship? Says he, I can only tell the Story as I heard it; (for I was sick on
Shore) which is as follows:

Sixteen of our Men got a Paragua from the Indians, who hate the Spaniards,
though under their Subjection, and love the French and English very well; these
set out to seize upon the first Ship that they thought they could compass; when
after being five Days Cruising along Shore, they spied a large Ship weathering
Cape Catoch; but believing it to be too strong for 'em, they resolved to work
by Stratagem, thus: Twelve Men laid down in the Boat, as if very faint and
weak, and made a Signal to the Ship, as if in Distress, who very charitably
brought too; now they had no Arms with 'em, for when they resolved to use this
Stratagem, they left 'em Ashore, as making the Pretense more feasible; so that
when they arrived at the Ship, they all went feebly up, as if not able to
stand; nay, some were obliged to be led, forsooth, to color the Matter the
better. They then told 'em that their Ship was cast away upon Logerhead's Key,
about three Leagues from Cape Catoch, and saving themselves in their Boats,
they got safe into the Cape; but that wandering up in the Country, they were
met by the Indians, who used 'em barbarously, killing Eleven of their Number;
and would have served the rest so, if they had not made their Escape in that
Paragua; that they were so harrass'd for want of Food, having been without
eating two Days, that they feared some of their Companions would never recover.

The poor Spaniards swallowed the Bait, and their Captain being a very good
Man, resolved to relieve 'em, and asked 'em what they would have him to do for
'em? They begged him to land 'em on the first English Colony, or Island in their
Way. He answered, he was bound for St. Domingo in Hispaniola; but that he would
put in at Jamaica, though something out of his Way; yet, says he, I don't care
for going to any of the noted Ports, because there is a War talked of between
England and Spain, and though it was not proclaimed they might meet with some
Trouble. They were mightily obliged to him, they said, but they did not know
how to return the Obligation, but by praying for him and his.

They sailed very lovingly with 'em for three or four Days, till at last
Fortune gave them an Opportunity to put their Enterprise in Execution. They had
Notice that the Ship leak'd mightily, and that the Water came into the
Bread-Room; upon which, the Spaniards went down to remove the Bread to get at
the Leak, and did not leave more than five Men and the Captain above, whom they
instantly seized, and clapped down the Hatches upon the rest. When they had
secured them, they armed themselves with Pistols and Lances, which were placed
in the Steerage of the Ship, and so capitulated with 'em; but first, they
steered their Course back again, that they might not lose any Time. As they
came up, one by one, they bound them, till they were all so, but the Captain
and the Pilot: The Captain they confined to his Cabin, with a Centry to guard
him; but they let the Pilot go loose, that he might steer the Ship. O inhuman!
cried I! thus the Snake in the friendly Bosom warmed, turns and stings his kind
Protector: Thus was their generous Host (if I may call him so) betrayed by his
too much good Nature.

After they had brought the Ship safe to us, we embarked, and put the Spaniards
on Shore without a Morsel to help themselves; nay, if the Indians could
conveniently meet with 'em, they would not leave one alive. I must confess,
pursued the Man, that the barbarous Story shocked my very Nature, and made me
hate their Society; and I really believe the Abhorrence of this cursed Action
brought my Distemper upon me.

How much are some Beasts Acknowledgments of Kindness more than Man? A poor
Cur, fed but with a Crust a Day, will follow still the bounteous Hand that
gives it. Ingratitude is the Fountain of all other Crimes, for from thence flow
all the rest. But all the Knowledge some Men are endowed with, is but to find
the best Way to deceive. How happy it would be, if such Creatures could shake
off their Humanity, and become Beasts in Form as well as Mind; then we should
have a Mark to shun 'em by. Our Creator has formed all Kind of Beasts in Shapes
that tell us what they are: But Men differ in their Natures more than Beasts,
or are indeed under their Human Form, the very Natures of the Brute Creation.
How many Villains, under a smooth Face and Tongue, betray their Brothers? The
Father cheats the Son, the Son the Father, Mothers squander the Dowry of their
Daughters, and then prostitute 'em to gain 'em Bread; which is not Gain but
Punishment: But Ingratitude, like Murder, meets with its Punishment on Earth,
as well as in the other World; and an ungrateful Man should have a Mark that
all Human Society may shun him. I think the Lacedaemonians used to punish
Ingratitude with Death, as a Crime equal to Sacrilege or Parricide.

After having taken all their Men on Board, (and leaving Directions on a Bark
of a Tree, for the five Men that were gone upon the same Design another Way;)
we set sail, and had not been out two Days before we met with you. Pray, says
I, how came you among 'em, if you liked not their Design? Why, Sir, answered he
by Accident; Embarking from Bermudas, bound for St. Catherines, or the Isle of
Providence, we were met by this Pyrate in a Ship of twenty Guns, and a hundred
and twenty Men, who took us, and rumaging us, threatened to turn us a-drift
without Provision, if we would not embrace his Designs, which was Pyracy. We,
rather than undergo what he threatened us withal, consented with our Tongues;
but our Inclinations were far from it. And from our first being with him, we
were ploting to make our Escape the next Opportunity. But the other four (being
but five in all in our Vessel) were unfortunately killed in that Engagement,
where they lost their Ship. What Ship was it they fought with? Why, Sir, a Man
of War of twenty six Guns, sent out on Purpose to take her; for the Captain had
committed such Disorders wherever he came, that he obliged the Governor of
Jamaica, to send out the Ship called the Experiment, to cruise till she met
with him; which she did about five Weeks ago. Our Captain, as soon as he saw
her, guessed at her Design, and resolved to fight her to the last; well knowing
if he could take or sink her, he might be pretty secure to range where he
pleased, there being never another Ship of War nearer than Barbados; who never
came so far West. After he had made a Speech to his Men to encourage them to
fight it out, and told 'em their Advantage, they consented to hoist the Bloody
Flag, and neither to give or take Quarter. As soon as ever the Man of War saw
our Bloody Flag out, they hoisted theirs, and there ensued a dreadful Fight. We
began about two a-Clock, and fought till dark Night, without perceiving any
Advantage on either Side; and then by Consent lay by till Morning without
fighting; which we did so nigh, it being calm, that we could talk to one
another; but we did it only in threatening Language. As soon as the Morning
dawned, we went to it again, with more Fury than before, for our People fought
like desperate Madmen, well knowing if they should be taken, they must all die.
The other Ship fought with a Bravery uncommon; but I believe the Advantage was
on our Side, though we had killed on Board us thirty six Men.

We fought on till Noon, when we discovered a Ship about three Leagues to
Windward of us, which bore down upon us with all the Sail they could. We soon
conjectured, they could be no Friends to us, so without much Consultation, we
resolved to run it before the Wind, with all the Sail we could make; as for the
Experiment we fought with, we had put it out of their Power to follow us, being
we had shot their Mainmast by the Board, so that if the other overtook us we
should have but one to deal with. We by good Fortune had all our Masts firm,
and we out-sail'd the other Vessel; but as soon as she came up with the
Experiment, (who never offered to follow us) she laid by, as we suppose to
assist her, and we observed through our Telescopes that she had Spanish Colors
out.

We soon lost Sight of 'em, and then we designed to change our Course, but were
prevented by the Men discovering two Foot Water in the Hold; who could not find
out the Leak, though they searched with all the Diligence they could. So we were
obliged to Pump, but all that we could do, the Water still gained upon us, we
resolved to bear away to Jucatan, a Province belonging to the Spaniards, and
seek out some convenient Place unfrequented by them, where we might find out
our Leak, and stop it.

Notwithstanding our Labor in Pumping, the Water gained upon us; so we put out
our Longboat, and our Pinnace, in order to put in our Provision; which by
Morning we effected, and very happily for us; for it was agreed upon all Hands,
the Ship could not swim above Eight Hours; and though we discovered Land, and
were not above six Leagues off Shore, yet we were afraid we could not reach it,
being the Ship was so heavy with Water. So all that could not swim were ordered
into the two Boats, with their Arms; which held in 'em thirty seven Men with
Officers. They that were left on Board, had Orders to Pump as long as they
could, and run directly into Shore to the Leeward of Cape Catoch; but within
half a League off the Place the Ship sunk, and the Men betook themselves to
swiming, which we met with our Pinnace, and took up.

I cannot omit one barbarous Action of the Captain's. There was five Men
wounded, who begged to be taken into the Boat, but the Captain refused 'em; and
this was his Reason, as he gave to us in the Boat. Says he, those five that are
wounded, will take up too much Room, being they cannot sit as we do, but must
lie along; and another Thing is, they will take more Time in looking after,
than we can well spare. Besides, as I believe they will not recover, they will be
the sooner out of their Pain; and if they should recover, added he, they would
help us to devour our Provision, which we must take particular Care of, for we
know not when we shall get more. I must confess, this Usage struck me to the
Heart almost, especially as to one of 'em, who seemed to have a Sense of his
Condition, and repented of all his past Crimes.

After we were on Shore, we found that we had killed on Board us forty three
Men, besides the five that our Captain barbarously murdered, by leaving 'em in
the Ship when she sunk. Two of their Bodies were drove on Shore the next Day,
but were ordered by the Captain to have Stones tied to their Feet, and carried
off Shore and sunk. As soon as we had made us two Tents with Sails that were
put in the Boat for that Purpose, they began to consult in what Manner they
should get a Ship; when one Warren proposed to take the Boat, and four Men
beside himself, with Arms, and a Week's Provision, for he would not have any
more, and go to the Bay of Campeache, or Campeche Town, where he did not fear
getting a Vessel for their Purpose; being he said he had done so upon the like
Occasion before. Whereupon the Boat and four Men were ordered for him; but he
staying longer than the appointed Time, they thought some Mischance had
happened to him, so took off their Thoughts of having any Vessel from him. One
Day they spied a large Paragua coming toward Shore with Nine Indians, and two
Spaniards in it, and finding it come so near, that they must of Course see 'em,
they immediately resolved either to take or kill 'em all, for fear they should
discover 'em to the Spaniards, before they had got a Vessel to go off again.

Though I must confess there was some Reason, yet I thought it barbarous to see
how they murdered the two Spaniards, and nine Indians. They put out their
Pinnace and ten Men well armed, to go and take this Paragua; as soon as ever
they were discovered by the Indians, they jumped Overboard, and made toward
Shore; but were shot by our Men, or knocked on the Head with the Butt-End of
their Muskets. The two Spaniards had a new Kind of Death; they tied 'em,
Breast to Breast, and their Hands behind 'em, and threw 'em Overboard; where
they struggled for some Time, and at last were drowned. I thought this was a
Cruelty exceeding all the Tyrants in the World, and if I had had a Boat, and
our People never a one, I would have run any Hazard to have saved 'em. Their
Paragua was laden with Flower, and dried Fish, with several Sides of dried
Pork, or Bacon; which was too good for the People that had it. As for my own
Part, but little of it came to my Share, for I was taken ill the second Day
after we came there, and so weak and feeble, that I did not expect to overcome
it; and if it had not been for a Black, that was Trumpeter to the Captain, I
should have perished for want of Sustenance; but the poor Fellow frequently
would bring me something or other to nourish me; and it is to him, under God,
that I owe my Life. He would often tell me that he did not love that sort of
Life, and wished he could get rid of his Master; but, says he, if he did but
know I had as much as a Thought that Way, he would be the Death of me. I
believe this was the only poor Fellow that prayed in the whole Crew. He was
christened at Plymouth in England, (and had very good Notions of Religion)
where he was given to his present Master, who had made several Voyages into the
West Indies, for a Plymouth Merchant; but at last finding Matters on Shore go
but indifferently, and having killed a French Officer there, seized upon the
Ship he used to Command, and with a Crew of desperate Fellows made off to Sea,
and steered his old Course for the West Indies, and there commenced Pyrate; but
had met with no other Success, than what has been related to you.

Says I, this Fellow's too wicked to have Success in any Thing, especially when
Success must be an Addition to his Crimes: If it were possible to know his
Fate, we should find that he would have some desperate End: For Men when
abandoned by Providence Divine, though perhaps they may meet with some Success at
first, at last find an End that is fitted for such Wretches, who deny a Superior
Being; and even Atheists, notwithstanding their Human Form, are no better than
Brutes; nay, I take an Atheist or Deist, to have far less Right to Salvation,
than those Indians that pray to the Devil; for they do it through Ignorance, and
Worship him with a more sincere Devotion, because they know it is in his Power
to do 'em Harm. With what a fervent Zeal would they serve the true God, if they
knew (as all who profess Christianity do) that it is in his Power to bestow
Blessings, even after this Life. With what Devotion they Worship the Sun, who
they take to be the Superior Deity, because it makes the Earth green, and is
the second Cause of all the Good they enjoy? Then, with how much more Reverence
ought we to give Praise to that Power that lends Light and general Heat to that
Planet? If an Atheist would consider the Works of Nature justly, he would find
it an Impossibility to be so any longer; and to fancy this World was formed by
Chance or Accident, is to allow Beasts the Privileges of Nature and Reason, to
as great a Degree as we that pretend to Humanity.

John Rouse was the Name of this Sailor we took on Board, born at Bermudas. He
offered us some Proposals if we would go along with him thither; but I declined
it, as wanting to be with my old Ship's Crew, and thought of seeing my own
Country again, as I believe all Travelers have, who bring nothing Home but
Misfortunes, or the Vices of the Places they have traveled through. From this
Man, said Rouse, I had the following short Description of Bermudas, or the
Summer Islands.

Bermudas, (the Place of my Birth) or the Summer Islands, is supposed by some,
to take its Name of Bermudas from certain Black Hogs that came out of a Spanish
Ship that was cast away on those Shores. And by others from one John Bermudas,
a Spaniard, the first Discoverer of the Islands. The Name Summer Islands, is
derived from George Summers, an English Man, who suffered Shipwreck there. They
are situated in thirty two Degrees, and twenty five Minutes of Northern
Latitude; Sixteen Hundred Leagues from England; Twelve Hundred from Madera;
Four Hundred from Hispaniola; and about Three Hundred from Boston in New
England. The Spaniards had it first, and after them the French; but the
Supplies that were sent 'em from France miscarrying by Shipwreck, they were
obliged to abandon the Islands. After this, one Wing field, a Merchant in
London, sent in two Ships, Captain Gosnel and Smith, with People to settle
there; but there was not much done till 1612. when a Company was Established at
London by Letters Patents, given by King James the first, who immediately sent
Captain Moor with sixty five Men, where he was two Years in fortifying the
Islands against the Attempts of any Invasion from either French, Spaniards, or
Indians. In the mean Time a sort of Rats so increased, that they devoured every
Thing that was Green in the whole Island, and had like to have starved the
Inhabitants, if Providence had not timely sent a Disease among 'em that
consumed 'em All. In about three Years after the first Plantation by Captain
Moor, there was sent 'em another Supply of Men and Provision, by Captain
Bartlet, who returned with a Hundred Weight of Ambergreese. The next Year,
there arrived five hundred Men and Women, with Tradesmen of all Sorts. In 1616.
one Tuckard succeeded in the Government, and was very serviceable to the
Plantation, in bringing and planting several Trees, and Tobacco. He also
divided the Country into Acres, and parcell'd it out to the Tenants. It
increased daily in Culture and Inhabitants. The Form of the Islands as they
lie, resembles something of a Lobster with its Claws off. The Chief of the
Islands is called George Island, and is divided into Eight Parts, besides the
General Land. 1. Hamilton Tribe; 2. Smith's Tribe; 3. Devonshire Tribe; 4.
Pembroke Tribe; 5. Paget's Tribe; 6. Warwick Tribe; 7. Southampton Tribe; 8.
Sandy's Tribe. The Islands are all surrounded by Rocks, that at High Water are
dangerous to Strangers. The Chief Harbors are Southampton, Harrinton, and the
Great Sound. Upon St. George's Island, they have built several large and strong
Forts, whose Chief are Warwick and Dover Forts. The Soil in some Places is
Sandy or Claye; and in other Places Ash-colored, White, and Black; about two
Foot deep under the Ash, is found great Slates, which the Inhabitants make use
of several Ways; and under that Black is found a Stony Substance* something
like a Sponge, or Pummice-Stone. The Wells, and Pits, Ebb and Flow with the
Sea, yet produce excellent fresh Water. The Sky is generally serene; but when
it is o'er-cast they have dreadful Thunder and Lightning. The Air is much the
same as with you in England. They have two Harvests in the Year: They Sow in
March, and Reap in June; then they Sow in August, and Gather in January: And
from that Month till May, the Whales frequently swim by them. They often find
great Quantities of Ambergreece, and sometimes Pearl Oysters. No venomous
Creature* will live in any of the said Islands. The yellow large Spiders have
not the least Venom in 'em. There Is Plenty of all Sorts of Cattle, both Wild
and Tame, especially Hogs, who have mightily increased since their first
Landing; but they are not altogether so fat as we could wish, feeding only on
Berries that fall from the Palmeto-Trees, which are very sweet. There Is Plenty
of Mulberies, both White and Red, which produce prodigious Numbers of
Silkworms; who spin Silk of the Color of the Berry. The Trees are here of
different Kinds; the Cedar is reckoned the Largest in the Universe. The Leaves
are downy, and prickly at the End: The Berries that it produces are of a pale
Red which enclose four White Kernels; the Outermost Skin is sweet; the
Innermost that contains the Kernel, is sharp; and the Pulp is tartish. The Tree
is always flourishing, being at the same Time full of Blossoms, green, and ripe
Fruit. The Berries when ripe begin to gape, and fall off in Rainy Weather;
leaving a round Stalk on the Boughs, which loses not its Rind till that Time
two Years after. The Berry requires one Year before it comes to its full
Ripeness, which happens about December. The Boughs shoot upwards, and in a
little Time are so heavy, that they weigh down the Body of the Tree. There are
many Plants, as the Prickle Pear, Poison Weed, Red Weed, Purging Bean, Red
Pepper, and the Costive Tree, and the Sea Feather, which grows on the Brink of
the Sea. There is another Plant called Nuchtly, which grows in the Niches of
the Rocks, washed by the Waves of the Sea, and produces a Fruit like a Pear,
which they call the Speckl'd Pear, from its Spots. For Fowls, we have all Sorts
that England produces, besides a great Number of Cranes, larger than any I have
seen elsewhere; with a sort of Fowl that lives in Holes in the Rocks, like
Rabbets. As for Tortoises, they are as good there as any where* They catch them
in this Manner; they watch for 'em at Night, when they come on Shore to dig
Holes to bury their Eggs in; while they are doing of it, they turn 'em on their
Backs, and not being able to get upon their Legs again, they are easily taken.
Some will have a Hundred Eggs in 'em about as big as a common Tennis-Ball, and
very round; but a thin Skin, and the Yolk lies on the Side of the Skin, or
Shell, and may be seen on the Outside: These hidden in the Sand, are nourished
by the Sun, and never minded by the Tortoise that lays 'em; and as soon as ever
they have broke the Shell, they all run into the Sea. Some say they are full
six Years a Hatching. They are excellent Meat, (for I cannot call 'em Fish) and
very nourishing, and we use the Oil instead of Butter, which will keep longer,
and is reckoned much wholesomer for many Uses. Besides, it is good to bathe,
the Place that is stung by a little Insect, called Musketto. The Largest of
these Islands, is Long Island; the next, St. George's Island; after that,
Somerset, and St. David's; next, Hibernia, or Ireland Island; then Longberd,
Cooper's, and Smith's Island; Nonsuch Gates; and the Brothers Island; with many
others as well inhabited, and provided with every Thing for the Life of Man;
which is elegantly described by your English Poet, Mr. Edmund Waller.

Bermudas, walled with Rocks, who does not know
That happy Island where huge Lemons grow,
And Orange Trees, which golden Fruit do bear?
The Hesperian Garden boasts of none so fair.
Where shining Pearl, Coral, and many a Pound,
On the rich Shore, of Ambergreese is sound.
The lofty Cedar, which to Heaven aspires,
The Prince of Trees is Fuel for their Fires:
The Smoke, by which their loaded Spits do turn,
For Incence might on Sacred Altars burn:
Their private Roofs, on Odorous Timber born,
Such as might Palaces for Kings adorn.
The sweet Palmettos, a new Bacchus yield,
With Leaves as ample as the broadest Shield:
Under the Shadow of whose friendly Boughs,
They sit Carowzing where their Liquor grows.
Figs there unplanted through the Fields do grow,
Such as fierce Cato did the Romans show;
With the rare Fruit inviting 'em to spoil*
Carthage, the Mistress of so rare a Soil.
The naked Rocks are not unfruitful there,
But at some constant Seasons every Year,
Their Barren Tops with luscious Food abound,
And with the Eggs of various Fowls are crowned.
Tobacco is the Worst of Things, which they
To English Landlords as their Tribute pay:
Such is the Mould, that the Blessed Tenant feeds
On precious Fruits, and pays his Rent in Weeds:
With candy'd Plantanes, and the juicy Pine,
On choicest Melons, and sweet Grapes they dine,
And with Potatoes, fat their wanton Swine.
Nature these Cates with such a lavish Hand
Pours out among 'em, that our coarser Land
Tastes of their Bounty, and does Cloth return,
Which not for Warmth, but Ornament is worn:
For the kind Spring, which but salutes us here,
Inhabits there, and courts them all the Year;
Ripe Fruits and Blossoms on the same Trees live,
At once they promise, what at once they give.
So sweet the Air, so moderate the Clime,
None sickly lives, or dies before his Time.
Heaven sure has kept this Spot of Earth uncurst,
To show how all Things were created first.
The tardy Plants in our cold Orchard placed,
Reserve their Fruit for the next Age's Taste:
There a small Grain in some few Months will be
A firm, a lofty, and a spacious Tree:
The Palma Christi, and the fair Papah,
Now but a Seed, (preventing Nature's Law)
In Half the Circle of the hasty Year
Project a Shade, and lovely Fruits do wear.
And as the Trees in our dull Region set,
But faintly grow, and no Perfection get;
So in this Northern Tract, our hoarser Throats
Utter unripe, and ill-constrained Notes:
While the Supporter of the Poet's Style,
Phoebus, on them eternally does smile.
O! how I long my careless Limbs to lay,
Under the Plantane's Shade --
There is now in the Islands of Bermudas, near Forty Thousand Inhabitants, most
English. The Laws are the same as in England. The Religion and Divine Worship
the same. There are Three and Twenty Parish Churches, besides Chapels. In the
Year 1616, five Seamen set sail from thence in an open Vessel of about Three
Tun, and after having suffered several Storms and Tempests, were safely landed
at Kingsale in Ireland. The French and Spaniards have made several Attempts
upon those Islands; but always were drove away with considerable Loss.

About a Month before I embarked for this unfortunate Voyage, we took a French
Pyrate, who was so insolent as to come into Harrinton's Sound, even at
Noonday, and cut the Cables of a Merchant-man, richly laden, bound for
England; but by good Fortune run upon the Flats in the Mouth of the Sound, in
going out again: So we had Time to Man some Boats with some of the Soldiers of
the Garrison, and send to their Relief, where there happened a desperate Fight
for some Time; but more Forces going to the Assistance of the others, they took
'em after an obstinate Resistance, killing twenty seven of their Men, and
losing eleven of our own. The Captain made his Escape in his Boat, in the
latter End of the Engagement, when he perceived his Danger; but was obliged to
go on Shore on Ireland Island for some Provision, where he, and four Men that
were with him, were secured, and sent to Tucker's Town; where they were to be
tried the Day I came away.

Two Nights after we had parted with the Pyrate, we were encountered with a
dreadful Storm, that lasted two Days without abating; and out poor Bark, which
was none of the best, was tumbled and tossed like a Tennis-Ball, yet we
received no Damage, but that she would not answer the Helm; so that we were
obliged to let her go before the Tempest, and trust to the Mercy of Heaven for
Relief. This Storm and the Danger we had escaped from the Pyrate, put me in
Mind of these four Lines of the forementioned Poet, the celebrated Waller.

Bold were the Men, which on the Ocean first
Spread their new Sails, when Shipwreck was the Worst.
More Danger now from Man alone we find,
Than from the Rocks, the Billows or the Wind.
We, in the Middle of the Storm discovered Land right a Head, which put us all
into our Pannicks; we endeavored to bring our Vessel to bear up to the Wind,
but all to no Purpose; for she still drove nearer the Shore, where we
discovered several Tokens of a Shipwreck, as Pieces of broken Masts, and
Barrels swiming on the Water, and a little farther Men's Hats; then we began to
think we should certainly run the same Fate, when as soon as thought our Bark
was drove on Shore, in a smooth sandy Bay, but where we had Opportunity to quit
her, which was happy for us; for the Sea washed over her with such Violence, we
had not any Hopes of her escaping the Storm, but thought of Course we should be
torn to Pieces.

When we were Ashore, we all concluded it could be no other Part but the South
of Cuba Island, belonging to the Spaniards. We were then in a terrible Fright,
lest we were near any Part that belonged to the Indians; for Mr. Musgrave
assured me, that there were some Parts of the South*Side of Cuba, that Indians
dwelt in, in Spite of the Spaniards, and Massacre'd them wherever they met
'em, or any other Whites. We lay all Night in terrible Fear, and though we found
the Storm abated, or rather a Calm succeeded, yet we durst not stir till the
Moon rose, and then we all walked toward our Vessel, which we found all on one
Side; but by good Fortune most of our Provisions was dry, which mightily
rejoiced us; but all the Vessel's Riging and Masts were shattered and torn to
Pieces, and some Part of her Quarter wrung off, that she could not be of any
Use to us if we could have got her upright. But we took out all our Provision,
and our Arms, with two Barrels of Gunpowder that was dry, the rest being
damaged with Water and Sand that had got in. We had Arms enough, as having them
that belonged to the three Sailors that were taken in the Pyrate, which we
supposed they had forgot; so we were six Men well armed, with each a Musket, a
Case of Pistols, and a Bayonet; beside two Cutlasses, if Need were.

By that Time we had taken every Thing out, Day approached, and then we
designed altogether, well armed, to go and view the Country. John Rouse was
very well recovered of his Fever, but a little weak, yet his Heart was as good
as the Best of us. So we resolved if we were set upon by Indians, to defend our
selves to the last Drop of Blood, choosing rather to die by their Hands in
Fight, than to be tortured after the Manner as they inflict upon all the Whites
they get into their Hands. But still we had some Hopes that we were too far
toward the Northward for 'em.

When we had placed our Provision and other Necessaries safe behind a Tuft of
Trees that grew close by the Water Side, we fixed our Arms, and ventured to
walk up in the Country, which we did almost every Way that Day, four or five
Miles; but could not discover any Living Creature, nor any Sign of Inhabitants,
only in one Place the Grass seemed to be lately trodden, but whether by Man or
Beast we could not discover; so being pretty well tired, we went back again to
our Station, where we eat heartily, and at Night we laid our selves upon the
Grass, and fell asleep, for we durst not lie upon the Sails we had got for that
Purpose, being they were not dry, though spread all Day long.

I was awakened the next Morning by a Company of Lizards creeping over me,
which is an Animal frightful enough to look at, but very Harmless, and great
Lovers of Mankind; they say, that these Creatures, if a Person lies asleep, and
any voracious Beast, or the Alligator, which comes on Shore often, is
approaching the Place where you lie, will crawl to you as fast as they can, and
with their forked Tongues tickle you till you awake, that you may avoid by
their timely Notice the coming Danger. I got up, being rowz'd by these Animals,
and looked about me, but saw nothing but an odd Kind of a Snake about two Foot
long, having a Head something like a Weesel, and Eyes fiery like a Cat's; as
soon as it spied me it ran away, and my Dog after it, but he did not kill it;
but I believe put it in a terrible Fright, for it made a Noise something like a
Weesel, but louder, which awakened my Companions. When I told Mr. Musgrave what
I had seen, he said it was a small Serpent, but not very hurtful, called the
Guabiniquinaze Serpent, from eating a little Creature of that Name, something
resembling a small Mole; and the Indians and Spaniards eat of 'em, and reckon
'em dainty Food.

We now resolved for another Walk, to discover what Inhabitants were our
Neighbors, whether Indians or Spaniards; if Indians, we designed to patch up
our Boat, which had several Holes in it, and make off as fast as we could, and
Row Northward, till we came to some Place inhabited by Spaniards. But if we
found the Latter, to beg Protection, and some Means to get to Jamaica;
whereupon we ventured out with these Resolutions. We met with several fine
large Cedar Trees, and one particularly so large, that Mr. Musgrave and I could
but just fathom it with our Hands joined.

We had not gone far before my Dog began to bark, when turning my Head on one
Side, I beheld a Black approaching toward us, and being startled at the Sight,
I cocked my Piece, and resolved to fire at him; but he called to me in English,
and told me he did not come to do any Harm, but was a poor distressed
Englishman, that wanted Food, and was almost starved, having eat nothing but
Wild Fruit for four Days. Upon that I let him come near, where he was soon
known by Mr Rouse to be Willam Plymouth, the Black that was Trumpeter to the
Captain that commanded the Pyrate Ship. Upon his knowing him, we sat down and
gave him some Provision, which we had brought with us, because we designed to
be out all Day.

After he had refreshed himself a little, we asked him how he came into this
Island? Why, answered he, we were Cruising about Cuba, in Hopes of some Spanish
Prize, when a Storm arose and drove us upon a Rock, where our Ship was beat to
Pieces, and not above Eighteen Men saved beside the Captain. And did that
wicked Wretch escape the Shipwreck? Yes, answered Plymouth, but to undergo a
more violent Death. For, says he, as soon as ever we landed, we wandered up in
the Country to see for some Food, without any Weapons but a few Cutlasses,
having lost our first Arms; but however we all got something or other to defend
our selves on Shore, as long Clubs, which we got from the Trees we found in our
Walks; our Captain resolved if he met with any Indians or Spaniards Huts, that
he would murder all that he found in 'em, for fear they should make their
Escape, and bring more upon us. Thus he encouraged his Men to follow him with
their Clubs; says he, we will walk till we find foam beaten Path, and there lie
hid till Night, when we may go on to some Houses, and come upon 'em
undiscovered; by which Means we may get Provision and other Arms: For the
Indians of Cuba use Firearms as well as the Spaniards, and are full as
dexterous in using 'em as any Europeans, etc. After traveling about ten Miles
to the N. W. we discovered a Path, upon which a Halt was commanded, and to
retire in to the Woods again till Night; which we did, and dined upon what
Fruits we could get upon the Trees.

About two Hours before Night a Dog smelled us out, and running away from us,
barked most furiously; upon that we were afraid of being discovered, which Fear
proved true; for in Half an Hour, or thereabouts, after the Dog left us, we
were saluted with several Arrows and Musket Shot, that killed us three Men,
and wounded me in the Foot, but it proved the Means of saving my Life: For as
soon as our Men perceived what had happened, they ran as hard as they could to
meet the Danger, as knowing they could do no Good till they came to
Handy-Blows; I, in endeavoring to follow 'em, found my Hurt, which prevented
my keeping up with the rest; but I could hear and see 'em at it: There was
about Two Hundred Indians set upon our Men, and in about Half an Hour killed
'em every One. I saw the Captain lay about him desperately, but at last fell,
being run through the Throat with a Wooden Stake. As soon as ever they had
conquered 'em. or rather murdered 'em, they fell to striping of 'em as fast as
they could, and carried 'em off, together with their own Dead, which were many,
for the English sold their Lives very dearly.

After they were all gone, which I sound by their Screeming and Noise at a
Distance, I ventured to steal out from behind a Row of Bushes, where I had
placed my self to see what had happened; I went to the Place of Battle, where I
found two of our Men that they had left, with all their Arms, and some of their
own; so I took up one of their best Muskets, and a Cutlass, and made farther
into the Wood, for fear of being caught; which I had certainly been, if I had
staid a Quarter of an Hour longer, for I soon heard 'em come Hooping, Screaming
and Hollowing back, to fetch the other two Bodies, and their Arms, as I
conjectured.

I walked as far as my hurt Foot would let me that Night, and out of Danger of
the Indians as I thought, and then laid me down to sleep as well as I could,
being very hungry, and sadly tired, and slept pretty well till Morning, when I
proceeded forward in my painful Journey, and directed my Course N. E. thinking
that was the best Way to avoid the Indians, and probably to meet with some
Spaniards, whom I knew inhabited toward the North; the Havanna the Capital
City of the whole Island being seated there. I wandered for four Days, eating
nothing but Fruit in the Woods; but laying my self down about an Hour ago, to
rest my self a little, I thought I heard the Tongues of Englishmen, which to my
great Joy proved true. I left my Musket behind the Bushes, for fear of
alarming you; but now after returning God and you Thanks for this timely
Nourishment, I Will go and fetch it, which he did; and we might easily know it to
be an Indian Piece, for they had rudely carved it all over with several Figures
of Birds and Beasts.

Now, said I to my Companions, you see the Reward of Wickedness. He was not
suffered by Providence to go on long in his Crimes, though some are that are
inured to Ills; yet they are overtaken at last, when their Crimes are full
blown; for though Justice has Leaden Feet, yet they always find he has Iron
Hands: And we too often see that he who kills his Adversary in a Duel, though he
escape the Law, one time or other meets the same Fate himself.

After poor Plymouth had refreshed himself, we set forward, and walked along
till we came to a Road that seemed to be a Main Road of the Island, by the
Largeness. Here we consulted what we should do, whether we should go on, or
return for more Provision; but we resolved to go a little Distance from the
Road, for fear we should meet with more of the Indians, and run the same Fate
with the other Englishmen. But Plymouth told us, we were a great way from that
Place where his Countrymen were killed; (for Plymouth, though born in Guinea,
would always call himself an Englishman, as being brought over very young,) so
we resolved one and all to venture.

We sent up our Prayers to the Almighty for our Safety, and went on with a
Faith that we should come off with Success; but we had not gone far when we
heard the Reports of several Muskets, and shouting in a barbarous Manner,
behind us. Looking that Way, we saw a Mulatto riding as fast as ever his Mule
could carry him; when he came up to us, he stopped, and cried in Spanish, Make
haste, run, for the Indians are coming upon you, they have killed several
Spaniards already, and they are fighting with them. Mr. Musgrave, who
understood Spanish very well, interpreted what he said to us; he asked him how
far they were off? He answered just by, and hearing another Shout, put Spurs to
his Mule, and left us in an Instant. We found by the Shouting and the Firing,
that they would be immediately upon us, so we retired out of the Road to let
'em pass, and laid down upon our Bellies that they might not discover us.
Immediately came by about twenty Spaniards on Horseback, pursued by near a
hundred Indians: Just as they came by us one Spaniard dropped, and crept into a
Bush on the other Side of the Road; and presently the Indians followed,
shouting in a horrid Manner, and overtook the Spaniards again, who being very
swift on Foot, outrun an ordinary Horse; and they had thrown away their
Firearms, to make them the lighter to run, as we supposed. The Spaniards knew
they would soon overtake 'em, so only run to charge their Pistols, and stand
till they came up; then discharge 'em, to put 'em in Confusion; and run again,
to prolong the time, in Hopes of some Aid. All this we understood by the
Spaniard, that crept into the Bush undiscovered by the Indians, by Reason of
the Horses Feet, and the Dust together, he being the Foremost in Flight. He
told us moreover that about three Leagues farther, there was a Fort belonging
to the Spaniards to stop the Indians, they using to make Inroads before that
Fort was built, even to the Gates of the City Havanna. Upon this we consulted
and resolved to follow, upon the Edge of the Road, to see how we could be
assisting; we soon came even with 'em, for they were in a narrow Place, and the
Spaniards kept 'em at Bay pretty well; by good Fortune there was a high Hedge
made by Trees all along as we went, which hindered us from being discovered.
Here we resolved to fire upon 'em all together, and then run further up, and if
possible get out into the Road and face 'em. Accordingly we agreed to fire
four, and three, and the first four to charge again immediately. Mr. Musgrave,
Mr. Middleton, Mr. White and my self agreed to fire first; then Hood, Rouse and
Plymouth; which as soon as we had taken good Aim we did, and firing at their
Backs, killed four downright, and wounded several, for I had ordered 'em to put
two Bullets into each Piece. As soon as ever we had fired our Muskets, we let
fly one Pistol each, and then the other three fired their Guns. As soon as
Plymouth had fired, he ran and charged our four Guns, (he having never a
Pistol) and then we let fly our other Pistols. With these Discharges we had
killed at least fifteen Indians, and put the rest into such Frights that they
began to run; (for with the Dust and Bustle they made, they could hardly
distinguish from whence the Fire came) neither did they stop till they met with
the poor wounded Spaniard, who had crept out, hearing the Discharge of our
Pieces, (as we supposed) they fell upon the poor Fellow with Shouts and
Outcries, and tore him to pieces, never minding the Spaniards pursuing 'em; who
cried Miracalo! Miracalo! a Miracle! a Miracle! By this Time we got within
twenty Yards of the End of the Hedge, where we Seven fired our Muskets, and
left 'em to Plymouth to charge; then we ran in upon 'em with our Pistols, and
discharged 'em close upon 'em. With this last Fire we dropped 'em twelve Men,
and they scream'd out, and ran away as fast as they could. We did not think fit
to follow 'em, for it was not to any Purpose, being they were soon out of
Sight. We charged our Guns and Pistols again, and the twelve Spaniards did the
like, they having Nine in the last Conflict killed, and two desperately
wounded. They gave us Thanks for our Rescue, and said we were surely sent from
Heaven to their Relief; they let us know they were Tax-gatherers for the King
of Spain, and were obliged to go in Numbers, and well armed, for fear of these
desperate Indians; who, about nine Years ago, set upon 'em and killed Eighteen
of 'em, and but two escaped; but never met with any Molestation from that Time
till now; so that this Time (thinking the Danger over) we lessened our Number
from Fifty to Thirty, which I suppose the Indians having Notice of, was the
Occasion of their setting upon us. They said it was to no Purpose for to go
back, for the rest of their Companions that were killed, which being a Mile of,
they had taken with 'em.

We had not gone above half a League onward, but we heard dreadful Shoutings as
before, and looking behind us, it being a strait Road, we could perceive a
Cloud of Dust, and the Indians running full Speed toward us. Upon which, we
put down our two wounded Men that were on Horseback, and mounted upon the
Spaniards spare Horses. Now we being nineteen Horsemen, resolved to stand it:
We divided into Ranks, four in a Rank, which made five Ranks; only there was
but three in the last Rank. So we resolved to keep directly one behind the
other, and when the first File had fired to fall in the Rear, and charge again.
The Spaniards would make up the three first Ranks, as they said they could not
in Honor expose us to the first Onset, being we ventured our Lives in coming
to their Assistance. We had no Time to dispute for now they were just upon us,
and to our Surprise had several Fire Arms among 'em. As soon as they got within
a Hundred Paces of us they fired, but not above two of their Pieces went off,
the rest were clogged with Dust in running, that very happily for us hindered
their Discharging. The Shot missed us by Providence, and we would not give 'em
Time to charge again, but we moved forward and fired in upon 'em, and did great
Execution; when it came to our Turn to fire, we in the Heat forgot our Orders,
but after we had discharged our Guns and Pistols, we fell in with 'em with our
Cutlasses, and being raised above 'em by being on Horseback, did great
Execution; and that with the Spaniards charging and firing again, put 'em to
the Rout; but now we followed 'em being on Horseback, and dispersed 'em so that
it was impossible for 'em to rally any more that Night. However we took four of
'em Prisoners, and tying their Hands behind 'em, fastened 'em to two of our
foremost Horses, the rest following after, that they might not get Loose.

We were met in the Road by twenty Spanish Horse, with each a Foot-Soldier
behind 'em, who were upon the full Gallop to our Assistance, being alarmed by
the Mulatto that rode by; but I believe some were glad they came too late. The
Officer and the rest saluted us very courteously, when they heard how luckily
we came to their Assistance; but fell a whipping the poor naked Indians so
barbarously, that though they deserved it, I could not bear to see it done in
cold Blood, and though the Blood followed every Lash, yet they never cried out.
This is the chief Cause of the Hatred of the Indians, when ever the Spaniards
get any of 'em in their Power, they put 'em to all manner of Torture; but if,
on the contrary, they would use 'em civilly, and discharge 'em now and then, I
am sure they might live in perfect Friendship with 'em: For the Indians are
good-natured, loving and affable, till they are incensed, and then they are
implacable.

We arrived at the Fort about Evening, and were very well entertained. The
Officer did not doubt but to procure us a Ship* to transport us to Jamaica,
though they had Orders from Havanna to secure all English Vessels, there being a
War talked of between the Spanish, and French, and English, and Dutch. The next
Day the Officer mightily bragged of being an old Spaniard, that is, born in
Spain, and of an ancient Family; and Mr. Musgrave made us very merry upon the
Road, in interpreting the Don's Speeches. We found all along from the Fort, a
great many Gentlemen's Houses pleasantly situated, and the Country all along
yielding delightful Prospects.

We were well entertained at a Gentleman's House at Dinner, with Provisions
dressed after the English Way, and all manner of Sweetmeats and cool Wines. The
Gentleman had a Vault or Cellar thirty Foot deep under Ground. He spoke pretty
good English, and had been a Factor several Years in London, and knew our
Customs and Manners very well, and preferred our Way of dressing Victuals before
their own. He had an English Cook from a Tavern behind the Royal Exchange, that
he brought with him into Spain, and from thence to Cuba, where he had a vast
Estate left him. His Cook's Name was Hodges, a good understanding Fellow, and
made very much of us, and would fain have had us to stay with his Master
longer. But as soon as we had dined, we were obliged to get on Horseback, and
away for the Havanna, which we reached about six a-Clock in the Evening. We had
Rooms alloted us, and several English and Irish Men came to see us, that lived
there.

Havanna is the Capital City of the whole Island of Cuba, and has as great a
Trade as any Place belonging to the Spaniards in the West Indies. It has one of
the finest Harbors in the Universe, not for its Greatness, but its Security,
yet able to contain five hundred Ships of the greatest Burden. The Mouth of
the Harbor is commanded by a Platform, and a square Fort, fastened together by
a strong Boom, or Iron Chain, that no Ship can enter. The most shallow Part of
the whole Harbor, is eight Fathom Water, and all its Banks is paved round with
flat Stone, so that a Vessel of a Thousand Tun may lay her Side to it and
unlade. Just between the two Forts there stands a round Water Tower, where they
discover to the Town how many Vessels are coming toward the Harbor by putting
out a Flag for every Ship. This Place is the best fortified and garrisoned in
all the Indies, to secure the Plate Fleet, and all other Ships that meet here,
to set Sail altogether for Spain. This City is very large, near as big as
Bristol in England, and the Houses are handsomely built, but after the Spanish
Fashion. There are Two handsome Churches, fine, and well built, with Spires,
and an Organ in each, besides several Chapels; and a Foundatien laid for a
third Church while we were there. This City almost as soon as it was built, was
sacked by a French Pyrate in the Year 1536, who was driven thither by a
Tempest, and landing his Men well armed, took the City in Spite of all their
Resistance, and burnt many of the Houses, they being most part Wood; and had
consumed 'em all, had not the Spaniards redeemed the rest by paying 'em a
Thousand Ducats. Upon the receiving of the Money, they made out to Sea, and the
same Evening came into the Havanna three Ships from Spain, who hearing of what
had chanced, prepared to follow 'em, taking several Soldiers on Board 'em; the
Admiral, who sailed best, got the first Sight of the Frenchman; but being
fearful to attack him before the other Ships came up, lay by. The Frenchman
seeing that, boldly set upon the first Ship, and took her without fighting; the
second, seeing that, tacked about, and ran Ashore, which was taken by the
Ship's Boat; the third also run the same Fate. Flushed with this Success, they
returned to the Havanna the second time, and exacted a Thousand Ducats more, or
else they threatened to level the City with the Ground, which was paid 'em
immediately. Then they took their last Leave, with this rich Booty, and sailed
for Rochel in France, where they shared their Prizes. After this they built
their Houses with Stone, as they are now, which nevertheless the English took
about twelve Years after.

There are many fair Harbors besides the Havanna, in Cuba, as that of St. Jago
City and Harbor, which is a handsome Place, seated on the South of the Island,
and is also a Bishop's See under the Archbishopric of St. Domingo. Three
Leagues from St. Jago lies those famous Copper Mountains, called by the
Spaniards, Sierra de Cobre. There Is another Town and Harbor situated on the
Eastern Part of Cuba, called Baracoa, where they gather the best Ebony of all
the Indies. There Is many other good ones, as St. Salvador, Trinedad, Puerto del
Principe, which has a Fountain near it, that some times of the Year produces
Liquid Pitch.

Cuba was formerly divided into Eight Provinces and Governments, and better
Peopled than any other Island in America, before the Spaniards invaded 'em; but
now there are but few Indians, which inhabit several Parts of the Island
unmolested by the Spaniards; but the Natives can never forget their Barbarity,
which they have by Tradition from Father to Son. Nay, I have been informed that
they keep a solemn Festival once a Year, which was the Time that the Massacre
of the Indians happened; and if they can get any Spaniards, they sacrifice 'em
to satisfy the Manes of their dead Ancestors.

Hugh Linscoten, the French Voyager, relates that a Cassick, or one of the
Lords of a Province, caught a Spaniard at their first Landing, and threw him
into a River, to see if he would drown, which he did, and that satisfied him
they were not Immortal. Whereupon he encouraged his Men, and repulsed the
Spaniards several times with great Loss; but at last run the same Fate with the
rest of the Natives. It Is reported that the Spaniards first and last had
massacreed Sixty Thousand Indians in the Island of Cuba.

La Casas, a Bishop in New Spain, that wrote the History of the Indies, tells
us this Story of another Cassick, that was taken by the Spaniards in Cuba, and
condemned to be burnt alive with green Wood, that his Torture might be the
longer and more exquisite. While he was tied to the Stake, before the Fire was
lighted, a Friar that was present preached to him the Truth of the Christian
Religion, and that all who died in that Faith, and trusted in God that formed
the Earth, and all the Creatures therein, should immediately after their
Purgation, ascend into Heaven, the Residence of our Creator, there to converse
with Angels, and such as died in that Faith; but on the contrary, if they
persisted in Ignorance, and died in a contrary Opinion, they should descend
into Hell, and live in an Eternity of Torments. Upon this, the Cassick asked
him if there were any Spaniards in Heaven? And being answered there were many;
Then says the Cassick, let me go to Hell, for I would rather converse with
those you call Devils, than you Spaniards in Heaven; for I am sure you are far
the Worst of Devils, and take Delight in nothing but tormenting us. Though the
Fryar's Preaching was certainly true, yet Men of any Reason must conclude, that
no Religion can be propagated by Cruelty and the Sword, which was always the
Spaniards Method with the Indians, wherever they came; and all their Excuse
was, that if they had not used them in that Manner, they could never have made
their Conquests, being they were forced to lessen 'em, for fear their Numbers
might overpower 'em; so that in short, as Dryden says in his Conquest of Mexico
by the Spaniards, You threaten Peace, but you invite a War.

I met here with a Priest, that I am sure harbored nothing of Cruelty in his
Breast, for he came to see us every Day, and in such a friendly Manner, that
charmed us all. He was always sending us one good Thing or other, and would
take us to divert us Abroad. He understood Latin very well, and some English.
On the Sunday he preached an excellent Sermon in Spanish, as Mr. Musgrave
informed us, whose Chief Heads ran upon us; and to excite Charity in his
Auditors, to let us have what was necessary in carrying us to Jamaica. The next
Day he brought us to the Value of Fifty Pound in Spanish Dollars, which were
collected at the Church Doors for us. There was a small Vessel of about Forty
Tun upon the Stocks, that was bought of the Owners for us, and a Collection
made in the Town for Money to pay for it. We told 'em of the Provision we had
left on Shore, which by our Computation could not be above twenty Leagues off;
but they told us it would be difficult to find it. One Day a Spaniard met us
walking with Father Antonio in one of the Cloisters of the Convent, and
reprimanded him for favoring Heretics (as he called us) so much. He thought
none of us understood Spanish, so was more free in his Conversation. Says
Father Antonio, we ought to use Charity even to Brute Beasts, and much more to
our Fellow Creatures, who wear with us our Creator's Image; I would not be
thought to make a Schism in our Religion, which I am sure is the holiest and
most pure; but yet I cannot consent in my Thoughts, that All who are out of the
Pale of our Church must suffer Damnation; it would be horrid to think it, and
would take away from the Luster of our Opinion, which shines so brightly. If
they are in any Errors concerning their Belief, God, in whose Breast it lies,
can open their Eyes when he thinks fit that they may see those Errors. Then
added the Spaniard, with the same Reason you may say the Indians and Natives
may still remain in Ignorance, till Heaven shall think sit to open their Eyes,
as you say; and if so, the Missionary Fathers may spare their Trouble. No,
replied the Father, We are there appointed by Providence to bring 'em out of
the Cloud that dims their Sight. But of People that own Christ, and serve the
same God with us, who differ but in a few outward Forms of Worship, it is very
hard to believe that those instructed in that Worship, must inevitably sink
into Damnation. I cannot tell what the Spaniard's Thoughts were upon this
Discourse, but I am sure he was more charitable than before, for he pulled out
of his Purse a Moidore, and gave Father Antonio for our Use, which it seems he
had refused to do, when he went about collecting for us. After he was gone, he
told us his Discourse, Pro and Con, and what he could not make out in English,
Mr. Musgrave cleared to us from the other's telling him in Spanish what he
meant.

The End of the Second BOOK.
THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES OF Capt. Richard Falconer. BOOK III.
WE were told our Vessel was ready, and therefore might be going when we
pleased. It was a very neat one as ever was built by the Spaniards, and carried
between thirteen and fourteen Tun.

We had all sorts of Provision sent on Board for half a Year, or more, so that
we only stayed for the Wind to rise, it being quite calm.

While we stayed there, the four unfortunate Indians were to be executed in the
midst of the Parade. They were first to be dragged by four Horses, naked, along
the great Street to the Parade, and then to be chained to a Post, fixed for
that Purpose, and burnt to Death: I must confess, when I saw with what
barbarous Cruelty they designed to use 'em, I repented my being an Instrument
in the taking of 'em. This Execution was ordered to be between seven and eight
in the Evening, being then it was coolest: All the Indian Slaves that served
Spanish Masters in the Town, were ordered to go and be Spectators of the
Tragedy, that they might see what they must expect, if they ever offered to
Rebel in the like manner. When the Time came, the whole Street was crowded with
a vast Number of People of all Conditions. But such a Sight I never desire to
see again, each Indian was tied by the Feet to the Harnass of the Horse, and so
dragged from the Prison to the Place of Execution upon the bare Stones naked,
their Arms tied upon their Breasts, and fastened upon their Backs, that they
might not lift 'em up to save themselves as they were dragged along the Stones;
but by that time the poor Creatures came to the Parade, their Skin of their
Legs, Thighs, and Back, were almost stripped off, yet without the least
Complaint; As soon as they were tied fast to the Stake, they took from a Pot of
Liquid Pitch, boiling hot, a Stick with something fastened to the End on it, and
rubbed over their naked Bodies. One of them then, I observed, began to faint,
but was rated by another of his Fellow Sufferers in their own Language, which
none understood but Indians, and the Fellow seemed to bear it much better.
Before the Fire was put to the Pile, a Friar stepped up to them, and in Spanish
spoke to the Indian that was ready to faint before, who had been Servant in the
Town, but run away from his Master, and understood Spanish. The Friar desired
'em, if they would be happy in the other World, to acknowledge themselves
Christians, and go out of the World in that Faith. Upon this the Indian
answered, When I lived among you (said he) and was taught to worship your God,
you told me he was an upright God, and a just God to them that served him
Faithfully, but an avenging Power to those that once Offended him: If so, how
comes it to pass that he has not punished you for all your Crimes. You have
taught me, that Whoring and Adultery were Sins not to be Pardoned, and yet you
commit those Sins, as if you were in no fear of any Punishment. Murder is one
of your Commandments not to be forgiven, when at the same Time you will hire a
Bravo to kill a Stranger that looks but wantonly on your Wives. In short, I
know not any one thing that I have heard preached to us poor Indians, that you
practice your selves. Therefore if your Spanish God be as you described him to
us, the Curse must fall upon you if we cannot believe in him, being we are
detered by the Cruelties you inflict upon us in serving him as you would have
us, when we find your Actions and Words differ more than our Complexions. You
preach up Holiness, and Righteousness, but you Practice Debauchery and Lewdness.

He said more, which was to excite the Indians to Rebel, but they put a stop to
it, by putting Fire to the Wood, which being composed of several Combustible
Matters, soon consumed the poor Wretches.

When all was over, Father Antonio took us home to his Lodgings, to give us a
small Collation for the last time, being the next Day, we did All design to lie
on Board, in Expectation of the Winds rising. We told him by Mr. Musgrave, That
we thought it a great Weakness in them to preach in that manner, to Indians in
their Condition, and it would be apt to make others despise their Religion;
says Mr. Musgrave, it is like courting a Woman to Love by Stripes; (pardon the
Comparison) Why, says Father Antonio, I must confess it is not what any of our
Fathers like, but it is what we are ordered to do, and therefore must not be
denied. Besides at first, it was a piece of barbarous Policy in the first
Conquerors of the Indies, they would order the Missionaries to preach to all
Indian Criminals, but out of hearing of any Spectators; so as soon as they were
executed, they would declare to all the Indians, that they died Christians, and
were happy. Mr. Musgrave, asked him, What made them use 'em so inhumanely, was
it not enough that they suffered Death, but must be tortured in that barbarous
Manner? He replied, It was done to terrify the other Indians from any
Violence. Mr. Musgrave answered, That was certainly wrong, for as they are an
implacable sort of People, and have handed down to them from Father to Son, the
first Massacre, though almost Two hundred Years ago, they must needs remember,
these Cruelties of so fresh a Date, which revives in their Memories the former,
if they had any Mind to forget 'em: He could not say much to it, he said, but
evaded the Discourse, by bidding us be merry, that is innocently and
disoffensively so, for he did not allow of Disorders in any one; so we
refreshed our selves, and took our Leaves of the good Father, who Blessed, and
Embraced us, and said he would pray to Heaven for our prosperous Voyage: So on
the next Day, we paid our hearty Acknowledgments to all our Benefactors, and
went on Board; where we had not been a Quarter of an Hour, before an
extraordinary Message came from the Governor for Plymouth, our Black, who went
with them without any Hesitation, and returned with a Present from the
Governor, of several Bottles of Rack, Spanish Wines, Fowls, Rice, and Brandy,
with twenty Pieces of Spanish Gold, as the Messenger told us, in Recompense for
the Loss of one of our Companions; for the Governor had sent for Plymouth, to
know if he would serve him in Quality of his Trumpeter, and he would settle a
Pension upon him for Life. Plymouth thought fit to accept of it, as having no
Master, nor knowing when he should have one: But he got leave to come on Board
to bid us farewell which he did in a very Affectionate manner. I bid him have a
care to please the Governor, and then he need not fear doing well; so we parted
with Plymouth, with our hearty Thanks recommended to Father Antonio for all his
Favors. Plymouth had a Trumpet given him by the Governor, as soon as he came
on shore, which he brought with him, and sounded all the Way in the Boat, as he
went back again to oblige us; for really he sounded extraordinary well, and had
learnt on several other Instruments, having a tolerable Understanding in
Music. We were sorry to part with Plymouth, as being a faithful honest Fellow,
yet glad he had got so good a Master. The Wind rising, we weighed Anchor, and
left the Port with three Huzza's and a Volley of Small Arms, (we having no
Cannon) and in two Days lost Sight of the Island Cuba.

This famous Island of Cuba, which was first called Joanna by Columbus the
first Discoverer, afterward Fernandina, then Alpha and Omega, as being the
First and Last Island the Spaniards touched at: But afterward was called Cuba,
and still retains that Name. This is reckoned one of the Four Islands of the
Barlovento. The others are Hispaniolo, Jamaica, and Porto-Rico. The North Side
of Cuba is fortified with a vast Number of small Islands, called the Lucaies,
which some Geographers have taken for a Part of the main Land. The chief is
Bahama, which forms the Gulf of Florida, the Passage that all Ships go
through, when they come out of the West Indies into Europe.

Cuba has on the North, Jucatan, a Province on the main Land, distant about 50
Leagues, and on the South Jamaica, about 40 Leagues: In length 220, and in the
broadest Part about 56. The Soil in most Parts, that are inhabited by
Spaniards, is Fruitful, and much more Healthy than Hispaniola. The Tobacco is
reckoned the best in the Spanish West Indies. I have seen very large Vines
there, which bear excellent Grapes, but not fit to make Wine; many have tried,
but it turns sour in a few Days. And for Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, it comes up
to, if not exceeds any of the other Islands. The Bird Flamingo is a Fowl
something bigger than our ordinary Geese, but Legs and Neck twice as long, and
all over red, and generally go in a Body at a Distance, they look like a
Company of Soldiers marching. The Spaniards have a Proverb here, That the Time
will come that English Men will walk as freely in their Streets, as the
Spaniards do now; if it were so, it would be of a prodigious Advantage to the
English, being the Havana is a Strait that Commands all the Ships that come out
of the Indies for Europe, and I really think from what I have seen, that it
would be in the Power of Ten thousand Men, with a Fleet proportionable, to
overcome the whole Island in a little Time. Besides it is observed, that there
are more Prizes brought into the Havana, than any four Havens in the Indies.

While we were at the Havana, a Spaniard carried two strange Beasts about the
Streets for a Show, that he brought from Brazil, the one was called Ai, with a
Head something resembling that of a Man's, and covered with rough short gray
Hair: Each Foot has three Claws close together, about a Finger long, very sharp
Teeth, with a smooth high black Nose, very small sleepy Eyes, and no Ears, with
a Tail small above, and broad at the Bottom, with Hair all over the Body of an
Ash color. This Beast is about the Size of a large Fox, but so lazy a
Creature, that when it gets up a Tree, it never comes down*till it has devoured
every Leaf, and when it has done, it will sit there twenty Days together
without eating, and almost starved before it will take the pains to go down to
feed. It cannot travel or creep in a whole Day not above a Quarter of a Mile.
This that was shown to us, never would stir till roused with a stick, and it
would be asleep again in an Instant.

The other Creature was something like a Baboon, but considerably larger, with
a Face and long Beard, like an old Man's, and hairy like a Goat, all over the
Body; his Ears bald, his Eyes black, large and Sparkling. He that showed it to
us, called it a Cayon, its Tail is about four or five Foot long, which they
twist round a Tree, and so fling themselves to the next. They are very Fierce
and Subtle, and when Wounded, will set upon their Adversary without any Fear;
and if forced to climb the Trees, they carry their Mouths and Hands full of
Stones to throw at Travelers as they pass by; and when wounded, they set up a
shriek, that immediately brings all of their Kind, within Hearing, to their
Succor, who stop the Wound with Leaves and Moss, which will soon be healed.
This that we saw was brought up very young by the Person that had him, and
would play many comical Tricks; As he was shown to us, he urin'd in his Paw and
threw it in our Faces, before we were aware, and while I was a wiping mine, he
gave me such a Salute with his Tail, that made me stand farther off, which
seemed to please him mightily, for he looked at me and chatter'd, as much as to
say, I have given it you. The Spaniard told us, they used to play at a certain
Game with the Natives for Money, and would often win, and then go spend what
they had got, upon a Liquor that made them Drunk, and as soon as they found
themselves so, they would retire very decently, and take a Nap, by which they
were very often caught.

Joseph de Acosta, that wrote the History of the West Indies in Spanish, tells
a Story of one of these Sort of Creatures, going to a Tavern, with a Pot, and
Money to pay for his Wine* yet would not part with his Money, till they had
filled his Pot with the Wine; but in the mean time beat four or five Boys, that
did their Endeavor to take it from him, and carried it safe to them that sent
him.

Peter Martyr relates another Story of one of them, that seeing a Spaniard
going to fire a Gun at him, snatched up a little Child that was there, and held
it before him as a Buckler, and would not let it go before the Spaniard was
retired; then he laid the Child gently down, and ran away, after having first
Urin'd upon it.

The Fellow that showed them, sold 'em to the Governor of Havana for Two
hundred Dollars, and would have gone with us to Jamaica, or any where; but we
durst not take him without an Order from the Governor, who does not suffer any
one to go out of the Island without a Pass from him, which costs a Dollar, and
brings into his Purse a great deal of Money in the Year, having no other
Revenue from the King of Spain, only so much a Year for a Table, and a Palace
ready furnished with every thing that is necessary, besides Servants. Every
Ship that comes in pays two Dollars, and at going out four more, so that the
Government of this Island exceeds in its Profit any other Government (except
the Vice Roy of Mexico) in the Spanish West Indies.

The Weather continued favorable, so that we arrived at Jamaica without
meeting any thing remarkable in our Passage: As soon as we had cast Anchor, I
ordered the Boat to be made ready to carry me on Board my own Ship, which I saw
Ride there. But when I got up the Ship-side, I found my Clothes selling at the
Mast, at, Who bids more? which is the Method, as soon as a Person is dead, or
killed; the first Harbor they Anchor in, the Clothes of the Deceased are
brought upon Deck, and Sold by Auction, the Money to be paid when they come to
England, for it generally happens that Sailors have not any till they come Home
again.

They were at the last Article when I came up the Ship-side; which was a pair
of black worsted Stockings that cost I believe about four Shillings, which went
at twelve and Sixpence, though they had been worn. As soon as I was seen by 'em,
some cried out a Ghost! a Ghost! and others ran away to secure the Clothes they
had bought, suspecting that now I would have 'em again. When they were
satisfied of my being alive, and were told my Story, they were all rejoiced at
my good Fortune, but none would be prevailed upon to let me have my Clothes
again. So I took up the Slop-Book and cast up what they were sold for, and
found, that what cost me about twenty Pound, were sold for four times the
Money: When I was satisfied in that, I called every Person, one by one, that
had bought any of my Clothes, and struck a Bargain with them for ready Money,
and bought them for about ten Pound; but the ready Money pleased them mightily.

Captain Wase being sick ashore, I went to pay him a Visit, where he was mighty
glad to see me, as believing I had perished; he told me that the Vessel hung
Lights out for several Hours, that I might know where to swim, and laid by as
long as the Wind would permit, as the Crew acquainted him when they came into
Harbor. The Captain told me, That he did not think he should live long,
therefore was mighty glad I was come to take Charge of the Ship, which had
sailed before, if he had been in a Condition to bear the Sea. From thence I
went on Board my new Bark, and settled my Affairs there with my Companions, who
were mighty sorry to think of parting with me, Hood and Rouse desired they
might be received on Board as Sailors, and go for England with us; for Hood was
an Englishman, I mean born in England, and Rouse had Friends there. Besides it
was as easy to go from England to Bermudas, as from Jamaica. So I spoke to the
Captain, who was very well pleased to receive them, being he had lost five Men
by the Distemper of the Country. The poor Captain died in a Week after my
coming, and left me Executor for his Wife, who lived at Bristol.

As soon as we had Buried him, I went on Board with my two Men, and did design
to Sail in three Days at farthest, which I would have done before, but that I
was hindered by wanting a Chapman for our Bark, being we had Shares to dispose
of; when I came on Board, the Master told me, he had no Occasion for the two
Men to add to their Charge; says I, that is as I shall think fit, for the Power
is in my Hands now; And who put that Power into your Hands? (says the Master)
He that had the Power so to do (says I) the Captain, whereupon I showed him in
Writing. He told me it did not signify any thing, and that he would find no one
of the Sailors would obey a Boy, incapable to steer a Vessel. Says I, I don't
desire to have any Command over you, but only to represent the Captain that is
deceased: We have no want of any Representatives (replies the Master) and you
shall go in your own Station, or not at all. It would be a pretty thing, added
he, for my Mate to become my Captain, and as I was designed by the Captain to
have the Command of the Vessel before you came, so I intend to keep it. But
says I, this Paper signed by his own Hand, is but of two Days Date, and you
cannot show any thing for the Command, as you pretend to: Therefore (says I)
I Will make my Complaint to the Governor, and he shall Right me. Ay, ay, do so!
(says he) I Will stand to any thing he shall Command. Whereupon Rouse, Hood, and
my self went into the Boat again, and rowed immediately on Shore; but the
Governor was six Miles up in the Country, and it being pretty late, we designed
to wait for his coming home, which we were told would be in the Morning early.
So I went on board the Bark, and laid all Night, the Ship lying beyond the Keys
two Leagues from the Harbor, in order to sail. The next Morning getting up,
with an Intent to wait upon the Governor, and looking toward the Place where
the Ship lay over Night, found she was gone, and casting my Eyes toward Sea,
saw a Ship 4 or 5 Leagues distant from us, which we supposed to be ours. I
immediately went on Shore, and found the Governor just come to Town, and made
my Complaint. He told me there was no Remedy, but to send immediately to
Blewfields Bay, where he supposed they would stop to get Wood, which was usual
with our Ships that were bound for England: Whereupon there was a Messenger
ordered for Blewfields, which I accompanied, to give Instructions to the
Officer that commanded at the Fort, to seize the Master of the Ship, and order
him before the Governor at Port Royal: So we got on Horseback, and reached it
in three Days, it being almost a hundred Miles. When we came there, we found
several Ships in the Harbor, but none that we wanted: So we waited a Week, but
all to no Purpose, for she past the Bay, as mistrusting our Design; upon this
we were obliged to return with a heavy Heart, and tell the Governor of our ill
Success. Who pitied me, and told me he would see me shipped in the first Vessel
bound for England: So I went on board my own Bark, where they were all glad to
see me, though sorry I was so disappointed. Now I was very glad that I had not
disposed of my Bark, for I thought now it might be of use to me. We consulted
together, to know what was best to do; at last I made a Bargain with them, if
they would venture with me in our Bark to England, I would give them not only
my Share of her, but as much Money as came to the other two Shares, if they
would be willing to part with them: Upon this we agreed, and with what Money I
had, I began to lade my Vessel with Things to Traffic with. I bought a good
Quantity of Indigo, some Cotton, Sugar, and Rum. In short, I laid out the best
Part of my Money; and on June the 1st, 1700, set Sail, and steered our Course
for England.

Before I leave Jamaica, I think it will not be amiss to give some Account of
the dreadful Earthquake that happened there in 1692. I am sure it is a true
Account of it, being it was wrote by the Rector of Port-Royal's own Hand, who
was upon the Place when the Accident happened. You shall have it in his own
Words.

June 22, 1692. Dear Friend,
FROM on board the Granado Merchant in Port Royal Harbor, I doubt not but you
will hear both from Garret's and Bris's Coffee-House, of the great Calamity
that has befallen this Island by a terrible Earthquake on the 7 th, Instant.
Which have thrown down almost all the Houses, Churches, Sugar Works, Mills and
Bridges, through the whole Country; it tore the Rocks and Mountains, and
destroyed some whole Plantations, and threw them into the Sea; but Port Royal
had much the greater Share in this terrible Judgment of God. I will therefore
be more particular in giving you an account of its Proceeding, that you may
know what my Danger was, and how unexpected my Preservation. On Tuesday the 7
th, of June, I had been at Church reading Prayers, (which I did every Day)
since I was Rector of PORT ROYAL, to keep up some show of Religion amongst a
most Ungodly, and debauched People. When Prayers being ended, I went to a Place
hard by the Church, (where Merchants use to meet) where the President of the
Council was, who acts in Chief till we have a new Governor; came into my
Company, and engaged me to take a Glass of Wormwood-Wine with him, as a whet
before Dinner. He being my very good Friend, I stayed with him; upon which, he
lighted a Pipe of Tobacco, which he was pretty long taking, and not being
willing to leave him before it was out; I was detained from going to one
Captain Rudder's where I was to Dine; whose House upon the first Concussion
sunk into the Earth, then into the Sea, with his Wife and Family, and some
others that came to Dinner with him. But to return to the President and his
Pipe of Tobacco, before it was out, I found the Ground rolling and moving*
underneath my Feet; upon which I said to him, Lord, Sir! What Is this? He
replied very composedly, being a very grave Man; it is an Earthquake, be not
afraid it will be soon over; but it did increase every Minute, and we heard the
Church and Tower fall; upon which we ran to save our selves. I quickly lost him
and made toward Morgan's- Fort, which being a wide open Place, I thought to be
there more secure from the falling Houses; but as I made toward it, I saw the
Earth open and swallow up a Multitude of People, and the Sea mounting in upon
us over the Fortifications. I then laid aside all hopes of escaping, and
resolved to make toward my own Lodging, and there to meet Death in as good a
Posture as I could, but I was forced to cross and run through two or three narrow
Streets, the Houses and Walls fell on each side me, some Bricks came rolling
over my Shoes but none hurt me: When I came to my Lodging I found all things in
the same Order I left them in, not a Picture (of which there were several fair
ones in my Chamber) being out of it is Place. I went to the Balcony to view the
Street in which our House stood, I saw never a House down, nor the Ground so
much as cracked. The People seeing me there cried out to me to come and Pray
with 'em. When I was come into the Street every one lead hold on my Clothes and
Embraced me, that with their fear and kindness I was almost stiffled. I
persuaded 'em at last to kneel down, and make a large Ring, which they did: I
Prayed with them near an Hour, when I was almost spent with the Exercise, they
brought me a Chair; the Earth working all the while with new Motions, and
trembling like the rolling of the Sea; insomuch, that sometimes whilst I was at
Prayer, I could hardly keep my self upon my Knees by that time I had been half
an Hour longer, setting before 'em their many and heinous Sins. Some Merchants
came to me, who desired me to go Aboard some Ship in the Harbor and refresh my
self; they told me they had gotten me a Boat to carry me off. Coming to the Sea
which had entirely swallowed up the Wharfe, with all those goodly Houses on it;
most of 'em as fine as those in Cheapside, and two entire Houses beyond it. I
upon the tops of some Houses that lay level with the Water, got first into a
Canoe, and then in a long Boat which put me Aboard a Ship, called, the Siam
Merchant, where I found the President safe, who was overjoyed to see me: I
continued there that Night, but could not Sleep for the returns of the
Earthquake almost every Hour, which made all the Guns in the Ship to jar and
rattle. The next Day I went from Ship to Ship to visit those that were taken up
in Boats bruised, and Dying, and to Pray with 'em, also to do the last Office
to them, in saying the Form of Prayer that is used at the Burial of the Dead,
which has been my sorrowful Employment ever since I came Aboard this Ship,
with design to come for England; we having nothing but shaking of the Earth,
Thunder, Lightning, and foul Weather ever since. And the People being so
desperately Wicked, it makes me afraid to stay in the Place; for that very time
this terrible Earthquake was, as soon as it was Night, a Crew of lewd Rogues
which they call Privateers, fell to breaking open Warehouses, with intent to
rob and rifle their Neighbors, whilst the Earth trembled under them, and some
of the Houses fell on 'em in the Act, and those that remain still in the Place,
are as Impudent and Drunken as ever. I have been twice ashore to Pray with the
Bruised and Dying Persons, and to Christen their Children, where I met too many
Drunk and Swearing. I did not spare 'em, nor the Magistrates who have suffered
Wickedness to grow to so great a Height. I have I bless God to the best of my
Skill and Power, discharged my Duty in that Place, which you will hear from
most Persons that come from hence: I have Preached so seasonable to them, and
so plain, in the last Sermon I Preached in the Church, by setting before them
what would be the Issue of their Impenitence, that they have since confessed it
looked more like a Prophesy than a Sermon. I had, I confess an Impulse to do
it, and many times I have preached in the Pulpit, Things that I never meditated
at home, and could not methought do otherwise. The Day (when all this befell
us) was clear, affording not any Suspicion of the least Evil, but in the Space
of three Minutes, about half an Hour after Eleven in the Morning, Port Royal,
the fairest Town of all the English Plantations, the best Empire and Mart of
this Part of the World, exceeding in its Riches, plentiful of all good Things,
was taken and shattered to Pieces, sunk in, and covered for the greatest part
by the Sea, and will in a short Time be wholly eaten up by it; for some of
those Buildings that yet stand and are left, we every Day hear fall, and the
Sea daily incroaches upon the Town. We guess, by falling of the Houses, and
opening of the Earth, and Inundation of the Waters, that there are killed
Fifteen Hundred Persons, and many of good Note, of whom are my good Friend
Attorney General Musgrave, Martial Reeves, William Turner, Thomas Turner's
Brother, is lost: I have lost the best Living, that ever I had or shall have. I
came, as I told you, aboard this Ship, in order to come home; but the People
are so Importunate with me to stay, I know not what to say to them, I must
undergo great Hardships if I stay here, the Country being broken all to pieces,
I must now live in a Hut, and eat Yams and Potatoes for Bread, which I could
never endure; drink Rum Punch and Water, which were never pleasing to me. I
have wrote as effectually as I could to my Lord Bishop of London to send a
younger Person, who may better endure the Fatigue of it, than I can: Now it
would look very unnatural in me to leave the People in their Distress, and
therefore whatever I suffer, I would not have such a Blame lie at my Door. I
have acquainted my Lord of London, That by Reason of the present Distress. I am
willing to continue a Year longer. They are going to build a new Town near the
Rock in Liguinea, the Garden of the Island. The French from Petigauies did
attack the Island on the North Side, but were all defeated and destroyed, it
being near the time of the Earthquake.

June 28, 1629.
EVER since that fatal Day (the most terrible that ever I saw) I have lived on
board a Ship for the shaking of the Earth, returns every now and then:
Yesterday we had a very great one, but it seems less terrible aboard than on
shore. Yet I have ventured to Port Royal three times (since its Desolation)
among the shattered Houses to bury the Dead, and Christen their Children.
Sunday last I preached amongst them in a Tent; The Houses that remain being so
shattered, that I durst not preach in them. The People are overjoyed when they
see me amongst them; and wept very bitterly when I preached to them: I hope by
this terrible Judgment, God will make them Reform themselves, for there was
not a more ungodly People upon the Face of the Earth. It is a sad Sight to see
such a fair Harbor covered with the dead Bodies of the People of all
Conditions; for our great and famous Burial Place, the Pallisadoes, was
destroyed by the Earthquake, and the Sea washed the Carcasses of those that
were there Buried, out of their Graves. Their Tombs being dashed to pieces by
the Earthquake, of which there were Hundreds in that Place. Many rich Men are
utterly ruined, whilst many by watching Opportunities, searching the sunk
Houses, even almost whilst the Earthquake lasted (while Terror and Amazement,
had seized on all the considerable Persons) have gotten great Riches. We have
had an Account from several Places of the Island, of Mischiefs done there by
the Earthquake: From St. Ann's we hear, that above a Thousand Acres of
Wood-Land, are washed into the Sea, carried away whole Plantations in diverse
Places, but none suffered like Port Royal, where Streets were swallowed up by
the opening of the Earth. The Houses and Inhabitants went down together. Some
of them were driven up again by the Sea, which arose in the Breaches of the
Houses wonderfully escaped. Others were swallowed up to the Neck, the Earth
shut upon them and squeezed them to Death. And in that manner several are left
buried with their Heads above Ground, only some Heads the Dogs have eaten. They
are covered with Dust and Earth by the People, which yet remain on the Place to
avoid the Stench. Thus I have told you a long and sad Story, and God knows what
worse may happen yet. The People tell me they hear great Bellowing and Noises
in the Mountains, which makes some very Apprehensive of an Irruption of Fire;
if so, I fear it will be more destructive than the Earthquake. I know not how
to stay, and yet I cannot tell how, at such a Juncture, to quit my Station.

Yours, etc.

I believe this was the most terrible Earthquake that has ever happened since
the Creation of the World, and did more Damage. They tell a Story of a wicked
Fellow, that in the Time of the Earthquake ravished a Merchant's Daughter, and
after murdered her, that he might not be discovered; but a Black that happened
to be in another Room, and hearing what had happened, ran away to the Ship
where her Father was to give him Notice, that he might come and apprehend him.
But when he came and found his Daughter murdered and the Villain gone, he was
almost Distracted, and the House tumbling with the Earthquake, he perished in
the Ruins bemoaning his Daughter. The execrable Wretch was soon overtaken with
Divine Vengeance; for going to make his Escape, a large Stone from one of the
falling Houses, dropped on his Back and broke it, where he was taken up in such
Misery, that he prayed for some one to knock him on the Head to put him out of
his Torture. The Pain was so violent, that it took away his Senses, and in the
height of his Raving, discovered himself to be the Author of the horrid Fact
mentioned; but he died without Repentance, cursing every Body.

Another Story that was told me, was, That a Gentlewoman had come out of the
Country to lye-in there, being she would be better accommodated, and was
brought to Bed but two Days before. The Husband was gone out; and at the first
shock of the House all her Servants left her, with the Infant with her, which
with the Violence of the shock, was overturned in the Cradle: With this
Accident, the Gentlewoman in a Fright rose out of her Bed, though in a weak
Condition, and took up her Child, and feeling the House totter, ran down Stairs
in her Shift, with her Infant in her Arms, where she was met by her Husband,
who took her in his Arms to carry her away, just as the House fell upon them
all, where they were drawn out, but the Child was dead, and the Mother died in
half an Hour, the Husband mightily bruised, with much Pain lingered out to the
next Day, and then expired, and were all three buried together in one Grave.

One Abraham Matthews, an Inhabitant of Port Royal, that was alive when I was
there, told me of a remarkable Providence that happened to him, as he was
packing up several Things to carry on Board some Vessel that was in the
Harbor, for the more Security. He had no sooner come out of the House where he
lodged, but it fell down and smothered several People within. Just as he got to
the Waterside, the Boat was going off, and as he put one Foot into the Boat,
the Boat-Man pushed him out again, and told him he must stay till he came back,
being the Boat was full. The Boat in turning the Point by the Fort was
overwhelmed by a Point of the Shore, which fell upon it, and all that were in it
perished. This was the second Deliverance. When he saw what had happened, he
retired to the Church, which was open, to return God Thanks; and beg his
farther Protection, or if Death happened, he could not choose a better Place to
die in. While he was at Prayers, he saw one of the Buccaniers, or Thieves,
stealing away his Bundle, which he immediately followed, seized, and took it
from him: As soon as he was out of the Church, that fell to the Ground. When he
had got the Bundle, he kneeled upon the Earth to tie it faster, the adjacent
House sunk down also and smothered the Fellow, with several others that were
in it. Going a little farther he met some of his Acquaintance, who were getting
a Canoe ready to convey themselves on Board a Ship in the Harbor, where he
safely arrived, and gave God Thanks for his many and happy Deliverances.

We put in at Blewfields-Bay, for the Convenience of Wood and Water, and when
we were provided, steered our Course onward for England. But as we came within
ten Leagues of the Havana, a Spanish Man of War of Forty Guns came up with us,
who commanded us to strike our Sails, which we did immediately, and coming on
Board us, were surpised to find us all Englishmen, not expecting other than
Spaniards from the building of our Vessel. Whereupon they made us all
Prisoners, and sent fifteen Men on Board us to carry the Vessel into the
Havana. Telling 'em how we came by the Vessel did not signify any thing, for
they said we were Pirates, and had seized it. And our Pass which we had from
the Governor of the Havana, not being to be found, made Things appear but with
an indifferent Face; we were afraid we should find many Difficulties in getting
our Liberty, especially if they went to their Station, which was St. Jago. But
it happened better than we expected, for she made directly to the Port of the
Havana, where we knew every thing would be placed in a true Light again. When
we were anchored, and the People could come on Board us, we were soon known,
and the Captain going to the Governor, was soon informed of the Matter; so we
were released immediately, and had a Visit made us from Father Antonio, and
honest Plymouth, who were mightily rejoiced to see us.

We were detained two Days, before we could get away: And then we set Sail with
a brisk Gale, first saluting the Town with our 4 Guns, and 4 Patteraroes, which
I had forgot to mention our buying at Port Royal.

In two Days after our first Sailing we made Cape Florida, and entered the Gulf
that bears the same Name, and passed it without Danger. But here a sudden Calm
overtook us, as frequently happens when your past the Gulf; and the Current
set strong to Westward, occasioned, as we supposed, by the opening of the Land,
upon that Coast. The Calm lasting for four Days and we were insensibly carried
within half a League of the Shore, but a little Breeze rising from Land, helped
us farther out again: But still our Danger more increased, for we soon
perceived three large Canoes making toward us, full of Indians, armed. We had
not much time to consult what to do, for they gained upon us every Moment. Now
Death, or something worse than Death, glar'd us in the Face, and most of us
thought this the last Day we had to live. Come Friends (said I) if we must die,
let us die bravely like Englishmen. To die is just as common as to live, only
Life is choice, but Death we still pursue, and every step we take shortens our
Journey. If then we follow Death, why should we fear it? Or if we should fear,
what would that avail, since fearing cannot put back the Fated Hour. Then let
us like those that would dispose of somewhat, do it to the best Advantage. We
charged our 4 Guns with double and round, and our Patteraroes with
Musket-Balls: The rest of our Arms we got in readiness, and resolved to Die
fighting, and not suffer our selves to be taken, to be miserably Butchered, as
all the Indians of Florida do, when they get any Whites in their Power. We
resolved to fire our six Muskets upon 'em, as soon as they came within reach;
so we took our aim, two to each Canoe, and fired upon 'em, which did 'em some
Damage, for they stopped upon it: Which made us make the best of our way, but
they soon pursued us with loud and rude Shouts. By this time, we had charged
our Muskets again, and fired as before at the same distance; but whatever
damage we did 'em, they came on as fast as they could, but not before we had
charged our Pieces the third Time, which we fired as before, but did more
Execution, as being nearer to us; and now we charged 'em the 4 th, Time, and
laid them along upon the Deck for a farther Occasion; for they being so nigh
that our great Guns would reach 'em with our double and round, which we fired
one at a time; the first we fired at was the largest Canoe, which put them in
such confusion, that they fell foul of one another, and being in a huddle
together, we fired the other three, that made a mighty Havoc among 'em. We now
thought of a Victory, instead of being made Slaves, and bore up to them that we
might make our Patteraroes of use to us, which we fired upon 'em with Patridge
(or Musket) Shot, that answered our end; for now they began to turn tail, which
we seeing, fired our Muskets the 4 th, time, which killed them two Indians: And
charging our great Guns with single Balls, of 3 pound Weight, (or 3 Pounders as
they call them at Sea) and firing at their Boats (or Canoes) we sunk one of
them, but the Men swam to the other Canoes, and taking hold of the sides, with
their weight turned it over. Mr. Musgrave and the rest of our Men, advised to
make up to them, and in this Confusion kill them all. But I was satisfied with
the disappointment they had met with, and as it was not in their Power to hurt
us farther, resolved to make the best of our way. But looking toward the
shore, saw Eight more of their Canoes making up to us; this put us upon making
all the Sail we could, and the Sea breeze being now pretty strong, we made good
way. We thought the Canoes would stay when they came up with the other three,
but they made after us a long with the those Indians, that they had taken up.
We had charged our great Guns with great Shot, and fired at them, but mist
them; we charged them the 2 d, time, and one Shot by good Fortune took the
first Canoe and over-set her, which put them into more Confusion than before;
but still five of them pursued us, which were met with by some of our
Musket-Balls, that gave two of them their Quietus est: And firing our great
Guns once more, sunk one of their Canoes, but the Men soon got into the other
and followed us still. Seeing this, we resolved to make one strong Effort, and
make the best of our way. So we backed our main Sail and laid by for 'em, and
brought our four Guns to one side, and our 4 Patteraroes to bear accordingly;
we charged our Muskets once more, and laid them in readiness, with two half
Pikes, and our Cutlasses; and now we resolved not to fire till every Gun might
do Execution; we staid till they came within two Ships length of us, and then
we fired upon them as fast as ever we could, which proved effectual; for we
killed 'em at least Twenty. Upon which, they set up dreadful uncommon Noises,
and rowed back as fast as ever they could; we gave them our farewell
Musket-Shots, and made the best of our way. By a moderate Computation we killed
them at least 50 Indians, without their once firing at us; neither could we
conceive how they intended to Assault us, or whether they had any fire Arms,
for we saw none. After we had brought our Vessel to rights again, we Assembled
our selves to Prayers, and returned our sincere Thanks to the Defender of the
Weak, and giver of all good Things, for our happy Deliverance. We saw the
Canoes padling toward Shore, and were met by several others, with a design as
we supposs'd to assist them; but we were now too far for them, and there was
nothing more to be feared, and so we Sailed on with a prosperous Gale, and met
with nothing worth note. Till Thursday July the 15 th, we discovered Land,
which amazed us all, for we did not think of falling in with any Shore till we
saw England: We went to consult our Charts, and saw we were near Newfound-land,
and finding that, we steered directly into St. John's Harbor, which is the
Capital of the Island, I mean of that Part which belongs to the English. The
Harbor is large, fair, strong, and Commodious, commanded by several good
Forts, and a strong Boom that shuts it up: The Town consists of about 800
Houses, built after the manner of the Houses in England.

Newfound-land, or Terra Nova, was discovered by Sebastian Cabot, for King
Henry the VII. of England. This Island is seated in 52 of Northern Latitude;
and divided from the Continent by an Arm of the Sea, about 20 Leagues over; it
is larger than Ireland; the Climate is much the same as in England, very
wholesome; has several commodious Harbors. The English possess one Part, and
the French the other; but the English are more Populous. This Island is of
great Benefit to the English, as well as other Nations, from the vast
quantities of Fish that are caught upon the Banks of Newfound-land. This is a
very large Bank of Sand, which extends a hundred and twenty Leagues to the
West, near the Continent, and about 20 Leagues broad in the middle, and
Sharpens to each end. It is reckoned the most extraordinary thing found in the
Sea of that kind, for Ships may Anchor though twenty or thirty Leagues from Land.
The Fruits are the same with us in England, and the Soil so very rich, that it
will bare Pease, Beans, etc. without Tilage, which are as good as any in
England. The Beasts the same, only the Bear which is found there. In short,
Newfound-land resembles England in every thing so much, that if a Man could be
carried from thence in his Sleep, he would only think he was strayed somewhere
out of his Knowledge. There is only this to be said, that there is not so many
Inhabitants, so there is more Plenty of every thing for human Life: Their chief
Trade is Fish, but they send great Quantities of Musk, Sables, and other Furrs.
There is not one Indian to be found upon the whole Island, but what are brought
from other Countries, and used as Servants; though it is reported about 20 Years
ago toward the North-West Parts, the French met with some Indians, that used
to help them to Cure their Fish, and make their Oil. They describe them a civil
sort of People, but no Knowledge of a superior Deity, and when attempted to be
taught, they would Answer. We are well contented with our own God, neither do
we desire any other; Why should we offer to change? We think our Forefathers
wiser than we are, and they Worshipped the same with us: Therefore, as we think
of going to the same Place where they are, we must Worship the same Power. You
have your God, and we have Ours; every Nation must have a God according to
their own Language. Should we Pray to your God in our Indian Language, how
should we be understood; or should you Pray to Ours, what would it avail you,
being he would not know what you said to him. Now we have not one God only, but
many; as one for Fishing, one for Fowling, and another for Husbandry: And when
we are about any of these particular Buisinesses, we Pray to that God, for it
would be too much for one to mind them all. Would it not seem ridiculous for
one of us if we wanted Success in Hunting, to Pray to him that takes care of
Fishing; or you that wear Clothes, Would you go to a Fisherman to bid him
Cloth you. You tell us there is a vast Number of Worshipers of your God, in
all Countries, than what need you any more: We will serve you as well, and as
faithfully as if we had but one God, and Pray to our God's to give you Success
in whatever you undertake. If you Fish, we'll Pray to that God; if you go to
fell Timber, we'll Pray to that, and so on, to whatever you employ your selves
in. When you are out of their Dominions, you must Pray for your selves to your
own God. In short, there is neither fair means or foul, will ever bring these
poor Creatures to the Knowledge of the true God: If you are angry with them,
they will comply with you, and say, Well, Well, we will do as you would have
us, but never think of it afterward: If you Reason calmly with them, than the
Answer you as above.

After being here two Days we set Sail, and made our Course for England, July
25 th, 1700. We met with no extraordinary Accident in our Passage, till we
discovered the Land's End, August the 21 st, How rejoiced I was to see my
Native Country, let them judge that have been in the same Condition as I have
been; and I may with truth say, that the Transports felt in first seeing the
white Cliffs of the Island that gave me Birth, exceeded the Joy I received when
I was delivered from the most imminent Danger. Here we consulted, whether it
were better for us to go to London, or to Bristol, but every one allowed London
to be the best Mart for our Goods; so we made for the Thames and the Weather
being fair, and a brisk Gale; we Anchored over against Shadewell Dock. Now all
that we had to do was to get Chapmen for our Goods; I applied my self to a
Merchant upon Change, who soon struck a Bargain, and with the Consent of my
Companions, sold the Lading, bottom and all, for Nine hundred and twenty Pound;
reckoning the Lading Seven hundred Pound, which was my own, and two hundred and
twenty for the Vessel, and every thing besides. They were all contented with
their Dividend, but still resolved to go with me to Bristol, to see after my
Affairs there: So we set out on foot, intending to walk it, and be a little
Merry upon the Road, for we expected more Diversion by walking it leasurely,
than going in any other manner. I had turned all my Money into Bank Bills,
which amounted to 800 l. with my Money that I had for my Goods, and sewed them
in the Wasteband of my Breeches, not that there could be any Danger, being so
many in Company. We took the Salisbury Road, though something out of our way,
being I resolved to carry my Friend to Bruton, the Place of my Birth. Comeing
through Basing-stoke, a Sailor met us begging Charity for God's sake: I gave him
Sixpence, which he returned me many thanks for; I asked him how it came to
pass, that a lusty Sailor as he was did not go to Sea, (especially now War
being talked of between the English and French) He answered he was going to
London for that intent, but was obliged to be beholding to good Men's Charity
to assist him in his Journey. Why, pursued I, have you no Friends, your Clothes
are good, you don't seem to have begged long. No answered he, this is my first
Day, I made an end of the little Money I had last Night. Have you been long
from Sea, (says I) but a Week: I had the Misfortune to be cast away in sight of
Harbor; from whence came you? (asked I) says he we came from Jamaica, and were
bound for Bristol; but a violent Storm over took us within six Leagues from the
Mouth of the River Severn, and drove our Ship upon some Rocks in the Mouth of
the Bay, and all the Men perished but my self. From Jamaica, (says I) Pray what
Ship? The Albion Frigate replied he, Who was your Captain? added I. The Captain
died at Jamaica, but the Master supplied his Place, one Jacob Bingley. Did you
ever hear of one Falconer? Yes, he was the Mate supposed to be lost in a Voyage
he made to the Bay of Campeachy, but coming safe into Harbor afterward, the
Captain before his Death gave him the Command of our Ship; but the Master not
approving of such a young Man to have the Power over him, set Sail without him:
This I learned on Board afterward, for I and another Sailor were hired for the
Voyage that Afternoon, before the Morning we set Sail. We had but an
indifferent Passage the whole Voyage, which was made up with nothing but
Storms, and Calms, that caused a great deal of uneasiness and our Provision
received Damage by the Salt Water, which drove us to the last Extremity; and
when we were raised in our Hopes of setting our Feet upon our native Country,
we were devoured by the tempestuous Waves: I my self was taken up for Dead upon
the Shore by a Fisherman. Have you any Friends (says I) at London? None,
(replied he) every Place to me is Home, a Sailor is never out of his way; if
so, return with us to Bristol where we are bound, and I Will promise you if I
cannot get you a Ship, I Will give you where withal to carry you to London without
begging. We easily agreed upon the Matter, and honest Tarr went on with us. I
asked him why he did not endeavor to get a Ship at Bristol, he answered, he
would rather choose to go in a Man of War, than a Merchant Man, since War was
approaching, and he heard there was a Fleet fitting out for the West Indies,
and if so, (says he) there may be some hopes of getting something there, either
of Jack Spaniard, or Jack Frenchman. We came to Bruton, and took Lodgings in
the Magpye-Inn, where I visited all my Acquaintance; and from thence we went in
the same manner to Bristol, where the first thing was to enquire after my poor
Father; But I was informed by Captain Pultney, that he thought he was certainly
Dead: Though he had seen him but once since I had been Abroad, and that was in
the January before; when he came privately to him, and told him he was settled
in a small Village near Hereford, and went by the name of Hawkins. What
convinces me he is Dead, is that about two Months ago, he sent me a Letter
which I Will show you: He went up Stairs and fetched it, which contained these
Words.

SIR,
WHEN I had settled my self in my little Tenement, I began to think of turning
Farmer, that I might have some Employment to pass away the tedious Hours of my
voluntary Banishment; but going the other Day to view a hollow Place, where we
had our Marl to Marl our Ground; the Earth on a sudden fell upon me, and I was
scarce taken out alive, my Back broke, and bruised all over in a pitious
Manner. This is the first Day of rest or ease, that I have had from my
intolerable Pain: It is allowed, and I am very well satisfied, that I cannot
survive it. Pray be kind to my dear Dick, if he ever lives to come home, (if
not) what I have deposited into your Hands let it remain with you for your own
use, since my Daughter is provided for. If I should against the expectation of
every Body recover, you shall hear from me very soon, if not, believe that I am
returned to Earth, from whence I came. I hope I need not caution you once more
to be kind to my poor Boy if he should return; and be a Father to him, Comfort
him amidst his Affliction, and restore to him what I left with you, with a
dying Parents Blessing, that he may be as Happy, as his wretched Father was
Miserable. Which is the hearty desire of your Friend and Servant,

Falconer.


Grief so overcame me for a time, that I was not able to speak; to be robbed of
a Father, and a Father I loved so dearly, was a cutting Stroke; and I was
constrained to make use of all my young Philosophy to support it. My Father had
left the Writing of his Estate with Captain Pultney: He having only Mortgaged
it before for five hundred Pound, to a Friend to prevent its being seized on by
the Crown, which was redeemed by the Captain by my Father's Appointment, when
he came to see him last. I paid him his five hundred Pound, and would have
given him Interest for it, but he would not accept of it, but advised me to
part with it, without I designed to settle in England, which I thought was the
best way, whether I staid in England or not. The Captain undertook the Matter,
and sold it for four Thousand Pound. But whilst he was busy about it, I got
Mr. Musgrave, who was always my bosom Friend to go to Hereford, and if it
'twere possible to find where my dear Father was buried, and to see how Matters
stood there. Accordingly we hired a couple of Horses, and set out; when we
arrived at Hereford, we found it not a little difficult, but at last through the
means of one Mr. Hall Organist of the Cathedral Church, we had sight of the
Place, which was about half a Mile from the City: Mr. Hall came by the
knowledge of it by the means of an honest Clergyman, that my Father had
contracted a Friendship with, before that unhappy Accident befell him that
deprived him of his Life. He brought us to his House, where the Gentleman was
laid up with a fit of the Gout; as soon as we were private, I let him know who
I was, upon which, he tenderly Embraced me, and was mightily joy'd to see the
Son of his late Friend. Says he, I should have been at Bristol e're now, but
that the Gout prevented me: Your Father was a Man I had but a short
Acquaintance with, yet that little time discovered him to be a Man of
Integrity, Honesty and Honor. When He was upon his death Bed, he told me his
real Name, and Circumstances, and what Misfortunes had brought him to this
Part; he told me also, that he had a Son at Sea, and begged of me to dispose of
his little Fortune he had here, and see it put into the Hands of Captain
Pultney of Bristol, which I had done, but was prevented as I said before, by
this sudden Fit of the Gout. I have taken care of all your Father's Effects,
and the little Farm I have bought my self, it being for my turn. Upon that, he
sent his Maid for a little Box which he unlocked, and told me out two hundred
Guineas; this is what your Father left in ready Money behind him: His Farm,
etc. I rate at two hundred and fifty pound more, there are the Writings, and
there is the Money. By the Writings I saw it cost my Father, but two hundred
Pound; as for his Apparel and other little necessaries, I gave them by his
Order to a Maid Servant, and a Man that he hired; and for his Goods, there is
but few, nor have we made an Estimate of them; but if you will have them Praised,
I will give something more than what they are valued at, being I would
willingly have them along with the House. Says I, neither shall they be parted,
and if you please to except of them, be they what the will you shall be
heartily welcome: He refused them obstinately, but I prevailed with him to take
them with much ado; he also gave me a Ring which I prized mightily, because it
had been my Father's from his Infancy, given him by my Grandfather. When he had
settled every thing, I went to see the Place where my Father's Bones were laid,
which filled me with such awful Sorrow, that I could not refrain from Weeping
in spite of my Resolution to the contrary. I would have Erected a Tomb, or
Monument for him, but it was his last Request that he might be Buried as
obscurely, as he did design to live there.

After parting with my Father's Grave with a load of Sorrow, we took leave of
my Friend the Parson, and Mr. Hall, and rode for Bristol again; but were
overtaken about six Miles from Hereford by three Gentlemen of the Pad, that had
got some notice of the Booty they should gain if they could Rob us, for I was
so Inadvertent as to put all my Money into my Bags which I wore before me at my
Saddle; they past us first, but looking wishfully upon us, gave us some
suspicion of what they were. Mr. Musgrave advised me to ride back again, and
stay still we had more Company; but I told him they would soon overtake us, and
seeing us fearful would make them more Resolute, so I rather chose to face
them, for we observed they were returning to meet us. We resolved to be before
hand with them, and we drew out our Pistols ready, and if they offered to come
too near us to begin with them. As soon as they came within 20 Yards of us, I
called to them, and asked them what they wanted; if it was our Money, they
should first take our Lives; they answered, they had no such Intention; Than
what is your Reason of passing us first, and then meeting us again? They
answered, one of their Companions in lighting to ease himself below the Hill
had dropped his Watch, and they were returning to find it if they could. Why
then pass by in the Name of God, (says I) and accordingly they did; but we were
cautious of letting them come too near us; as soon as they were past us, we set
Spurs to our Horses, and got over the Heath before we looked behind us; but
riding leasurely through the Village, we saw them coming after a full Gallop. Now
we repented we had not stayed in the Village; but we resolved as before to
encounter them if they Assaulted us: The soon overtook us, and coming even with
us, told us their Companion had found his Watch, which he pulled out and showed
us. They said they could not blame us in taking them for Highway-Men; but they
assured us, they were Travelers as we were, and were going to Worcester. We
did not make any Words with them, but rode along with them, indeed, because we
could not help it: They rode with us for about a Mile, and then the Road going
narrow, one of them pretending to go foremost seized hold of my Bridle, with
the Surprise, my Horse being a very good one, rose up an end; and he
discharging his Pistol, the Ball grazed upon my Cloak-Bag, and did not do any
farther Damage. Upon this I fired one of my Pistols but missed him, but I threw
it at him with all my force, which hit him on the Head so full, that he
staggered a little and fell from his Horse: The other discharged a
Pocket-Pistol at me, and Wounded me slightly in the left Shoulder; but going to
discharge another, I set Spurs to my Horse, and had the good Fortune to snatch
it from him, but in the bustle between us it went off, and shot the other
Highway-Man's Horse in the Head; which so enraged him, that he ran away with
him in spite of all he could to stop him. Mr. Musgrave who engaged with him,
followed him, but considering he had left me with two, returned again, and in
very good time; for the other Fellow that I had knocked down with my Pistol,
had got up again, and had just caught his Horse that was grazing under the
Hedge. His other Companion that I had taken the Pistol from, had* drawn a broad
cutting Sword, and was laying at me; I by good Fortune had before me a great
Coat for fear of Rain, and the ball of his Pistol had broke the Strap, so that
I wrapped it round my left Arm, and received his Blow, which did me no damage,
and in the mean time thrust my Sword into his Side up to the Hilt, which
nevertheless did not kill him. But he called to his Companion; come Harry let us
make off, for by G -- d I believe I Am killed: Accordingly they fled as fast as
ever they could back again, the way we came, with my Sword in his Breast; for
when he received the Wound, he turned so short with his Horse, that wrung the
Hilt out of my Hand. Mr. Musgrave was for following them, but I found some pain
in my Shoulder, and it began to grow stiff, being cold, and chose to go on; but
in our riding and talking of the late Accident, we lost our Road, and had taken
that which had led to Gloucester; and riding on, we met the third High-way-man,
whose Horse had run away with him, who was coming back, as we supposed, to see
how Things went: As soon as ever he saw us, he turned his Horse, and rid away
as hard as ever he could, and we rid as fast after him, it being, as we
thought, our Road; we followed him through several Villages, and we called to
the People to stop him, but to no purpose; at last his Horse stumbled, which
gave us time to come pretty near him; when he found he could not escape us, he
turned about, and discharged a Pistol at us; I had one Pistol that I had not
fired yet, which I drew from the Housing, and let fly at him, and wounded him
in the Neck; he fled as fast as he could, and our Horses beginning to tire, he
got out of our sight; we asked several People we met, whether they had seen any
such Person, and they told us he was gone into Gloucester Town e're then; we
followed, and got into Gloucester immediately, and were told such a Man was seen
to ride through the Town, so we pursued him no farther, our Horses being very
much tired; but they sent a Hue-and-Cry after him, but to no purpose, for they
returned no wiser than they went out. We stayed at Gloucester two Days to have my
Wound dressed, and then rode to Bristol, where all our Friends waited
impatiently for us, being we had exceeded our Time three Days, after having
settled my Money in the Hands of People, that the Captain appointed to Improve
it for me. I resolved to make a Trip to Ireland to see my Sister that was
married very well to a Merchant there: But hearing of the Grand Fleet making
Preparation for some Expedition, put us all agog, and my natural Genius for
Travel, made me once more resolve to be Gadding. I opened my Mind to Captain
Pultney, who advised me to the contrary; but I told him I was so much concerned
for my Father's Death, (as indeed I was) that I should sooner wear it off at
Sea, than on Shore, being here every Object that I saw put me in mind of Him.
He was very well satisfied with my Reasons at last; but, says He, I would not
have you go in any Post, but as a Voluntier, that you may not be confined to
stay longer than you should desire. I thought this the best way, therefore
resolved for London with all my Companions, and get us a Ship. I had Letters of
Recommendations to Secretary Burchet, and several Gentlemen that had the
Management of the Navy. We arrived at London February the 8 th, 1701, Mr.
Musgrave and I entered on Board the Breda, Captain Fog Commander, because we
were informed Admiral Benbow would hoist his Flag in that Ship. Mr. Musgrave
having formerly had some Acquaintance with the Admiral, waited on him, and had
a Warrant for a Quartermaster given him. The rest of our Companions entered
before the Mast, that is, Common Sailors in the same Ship. Hood was soon made
Cook's Mate, and the rest of 'em got some little Office, that raised 'em
something above the Common Sailors, though they entered as such, and all by the
means of Mr. Musgrave, who acquainted the Admiral with their Fortunes. When we
had sent all our Things on Board, and not knowing when they would Sail, Mr.
Musgrave and I got leave to go to Portsmouth by Land, where we arrived on
Saturday March the 3 d, and stayed there till the English and Dutch Fleet
arrived. A Squadron was ordered out to Cruise, of which our Ship was one, but
an unlucky Accident hindered my going with her, (but Mr. Musgrave was forced to
go against his Inclinations, and leave me behind him;) which was as follows.
One Evening coming from seeing a Play at the Bull's Head, a Gentleman coming
out with a Lady, the Crowd by chance jostled me against the Lady, which this
Gentleman Mr. Martin (Nephew to Johnny Gibson, Governor of the Place) took as
an Affront put upon him, being he had the Care of the Lady; but I begged her
Pardon, and told her it was an Accident I could not help; but he being in a
strange Passion, called me several genteel Names, as Rogue, Rascal, and such
like, and struck me over the Head with his Cane, though I did not much mind his
Words; I did not care to take his Blows without a Return, which I did with
Interest, and we were soon parted. But an Hour after, being at the aforesaid
Bull-Head at Supper, the Drawer came up and told us, There was a Gentleman
below desired to speak one Word to Mr. Falconer; there was one Mr. Langley,
Lieutenant to the Windsor Man of War, that I had made an acquaintance with at
the Play, that promised to come and sup with us, and I took the Message to come
from him, but was surpised to find it, the Gentleman that I had the Bustle
with. He wanted to drink a Glass of Wine withme He said, and led me into a
Room; when we were there, he told me he came for Satisfaction of the Affront I
put upon him about an Hour ago; therefore draw, added he, or I Will run you
through. I endeavored to pacify him with good Words, yet all to no purpose; he
made so many Thrusts at me, that I was in danger of my Life; but at last I
disarmed him, but not without a little Wound in my Arm: As soon as I gave him
his Sword again, he pushed at me with all the Malice imaginable; and hearing
the People from all Parts of the House, coming to see what was the Matter, he
clapped his Back against the Door to keep 'em out, which They on the other side
broke open, and giving him a push, his Breast ran against the point of my
Sword, which appeared at his Back, and he fell down without any sign of Life.
The People coming in, I was immediately secured, and carried to Prison, till
they knew whether he would live, or die. I was mightily concerned, not from any
Danger was to be feared, but that it would be a hindrance to my Voyage. The
Gentleman continued in a violent Fever a great while, and his Life was
despaired of; but at last, after a tedious Illness recovered, but continued
weak. One Day he came to visit me in a Chair, where I was confined, and told me
He was very sorry for what had happened, and that to day I should be at
liberty; and accordingly came an Order in the Afternoon for my Freedom, without
paying any Fees. But to my great Grief the Fleet was sailed, and Benbow's
Squadron designed for the Indies. But Mr. Martin begged me to be patient, and he
would procure me a Passage in a Store-Ship that would sail in a Week at
farthest for Jamaica, and he was as good as his Word; for the next Day he
carried me to Captain Young, Commander of the Tiger Store-Ship, and entered me
immediately. Then my Heart began to be at Rest, and I gave him Thanks; and for
the time we stayed there, Mr. Martin and I were very intimate; and he expressed
himself so genteelly about our former Encounter, that he gained my Esteem.

Passion indeed, is certainly a Madness; and therefore what is done in that
Heat ought to be forgot, if the Person themselves repent of it. But how humane
it would be, if in the midst of that Fire of Passion which blazes out, they
could sprinkle the cool Water of Reason, and quench it? For nothing more
deforms the Mind or Body than Passion, and it is then we lose our humane Form,
and are metamorphos'd into Beasts. How many great and good Men have done such
things in Passion, that they have repented of all their Lives after. Therefore
Passion may be well termed a Pilfering Devil, that steals away our Senses, and
prompts us to do Actions unbecoming the Form we bear.

We set Sail from Spithead May the 18 th, 1701, and our Captain gave us hopes
of overtaking the Fleet, by reason he said, one Ship could make better way than
a whole Fleet, being they were obliged to wait for one another. We met with
nothing extraordinary but a Storm, that drove us almost upon the Island Madera*
which being so nigh, our Captain resolved to Anchor at, and accordingly we did
in the Bay of the City of Funzal, the Capitol of the Place, Captain Young and I
went on Shore to view the Town.

Funzal, the Capitol of this Island, is a large handsome City, with one
Cathedral and four other Churches, all neatly Built; two Cloisters, one for the
Men, and the other for the Women. The City contains 1600 Houses. There is also
computed to be upon this Island 100000 Inhabitants. I bought a Portugueze Book
here that gives a better Account of the first Discovery of this Island than any
I have seen extant, which Mr. Musgrave translated for me in English. I have
seen it in French since, but not truly translated, being there was something
left out concerning King Edward the Third, that conquered France. And as the
Honor belongs to the English as the first Inhabitants, I shall here give it
you faithfully translated. It being but short, I hope it will not be found
tedious. For in all my Voyages I avoid prolixity, as being offensive to all
Readers, and the Places I describe are generally such as are not frequented by
the English, it being my fortune to be carried there.

THE HISTORY OF THE Discovery of the Island of MADERA:
Written Originally in Portugueze by Don Francisco de Alcafarado, and
Translated into English by W. Musgrave, Native of Jamaica.
WHEN England was settled in a lasting Peace, after the Turmoils and Hazard of
a dangegerous War. King Edward the Third, who conquered France, and fixed his
Royal Standard in the City of Paris: He who had felt the Inconveniences of War,
knew how to encourage the Pleasures of Peace, and London the Metropolitan City
of the Kingdom, became the Seat of Mirth and Jollity. All thoughts of War were
banished; the Ensigns now were furled, and Swords were wore for Ornament, not
Use. Among the rest that embellished the Court, was one Lionel Machin, the
youngest Brother of a noble Family, and consequently not over-rich; yet a
Gentleman (which often happens in younger Brothers) that was reckoned the only
Ornament of the Root from whence he sprung. This Gentleman fell desperately in
Love with a Lady, beautiful to Perfection, and the only Boast of her Time. But
there was a vast Disparity in their Fortunes; for she was the only Daughter to
a Nobleman, whose Riches exceeded most of his Rank, and consequently courted by
those that could make her a Jointure equal to the Fortune her Father would give
her. But nevertheless the Force of Love is such, that it never minds Interest
nor Duty; and the young Lady, whose Name was Arabella, was so much taken with
the winning Behavior of Lionel, that she placed her entire Affection upon him,
who was indeed, bating his slender Means, the most deserving of her. But the
Parents of Arabella hearing of the Amity that was between 'em, complained to
King Edward, and begged that he would interpose his Royal Authority. The King
used many Persuasions to Lionel to withdraw his Affections, but it was like
bidding the Sun stand still, or the Wind, or Rain, to cease; for their
Affections were so strongly united, that nothing could ever part 'em. The
Father having provided a fit Match for his Daughter, entreated the King to
secure Lionel till the Marriage was solemnized, who granted his Request, and
clapped Lionel in Prison under pretense of some treasonable Practices. When
immediately the Marriage-Rites were performed, and Arabella was constrained to
give her Hand where it was not in her Power to give her Heart; and Parents are
to blame to force their Children to marry against their Inclinations, being
from thence springs such Disorders in Families that is not in their Power to
compose. As soon as the Ceremony was over, the Husband carried his Lady to a
Palace, seated upon the River Severn, near Bristol: When done, Lionel was
released out of Prison, but with a heavy Heart, for the Loss of his dear
Arabella. But still his Love increased from the Difficulties he found to obtain
his Desire, and knowing it impossible to live without her, thought of a
Stratagem that gave him hopes of conquering all Difficulties. He summoned about
Thirty young Gentlemen, all Resolute, Bold, and fit for any Undertaking* When
he had got 'em all together, he made this short Oration to 'em:

Most here are my Relations, or what is a nearer Tie, my Bosom-friends: You all
know the Indignity I have suffered, by Arabella's forced Marriage; therefore I
require you all to assist me in whatever I shall undertake (without tainting
your Honor) to be Revenged for the Affront put upon me. To this Request they
all agreed to serve him with their Lives and Fortunes.

Whereupon it was resolved to part and take several ways to Bristol: When they
all arrived at their Place of Rendezvous, they consulted together, and resolved
to seize any Ship in the River, that they found was fit for their turn. Lionel
thought nothing difficult when Love was to be the Reward; but now he wanted
some means to let Arabella know their Design: But at last it was agreed, that
one of their Company should enter into the Service of the Husband, which fell
out as they could wish, and a proper Person was hired to be Groom, where he had
the care of a fine spotted Horse, that used to carry the Lady abroad, to visit
her Neighbors: The Wind proving fair, notice was given that the Project was to
be put in Execution; the pretended Groom, to favor the Business, had omitted
giving Arabella's Horse any Water. When Arabella had notice of the Hour, she
ordered her spotted Horse to be Sadled, under pretense of taking the Air,
attended with her Groom, and two more of her Domestics. When they came near
the Cape of Land, where Lionel and his Companions waited for Her; the Horse by
beating of the Waves against the Shore heard and smelt the Water, and made down
to it to Drink, where Lionel immediately laid hold of the Lady, (who seemed to
be mightily frightened) and put her in their Boat and made off. Now the Day
that they had seized the Lady, was also pitched on to seize the Ship they had a
design upon; which was easily done, being their Crew were most of them a Shore.
They cut her Cables, and made off to Sea withal the Sail they could bear, and
soon got out of sight, and directed their Course for France, but a Storm met
them and drove them quite contrary. Lionel's Friends now began to Repent of
their Undertaking, and Lionel was mightily concerned for the Danger of Her, he
Loved more dear than Life; who though mightily disordered with the Sea, yet
seemed contented in having the Object of her Desire with Her. Thirty Days they
were the sport of the Waves, every Day expecting Death; but one Morning they
discovered Land, high, craggy, and very Woody, which filled them with Joy, more
especially Lionel, for now he hoped a resting Place, for his dear Arabella.
None in the Ship could guess what Land it could be, for they knew it was not
Inhabited, being Birds of all sorts were so tame, that they would suffer
themselves to be taken with the Hand. The Place they chose for their
Habitations was a fine Grove of Laurel-Trees that were very delightful, as was
also every part of the Country they had rambled over. Finding they were to stay
there a great while, they got out of their Ship several Necessaries, and lived
very pleasant for about 13 Days, designing to commit themselves in a Day or two
to the mercy of the Waves, for though the Island was delightful to live in, yet
it seemed tiresome to those that wanted many things they enjoyed in their own
Country.

The Night before they designed to Embark, a violent Storm rose, and drove the
Ship from the Island with about 16 Men that were preparing all things for
Sailing the next Day. These were tossed by the Winds and Sea for many Days, but
at last, to their great Joy, discovered Land, where they ran their Ship on
Shore, being she was so leaky she could hardly Swim. But their Joy for being
saved from the watery Element, soon changed to Sorrow, when they found
themselves taken by the Moors; they being Landed on the Coast of Africa. Their
new Masters (after hard usage) arrived at the City of Morocco, with their
Purchase, where they sold them in the Market like Cows, or Oxen; but all
declaring they were Men of Rank, they were Imprisoned, in hopes of large
Ransoms.

When Lionel and Arabella, and the rest that were left on Shore, discovered the
next Morning their fatal Disaster; Grief siez'd them with such a force, that
some of them lost their Senses, running Frantic up and down the Woods, and
raving, killed themselves. Poor Arabella's Grief sunk inward, and preyed upon
her Life with such Violence, that Death appeared to her Rescue: She never
upbraided Linel with her Misfortunes, but closed her Eyes with a true
Repentance of her failings.

Lionel was like a distracted Man, laid himself down at her Feet, and could
not be removed till Death gave him his Release. His Companions buried them
together in one Grave, and at the Foot Erected a Cross, to show those that were
Interred there, died under the Banner of Christ: Upon the Bark of the Tree,
they cut in Letters the whole Story of their Misfortunes. The rest that
remained upon the Island, proposed to themselves of venturing into their Boat
(which by good Fortune was left on Shore) and steered their Course to the
nighest main Land, where they happily arrived without Danger, but ran the same
Fate with their other Companions that were thrown on the same Coast in the
Ship, that they all thought was cast away. All the comfort they received in
their Misfortunes, was, that they were committed to the same Prison, that their
Companions were in. They were over Joy'd to find those alive that were thought
dead, but mourned to think of meeting in such a melancholy Place. In the same
Prison was one Juan de Morales, a noted Pilot, and an excellent Navigator; this
Man was mightily pleased with the Tales of these English Gentlemen, and so
often begged them to repeat their Adventures, that he had every Mark of the
Island exact, and perfectly saw it in immagination. In the Year 1416 Don
Sancho, Son to Ferdinand King of Arragon, died in Castile, and left
considerable Sums of Money to redeem Spanish Prisoners that were Captive in
Barbary; among the rest was Juan de Morales, and at the same time the English
Gentlemen got their Ransom, and safely arrived in their own Country, with a
Pardon for their Offense from the King of England, and the Husband of Arabella.
Morales and all his Ship's Crew, were taken by the Portugals, who met with 'em
cruising in those Seas, but all excepting Morales had their Liberty given them,
who was detained for his Knowledge in the Mathematics, and Promises were made
him of great Recompense, if he would serve King John of Portugal in his
Discoveries.

As soon as they were arrived at Lisbon, Morales was presented to the King, by
Don Henry the Infant, who was a great encourager to new Discoveries, where he
opened the whole Story of Lionel and Arabella: Which was so generally received,
that a Fleet was ordered immediately for this new Voyage, and June the 2 d,
1420 set out to Sea well Armed. They designed first for Porto Sancto, as being
nigh the Island as Morales conjectured the English abandoned.

When they arrived there, the Inhabitants advised them not to go any farther in
their Discoveries toward the N. E. being there was a black Cloud which would
terminate their Navigation, because there was not any one that ever attempted
it, but lost their Lives for their Presumption, and were never heard of more.
Notwithstanding Gonsalvo the Admiral, and Morales the Pilot, were well assured
that very Cloud was the Island they wanted to find, they were the more
convinced in it, by reason the Cloud continued of the same color through every
Change of the Moon. But the rest of the Ship's Crew were of the contrary
Opinion, and Mutiniz'd against Morales, telling him that he being a Castilian,
(an consequently their Enemy) did it to Disgrace them; and that it was a
Presumptious thing to pretend to search into the Secrets of Providence.

Notwithstanding their grumblings, they set Sail from Porto Sancto, and made
forward for their Discovery; but the nearer they approached this Cloud, the
more frightful it grew, which caused a terrible fear in all the Sailors,
entreating Gonsales to return, and not to be the Death of so many innocent
People. But still they held their Course for all their Clamours; yet Gonsales
to encourage the Sailors, assured 'em it must be firm Land, and to dissipate
their Fears, made 'em this following Oration.

Why should I be more hardy than you, but that I am confirmed it is as I tell
you? If there should be any Danger, have I any Means to extricate my self more
than your selves? Is not my Life as precious to me, as any of yours, my
Companions? A Fool-hardiness does not become us, it is true; but a firm Courage
is what all Men should be endu'd with. Every Person here has ventured his Life
for his King* in Battle before now, without half the Recompense or Honor that
will be gained by this Expedition, if we succeed, as we certainly shall, if we
arm our selves with Resolution to overcome all Difficulties: Banish your Fears,
and call your Reason to your Aid, and let us proceed in the Name, and for the
Honor of God, and our King.

They proceeded cheerfully, animated by this Oration, and in a little time
entered the Cloud, or settled Fog; but the Tide driving the Vessel too far
North, they put out their Boats to Tow their Ship in the midst of the Cloud;
but the farther they Rowed, the Cloud seemed to decrease, and presently after
they discovered Land to their great Joy, being it was what but few of them
expected: The first Cape they discovered, was called by Gonsales, Cape St.
Lawrence, which they doubled and saw a fine and fertile Country full of fair
and lofty Trees, that made the prospect Delightful. Sailing on, they discovered
a large Bay, which Morales judged to be the Place where the English were
thrown; but it being late, Gonsales ordered to let fall the Anchors, not caring
to Land till they had the whole Day before them. The next Morning they Landed,
and found it to be the same Place where Lionel Machin, and Arabella were Buried.

When they had given account to the Admiral of the State of Things, He Landed
and took Possession of the Island for his Master, John the First, King of
Portugal. They erected an Altar upon the Tomb of the two Lovers; said Mass, and
returned God thanks for their happy Success.

Gonsales termed the Island Madera from the quantity of its Wood, (which in the
Portugueze Language signifies Woody) that was found all over the Island, but no
humane Inhabitants.

After they had searched well on Shore, Boats were ordered to Row round the
Island, being it was dangerous for their Ship, by reason of many Rocks and
Shallows that lay in the Water. So steering West, they discovered four fine
small Rivers running into the Sea, the Water being extremely clear. Gonsales
ordered some to be bottled to present to the King of Portugal his Master at his
Return.

Going farther, several Soldiers were Landed in a Valley, which was watered by
a fine River, and a noble Grove of Trees that made a perfect Harbor, where
Gonsales erected a large Cross.

Sailing on, they came to a Point of Land that ran a great way into the Sea,
which was inhabited by such a Number of great, different Birds, that the Men
were afraid of being devoured by 'em. This Place was named Punta des Gralhos,
from the large Number of Birds.

Going forward, they discovered a Valley covered with fine large Cedar-Trees;
next to that they found another large one, where was a great Lake or Pond, from
whence they could perceive the Bay they set out from. With searching the
Country, they discovered a large Plain, which overlooked the rest of the
Island, free from Trees, but covered over with a beautiful Fennal, called by
the Portugueze Funchall. Upon this Plain they built a City, and called it
Funchall, from the quantity of Fennel that was found there, which was formerly
a Bishop's See, but is still the chief Place for Temporal Affairs.

From this Plain runs three Rivers into the Sea, which form an Island, and
Landlock the Haven, secure from Storms and Tempests.

Gonsales still sent out more Men for Discoveries in the Island, where they
found a white Rock, called by the Portugueze Praya Formosa, or the Fair Rock;
below which was a fierce Torrent of Water, so clear, that obliged 'em all to
observe it. Two resolute Soldiers pulled off their Clothes, and attempted to
swim across the Stream, but were hurried away with the Current in such an
impetuous manner, that they had perished if they had not been timely succored
by their Companions by Ropes, which they threw in, and pulled 'em up against
the Violence of the Stream. This Torrent they named Soccorides,

The most remarkable Thing they found in their Voyage, was a great Number of
Sea-Wolves, which rushed out of a Cave into the Water when they approached 'em.
Gonsales gathered all Sorts of Plants, Roots, Flowers and Minerals, together
with all Sorts of Birds, and a large Parcel of the Earth, and embarked for
Portugal, where he safely arrived August the 2 d. The same Year 1420, where he
was received with all the favor imaginable.

In May 1421, Gonsales was made Governor of the whole Island, with an
additional Title of Count, and in the same Month set Sail with his Wife and two
Daughters, and many more, for the Inhabiting the same, where he happily
arrived, and laid the Foundation for the present Capitol of Funchal, or Funzal,
but to Honor Lionel Machin, who was there interred, he called the Place Porto
Machino, and over the Grave he erected a noble Church. Some Writers relate that
Gonsales set the Woods on fire, that continued burning for seven Years, which
made Wood scarce in that Island; but there is such Plenty of all Sorts, that I
look upon that Story but as a Fable. The Island daily increased in its
Inhabitants, till it came to the now flourishing State it remains in.

Madera is situated in thirty Degrees and thirty-one Minutes. In Circumference
and about forty Leagues, twelve in Length, about two Broad. The Air so
temperate, that neither Heat nor Cold is troublesome, and the Soil so fertile,
that it yields more Corn for the Bigness of the Place than any other Island, as
large again. The Grass shoots up so high, that they are obliged to burn it, and
in the Ashes they plant Sugarcanes, which in six Months time produce Sugar.
The Inhabitants are more civilized than any of the Canary-Islands.

After we had made an End of our Affairs, we set Sail from thence, and directed
our Course for Teneriff, one of the Canary-Islands, or the Insulae Fortunatae
of Ptolomy, where we safely arrived* This Island lies in twenty-seven Degrees,
and thirty Minutes; about fourteen Leagues in length. Sancta Cruze, the Place
where we Anchored, is the chief Harbor. It is an Island very well inhabited,
containing three Cities, or large Towns, besides a great Number of Villages.
But what it is famed most for is the Pike, or high Mountain, that rears its Head
above the Clouds, and seems to scale even Heaven it self. I have seen many
People that have told me they have been at the Top of this Mountain: But none
give so good a Description of it (and even the whole Island) as the Right
Reverend Dr. Sprat in his History of the Royal Society; which is as follows.

Having furnished our selves with a Guide, Servants, and Horses, to carry our
Wine and Provision; we set forth from Oratava, a Port-Town in the Island of
Teneriff, situated on the Northside, two Miles distant from the Main Sea, and
traveled from twelve at Night till eight in the Morning, by which time we got
to the Top of the first Mountain, toward the Pico de Terraira: There, under a
very large, and conspicuous Pine Tree, we took our Breakfast, Dined, and
refreshed our selves till Two in the Afternoon: Then we passed through many
sandy Ways, over many lofty Mountains, but naked and bare, and not covered with
any Pine-Trees, as our first Night's Passage was. This exposed us to excessive
Heat, till we arrived at the Foot of the Pico, where we found many huge Stones,
which seemed to have fallen from some upper Part: About six in the Evening we
began to ascend the Pico, but we were scarce advanced a Mile, and the Way being
no more passable for Horses, we left them with our Servants. In the Ascent of
one Mile, some of our Company grew very faint and sick, disordered by Fluxes,
Vomitings, and Aguish Distempers, our Horse's Hairs standing upright like
Bristles, and calling for some of our Wine, carried on small Barrels on a
Horse; we found it so wonderfully cold, that we could not drink it till we had
made a Fire to warm it, notwithstanding the Air was very calm and moderate. But
when the Sun was set, it began to blow with such Violence, and grew so cold,
that taking up our Lodging amongst the hollow Rocks, we were necessitated to
keep great Fires in the Mouths of 'em all Night. About Four in the Morning we
began to mount again; and being come another Mile up, one of our Company
failed, and was not able to proceed any farther. Here began the black Rocks.
The rest of us pursued our Journey till we came to the Sugar Loaf, where we
began to travel again in a White Sand, being fitted with Shoes, whose single
Soles are made a Finger broader than the upper Leather to encounter this
difficult Passage. Having ascended as far as the black Rocks, which lay all
flat like a plain Floor. We climbed within a Mile of the very Top of the Pico,
and at last we gained the Summit, where we found no such Smoke as appeared a
little below, but a continual Perspiration of a hot and sulphurous Vapor, that
made our Faces extremely sore. All this way we found no considerable Alteration
of the Air, and very little Wind, but on the Top it was so impetuous, that we
had much ado to stand against it, whilst we drank the King's Health, and fired
each of us a Piece. Here also we took our Dinner, but found that our
Strong Water had lost their Virtue, and were almost insipid, while our Wine
was more spirituous and brisk than before. The Top on which we stood being not
above a Yard broad, is the brink of a Pit, called the Caldera, which we judged
to be a Musket Shot over, and near fourscore Yards deep, in form of a Cone,
hollow within like a Kettle, and covered with small loose Stones, mixed with
Sulphur and Sand, from among which issued diverse Spiracles of Smoke and Heat;
which being stirred with any thing, puffs and makes a Noise, and so offensive,
that we were almost suffocated with the sudden Emanation of Vapors, upon the
removing one of these Stones, which were so hot as not easily to be handled. We
descended not above four or five Yards into the Caldera, because of the
slipperiness under foot, and the difficulty; but some have adventured to the
Bottom. Other Matters observable, we discovered none, besides a clear sort of
Sulphur which lay like Salt upon the Stones. From this renowned Pico we could
see the Grand Canaries, 14 Leagues distant; Palma, 18; and Gomera, 7; which
interval of Sea seemed not much wider than the Thames about London. We
discerned also the Herro, being distant about 20 Leagues, and so to the utmost
Limits of the Sea, much farther. As soon as the Sun appeared, the shadow of the
Pico seemed to cover, not only the whole Island, and the Grand Canaries, but
the Sea, to the very Horizon, where the top of the Sugar Loaf or Pico, visibly
appeared to turn up, and cast its shade into the Air itself, at which we were
much surpised; but the Sun was not far Ascended, when the Clouds began to rise
so fast, as that they intercepted our Prospect both of the Sea, and the whole
Island, except the tops only of the subjacent Mountains, which seemed to pierce
them through. Whether these Clouds do ever surmount the Pico, we cannot say, but
to such as are far below, they seem sometimes to hang above it, or rather wrap
themselves about it, as constantly when the West Winds blow; this they call the
Cap, and is the infallible Prognostic of ensuing Storms. One of our Company
who made this Journey again two Years after arriving at the top of the Pico
before Day, and creeping under a great Stone to shroud himself from the cold
Air, after a little space found himself all wet, and perceived it to come from
a perpetual trickling of Water from the Rocks above him. Many excellent and
exuberant Springs we found issuing from the tops of most of the other
Mountains, gushing out in great Spouts almost as far as the huge Pine Tree,
which we mentioned before. Having stayed a while at the top, we all descended
the sandy Way, till we came to the foot of the Sugar Loaf, which being steep,
even almost to a perpendicular, we soon passed; and here we met with a Cave
about 10 Yards deep, and 15 broad, being in shape like an Oven, or Cupola,
having a hole at the top, near 8 Yards over. This we descended by a Rope that
our Servants held fast at the top, while with the other end (being fastened
about our middles) we swung our selves, till being over a Bank of Snow, we slid
down lighting upon it; we were forced to swing thus in our descent, because in
the midst of the bottom of this Cave, opposite to the overture at the top, is a
round Pit of Water, like a Well, the Surface whereof is about a Yard lower, but
as wide as the Mouth at top, and about six Fathom deep. We supposed this Water
not a Spring, but dissolved Snow blown in, or Water trickling through the Rocks.
About the sides of the Grot, for some height there is Ice and Icicles hanging
down to the Snow. But being quickly weary of this excessive cold Place, and
drawn up again, we continued our Descent from the Mountains, by the same
Passage we went up the Day before, and so about five in the Evening arrived at
Orotava, from whence we set forth; our Faces so red and sore, that to coll 'em,
we were forced to wash and bath them in whites of Eggs. The whole height of the
Pico in Perpendicular is vulgarly esteemed to be two Miles and a half; no
Trees, Herbs, nor Shrubs did we find in all the Passage, but Pines; and among
the whiter Sands, a kind of Broom being a bushy Plant; and on that side where
we lay all Night, a kind of Coalon, which had stems eight Foot high, and the
Trunk near a Foot thick, every stem growing in four Squares, and emerging from
the Ground like tuffs of Rushes; upon the edges of these Stems grow very small
red Buttons, or Berries, which being squeezed, produce a poisonous Milk; which
falling upon any part of a Horse, or other Beast, fetches off all the Hair from
the Skin immediately; of the withered Sticks of this Vegetable we made our Fire
all Night. This Plant is also universally spread over the Island, and is
perhaps a kind of Euphorbium.

Of the Island Teneriff it self, this Account was given by a Judicious and
Ingenious Man who lived twenty Years in it, as a Physician and Merchant, his
Opinion is, that the whole Island being a Soil mightily impregnated with
Brimstone, did in former Times take Fire, and blow up all, or near all, at the
same time; and that many Mountains of huge Stone, calcined and burnt, which
appears all over this Island, especially in the South-West part of it, were
cast up, and raised out of the Bowels of the Earth, at the time of that General
Conflagration; and that the greatest Quantity of this Sulphur, lying about the
Center of the Island, raised up the Pico to that height at which it is now
seen; and he says* that any one upon the Place, that shall carefully Note the
Situation, and Manner of those calcined Rocks, how they lie, will easily be of
that Mind; for they lie (says he) three, or four Miles almost round the bottom
of the Pico, and in such Order one above another, almost to the Sugar Loaf, as
it is called, as if the whole Ground swelling and rising up together, by the
Ascension of the Brimstone, the Torrents, and Rivers of it, did with a sudden
Eruption, roll, and tumble them down from the rest of the Rocks, especially (as
is said before) to the South-West, for on that side from the very top of the
Pico, almost to the Sea Coast, lie huge heaps of these burnt Rocks one under
another; and there still remain the very Tracts of the Brimstone Rivers, as
they run over this Quarter of the Island, which has so wasted the Ground beyond
recovery that nothing can be made to grow there but Broom: But on the
North-side of the Pico, few or none of these Stones appeared; and hence he
concludes, that the Vulcanio discharged it self chiefly on the South-West side.
He adds farther, that at the same time Mines of several Mettles were blown up,
some of those calcined Rocks resembling Iron-Oar, some Silver, and others
Copper; particularly on the South-West Parts, called Azuleios being very high
Mountains, where never any Englishman but himself (that ever he heard of) was.
There are vast quantities of a loose bluish Earth, mixed with blew Stones,
which have a yellow rust upon 'em, like that of Copper, or Vitriol; as also
many small Springs of Vitriol Water, where he supposes a Copper Mine, and he
was told by a Bell-founder of Oratavia, that he got out of two Horse Loads of
this Earth, as much Gold as made two large Rings: And a Portugueze who had been
in the West Indies told him, that his Opinion was, there were as good Mines of
Gold and Silver there, as the best in the West Indies. Thereabouts also are
Nitrous Waters, and Stones covered over with a deep Saffron-colour'd rust,
tasting of Iron; and farther, he mentions one of his Friends, which of two
Lumps of Earth or Oar, brought from the top of this side of the Mountain, made
two Silver Spoons. All this he confirmed by the last Instance of the
Palm-Island, 18 League from the Teneriff, where, about 12 Years since a
Vulcanio was fixed, the violence thereof made an Earthquake in this Island, so
great, that he and others ran out of their Houses, fearing they would have
fallen upon their Heads; they heard the noise of the Torrent of flaming
Brimstone, like Thunder, and saw the Fires as plain by Night, for six Weeks
together, as a burning Torch, and so much Sand and Ashes brought from thence by
the Wind and Clouds fell upon his Hat, as would fill the Sandbox of his Inkhorn.

In some places of this Island grows a crooked Shrub called Legnan, which they
bring for England as a sweet Wood. There are likewise. Apricocks, Peach-trees,
and others, which bear twice a Year; also Pear Trees, as pregnant; Almonds with
a tender Shell; Palms, Plantains, Oranges and Lemons, especially the
Paeguadaes, which have small ones within them, from whence they are so
denominated. Also they have Sugarcanes, and a little Cotton, Colloquintida,
etc. The Roses blow at Christmas; there are good Carnations, and very large,
but no Tulips will grow or thrive there; Samphire clothes the Rocks in
abundance, and a kind of Clover the Ground. Another Grass grows near the Sea,
which is of a broader Leaf, so luscious and rank, that it will kill a Horse
that eats of it, but no other Beast. Eighty Ears of Wheat have been found to
spring from one Root, but grows not very high; the Corn of this is transparent,
like the purest yellow Amber, and one Bushel has brought forth a hundred in a
seasonable Year.

The Canary Birds which they bring to us in England, bred in the Baranco's or
Gills, which the Water has fretted away in the Mountains, being Places very
cold. There are also Quails, Partridges larger than ours, and exceeding
Beautiful, great Wood Pigeons, Turtles at Spring, Crows, and sometimes the
Falcons come flying over from the Coast of Barbary.

Bees are carried into the Mountains, where they prosper exceedingly, and there
they have wild Goats which climb to the very top of the Pico sometimes; also
Hogs, and multitude of Coneys.

Of Fish, they have the Cherna, a very large and excellent Fish, better tasted
than any we have in England; the Mera, Dolphins, Lobsters without great Claws,
Mussles, Periwincles, and the Clacas, which is absolutely the very best
Shellfish in the World; they grow in the Rocks five or six under one great
Shell, through the top Holes whereof they peep out with their Nibs, from whence
(the Shells being broken open a little more with a Stone) the draw them, there
is also another sort of Fish like an Eel, which has six or seven Tails of a
span long, united to one Head and Body, which is also as short; besides, there
they have Turtles and Cabrido's, which are better than our Trouts. The Island
is full of Springs of fresh Water, tasting like Milk; which in Lalagima, where
the Water is not so clear and Lympid, they cleanse by percolating it through a
kind of spungy Stone, cut in form of a basin. The Vines which afford those
excellent Wines grow all about the Island within a Mile of the Sea; such as are
planted farther up are not much esteemed, nor will they thrive in any of the
other Islands. Concerning the Guanchio's or ancient Inhabitants, he gave this
full account the 3 d of September, about 12 Years since, he took his Journey
from Guimar, a Town for the most part Inhabited, by such as derive themselves
from the ancient Guanchio's in the Company of some of them, to view their
Caves, and the Corpse buried in them: (a Favor they seldom or never permit to
any, having the Corpse of their Ancestors in great Veneration, and likewise
being extremely against any molestation of the Dead) but he had done several
Elemosinary Cures among them, for they are very poor (yet the poorest think
themselves too good to Marry with the best Spaniard) which endeared him to them
exceedingly; otherwise it is Death for any Stranger to visit these Caves and
Bodies. The Corpse are sewed up in Goats Skins, with Thongs of the same, with
very great Curiosity, particularly in the incomparable exactness and evenness
of the Seams; and the Skins are made very close and fit to the Corpse, which are
for the most part entire, the Eyes closed, Hair on their Heads, Ears, Nose,
Teeth, Lips and Beard, all perfect, only discolored, and a little shrivled;
likewise the Pudenda of both Sexes. He saw about three or 4 Hundred in several
Caves, some of them standing, others lying upon Beds of Wood, so hardened by an
Art they had (which the Spaniards call Curay, to cure a piece of Wood) that no
Iron can pierce or hurt it. These Bodies are very light, as if made of Straw,
and in some broken Bodies be observed the Nerves and Tendons, and also the
spring of the Veins and Arteries very distinctly. By the relation of the most
ancient of this Island, they had a particular Tribe that had this Art only
among themselves, and kept as a Thing Sacred, and not to be communicated to the
Vulgar; these mixed not themselves with the rest of the Inhabitants, nor Married
out of their own Tribe, and were also their Priests and Ministers of Religion.
But when the Spaniards Conquered the Place, most of them were destroyed, and
the Art perished with them, only they held some Traditions yet of a few
Ingredients that were used in this Business; they took Butter (some say they
mixed Bears-grease with it) which they kept for that purpose in the Skins;
wherein they boiled certain Herbs, first a kind of wild Lavender, which grows
there in great Quantities upon the Rocks; secondly, an Herb called Lara, of a
very gummy and glutinous Consistence, which now grows there under the tops of
the Mountains; thirdly, a kind of Cyclamen or Sowbread; fourthly, wild Sage,
which grows plentifully, upon this Island; these, with others bruised and
boiled up with Butter, rendered it a perfect Balsam; this prepared, they first
unbowel the Corpse (and in the poorer sort, to save Charges, took out the Brains
behind) after the Body was thus ordered, they had in readiness a Lixivium made
of the Bark of Pine-trees, wherewith they washed the Body, drying it in the Sun
in Summer, and in the Winter in a Stove, this repeating very often; afterward
they began their Unction, both without and within, drying it as before; this
they continued till the Balsam had penetrated into the whole Habit, and the
Muscle, in all parts appeared through the contracted Skin, and the Body become
exceeding light, then they sewed them up in Goats-skins, as was before
mentioned. The ancients say, that they have above twenty Caves of their Kings
and great Personages, with their whole Families, yet unknown to any but
themselves, and which they will never discover. Lastly he says, that Bodies are
found in the Caves of the Grand Canaries in Sacks, quite consumed, and not as
these in Teneriff. Anciently when they had no knowledge of Iron, they made
their Lances of Wood, hardened as before memtion'd. They have earthen Pots so
hard that they cannot be broken: Of these some are found in the Caves, and old
Bavances, and used by the poorer People that find them to boil Meat in. Their
Food is Barley parched and then ground with little stone Mills, and mingled
with Milk and Honey, which they always carry with them in Goats-skins at their
Backs: To this Day they drink no Wine, nor care for Flesh, they are very
ingenious, lean tall, active, and full of Courage, for they leap from Rock to
Rock, from a prodigious Height, till they come to the bottom, sometimes making
ten Fathoms deep at one leap, in this manner: First they tertiate their Lances,
which are about the bigness of a half Pike, and aim with the point at any piece
of a Rock, upon which they intend to light, sometimes not half a Foot broad, in
leaping off they clap their Feet close to the Lance, and so carry their Bodies
in the Air, the point of their Lance comes first to the Place, which breaks
the force of their Fall; then they slide gently down by the Staff, and pitch
with their Feet on the very place they first designed, and so from Rock to
Rock, till they come to the bottom; but their Novices sometimes break their
Necks in the learning. He told also (and the same was very seriously confirmed
by a Spaniard, and another Canary Merchant there in the Company) that they
whistle so loud, as to be heard five Miles off, and that to be in the same Room
with them when they whistle, were enough to endanger the breaking the Tympanum
of the Ear; and added, that he (being in Company of one that whistled his
loudest) could not hear perfectly in 15 Days after; he affirms also, that they
throw Stones with a force almost as great as that of a Bullet; and now use
Stones in all their Fights as they did anciently.

This Account was given to that Ingenious and Reverend Divine Dr. Sprat, Bishop
of Rochester, by some English Merchants, who had the Curiosity to ascend the
Pico, one of the highest Mountains in the World; neither could I find him out
in any thing but in the height he allows it to be but two Miles and a half;
but all the Inhabitants agree to make it a full League high.

Captain Young and I attempted to ascend it; but there was such a thick Fog,
that we were persuaded to the contrary; we went up about a Quarter of a Mile,
but were so wet with the Fog, that we had not a dry Thread about us.

When we had satisfied our Curiosities as far as we could, we set Sail from
Teneriff and made our Course for the West Indies. We met a Dutch Ship from
Batavia that was drove by ill Weather several Degrees out of her due Course; we
spared 'em what Necessaries we could, being they were in great Want, and took
our Leaves of 'em. The same Evening a Storm overtook us, and drove us out of
our Course, but in the Night it turned stark Calm. The next Morning we
discovered a Galley with Turkish Colors out, Rowing up to us with all their
Strength; we were all surpised and amazed, and could hardly give credit to our
Eyes, being no one on Board us ever heard of a Turkish Galley so far from their
own Coast; but it seems we were nigher Africa than we supposed, as it proved
afterward. Our Captain told us we had nothing to do but fight it to the last;
for if we were taken, we might be Slaves all our Lives long. I advised our
Captain to put out our Boat, and tow our Ship from 'em: For, says I, if a Wind
does not rise in the mean time, that we may escape 'em, yet we shall gain more
time to put our selves in Readiness to receive 'em when they come up with us.
This Advice was approved on, and the Boat was got out immediately with six Men
to Row, and I obliged my self to go along with her to steer her right, that
they might Row with all their Strength. We Towed so tightly for an Hour, that
we made pretty good way with our Ship; but for all our Endeavors, we found
that in about another Hour they would get up with us; but we designed to Row
till they were within a Quarter of a Mile of us, and then go into the Ship
again. In the mean time our Men on Board had prepared every thing, and were in
good Order to receive 'em. We had sixteen Guns, and forty Men, and Ammunition
enough. We were preparing to come on Board, when we found they were almost up
with us, but our Captain advised me not, and ordered us to have Arms in the
Boat, with some Hand-Granado's; and as soon as we should see 'em Engaged, to go
to the contrary Side of the Enemy, and fire upon 'em, and by that means we
should amuse 'em, that they would not venture to Board us. Immediately it was
agreed, and two more Men together, with our Arms, were put into us. The Galley
came up with us in an Instant, and hailed us in English, and bid us strike our
Colors immediately, or it should be worse for us, but were answered by us with
our Cannon, instead of our Voices, and we went to it. Now to obey my Orders, I
loosed my Tow-Rope, Rowed to get on the other Side of the Galley, but was
mightily surpised to find their Boat out, and about the Number of twenty Turks
getting into her, our Men in the Boat advised immediately to return, but I told
'em 'twas too late, for it would be worse for us if we did: Nay, our Captain
called to us to come on Board, but I thought they would do us more Injury in
getting up the Ship's side, than if we stood 'em boldly, which we resolved to
do: There was nine of us, and we had Arms enough; so before they could fire at
us, we discharged our Muskets at 'em, and laid our selves under the Gunnel of
our Boat to charge again: When we were prepared, I ordered 'em not to stir till
the Turks had fired; and as soon as they had done so, to set Fire to the Fuze
of their Hand- Grando's, and throw 'em upon 'em, as soon as we heard the Turks
fire, which did us no Damage, we set Fire to our Hand- Granado's, as agreed
upon, and threw 'em in upon 'em; but they suspecting something, it seems,
ordered but half their Number to fire at first, and the other half fired upon
us so unluckily, when we rose to discharge our Granado's, that they killed
three of my Men outright, wounded another dangerously, and my self in the left
Arm. It is true, our Granado's killed 'em four, and wounded several; but still
their Number doubled ours, and now they prepared to Board us. My four
Companions and my self fired upon 'em with our Pieces, but could not prevent
'em Boarding us; yet we clubb'd our Muskets on both Sides, and fell to work;
but a Turk coming behind me while I was engaging with another, and struck the
Cock of his Pistol into my Skull, and I dropped down for Dead; but when I came
to my self, which was not in several Hours, as I was told, I found my self on
Board the Galley,

They had ordered a Surgeon to dress my Wounds, which were three; one in my
left Arm, that in my Skull, and another upon the Side of my Throat, which I did
not feel in the receiving. I was ordered to be taken particular care of; for
being I was not in a Sailor's Habit, they thought I was something above the
rest, and therefore hoped to get a considerable Sum for my Ransom. The Surgeon
that dressed me was an English Renegado, whose Name was Matthews. The Captain
was an Englishman too, born at Deptford, but the vilest Wretch sure that ever
breathed. There were several other English Renegado's on Board, most of 'em
profligate Wretches. I understood from my Surgeon, that the two Vessels parted
after a desparate Engagement, and the Turks had above fifty Men killed and
wounded. Three of my Companions were Prisoners likewise; the fourth being
killed in the last Conflict, and the other expired in the Boat with his Wounds.
When I began to mend, I walked upon Deck, and looked about me a little; the
other three (being well) had renounced their Savior Jesus Christ; he who died
for their Sins, and took upon him the State of Man, that he might redeem us
miserable Sinners from the Curse of the Serpent. What must be their Punishment,
who for a little Ease in this World, forego their Portion of Eternal Life? If
the Tortures of Hell have their Degrees, the last and greatest must be their
Lot. The Captain of the Galley ordered me one Day to be brought before him on
the Deck, where he told me, If I did not in a Twelvemonth procure him to the
Value of Eight hundred Pound for my Ransom; I should be chained to the Oar, and
be a Slave all my Life; (it seems one of the Three that was taken with me, had
fold him of my Abilities, and that I was possessed of a plentiful Fortune.) I
answered, I would send to England, and do my Endeavor to get that Sum; but I
told him it was more than I was worth, and there was no hopes of so much Money
for my Ransom, unless my Friends would out of Charity contribute toward it. I
added, I believed I could raise a Hundred and fifty, or Two hundred Pounds: But
he stuck to his Text, and told me, He would bate me nothing of that; and when
the Time was expired that he had fixed, if the Money did not come, I should
never have my Liberty. I told him, I would do my Endeavor to procure it for
him when we came into Port, and had liberty to write to my Friends in England.

The Captain did design to Cruize a Month longer, that he might take some Prize
to make him amends for his last Disappointment. He never importuned me to
forsake my Religion; being, if I had been as vile as the others, he would not
have had any hopes of my Money to redeem me. We coasted off the Shore of Africa
a Fortnight or three Weeks, but met with no Prize; which enraged the Captain
very much. One Day the Surgeon dressing the Wound in my Head, slipped into my
Hand a Letter, which he bid me Read cautiously, and give him an Answer the next
Day. I had not an Opportunity for several Hours to Read the Contents; at last I
counterfeited a sudden Weakness, and retired to my Cabin, which was in the
Place we call the Forecastle. When I laid my self down, and found no one was
near me, I opened my Letter, and Read the Contents to this Effect:

We whose Names are subscribed to this, have resolved upon a Stratagem for our
Liberty, there is seven of us, English, besides your self; and the
Galley-Slaves are 20 in Number who have notice of the Project. One of the
English that has the Keys of the Galley-Slaves Chains is also one of our
Number. Our Project must be put speedily in execution, being they will go into
Harbor in Ten Days, and then it will be impossible to effect it. We will
procure Arms, and give you farther Notice of the Hour. We must not seem to
converse together, neither must you take it ill if you find we give you ill
Language now and then, it being only to insinuate our selves into the good
Esteem of the Turks. When we have redeemed the Slaves, we shall be Twenty-eight
in Number, which will be a sufficient Strength to Cope with the Turks, they
being but Forty-one in all. We will convey Arms into your Cabin by the means of
Mr. Matthews, and we doubt not but we shall effect our Liberty under God.

Signed, Ralph Smallwood, George Jenkins, George Kirk, William Ashton, Richard
Sloan, Edward Wilkins, Anthony Matthews.



After I had read it, I prayed to God to Aid us in our Design. The next Day Mr.
Matthews came to dress me as before; I gave him to understand that I had read,
and considered the Letter, and told him my Opinion was to execute it as fast as
ever we could, for fear of any Accident that might happen: For, says I, it is
not impossible but we may meet with one of their own Galleys, and then we shall
find it to be a fruitless Undertaking. Says he, we must wait a convenient time;
for if we should fail, we must expect the worst of Torments. He went from me
upon this, being some of the Turks came to look upon my Wound. The Captain
asked him how my Hurts fared? Ah! Dam him, says he, the Christian Dog will do
well enough I warrant him: So much the better, answered the Captain, for I am
informed he is worth a great deal of Money, and I shall set his Ransom at a
higher Rate than what I first determined. All this Discourse I heard, being
upon Deck, talking with my three Companions that were taken with me, who
treated me with ill Language, and called me Christian Fool, that would not turn
Mohammedan, when I might have all the Liberty I desired. One of them carried the
Jest so far, that he gave me two or three good Strokes with his Hand; but the
Captain seeing 'em, said to 'em, laughing, Let the Fool alone, it is not worth
your while to foul your Fingers about him. I said so much to 'em concerning
Mahomet their False Prophet, that if the Turks had understood me, I might have
run the Danger of being murdered. But generally the Rengado's, (that is, those
that forsake their Christian Faith, and turn Turks) have so little of any
Religion in 'em, that they laugh at those that have any at all. At Night Mr.
Matthews told me in French very low, that the next Morning early was designed
for their Enterprise, being it was some Fast Day with them, that they usually
at Four a Clock in the Morning rise, and wash themselves all over, and pray to
their Prophet for some time; and this being to be done below, they thought then
would be the right time. Accordingly all that Night they spent secretly in
preparing every thing. He that commanded the Slaves (which was Jenkins) found
fought with 'em for something, and chastised 'em as usual, but took the
Opportunity to unlock 'em all, and ordered 'em to lie still as if their Chains
were fast, till they had Command to do otherwise. Every thing succeeded to our
Wishes, for the Turks got up to their Devotion sooner than we expected, even
before it was Light; and hudling down together, we clapped down the Hatches, and
secured the best part of 'em. The Captain, with two Englishmen, and one
Frenchman, were seized in the Cabin, and bound Hands and Feet; and this without
any Noise. About Eight others that had not got up as early as the rest, our
Galley-Slaves seized; and before we could prevent 'em, had killed 'em all, and
begged they might serve the Captain and the whole Crew in the same kind.

The Bustle the Slaves made in killing the Eight Turks, roused the others below
from their Prayers; and when they found they were shut down, they made a Noise;
and knocking to be let out, which we did; but first we loaded a great Gun with
Musket Shot, and turned the Muzzle toward the Scuttle. Then as they came up,
we Bound 'em; but being but few English, we could not hinder the Slaves from
killing several of these too. At last we bound 'em all, being Twenty-five,
there being killed by the Slaves sixteen; and afterward, by the Consent and
Agreement of all, we chained twenty of 'em to the Oar in the room of those we
had released; but they began to be very stubborn at first, but we put the
Slaves to 'em, and they soon made 'em work, by giving 'em the same Usage as
they generally used to receive from 'em.

When we had secured 'em, we returned God thanks for our happy Success, and
then consulted which way we should steer. We English agreed to go for England,
but the Slaves we redeemed, being mostly Spaniards and Portugueze, were for
going to Spain; in short, there was no agreeing, for they being the greater
Number, they pretended to have the Command over us, never considering 'twas to
us they chiefly owed their Liberty. I must confess I was very much dissatisfied
at their Ingratitude, but could not find any means to help our selves. Mr.
Matthews spoke to 'em in Spanish, and laid before 'em the Benefit it would be
for 'em to go for England; but it was like Preaching to so many Beasts, for
they regarded him not, but resolved to follow their first Design of directing
their Course for Spain. When we found there was no Remedy, we desired 'em to
touch at Lisbon in Portugal, and set us ashore there; which they consented with
much entreaty. If we had been of an equal Number, we would have endeavored to
have forced 'em with us for England, that they might have repented their
Ingratitude.

They would not let any of us have the Command of the Vessel, but one Velasques
a Spaniard was chosen Captain, who immediately turned out Mr. Matthews, that we
had given the Captain's Cabin to, and took Possession of it himself. This set
us all a murmuring, and we consulted to contrive some way to be even with 'em;
but they were so watchful, and always upon their Guard, that it was to no
purpose to plot any thing. They used to put Sentinels upon us every time we
went to Rest. One Night we was awakened out of our Sleep by Orders from our new
Captain Velasques; when we were upon Deck, he told us there was a Ship
discovered to the Windward of us. Now my Reason of sending for you, says the
Captain, is, We design to Attack her, and make Prize of her, let her be of what
Nation she will, excepting Spanish. When Mr. Matthews had told us in English
what he said, my Indignation rose that I could hardly forbear rushing upon him,
and tear his Throat out: But at last my Reason conquered my Passion, and I
became calm. I bid Mr. Matthews let him know he could not expect us to fight,
if they were English, our Countrymen: But he swore we should fight, or be
killed, if they were our own Fathers. I bid Mr. Matthews tell him, As for my
own part, I would not fight a stroke, let it be what Nation it would; and for
his threatening to kill us, I did not know but it would be better to die, than
to Sociate with such an ungrateful Crew as they were. The Ship now, instead of
keeping her Course, as she did at first, made all the Sail she could, and bore
down upon us, which they did not mind in our Disputing. The Captain then began
to change his Tone, and thought it the wisest way to steer away before the
Wind, and endeavor to get from 'em. Whereupon he crowded away, and belabour'd
the poor Turks with his Bastinado to Row with all their Strength, that I pitied
'em. Looking toward the Ship that pursued us, we could perceive English
Colors out, which rejoiced us English mightily. We now consulted how we should
stop the Galley; for with Sailing and Rowing we went faster than they. At last
I resolved to take a Pistol, and shoot him through the Head, let the
Consequence be what it would. So I laid hold of one of the Pistols unperceived
(they having prepared their Arms for their Engagement,) goes up to Velasques,
and took him by the Throat with my Left Hand; and holding the Pistol to his
Breast with my Right, I threatened to shoot him Dead if he or his Men offered to
stir. Several of his Companions were running to his Assistance, but were stopped
by Mr. Matthews, telling 'em, if they offered to stir, their Captain was a Dead
Man. This Bustle caused the Turks to lie upon their Oars, and in the mean tims
Mr. Sloan brought the Gally to the Wind, and laid by, and the Ship got up with
us in an Instant, and without hailing us, poured in a Broadside upon us, which
killed us two of the Turks, and five of our Spaniards, among which was that
ungrateful Monster Valasques, and the wind of one of the Shot threw me down
upon Deck without any farther hurt; we had no Colors up at all but the Vane
upon the Topmast Head, which showed us to be a Turkish Vessel; I sent up
George Kirk to take down that, which prevented their Firing again; upon this
they haled us: But after we told 'em we were English, they sent immediately two
Boats well armed on Board us, and when we had satisfied 'em how it was with us,
we seized upon our vile Spaniards and Portuguese and bound 'em, we saw it was
an English Man of War, and upon enquiry found it was the Ruby, Captain Walton
Commander, bound after the Fleet for the West Indies. They had met with Capt.
Young and his Crew steering their Course for England, being they were so
disabled with the Engagement they had with the Gally of the Turks that we were
in, they durst not hold on their Way for the West Indies. So the Stores were
most of 'em put on Board the Ruby, and the rest were to follow as soon as they
could Ship 'em in another Vessel. Now there were two Men that were Passengers
in Captain Young's Ship, put on Board the Ruby to pursue their Voyage, and they
seeing the Galley knew her to be the same that engaged with Captain Young in
the Tiger, and that was the reason they fired upon us without hailing, as is
usual in those Cases.

I was very glad of an Opportunity to pursue my Voyage, I made my Address to
Captain Walton, who very friendly received me; while we were consulting what we
should do about our Prisoners, the Galley seemed to lie deeper in the Water,
and going to examine her, found a Shot had pierced her between Wind and Water,
but it was impossible to come to it to stop it; so we took what we could out of
her, and going to unlock the Galley-Slaves Chains, the Key was not to be found,
and the Galley was sinking every Minute, and before we could break the Chains
she sunk down right with the whole 20 poor unfortunate Turks, and all the
Spaniards (who being tied) could not help themselves, neither had we time to
give 'em any Assistance. I must confess I was very much concerned to see so
many poor unfortunate Creatures meet with Death, when it was in our Power ten
Minutes before to have saved 'em. Captain Walton was realy grieved at it, and
showed a Temper full of Humanity. We had just brought on Board the Captain, and
two more Englishmen, with the Frenchman, Renegado's. The Captain was so sullen
that he would not eat or drink, but intended (as we supposed) to starve himself
to Death. Captain Walton used all gentle means possible to bring him into
Temper, but to no purpose, for he would not so much as give any answer to what
he asked him, and in about a Week or eight Days after we took him on Board, he
was found dead in his Hammock; one of the Englishmen told us he had poisoned
himself, for he always said if he was ever taken by the English he would make
away with himself, to prevent the punishment he should undergo. The other four
Englishmen that were Instrumental in our Deliverance, were all Mahometans in
appearance, as I said before, that is, they forsook their Christianity in
outward show, but were realy Christians in their Hearts, as was likewise my
three Companions that were taken in the Boat with me, but as they told me they
only did it to have some Opportunity of getting their Liberty, and the Words
that were used, though it was in a Speech they did not understand, perfectly
shocked 'em in their utterance, and they all hoped their Peace was made with
God for their Crimes, with a sincere Penitence from the moment they had
committed it.

Mr. Matthews the Surgeon, George Jenkins, William Ashton, and Ralph Smallwood,
were taken in a Ship called the Two Brothers of Bristol, bound for Scanderoon,
after an obstinate Fight, where all were killed, excepting the abovementioned
four, who were taken and sold for Slaves, and continued so for some Years; but
seizing on a Boat with the four Frenchmen that did design to venture for their
Liberty with 'em, they put to Sea, and rather chose to trust in the Waves, and
an open Boat, than stay there to be Slaves for ever. But Hamet the Renegado,
whose Christian Name was Lewis Gordon, having notice of their flight, followed
'em with a swift Galley, and got sight of 'em; Mr. Matthews (who relates the
Story in this manner) and his Companions seeing it impossible to make their
Escape, thought of a Stratagem for four of 'em to get the Good Will of the
Renegado Hamet; which was this: Seeing no likelihood of getting clear off, the
four English proposed to the French to cast Lots, and that should decide which
four should be bound, and the other four should immediately Row back, as if
they had no design of running away, and make out their Story as well as they
could; accordingly we drew, and the Lots fell upon the four Frenchmen.
Immediately we Bound 'em, and Rowed back, and were soon met by the Galley,
where we made our Tale good, by telling the Turks, that going a Fishing with
the four Frenchmen, they would have compelled us by force to have Rowed with
'em in their Boat for Spain; but we being not willing, fell to grappling with
'em, and overcame 'em by main force, tied 'em, and were bringing 'em back. The
Frenchmen kept true to their Promise, and never contradicted us in our Story.
Hamet upon this became very civil to us, and put us in Trust: He made me
immediately Surgeon to the Galley, Mr. Jenkins Master of the Slaves, and our
two other Companions had some little Office that pleased 'em. We went several
Voyages with him, and took many Vessels, but never met with any English Ship
before the Tiger that we had the desperate Engagement with. The four Frenchmen
were made Slaves to Row in another Galley, which was taken about two Months ago
by a Spanish Man of War, and by that means got their Liberty.

The other two Englishmen, and Frenchman, that were taken in the Cabin,
confessed that they had been guilty of many Crimes, but more especially in
denying their Savior; but they now felt in their Hearts and Minds, and Earning
to Repentance, and begged that Captain Walton would forgive 'em, and not take
their Recantation for a Falsehood, being they were in some danger; but a true
Light of the Divine Brightness. Captain Walton freely forgave 'em, and having a
Chaplain in the Ship, we re-christen'd 'em; and the Fellows seemed ever
afterward to have a true Sense of their happy Condition. Captain Walton, and
my self, were Godfathers for 'em all. Therefore it behooved us to see, that they
were now instructed in their Faith; though these were of sufficient Years to know
their Duty without Sureties for 'em. We have many People that undergo that
Office, but never consider what their Duty is; and, in short, make it nothing
but an outward Ceremony, when if they thought of it, as they ought to do, they
would find it of the utmost Concern; for the true Office of Sureties, or
Godfathers, etc. are to train up the young Plant, till it is capable of bearing
Fruit it self of Good Works. But many nowadays do as the Turtles do by their
Eggs, lay 'em, cover 'em with Sand, and never more regard 'em.

We came into our old Course again, and pursued it with success: When we were
got into the Latitude of the Tropic, we duck'd our Men as before; but there
was a great Mutiny of the Sailors: The Captain had three Dogs on Board, and
they would have 'em duck'd as well as themselves, unless he would pay the usual
Rate; which being promised 'em, they were composed again, and the Sailors and
Dogs were reconciled without going together by the Ears.

We overtook an English Vessel that had suffered much by an Engagement with a
Spanish Pyrate; she had lost all her Masts, but had raised a Jury Mainmast,
yet could make but little way, by Reason of her Leaks. Our Captain sent a Boat
on Board, and gave 'em all the Assistance he could; but finding it was but two
Days since the Engagement, we had some hopes of coming up with her, being we
learnt from the other Ship she was mightily disabled as well as themselves. So
we crowded all the Sails we could; and though it was in the Night, we made the
best of our way. The Vessel we left, saluted us with five Guns to take their
Leave, which we answered with three; and in a quarter of an Hour afterward
heard several Guns fired now and then, as if some Vessel was in distress, and
in an Hour more discovered a Light, which we made directly toward, and coming
up with it, found it to be the Spanish Vessel that had engaged with the other
English Ship two Days before; the Light that they made was only a large
Lanthorn fixed on their main Topmast Head, that we might the sooner perceive
'em. We immediately hailed 'em, and commanded 'em to surrender: They readily
obeyed, and begged our Assistance, which they had great need of; for the Water
gaining upon 'em every Moment in an Hours time, the Ship sunk, but we had
preserved all the Men, being in number 23, having lost in the Engagement with
the English Ship 27, and received several Shot between Wind and Water, which
they did not perceive till they discovered two Foot Water in the Hold, and
found no hopes of being saved from the merciless Enemy the Sea, if we had not
fortunately for them came timely to their Assistance. But to allay their Joy
for their Deliverance from Death, they were made Prisoners, and being Pirates
(as we supposed,) for there was no War declared between the two Nations;
therefore they might very probably think they were to be punished with Death
when they came on shore.

The Ship sunk so fast, that we could save nothing but the Men, which took us
up about four Hours, and then we pursued our Course, and about four in the
Evening made the Island Barbados, where we set our Spanish Prisoners on shore.
Captain Walton gave the Governor an Account of what had happened, and left it
to his discretion to do with 'em as he thought fit.

On June the Twenty-third we set Sail for Dominio, where we arrived without any
Accident. Here I went on shore along with several of our Men to get Wood and
Water for our Ship. The Natives seemed very civil, and came on Board us in
their Canoes.

These Indians are most of 'em tall, lusty Men, well featured and well limbed,
but poor Brains, for an ordinary Glass of Rum will make 'em drunk: They
mightily like this Liquor, and will call for it as soon as ever they come on
Board you: They wear no Clothes, but a little Skirt about their Waste; but most
of 'em have Pieces of Brass in the form of a Threequarter Moon in their Nose
and Ears. I gave one of these Indians a pair of Breeches, and he made an Essay
to put 'em on in this manner. He first put his two Arms into the Thighs of the
Breeches, and desired one of his Companions to button the Wasteband about his
Neck; but when we showed him the right way, and he had put 'em on, he walked as
if he had formerly worn Irons, and was so uneasy with 'em that he pulled 'em
off, and made Signs to have some Linen in exchange: In Return I gave him a
long Cravat, and tied it properly about his Neck: But to see how the Fellow
strutted, one would have taken him for one of the Captains of the
Train'd-Bands, ready to march.

I rambled with these Indians several Miles up in the Country, and saw their
Hutts, that were dig'd about three Foot deep in the Earth, and then raised
about six Foot high above the Surface, and covered with Barks of Trees, and
sometimes divided into Apartments by a couple of long Poles, and Fathers, Sons
and Daughters, lie promiscuously together.

The Day before we sailed, (after we had provided our selves with Wood and
Water) I went up to the Indian Hutts to exchange a trifle or two for one of
their Bows and Arrows; and returning toward the Ship, by my self, lost my way;
and though I directed my Course (as I thought right) I came to that part of the
Shore where was no Ship to be found; but endeavoring to go more West along the
Strand, my Way was intercepted by several high pointed Rocks, which I made
several fruitless Essays to pass. I then endeavored to make a Compass within
Land to get by the Rocks; which I did, but could not find the Bay where the
Ship rod. I was now in a deep perplexity, and though very much tired, yet
resolved to look for the Track that would carry me back to some of the Huts,
where I might get an Indian to direct me; but there were so many various ones,
that I knew not which to choose. At last I pitched upon one that brought me to
several of 'em, but not those from whence I came. I searched 'em, but could
find no Indians in 'em. I from thence walked a little farther, but was
surpised with a Sight that shocked me with Horror. Near the Skirt of a thick
Wood I found one of our Men killed, with an Arrow in his Throat; and by the
Posture he lay in, I found it was done when he was easing Nature. The Object so
overcame me, that I thought not my own unhappy Condition, till I was awaked
from my Stupidity by a Noise and Gabbling I heard in the Wood on my Right. This
put me into a terrible Fright, which made me run as far from the Noise as I
could; for I made no doubt, that if they caught me, I should run the same Fate
with the poor, unfortunate Fellow, who perhaps might lose his Life by his
seeking me. When I had got a considerable Distance, I entered the Wood, and
ventured to look out, where I could perceive (though it was almost dark) what
they were doing.

They cut off the poor Fellow's Head, and tore out his Bowels in a most
inhumane Manner. Let any one judge what my Condition must be; I Am sure my
Thoughts were so confused, that I might justly say I never thought at all. I
observed, when they had done, they carried him between Eight of 'em upon four
Staves, and went toward their Tents. When they were gone, and I had leisure
for Reflection, every Thought was a Dagger to me; but yet when my Senses were
composed, I put my Trust in God that he would deliver me from this Danger, as
well as several other imminent ones, which through his Mercy I had overcome.

I crept farther into the Wood to rest my Limbs, but my Thoughts kept me waking
all Night. When Day approached I went still farther into the Wood, not only to
avoid those Barbarous Indians, but to see if, when on the other side, I could
find some Path that would. lead me to the Bay where our Ship rode; but before I
could get out of it I heard a Cannon discharged, that both rejoiced and grieved
me; it joy'd me to know that the Ship could not be far off, and grieved me to
think that it was certainly the Signal for the Boat to come on Board, and
perhaps they might be that Moment under Sail. I ran with all the haste I could*
but with a Mind mixed with Hope and Fear. I got out of the Wood at last, and
directed my Course to that Part as I thought the Noise of the Gun came from,
but could find no Path; yet at last I got to the Top of a Rock from whence I
could behold the Sea, and the great Grief to see our Ship under Sail not half a
League from the Shore. I immediately pulled off my Shirt, and hung it to a
Stick I had broke to support me in my Walking; but my Signal did not do me any
good, for they saw nothing of it. My Despair began to be predominant over my
Reason, and I had often resolved to throw my self down from the Rock to end my
Misery; but still my Conscience would give me a secret Check; and at last I
resolved with my self to submit to whatever should befall me, with a thorough
Resignation to the Will of Heaven. As soon as the Ship was out of sight, I went
down from the Rock (not having power to stir before) and endeavored to find
some Food, but was prevented by a hideous Noise I heard, which drove me to
shelter in the Wood again; but the farther I went, the plainer I heard the
Noise, so that I knew not what to do; for at last it increased on every side:
So that coming to a thick parcel of Shrubs, I laid my self down, and couched so
close, that it was impossible for 'em to see me, unless they came into the very
middle of it. I had thrown my Bow and Arrows away, as being of no use to me;
but I had my Sword, which, however, I did not design to use. The Noise came so
nigh me, that I could hear the Tread of their Feet, and the Boughs rustle about
me; but at last they went insensibly away, so that I heard no more of 'em for
some time.

When I found all was still, I began to get up and look about me, where I saw
'em in the Plain engaged with several other Indians, whom I thought I knew,
though at a good Distance. I saw several of 'em fall upon the Ground. At last
those Indians that went hollowing through the Wood seemed to me to have the
worst of it, and were drove by the other Party quite back again; but did not
pursue 'em any farther, only let fly their Arrows at 'em; and one of 'em came
among the Shrubs where I lay, which startled me, for I was afraid they would
come to look for their Arrows, and so find me. After the hurlyburly was over, I
resolved to go out of the Wood, and follow those Indians that were Vanquishers,
with this hope, That they might be of a milder Nature, and not so barbarous as
the others who run through the Wood, who to my thinking had more stern Looks
than those Indians I had seen upon that part of the Island where we used to
Land to get Wood and Water. So as I said, I got up, and directed my Course out
of the Wood after the Indians, but soon discovered two Indian Men, and four
Women coming toward me, (which I suppose had hid themselves during the late
Conflict:) It was to no purpose for me to fly, for they had got sight of me; or
if I had, they would have soon sent one of their winged Messengers after me; so
I chose boldly to meet 'em. When we were come within forty Paces one of
another, one of the Indians was going to shoot at me, but was withheld by one
of the Women: As soon as ever I came close to 'em, they looked upon me with
strange Gestures, and distorted Countenances; I put my Hand to my Head and
Breast, which is the Token of Submission with the Indians; and they let me know
by Signs that I must go with them, which I did not deny; for if I had, I knew I
should be forced; so I went willingly enough. When we had got through the Wood,
one of the Indian Men would have my Coat and Wastecoat of, which I durst not
refuse: The Coat he put upon his Companion, and the Wastecoat on himself, and
strutted strangely. I gave my Handkerchief and Neckcloth to the Woman that
hindered the Indian from shooting at me, who received it with a great deal of
Joy, and seemed mightily pleased with me. When we arrived at their Hutts, there
came out at least a Hundred Frightful-looking Indians, who came about me, and
had a great deal of Talk with those that brought me with 'em; but the two
Indians were forced to part with their Clothes they had taken from me, to two
of the oldest Indians, who immediately put 'em on, and seemed mighty proud of
themselves. They gave me some Rice, and another sort of Victuals boiled; but
what it was composed of, I could never learn, neither did I eat any of the same
all the while I was among 'em. When Night came, I was sent into a Hutt by my
self, and the Door shut upon me, I had a piece of Mat to lie on, but nothing to
cover me. Now I had leisure to reflect upon my Misfortunes, which I could not
do before, by reason of the Fears I was in. I thought my Condition was now
worse than ever it was, for I really believed they designed to make a Sacrifice
of me, for I thought to my self they were Cannibals, or Men-Eaters. I passed
the Night with a thousand Anxieties and Inquietudes; but nevertheless my Senses
were so tired, that I slept whether I would or no; and in the Morning was
awaked by four of the Eldest Indians that came to visit me, who made Signs to
me to follow 'em, which I did without any hesitation; when I was out in the
midst of the plain Place before the Doors of their Hutts, they brought before
me several of their Women, and gave me to know by Signs that I should take her
to be my Mate, or Bedfellow, or suffer Death. I must confess I was mightily
shocked, but not giving my self much time to weigh, or think of the Matter, I
pitched upon her that I had given my Neckcloth and Handkerchief too, and
immediately all the rest were dismissed; and my Bride and I (for it was even
so) were conducted to a Hutt, where there was several old Indians waiting for
me to complete the Ceremony. When my Bride and I came before 'em, we were
ordered to sit down, then both our Feet were washed with Water: After that they
brought us a piece of their Indian Cake, or Bread, on which I was ordered to
break off a piece, and give to my Bride. She then came and laid her Head on my
Breast; and then, kneeling, put my Right Foot upon her Neck; when that was
done, she rose and went out, but immediately returned, and brought me some
Flesh broiled on the Coals, with which she tore into Morsels, and put in my
Mouth, and stood before me all the while I eat. I must confess I was so hungry,
that I had a very good Appetite to my Victuals, being I had not eat any Flesh
for four Days: But I had no great Stomach to my Bride, although a young
well-featur'd Woman, yet her Complexion did not like me. When I had done
Eating, my Bride and I were put into a Hutt, and shut close without any Light;
but the old Proverb, Joan's as good as my Lady in the Dark, had like to have
proved no Proverb to me. In the Morning we were waked with a rude Noise round
our Tent, which startled me at first; but I found afterward it was a sort of
an Epithalamium. When they had made their frightful Noise for sometime, they
entered promiscuously Men and Women. The Men came and took hold of me, and the
Women of my new Spouse, led us out with Shouts, unpleasing Noises, and antic
Gestures: They continued it till we came to a River, and then we parted; the
Men with me, and the Women with my Wife. They put me into the River, and washed
me all over, and I suppose the Women did as much by my Tawny Rib. After they
had given notice by their Shouts, that they had made an End of scowring me,
they put on my Shirt and Drawers again, and led me to the Bank where my Spouse
waited for me with her She-attendance, and we returned with the same Noise as
we came out. When we came to the Hutts, the old Indians met us; the Old Men
took me, and the Old Women my Wife, and gave us an Entertainment seperably,
which lasted two Hours, according to my Computation; when they had made an End,
they fetched us out of our different Tents, and seated us on a Bank, and then
danced, and played such mad, rude, monkey Gambols, that put me in mind of the
mad Feasts of the Bachii in Virgil, for they would tear their Faces with their
Nails, and scratch one another so violently, that one would have thought they
had been so many Bethlemites, and yet all in Mirth; for they would laugh such
Horse-laughs when ever any one of 'em was hurt, that quite stunned me. When this
sport was over, the young Indians of both Sexes took my Bride and I into one of
their Hutts, and gave us an Entertainment of Fish broiled upon the Coals, and a
pleasant Liquor in a Calabash, that was exceeding strong, which soon got into
most of their Noddles; and as fast as they grew a little Tipsie, they reeled
out one by one, and laid themselves before the Door of the Hutt, and went to
sleep. My good Wife, among the rest, got her Dose too; but was so monstrously
loving withal, that I could not tell well what to do with her. When Night
came, we retired to our Rest as before, and were waked next Morning by another
kind of Noise that was made, with rude knocking at our Door, or rather Basket,
for it was nothing else, and five or six of the old Indians came in with
Hatchets, and other Instruments, to enable us to get Food for our selves, as I
understood. My Wife took me out by the Arm, and carried me into the Wood with
our Bows and Arrows, and by her Signs gave me to understand that she would
bring me where I should kill some Creature. At last we came to the Foot of a
Hill, where we ascended with some difficulty; but when we had gained the
Summit, we discovered vast Numbers, or Herds of Goats. My Spouse shot, and
killed one the first time; but I was such a Bungler at it, that I could never
do any execution. But my Spouse was very dexterous, as all the Indians are in
the Island of Dominico. My Wife seemed to have a great Love for me, and would
always make much of me, her Way. When we had skinned our Goat, we took out our
Implements, and made a Fire to broil some of it. When it was ready, I gave my
Creator thanks for providing for us poor insignificant Mortals; and looking
toward Heaven, the Residence of him that formed us all. My Wife fixed her Eyes
upon me, and then looked upwards too, with a kind of Concern. After we had
done, I returned thanks again in the same manner as before, and my Wife did the
same; that is, she star'd upwards again as if she had a mind to see something
as she thought I looked at: And when she found she could not see any thing, she
came to me, and put her Arm tenderly about my Neck, and with a sort of a
begging Tone, seemed to ask me by Signs and Words, which I could not
understand, what I meant by looking upwards. I really grieved to know that I
could not make her understand, for I could not learn any of their Speech, but
here and there a common Word; neither did I ever perceive they had any manner
of Worship to any thing; otherwise if I would have made her comprehend what I
meant, I might have found it no hard Matter to have converted her from their
abominable Heathenism; for she was of a mighty mild Nature, very Loving and
Courteous, and nothing like the rest of the Savage Crew, who were prone to all
manner of Wickedness. Her Voice too, differed from theirs, for most of the
Indians pronounced their Words in their Throat, as indeed you could not well
speak 'em without a Gutteral Sound; yet she, whatever was the meaning on it,
spoke her Words a different Way from the rest, and had a pleasing Manner. I
really began to love her, and only wished she had been my Wife in the usual
Forms: She could pronounce any Word in English that I would say to her, but I
could never get her to repeat whole Sentences; and all she did was like a
Parrot. After we had done our hunting-work, I was for going over the Hill to
view the Country, and walked up and down a good way; but I observed my Wife was
very uneasy, but especially when I got to the Brow of the Hill. On the other
side (which was about half a League over) I made an Essay to go down; she laid
hold of my Arms, and pulled me back with all her force, and with many
supplicating Actions seemed to beg of me not to go; and when she found I was
offering at it again, she screem'd out so dismally, that it frighted me from
making any more attempts. I endeavored to know what she meant, but could
gather nothing from her Words and Actions that could let me into any thing: But
she would often handle her Bow and Arrows, and with menacing Actions let me
know there was some Danger. As we went homeward this odd Accident ran very much
in my Head, and I was mighty desirous to find out the meaning of it; and every
time I went to hunt there with my Wife, I wanted sadly to get down the Hill on
the other side. This Hill was of a vast Length, and extended from East to
South-West, almost across the Island. I did not know how to contrive it, but
after hunting, I made believe I was very much tired, and laid my self down in
order to sleep; and my Wife with her usual good humor, accompanied me, and in
a very little time I found she was in a sound Sleep. I immediately rose, and
stole away softly upon my intended Journey. I got away from my Wife without her
awaking, and came to the Brow of the Hill, which I surveyed, and found no
difficulty in the descending. When I had got to the Pottom of the Hill, I was
mightily pleased with the Evenness of the Ground, and the Prospect round me,
which I could compare to nothing but the Vale of Esham in England, bating the
Houses and Towns in it. I had walked up and down the Vale for near an Hour, and
was preparing to go back the same way I came. When looking back to take my last
Survey, I saw a Smoke at a Distance, and it ran in my Mind it was the very
place that our Men used to go to, from on Board, to truck with the Inhabitants.
The Thought took up some of my Time; and I believe, if it had not been for a
tender Regard for my Wife, I had certainly directed my Course for that Smoke I
saw there. But I must confess I could not think of leaving her behind me, but
Curiosity put it into my Head to go a little nearer that Smoke I had
discovered: But just as I was moving that way, I heard a dreadful Screaming
behind me; and turning about, I saw my Wife upon the Brow of the Hill, making
the most pitiful Lamentation imaginable. The tender Regard I now began to have
for my Wife, made me make all the haste I could to her Relief, as thinking some
Mischance might have befell her. When I came to the Bottom of the Hill, I saw
several of the Indians of our Neighborhood waiting for me above, and some were
coming down. As soon as I had got to the Top of the Hill, I was immediately
seized by the Indians above, and dragged along as if I had been the greatest
Criminal imaginable, and my poor Wife hanging upon my Arm all drowned in Tears.
I could not imagine what was the Matter, and what could be the Reason of their
using me in that manner. I found it must be something extraordinary by the
Grief of my Wife, whose Sorrow increased the farther I went toward our Hutts;
but e're we could get there, it rained and thundered so violently, that we were
well washed before we came to our Journey's End, when we were within ken of our
Hutts; the whole Tribe came near us, some skipping and dancing, as mightily
rejoiced; others with the Face of Concern, and hanging their Heads in sign of
Sorrow, and mightily lamented over my Wife. After the old Indians had consulted
some time, they tied me to a withered Tree that stood at the Mouth of the
Hutts; then I began to understand what they meant, for I could perceive they
were bringing Boughs of green Wood, in order to burn me. This Sight made my
Courage fail me, and it was impossible to express my Despair and Horror. I
found now that the last Day of my Life was come, (for it was impossible to
foresee any thing to the contrary.) My last Recourse was to the Maker and Giver
of all good Things, for I had tried all other Means in vain; as also had my
poor Wife, whose Rage and Despair overcame her; and she was carried away by the
Women in the utmost Agony. After my Wife was gone, they set fire to the Wood
which enclosed me; which being green and wet with the late Rain, was a great
while in Burning; all the while it was kindling, some of the Indians jumped
round me, and danced after their barbarous manner, while others stood ready
with their Bows and Arrows to shoot at me (as I supposed) if the Fire should
burn the Bands that tied me, and I should offer to run away. The Wood being
green (as I said before) was very stubborn in kindling, which made the
Apprehension more dreadful: I made several Essays to break the Bands that held
me, but all my Efforts were but in vain; and I observed every Time I made my
fruitless Endeavors, the barbarous Crew shouted and laughed for joy. The Fire
increasing, I prayed to Almighty God to give me Strength to bear the horrid
Pain I was going to suffer; and, if it was possible, to go out of the World
with the Patience and Fortitude of a good Christian, who was only going to
change this troublesome Life for a better. I compared my self to a wounded
Person, that must bear probing of his Hurts, in order to cure 'em. I now had
given my self up entirely to my Thoughts of the other World; and this seemed to
me like abandoning a barren Island, in order to go to one where was plenty of
every thing. But before the Fire reached me, there fell such a prodigious
Shower of Rain, mixed with Thunder and Lightning, that extinguished the Fire.
The Storm lasted for several Hours with the utmost Violence, and I remained
still tied to the Tree. When the Storm was over, they began to renew their
Fire, and brought the Wood nearer than before, it being at first half a Yard
from my Body all round; but now they pil'd it close to me, that the Fire might
the sooner be my Executioner, which I wished for, as knowing it would put me to
a speedier Death. But before they had well placed the Wood, they heard Shouts
and Noises in the adjacent Woods; upon which the Indians immediately ran away
from me, and took to their Arms in an Instant, old and young. The Noise came
nearer, and nearer still, till at last I could perceive several Indians bolt
out of the Wood, who were met by our Indians, and a bloody Fight ensued. The
Enemy Indians seemed to have the best on it, by reason of some Firearms that
they had, with which they made strange havoc with our Indians; the Battle
continued for some Hours with a great deal of Heat, and many of our Indians
fell. At last the Enemy Indians drove ours, even beyond the Hutts, and I could
only hear the Noise they made, being I was still fastened to the Tree. The Fight
continued out of sight about half an Hour, when my Wife came running with all
the Transports of Joy imaginable; and after having put her Head under my Feet,
she untied me, and fell upon me with all the Signs of a sincere Love. I must
confess I was mightily rejoiced to see my self at Liberty, and let what would
happen, my Condition could not be worse than it was some Hours ago. I could not
forbear expressing my Love to my Wife by Kisses and Embraces. We went to our
Hutt, and I took my Sword that had been laid up from my first being amongst
'em. I was going out of my Tent in order to go with my Wife to some other part
of the Island, that was not known to these Indians: But just as we came among
the Tents, three Indians met us that had run way from the Fight (as I
conjectured:) As soon as they saw me and my Wife, they came up with a great
deal of ill Nature in their Countenances; and after some Talk with my Wife, one
of 'em with his wooden Sword, went to make a Blow at me; but my Wife
interposing, received the Blow upon her Head, which struck her to the Ground,
bloody and senseless. My Rage rose so high upon this, that I could not contain
my self; but I drew my Sword, and thrust it up to the Hilt in the Wretches
Body; the other two seeing their Companion's Death, ran upon me with the Rage
of Lions; but I slipping on one side, avoided the Strokes intended me: They
turned immediately upon me, and let drive at me several Blows, which had the
good Fortune not to hit me; but I run one of 'em into the Throat with my Sword;
upon which he set up such a Cry that frightened me, and ran away, and was
immediately followed by the other. I then ran to the Assistance of my Wife, who
lay almost strangled in her own Blood. I raised her from the Earth, and seated
her under the Tree where I was tied, and brought her to her self a little; but
I found her Skull was cracked with the Blow the Indian gave her, and to my
great Grief perceived she was just expiring. But the Sorrow and Tenderness to
part with me, (as I judged by her Actions) struck me to the Soul. She laid one
Arm about my Waste, and her Head in my Lap, but with such piteous Looks with
her Eyes that almost distracted me. She made Signs to me to look upward (as I
fancied) to pray for her, though I could not tell for certain what she meant; but
she pronounced several Words with Earnestness and Passion; and I really
fancied, if we ^^u'd have understood one another, I should have found she would
have had some Notions of a supreme Being. Before she expired, the Enemy Indians
returned with all of our Indian Prisoners, I mean all that they had not killed;
for out of Two Hundred Indians of our Party, there was not above Twenty-two
left. They were mightily surpised to find me, for many of the Enemy Indians
knew me; and when I came to examine their Faces, I remembered they were the
Indians that inhabited about the Bay where our Ship lay. One or two of 'em
could speak a little English, that they learned by conversing with the English
that usually Anchored in the Bay. One of 'em knew my Name, that he had gathered
from our Sailors enquiring for me, when sent by the Captain before the Ship
sailed. Master Falconer, says he, me glad to see you, White Men belong to great
Ships; come look, for you very Great, and not look you here go away much sorry.
My Wife took up all my Thoughts, who was just dying; and though her Strength
and Speech failed her, yet she endeavored to pull down my Face to hers, which
she kissed; th^n sunk her Head into my Bosom, and expired. I was really as much
concerned, as if I had married one of my own Complexion and Country; for I had
great Hopes, if ever I could have made my Escape with her, and could but have
taught her English, to have made her a good Christian. With the Assistance of
my now friendly Indians I laid her in the Earth: They told me she was Daughter
to one of the Chief of their Enemy-Tribe. From these Indians I learned, that
those I had fell amongst were a Tribe of Indians that had lived on this side
the Ridge of Mountains for many Years, and declared open War with those of the
other side for holding Correspondence with Whites; and were so strict, that
they put all Indians to Death that ever attempted singly to go over the
Mountains, which was the Reason of my Danger of Burning. The Women that they
took, (all that were with Child) were shot to Death, and the Men in general ran
the same Fate; for they were resolved not to have any one of the Breed alive.
When they had plundered the Hutts, they went through the Woods, and over the
Mountain again, and so to their own Hutts, which I knew. The Old Men, and Women
met 'em, skipping and danceing for Joy of their Success, and some Mourning for
the Loss of a Husband, Brother, or Father that was slain in Battle. These
friendly Indians were often plagued with their sudden rushing upon them, and
destroying many of them, till at last they took up a resolution to Assault
them, and if possible to extirpate the whole Race; and they had often made
Inroads upon 'em, which lessened their Number till this last ended 'em, as I
said before. The Women and Female Children dwelt contentedly among 'em, being
they had no where to go. I began to live comfortably among these Indians, and
used to partake of their Diversion and Labor; as, Hunting and Fishing, etc.
These Indians were so expert in Shooting with their Bows and Arrows, that I
have seen 'em hit the Mark Three Hundred Yards, within the compass of a half
Crown.

This Island of Dominico took its Name from its being discovered on a Sunday.
It is computed to be in length about thirty Leagues, and about twenty-eight in
breadth. It is very mountainous, especially to the North-East. I have heard
there are some French Settlements upon the Island; but I inquired of the
abovementioned Indian, who assured me there was not any Inhabitants but
Natives, and of those not above a Hundred Families, who were mostly seated near
that Part that composed the Harbor. Says the Indian that I used to talk with,
there be some indeed a great way off in de Island, dat are our Fathers and
Mothers; and some of our Wives dat when de die, we throw into de Sea, and de
swim to dat place; and when we die, we swim dear too. By this we might perceive
they had some Notion of the Immortality of the Soul. I did my Endeavor to make
him sensible of the Joys of Heaven, and Pains of Hell, but to no purpose. I
told him of a superior Being that commanded all things below, and that
Righteous People dwelt with him after this Life. He asked where my God live?
His Throne is in Heaven, answered I, pointing upward, where He sits to Judge
the Quick and Dead. He live up dare, high; how you get up high, no steps reach
dare. It is our Immortal Part, added I, that ascends, our Soul, which is
clothed with the Grace of our Divine Creator, and enjoys an Eternity of
Blessings. You be de White Man, you have Soul; we be no White, we have no Soul;
when we die, we fling in Water, big Fish come carry us to an oder place, den we
live dare and die again, and Fish bring us upon back to an oder place. How are
you assured of this (says I?) Have you ever seen any that have been transported
in the manner you tell me of? No (answered he) but me sure it be so. But when
we were carried by Fish to dat oder place, we eat de Leaf of Tree, dat we can
no remember what we do in toter place, dat we be bring from. All the Arguments
I could use was of no Effect; for Heathenism was so rooted in him, and all the
other Indians, that it will be the greatest Difficulty imaginable to bring 'em
to embrace Christianity. Their Understandings are so infirm, that without a
Miracle there will be no curing 'em. The Indians would have had me married into
one of their Tribe; and I, fearful to deny 'em, brought my self off by telling
no White could marry under twelve Moons after their Wive's Death; with which
they seemed satisfied, but made me Promise when that time was expired to change
my Condition of Widower to that of Married Man. I might have been accommodated
with a She-Companion if I had found any Inclination, but I evaded it as well as
I could.

The Soil of the Island is very fruitful, and there is plenty of every thing.

I could not perceive that these Indians worshipped any thing, except the Moon:
Which when at full, they would all gather together; and looking upward, stand
gazing a considerable time, and then with one Consent pronounce a word which
sounded like Hiu! This word they generally repeated three times. When they had
done Stargazing, they would fall to Jumping and Capering like so many mad
things. When that was over, they would retire to their several Hutts, and not
stir out till Morning upon any account.

I asked Will (for that was the Name of him that could speak English, who was
mighty proud to be called so) what Ceremony was it they performed after they
were retired into their Hutts? But he answered, Me no tell dat, Wife make much
Noise, she no care for dat; when you have new Wife, you know what we do, but me
no tell till den. What gave me a Curiosity to know, was, that Will told me that
after the Ceremony was over, I must not offer to come out of my Hutt, nor come
a nigh any of theirs; for if I did, they would kill me. The Hutt that was built
for me, was ordered in another manner than their own, with a high Door made of
Wicket; there is being so low, that an ordinary sized Man must have stooped to
go in or out.

I used to go fish in their Canoes with 'em, where they would catch good store;
and let it be what it would, the Cargo was divided among the whole Tribe, only
he that caught 'em chose first.

I told Will, that as soon as ever a Ship arrived there, I did design to imbark
in her in order to pursue my Voyage: But he told me I must take care not to let
any other of the Indians know it, for they would never suffer any one to go
from 'em, after they had been once settled among 'em. How do you know that,
says I? Have you had any Talk with 'em concerning me? He told me he had not,
but it was their way: For he gave me to understand, that about six Years ago
there was four Men left on shore upon their Island, by reason of their Vessel
driving out to Sea by a Hurricano; and these four Men settled among 'em, and
married Indian Wives, and had Children by 'em. But at any time when a Ship came
into the Bay, they were hurried a great way up in the Country, and detained
there till the Ships were gone, and then lived with 'em as before. But a small
Vessel putting in there by Night, the Englishmen spied it before any of the
Indians, and were got to the Shore side, conversing with the Crew of the Vessel
before the Indians found 'em out. But when they saw 'em talking together, they
were mightily enraged. The four Men went on Board the Vessel to make merry with
their Countrymen, and afterward came on shore again, and made it no Secret,
that they designed to go on Board that Vessel in order to go to their own
Country. The Indians took no notice for the present: But the Day they designed
to imbark, they set upon the Vessel with their Canoes, and killed every Person
on Board it. When they had done that, they took as many things out of her as
they had occasion for, and set her a-drift. He told me that the four Englishmen
were the first that taught 'em to use Firearms, and in the Ship they took,
they had several Muskets and Quantities of Powder and Shot. But carrying the
Powder to their Hutts, a Boy met 'em smoking in a Cane, they call a Smoking
Cane, and by some Accident the Fire caught hold of the Powder, and blew it up,
with the Death of Eight Indians, and wounding several others. After they had
brought every thing up to their Hutts, they took the Wives of the four Sailors
(the Indians with their Children) and shot 'em to Death with Arrows. This is
the Sense of the Story Indian Will told me, which was pretty hard to pick out
too, considering his manner of telling it. The Relation made me very uneasy,
yet put me upon thinking to make my Escape the first Opportunity. I waited a
full Month before I could see any Vessel, but at last one came into the
Harbor. I perceived they came in order to get Wood by hoisting out their long
Boat; but as I was observing 'em, I was seized by several Indians, and carried
at least six Miles up in the Country, in order to be secured till the Ship
should be gone. I began to despair now of ever getting away, being it was
natural to suppose, that they would be more watchful over me for the future.
Besides, I did not know but they would use me after another manner, and not let
me have so much Liberty as I had before. I wanted for nothing in my
Confinement, and was only guarded by four Indians that went to sleep when I
did. I once thought I might make my Escape whilst they slept; but afterward
repented that Thought, in knowing if they should chance to wake, I was
certainly a dead Man; for Indian Will told me, as I was carrying away, that the
Indians had Orders to shoot me if I offered to make my Escape: Besides, I
should have found it difficult enough to have known my way, especially in the
Dark; for they carried me to a place that I had never been at before. I had
been here four Days, and had given over all Hopes of my Liberty, and began to
call together my scattered Thoughts, that were fluster'd upon that Occasion;
when, on the fourth Day, about Noon, I was agreeably surpised with English
Voices, I began to prick up my Ears, and wished they might come to the place
where I was. I was not long in expecting of 'em; for one of 'em spying the
Hutt, where I was, called out to the others to come along; for here is an
Indian's Hutt, says he, we'll go in it, and see what they will give us. With that
they immediately came in before two of my Indians could hide me, (the other two
being gone in the Morning to the Village:) As soon as ever I saw 'em, though
Strangers, I could not forbear showing my Transports at the sight of my
Countrymen. They were mightily surpised to see me; and when I told 'em my
Condition, they said they would have me along with 'em in spite of their
Teeth: But I told 'em that was very dangerous; for if these Indians should
raise the Village (that lay within a Mile of the Shore) we should all lose our
Lives. Some advised to knock 'em on the Head; but I could not agree to that,
for these were Indians that never injured me. Two of my Countrymen had got a
couple of Spaw-water Flasks filled with Rum, upon the sight of which a Thought
came into my Head, that seemed the most likely to compass my Design. I told my
Countrymen if we could make the Indians drunk, there might be some hopes of
getting off without either hurting them, or endangering our selves. We drank to
one another, and the Indians did us Reason in pledging us; for I believe out of
the two Flasks they drank one and three quarters. It soon began to work with
them, and they got up and fell a Dancing most madly, and a while after dropped
down dead Drunk. We resolved to tie 'em Hands and Feet, that if they awaked,
they might not follow us, and raise the whole Body of Indians upon us. With the
help of our Garters we tied 'em fast enough without waking 'em, and made the
best of our way toward the Seaside. All the Danger we ran was in meeting with
any of the other Indians, but we happily avoided 'em, and came to the place
where the Boat lay. The Ship was ready to Sail, having got their Wood and Water
aboard; and these eight Men were those that had been laboring hard in cutting
Wood, etc. and so were resolved to go up the Country to view it, never having
been farther than the place where they felled the Trees, and happily for me
came to give me my Liberty, under Providence. As we were getting into the Boat
to go on Board (the Ship having made a Waft in her Ancient,) Indian Will came
running down almost out of Breath, and cried, Get quick in Ship, they come down
presently kill all me go wid you de kill me else for tell you. We hurried away,
and Indian Will with us, and got on Board in very good time; for before we were
well under Sail, we could perceive at least Two Hundred Indians bringing their
Canoes with 'em. We had a brisk Gale, so that they could not well overtake us;
for they never go above two Leagues from shore. Nevertheless they put their
Canoes in the Water, and began to paddle after us. The Captain was for Firing
at 'em with our great Guns, but I persuaded him against it, by telling him it
might be worse for other English Vessels that should come after us; and as they
could not overtake us to do us any damage, it was best not to take any notice
of 'em. When we had lost sight of Dominico, I asked Indian Will the Reason of
their endeavoring to detain all Whites in that clandestine Manner; and he gave
me to know, that they feared if the Whites should know the Smallness of their
Number, that they would put 'em all to Death, and seize upon the whole Island.
The Ship that took us up was called the Twins from Caroline, Captain Fuller
Commander; she came then from Barbados, and was bound for Jamaica. I took
Indian Will as my Servant, and did design to give him some Clothes, as soon as
we arrived at Jamaica; but for the present I had none for my self, and made but
an odd sort of a Figure. My Beard was pretty long, and being something
inclining to Red, looked but oddly: My Lining was all gone, so that my whole
Dress consisted of a Hat, a Wastecoat, a pair of Breeches, and a pair of
Shoes. The Captain was so kind to lend me a Shirt, and a pair of Stockings,
and I got my Beard off, and once more looked like a Christian. We made Jamaica
without meeting with any thing material, and found the Fleet at Anchor. I went
on Board the Admiral, and paid my Respects to him. which he took very kindly. I
there once more met with my Friend Mr. Musgrave, and the rest of my Companions
who had given me over for lost; for Captain Walton told the Admiral and my
Comrades, that I was certainly Murdered by the Indians. I had all my Things
restored me, that were brought in the Albion Frigate, that arrived about a Week
before me with the Stores of the Fleet, after she had been in the Dock at
Plymouth and well mended. She also brought News of War being declared between
England and France, and the Death of his Sacred Majesty King William the Third,
of Glorious Memory, and the Coronation of her Majesty Queen Anne. July the 11
th 1702, The whole Fleet set out from Jamaica, in order for a Descent upon St.
Domingo, as was supposed, but things not answering, the Admiral, in the Breda
Captain Fog, with six other Men of War, viz. Defiance, Captain Kirby;
Greenwich, Captain Wade; Windsor, Captain Constable; Ruby, Captain Walton;
Falmouth, Captain Vincent; and Pendennis, Captain Hudson, in quest of Monsieur
du Casse, the French Commodore, that was designed for America with Ammunition,
Forces, Provision, and Money to pay the Garrisons, besides several Governors to
be put in the room of others that were called back. We directed our Course to
Port Leogaon, where du Casse was expected every Day: But when we came there we
were informed that du Casse was Sailed for Carthagena, upon which we directed
our Course for that place, after having taken three Ships, one of Sixteen,
another of Thirty, called Reine de Angelos, or the Queen of Angels, and another
of Six Guns richly Laden, beside three Barks taken by Captain Constable, in the
Windsor, and a fourth Sunk, likewise a French Man of War of Forty Guns burnt.

On the 19 th of August, O. S. about 10 in the Morning, we discovered Ten Sail
to the Eastward of us, which we bore up to, and found 'em to be the Fleet we
were in quest of; though there was Ten Sail, yet there was but Six Fighting
Ships, the rest were Store-Ships which made the best of their Way; so when the
Admiral came up with 'em we had but Six to Engage. The Line of Battle was
formed about three in the Afternoon, The Defiance led the Van, the Windsor
second, and Benbow in the Breda the third. These three kept pretty close
together, but the other four were a League behind. At four in the Afternoon we
began the Engagement, but the Defiance after firing three Guns bore away to
Leeward and lay there out of Gunshot all the Evening, so that the whole
strength of the French Fleet lay upon the Admiral and the Windsor till it was
Dark. In the Night the Windsor fell foul of our Ship, which startled a great
many, that were not upon Deck, as believing it might be a French Fireship, though
we knew they had not one in the Fleet: But Fear, as well as Passion, blends our
Reason. The Wind chopped about in the Night, so that we had the Weather-gage of
'em; upon which we bore down upon 'em, and engaged for three Hours; but the
Ruby, Captain Walton, was disabl'd, and ordered by the Admiral to make for
Port Royal. My Man Indian Will, who was on Board, dressed like an European, was
terribly frighted with the Noise of our Guns; and every time he saw the Flash
of our Enemy's Cannon, he would squat down upon the Deck, and lie flat upon his
Belly for some time; one of our Men that was shot in the Guts lay expiring, and
Indian Will was getting away out of Danger, he said, but unfortunately stumbled
over the Dying Man, who in the Pangs of Death grasped Will so fast, that he
cried out lustily for Help, but it was more than I could do to unclench his
Hand till he was quite Dead, and then we released poor Will, frighted out of
his Wits, who could not be prevailed upon to come upon Deck any more till we
told him we had done Fighting. We took one Ship from the French, that they had
taken from the English in their Voyage. The Fight lasted six Days, on and off;
but the Admiral being wounded in the Thigh, and finding that, Wade, Kirby, and
Hudson, did not care for Fighting, we left 'em, after disabling two of their
Ships, and directed our Course back to Portugal. As soon as we arrived there,
the Admiral sent Orders to confine Captain Constable, Wade, Kirby, and Hudson,
and Summoned a Court-Marshal, Tried 'em, and found 'em Guilty of Cowardice,
excluding Constable; and accordingly the other Three were sent to England to
receive Sentence of Death, which was executed upon Two of 'em. The Third,
Captain Hudson died in the Voyage, and so prevented an Ignominious Death. How
easy had it been for the English to have taken the French, if they had been
unanimous; but such an Instance of Pusillanimity is not to be found in the
Records of the Navy.

December the 14 th, 1702, We were all concerned with the News of Admiral
Benbow's Death, who died of the Wound in his Thigh that he received in the
Engagement with Monsieur du Casse, lamented by all. I observed there was a
perfect Groan in every Ship in the Fleet, when the Admiral's Flag was Lor'd
with a Whiff, which is the Custom at Sea. He was buried at Kingstown, where he
died. He had several rich Plantations in Jamaica, and many Slaves. He had made
five successful Voyages to Jamaica, and returned home laden with Wealth and
Honor; but the sixth proved fatal to Him. He had a perfect Knowledge in the
Navigation of America, having been several Years Captain of a Privateer there.
He was a Man beloved of both Officers and Common Sailors; a Person of true
Courage, and Fortitude: For when he was wounded in the Engagement, he ordered
the Carpenters to make him a Cradle, that he might be upon Deck to give Orders.
Nothing went more near his Heart than this unfortunate Expedition; and the
Surgeons reported, that the Grief he conceived from it, hindered the healing of
his Wound, which was given with a Musket-Ball, and not a Chain-Shot, as has
been reported in our Public Papers. Admiral Martin, as being the eldest
Officer, supplied his Place till Admiral Whetstone arrived in the Boyne. My
very good Friend Captain Hercules Mitchell, Captain of the Strombelo Fireship,
was made Captain of the Windsor; and Admiral Benbow being Dead, I removed my
self, with Captain Fog's leave, into his Ship. The Fleet set Sail with the
Merchant Ships for England, March the 8 th, 1703, and met with nothing worthy
of Note.

On May the 5 th, we entered St. John's Harbor in New Foundland, and stayed
there till May the 12 th, then set Sail for the Bay of Bulls, a convenient
Harbor to Wood and Water in the same Island. After we had provided every thing
we wanted there, we weighed Anchor in order to Sail for England. In weighing
our best Bower (an Anchor so called) the Nippers giving way, the
Captstorn-Barrs killed us three Men, and broke the Back of a fourth, who died
in a Week after.

November the 1st, we were separated from the Fleet by a dreadful Storm, that
threw all our Masts by the Board, and our Boltsprit was also Sprung, but we
fished that which preserved it. We were in a very pitiful Condition, and I am
sure in great Danger, for I really heard some of the Sailors at their Prayers.
We lost two of our Men, who fell with the Mainmast overboard. The Storm lasted
for two Days, and the Weather continued so Hazy we could not take our
Observations. We put up our Jury-Masts, but could make but little Way. We had
Captain Titchburn's Company of Marines, and Major Bowls, Major of the Regiment
that did belong to Colonel Jones, who died in the Voyage, so that having above
our Complement, our Provision began to be at an Ebb, which obliged us all to
come to half-allowance, and half a Pint of Water a Day to each Man, for we did
not know how long we should be out at Sea; but we made Ireland beyond all our
Hopes November the 20 th, and got safe into Gallaway Harbor on the 23 d, and
it was a great Providence we did so; for on the 25 th there arose such a
violent Storm, that must have inevitably destroyed us. This was that fatal
Hurricane that did so much Damage in England, etc. There was two Ships in
Gallaway Harbor that was stranded, and it was allowed by every Body that we
should have run the same Fate, if our Masts had been standing; but having none
but Jury-Masts, which we took down when the Storm began to be pretty high, so
that the Wind could not have the same Power over us; neither do I think shat
the Storm was so violent in Ireland, by all Description, as it was in England,
Holland, and France. We stayed at Gallaway four Months, and in that time we had
got Masts up and repaired our other Damages. While the Ship was fitting up, I
lay on shore in the Town. Gallaway is a neat well-fortify'd Town, as big as
Salisbury, yet has but one Church. Every thing is very cheap there. I had my
Board in a private House for four Shillings per Week, and seldom Dined without
two or three Dishes at Table: We bought the best French Wine for Fourteen pence
per Quart, and sometimes under. We set Sail from Gallaway, February the 27 th,
1704, and arrived safely at Plymouth. Thus after many Misfortunes and Hazards I
once more set my Feet upon my dear native Country (accompanied with Indian
Will, who still lives with me, and proves an honest faithful Servant; and I
have taken Pains to have him instructed in the Christian Religion, and likewise
to have him Christened by the Name of William Dominico, from the Island that he
came from;) and though warned by many Dangers I had run, I could not forbear
making three Voyages more, but yet in a Station different from what I went
before. But as they were but common Voyages, that is nothing extraordinary
happening, I shall conclude with my Prayers and Thanks to Heaven for the many
Mercies I have received; wishing long Life and Happiness to my King,
Prosperity, Peace, and Riches to my Country, and a hearty Union among my Fellow
Subjects.

FINIS.

