A TREATISE OF THE URINARY PASSAGES, etc.

Librum hunc cui Titulus ( A Treatise of the Urinary Passages, etc.) dignum
censemus qui Typis mandetur.

Comitiis Censoriis ex. AEdibus Collegii nostri Dat' 6o Maii 1726. Hans Sloane.
Praeses. Censores.
Joannes Hawys Thomas West Gulielmus Stukeley Georgius Wharton


A TREATISE OF THE URINARY PASSAGES.

Containing their Description, Powers, and Uses; Together with the Principal
DISTEMPERS that affect them; in particular the STONE of the KIDNEYS and
BLADDER, As delivered at the GULSTONIAN LECTURE in the Theater of the Royal
College of PHYSICIANS, London, on the 17th, 18th, and 19th Days of March
1725/26.

By WILLIAM RUTTY, M. D. Fellow of the said College, or the Royal Society, and
Reader of ANATOMY at Surgeons-Hall.

Illustrated with Copper Plates.

LONDON: Printed for THO. WORRALL, at the Judge's-Head over against St.
Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street. M.DCC.XXVI.

TO Sir HANS SLOANE Bart. President of the ROYAL COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, London,
etc.
SIR,
THE Publication of the following Lecture, read by your Command, is owing in
great measure to the Request of several of the Faculty and others, who heard
it; but chiefly to YOUR Desire, which as soon as communicated bore with me the
Authority of a Command. For HE, who by his OWN Labors has brought so much
Honor to the Profession in general, has an undoubted Right, I think, to that
of every Member in the particular Body of which he is the HEAD. Accordingly I
have ventured to expose it to public Censure; which from the many Defects in
it, I take for granted, will be severe enough: However I dared not do even this
without first putting it under your Patronage; well knowing that if you
pronounce favorably upon it, who from your extensive Knowledge, and large
Experience, are so deservedly eminent, the Generality will soften their
Reflections.

YOU cannot be surpised, Sir, that I should be desirous of Your Protection, if
you will but reflect on Your Merit, and the Character You bear in the World.
One, who has made ALL NATURE his Study, has outgone the most emulating of his
Cotemporaries both at Home and Abroad, bears such a Sway in the Physical World,
without caballing for a Reputation, or using the low Methods too frequently
taken to raise one, must surely be a desirable Patron: and if this Pittance of
a Performance happens to please you as much in the Reading, as it to do upon
Hearing it, I flatter my self that it will meet with your Approbation.

IN Discourses of this sort much Novelty is not to be expected; the Design of
them being to set before the Audience in a clear Light and narrow Compass the
STATED Rules and ESTABLISHED Laws of the Science they treat of, as well as to
communicate what may have occurred to private Observation: If therefore the
Description of the Parts is just, their Uses and Powers properly ascertained,
the Distempers incident to them rightly investigated, it is sufficient. This
will answer the Design of the FOUNDER, which if I have succeeded in, it will be
lucky; if any thing is advanced besides, that may be of Use to the Students of
the Science, I shall be very well pleased; and if the Performance upon the
Whole is not so mean as to be a Disgrace to that Learned BODY, of which I am a
Member, and whose Honor I hold in the greatest Estimation, I shall be fully
satisfied.

THE two first Sections of this Lecture, with the first part of the Third, were
finished four Years ago, upon receiving your Orders for undertaking it; the
last upon the Stone of the Bladder has been added since, to make the Subject
more Complete. Such as it is, I now offer it to You, as a Token of my Respect,
being

SIR, Your very humble Servant, William Rutty.

A TREATISE OF THE URINARY PASSAGES, etc.
SECT. I.
IN pursuance to the Institution of this Lecture, which obliges me to read upon
some particular Parts of the Body, and upon two or more Distempers that are
incident to such Parts, I have pitched upon those that are formed for the
Separation of the Urine, or are immediately subservient to it afterward in its
Passage out of the Body: which I have taken more out of Necessity than Choice;
the most considerable Organs having been treated of already by some of our
learned Members, whose Notions and Observations I cannot pretend to amend. To
this purpose it is necessary, before I enter upon the Diseases that affect
them, to give an Anatomical Description of the Vrinary Passages, and to enquire
into the Nature of the Fluid secreted by them, and flowing through them; as the
Knowledge of these will lead us to the Uses and Powers peculiar to each, and
thereby inform us in great measure, by what means they become so altered and
vitiated, as to produce the Distempers we shall give an account of: And by such
a Method, as I take it, the Dr. GULSTON.
Founder's Design will be best answered, in ordering this Lecture to be read
over a human Body.

THE first then that are concerned, and present themselves to our Inspection,
are the Kidneys: which, as is commonly known, are situate in a duplicature of
the Peritonaeum, one on each side; the right between the Liver and the Musculus
Lumbaris, or Psoas; the left between the Spleen and the same Muscle on that
side. In human Subjects the Right is placed lower than the Left, in order to
make more room for the large Viscus of the Liver, as in Brutes frequently the
contrary; not only as the prone Situation of their Bodies does not require such
a Position, the Liver in them projecting forwards and downwards, and thence
leaving a greater Space for the right Kidney; but because these Animals being
very voracious, their Stomachs are often so distended with Food, that it was
necessary to place the left Kidney lower, to prevent its being compressed by
this Organ (together with the Spleen) during so great a Distension.

THE Kidneys are covered with two Coats or Membranes; the exterior of which is
borrowed from the Peritonaeum, and envelops them but loosely, generally
abounding with Fat; which not only lubricates their Surface, but forms a proper
Nidus, wherein they lay secure from the pressure and action of the circumjacent
Parts. Their interior or proper Coat is only a Production of the outer
Integument of the Blood Vessels, for which reason it adheres closely to their
Surface; tho not so firmly, but it may be separated from it, without any
considerable Laceration of their Substance.

THEY are connected to different Parts, in order either to keep them in their
just Situation, or to communicate their proper Fluids to each other. The Tunica
adiposa strongly affixes them to the Loins, and prevents their falling down
into the Cavity of the Abdomen, which would occasion the sides of the emulgent
Vessels to collapse at their Orifices next the great Blood Vessels, and thereby
take off any Communication between them and the Kidneys. As a farther Security,
the Right is sometimes connected to the Liver, sometimes to the Intestinum
caecum, and the left to the Colon and Spleen. They communicate with the Aorta
and Vena Cava, by means of the Emulgents, and Arteria, and Vena adiposa, and
have a near Relation to the Bladder by means of the Vreters.

THEY have Nerves from the Intercostals and spinal Marrow, which together form
the Plexus Renalis, though very few in number, and their Twigs very small;
seeming only designed to be subservient to the other Vessels that are
immediately employed in the Secretion of Urine: but they are pretty plentifully
stocked with Lymphaticks; some of which coming out of their concave Side, and
making several Anastomoses in various places, are at lengh inserted into a
Gland in human Bodies, and thence carry the Lymph to the Receptaculum Chyli;
whilst others arising from their gibbose Side, form a double Trunk: one of
which creeping upwards, the other downwards along their Back, and both making a
Flexure toward the Emulgent Vessels, terminate likewise in a Gland, and thence
proceed to the same Receptacle. These Lymphaticks spring from so minute an
Origin, that it escapes the Eye, though assisted by the best Microscope, which
has occasioned variety of Conjectures concerning them: But Nuck's Experiments
Nuckii adenographia, cap. 6. p. 61.
, from whom I have taken this Account, (not being able my self to trace their
Beginning) have taught us, that they arise from the Capillary Branches of the
Emulgent Arterties: for by blowing into this Artery, the Flatus easily passed
into these Ducts, and distended them. As this Experiment demonstrates the
Communication between these Vessels, it at the same time gives us an insight
into the use of the Lymphaticks of these Parts; which is to receive and carry
off the Lymph from the Blood brought for the Nourishment of the Kidney, as the
Urinary Tubes receive the excrementitious Parts, or the Urine.

WE come now to the Body of the Kidneys, whose external Superficies in Adults
is uniform and even, but in Infants rough and unequal, being divided as it were
into distinct Lobes; which has made several imagine the Kidney to be composed
of a Number of conglomerate Glands: but its inward Structure has occasioned a
great Variety of Opinions Vid. Aristotle, Galen, Vesalius, Fallopius, Highmore,
Veslingius, Bartholin.
suitable to the Philosophy in vogue at the Time the Authors wrote concerning
them: To examine which is now altogether needless, because the modern
Improvements in Anatomy have demonstrated them to be so many Fictions of
learned Men. It will however be worth while to take notice, that the great
Hippocrates Lib. de glandulis.
observing the Matter contained in the Glands to be White, and resembling
Phlegm or Pituita, ascribes a Use to them of receiving any redundancy of
Moisture in the Body, which by the peculiar sponginess of their Substance they
attract; and accordingly tells us, that the Kidneys abounding with much
Humidity have Glands, and these larger than in any other Part. From this
Description of the largeness of these Glands, it is certain Hippocrates did not
say this from observing the inward Structure of the Kidneys, but from
reflecting on the Quantity of Urine proceeding from them; which, according to
his Notion, must have Glands proportionably large to attract and percolate it.
But however, what he concluded from his penetrating Sagacity laid a good
Foundation for farther Anatomical Inquiries into their Make; which it is a
wonder were attended for so many Ages after him with so little Success,
excepting only by Aretaeus, who says the same thing Lib. 2. de Causis, etc.
Auctorum Morborum, cap. 3. Id. diuturnorum morb. cap. 4.
. And indeed I must say thus much for the honor of this great Father of
Physic, (tho it has been endeavored to make us believe the contrary) that
even in this knowing Age Blackmore 's Preface to his Essay on the Smallpox.
whoever will take the pains to read him, and has the proper Requisites to
understand him, will find Gains worthy of his Labor, and upon many Accounts
become the better Physician for it.

THE first Author, who gives a Description of all the constituent Parts of the
Kidney, that comes near the Fact, is Bartholomaeus Eustachius, a Scholar and
Cotemporary of Vesalius. He observes, that in some Animals, as Bulls, Bears,
etc. the Kidneys have Glands, which appear very conspicuous, both in the
exterior and interior part of them: but that in human Bodies these glandulous
Substances are found in the inmost part of the Kidney only De Renum structura,
cap. 2.
, and are placed in that particular part of it, where the Branches of the
Vreter terminate, covering the extremity of each Branch; which Glands being
divided lengthways, certain Furrows or little Channels may be perceived, like
so many small Hairs, through which he does not doubt, but that the Urine
percolates Id. cap. 7.
. This Account has a very near Resemblance of their real Structure: but at the
same time it proves, that he mistook the Carunculae Papillares for Glands, as
he did the Interstices between the Urinary Ducts for Channels to convey the
Urine; for he does not admit of any Tubes for this purpose: but in opposition
to some, who imagined these small Filaments might be so many minute Vessels, he
gives it as his Opinion, that they are only Furrows elegantly engraved in the
Substance of the Kidney Id. cap. 37.
.

THESE Mistakes are rectified by Bellini, who was the first Discoverer of the
Vrinary Ducts; (though very likely the former Author gave him the Hint) and has
also shown from whence they spring, and how they are propagated De structura
Ren. p. 19.
. From what has been wrote by him, and from reiterated Inspections and
Experiments since his Time, it appears, that the Substance of the Kidney is
only a Congeries of Blood Vessels and Excretory Ducts wrapped up in one common
Covering: Tab. I.
for the Emulgent Artery, which goes off from the Trunk of the Aorta, ^ig I.
in its Progress toward the Kidney divides first into two Branches, and these
again into two, three, and sometimes four more, which pierce the concave Side
of it; when they immediately disperse themselves between the Coats of the
Pelvis. These at their exit from hence, send off smaller Branches; which being
incurvated, and meeting each other, form several Anastomoses. From these,
toward the gibbose part of the Kidney, arise still more minute Ramifications,
which are propagated to the outer Superficies, and by their different
Convolutions and Contortions there form a sort of Network, Fig. II.
not unlike a Ball of Silk; but before their ultimate Branches lose their form,
and assume that of Excretory Ducts, they change their circular Progress into a
serpentine one Ruysch. Thesaur. 6. p. 13.
. From the Extremities of these capillary arterial Branches arise the Veins,
which being divided into the like Ramifications (tho differently modified) are
enclosed in one common Capsula with the Artery, and accompany it throughout the
whole Kidney, going out where the Artery enters, and terminating in the Cava.
In some Brutes of the Cat-kind this Vein is differently disposed: for instead
of accompanying the Artery within the Kidney, it propagates its Branches upon
the Surface, as you may see in some very curious Preparations of Mr. Ranby's
here given. Fig. V.


NEXT within these appears a Number of small Filaments, which look like fleshy
Fibers, but are really membranous and hollow, and agree with other excretory
Ducts both in Substance and Use. These were first found out by Bellini, and are
therefore called Tubuli Belliniani: Fig. III.
They seem so spring from the Sides of the Capillary Arteries, and extending
themselves in a right Line toward the Center or Pelvis of the Kidney, are
collected at their Extremities into twelve Classes, and form the Papillae,
which are nothing else but the Endings of these Ducts so collected together,
and not Glands, as Eustachius supposed. The remaining part of the Kidney is
possessed by a Dilatation of the Vreter, which forms the Pelvis, and then sends
off twelve Branches called Fistulae Membranaceae, which join the Papillae, and
have Fat interspersed between each of them for the Lubrication of their
Substance.

THIS Disposition and Communication of the Vessels in the Kidneys easily
appears, by blowing into the Emulgent Artery, or injecting a colored Liquor
into it, which will not only very much distend the whole, but will pass into
the Emulgent Veins, the Tubes just mentioned, and sometimes the Vreter it self.

BUT besides this aggregate of Vessels, the accurate Malpighius has observed a
considerable Number of exceeding small Bodies, of a round Figure like the Eggs
of Fish, which are annexed to the ends of the Arteries, and placed between them
and the Tubuli Vrinarii; to the last of which they are likewise joined by their
proper Excretory Ducts, and correspond to them in Number; and which upon
filling the Emulgent Artery with Ink, will also, he says, appear tinged with
it, and their Adhesion to the Capillary Branches thereby discovered De Renibus,
cap. 3.
. This has occasioned Anatomists to differ about the Structure of this Part of
the Kidney: Malpighius will have these Appearances to be distinct Glands, and
the immediate Instruments of the Secretion of Urine.

THE curious Dr. Ruysch absolutely denies that there are any such Vesicular
Bodies in this Part, and confirms his Judgment by repeated Injections, which
discovered the immediate continuity of the Arteries and Urinary Ducts without
any intervening Substance Thesaur. 2. page 64, 65.
: He acknowledges indeed to have observed certain round diaphanous Bodies in
the middle of the Kidney, but they were not in number sufficient to answer the
Ends assigned Id. page 65.
; and even these vanished upon Injection, and consequently could not be Glands
Thesaur. 1. p. 35, 58.
. The Question between them then is not whether there are Glands in the Kidney,
for they both allow that; but concerning the intimate Structure of that
particular Part of them, which is the immediate separating Organ: The one being
of opinion that the Blood is altered, or in other words, the Urine is secreted
in these membranous Follicles, which afterward empty themselves through their
own proper Excretory Ducts into those of Bellini: The other, that there are
none such; and if there were, yet that they are not distinct Glands, but that
the Percolation is simply made by the Orifices of the Bellinian Ducts
themselves.

IF it be lawful in this Place to enter into the nicer Parts of Anatomy, we may
observe, that Dr. Ruysch's Assertions are very much confirmed by several
Preparations of this Part; in which the spherical Bodies that seemed to be so
many Glands before they were injected, appear after it to be only the
Convolutions of the Capillary Branches of the Emulgent Artery, which the
injected Liquor subtly permeates, and passes directly thence into the Tubuli
Vrinarii. This is more easily seen in the Kidneys of Infants, which are the
properest for this purpose, because they are of a looser Contexture, and
divided in a manner into Clusters of Glands; so that if these membranous
Follicles would appear at all, they would in such Subjects. Whether, as some
will have it, the Injection at the same time it fills these Vesiculae, does not
introduce such a Confusion, by enlarging their Dimensions, and making them
press against one another on all Sides, that the exceeding thin Membranes which
compose them cannot be distinguished from the injected Matter it self, is not so
easy absolutely to be determined; nor whether from the Distension it makes in
the Vessel it flows through, it may not compress such others as lie contiguous
and are not injected; at the same time it makes the one visible, totally
obliterating the other: but it is not likely that it produces such Effects,
because in other Preparations of this sort, we find that it discovers the
natural Contexture of the Part, which renders Dr. Ruysch's Notion more certain
and probable.

HOWEVER, admitting there are such membranous Bladders where Malpighius has
placed them, which the Favorers of this Assertion strenuously contend for,
from the regular Appearances in his different Experiments Malpighii Epist. ad
Spon. p. 25.
, and from other Observations of their own, especially upon morbid Kidneys, in
which they have been found pretty large and turgid with Urine, when the Urinary
Ducts have been obstructed Memoires d' Academie des Sciences; Ann. 1705. p. 40.
; yet that they are distinct Glands, and the proper secretory Organs of the
Urine, is no way agreeable to Nature in other Parts of the like kind; because
wherever we find these Follicles with their own proper investing Membranes
and Excretory Ducts, they don't perform the Office of a Gland, but are only
Appendages of it, or Receptacles to contain the Fluid already separated by the
Gland, till it is proper to discharge it into some common Outlet, analogous to
the Vesiculae Seminales, Gallbladder, and such like. And by the way, in this
consists one Difference in the Composition of the Glands of the Body: that
those Glands which secret a Liquor, that is afterward to be discharged from
them at distant Intervals, as occasions require, are furnished with these
membranous Follicles, into which the separating Canal empties its Contents,
which are reserved there for that purpose; such are the Mamillary Glands, those
of the Stomach and Guts, and several other in different Parts of the Body: As
on the contrary, those Glands which separate a Fluid that is continually to
flow from them to some other Part, have no such Provision within their
Substance, neither do they want it; of which sort are the Brain, the Testicles,
several of the Conglomerate kind, and the Kidneys. This Distinction founded
upon the strictest Inquiries, may in some degree decide the Controversy now
depending between Anatomists concerning the peculiar Make of these Bodies
Bo^rhaave de Fabrica Glandularum.
; for both are in the right, when they confine their Assertions to particular
Glands, as they both err, when they expend them to the whole Genus. But to
return,

THE remaining part of the Kidneys, as before observed, is possessed by a
Dilatation of the Vreters, which make the Pelvis; these at their exit from
hence contract their Dimensions, and form each of them a small Tube, which runs
with a tortuous inflexion to the Bladder. Fig. V.
They are naturally of the bigness of a Goose-Quill; but are capable of being
distended to a much greater Size, as is evident in some calculous Cases; of
which sort I have seen two remarkable Instances, where their Orifices were so
enlarged, that upon injecting the Bladder, in order to perform the high
Operation of Cutting for the Stone, the Water passed into the very Pelvis of
the Kidney, so that the Bladder was never distended, which appeared to be the
Case upon Dissection. They are of unequal Diameters in different parts of them,
being contracted and dilated alternately throughout their whole len^th, and not
in that single part only, where they descend over the Iliack Arteries,
according to the common Opinion. This appears by making a Ligature at one end
of the Vreter, and after having inflated it, closing the other Extremity, and
letting it dry. Hence Morgagni Adversar. 2. Animadvers. 47.
rightly infers, that this alternate Contraction and Dilatation proceeds from
their natural Conformation; to which I may add for a particular Design too,
which will presently appear, and not only because their Sides are compressed by
the Pulsation of the Iliack Arteries, which Mr. Cowper assigns as the sole
Cause of this Inequality of their Dimensions Cowpen's Appendix, Tab. IV.
.

THEY are composed of three Coats, which make them more than ordinary thick in
proportion to the Space they enclose, and enable them the better to resist the
weight of the distended Intestines, (and in Women the Vterus likewise) which
might otherwise so compress them, as to hinder the Transflux of Urine.
Anatomists particularly describe the Substance of these Coats, and call the
outer Membranous, the middle Muscular, and the innermost Nervous: but upon the
nicest Inspection, there is no such Distinction appears, but the whole seems to
be a thick nervous Membrane; in the inside of which are placed diverse small
Glands that emit a Mucus to guard them from the Salts of the Urine.

THEY are inserted into the Bladder very obliquely, after having passed about a
Finger's breadth between its Coats, and are remarkably contracted at the Place
of their opening into it. They are furnished with Arteries and Veins from the
Trunks of the Aorta and Vena Cava, and have Nerves from the Intercostals and
spinal Marrow; which last render them extremely sensible, and occasion that
excessive Pain upon any forcible Distention.

IN the common Course of Nature there is only one Vreter to each Kidney; but
sometimes she furnishes both of them with two, when unavoidable Necessity
requires such a Deviation from her general Rules. Double Vreters have been
often observed, but seldom to both Kidneys, as in the Preparation following;
Tab. II.
in which may be observed, Fig. I.
that there are two Vreters arising distinctly, the one above the Emulgent
Vessels, the other below them, which running separately almost, their whole
Course, are at length conjoined just at their penetrating the outward Coat of
the Bladder, and there forming one Tube terminate in a single Orifice as usual.

SUCH an extraordinary Provision in this Subject was absolutely necessary from
the uncommon Structure of the Kidneys; in which the Fistulae Membranaceae do
not discharge themselves into one common Pelvis, but into two distinct ones;
which not communicating with each other, but being separated by the Substance
of the Kidney, it was requisite that each should be furnished with its proper
Vreter, to carry off the Urine sent into it.

WE come now to the grand Receptacle of the Urine, the Bladder. This is situate
in the Pelvis of the Abdomen, between a Duplicature of the Peritonaeum; the
outer Lamella covering its forepart, the inner passing over its Fundus, and
covering the hinder: It is composed of three Coats; the outer is a Covering of
the Peritonaeum, the middle is Muscular, and made up partly of Longitudinal,
and partly of Fibers variously intersecting each other. The inner is Nervous,
in which are placed several Glands that separate an unctuous Matter to defend
it from the Acrimony of the Urine. This Coat is capable of very great
Distention; but not having a Power of contracting its Dimensions as the two
others have, it is therefore, when not distended, and the Bladder empty,
corrugated in several places.

THE middle Coat is placed by Anatomists among the Muscles, Tab. III. Fig. I.
and named Detrusor Vrinae from its Office; but it is not easy to apprehend how
the Contraction of this Muscle should produce such an Effect as it is commonly
described; since its Longitudinal Fibers having no fixed Point whence they
spring, but terminating at each end in the lower Orifice of the Bladder, they
would rather pull up the Neck of it when they contract themselves, Fig. I. II.
than bring the Fundus downwards. Dr. Douglas, among his other curious
Preparations of this Part, has one which gives us a different, but the true
Disposition of these Longitudinal Fibers; whence he found, that they arise from
the inner and lower part of the Os Pubis, and the fore part of the Prostata,
and passing from thence over the Fundus of the Bladder, come down the hinder
part of it, and are inserted into the back part of this Gland: and that these
Fibers are ranged in the manner that accurate Anatomist has described, the two
annexed Preparations plainly show, which have been made for that purpose since
his communicating this his Discovery to me; for which I take this Opportunity
publicly to return him Thanks, as well as for several others, that are well
worthy Observation, and when he thinks proper to oblige the Public with them,
will appear very much to his Honor. Analogous to the Prostata, in Women, is
the Vagina Vteri, in which the Fibers terminate. As this Muscle is so disposed,
we easily see that by its Contraction the Fundus of the Bladder will be pulled
forwards and downwards toward the Os Pubis by the Longitudinal Fibers, at the
same time that the Oblique ones lessen its Dimensions, and so both together
will exclude the Urine.

THE Bladder has three Orifices; one External for the exit of the Urine, and
two Internal for its Admission, where the Vreters open into it. Fig. III.
From each of these latter Morgagni has observed in both Sexes, that there
proceeds a small but pretty thick and compact fleshy Body, which passing from
the Vreters obliquely downwards on the back part of the Bladder, and being
somewhat Protuberant within its Neck joins its Fellow, and both together make
an Angle at their Juncture; from whence in Males a Line is extended downwards
as far as the Caput Gallinaginis. These Bodies he takes to be a Production of
the Vreters themselves, and with very good reason; for by depressing them with
your Fingers, the Mouths of the Vreters contract and are closed Adversar. 1.
Page 5.
. The Bladder is divided into two Parts, the Fundus and the Neck; the former of
which is the larger Part, which rests upon the Intestinum Rectum in Men; but in
Women upon the Vagina Vteri: The Neck is the smaller, which is much more
contracted, and longer in Men than in that Sex. At the bottom of this is placed
a small Muscle of circular Fibers, called the Sphincter, which prevents the
involuntary Emission of Urine.

THE Neck of the Bladder is fixed behind to the Rectum in Men, in Women to the
Vagina; and before in both to the Os Pubis, by means of the Peritonaeum. Its
Fundus is tied above to the Navel by the Vrachus, degenerated into a Ligament.
But besides this Connection to these different Parts, Dr. Bohn, a Professor of
Leipswick near fifty Years ago, observed another particular Adhesion of the
Bladder; which is, that the greater part of the Fundus in human Bodies, adheres
to or is continuous on the forepart of it to the Peritonaeum and Muscles of
the Abdomen; and upon this Consideration, and because this Part of the Bladder
is not merely Membranous, but Muscular also throughout its whole extent, he
admonishes us not at all to despair of Wounds made in it; inasmuch as the
Muscles, Peritonaeum and Bladder, being thus continuous to each other, their
Fibers will grow together, and all of 'em unite in one common Cicatrix,
provided proper Care is taken in the Dressing, and the Wound not dilated with
Tents, as he and the Surgeons attending observed in a Student about six Years
before OEconom. Animal. Progymnas. 24. page 224.
. Stalpart vander Wiel, who wrote his Observations about that time, has taken
notice of the same thing Centur. 1. Observat. 83.
, and how near they both come to the Truth, our Surgeons are now sufficiently
informed of, since Mr. Douglas upon much the same Principles has introduced a
successful Operation for extracting the Stone out of the Bladder above the Os
Pubis, by making an Incision into this very Part Lithotomia Douglassiana, Sect.
9. page 49.
. But to go on, the Bladder has Arteries and Veins from the Epigastricks and
Iliacks, and Nerves from the two Plexuses in the Pelvis, made out of the
Branches of the Par Vagum, and the Nerves of the Os Sacrum.

ADJOINING to the Neck of the Bladder is the Vrethra, which in Men makes a
Curvature of about four Inches in length under the Os Pubis, and is extended
underneath and between the Corpora Cavernosa Penis to the end of the Glands.
Its Substance is partly spongious, and partly nervous; but as it relates to the
Emission of Urine, in which Circumstance only we consider it here; we need only
take notice of its inward Membrane. Fig. IV.
This is extremely soft, and of exquisite Sense. The upper part of it is
perforated in several Places by the Mouths of several small Ducts which lie
immediately upon it, and run length-ways; commencing about a Thumb's breadth
from the Glans, and ending about the breadth of seven or eight Inches from it.
These Ducts probably come from some small Glands placed within the Body of the
Vrethra; and the Liquor they separate is the same Color and Consistence with
that separated by Mr. Cowper's Glands, though the Use of it seems rather to
defend the Cavity of the Vrethra from the sharpness of the Urine than to
lubricate it for the freer Passage of the Seed, (which is the principal Office
of the others) because the same are found in the Vrethra of Women (over and
above the Lacunae) where they can contribute nothing in Coitu.

THE Vrethra is likewise furnished with a Muscle, Fig. V.
which is serviceable to it as a Urinary Vessel, and called from its Office
Accelerator Vrinae. This arises fleshy from the upper Part of the Vrethra on
both sides as it passes under the Ossa Pubis, and encompassing the Bulb meets
on its inferior Part; where having run along a little way in the Peritonaeum,
it divides its self, and makes two tendinous Insertions into the sides of the
Corpora Cavernosa Penis.

AS to the Disposition and Structure of the other Parts of this Tube, as the
Corpora Cavernosa, the Glandulae Mucosae of Mr. Cowper Philosophical
Transactions, No. 258.
, the Lacunae of De Graaf De Mulier. Organis, cap. 6. page 163.
, etc. they relate to it as it is an Instrument of Generation, and not as a
Conduit-pipe to the Urine, and are therefore foreign to the Subject in hand: We
shall only take notice in general, that it has Arteries and Veins from the
Hypogastricks, and in Women from the Pudenda, and is furnished with Nerves from
those of the Os Sacrum.

BEFORE we finish this Section, it will be proper to take notice of the
Glandulae Renales; because most Anatomists have fancied that they contribute
something to the Kidneys in performing their Office; for they are situate so
near each other, that the Membranes which invest them both externally are
connected very fast together, and in a Foetus these Bodies lie so contiguous,
that they seem at first Sight to be the same. These Glands are about an Inch
broad and two long, but much bigger proportionably in Children; and in a Foetus
near as big as the Kidneys themselves, but they don't increase in proportion
with other Parts. Within they have a pretty large Sinus, which the late Dr.
Tyson, by blowing into, found to empty themselves into two Veins; whereof the
Right passed immediately into the Cava, the Left into the Emulgent
Philosophical Transactions, No 142.
. They have Arteries from the Emulgents, sometimes from the Aorta itself, but
their Excretory Ducts could never be found, and therefore the Use of these
Glands has not been ascertained, till very lately Valsalva observed them, which
he says descend to the Testicles in Men; but in Women are sent to the Ovaria,
and are therefore instrumental in Generation Id. No 385.
: This has put several upon inspecting these Bodies more narrowly, but to no
purpose, for none such appeared. However Mr. Ranby has discovered, instead of
them, two Spermatick Arteries never taken notice of before, which very probably
are what Valsalva took for Excretory Ducts Id. No 387.
; for the Description of the Disposition and Progress of both are very much
alike; and we all know, that the smaller Arteries in dead Bodies, appear white
like those Vessels. These Arteries are near as big as the Seminal. That on the
right springs from the Aorta, about a Finger's breadth above the Seminal, first
sending off a large Branch to the Glandula Renalis, and then another, which
being enclosed in the same common Capsula with the Spermatick Artery and Vein,
descends along with them to the Testicle. That on the Left is propagated in the
same manner, only sometimes it arises from the Aorta, sometimes from the
Emulgent. But notwithstanding this Discovery, we are still as much at a Loss
for the Use of these Glands as ever: for though these Arteries distribute a
Branch both to them and the Testicles, yet there is nothing communicated from
one to the other upon that account; an^ that they separate a Liquor for
diluting the Venal Blood, which is too thick after its being robbed of its
aqueous Parts by the Filter of the Kidneys, as is the Opinion of some, does not
appear altogether rational; for if this was their Office, why are they so very
large in a Foetus where there is so little Urine secreted? What Morgagni hints
upon this Subject appears much more probable; that they are Lymphatick Glands,
and of the same Nature with those placed near the Receptaclum Chyli, and the
beginning of the Thoracick Duct: Namely, continually to pour forth a Liquor
through their Lymphatick Vessels, in order either to dilute the Chyle, or to
keep open and lubricate the Passages; and this may agree with their
extraordinary Bulk in Foetuses, since in them there is either no Chyle, and
therefore a greater Quantity of Lymph is necessary to keep these Viae Lacteae
open; or if there is, it is in so small a Quantity, and at the same time not
acted upon by the Diaphragm, that more Lymph is required to carry it through
these Ducts into the Subclavian Vein Adversar. ^o. Animad^ers. 3^. p. 66.
.

I HAVE now gone through the Anatomy of the Parts; in which I have taken notice
of every late Discovery that is confirmed by Inspection, and which don't
commonly occur in Authors. Some may reckon these among the Minutiae of Anatomy;
but then these Minutiae are not only the immediate Instruments of Action, but
also the latent Niduses of the grand Distempers incident to these Parts. The
searching these out therefore cannot be useless, as they will lead us to the
Knowledge of the Powers peculiar to each, and to the Rise and Nature of these
Distempers themselves, which I hope will appear in the Sequel of this L^ct^re.

SECTION II. Of the Uses and Powers of the Urinary Organs.
WE come now to inquire into the Uses of the Organs described, and into the
Powers with which they respectively act upon the Fluids that pass through their
Cavities. That the general Use of them is to separate the Urine from the Blood,
and to promote its Passage afterward out of the Body, appears prima facie,
upon dissecting these several Parts: but the Manner how this Separation is
performed has been very little understood by all the ancient Writers, as well
as by many of the more modern ones, which has occasioned this Action to be
attributed to different Causes. As, that the Urine was secreted from the Blood
by means of Digestion Van Helmont.
; that the aqueous Serum was precipitated from the Cruor by a peculiar Ferment
residing in the Kidneys Sylvii Praxis Med. lib. 1. cap. 55. Du Hamel de Affect.
Corpor. lib. 2. cap. 3.
; that the Blood was disposed to part with its Serosity by a Ferment that put
it into Fusion Willis. Pharmaceut. Part. 1. Sect. 4. cap. 3.
, and that the Kidneys separated the aqueous Parts from the rest by an
attractive Power inherent in their Substance Galen de usu Part. lib. 5. cap. 6,
and 7.
: the bare Recital of which in this Age is sufficient to show, that they have
no Existence in this part of the Animal Economy.

IT will not however be amiss, before we explain the Nature of this Secretion,
to premise, that Bellini and Professor Boerhaave, though both of them reject
these Hypotheses, have notwithstanding fallen into a Mistake about this Affair;
for the first imagines, that the Blood, when arrived at the Extremities of the
Emulgent Arteries, is extravasated through their patent Orifices into a small
Space that lays between them, and the Origination of the Tubuli Vrinarii and
Emulgent Veins; the former receiving the urinous Parts, the latter the refluent
Blood by means of the different Configuration of their Orifices: whereas it is
not only evident to Sense, from injecting the Kidney, that the Urinary Ducts
spring immediately from the extreme Branches of of the Artery; but it is
demonstrable likewise from the Nature of Fluids, that the Orifices of these
Vessels cannot be different in Figure; because the Pressure of all Liquors
being constantly perpendicular to the Sides of the containing Vessels, these
will hereby be every where distended equally, that is, they must be Circular
Bellini de Structura Renum page 23.
.

THE Blood indeed is previously disposed for a particular Secretion by the
peculiar Attrition of its Parts, and the Pressure it undergoes in the various
Complications and Contortions of the Arteriolae of the Gland; whereby it is
determined to part with such Particles as are adapted to the Orifices of of the
secerning Canals, which will be imping'd upon them with a certain Velocity; and
as these Complications and Contortions are vastly different in different
Glands, there will hence arise a Variety of Secretions in these Bodies: but
that the Orifices of the Secretory Ducts must be Circular, (though their
Dimensions differ in different Glands) is evident from the necessary Effects of
Fluids upon yielding Vessels, as they run through them. And by the way, the
whole Doctrine of Secretion depends upon the particular Contexture and
Disposition of the Arterial Branches of the Gland, the Velocity with which the
Blood is imping'd upon the Orifices of the separating Canals, and the Diameters
of the Orifices themselves.

THE last Author has erred, by concluding, that the Secretion of the Urine is
performed two ways; the one more simple, by the immediate Percolation of the
Urinous Parts through the Bellinian Ducts; the other more complex'd, by the
Assistance of distinct Glands: whereas there are no such Bodies, in his Sense
of that word, to be found in the Kidneys Boerhavei Institut. No 353.
.

THE Separation of this Liquor then from the Blood is performed by a very
simple piece of Mechanism, arising only from the Structure of the Kidneys, and
some Properties of the Blood circulating through them. For from the Description
of the constituent Parts of these Organs already given, it appears, that the
Blood by the Force of the Heart is propell'd through the various Ramifications
and Convolutions of the Emulgent Arteries, till it comes to the Orifices of the
Bellinian Ducts, which are the separating Canals; but these not being capable
from the smallness of their Diameters, of admitting the whole heterogeneous
Mass, but only such Parts of it as are proportionate to them, these only will
be received, whilst the grosser Compound will circulate through the more patent
Originations of the Emulgent Veins, to be returned by them into the Vena Cava.
Now the aqueous part of the Blood consisting of much the smallest Particles of
it, and the Salts of the Blood having a close Union with the watery Part, as
being dissolved in it, these will first pass through the Orifices of the
Secretory Vessels, and the secern'd Fluid will consequently for the most part
consist of these Principles; which that the Urine does, will presently appear.

THE Urine thus separated, flows through these Ducts to the Papillae, and is
discharged by them into the Fistulae Mebranaceae, which convey it to the
Pelvis. This Cavity, though different from what Nature practices in other
glandulous Parts, the Excretory Ducts of such generally terminating in one
large common Duct without any Cavity interposed, yet is absolutely necessary
from the Figure of the Kidney; for this making a considerable Segment of a
Circle, in which the Urinary Tubes are propagated in great numbers from the
Circumference toward the Center, if they had opened there at once in a Duct of
a small Diameter, their Orifices would have been brought so close to one
another, and with Directions so opposite, as necessarily to have hindered
several of them from discharging their Contents, or at best have rendered such
Discharge very irregular; which is prevented by this Basin, whereby their
Orifices are removed farther from the Center and one another, and the Discharge
rendered thereby equal and uniform.

FROM hence the Urine descends through the Vreters into the Bladder; but
whether by its own Gravity, or whether it is forwarded in its Course by the
Action of these Tubes, has not yet been determined. Some Verheyen Anatom.
Tractat. 2. cap. 18. Dionis Anatom. Demonstrat. 3.
Anatomists of great Note have inferred, from the substance and disposition of
their investing Coats, that they are not merely passive, and barely afford a
Passage to the Urine, but that they are endu'd with a sort of Peristaltick
Motion, which promotes its Descent into the Bladder. In Brutes indeed this
Action of the Vreters seems somewhat needful, by reason of the Horizontal
Situation of their Bodies, the Urine not flowing downwards as in Men, and
consequently its Weight contributing little or nothing to its Motion; but in
Men there is no such Necessity for this Action, because the Urine will descend
of course from the erect Position of these Tubes. On the other hand, I am apt
to think, that the Course of the Urine in us rather requires a Check than a
Spur, in order to prevent its coming too violently into the Bladder, which
would create an uneasy Sensation; and that for this reason Nature has made the
Vreters of unequal Dimensions in different parts of them, and has remarkably
contracted their Orifices at their opening into the Bladder, that they might be
so many Impediments to any sudden Influx. But besides this Consideration, it is
still more probable that they want this Power, because these Tubes, contrary to
all other Parts that have muscular Fibers, when once they are forcibly
distended, never resume their former Dimensions, as is observed in hard
Drinkers, and in Nephritick Cases Ruysch. Thesaur. No 8. p. 13.
, which they would do if they enjoyed a peristaltick Motion. But to proceed,

THE Urine is received from the Vreters by the Bladder, and is prevented from
regurgitating into them by the Contraction of their Orifices, and the Obliquity
of their Insertion. Here it remains, till by its Quantity and Acrimony it
distends and stimulates its inmost Coat, which causes the muscular Coat to
contract its Fibers, and act strongly upon it; the two Corpora Carnosa of
Morgagni shortening their Fibers at the same time, and so straitening the
Orifices of the Vreters that none should escape that way. By this Pressure, and
that of the Abdominal Muscles, the Urine is protruded downwards with a Force
sufficient to overcome the Sphincter of the Bladder, and to carry it through
the Vrethra some distance from the Body. But lest any part of it should stay in
this Tube, when the Pressure ceases and the Sphincter is closed, the
Accelerator Muscle begins to act, which expels any Remains that lodge therein.

THE Force with which the Bladder acts in projecting the Urine has been
attempted to be fixed by two speculative Mathematicians: but their Calculations
are widely different; the one making it amount to an uncommon Weight, whilst
the other reduces it to a Trifle.

THE late ingenious Dr. Keil has computed it, exclusive of the Keil's Essays,
page 91.
Abdominal Muscles, to be equal to no more than three Ounces; which seems too
inconsiderable to overcome the Contranitency of the Sphincter, and at the same
time project the Urine six Foot from the Body in a Horizontal Direction; for
the Abdominal Muscles contribute very little, except when we hold our Breath
and strain, and then indeed they force strongly downwards and press upon the
Bladder. But this Calculation is very defective: for not to mention what
Michelotti has observed, that Dr. Keil has not at all taken notice of the Vis
Compressionis innate to all Parts of the Bladder's internal Superficies, but
only to that part of it which answers to a transverse Section of the Vrethra,
it is farther deficient, in that he has omitted to consider the Length of the
Vrethra from the Orifice of the Bladder, and the Friction arising therefrom,
which he ought to have done to make it more perfect; for though the Force that
causes a Fluid to run out at an Orifice with a certain Velocity, is as he has
laid down; yet if there is a Tube expended any distance from it, through which
the Fluid must pass afterward, the Velocity of it at its coming out at the end
of this Tube will be, caeteris paribus, as its Length; and a greater Force will
be required, for example, to move a Fluid with a given Velocity through a Tube
of twelve Inches long, than through one of four and of the same Diameter. This
will raise the Power of the Bladder somewhat higher; but will scarcely yet be
sufficient to throw the Urine so far from the Body.

MICHELOTTI on the other hand De Separatione Fluidorum, page 117. and seq.
, from mechanical Deductions raises the Power of the Bladder to 504 lb. Weight,
but then the Principle he sets out upon is false; for he lays down, that the
Force by which a Fluid running out at the Orifice of any Canal acquires a
certain Velocity, is equal to the Weight of a Cylinder of the same Fluid, whose
Basis corresponds to the Orifice it flows through, and whose Altitude is equal
to the simple Altitude of the extreme Superficies of the Fluid above it;
whereas it has been demonstrated by Sir Isaac Newton Philosophiae Principia,
Lib. 2. Prop. 36. Corollar. 2.
, that this Force must amount to that of a Cylinder of the same Basis, but of
double the Height, from whence any heavy Body must fall to gain such a
Velocity. However, what deduces from the Principle he lays down is just; and if
he had proceeded in the same manner upon Sir Isaac Newton's, as he has upon his
own, he would have come as near as possible to the entire Force of this Organ.
The whole Proposition, with what he draws from it, is much too long to be
transcribed into a Discourse of this kind: I shall therefore refer you to the
Work it self; and only observe, that from hence may be seen the Uncertainty
even of mechanical Reasoning, when applied to explain some Powers in the Animal
Economy; though it is the best we can make use of in this part of Learning.

FROM this cursory View of the Actions of the respective Parts, and of the
Nature of the Urinous Secretion, may be drawn some Conclusions, which will
serve as so many Answers to several Queries that commonly occur among the
Writers of Institutions: For from hence we learn, that the Urine is not an
Excrement of any particular Concoction, as the Ancients term it, but that all
the Digestions supply Matter for it; because whatever is brought to the Kidneys
has undergone the Action of the Stomach, has been broken and divided in its
Passage through the Lungs by the Force of Respiration, and from thence flows
blended with the nutritious part of the Blood, till it is separated from it by
the Orifices of the Urinary Tubes; and consequently is an Excrement of all the
Concoctions.

HENCE likewise we can account why we urine so frequently when we drink
plentifully; and particularly why this Excrement is secern'd in so short a
time, and in such large Quantities, after taking Diuretic Liquors upon an
empty Stomach, without having recourse to any occult Passages from this Organ
to the Bladder, which Anatomy has never shown, and which repeated Observations
have proved to have no Existence. For notwithstanding an Experiment printed in
the Philosophical Transactions somewhat favors this Notion, a pretty Quantity
of Urine being found in a Dog's Bladder, though the Vreters were tied, and were
also a little swelled above the Ligature, yet on the other hand, upon opening
the Bladders of Persons dead of a Suppression of Urine from an Obstruction of
the common Passages of the Kidneys and Vreters, there never was found a Drop of
Urine in them Philosoph. Transact. No. 65, 67.
.

NEITHER indeed is there any occasion for a shorter Conveyance than what Nature
has made apparent; for as to the frequent Emissions during the time of
Drinking, it is to be observed, that before this happens, the Stomach, the
smaller Intestines, and the Lacteal Veins are replete with the Potables, so
that the Blood receives a fresh supply of a Fluid from the next Draught that is
taken down, which, if I may so call it, protrudes what is already contained in
the Vessels abovementioned into the Subclavian Vein: The Consequence of which
will be, that a greater Quantity of Blood will be brought to the Kidneys than
usual, and therefore more Urine separated; and so much the more, the more
frequent the Draughts are repeated. And this is the reason why the first Urine
that is voided is of a higher Color, and bears the Tokens of Concoction;
whereas the subsequent Emissions lose these Signs, and the Urine at length
flows perfectly limpid and crude, which it will continue to do till this
extraordinary Supply has quite passed off, and then it will reassume its former
Color, etc.

AS to the other Case, where the Stomach is empty, and the Blood is supposed to
be diverted of the Urinous Matter in great measure, if we attend to the time
which Fluids take up in passing from the Stomach into the Blood, and how soon
afterward they are carried to the Kidneys by the Rapidity of its Circulation,
we shall find the common Passages altogether sufficient.

IT must be considered then, that though solid Substances require a good deal
of time to be comminuted by the Stomach, in order to have their Parts rendered
small enough to enter the Lacteals, yet Fluids when taken alone, from the
minuteness of their Particles are naturally fit to pass through them, and from
their Aptitude to Motion will yield to the first Impression; for which reason
they will make no stay there, but very soon be protruded by the Action of the
Stomach and Guts into these Vessels: and that the Progress of Fluids through
them takes up but a very short time, is demonstrated from the almost
instantaneous Depletion of the Lacteals in living Animals, that have been
opened for this purpose some time after a full Meal, when the Chyle has been
flowing through them; so that if that part of the Liquids which comes away by
Urine is not longer in flowing through the Heart to the Orifices of the Urinary
Ducts of the Kidneys, than the same is in passing from the Stomach to the
Heart, the common Channels will be found every way to answer these Emergencies.

NOW, as the Heart throws out every Systole one Ounce of Blood, and beats sixty
Systoles in a Minute, there will pass into the Aorta 900 Ounces in a Quarter of
an Hour: taking therefore the Dimensions of the emulgent Arteries, which spring
immediately from its Trunk, to be one Tenth of that of the Aorta, (which is
very near the matter,) the Quantity of Blood passing through them in that time
will be ninety Ounces, or seven Pounds six Ounces Troy. Add to this, that the
Serum makes up the greater part of the Blood, and at this time is in a much
larger Proportion, from the Addition of the ingested Liquor, and we may
conclude reasonably, that two or three Pints of Urine may be secreted from such
a Quantity of Blood in that time, and great part of it much sooner: which will
answer every thing that has been observed, as to the quick Passage of
Diuretics; the Effects of which upon this Secretion, either as to its Quantity
or Quality, being at the soonest more than half this time.

THIS Notion of an immediate Passage from the Stomach to the Bladder, so
contrary to Anatomy and the Nature of the Animal Economy, one would imagine
should have been exploded at the first Dissection of an Human Body; much more
now, when these Parts are so accurately known: but it seems it is again revived
and strenuously argued for Morgan's Principles of Physic, Land. 1725.
, which is the reason for inserting the foregoing Paragraphs. But to proceed,

AS a Corollary to the foregoing it may be laid down, that the Quantity of
Urine ought to be proportionate to the Quantity we drink. For caeteris paribus,
the Quantity of the secern'd Fluid is in proportion to the Quantity of Blood
brought to the Orifice of the separating Canal; but the Quantity of the aqueous
part of the Blood, of which the Urine chiefly consists, is in proportion to the
ingested Liquors; therefore the Quantity of Urine will be in proportion to them
likewise. But here some Allowance must be made for what passes off by
Perspiration and Sweat, in Exspiration, and with the Saliva; as likewise for
different Circumstances. For Example, from Heat or Exercise, the aqueous Parts
of the Blood passing through the Pores of the Skin in Sweat, the Quantity of
Urine will be less; as on the contrary, the Pores of the Skin being stopped by
Cold, a larger Portion than usual will be voided.

AS the last Inference from the foregoing Theory, it appears, that other
Particles besides what naturally compose the Urine, though of unequal Surfaces,
one of which too may be longer than the Diameter of the Secretory Canal, may
nevertheless be separated together with it, provided the Surface that presents
it self to the Orifice does not exceed its Diameter. And that Blood it self may
pass through, if it is imping'd with a Force sufficient to distend and enlarge
the Secretory Ducts; analogous to what happens to some other Vessels that are
naturally smaller, but ampliated for a time, as in critical and symptomatical
Haemorrhages, and in the Menstrua.

THE Doctrine laid down is so well established upon the mechanical Properties
of the Parts concerned, that it is scarce liable to any Objection. The main one
which seems to affect it is this: That seeing all the Parts that constitute the
Urine are in the Blood when it is brought to the Orifices of the Urinary Ducts,
if the Percolation of these from the rest only depended on their Diameters,
they would all be secern'd at the same time, being of the same Nature and
adapted to them, which is contrary to Fact; the refluent Blood found in the
Emulgent Veins being still possessed of some of the Principles of the Urine.
But if we consider that part of the Blood is spent upon the Nourishment of the
Kidneys, and does not come to these Orifices, but is immediately received by
the Venal Branches that correspond to them, we shall find the reason why it
still retains these Principles in some degree, (which by the way may be
separated from it in some subsequent Circulation through these Organs) and at
the same time see this Objection obviated.

WE come now to consider the Nature and Properties of the Urine it self; this
consists of a fluid Substance, in which are sustained several dense and solid
Particles. The elementary or more simple Parts of it are Water, Salt, and
Earth, which are manifested to the Senses in the Experiments of Bellini Bellini
de Urinis, page 9.
.

THAT simple Water is the fluid Part of the Urine, almost wholly, is known from
a gentle Evaporation of it; by which means what is exhaled is found to be
limpid and insipid as the purest Water, and the inspissated Residuum after the
Evaporation is over, is in all respects restored to the state of true Urine
again; that is, in Color, Taste, Smell and Consistence, by pouring the same
Quantity of common Water upon it, instead of the Fluid that was evaporated.

THE Existence of a Salt is proved by the Taste, which becomes more pungent,
the more the aqueous Menstruum is exhaled, till at length there is left a black
viscid Substance that liquifies in the Air like common Salt, and is so poignant
as scarce to be borne by the Tongue. The Nature of this essential Salt has not
been considered by this Author; but by Experiments we find, that it is not a
pure Alkali as some Chemists have imagined, neither is it an Acid, but is sui
generis, and partakes of both Qualities. For if you pour Spirit of Nitre,
Aquafortis, or the like Acid upon the Urine, they will only produce a somewhat
higher Color in it; which acid Spirits, when mixed with either a fixed or
volatile Alkali, always occasion a considerable Ebullition. So if you put a
nitrous Salt into the Spirit of Urine, it will turn it milky; and the like will
happen if you do the same Salt of Tartar; which Experiments plainly prove this
Salt to have both Acid and Alkali in its Composition. But to proceed,

THE Particles of Earth in the Urine are perceived by the following one: If you
evaporate the Urine till it comes to the Consistence of Honey, and pour upon it
the same Quantity of common Water, the Artificial Urine will have this in
common with the Natural; that it will grow turbid and putrify, and before its
Putrefaction, will let fall a perfectly insipid, subpallid and impalpable
Powder every way agreeing with Elementary Earth.

THAT there is a Sulphur also in the Urine, though overlooked by Bellini, is
evident from the strong Smell it has when only voided; but chiefly from that
Foetidness arising from it, when it is in a State of Putrefaction, or during
Evaporation; though there is indeed but a small Quantity of this Principle,
because there is scarce any of it comes off in Distillation.

UPON these three Principles of Water, Salt, and Earth, and the different
Proportions they bear to each other, depend in great measure the Color,
Saltness, and Cousistence of the Urine, with all the Varieties observable in
each. If the aqueous Parts more than ordinary exceed the other, the Urine will
be limpid or pale: If the Salts abound too plentifully, it will be of a shining
flammeous Color, but still clear; the Salts being pellucid Bodies. If the
Earth prevails, being an Opake Body, it will obstruct the Passage of the Rays
of Light, and produce a more intense Color, taking off from the Clearness and
Pellucidness of the Urine, and the more so as its Quantity increases in an
Over-proportion, till at length the Urine will be turbid and thick.

BUT besides these three, it is reasonable to think, that the natural Color of
the Urine is owing in great measure to the Sulphur contained in it. For though
its Quantity is but small, yet it still retains its Color after it is
separated from the other Principles, and will give a considerable Tincture to
Water, when mixed with it, which the other Principles of Salt and Earth will
not do after their Separation, and yet they are allowed on all hands to
contribute chiefly to its Color.

THE different Degrees of Saltness in the Urine arise from the different
Quantities of Salt floating in the aqueous Menstruum; whose Pungency upon the
Tongue will be greater, the less Fluid there is to dissolve them and obtund
their Spiculae, and so vice versa. And that the Urine will be of a grosser or
thinner Consistence, as the solid Particles are in a greater or lesser Degree,
is so evident, that it wants no Explanation.

THE Contents observable in the Urine, which bear the Names of Nubeculae,
Suspensiones and Sedimenta, are nothing else but these solid Particles; which
when this compound Fluid is out of the Body and at rest, separate from the
aqueous Part, and take place according to their specific Gravities; having
these Appellations given them as they are found in the upper, middle, or lowest
part of the Urine: but so nevertheless, that the different Density of these
Contents at one time more than another, and the different Resistance of the
Medium in which they are suspended, may afterward alter their Situation;
insomuch that what was at first a Suspension, may at length subside and become
a Sediment.

THE Nature of the Urine being thus known, we may draw several Inferences from
it that will explain some Affections common to the Animal Economy. Hence first
the Reason appears, why upon using Exercise, and in hot Weather, the Urine is
of a higher Color, and more salt and stimulating than at other times: and why
the like Urine is made, after having abstained some time from taking any
Liquid. For in both cases the solid Contents will be in a greater proportion
than the aqueous Menstruum; this last being carried off through the Pores of
the Skin in the first Instance, as in the second a fresh Supply of it being for
some time taken off from the Blood, what is secreted by the Kidneys in such
Circumstances will be more than ordinarily saturated with these solid
Principles.

THE foregoing Observation shows the Cause, which makes the Urine of healthy
People and of a strong Habit of Body, to have seldom the Nubeculae and
Suspensiones found in it, but the Sediment more frequently; because the two
first consisting of the more fine and subtle Parts of the solid Contents, pass
off together with the aqueous by Sweat and Perspiration, which the more gross
and heavy Particles that form the Sediment cannot do, by reason of their Bulk
and Figure, and therefore will be secreted by the Kidneys, and subside by their
own Gravity. The same shows the near Relation between the Urine and Sweat; and
that the Increase of the last may supply the Defect of the Urinous Secretion in
some measure; which is the reason that Patients linger so long under a total
Suppression of Urine from a Stoppage in the Kidneys, before this Ailment kills
them; which some times in strong Bodies is eighteen or twenty days: and there
are several Instances where the Urine has been totally suppressed from the same
Cause for fifteen and sixteen Days together, and yet the Patients recovered
Stalpart. Observat. Centur. 1. Observat. 51
.

TO determine the exact Color and Consistence the Urine ought to have in
healthy Persons is almost impossible, by reason of the great Latitude that must
be allowed for the difference of Age, Constitution, and Diet of different
Persons, and of these in the same at different times. But seeing the two
Extremes of a limpid Urine, and of a red and turbid one, are produced as either
the watery Menstruum or the solid Contents abound beyond measure, we may
venture to conclude thus far, that from a due portion and mixture of these in a
state of perfect health, there should arise a Medium between these Extremes,
which is a light yellow, or Citrine Color. As to its Consistence, regard being
had to the foregoing Circumstances, it should be pretty near that of common
Water, but somewhat more thick and heavy, by reason of the solid Principles
contained in it.

WHY the natural Sediment should be white, light and equal, is more easily
accounted for. For seeing the Fluids secreted from the Blood, will be as the
state of the Blood at the time of their Secretion; and the Blood in a natural
State is supposed always to be alike and equal to it self, whatsoever Parts of
it are separated by the Kidneys in equal times, will also be alike and equal;
and consequently when out of the Body and at rest, will mutually take place by
one another, and render the Sediment equal. The Whiteness of it is owing to the
large Quantity of Salts contained in it (as is manifest from the Bellinian
Experiment) De Urinis, page 13.
which being united with the thick viscid Parts of the Urine, will subside
along with them, and by the Rules of Optics produce such a Color.

Hence in the last place we may know, how far the Inspection of the Urine is
useful in the practice of Physic: for by comparing the several Appearances in
the Urine of diseased Persons, with those that naturally arise in it, and
observing in what respects they differ from each other, we shall be informed in
great measure of the present state of the Blood, as to the mixture of its
Parts, and the Proportion between them. And if we take notice at the same time
of all the Symptoms that accompany such Appearances, and follow upon them, we
shall discover what the Distemper is that proceeds from such a Crasis of Blood,
and also prognosticate the Event of it.

IT were easy to show from Authors and private Observation what State of Blood
each Alteration of the Urine discovers: but being confined to treat only of the
Distempers belonging to some particular Organs, it will be impertinent to take
notice of any other, than what will lead us to the Knowledge of these; which
will be seen in the remaining part of this Lecture.

WE have now gone through the Uses of the Parts, and inquired into the Nature
of the Urine; in which last I have for the most part followed Bellini in the
most concise manner possible, as his Account of it is the best, both by his
Experiments, and the Conclusions he draws from them. And as the latter are here
proved by different Mediums from what he himself made use of, they so far make
them bid fairer for Truth.

SECTION III.
PART I. Of a STONE in the KIDNEYS.
THE Organs of Urine are incident to several Indispositions, in common with
other Parts of the like Structure and Composition, and which spring also from
the same general Causes; As Inflammations, Tumors, Abscesses, Ulcers, Schirri,
etc. but the most frequent, and indeed chief Distempers that afflict them
proceed from the Urine separated by them, or passing through them. These are
attended with very untoward Symptoms, and if of long Continuance, very fatal
Consequences: none of which are more common than those arising from a Stone in
the Kidneys or Bladder; which shall therefore be the Subject of the remaining
part of this Lecture.

IF we compare what has been said in the foregoing part of it, concerning the
Elementary Principles of the Urine, with several Experiments made upon these
concreted Substances, it will appear, that the material Cause of a Stone in the
Kidney is originally in the natural Composition of this Fluid: For we find from
Chemistry and microscopical Observations, that what we call a Stone almost
entirely consists of a volatile and fixed Salt, such as the Urine plentifully
abounds with. In order therefore to form a calculous Concretion, there is no
Petrefaction required, as the Naturalists term it, nor any change of Substance
in the constituent Parts of the Urine, but only a Separation of the saline and
some earthy Particles of it from the Fluid, and such an intimate Cohesion of
these solid Corpuscles thereupon, as not to be disunited or dissolved again by
any subsequent Afflux of Urine upon them.

BOTH these Accidents will happen, if either the Salts are in such great
abundance in the Urine, that they cannot pass through the exceeding small Ducts
that form the Papillae; or if they are hindered from moving through them by any
viscid Matter that is separated along with them, and so unites them together;
or if these Ducts themselves are so much compressed or contracted, as not to
admit the Salts through their Cavities. For in all these Circumstances the
saline Lympha will stagnate at the Papillae, whereby the Salts will be brought
too near one another; which being Corpuscles of very great attractive Powers,
they will be more strongly attracted by each other than by the Fluid in which
they are suspended, and consequently will separate from it, and unite in one
solid Substance.

THAT any of these three Causes may singly produce such a Concrete, if they
exist in the Degree laid down, is proved from the Nature of Salts in general,
when in Fluore, and the Consequences that must follow from their being brought
too much within the Sphere of each others Activity; more particularly from the
Nature of those, of which the Stone consists; which are so very attractive,
that even when a Calculus is reduced to a Caput Mortuum, and beat into an
impalpable Powder, so that it will dissolve in Water, yet in a short time the
Salts will separate from it, and coagulate so strongly, that though the Water
is heated never so intensely, they will not dissolve in it again.

HOWEVER it is reasonable to think, that a Nucleus of a firm Consistence is
seldom formed by the first or second Cause, without the Concurrence of the
last; as on the other hand, that the last alone will produce one. For though
there should be an over large Quantity of Salts in the Urine, or if an usual
Quantity should be envellop'd in a viscid Matter, yet if the urinary Ducts are
of a natural Dimension, they would not stagnate at the Papillae, unless these
Qualities were in a very great degree; but would be protruded through their
Orifices by the force and weight of the next Urine flowing upon them: whereas
if these Ducts should be much contracted, even a natural proportion of Salts
would stagnate there. And I think it is plainly proved, that a Nucleus is
formed more from the Fault of the Kidney it self, than from the Qualities of
the Urine; in that one Kidney only is generally affected, whilst the other
remains free. For if the Fault lay as much in the Urine, they would both be
affected alike, the Urine separated by both Kidneys necessarily partaking of
the same Qualities. However, that the two first are concomitant Causes, and
very much contribute toward the Generation of a Stone is highly probable; and
it is almost certain, that a sabulous Sediment, or what is called the Gravel,
may owe its Origin to either of these Causes singly.

AS a farther Confirmation of the Truth of what has been laid down, it were
easy to show, that the antecedent Causes of a Nephritick Fit introduce one or
both of these Qualities in the Urine, or affect the Passages of the Kidneys in
the manner just mentioned: but as it will be troubling you with frequent
Repetitions of the same way of Reasoning, to explain how each in particular
operates toward producing one or more of these Effects, I shall mention the
chief and most common procatartick Causes, which are comprehended in the
following Observation, viz. that those Persons who make spirituous Liquors
their constant Drink, and use them too plentifully; or those who have weak
Stomachs, or live upon Food that abounds with viscid Juices; or those who
altogether lead an unactive and sedentary Life, are, above all others, most
afflicted with this Distemper. And that the Urine of such Persons must
necessarily be over-stock'd with Salts, or with a tenacious viscid Matter, or
that the Channels of the Kidneys will be too much straightened or compressed
according as either of these Causes prevail, will appear upon Examination.

1st. IN the first Part of this Observation it is to be taken notice of, that
all spirituous Liquors abound plentifully with Salts; a Spirit being nothing
else but a large Quantity of these Substances suspended in a little Water and
Oil; whence from frequent drinking these Liquors the Blood will be over-stock'd
with this Principle. But besides this, from an habitual Use of them, in process
of Time, the Serum which is the most aqueous part of the Blood, will contain a
large Portion of a spirituous Fluid; and we know from Experiments, that a
urinous Salt will not dissolve in such a Menstruum: upon which account the
Quantity of Salts brought into the Blood with our Food will be daily increased.
Now the Urine being separated principally and immediately from the Serum, which
is over salt upon a double account, must likewise from the Nature of its
Secretion be over salt too.

HENCE we can account why the Fits of the Stone are not so severe in Women as
in Men; they generally drinking less Wine, and feeding less upon such gross
Meats as abound with Salts. And for the same reason we may conclude, that the
Exemption those Persons enjoy from this Distemper, who only drink Malt Liquors,
is owing a great deal to the lesser Quantity of Salts in these Potables, than
in Wine.

2dly. AS an over salt Urine is the Consequence of the foregoing Cause, so from
a bad Digestion and viscid Food the Urine will be slimy and roapy. For the
Aliment being too viscid, or not sufficiently comminuted in the Stomach, the
Chyle will be more than ordinary viscid, which being constantly sent into the
Blood, will render that in some time of the same Nature. But over and above
this, the Salts which are the most incorruptible part of our Food, being not
thoroughly broken through the weakness of the digestive Powers, will exist in
larger Combinations than usual; and at the same time be enclosed in a
gelatinous Chyle, which will hold them together; for which reason the Blood
will not only be too viscid, but the Salts of it will not be sufficiently
dissolved in its Serum; whence it follows from the same Reasoning as in the
former, that the Urine must be likewise too viscid, and its Salts brought too
near one another, which will occasion them to cohere. From hence it appears,
that Galen did not altogether err, when he attributed the material Cause of a
Stone to a thick, slimy, and tenacious Matter De Renum affect.
, notwithstanding withstanding his Notion has been rejected by several modern
Writers: since being thus explained as a concomitant Cause, it is agreeable
both to Reason and Fact.

ACCORDINGLY we find, that Children are more tormented with the Stone of the
Bladder than Adults; and especially the poorer sort of them who are generally
nourished with Food that affords slimy and tenacious Juices. Hippocrates
ascribes one Principle of the Stone in Children to bad Milk; which he says,
being earthy and phlegmatic, will induce a Lentor into the Stomach, and when
mixed with the Sediment of the Urine in the Bladder cohere and become solid
Lib. de Morbis 4. Sect. 28.
; much more then will the same Consequences follow from Cheese, Fish, and the
other coarser Diet of the Poor; and there has been no better Reason assigned,
why such young Subjects being once cut, seldom require the Operation a second
time, than that as they grow up, their Diet is either altered, or the digestive
Powers increase, and the Solids become stronger, whereby the Aliment will be
more intimately divided, and any viscous Matter or Combination of Salts be
broken by this means, and excluded the Habit by the force of Labor and
Exercise. Agreeable to this is another Observation of Hippocrates Coacae
Praenotiones No 512.
that a Stone is not formed in the Bladder from the Fourteenth to the Sixty
third Year of Age; in which time we all know the digestive Powers are most
vigorous.

3dly, HOW an unactive sedentary Life, which is the last procatartick Cause
taken notice of, should bring on a straitness in the Urinary Passages of the
Kidney, a competent Knowledge in Anatomy will inform us. This teaches us, that
by a sedentary and bending Posture of the Body, not only all the Viscera of the
Abdomen, but the greater Blood Vessels themselves will be compressed;
especially the Emulgents, and that part of the Aorta and Vena Cava whence they
go off, as being placed where the Flexure is greatest. But this is not the only
Consequence; for from such a Position the Viscera will also be forced backwards
and downwards, and will consequently press externally upon these Vessels, so
that the weighty Viscus of the Liver on one side, and the Spleen on the other,
will as it were squeeze the Kidneys, which are placed between them and the
Musculi Lumbares: upon both which accounts, it is no wonder if the Urinary
Ducts that are continued from the Emulgent Arteries, and are by much the most
yielding Substance and of the finest Contecture, should suffer most, and be so
straightened as to occasion the saline Lympha to stagnate in them.

TO this Cause it is owing, that those Tradesmen and Artificers, who sit much
at their Work, are troubled with Pains in their Loins, as Rammazzini has
observed De morbis Artificum, cap. 33.
; and that Nephritick Complaints are almost entailed upon studious Men Id. cap.
43.
. And from the same Cause it comes to pass, that few People who are troubled
with the Gout escape these Complaints at the last; for although as long as the
Kidneys are able to do their Office, and transmit all the constituent Parts of
the Urine through them, these Nephritick Symptoms will not arise (though they
proceed from one common Parent) yet when the Fits of the Gout become frequent,
and of such long continuance, as to confine the Patient very often, and for a
great while together, the Consequence will be such a Disposition of the Kidneys
as is just described, and the Stone will come in aid to his Destruction.

MANY other Errors in the Non-naturals which are reckoned by our Writers among
the procatartick Causes of this Disease, are included in the foregoing
Observation, or may be accounted for the same way; excepting an hereditary
Disposition, which cannot be ranked amongst any of them, and requires a
particular Explanation to its self; but this is needless formally to enter
upon, since it is as easy to conceive, that Parents may communicate a
parricular Disposition of their Solids and Fluids to their Offspring, as that
they can stamp upon them their Features, or tinge them with their Complexion.

TO proceed then, a Nucleus thus formed in the Urinary Tubes of the Kidney,
will at length by its own Weight and that of the Urine coming upon it, be
forced through the Carunculae Papillares into the Pelvis: where if it makes no
long stay, but is small enough to pass through the Vreter into the Bladder, it
will not occasion a Nephritick Paroxism, but only some Pain from the roughness
and hardness of its Substance pressing against and vellicating the extreme
sensible Fibers of this Tube. But if from its pointed Surface it should chance
to adhere to the Pelvis, or from any other Accident lodge in it so long, till
by the addition of adventitious Concretions, it is rendered too big to pass
through the Head of the Vreter without distending it, a true Nephritick Fit
will be produced.

THIS is attended with the following Diagnosticks, viz. A fixed Pain in the
Region of the Loins, which is propagated through the whole length of the
Ureter, and accompanied with a Nausea and Vomiting, a numbness in the Thigh and
Leg of the side affected, and a Retraction of the Testicle of the same side.
The Urine about the beginning is thin, aqueous, and pale, and voided in small
Quantities; and if both Kidneys are affected, sometimes totally suppressed; but
in the Decline of a Fit, and after the Stone has passed into the Bladder, it
becomes thick and turbid, and is discharged copiously. Very often Blood flows
out together with the Urine; which is many times in so large a Quantity, as
easily to discover it self; at others in small a one, as only to tinge it of a
Coffee Color. But the most certain Diagnostick, and which is a Pathagnomick
Sign is, if to any of the foregoing is added a frequent Excretion of sabulous
Matter, or a small Stone.

BESIDES the Diagnosticks now cited, for the Knowledge of which the World
stands indebted to Hippocrates Lib. de intern. affect. Sect. 15. Id. lib
Epidemic. 6. Sect. 1.
, there is another taken notice of by him, which although when alone does not
particularly indicate a Stone in this Part, yet together with some of the
former, will assist us in making a right Judgment of the Distemper. This is
contained in one of his Aphorisms, and is certainly above a Nurse's Observation
(though we have been lately told the contrary) let her be never so old or
experienced. He lays it down as a Maxim, that when Bubbles swim upon the
Surface of the Urine, they indicate Nephritick Disorders, and a long
Indisposition *.

THESE Diagnosticks may all appear at one time or other in the Course of one
Paroxism; but generally the Symptoms are in a greater or lesser Degree, and
sometimes one, sometimes another shows it self according to the Nature of the
Stone, and the particular Place where it is lodged. If it as yet remains within
the Body of the Kidney, and has not entered the Head of the Vreter, the Pain
will be obtuse and easily born; the Substance of the Kidney being very
sparingly furnished with Nerves. Nay it is certain that it may lie quiet a long
time, without creating any remarkable Inconvenience, from several Examples in
daily Practice, of such a Body's being found in this Part, which has filled the
Pelvis, all its Branches, and even possessed the greatest Part of the Kidney,
and yet the Subjects, from whom it was taken, have labored under no very
painful Symptoms, nor have had but very little Warning before some accidental
Shock has unfortunately altered its Position, and so brought on a Paroxism that
ended fatally. Agreeable to this, Heurnius Aphorism. 34. Sect. 7. cap. 12.
, upon opening a Patient, took out of one Kidney seventy small Stones, and from
the other fourscore, and yet the Person had never before complained of any
Nephritick Symptoms. And Bonetus Medicin. Septentrional. Lib. 3. de imo Ventre,
Sect. 25. cap. 6.
relates from Anton. de Pozzis, that he found in each Kidney a Stone weighing
six Ounces, without any previous Symptoms either of Gravel or Numbness in the
Loins, or a Diminution in the Quantity of Urine, it flowing more copiously, but
limpid as Water, only attended with an insatiable Thirst. Fernelii Opera a
Heurnio Edit. Part 2. Lib. 6.


BUT when the Stone moves into the head of the Vreter, and twitches and
distracts its extreme sensible Membranes, the Pain will be acute, pungent and
lancing, and all the other Symptoms vehemently exaggerated. The Vomiting will
be frequent and violent; because the Stone irritating the Branches of the
Intercostal Nerve, the Par Vagum will suffer by consent, being intimately
interwoven with the former, and both together making one Plexus in this part of
the Body. Hence the Animal Spirits will flow convulsively and in great plenty
to the Stomach, which receives Nerves from the Par Vagum; by which means its
Fibers will be brought into Spasmodick Contractions, which will forcibly throw
out any Contents lodged therein.

THERE will be a Numbness felt in the Thigh and Leg of the side affected, both
by reason that the Psoas Muscle, upon which the Kidney and Vreter lay, will be
compressed by this extraneous Body; and forasmuch as the Nerve that is sent off
from the Spinal Marrow, and is distributed through the Crural Muscles will
undergo the like Compression: whence the free Influx of the Animal Spirits into
the Muscles being partly taken off, such a Sensation will naturally arise. And
to the same Cause, together with the Nerves of these Parts, being convulsed by
the Stimulus of the Stone, is owing that difficulty of walking upright
observable in the Fit.

THIS convulsive Contraction from the Violence of the Pain, will be propagated
to all the Parts that lie contiguous, and have any near Relation to those
immediately affected. For which reason the Peritonaeum, in whose duplicative
the Kidney is placed, and which gives an outward Coat to it, as also the Vasa
Praeparantia, which run between its Lamellae, and are furnished with Nerves
from the same Pair that the Vreters are, will be considerably contracted, and
draw up the Testicle to which they are affixed. But this Symptom proceeds
likewise in great measure, if not principally, from the praeternatural
shortness of the Vreter at this time; whereby the Vas Deferens, which passes
over it and between it and the Bladder, will be pulled up by the Vreter, and
draw the Testicle after it.

AS all these Symptoms are aggravated whilst the Stone remains in the Vreter,
so they abate or altogether cease, as soon as it has passed into the Bladder.
In like manner the other concomitant Signs vary according to the Nature of the
Stone: If it is so large as to plug up the Orifices of the Vreter or Papillae,
and both Kidneys affected, the Urine will be totally suppressed; or if it is so
big, or placed in such a manner, as not to give room for the solid Contents to
pass through, the Urine will be thin, aqueous and limpid. If the Stone by its
pointed Surface should have lacerated the Blood Vessels, or by its bigness very
much distended the Vrinary Ducts, as it moved through them, in both Cases the
Urine will be bloody. If its Cohesion is so lax, as easily to be broken, some
of its Parts will be washed away gradually by the transfluent Urine; or if it
occasions a Paroxism, before it is much indurated, a Portion of Sand adhering
to its Surface will be abraded by the same Transflux; in both which Cases there
will be a frequent Secretion of sabulous Matter: and if it is of a firm
Consistence, but small enough to move through the Vreter, though with the
utmost difficulty, it will be voided entire.

BUT there is another Reason, besides this now given, why the Urine at the
beginning of a Fit should be pale, and made in small Quantities, but in its
Decline become turbid and discharged copiously, which at the same time has no
relation to the Nature of the Stone; and that is, because this praeternatural
Substance irritating the Kidney, the Tubuli Vrinarii, which are the separating
Canals, will be very much contracted, as lying so near the greatest Force of
the Stimulus: by which means, there will not only be very little Urine
separated during such Circumstances, but likewise what is, will be thinner than
usual, the more gross Parts of it not being small enough to pass through their
Orifices in this contracted State; or if they do, will stagnate at the
Papillae. And these Effects will be propagated in some degree also to the other
Kidney, as it is furnished with Nerves from the same Plexus. But when the Stone
has moved through the Vreter, or the Stimulus it occasions is cluded by proper
Remedies, these small Tubes will be relaxed, and recover their former
Dimensions; whereby a larger Quantity of Urine will be separated, and those
solid Particles that stagnated in them washed away, which mixing with the Urine
will make it turbid.

IF we reflect on the Nature of these various Diagnosticks, we shall find, that
though all of them taken together are Direction sufficient to pronounce the
Complaint to be the Stone, yet when considered separately, many of them are
equivocal, and may spring from other Causes: and it is commonly known, that the
Symptoms of the Cholick bear so near a resemblance to many of these, that it is
frequently difficult to distinguish between them. Indeed when any of the
Pathognomonick Signs appear, as Sand or small Stones in the Urine, the Cause
stands confessed; or if the Urine is bloody, and a Numbness perceived in the
Thigh and Leg, we may know that it is not the Cholick: but when none of these
show themselves, the Cause is still latent, and must be discovered by some
distinguishing Characteristicks peculiar to it self. These were first marked
out by Galen, from whom all succeeding Writers have borrowed, or rather copied
what they have wrote on this Subject: to whom therefore I refer the
Inquisitive; and so much the rather, because it will thence appear, that some
beneficial Knowledge may be got from Galen too, though one of the ancient
Writers of the Faculty Galen de loc. affect. lib. 6. cap. 2.
.

THE Symptoms likewise that arise when the Kidneys are hysterically affected,
mimick a Nephritick Fit, not only in the Nature and Situation of the Pain, and
the exorbitant Vomiting which attends it, but also in the Propagation of it
into the Vreters, etc. and are not easily distinguished, unless from the
previous Disposition of the Patient to one Complaint more than the other, or
from the discharge of a porraceous Matter by Vomit, or from the constant
Limpidness of the Urine, which in the Hysteric Affection continues hi the same
Condition all the time it lasts, whereas in the other it grows higher colored
and turbid. A Rheumatick Pain in the Loins produces the same Effects, but may
be discerned from the Difficulty the Patient finds in raising his Body from a
bending Posture to an erect one, and the Sensation arising thereupon; which is
as if he was cut through the middle. The last I shall mention is the Nephritis
or genuine Inflammation of the Kidney, which resembles a Nephritick Paroxism in
most Points, but may be known from the acute Fever that constantly attends it,
and from the reversed Condition of the Urine; which in this Disease is red and
flammeous at the beginning; but when the Inflammation is at the greatest
height, it becomes aqueous and limpid, whereas in the Nephritick Paroxism it is
just the contrary.

THE Prognostic during a Paroxism, is taken from the vehemence and duration of
the Symptoms, and the different Appearances that arise in the Course of it;
which any one may foresee the Consequence of, who is acquainted with the Reason
of their appearing. As to the Disease in general, in old People who have been
harassed with many Shocks of it, and whose Urine and Kidneys have been a long
time faulty, it is incurable Hippocrat. aph. 6. sect. 6.
: According to which Aretaeus has observed, that it is more difficult to
prevent the Kidneys and Bladder, that are obnoxious to a calculous Disposition,
from generating these Substances, than it is to make a Prolifick Womb barren De
curatione Morbor. diuturn. lib. 2. cap. 3.
When it proceeds likewise from an hereditary Disposition, or if at the same
time there is an Ulcer in the Kidneys Sennertus lib. 3. Part 7. Sect. 1. cap. 6.
, the same Judgment is to be made: and indeed at best the general Prognostic
is melancholy enough; the most that a Physician can do, being to relieve the
Patient from a present Fit, and ward off another as long as he can.

THE Indications of Cure during a Paroxism are to force the Stone into the
Bladder; to facilitate its Passage thither, by relaxing and enlarging the
Dimensions of the Vreters, that they may yield and give way to its Motion; to
guard them against the hardness and asperity of its Substance, that it may not
injure them in irs way; and lastly, to mitigate and take off the exorbitant
Symptoms.

1st. THE first is answered by a plentiful administration of Diuretic
Medicines; especially such, as by their attenuating and detersive Qualities do
thin viscid Humors, and scour the Vessels they pass through. But since in the
present Case there is a great Stricture and Tension of the Parts from the
Violence of the Pain, and as the stronger Diuretics act with a Stimulus, it is
unsafe to use them; lest instead of forcing a Passage they should contract and
straiten what was too strait before: The only Remedies of this Class then, that
can safely be administered with a free Hand, are those, which at the same time
they increase the Quantity of the Urine, do by their balsamic Properties and
Smoothness lubricate and relax the Urinary Passages: upon which account the
Turpentines and Balsams are of singular Service in these Complaints; especially
when blended with Medicines appropriated to the next Intention.

2dly. THIS indicates the Use of emollient, lenient and anodyne Remedies; of
which sort are oily Compositions, and such Roots and Herbs as abound with
smooth mucilaginous Juices; which, at the same time they relax the solid
Fibers, do by their Smoothness and Viscosity blunt the Acrimony of the Humors,
and defend the Passages from the roughness of the Stone. Emollient Clysters
injected at proper Intervals very much contribute to these Ends; both as they
empty the Colon of Wind and Excrement, which distending the Intestine, cause it
to press against the Kidney and Vreter; and as by their kindly Warmth and
softening Quality they relax its Fibers, and communicate the same Effects to
the Parts contiguous. For the same Reason a Purge is necessary, when the
smaller Intestines are loaded with a Saburra of crude Humors, which are out of
the reach of a Clyster's Operation; which frequently happens in this Case. But
what is of the most signal Benefit in this Intention is the use of warm lenient
Baths, which introduce an universal Relaxation of the Passages. This is
directed by Hippocrates Lib. de intern. affect. Sect. 15.
, who always directs judiciously: for Experience teaches, that there is more
Advantage found from a gentle Medicine administered whilst sitting in Semicupio,
than from all the Farrago of Lithontripticks, or the most pompous Means
whatsoever. The present Age, so fruitful of Discoveries, has not yet found out
a Specific of this Virtue; much less might we expect it from the Ancients.
Galen therefore cannot be esteemed the less for frankly declaring, that in his
time no Remedy was discovered which could break a Stone; but that the whole
Cure depended on Surgery and Incision.

3dly. AS to the Symptoms, the first to be attended to is the excessive Pain:
and this is of such Consequence, that unless it is assuag'd, there is little to
be expected from the most rational Process. For as long as this is exorbitant,
the Contraction of the Vessels will continue, which will hinder the Stone's
passing through them. This is alleviated in great measure by the Remedies
adapted to the foregoing Intention; but what is particularly indicated here, is
Phlebotomy, and a cautious Use of Opiates: the first as it empties the
Blood Vessels, and thereby takes off the Distention; the other as they quiet
the Orgasm of the Spirits, and elude the Force of the Stimulus. It is therefore
with good reason, that a shining Ornament of our Body lays down, that no one
can more happily go about to assuage Nephritick Pains than by letting blood
Mead de imperio Sol. and Lun. page 85.
.

THE Vomiting that accompanies a Fit ceases as soon as the Stone has passed
into the Bladder: but as the Stomach is sometimes so affected as to throw up
whatever is taken, we must endeavor to mitigate this Symptom by gentle
Stomachicks blended with Opiates, which will take off the Irritation for a
while, and give time to the proper Medicines to pass into the Blood.

IF these means prove unsuccessful, and we have reason to apprehend that the
Stone is larger than ordinary, which is perceived from the fixed heavy Pain,
and the Absence of any Calculous Excretions, rather than leave the Patient
destitute of Help, we must have recourse to more forcible Methods; such as
Vomits, Purges of the stronger sort, and the more powerful Diuretics: which
from the Shocks they give the Parts may possibly remove the Stone, and force it
through the Vreter. But these are to be tried only in very bad Cases, lest by
shifting it from a larger Space into a smaller, they should fix it there
irremoveably.

AS to Nephrotomy, or the cutting into the Kidney in order to extract the
Stone, it has been recommended by Rosettus; and the Philosophical Transactions
inform us, that it was performed once with success by Dominicus Marchetti, a
Physician of Padua, upon a Countryman of our own No. 223.
. But if we attend to the Parts to be cut through in this Operation, we shall
find it only barely possible to succeed: which is not a sufficient inducement
to a wary Practitioner, either for to advise it or undertake it; it being much
more eligible to alleviate the Symptoms and wait the Event, than to add to the
Patient's Torment, and render his Death more certain.

THE Prophylactick Part in this Distemper, in order to keep off another Fit, or
to lessen the frequency of its returning, is partly observed by religiously
avoiding any of those Errors in the Non-naturals, that are reckoned among the
distant Causes of it. But besides this, we must endeavor to diminish the Salts
introduced into the Blood with our Food, by purging Medicines, and moderate
Exercise repeated at proper Intervals.

WE must strive to prevent the Salts from running into Combinations, and to
attenuate any viscid Matter that may unite them together by proper Diluters,
which by their Aquosity will dissolve them; and by strengthening the
Instruments of Digestion, which will occasion the Chyle to be sufficiently
comminuted, and the Salts intimately divided. But we must chiefly aim at
relaxing and widening the Capacities of the Vrinary Passages, that they may
freely admit all the constituent Parts of the Urine through them, which is
partly obtained from the Use of Balsamic Emollient Diuretics, and from gentle
Exercise; which last by promoting the Circulation drives the grosser Particles
of the Fluids through the Capillary Vessels, whilst the first enlarges their
Dimensions by their relaxing Properties.

AMONGST all the Variety of Purgers, none seem so well adapted to answer all
these Ends, as some of the mercurial Preparations; these not only evacuating
the Salts, but having also a peculiar Power of breaking and obtunding their
Spiculae, of removing Obstructions and enlarging the Vessels.

THE Stomachicks that are of most Service, are such as by their gentle
astringency brace the Fibers of the Stomach, and by their mild grateful Warmth
attenuate any viscid Matter lodged therein. For as to the botter and stronger
Bitters, they induce a universal Rigidity in the Fibers of the whole Body; and
for that reason will do more harm than good. Galen thought in this way, when he
laid down, that most Medicines proper for Calculous Patients are Bitters De
Composition. Medicament. secund. Loc. lib. 10.
: But then he tempers them before with this Hint, that by no means it is proper
to give such Persons very heating Remedies De Sanitat. tuend. Lib. 6.
.

THE Diuretics ought to be such only, as at the same time they force open any
Obstruction formed in the Kidneys, will likewise relax their Urinary Ducts:
those of this Tribe being carefully to be avoided, that are prepared from stony
or earthy Substances, which by attracting one another in the Capillary Tubes,
instead of doing Service, may lay a Foundation for another Fit.

UPON all these accounts the Bath, Spaw, and other Chalybeate Waters, are of
the utmost Benefit in the Intervals between the Fits, as they dissolve the
Salts, strengthen the Stomach and Bowels, scour the Urinary Passages, and carry
any Recrement out of the Body by Perspiration and Urine.

SECT. III. PART II. Of a STONE in the BLADDER.
WE come now to consider the Consequences that will follow, when a Stone has
changed its Seat, and lodged some time in the Bladder. That a Nucleus generated
in the Kidney, when once received into this Organ, is the general Basis of
those large Concretions found in it, is evident from inspecting these Bodies;
in the Center of which for the most part is found a solid Substance, of a
different Color and Consistence from the rest of the stony Integuments, over
which the adventitious Concretions are spread lamellatim, and enclose it as a
Shell does the Kernel of a Nut. Not but that a Stone may be primarily generated
here, without the Kidneys being first affected: which not only appears in
Children, who are frequently troubled with this Disease without the least
previous Complaint of Nephritick Symptoms, but likewise from the reason of the
thing: For if the solid Parts of the Urine should be deposited in the Bladder
in such manner, as to be brought near to one another, and not be washed away by
a following Afflux, they will unite by means of their attractive Powers. This
will happen if the Urine is over viscid and too much loaded with saline and
earthy Principles: for if it stays any considerable time before it is voided,
these will subside to the Bottom by their own Gravity; where they will
consequently be brought into a narrow Compass, and at the same time may adhere
to it by the Tenacity of the Parts that envellope them. Accordingly constant
Observation tallies with it; the Urine of Persons subject to these Complaints
being generally thick and viscid, and dropping a whitish Sediment which sticks
to the bottom of the Vessel it is contained in. Thus then there may be a Stone
formed in the Bladder without a Nucleus previously generated in the Kidney: but
this is not near so frequent; for the Bladder being a large Vessel, and so
often distended with Urine, such a Deposition of the solid Contents will very
rarely happen; but they will either flow out with the aqueous Vehicle, or else
be washed away by the weight of the Urine that so often falls upon them:
whereas a Nucleus already formed being a solid concrete and ponderous, it may
be so lodged, that the Urine may pass over it, or its Surface so pointed as to
adhere too closely to be separated: and accordingly we find, that Stones are
formed in, the Bladder, when any extraneous solid Bodies have accidentally got
in there, which have been the Foundation of the subsequent Incrustations, of
which there are many Instances Philosoph. Transact. No. 168. 171. 266.
.

THE Basis of a Calculus being laid in this manner, it will necessarily
increase if it stays any considerable time there. For as it consists of a
Substance, which in its Nature is very attractive, it will draw the solid
Particles of the Urine to it, which are of the same Nature, and will therefore
separate from the Fluid and adhere to its Surface: and this attractive Power
will be greater as the Surface of this solid Body grows larger; so that a Basis
once formed, the Stone will become large in a shorter time than is commonly
imagined: every new Incrustation not only adding to the Quantity of Matter, but
increasing the Surface in a very great Proportion. The Disposition of the
several Lamellae that compose the Calculus, shows that it increases in this
way: for their running parallel to one another can be only owing to this force
of Attraction; by which the solid Particles of the Urine, when brought to a
certain Distance from the Concretion, are impelled toward it, and unite
themselves to it on all sides, at equal Distances from its Center, as near as
the Figure of the Place in which it is lodged will allow of.

FROM hence it appears, that the Stones of the Kidneys and Bladder are of the
same Nature, and formed in the same manner; which I believe will hold good
likewise in all Stones of the Body, in whatsoever Part they are found, and
howsoever they differ in Figure, Color, or Weight: though the Effects produced
by them will vary, as they are lodged in one Part or another. When such a
Substance is in the Bladder, it will produce the following.

AT first, little or no Disturbance will arise from it; because being small and
light, the Mucus that lines the Bladder is sufficient to guard it from the
hardness and asperity of its Surface; only the Urine is now and then
intercepted in its Voidance, when the Stone casually falls upon the Orifice of
the Vrethra. But when it grows larger and more weighty it will abrade this
Mucosity, and twitch and vellicate the nervous Coat; more especially when it
moves from one place to another. Hence the Urine will become thick and slimy
from the abraded Mucus n="*" Hippocratis Aphorism. 79. Sect. 4.
, which Qualities will increase as the Stone grows larger, the Glands
separating more Mucus as the Stimulus grows more forcible. This Stimulus at the
same time will extend farther, and create a Pain in the Neck of the Bladder,
which will increase toward the end of Micturition, and be propagated toward
the end of the Glans; the one because the Calculus falls to its more depending
part, the Neck, the other because the nervous Coat of the Vrethra is no more
than the Continuation of the same nervous Membrane: and it is no wonder, that
when these Parts, which lie so near, endure a Pain, that the more distant of
the procreative Organs should enjoy only a Pruritus. As the Bulk of the Stone
increases, it will press more forcibly upon these Parts, from whence the Pain
will become more intense, and a Weight perceived in the Region of the Os Pubis
and in Perinaeo: and the Irritation it produces will be extended farther to the
Sphincter Any and Intestinum Rectum, both these being contiguous to this Part,
and receiving Branches from the same Nerve; so that a Desire of going to stool
will come upon every Attempt to make water. This must be very frequent by
reason of the continual Stimulus upon the Bladder, which will provoke it to
discharge its Contents; but at the same time it will be voided with the
greatest difficulty, and guttatim, from the Stones lying upon the Orifice of
the Vrethra, and stopping it up: so that the Patient is obliged sometimes to
lie in a supine Posture, in order to remove it from thence before the Urine
will pass off. Hence it is not at all surprising, that when this Body has
accumulated, it should occasion a difficulty of moving from place to place,
since the Pressure of it upon the lower Parts is so great.

THESE are the natural Effects of a Lodgment of the Stone in the Bladder; but
as it does not create all of them at the same time, but seriatim as it grows in
magnitude, its Diagnosis is uncertain; so that we are obliged to have recourse
to some Collateral Tokens, the better to form a surer Judgment of the Case.
Thus we must have an Eye to the previous Disposition of the Patient to
Nephritick Symptoms, which will guide us a little; as also whether the Remedies
proper for this Distemper have a laudable Effect. But we principally depend
upon the introduction of the Catheter into the Bladder, or the Finger in Anum,
though I have known the former to fail; and a Schirrus has imitated the Stone
so artfully in all Symptoms, as to disappoint the Lithotomist: agreeable to
which is an Observation of Baglivi Praxis Medic. lib. 5. cap. 13. Sect. 8. lib.
2. cap. 4.
. The Haemorhoides also mimick this Affection; but then the Pain they occasion
is not so acute. But the most remarkable Case of this kind is from Dr. Bamber,
wherein a great Quantity of tophaceous Substances, that seemed to me so many
Globules of hardened Excrement, were lodged in the beginning of the Colon where
the Ileum is ingrafted, and created Symptoms which aped the Stone of the
Bladder so nicely, that only Death and Dissection thereupon detected the
Fallacy. In this Case it was almost impossible but the most skilful Surgeon
should be deceived; for these concreted Substances gave the same Resistance to
the Catheter, and caused the same Sensation to the Hand that a Stone would,
when in the Cavity of the Bladder. However it was very lucky for this
Gentleman, considering the censorious Humor of the World, that the Patient
died before he underwent the Operation. Sometimes the Surface of the Stone is
so rough and pointed as to adhere to the inward Coat of the Bladder; but then
there will be no Suppression of Urine along with its other Diagnosticks, as
Aretaeus has observed De cause. and sign. diuturnor. morb.
:: from the Absence of which we may justly suspect an Adhesion, if the Patient
labors under the other Symptoms. This is a desparate Case, for if you
endeavor to extract the Stone forcibly, you will lacerate the nervous Membrane
of the Bladder, upon which will ensue an Inflammation and Mortification of this
Vessel, with all the direful Train of consequential Symptoms. But I cannot well
conceive how the Stone can be enclosed in a membranous Cystis; for if so, how
can it increase, the Capsula keeping any adventitious Concretions from its
Surface? Possibly this may not happen before it is grown large, and has adhered
some time; and so by wounding and dividing the nervous Coat, (whilst the
closeness of its Adhesion hinders it from reuniting) it may occasion this
Membrane to shoot over it and form a Case for it.

Here I cannot help mentioning an extraordinary Case of the Stone, that fell
under the Inspection of the famous Dr. Glisson, and Dr. Hugh Chamberlain, sen.
The Daughter of Sir Hugh Middleton, who had been before troubled with
Nephritick Symptoms, upon riding a Journey unfortunately altered the Position
of the Stone, and turned it transverse, which brought on a Suppression of Urine
which killed her; for as one Kidney was choked up by a large Stone, that only
officiated, in whose Vreter the other Stone was lodged, which occasioned her
Death. Upon opening the Body by Mr. Holliard Surgeon, there was found "An
Abscess in the left Kidney, with abundance of purulent Matter, and a brown
hollow long Stone of near two Drams Weight in the bottom of the Vreter, at its
Insertion into the Bladder. The right Kidney was likewise Ulcerous, containing
a thicker Pus; and at the bottom of it, at the Ingress of the Vreter, a larger
whitish Stone weighing three Drams, two Scruples and a half." This Case being
very uncommon from the hollowness of the Stone through which the Urine passed,
being the first Instance I have any where met with of such a one's being found
in the Vreter, though they are sometimes, but rarely, in the Bladder, I have
thought it worth inserting; more especially since it has not heretofore been
made public. The Stones, together with the Case, were left for some time in
the Custody of Mr. Dobyns Surgeon, but are at present in the Hands of Dr.
Middleton Massey; who, to give a clearer Idea of them, has made a very accurate
Drawing, which is here annexed. Tab. III. Fig. VI.


CONSIDERING the nervous Contexture of this Organ, which renders it of a very
acute Sense, and the important Office it bears in the Animal Economy, such a
Praeternatural Substance must necessarily prognosticate very bad Events: and
accordingly, not only the Physicians of the present time, but Antiquity too
have registered a perfect Catalogue of Evils it induces. A Suppression of
Urine, the Fever it occasions, the Convulsions it introduces, and the emaciated
Habit that follows, are common Effects of this Cause Aretaei de diuturnor.
morbor. causis etc. lib. 2. cap. 3, 4.
, if it is let stay a long time in the Bladder, or the Patient will not submit
to the artificial Extraction.

THE Method of Cure in this Distemper, as far as it regards the Physician,
which is only, whilst the Calculus is small enough to be forced through the
Vrethra by medicinal Process, is very much the same with that to be used in the
Stone of the Kidney: and if it is grown to any considerable size, it is the
Surgeon's Province, and requires the Operation; under whose hands therefore for
the present I leave it.

TABLE I.
FIG. I.
THE emulgent Artery injected and cleans'd from the Substance of the Kidney.

a. Its Trunk. b b b b b. The minute Ramifications of its smaller Branches, as
they are propagated throughout the Kidney. c. A Portion of the Vreter.
FIG. II.
THE numerous Convolutions of the Capillary Branches of the Emulgent Artery
upon the external Surface of the Body of the Kidney.

FIG. III.
THE internal Structure of the Kidney taken from Dr. Ruysch, with which a
Preparation by me exactly corresponds.

a a. The serpentine Progress of the Emulgent Artery, before it terminates in
the Bellinian Ducts. b b. The said Ducts. c c. The Papillae. d d. The Fistulae
Membranaceae. e. The Pelvis. f. Part of the Vteter.
FIG. IV.
THE Kidney of an Hyaena injected, taken from the invaluable Collection of Sir
Hans Sloane, in which the Emulgent Vein spreads its Branches on its outward
Surface.

a. The Trunk of the Emulgent Artery. b. That of the Vein. c c c c. The various
Ramifications of this Vein.
FIG. V.
THE Kidney of a Cat, which shows the like Disposition of the Emulgent Vein in
that Species.

FIG. VI.
SHOWS the unequal Dimensions of the Vreters.

TAB. II.
FIG. I.
REPRESENTS the Urinary Passages in which each Kidney has two Pelves, and
double Vreters.

A. The left Kidney. a. The Emulgent Artery before its entering the Kidney. b.
The Emulgent Vein. c. The exit of the upper Vreter. d. That of the lower.
B. The right Kidney divided longitudinally to show its peculiar inward
Structure. e. The upper Pelvis. f. The lower. g. The Substance of the Kidney
interposed between them. h. The Head of the upper Vreter. i. The same of the
lower. k k. The Disposition of the four Vreters in their Progress toward the
Bladder.

C. The Bladder laid open. l. The Union of the double Vreters before their
Insertion into it. m. The Obliqueness of their Insertions on the right side. n.
Their opening into it on the left.

FIG. II.
THE Bladder of an Infant, with part of the Vreter injected, in which the
Distribution of the Artery upon the outward appears.

TAB. III.
FIG. I.
SHOWS the Forepart of the Bladder of Urine stripped of its outward Coat.

a. The Origin of its Longitudinal Muscular Fibers, from the inner and lower
part of the Ossa Pubis, and the forepart of the Prostata. b b. The Progress of
the same Fibers over the forepart of the Bladder. c c. The Oblique Fibers of
its Muscular Coat intersecting each other. d. The Vrachus. e e. A Portion of
the Vreter. f f. The Prostata.
FIG. II.
SHOWS the hinder part of the Bladder fore-shorten'd.

a a. The Course of the Longitudinal Fibers down this side of it. b. Their
Insertion into the back-part of the Prostata. c c. The Oblique Fibers, as in
the former. d d. A part of the Vreters, as they appear in this Position of the
Bladder. e e. The Vesiculae Seminales, turned downwards, to show the tendency
of the Longitudinal Fibers.
FIG. III.
THE Bladder opened, to discover what is most remarkable within it.

a a. Its Nervose Coat. b b. The Orifices of the Vreters that terminate in it.
c. The fleshy Fibers extended from each of them. d. Their Termination in an
Angle on the backside of the Bladder, near its Neck.
TABLE IV.
FIG. I.
THE lower part of the Penis, with the Vrethra laid open.

a a. The outward Substance of the Penis. b. The Nervous Coat of the Vrethra. c
c c c c. The Ostiola of the Ducts opening into it. d. A remarkable one very
near the Glans. e. Another in the upper part, whose Duct runs the length of an
Inch. f. The Accelerator Vrinae divided. g g. The Musculi Erectores. h h. The
Transversales. i i. The Vesiculae Seminales.
FIG. II.
SHOWS a hollow Stone in two Positions, which was lodged at the bottom of the
left Vreter.

a. Its upper orifice, through which the Urine from the Kidney passed. b. Its
lower Orifice at the Aperture of the Vreter into the Cavity of the Bladder.
FIG. III.
a. A whitish Stone, which plugg'd up the Right Kidney of the same Subject. b.
A Frustulum of the same.
FINIS.
Tab. I.
artery and kidney

Fig. 2
capillaries on external surface of kidney

Fig. 3
internal structure of kidney

Fig. 4
kidney of a hyena

Fig. 5
kidney of a cat

Fig. 6
a section of ureter

I. G. Scheuchzer ad viv: delin
G. V.dr: Gucht Sc:
TAB. II.
Fig. 1
urinary passages

Fig. 2
bladder of an infant

I. G. Scheuchzer delin.
Vander Gucht Sculp
Tab. III
Fig. 2
front side of bladder

Fig. 1
back side of bladder

interior of bladder

I.G.S delin.
Vdr: Gucht Scul:
Tab. IV.
Fig. 1
lower part of penis

Fig. 3d. a
kidney stone

Fig. 2d. b
upper orifice of ureter

Fig. 3d. b
frustulum of kidney stone

Fig. 2d. a
lower orifice of ureter

I. G. Scheuchzer. delin.
Vander Gucht Scu^^.
The Engraver not being able to insert all the Figures in three Plates, as
first designed, has occasioned several Errata in the References to them. The
others, which are very few, are oversights of the Press.

ERRATA.
PAGE 4. l. penult. pro Auctorum, l. Acutor. P. 6. l. 8. post like, add
number. P. 14. l. 4. pro Glands, l. Glans. Id. l. 8. pro Fig. 4. l. Tab. 4.
Fig. 1. Id. l. 22. pro Fig. 5. l. Tab. 4. Fig. 1. P. 22. l. 25. add he. P. 28.
l. 4. add with. P. 38. l. 30. pro parricular, l. particular. P. 39. l. 25.
add so. Id. l. 27. pro Pathognomick, l. Pathognomonick. P. 53. l. ult. pro
Tab. 3. Fig 6. l. Tab. 4. Fig. 2. P. 54. l. 6. pro have, l. has. In tabula^ n.
2. Fig. 2. l. ult. add Coat.

BOOKS and PAMPHLETS lately printed for T. WORRALL.
1. CUrsus Mathematicus, or a complete Course of the Mathematics, in 5 Vol.
Octavo. Vol. I. Contains a Treatise of Algebra, and the Elements of Euclid.
Vol. II. Arithmetic and Trigonometry, with correct Tables of Logarithms, Sines
and Tangents. Vol. III. Geometry and Fortification. Vol. IV. Mechanics and
Perspective. Vol. V. Geography and Dialling: The whole illustrated with near
200 Copper Plates. Done into English from the French of Monsieur Ozanam, with
Improvements and Additions. By J. T. Desaguliers, L.L.D. F.R.S. and other
hands. Price 1 l. 5 s.

The Practicing Attorney, or Lawyer's Office; containing the Business of an
Attorney in all its Branches, viz. 1. The Practice of the Courts of
King's Bench and Common Pleas; showing the Nature and Forms of Writs, Entries,
Declarations, Pleadings, Judgments, Executions, etc. With Directions in all
Cases relating to Causes and Trials. 2. Proceedings of the High Court of
Chancery and Exchequer from the leading Process the Subpaena, to the Final
Order or Decree, interspersed with great Variety of Bills, Answers,
Replications, Rejoinders, etc. 3. The Attorney's Practice in Conveyancing; with
Precedents of Leases, Mortgages, Assignments, Releases of Lands, Deeds to lead
Uses of Fines and Recoveries, Marriage Settlements, and Wills. 4. Of
Court-keeping, the Charges of Stewards, and Proceedings of Attorneys therein;
and the Forms of the Grants, Surrenders, Admittances, Copies of Court-Roll,
Presentiments, etc. The Second Edition carefully corrected and much improved,
with the Rules and Orders of the several Courts, and the Laws and Statutes
under each Head, continued to this Time. By William Bohun of the
Middle-TempleEsq; Price 6 s.

A Discourse on Murder, preached in the Chapel of Lincoln's Inn, and published
at the Request of the Worshipful the Masters of the Bench. By William Lupton,
D. D. Preacher to that honorable Society. Pr. 6 d.

A Poetical Paraphrase on part of the Book of Job, in Imitation of the Style of
Milton. By W. Thompson, Fellow of Trinity College in Dublin. Pr. 1 s.

Original Poems, Serious and Humourous. By Mr. Henry Baker, in two Parts. Pr. 1
s. 6 d. each, stitched; or 4 s. bound together, in Calf.

An exact Account of the French King's Marriage with the Princess Mary,
Daughter of King Stanislaus. Together with the excellent Advice the said Prince
gave his Daughter at her Departure from Strasbourg, and also the several
elegant Speeches on that Occasion of the Duke of Autin, the Card. de Rohan, the
University of Strasbourg, the Jews of Metz, the Bp. of Angers, the Bp. of
Luson, the Bp. of Blois, the Count de Hoym, etc. To which are prefixed some
Memoirs of the Revolutions in Poland, with a short Account of that Kingdom and
its Constitution. Illustrated with geographical Notes. Pr. 1 s.

Love upon Tick, or Implicit Gallantry, exemplified in some merry Memoirs of
the Rise and Progress of an extrordinary and occasional Amor, in which the
whole Mechanism of that Passion is exposed, and made obvious to the meanest
Capacity. By the Author of --

Doubtless of the Pleasure is as great
Of being cheated as to cheat.
Hud. Semel insanivimus Omnes.
The 3d Edition. Pr. 1 s. 6 d.

An Essay on Book-keeping, according to the true Italian Method of Debtor and
Creditor, by double Entry; wherein the Theory of that excellent Art is clearly
laid down in a few plain Rules, and the Practice made evident and easy, by
variety of intelligible Examples: The whole in a Method new and concise. The 3d
Edition corrected and improved. By William Webster, Writing-Master, Author of
Arithmetic in Epitome. Pr. 1 s. 6 d.


