A TREATISE Concerning the PRINCIPLES OF Human Knowledge.

PART I.

Wherein the chief Causes of Error and Difficulty in the Sciences, with the
Grounds of Skepticism, Atheism, and Irreligion, are inquired into.

By George Berkeley, M. A. Fellow of Trinity-College, Dublin.

DVBLIN: Printed by AARON RHAMES, for JEREMY PEPYAT, Bookseller in Skinner-Row,
1710.

TO THE Right Honorable THOMAS EARL OF PEMBROKE, etc. Knight of the Most Noble
Order of the GARTER, AND One of the Lords of Her MAJESTY's Most Honorable
PRIVY COUNCIL.
MY LORD,
You Will, perhaps, wonder that an obscure Person, who has not the Honor to be
known to Your Lordship, should presume to Address You in this manner. But that
a Man, who has Written something with a design to promote useful Knowledge and
Religion in the World, should make Choice of Your Lordship for his Patron, will
not be thought strange by any one that is not altogether unacquainted with the
present State of the Church and Learning, and consequently ignorant how great
an Ornament and Support You are to both. Yet, nothing could have induced me to
make You this present of my poor Endeavors, were I not Encouraged by that
Candor and Native Goodness, which is so bright a Part in Your Lordship's
Character. I might add, my Lord, that the Extraordinary Favor and Bounty You
have been pleased to show toward our Society, gave me Hopes, You Would not be
unwilling to countenance the Studies of one of its Members. These
Considerations determined me to lay this Treatise at Your Lordship's Feet. And
the rather, because I was Ambitious to have it known, that I am with the truest
and most profound Respect, on account of that Learning and Virtue which the
World so justly Admires in Your Lordship,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble And most Devoted Servant. George Berkeley.

THE PREFACE.
WHat I here make Public has, after a long and scrupulous Inquiry, seemed to
me evidently true, and not unuseful to be known, particularly to those who are
tainted with Skepticism, or want a Demonstration of the Existence and
Immateriality of GOD, or the Natural Immortality of the Soul. Whether it be so
or no, I am content the Reader should impartially Examine. Since I do not think
my self any farther concerned for the Success of what I have Written, than as
it is agreeable to Truth. But to the end This may not suffer, I make it my
Request that the Reader suspend his Judgment, till he has once, at least, read
the whole through with that degree of Attention and Thought which the subject
Matter shall seem to deserve. For as there are some Passages that, taken by
themselves, are very liable (nor could it be remedied) to gross
Misinterpretation, and to be charged with most absurd Consequences, which,
nevertheless, upon an entire perusal will appear not to follow from them: So
likewise, tho the whole should be read over, yet, if this be done Transiently,
it is very probable my Sense may be mistaken; but to a Thinking Reader, I
flatter my self, it will be throughout Clear and Obvious. As for the Characters
of Novelty and Singularity, which some of the following Notions may seem to
bear, it is, I hope, needless to make any Apology on that account. He must
surely be either very weak, or very little acquainted with the Sciences, who
shall reject a Truth, that is capable of Demonstration, for no other Reason but
because it is newly known and contrary to the Prejudices of Mankind. Thus much I
thought fit to premise, in order to prevent, if possible, the hasty Censures of
a sort of Men, who are too apt to condemn an Opinion before they rightly
comprehend it.

ERRATA.
Page Lin. 60 14 for one, read own. 61 11 for should, r. might. ibid 14 after
Intelligence, r. without the help of External Bodies 83 9 for came, r. come.
121 7 after there, r. are. 124 1 f. acception, r. acceptance. 125 7 after by,
r. the. 131 3 for many, r. may. 156 10 for show, r. showing. 160 19 after
relation, r. in. 165 7 for any r. some. 187 19 for have r. has.

Page 12, line 5, after General Ideas whatsoever, these Words are to be
Inserted, viz. To be plain, I own my self able to abstract in one Sense, as
when I consider some particular Parts or Qualities separated from others, with
which tho they are united in some Object, yet it is possible they may really
Exist without them. But I deny that I can abstract from one another, or
conceive separately, those Qualities which it is impossible should Exist so
separated; or that I can frame a General Notion by abstracting from Particulars
in the manner aforesaid. Which two last are the proper Acceptations of
Abstraction.

Introduction.
1. PHILOSOPHY being nothing else but the study of Wisdom and Truth, it may
with reason be expected, that those who have spent most Time and Pains in it
should enjoy a greater calm and serenity of Mind, a greater clearness and
evidence of Knowledge, and be less disturbed with Doubts and Difficulties than
other Men. Yet so it is, we see the Illiterate Bulk of Mankind that walk the
High-road of plain, common Sense, and are governed by the Dictates of Nature,
for the most part easy and undisturbed. To them nothing that is familiar appears
unaccountable or difficult to comprehend. They complain not of any want of
Evidence in their Senses, and are out of all danger of becoming Skeptics. But
no sooner do we depart from Sense and Instinct to follow the Light of a
Superior Principle, to reason, meditate and reflect on the Nature of Things,
but a thousand Scruples spring up in our Minds, concerning those Things which
before we seemed fully to comprehend. Prejudices and Errors of Sense do from
all Parts discover themselves to our view; and endeavoring to correct these by
Reason we are insensibly drawn into uncouth Paradoxes, Difficulties, and
Inconsistences, which multiply and grow upon us as we advance in Speculation;
till at length, having wandered through many intricate Mazes, we find our selves
just where we were, or, which is worse, sit down in a forelorn Skepticism.

2. The cause of this is thought to be the Obscurity of things, or the natural
Weakness and Imperfection of our Understandings. It is said the Faculties we
have are few, and those designed by Nature for the Support and Pleasure of
Life, and not to penetrate into the inward Essence and Constitution of Things.
Besides, the Mind of Man being Finite, when it treats of Things which partake
of Infinity, it is not to be wondered at, if it run into Absurdities and
Contradictions, out of which it is impossible it should ever extricate it self,
it being of the nature of Infinite not to be comprehended by that which is
Finite.

3. But, perhaps, we may be too partial to our selves in placing the Fault
originally in our Faculties, and not rather in the wrong use we make of them.
It is a hard thing to suppose, that right Deductions from true Principles
should ever end in Consequences which cannot be maintained or made consistent.
We should believe that God has dealt more bountifully with the Sons of Men,
than to give them a strong desire for that Knowledge, which he had placed quite
out of their reach. This were not agreeable to the wonted, indulgent Methods of
Providence, which, whatever Appetites it may have implanted in the Creatures,
does usually furnish 'em with such means as, if rightly made use of, will not
fail to satisfy them. Upon the whole, I am inclined to think that the far
greater Part, if not all, of those Difficulties which have hitherto amused
Philosophers, and blocked up the way to Knowledge, are entirely owing to our
selves. That we have first raised a Dust, and then complain, we cannot see.

4. My Purpose therefore is, to try if I can discover what those Principles
are, which have introduced all that Doubtfulness and Uncertainty, those
Absurdities and Contradictions into the several Sects of Philosophy; insomuch
that the Wisest Men have thought our Ignorance incurable, conceiving it to
arise from the natural dullness and limitation of our Faculties. And surely it
is a Work well deserving our Pains, to make a strict inquiry concerning the
first Principles of Human Knowledge, to Sift and examine them on all sides,
especially since there may be some Grounds to suspect that those Lets and
Difficulties, which stay and embarrass the Mind in it is search after Truth, do
not spring from any Darkness and Intricacy in the Objects, or natural Defect in
the Understanding, so much as from false, Principles which have been insisted
on, and might have been avoided.

5. How difficult and discouraging soever this Attempt may seem, when I
consider what a number of very great and extraordinary Men have gone before me
in the like Designs: Yet I am not without some Hopes, upon the Consideration
that the largest Views are not always the Clearest, and that he who is
Short-sighted will be obliged to draw the Object nearer, and may, perhaps, by a
close and narrow Survey discern that which had escaped far better Eyes.

6. In order to prepare the Mind of the Reader for the easier conceiving what
follows, I thought it proper to premise somewhat, by way of Introduction,
concerning the Nature and Abuse of Language. But the unraveling this Matter
leads me in some measure to anticipate my Design, by taking notice of what
seems to have had a chief part in rendering Speculation intricate and
perplexed, and to have occasioned innumerable Errors and Difficulties in almost
all parts of Knowledge. And that is the opinion that the Mind has a power of
framing Abstract Ideas or Notions of Things. He who is not a perfect Stranger
to the Writings and Disputes of Philosophers, must needs acknowledge that no
small part of them are spent about abstract Ideas. These are, in a more
especial manner, thought to be the Object of those Sciences which go by the
name of Logic and Metaphysics, and of all that which passes under the Notion of
the most abstracted and sublime Learning, in all which one shall scarce find
any Question handled in such a manner, as does not suppose their Existence in
the Mind, and that it is well acquainted with them.

7. It is agreed on all hands, that the Qualities or Modes of things do never
really exist each of them apart by it self, and separated from all others, but
are mixed, as it were, and blended together, several in the same Object. But we
are told, the Mind being able to consider each Quality singly, or abstracted
from those other Qualities with which it is united, does by that means frame to
it self abstract Ideas. For example, there is perceived by Sight an Object
extended, colored, and moved: This mixed or compound Idea the mind resolving
into it is Simple, constituent Parts, and viewing each by it self, exclusive of
the rest, does frame the abstract Ideas of Extension, Color and Motion. Not
that it is possible for Color or Motion to exist without Extension, but only
that the Mind can frame to it self by Abstraction the Idea of Color exclusive
of Extension, and of Motion exclusive of both Color and Extension.

8. Again, the Mind having observed that in the particular Extensions perceived
by Sense, there is something common and alike in all, and some other things
peculiar, as this or that Figure or Magnitude, which distinguish them one from
another; it considers apart or singles out by it self that which is common,
making thereof a most abstract Idea of Extension, which is neither Line,
Surface nor Solid, nor has any Figure or Magnitude but is an Idea entirely
prescinded from all these. So likewise the Mind by leaving out of the
particular Colors perceived by Sense, that which distinguishes them one from
another, and retaining that only which is common to all, makes an Idea of
Color in abstract which is neither Red, nor Blue, nor White, etc. And in like
manner by considering Motion abstractedly not only from the Body moved, but
likewise from the Figure it describes, and all particular Directions and
Velocities, the abstract Idea of Motion is framed; which equally corresponds to
all particular Motions whatsoever that may be perceived by Sense.

9. And as the Mind frames to it self abstract Ideas of Qualities or Modes, so
does it, by the same precision or mental Separation, attain abstract Ideas of
the more compounded Beings, which include several coexistent Qualities. For
example, the Mind having observed that Peter, James and John, etc. resemble
each other, in certain common Agreements of Shape and other Qualities, leaves
out of the complex or compounded Idea it has of Peter, James, etc. that which
is peculiar to each, retaining only what is common to all; and so makes an
abstract Idea wherein all the particulars equally partake, abstracting entirely
from and cutting off all those Circumstances and Differences, which might
determine it to any particular Existence. And after this manner it is said we
come by the abstract Idea of Man or, if you please, Humanity or Humane Nature.
wherein it is true, there is included Color, because there is no Man but has
some Color, but then it can be neither White, nor Black, nor any particular
Color; because there is no one particular Color wherein all Men partake. So
likewise there is included Stature, but then it is neither Tall Stature nor Low
Stature, nor yet Middle Stature, but something abstracted from all these; and
so of the rest. Moreover, there being a great variety of other Creatures that
partake in some Parts, but not all, of the complex Idea of Man, the Mind
leaving out those Parts which are peculiar to Men, and retaining those only
which are common to all the living Creatures, frames the Idea of Animal, which
abstracts not only from all particular Men, but also all Birds, Beasts, Fishes
and Insects. The constituent Parts of the abstract Idea of Animal are Body,
Life, Sense and Spontaneous Motion. By Body is meant, Body without any
particular Shape or Figure, there being no one Shape or Figure common to all
Animals, without Covering, either of Hair, or Feathers, or Scales, etc. nor yet
Naked: Hair, Feathers, Scales, and Nakedness being the distinguishing
Properties of particular Animals, and for that reason left out of the Abstract
Idea. Upon the same account the spontaneous Motion must be neither Walking, nor
Flying, nor Creeping, it is nevertheless a Motion, but what that Motion is, it
is not easy to conceive.

10. Whether others have this wonderful Faculty of Abstracting their Ideas,
they best can tell: for my self I dare be confident I have it not. I have
indeed a Faculty of imagining, or representing to my self the Ideas of those
particular things I have perceived and of variously compounding and dividing
them. I can imagine a Man with Two Heads or the upper parts of a Man joined to
the Body of a Horse. I can consider the Hand, the Eye, the Nose each by it self
abstracted or separated from the rest of the Body. But then whatever Hand or
Eye I imagine, it must have some particular Shape and Color. Likewise the Idea
of Man that I frame to my self, must be either of a White, or a Black, or a
Tawny, a Straight, or a Crooked, a Tall, or a Low, or a Middle-sized Man. I
cannot by any effort of Thought conceive the abstract Idea above described. And
it is equally impossible for me to form the abstract Idea of Motion distinct
from the Body moving, and which is neither Swift nor Slow, Curvilinear nor
Rectilinear; and the like may be said of all other abstract general Ideas
whatsoever. And there is Grounds to think most Men will acknowledge themselves
to be in my Case. The generality of Men which are Simple and Illiterate never
pretend to abstract Notions. It Is said they are difficult and not to be
attained without Pains and Study; we may therefore reasonably conclude that, if
such there be, they are confined only to the Learned.

11. I proceed to examine what can be alleged in defense of the Doctrine of
Abstraction, and try if I can discover what it is that inclines the Men of
Speculation to embrace an Opinion, so remote from common Sense as that seems to
be. There has been a late excellent and deservedly Esteemed Philosopher, who,
no doubt, has given it very much Countenance by seeming to think the having
abstract general Ideas is what puts the widest difference in point of
Understanding betwixt Man and Beast. The having of general Ideas ( says he) is
that which puts a perfect distinction betwixt Man and Brutes, and is an
Excellency which the Faculties of Brutes do by no means attain unto. For it is
evident, we observe no Footsteps in them of making use of general Signs for
universal Ideas; from which we have reason to imagine that they have not the
Faculty of abstracting or making general Ideas, since they have no use of Words
or any other general Signs. And a little after. Therefore, I think, we may
suppose that it is in this that the Species of Brutes are discriminated from
Men, and it is that proper difference wherein they are wholly separated, and
which at last widens to so wide a Distance. For if they have any Ideas at all,
and are not bare Machines (as some would have 'em) we cannot deny 'em to have
some Reason. It seems as evident to me that they do some of 'em in certain
Instances Reason as that they have Sense, but it is only in particular Ideas,
just as they receive them from their Senses. They are the best of 'em tied up
within those narrow Bounds, and have not (as I think) the Faculty to enlarge
'em by any kind of Abstraction. Essay on Hum. Vnderst. B. 2. C. 11. 10 and 11.
I readily agree with this Learned Author, that the Faculties of Brutes can by
no means attain to Abstraction. But then if this be made the distinguishing
property of that sort of Animals, I fear a great many of those that pass for
Men must be reckoned into their number. The reason that is here assigned why we
have no Grounds to think Brutes have Abstract general Ideas, is that we observe
in 'em no use of Words or any other general Signs; which is built on this
Supposition, viz. that the making use of Words, implys the having general
Ideas. From which it follows, that Men who use Language are able to Abstract or
Generalize their Ideas. That this is the Sense and Arguing of the Author will
further appear by his answering the Question he in another place puts. Since
all things that exist are only Particulars, how come we by general Terms? His
Answer is, Words become general by being made the Signs of general Ideas. Essay
on Hum. Vnderst. B. 3. C. 3. 6. To this I cannot assent being of opinion that a
Word becomes general by being made the Sign, not of an abstract general Idea
but, of several particular Ideas, any one of which it indifferently suggests to
the Mind. For Example, When it is said the change of Motion is proportional to
the impressed force, or that whatever has Extension is divisible; these
Propositions are to be understood of Motion and Extension in general, and
nevertheless it will not follow that they suggest to my Thoughts an Idea of
Motion without a Body moved, or any determinate Direction, Velocitie, etc. or
that I must conceive an abstract general Idea of Extension, which is neither
Line, Surface nor Solid, neither Great nor Small, Black, White, nor Red, etc.
It Is only implied that whatever Motion I consider, whether it be Swift or Slow,
Perpendicular, Horizontal or Oblique, or in whatever Object, the Axiom
concerning it holds equally true. As does the other of every particular
Extension, it matters not whether Line, Surface or Solid, whether of this or
that Magnitude or Figure, etc.

12. By observing how Ideas become general, we may the better judge how Words
are made so. And here it is to be noted that I do not deny absolutely there are
general Ideas, but only that there are any abstract general Ideas: For in the
Passages we have Quoted wherein there is mention of general Ideas, it is always
supposed that they are formed by Abstraction, after the manner set forth in
Sect. VIII and IX. Now if we will annex a meaning to our Words, and speak only
of what we can conceive, I believe we shall acknowledge, that an Idea, which
considered in it self is particular, becomes general, by being made to
represent or stand for all other particular Ideas of the same sort. To make
this plain by an Example, suppose a Geometrician is demonstrating the Method,
of cutting a Line in two equal Parts. He draws, for instance, a Black Line of
an Inch in Length, this which in it self is a particular Line is nevertheless
with regard to it is signification General, since as it is there used, it
represents all particular Lines whatsoever; so that what is demonstrated of it,
is demonstrated of all Lines or, in other Words, of a Line in General. And as
that particular Line becomes General, by being made a Sign, so the name Line
which taken absolutely is particular, by being a Sign is made General. And as
the former owes its Generality, not to its being the Sign of an abstract or
general Line, but of all particular right Lines that may possibly exist, so the
latter must be thought to derive its Generality from the same Cause, namely,
the various, particular Lines which it indifferently denotes.

13. To give the Reader a yet clearer View of the Nature of abstract Ideas, and
the Uses they are thought necessary to, I shall add one more Passage out of the
Essay on Human Understanding, which is as follows. Abstract Ideas are not so
obvious or easy to Children or the yet unexercised Mind as particular ones. If
they seem so to grown Men it is only because by constant and familiar Use they
are made so. For when we nicely reflect upon them, we shall find that general
Ideas are Fictions and Contrivances of the Mind, that carry Difficulty with
them, and do not so easily offer themselves, as we are apt to imagine. For
Example, Does it not require some Pains and Skill to form the general Idea of a
Triangle (which is yet none of the most abstract comprehensive and difficult)
for it must be neither Oblique nor Rectangle, neither Equilateral, Equicrural,
nor Scalenon, but all and none of these at once. In effect it is something
imperfect that cannot exist, an Idea wherein some Parts of several different
and inconsistent Ideas are put together: It Is true the Mind in this imperfect
State has need of such Ideas, and makes all the haste to them it can, for the
convenience of Communication and Enlargement of Knowledge, to both which it is
naturally very much inclined. But yet one has reason to suspect such Ideas are
Marks of our Imperfection. At least this is enough to show that the most
abstract and general Ideas are not those that the Mind is first and most easily
acquainted with, nor such as its earliest Knowledge is conversant about. B. 4.
C. 7. 9. If any Man has the Faculty of framing in his Mind such an Idea of a
Triangle as is here described, it is in vain to pretend to dispute him out of
it, nor would I go about it. All I desire is, that the Reader would fully and
and certainly inform himself whether he has such an Idea or no. And this,
methinks, can be no hard Task for any one to perform. What more easy than for
any one to look a little into his own Thoughts, and there try whether he has,
or can attain to have, an Idea that shall correspond with the description that
is here given of the General Idea of a Triangle, which is, neither Oblique nor
Rectangle, Equilateral, Equicrural nor Scalenon, but all and none of these at
once?

14. Much is here said of the Difficulty that abstract Ideas carry with them,
and the Pains and Skill requisite to the forming them. And it is on all Hands
agreed that there is need of great Toil and Labor of the Mind, to Emancipate
our Thoughts from paticular Objects, and raise them to those Sublime
Speculations that are conversant about abstract Ideas. From all which the
natural Consequence should seem to be, that so Difficult a thing as the forming
abstract Ideas was not necessary for Communication, which is so easy and
familiar to all sorts of Men. But we are told if they seem obvious and easy to
Grown Men, It Is only because by constant and familiar use they are made so. Now
I would fain know at what time it is, Men are employed in surmounting that
Difficulty, and furnishing themselves with those necessary helps for Discourse.
It cannot be when they are grown up, for then it seems they are not conscious
of any such Pains-taking; it remains therefore to be the business of their
Childhood. And surely, the great and multiplied Labor of framing abstract
Notions will be found a hard Task for that tender Age. Is it not a hard thing
to imagine that a couple of Children cannot Prate together, of their
Sugar-plumbs and Rattles and the rest of their little Trinkets, till they have
first Tacked together numberless Inconsistencies, and so framed in their Minds
abstract general Ideas, and annexed them to every common Name they make use of?

15. Nor do I think them a whit more needful for the Enlargement of Knowledge
than for Communication. It is I know a Point much insisted on, that all
Knowledge and Demonstration are about universal Notions, to which I fully agree:
But then it does not appear to me that those Notions are formed by Abstraction
in the manner premised, Universality, so far as I can comprehend, not
consisting in the absolute, positive Nature or Conception of any thing, but in
the relation it bears to the Particulars signified or represented by it: By
virtue whereof it is that things, Names or Notions, being in their own Nature,
Particular are rendered Universal. Thus when I demonstrate any Proposition
concerning Triangles, it is to be supposed that I have in view the universal
Idea of a Triangle; which ought not to be understood as if I could frame an
Idea of a Triangle which was neither Equilateral nor Scalenon, etc. But only
that the particular Triangle I consider, whether of this or that sort it
matters not, does equally stand for and represent all Rectilinear Triangles
whatsoever, and is in that sense Universal. All which seems very Plain and not
to include any Difficulty in it.

16. But here it will be demanded, how we can know any Proposition to be true
of all particular Triangles, except we have first seen it demonstrated of the
abstract Idea of a Triangle which equally agrees to all? For because a Property
may be demonstrated to agree to some one particular Triangle, it will not
thence follow that it equally belongs to any other Triangle, which in all
respects is not the same with it. For Example, Having demonstrated that the
three Angles of an Isosceles, Rectangular Triangle are equal to two right Ones,
I cannot therefore conclude this Affection agrees to all other Triangles, which
have neither a right Angle, nor two equal Sides. It seems therefore that, to be
certain this Proposition is universally true, we must either make a particular
Demonstration for every particular Triangle, which is impossible, or once for
all demonstrate it of the abstract Idea of a Triangle, in which all the
Particulars do indifferently partake, and by which they are all equally
represented. To which I answer, that though the Idea I have in view whilst I make
the Demonstration be, for instance, that of an Isosceles, Rectangular Triangle
whose Sides are of a determinate Length, I may nevertheless be certain it
extends to all other Rectilinear Triangles, of what Sort or Bigness soever. And
that, because neither the right Angle, nor the equality, nor determinate Length
of the Sides are at all concerned in the Demonstration. It Is true, the Diagram
I have in view includes all these Particulars, but then there is not the least
mention made of 'em in the Proof of the Proposition. It is not said the three
Angles are equal to two right Ones, because one of them is a right Angle, or
because the Sides comprehending it are of the same Length. Which sufficiently
shows that the right Angle might have been Oblique, and the Sides unequal, and
for all that the Demonstration have held good. And for this reason it is, that
I conclude that to be true of any Obliquangular or Scalenon, which I had
demonstrated of a particular Right-angled, Equicrural Triangle; and not because
I demonstrated the Proposition of the abstract Idea of a Triangle.

17. It were an endless, as well as an useless Thing, to trace the Schoolmen,
those great Masters of abstraction, through all the manifold inextricable
Labyrinths of Error and Dispute, which their Doctrine of abstract Natures and
Notions seems to have led 'em into. What Bickerings and Controversies, and what
a learned Dust have been raised about those Matters, and what mighty Advantage
has been from thence derived to Mankind are things at this Day too clearly
known to need being insisted on. And it had been well if the ill effects of
that Doctrine were confined to those only who make the most avowed Profession
of it. When Men consider the great Pains, Industry and Parts, that have for so
many Ages been laid out on the Cultivation and Advancement of the Sciences, and
that notwithstanding all this the far greater Part of them remain full of
Darkness and Uncertainty, and Disputes, that are like never to have an end, and
even those that are thought to be supported by the most clear and cogent
Demonstrations, contain in them Paradoxes which are perfectly irreconcilable to
the Understandings of Men, and that taking altogether, a very small Portion of
them does supply any real Benefit to Mankind, otherwise than by being an
innocent Diversion and Amusement. I say, the Consideration of all this is apt
to throw them into a Despondency, and perfect Contempt of all Study. But this
may perhaps cease, upon a view of the false Principles that have obtained in
the World, amongst all which there is none, methinks, has a more wide and
extended Sway over the Thoughts of Speculative Men, than that we have been
endeavoring to overthrow.

18. I come now to consider the Source of this prevailing Notion, and that
seems to me to be Language. And surely nothing of less extent than Reason it
self could have been the Source of an Opinion so universally received. The
truth of this appears as from other Reasons, so also from the plain Confession
of the ablest Patrons of abstract Ideas, who acknowledge that they are made in
order to naming, from which it is a clear Consequence that if there had been no
such thing as Speech or Universal Signs, there never had been any thought of
Abstraction. See B. 3. C. 6. 39. and elsewhere of the Essay on Human
Understanding. But let us examine the manner wherein Words have contributed to
the Origin of that Mistake. First then, It Is thought that every Name has, or
ought to have, one only precise and settled Signification, which inclines Men
to think there are certain abstract, determinate Ideas that constitute the true
and only immediate Signification of each general Name. And that it is by the
mediation of these abstract Ideas, that a general Name comes to signify any
particular Thing. Whereas, in truth, there is no such thing as one precise and
definite Signification annexed to any general Name, they all signifying
indifferently a great number of particular Ideas. All which does evidently
follow from what has been already said, and will clearly appear to any one by a
little Reflection. To this, I doubt not, it will be objected that every Name
that has a Definition is is thereby restrained to one certain Signification. e.
g. a Triangle is defined to be a plain Surface comprehended by three right
Lines; by which that Name is limited to denote one certain Idea and no other.
To which I answer, that in the Definition it is not said whether the Surface be
Great or Small, Black or White, etc. nor whether the Sides are Long or Short,
Equal ot Unequal, nor with what Angles they are inclined to each other, in all
which there may be great variety, and consequently there is no one settled Idea
which limits the Signification of the word Triangle. It Is one thing for to keep
a Name constantly to the same Definition, and another to make it stand every
where for the same Idea, the one is necessary, the other useless and
impracticable.

19. But to give a farther Account how Words came to produce the Doctrine of
abstract Ideas, it must be observed that it is a received Opinion, that Language
has no other End but the communicating our Ideas, and that every significant
Name stands for an Idea. This being so, and it being withal certain, that
Names, which yet are not thought altogether Insignificant, do not always mark
out particular conceivable Ideas, it is straightway concluded that they stand
for abstract Notions. That there are many Names in use amongst Speculative Men,
which do not always suggest to others determinate, particular Ideas, or in
truth any thing at all, is what no Body will deny. And a little Attention will
discover, that it is not necessary (even in the strictest Reasonings)
significant Names which stand for Ideas should, every time they are used,
excite in the Understanding the Ideas they are made to stand for: In Reading
and Discoursing Names being for the most part used as Letters are in Algebra,
in which tho a particular quantity be marked by each Letter, yet to proceed
right it is not requisite that in every step each Letter suggest to your
Thoughts, that particular quantity it was appointed to stand for.

20. Besides, the communicating of Ideas marked by Words is not the chief and
only end of Language, as is commonly supposed. There are other Ends, as the
raising of some Passion, the exciting to, or deterring from an Action, the
putting the Mind in some particular Disposition; to which the former is in many
Cases barely subservient, and sometimes entirely omitted, when these can be
obtained without it, as I think does not infrequently happen in the familiar
use of Language. I entreat the Reader to reflect with himself, and see if it
does not often happen either in Hearing or Reading a Discourse, that the Passions
of Fear, Love, Hatred, Admiration, Disdain, etc. arise immediately in his Mind
upon the perception of certain Words, without any Ideas coming between. At
first, indeed, the Words might have ocasion'd Ideas that were fitting to
produce those Emotions; but, if I mistake not, it will be found that when
Language is once grown familiar, the hearing of the Sounds or Sight of the
Characters is often immediately attended with those Passions, which at first were
wont to be produced by the intervention of Ideas, that are now quite omitted.
May we not, for Example, be affected with the promise of a Good thing, tho we
have not an Idea of what it is? Or is not the being threatened with Danger
sufficient to excite a Dread, tho we think not of any particular Evil likely to
befall us, nor yet frame to our selves an Idea of Danger in Abstract? If any
one shall join ever so little Reflection of his own to what has been said, I
believe it will evidently appear to him, that general Names are often used in
the propriety of Language without the Speakers designing them for marks of
Ideas in his own, which he would have 'em raise in the Mind of the Hearer. Even
proper Names themselves do not seem always spoken, with a design to bring into
our view the Ideas of those Individuals that are supposed to be marked by them.
For Example, when a Schoolman tells me Aristotle has said it, all I conceive
he means by it, is to dispose me to embrace his Opinion with the Deference and
Submission which Custom has annexed to that Name. And this effect is often so
instantly produced in the Minds of those who are accustomed to resign their
Judgment to the Authority of that Philosopher, as it is impossible any Idea
either of his Person, Writings, or Reputation should go before. So close and
immediate a Connection may Custom establish, betwixt the very word Aristotle and
the Motions of Assent and Reverence in the Minds of some Men. Innumerable
Examples of this kind may be given, but why should I insist on those things,
which every one's Experience, will, I doubt not, plentifully suggest unto him?

21. We have, I think, shown the Impossibility of abstract Ideas. We have
considered what has been said for them by their ablest Patrons; and endeavored
to show they are of no Use for those Ends, to which they are thought necessary.
And lastly, we have traced them to the Source from whence they flow, which
appears evidently to be Language. It cannot be denied that Words are of
excellent Use, in that by their means all that Stock of Knowledge which has been
purchased by the joint Labors of Inquisitive Men in all Ages and Nations, may
be drawn into the view and made the possession of one single Person. But most
parts of Knowledge have been so strangely perplexed and darkened by the abuse of
Words, and general ways of Speech wherein they are delivered, that it may
almost be made a Question whether Language, has contributed more to the
hindrance or advancement of the Sciences. Since therefore Words are so apt to
impose on the Understanding, I am resolved in my Inquiries to make as little
use of them as possibly I can. Whatever Ideas I consider, I shall endeavor to
take them bare and naked into my View, keeping out of my Thoughts, so far as I
am able, those Names which long and constant Use has so strictly united with
them; from which I may expect to derive the following Advantages.

22. First, I shall be sure to get clear of all Controversies purely Verbal;
the springing up of which weeds in almost all the Sciences has been a main
Hindrance to the Growth of true and sound Knowledge. Secondly, this seems to be
a sure way to extricate my self, out of that fine and subtle Net of abstract
Ideas, which has so miserably perplexed and entangled the Minds of Men, and
that with this peculiar Circumstance, that by how much the finer and more
curious was the Wit of any Man, by so much the deeper was he like to be
ensnared, and faster held therein. Thirdly, so long as I confine my Thoughts to
my own Ideas divested of Words, I do not see how I can easily be mistaken. The
Objects I consider, I clearly and adequately know. I cannot be deceived in
thinking I have an Idea which I have not. It is not possible for me to imagine,
that any of my own Ideas are alike or unlike, that are not truly so. To discern
the Agreements or Disagreements there are between my Ideas, to see what Ideas
are included in any compound Idea, and what not, there is nothing more
requisite, than an attentive Perception of what passes in my own Understanding.

23. But the attainment of all these Advantages does presuppose an entire
deliverance from the Deception of Words, which I dare hardly promise my self;
so difficult a thing it is to dissolve an Union so early begun, and confirmed
by so long a Habit as that betwixt Words and Ideas. Which Difficulty seems to
have been very much increased by the Doctrine of Abstraction. For so long as
Men thought abstract Ideas were annexed to their Words, it does not seem
strange that they should use Words for Ideas: It being found an impracticable
thing to lay aside the Word, and retain the abstract Idea in the Mind, which in
it self was perfectly inconceivable. This seems to me the principal Cause, why
those Men who have so emphatically recommended to others, the laying aside all
use of Words in their Meditations, and Contemplating their bare Ideas, have yet
failed to perform it themselves. Of late many have been very sensible of the
absurd Opinions and insignificant Disputes, which grow out of the abuse of
Words. And in order to remedy these Evils they advise well, that we attend to
the Ideas signified, and draw off our Attention, from the Words which signify
them. But how good soever this Advice may be, they have given others, it is
plain they could not have a due regard to it themselves, so long as they
thought the only immediate use of Words was to signify Ideas, and that the
immediate signification of every general Name was a determinate, abstract Idea.

24. But these being known to be Mistakes, a Man may with greater Ease prevent
his being imposed on by Words. He that knows he has no other than particular
Ideas, will not puzzle himself in vain to find out and conceive the abstract
Idea, annexed to any Name. And he that knows Names do not always stand for
Ideas, will spare himself the labor of looking for Ideas, where there are none
to be had. It were, therefore, to be wished that every one would use his utmost
Endeavors, to obtain a clear view of the Ideas he would consider, separating from
them all that dress and encumbrance of Words which so much contribute to blind
the Judgment and divide the Attention. In vain do we extend our View into the
Heavens, and pry into the Entrails of the Earth, in vain do we consult the
Writings of Learned Men, and trace the dark Footsteps of Antiquity, we need
only draw the Curtain of Words, to behold the fairest Tree of Knowledge, whose
Fruit is excellent, and within the reach of our Hand.

25. Unless we take care to clear the first Principles of Knowledge, from the
embarras and delusion of Words, we may make infinite Reasonings upon them to no
purpose; we may draw Consequences from Consequences, and be never the Wiser.
The farther we go we shall only lose our selves the more irrecoverably, and be
the deeper entangled in Difficulties and Mistakes. Whoever therefore designs to
Read the following Sheets, I do Entreat him that he would make my Words the
Occasion of his own Thinking, and endeavor to attain the same Train of
Thoughts in Reading, that I had in Writing them. By this means, it will be easy
for him to discover the Truth or Falsity of what I say. He will be out of all
danger of being deceived by my Words, and I do not see how he can be led into
an Error by considering his own Naked, undisguised Ideas.

OF THE PRINCIPLES OF Human Knowledge. PART I.
1. IT is evident to any one who takes a Survey of the Objects of Human
Knowledge, that they are either Ideas actually imprinted on the Senses, or else
such as are perceived by attending to the Passions and Operations of the Mind,
or lastly Ideas formed by help of Memory and Imagination; either compounding,
dividing, or barely representing those originally perceived in the aforesaid
ways. By Sight I have the Ideas of Light and Colors with their several Degrees
and Variations. By Touch I perceive Hard and Soft, Heat and Cold, Motion and
Resistance, etc. and of all these more and less either as to Quantity or
Degree. Smelling furnishes me with Odors; the Palate with Tastes, and Hearing
conveys Sounds to the Mind in all their variety of Tone and Composition. And as
several of these are observed to accompany each other, they come to be marked
by one Name, and so to be reputed as one Thing. Thus, for Example, a certain
Color, Taste, Smell, Figure and Consistence having been observed to go
together, are accounted one distinct Thing, signified by the name Apple. Other
Collections of Ideas constitute a Stone, a Tree, a Book and the like sensible
Things; which as they are pleasing or disagreeable excite the Passions of Love,
Hatred, Joy, Grief, etc.

2. But besides all that endless variety of Ideas or Objects of Knowledge, there
is likewise something which knows or perceives them, and exercises diverse
Operations, as Willing, Imagining, Remembering, etc. about them. This
perceiving, active Being is what I call Mind, Spirit, Soul or my Self. By which
Words I do not denote any one of my Ideas, but a thing entirely distinct from
them, wherein they Exist, or, which is the same thing, whereby they are
Perceived, for the Existence of an Idea consists in being Perceived.

3. That neither our Thoughts, nor Passions, nor Ideas formed by the
Imagination, Exist without the Mind, is what every Body will allow. And to me
it is no less evident that the various Sensations or Ideas imprinted on the
Sense, however Blended or Combined together (that is whatever Objects they
compose) cannot Exist otherwise than in a Mind perceiving them. I think an
intuitive Knowledge may be obtained of this, by any one that shall attend to
what is meant by the Term Exist when applied to sensible Things. The Table I
Write on, I say, Exists, i. e. I See and Feel it, and if I were out of my Study
I should say it Existed, meaning thereby that if I was in my Study I might
perceive it, or that some other Spirit actually does perceive it. There was an
Odor, i. e. it was Smelt; There was a Sound, i. e. it was Heard; a Color or
Figure and it was perceived by Sight or Touch. This is all that I can
understand by these and the like Expressions. For as to what is said of the
Absolute Existence of unthinking Things without any relation to their being
perceived, that is to me perfectly Unintelligible. Their Esse is Percipi, nor
is it possible they should have any Existence, out of the Minds or thinking
Things which perceive them.

4. It is indeed an Opinion strangely prevailing amongst Men, that Houses,
Mountains, Rivers and in a word all sensible Objects have an Existence Natural
or Real, distinct from their being perceived by the Understanding. But with how
great an Assurance and Acquiescence soever, this Principle may be entertained
in the World: Yet whoever shall find in his Heart to call it in Question may,
if I mistake not, perceive it to involve a manifest Contradiction. For what are
the forementioned Objects but the things we perceive by Sense, and what, I pray
you, do we perceive besides our own Ideas or Sensations, and is it not plainly
repugnant that any one of these or any Combination of them should Exist
unperceived?

5. If we thoroughly examine this Tenent, it will, perhaps, be found at Bottom
to depend on the Doctrine of Abstract Ideas. For can there be a nicer Strain of
Abstraction then to distinguish the Existence of sensible Objects from their
being Perceived, so as to conceive them Existing Unperceived? Light and
Colors, Heat and Cold, Extension and Figures, in a word the Things we See and
Feel what are they but so many Sensations, Notions, Ideas or Impressions on the
Sense, and is it possible to separate, even in thought, any of these from
Perception? For my part I might as easily divide a Thing from it Self. I may,
indeed, divide in my Thoughts or conceive apart from each other those Things
which, perhaps, I never perceived by Sense so divided. Thus I imagine the Trunk
of a Human Body without the Limbs, or conceive the Smell of a Rose without
thinking on the Rose it self. So far I will not deny I can Abstract, if that
may properly be called Abstraction, which extends only to the conceiving
separately such Objects, as it is possible may really exist or be actually
perceived asunder. But my conceiving or imagining Power does not extend beyond
the possibility of real Existence or Perception. Hence as it is impossible, for
me to See or Feel any Thing without an actual Sensation of that Thing, so is it
impossible for me to conceive in my Thoughts any sensible Thing or Object
distinct from the Sensation or Perception of it. In truth the Object and the
Sensation are the same thing, and cannot therefore be Abstracted from each
other.

6. Some Truths there are so near and obvious to the mind that a Man need only
open his Eyes to see 'em. Such I take this Important one to be, viz. that all
the Choir of Heaven and Furniture of the Earth, in a word all those Bodies
which compose the mighty Frame of the World, have not any Subsistence without a
Mind, that their Esse is to be Perceived or Known; that consequently so long as
they are not actually Perceived by Me, or do not Exist in my Mind or that of
any other Created Spirit, they must either have no Exsistence at all, or else
subsist in the Mind of some Eternal Spirit: It being perfectly unintelligible
and involving all the Absurdity of Abstraction, to attribute to any single part
of them an Existence independent of a Spirit. To make this appear with all the
Light and Evidence of an Axiom, it seems sufficient if I can but awaken the
Reflection of the Reader, that he may take an impartial View of his own Meaning,
and turn his Thoughts upon the Subject it self, free and disengaged from all
Embarras of Words and Prepossession in favor of received Mistakes.

7. From what has been said, it is evident, there is not any other Substance
than Spirit or that which perceives. But for the fuller Demonstration of this
Point, let it be considered, the sensible Qualities are Color, Figure, Motion,
Smell, Taste, etc. i. e. the Idea^ perceived by Sense. Now for an Idea to Exist
in an unperceiving Thing is a manifest Contradiction, for to have an Idea is
all one as to perceive, that therefore wherein Color, Figure, etc. Exist must
perceive them; Hence it is clea^ there can be no unthinking Substance or
Substratum of those Ideas.

8. But say you, tho the Ideas themselves do not Exist without the Mind yet
there may be Things like them whereof they are Copies or Resemblances, which
Things Exist without the Mind, in an unthinking Substance I answer an Idea can
be like nothing but an Idea, a Color, or Figure, ca^ be like nothing but
another Color o^ Figure. If we look but never so little into our Thoughts, we
shall find it impossible for us to conceive a Likeness except only between our
Ideas. Again, I ask whether those supposed Originals or External Things, of
which our Ideas are the Pictures or Representations, be themselves Perceivable
or no? If they are, then they are Ideas and we have gained our Point; but if
you say they are not, I appeal to any one whether it be Sense, to assert a
Color is like something which is invisible; Hard or Soft, like something which
is Intangible, and so of the rest.

9. Some there are who make a distinction betwixt Primary and Secondary
Qualities: By the former, they mean Extension, Figure, Motion, Rest, Solidity
or Impenetrability and Number: By the latter they denote all other Sensible
Qualities as Colors, Sounds, Tastes, etc. the Ideas we have of these they
acknowledge not to be the Resemblances, of any thing existing without the Mind
or unperceived, but they will have our Ideas of the Primary Qualities to be
Patterns or Images of things which exist without the Mind, in an unthinking
Substance which they call Matter. By Matter, therefore, we are to understand an
Inert, Senseless Substance, in which Extension, Figure, Motion, etc. do
actually subsist, But it is evident from what we have already shown, that
Extension, Figure and Notion are only Ideas existing in the Mind, and that an
Idea can be like nothing but another Idea. and that consequently neither They
nor their Archetypes can Exist in an unperceiving Substance. Hence it is plain,
that the very Notion of what is called Matter or Corporeal Substance, involves
a Contradiction in it. Insomuch that I should not think it necessary to spend
more time in exposing it is Absurdity. But because the Tenent of the Existence
of Matter seems to have taken so deep a Root in the Minds of Philosophers, and
draws after it so many ill Consequences, l choose rather to be thought Prolix
and Tedious, than omit any thing that might conduce to the full Discovery and
Extirpation of that Prejudice.

10. They who assert that Figure, Motion, and the rest of the Primary or
Original Qualities do Exist without the Mind, in unthinking Substances, do at
the same time acknowledge that Colors, Sounds, Heat, Cold, etc. do not, which
they tell us are Sensations existing in the Mind alone, that depend on and are
occasioned by the different Size, Texture, Motion, etc. of the minute Particles
of Matter. This they take for an undoubted Truth, which they can demonstrate
beyond all Exception. Now if it be certain, that those Original Qualities are
inseparably united with the other sensible Qualities, and not, even in Thought,
capable of being Abstracted from them, it plainly follows that they Exist only
in the Mind. But I desire any one to reflect and try, whether he can by any
Abstraction of Thought, conceive the Extension and Motion of a Body, without
all other sensible Qualities. For my own part, I see evidently that it is not
in my power to frame an Idea of a Body Extended and Moving, but I must withal
give it some Color or other sensible Quality which is acknowleg'd to Exist
only in the Mind. In short, Extension, Figure, and Motion, abstracted from all
other Qualities, are inconceivable. Where therefore the other sensible
Qualities are, there must these be also, i. e. in the Mind and no where else.

11. Again, Great and Small, Swift and Slow, are allowed to Exist no where
without the Mind, being entirely relative and changing as the Frame or Position
of the Organs of Sense varies. The Extension therefore which Exists without the
Mind, is neither Great nor Small, the Motion, neither Swift nor Slow, that is,
they are nothing at all. But say you they are Extension in General, and Motion
in General: Thus we see how much the Tenent of extended, moveable Substances
Existing without the Mind depends on that strange Doctrine of Abstract Ideas.
And here I cannot but remark, how nearly the Vague and indeterminate Description
of Matter or Corporeal Substance which the Modern Philosophers are run into by
their own Principles, resembles that antiquated and so much ridiculed Notion of
Materia Prima, to be met with in Aristotle and his Followers. Without Extension
Solidity cannot be conceived; since therefore it has been shown that Extension
Exists not in an unthinking Substance, the same must also be true of Solidity.

12. That Number is entirely the Creature of the Mind, even tho the other
Qualities be allowed to Exist without, will be evident to whoever considers,
that the same thing bears a different Denomination of Number, as the Mind views
it with different respects, Thus, the same Extension is One or Three or Thirty
Six, according as the Mind considers it with reference to a Yard, a Foot, or an
Inch. Number is so visibly relative, and dependent on Men's Understanding, that
it is strange to think how any one should give it an absolute Existence without
the Mind. We say one Book, one Page, one Line, etc. all these are equally
Unites, tho some contain several of the others. And in each Instance it is
plain, the Unite relates to some particular Combination of Ideas arbitrarily
put together by the Mind.

13. Unity I know some will have to be a simple or uncompounded Idea,
accompanying all other Ideas into the Mind. That I have any such Idea answering
the Word Unity, I do not find, and if I had, methinks, I could not miss finding
it, on the contrary it should be the most familiar to my Understanding since if
is said to accompany all other Ideas, and to be perceived by all the ways of
Sensation and Reflection. To say no more it is an abstract Idea.

14. I shall farther add, that after the same manner, as modern Philosophers
prove Colors, Tastes, etc. to have no Existence in Matter, or without the
Mind, the same thing may be likewise proved of all other sensible Qualities
whatsoever. Thus, for Instance, it is said that Heat and Cold, are Affections
only of the Mind, and not at all Patterns of real Beings, existing in the
Corporeal Substances which excite them, for that the same Body which appears
Cold to one Hand, seems Warm to another. Now why may we not as well argue that
Figure and Extension, are not Patterns or Resemblances of Qualities existing in
Matter, because to the same Eye at different Stations, or Eyes of a different
Texture at the same Station, they appear various, and cannot therefore be the
Images of any thing settled and determinate without the Mind? again, It Is
proved that Sweetness is not really in the Sapid Thing, because the thing
remaining unaltered the Sweetness is changed into Bitter, as in case of a Fever
or otherwise vitiated Palate. Is it not as reasonable to say, that Motion is
not without the Mind, since if the Succession of Ideas in the Mind become
Swifter, the Motion, it is acknowledged, shall appear Slower without any
external Alteration.

15. In short, let any one consider those Arguments, which are thought
manifestly to prove that Colors, Tastes, etc. Exist only in the Mind, and he
shall find they may with equal force, be brought to prove the same thing of
Extension, Figure, and Motion. Tho it must be confessed this method of Arguing
does not so much prove that there is no Extension, Color, etc. in an outward
Object, as that we do not know by Sense which is the true Extension or Color
of the Object. But the Arguments foregoing plainly show it to be impossible
that any Color or Extension at all, or other sensible Quality whatsoever,
should Exist in an unthinking Subject without the Mind, or in truth, that there
should be any such thing as an outward Object.

16. But let us examine a little the received Opinion: It is said Extension is
a mode or accident of Matter, and that Matter is the Substratum that supports
it. Now I desire that you would explain to me what is meant by Matter's
supporting Extension: Say you, I have no Idea of Matter and therefore cannot
explain it. I answer, tho you have no positive, yet if you have any meaning at
all, you must at least have a Relative Idea of Matter; tho you know not what it
is, yet you must be supposed to know what Relation it bears to Accidents, and
what is meant by its supporting them. It Is evident Support cannot here be taken
in its usual or literal Sense, as when we say that Pillars support a Building;
in what Sense therefore must it be taken? For my part I am not able to discover
any Sense at all that can be applicable to it.

17. If we inquire into what the most accurate Philosophers declare themselves
to mean by Material Substance; we shall find them acknowledge, they have no
other meaning annexed to those Sounds, but the Idea of Being in general,
together with the Relative Notion of its supporting Accidents. The general Idea
of Being appears to me the most abstract and incomprehensible of all other,
and as for its supporting Accidents, this, as we have just now observed, cannot
be understood in the common Sense of those Words, it must therefore be taken in
some other Sense, but what that is they do not explain. So that when I consider
the two Parts or Branches which make the signification of the Words Material
Substance, I am convinced there is no distinct meaning annexed to them. But why
should we trouble our selves any farther, in discussing this Material
Substratum or Support of Figure and Motion, etc. does it not suppose they have
an Existence without the Mind? And is not this a direct Repugnancy and
altogether Inconceivable?

18. But tho it were possible that solid, Figured moveable Substances may Exist
without the Mind, corresponding to the Ideas we have of Bodies, yet how is it
possible for us to know this? Either we must know it by Sense or by Reason. As
for our Senses, by them we have the Knowledge only of our Sensations, Ideas, or
those things that are immediately perceived by Sense, call 'em what you will:
But they do not inform us that things Exist without the Mind, or unperceived,
like to those which are perceived. This the Materialists themselves acknowledge.
It remains therefore that if we have any Knowledge at all of External Things, it
must be by Reason, inferring their Existence from what is immediately perceived
by Sense. But I do not see what reason can induce us to believe the Existence
of Bodies without the Mind, from what we perceive, since the very Patrons of
Matter themselves do not pretend, there is any necessary Connection betwixt them
and our Ideas. I say it is granted on all Hands (and what happens in Dreams,
Frenzys and the like puts it beyond dispute) that it is possible we might be
affected with all the Ideas we have now, tho there were no Bodies Existing
without resembling them. Hence it is evident the Supposition of External Bodies
is not necessary for the producing our Ideas: Since it is granted they are
produced sometimes, and might possibly be produced always in the same Order, we
see them in at present, without their Concurrence.

19. But, tho we might possibly have all our Sensations without them, yet
perhaps it may be thought easier to conceive and explain the manner of their
Production, by supposing External Bodies in their likeness rather than
otherwise, and so it might be at least probable there are such things as Bodies
that excite their Ideas in our Minds. But neither can this be said, for tho we
give the Materialists their External Bodies, they by their one confession are
never the nearer knowing how our Ideas are produced: Since they own themselves
unable to comprehend in what manner Body can act upon Spirit, or how it is
possible it should imprint any Idea in the Mind. Hence it is evident the
Production of Ideas or Sensations in our Minds, can be no reason why we should
suppose Matter or Corporeal Substances, since that is acknowleg'd to remain
equally inexplicable with, or without this Supposition. If therefore it were
possible for Bodies to Exist without the Mind, yet to hold they do so, must
needs be a very precarious Opinion; since it is to suppose, without any reason
at all, that God has Created innumerable Beings that are entirely useless, and
serve to no manner of purpose.

20. In short, tho there were External Bodies, it is impossible we should ever
come to know it; and if there were not, we should have the very same Reasons to
think there were that we have now. Suppose, what no one can deny possible, an
Intelligence to be affected with the same train of Sensations or Ideas that you
are, imprinted in the same order and with like vividness in his Mind. I ask
whether that Intelligence has not all the Reason to believe the Existence of
Corporeal Substances, represented by his Ideas, and exciting them in his Mind,
that you can possibly have for believing the same thing? Of this there can be
no Question, which one Consideration were enough to make any reasonable Person,
suspect the strength of whatever Arguments he may think himself to have, for
the Existence of Bodies without the Mind.

21. Where it necessary to add any farther Proof against the Existence of
Matter, after what has been said, I could instance several of those Errors and
Difficulties (not to mention Impieties) which have sprung from that Tenent. It
has occasioned numberless Controversies and Disputes in Philosophy, and not a
few of far greater moment in Religion. But I shall not enter into the detail of
them in this Place, as well because I think, Arguments a Posteriori are
unnecessary for confirming what has been, if I mistake not, sufficiently
demonstrated a Priori, as because I shall hereafter find occasion to speak
somewhat of them.

22. I am afraid I have given cause to think, I am needlessly Prolix in
handling this Subject. For to what purpose is it to dilate on that which may be
demonstrated with the utmost Evidence in a Line or Two, to any one that is
capable of the least Reflection? It is but looking into your own Thoughts, and
so trying whether you can conceive it possible for a Sound, or Figure, or
Motion, or Color to Exist without the Mind, or Unperceived. This easy Trial
may perhaps make you see, that what you contend for, is a downright
Contradiction. Insomuch that I am content to put the whole upon this Issue; if
you can but conceive it possible for one Extended, moveable Substance, or in
general, for any one Idea or any thing like an Idea to Exist otherwise than in
a Mind perceiving it, I shall readily give up the Cause: And as for all that
compages of External Bodies you contend for, I shall grant you its Existence,
tho you cannot either give me any Reason why you believe it Exists, or assign
any use to it when it is supposed to Exist. I say, the bare possibility of your
Opinions being true, shall pass for an Argument that it is so.

23. But say you, surely there is nothing easier than for me to imagine Trees,
for Instance, in a Park, or Books Existing in a Closet, and no Body by to
perceive them. I answer you may so, there is no difficulty in it: But what is
all this, I beseech you, more than framing in your Mind certain Ideas which you
call Books and Trees, and at the same time omitting to frame the Idea of any
one that may perceive them? But do not you your self Perceive or Think of them
all the while? This therefore is nothing to the purpose: It only shows you have
the power of Imagining or Forming Ideas in your Mind; but it does not show that
you can conceive it possible, the Objects of your Thought may Exist without the
Mind; to make out this, it is necessary that you conceive them Existing
unconceiv'd or unthought of, which is a manifest Repugnancy. When we do our
utmost to conceive the Existence of External Bodies, we are all the while only
Contemplating our own Ideas. But the Mind taking no notice of it self, is
deluded to think it can and does conceive Bodies Existing unthought of or
without the Mind; tho at the same time they are apprehended by or Exist in it
self. A little Attention will discover to any one the Truth and Evidence of
what is here said, and make it unnecessary to insist on any other Proofs
against the Existence of Material Substance.

24. Could Men but forbear to amuse themselves with Words, we should I believe,
soon come to an Agreement in this Point. It is very obvious upon the least
inquiry into our own Thoughts, to know whether it be possible for us to
understand what is meant, by the absolute Existence of sensible Objects in
themselves, or without the Mind. To me it is evident those Words mark out either
a direct Contradiction, or else nothing at all. And to convince others of this,
I know no readier or fairer way, than to entreat they would calmly attend to
their own Thoughts: And if by this Attention, the Emptiness or Repugnancy of
those Expressions does appear, surely nothing more is requisite for their
Conviction. It Is on this therefore that I insist, viz. that the absolute
Existence of unthinking Things are Words without a Meaning, or which include a
Contradiction. This is what I repeat and inculcate, and earnestly recommend to
the attentive Thoughts of the Reader.

25. All our Ideas, Sensations, Notions or the things which we perceive by
whatsoever Names they may be distinguished, are visibly Inactive, there is
nothing of Power or Agency included in them. So that one Idea or Object of
Thought cannot Produce, or make any Alteration in another. To be satisfied of
the Truth of this, there is nothing else requisite but a bare Observation of
our Ideas. For since they and every part of them Exist only in the Mind, it
follows that there is nothing in them but what is Perceived: But whoever shall
attend to his Ideas, whether of Sense or Reflection, will not perceive in them
any Power or Activity, there is, therefore, no such thing contained in them. A
little Attention will discover to us that the very Being of an Idea implies
Passiveness and Inertness in it, insomuch that it is impossible for an Idea to
do any thing, or, strictly speaking, to be the Cause of any thing: Neither can
it be the Resemblance or Pattern of any active Being, as is evident from Sect.
VIII. Whence it plainly follows that Extension, Figure and Motion, cannot be
the Cause of our Sensations. To say, therefore, that these are the effects of
Powers resulting from the Configuration, Number, Motion, Size, etc. of
Corpuscles must certainly be false.

26. We perceive a continual Succession of Ideas, some are anew Excited, others
are Changed or totally Disappear. There is therefore some Cause of these Ideas
whereon they depend, and which produces and changes them. That this Cause
cannot be any Quality or Idea or Combination of Ideas, is clear from the
preceding Section. It must therefore be a Substance, but it has been shown that
there is no Corporeal or Material Substance: It remains therefore that the
Cause of Ideas is an Incorporeal, active Substance or Spirit.

27. A Spirit is one Simple, Undivided, active Being, as it perceives Ideas, it
is called the Understanding, and as it produces or otherwise operates about
them, it is called the Will. Hence there can be no Idea formed of a Soul or
Spirit: For all Ideas whatever, being Passive and Inert, vid. Sect. XXV, they
cannot represent unto us, by way of Image or Likeness, that which Acts. A
little Attention will make it plain to any one, that to have an Idea which
shall be like that active Principle of Motion and Change of Ideas, is
absolutely impossible. Such is the Nature of Spirit or that which Acts, that it
cannot be of it self Perceived, but only by the Effects which it produces. If
any Man shall doubt of the Truth of what is here delivered, let him but reflect
and try if he can frame the Idea of any Power or active Being; and whether he
has Ideas of two Principal Powers, marked by the Names Will and Understanding,
distinct from each other as well as from a third Idea of Substance or Being in
general, with a relative Notion of its supporting or being the Subject of the
aforesaid Powers, which is signified by the Name Soul or Spirit. This is what
some hold; but so far as I can see, the Words Will, Understanding, Mind, Soul,
Spirit, do not stand for different Ideas, or in truth, for any Idea at all, but
for Something which is very different from Ideas, and which being an Agent
cannot be like unto, or represented by, any Idea whatsoever.

28. I find I can Excite Ideas in my Mind at pleasure, and vary and shift the
Scene as often as I think fit. It Is no more than Willing, and straightway this or
that Idea arises in my Fancy: And by the same Power it is obliterated, and
makes way for another. This making and unmaking of Ideas does very properly
denominate the Mind Active. Thus much is certain, and grounded on Experience:
But when we talk of unthinking Agents, or of exciting Ideas exclusive of
Volition, we only amuse our selves with Words.

29. But whatever Power I may have over my own Thoughts, I find the Ideas
actually perceived by Sense have not a like Dependence on my Will. When in
broad Daylight I open my Eyes, it is not in my Power to choose whether I shall
See or no, or to determine what particular Objects shall present themselves to
my View; And so likewise as to the Hearing and other Senses, the Ideas
imprinted on them are not Creatures of my Will. There is therefore some other
Will or Spirit that produces them.

30. The Ideas of Sense are more strong, lively and distinct than those of the
Imagination, they have likewise a Steddiness, Order and Coherence, and are not
excited at Random, as those which are the effects of Human Wills often are, but
in a regular Train or Series, the admirable Connection whereof sufficiently
testifies the Wisdom and Benevolence of its Author. Now the set Rules or
established Methods, wherein the Mind we depend on excites in us the Ideas of
Sense, are called the Laws of Nature: And these we learn by Experience, which
teaches us that such and such Ideas are attended with such and such other
Ideas, in the ordinary course of Things.

31. This gives us a sort of Foresight, which enables us to regulate our
Actions for the benefit of Life. And without this we should be eternally at a
loss, we could not know how to act any thing that might procure us the least
Pleasure, or remove the least Pain of Sense. That Food Nourishes, Sleep
Refreshes, and Fire Warms us; that to Sow in the Seed-time is the way to Reap
in the Harvest, and, in general, that to obtain such or such Ends, such or such
Means are conducive, all this we know, not by discovering any necessary
Connection between our Ideas, but only by the Observation of the settled Laws of
Nature, without which we should be all in Uncertainty and Confusion, and a
grown Man no more know how to manage himself in the Affairs of Life, than an
Infant just Born.

32. And yet this consistent, uniform Working which so evidently displays the
Goodness and Wisdom of that Governing Spirit whose Will constitutes the Laws of
Nature, is so far from leading our Thoughts to Him, that it rather sends 'em a
wandering after second Causes. For when we perceive certain Ideas of Sense
constantly followed by other Ideas, and we know this is not of our own doing,
we forthwith attribute Power and Agency to the Ideas themselves, and make one
the Cause of another, than which nothing can be more Absurd and Unintelligible.
Thus, for Example, having observed that when we perceive by Sight a certain
round, luminous Figure, we at the same time perceive by Touch the Idea or
Sensation called Heat, we do from thence conclude the Sun to be the cause of
Heat. And in like manner perceiving the Motion and Collision of Bodies to be
attended with Sound, we are inclined to think the latter the effect of the
former.

33. The ideas imprinted on the Senses by the Author of Nature are called real
things, and those excited in the Imagination being less Regular, Vivid and
Constant, are more properly termed Ideas, or Images of Things, which they copy
and represent. But then our Sensations, be they never so Vivid and Distinct,
are nevertheless Ideas, i. e. they Exist in the Mind, or are perceived by it,
as truly as the Ideas of its own framing. The Ideas of Sense are allowed to
have more reality in them, i. e. to be more Strong, Orderly and Coherent than
the Creatures of the Mind; but this is no Argument that they Exist without the
Mind. They are also less dependent on the Spirit, or thinking Substance which
perceives them, in that they are excited by the Will of another and more
Powerful Spirit: yet still they are Ideas, and certainly no Idea, whether Faint
or Strong, can Exist otherwise than in a Mind perceiving it.

34. Before we proceed any farther, it is necessary we spend some Time in
Answering Objections which may probably be made against the Principles we have
hitherto laid down. In doing of which, if I seem too Prolix to those of quick
Apprehensions, I desire I may be excused, since all Men do not equally
apprehend things of this Nature; and I am willing to be understood by every
one. First, then, it will be objected that by the foregoing Principles, all
that is real and substantial in Nature is banished out of the World: And
instead thereof a Chimerical Scheme of Ideas takes place. All things that
Exist, Exist only in the Mind, that is, they are purely Notional. What
therefore becomes of the Sun, Moon and Stars? What must we think of Houses,
Rivers, Mountains, Trees, Stones; nay, even of our own Bodies? Are all these
but so many Chimeras and Illusions on the Fancy? To all which, and whatever
else of the same sort may be objected, I Answer, that by the Principles
premised, we are not deprived of any one thing in Nature. Whatever we See,
Feel, Hear, or any wise Conceive or Understand, remains as secure as ever, and
is as real as ever. There is a rerum natura, and the Distinction between
Realities and Chimeras retains its full force. This is evident from Sect. XXIX,
XXX, and XXXIII, where we have shown what is meant by real Things in opposition
to Chimeras, or Ideas of our own framing; but then they both equally Exist in
the Mind, and in that Sense are alike Ideas.

35. I do not Argue against the Existence of any one thing that we can
apprehend, either by Sense or Reflection, That the things I see with my Eyes and
touch with my Hands do Exist, really Exist, I make not the least Question, The
only thing whose Existence we deny, is that which Philosophers call Matter or
Corporeal Substance. And in doing of this, there is no Damage done to the rest
of Mankind, who, I dare say, will never miss it. The Atheist, indeed, will want
the Color of an empty Name to support his Impiety; and the Philosophers may
possibly find, they have lost a great Handle for Trifling and Disputation. But
that is all the Harm that I can see done.

36. If any Man thinks we detract from the Existence or Reality of things, he
is very far from Understanding what has been premised in the plainest Terms I
could think of. Take here an Abstract of what has been said. There are
Spiritual Substances, Minds or Human Souls which will or excite Ideas in
themselves at pleasure: but these are faint, weak, and unsteady in respect of
others they perceive by Sense, which being impressed upon them according to
certain Rules or Laws of Nature, speak themselves the effects of a Mind more
powerful and wise than Human Spirits. These latter are said to have more
Reality in them than the former: By which is meant that they are more
affecting, orderly and distinct, and that they are not Fictions of the Mind
perceiving them. And in this Sense, the Sun that I see by Day is the real Sun,
and that which I imagine by Night is the Idea of the former. In the Sense here
given of Reality, it is evident that every Vegetable, Star, Mineral, and in
general each part of the Mundane System, is as much a Real Being by our
Principles as by any other. Whether others mean any thing by the Term Reality
different from what I do, I entreat them to look into their own thoughts and
see.

37. It will be urged that thus much at least is true, viz. that we take away
all Corporeal Substances. To this my Answer is, That if the word Substance be
taken in the vulgar Sense, for a Combination of Sensible Qualities, such as
Extension, Solidity, Weight, etc. This we cannot be accused of taking away. But
if it be taken in a Phylosophic Sense, for the support of Accidents or
Qualities without the Mind: then, indeed, I acknowledge that we take it away, if
one may be said to take away that which never had any Existence, not even in
the Imagination.

38. But after all, say you, it sounds very harsh to say we Eat and Drink
Ideas, and are Clothed with Ideas. I acknowledge it does so, the word Idea not
being used in common Discourse to signify the several Combinations of sensible
Qualities, which are called Things: and it is certain that any Expression which
varies from the familiar Use of Language will seem harsh and ridiculous. But
this does not concern the Truth of the Proposition, which in other Words is no
more than this, viz. we are Fed and Clothed with those Things which we
perceive immediately by our Senses. The Hardness or Softness, the Color,
Taste, Warmth, Figure, etc. which combined together constitute the several
sorts of Victuals and Apparel, have been shown to Exist only in the Mind that
perceives them; and this is all that is meant by calling 'em Ideas, which Word
if it was as ordinarily used as Thing, would sound no Harsher nor more
Ridiculous than it. I am not for disputing about the Propriety, but the Truth
of the Expression. If therefore you agree with me that we Eat, and Drink, and
are Clad with the immediate Objects of Sense which cannot Exist unperceived or
without the Mind: I shall readily grant it is more proper or conformable to
Custom, that they should be called Things rather than Ideas.

39. If it be demanded why I make use of the word Idea, and do not rather in
compliance with Custom call them Things. I answer, I do it for two Reasons:
First, because the Term Thing, in contradistinction to Idea, is generally
supposed to denote somewhat Existing, without the Mind; Secondly, because Thing
has a more comprehensive Signification than Idea, including Spirits or
thinking Things as well as Ideas. Since therefore the Objects of Sense Exist
only in the Mind, and are withal thoughtless and inactive, I chose to mark them
by the word Idea which implies those Properties.

40. But say what we can, some one perhaps may be apt to Reply, he will still
believe his Senses, and never suffer any Arguments, how plausible soever, to
prevail over the Certainty of them. Be it so, assert the Evidence of Sense as
high as you please, we are willing to do the same. That what I See, Hear and
Feel does Exist, i. e. is perceived by me, I no more doubt than I do of my own
Being. But I do not see how the Testimony of Sense can be alleged, as a proof
for the Existence of any Thing, which is not perceived by Sense. We are not for
having any Man turn Skeptic, and disbelieve his Senses; on the contrary we give
them all the Stress and Assurance imaginable; nor are there any Principles more
opposite to Scepticisim, than those we have laid down, as shall be hereafter
clearly shown.

41. Secondly, It will be objected that there is a great difference betwixt
real Fire, for Instance, and the Idea of Fire, betwixt dreaming or imagining
ones self Burnt, and actually being so: If you suspect it to be only the Idea
of Fire which you see, do but put your Hand into it, and you will be convinced
with a witness. This and the like may be urged in opposition to our Tenants. To
all which the Answer is evident from what has been already said, and I shall
only add in this place, that if real Fire be very different from the Idea of
Fire, so also is the real Pain that it occasions, very different from the Idea
of the same Pain, and yet no Body will pretend that real Pain either is, or can
possibly be, in an unperceiving Thing or without the Mind, any more than its
Idea.

42. Thirdly, It will be objected that we see things actually without or at a
distance from us, and which consequently do not Exist in the Mind, it being
absurd that those Things, which are seen at the Distance of several Miles,
should be as near to us as our own Thoughts. In answer to this, I desire it may
be considered that in a Dream we do often perceive Things, as Existing at a great
distance off, and yet for all that, those Things are acknowleg'd to have their
Existence only in the Mind.

43. But for the fuller clearing of this Point, it may be worth while to
consider, how it is that we perceive Distance and Things placed at a Distance
by Sight. For that we should in truth see External Space, and Bodies actually
Existing in it, some nearer, others farther off, seems to carry with it some
Opposition to what has been said, of their Existing no where without the Mind.
The Consideration of this Difficulty it was, that gave birth to my Essay
toward a new Theory of Vision, which was published not long since. Wherein it
is shown that Distance or Outness is neither immediately of it self perceived
by Sight, nor yet apprehended or judged of by Lines and Angles, or any thing
that has a necessary Connection with it: But that it is only suggested to our
Thoughts, by certain visible Ideas and Sensations attending Vision, which in
their own Nature have no manner of Similitude or Relation, either with
Distance, or Things placed at a Distance. But by a Connection taught us by
Experience, they came to signify and Suggest them to us, after the same manner
that Words of any Language Suggest the Ideas they are made to stand for.
Insomuch that a Man Born Blind, and afterward made to see, would not, at first
Sight, think the things he saw to be without his Mind, or at any Distance from
him. vid. Sect. XLI. of the forementioned Treatise.

44. The Ideas of Sight and Touch make two Species, entirely distinct and
heterogeneous. The former are Marks and Prognostics of the latter. That the
proper Objects of Sight neither Exist without the Mind, nor are the Images of
External Things, was shown even in that Treatise. Tho throughout the same, the
contrary be supposed true of Tangible Objects: Not that to suppose that Vulgar
Error, was necessary for establishing the Notion therein laid down, but because
it was beside my Purpose to Examine and Refute it in a Discourse concerning
Vision. So that in strict Truth the Ideas of Sight, when we apprehend by them
Distance and Things placed at a Distance, do not Suggest or mark out to us
Things actually Existing at a Distance, but only admonish us what Ideas of
Touch will be imprinted in our Minds at such and such distances of Time, and in
consequence of such or such Actions. It is, I say, evident from what has been
said in the foregoing Parts of this Treatise, and in Sect. CXLVII and elsewhere
of the Essay concerning Vision, that Visible Ideas are the Language whereby the
governing Spirit, on whom we depend, informs us what Tangible Ideas he is about
to imprint upon us, in case we Excite this or that Motion in our own Bodies.
But for a fuller Information in this Point, I refer to the Essay it self.

45. Fourthly, It will be objected that from the foregoing Principles it
follows, Things are every moment annihilated and created anew. The Objects of
Sense Exist only when they are Perceived: The Trees therefore are in the
Garden, or the Chairs in the Parlour, no longer than while there is some Body
by to perceive them. Upon shutting my Eyes all the Furniture in the Room is
reduced to nothing, and barely upon opening 'em it is again created. In answer
to all which, I refer the Reader to what has been said in Sect. III, IV, etc.
and desire he will consider whether he means any thing, by the actual Existence
of an Idea, distinct from its being perceived. For my part after the nicest
Inquiry I could make, I am not able to discover that any thing else is meant by
those Words. And I once more entreat the Reader to sound his own Thoughts, and
not suffer himself to be imposed on by Words. If he can conceive it possible
either for his Ideas or their Archetypes to Exist without being perceived, then
I give up the Cause: But if he cannot, he will acknowledge it is unreasonable
for him to stand up in Defense of he knows not what, and pretend to charge on
me as an Absurdity, the not assenting to those Propositions which at Bottom
have no meaning in them.

46. It will not be amiss to observe, how far the received Principles of
Philosophy are themselves chargeable with those pretended Absurdities. It is
thought strangely Absurd that upon closing my Eyelids, all the Visible Objects
round me should be reduced to nothing; and yet is not this what Philosophers
commonly acknowledge, when they agree on all Hands that Light and Colors, which
alone are the proper and immediate Objects of Sight, are mere Sensations that
Exist no longer than they are perceived? Again it may to some perhaps seem very
incredible, that things should be every moment creating, yet this very Notion
is commonly taught in the Schools. For the Schoolmen, tho they acknowledge the
Existence of Matter and that the whole mundane Fabric is framed out of it, are
nevertheless of Opinion that it cannot subsist without the Divine Conservation,
which by them is expounded to be a continual Creation.

47. Farther, a little Thought will discover to us, that tho we allow the
Existence of Matter or Corporeal Substance, yet it will unavoidably follow from
the principles which are now generally admitted, that the Particular Bodies of
what kind soever do none of them Exist whilst they are not perceived. For it is
evident from Sect. XI, etc. that the Matter Philosophers contend for is an
incomprehensible Somewhat which has none of those particular Qualities,
whereby the Bodies falling under our Senses are distinguished one from another.
But to make this more plain, it must be remarked that the Infinite Divisibility
of Matter is now universally allowed, at least by the most approved and
considerable Philosophers, who on the received Principles demonstrate it beyond
all exception. Hence it follows, there is an infinite number of Parts in each
Particle of Matter, which are not perceived by Sense. The reason, therefore,
that any particular Body seems to be of a finite Magnitude, or exhibits only a
finite number of Parts to Sense, is, not because it contains no more, since in
it self it contains an infinite number of Parts, but because the Sense is not
acute enough to discern them. In proportion therefore as the Sense is rendered
more acute, it perceives a greater num-of Parts in the Object i.e. the Object
appears greater, and its Figure varies, those Parts in its Extremities which
were before unperceivable, appearing now to bound it in very different Lines
and Angles from those perceived by an obtuser Sense. And at length, after
various changes of Size and Shape, when the Sense becomes infinitely acute, the
Body shall seem infinite. During all which there is no alteration in the Body,
but only in the Sense. Each Body, therefore, considered in it self is
infinitely extended, and consequently void of all Shape or Figure. From which
it follows that tho we should grant the Existence of Matter to be never so
certain, yet it is withal as certain, the Materialists themselves are by their
own Principles forced to acknowledge, that neither the particular Bodies
perceived by Sense, nor any thing like them Exists without the Mind. Matter, I
say, and each Particle thereof is according to them Infinite and Shapeless, and
it is the Mind that frames all that variety of Bodies which compose the visible
World, any one whereof does not Exist longer than it is perceived.

48. But after all, if we consider it, the Objection proposed in Sect. XLV;
will not be found reasonably charged on the Principles we have premised, so as
in truth to make any Ojection at all against our Notions. For tho we hold
indeed the Objects of Sense to be nothing else but Ideas which cannot Exist
^nperceiv'd: yet we may not hence conclude they have no Existence except only
while they are perceived by us, since there may be some other Spirit that
perceives them tho we do not. Wherever Bodies are said to have no Existence
without the Mind, I would not be understood to mean this or that particular
Mind, but all Minds whatsoever. It does not therefore follow from the foregoing
Principles, that Bodies are annihilated and created every moment, or Exist not
at all during the Intervals between our perception o^ them.

49. Fifthly, it may perhaps be objected, that if Extension and Figure exist
only in the Mind, it follows that the Mind is extended and figured; since
Extension is a Mode or Attribute which (to speak with the Schools) is
predicated of the Subject in which it Exists. answer, Those qualities are in
the Mind only as they are perceived by it, that not by way of Mode or Attribute
bu^ only by way of Idea, and it no more fo^lows the Soul or Mind is extended
because Extension Exists in it alone, than it does that it is Red or Blue
because those Colors are on all Hands acknowleg'd to Exist in it, and no where
else. As to what Philosophers say of Subject and Mode, that seems very
groundless and unintelligible. For instance, in this Proposition, a Die is
Hard, Extended and Square, they will have it that the word Die denotes a
Subject or Substance, distinct from the Hardness, Extension, and Figure which
are predicated of it, and in which they Exist. This I cannot comprehend: To me a
Die seems to be nothing distinct from those things which are termed its Modes
or Accidents. And to say a Die is Hard, Extended and Square, is not to
attribute those Qualities to a subject distinct from and supporting them, but
only an Explication of the meaning of the word Die.

50. Sixthly, you will say there have been a great many things explained by
Matter and Motion, take away these and you destroy the whole Corpuscular
Philosophy, and undermine those Mechanical Principles which have been applied
with so much success to account for the Phenomenon. In short, whatever Advances
have been made, either by Ancient or Modern Philosophers, in the Study of
Nature do all proceed on the Supposition, that Corporeal Substance or Matter
does really Exist. To this, I answer, that there is not any one Phenomenon
explained on that Supposition, which may not as well be explained without it,
as might easily be made appear by an induction of Particulars. To Explain the
Phenomena, is all one as to show why upon such and such Occasions, we are
affected with such and such Ideas. But how Matter should Operate on a Spirit,
or produce any Idea in it, is what no Philosopher will pretend to explain. It
is therefore evident, there can be no use of Matter in Natural Philosophy.
Besides, they who attempt to account for Things, do it, not by Corporeal
Substance but, by Figure, Motion, etc. which are in truth no more than mere
Ideas, and therefore cannot be the cause of any thing, as has been already
shown vid. Sect. XXV.

51. Seventhly, it will upon this be demanded whether it does not seem absurd,
to take away Natural Causes, and ascribe every thing to the immediate Operation
of Spirits? We must no longer say upon these Principles that Fire Heats, or
Water Cools, but that a Spirit Heats, etc. would not a Man be deservedly laughed
at, who should talk after this manner? I answer he would so, in such Things we
ought to Think with the Learned, and Speak with the Vulgar. They who to
demonstration are convinced of the truth of the Copernican System, do
nevertheless say the Sun Rises, the Sun Sets or comes to the Meridian: And if
they affected a contrary Style, in common talk, it would without doubt appear
very ridiculous. A little Reflection on what is here said will make it manifest,
that the common use of Language would receive no manner of Alteration or
Disturbance from the admission of our Tenants.

52. In the ordinary affairs of Life, any Phrases may be retained, so long as
they Excite in us proper Sentiments, or Dispositions to act in such a manner as
is necessary for our well-being, how false soever they may be, if taken in a
strict and Speculative Sense. Nay this is unavoidable since, Propriety being
regulated by Custom, Language is suited to the received Opinions which are not
always the truest. Hence it is impossible even in the most rigid, Philosophic
Reasonings, so far to alter the Bent and Genius of the Tongue we speak, as
never to give a handle for Cavillers to pretend Difficulties and
Inconsistencies. But a fair and ingenuous Reader will collect the Sense, from
the Scope and Tenor and Connection of a Discourse, making allowances for those
unaccurate Modes of Speech, which use has made inevitable.

53. As to the Opinion that there are no Corporeal Causes, this has been
heretofore maintained by some of the Schoolmen, as it is of late by others
among the Modern Philosophers, who tho they allow Matter to Exist, yet will
have GOD alone to be the immediate efficient Cause of all Things. These Men
saw, that amongst all the Objects of Sense there was none, which had any Power
or Activity included in it, and that by consequence this was likewise true, of
whatever Bodies they supposed to Exist without the Mind, like unto the
immediate Objects of Sense. But then, that they should suppose an innumerable
multitude of Created Beings, which they acknowledge are not capable of producing
any one effect in Nature, and which therefore are made to no manner of purpose,
since God might have done every thing as well without them, this I say tho we
should allow it possible, must yet be a very unaccountable and extravagant
Supposition.

54. In the Eighth Place, the universal concurrent assent of Mankind may be
thought by some, an invincible Argument in behalf of Matter, or the Existence
of External Things. Must we suppose the whole World to be mistaken, and if so,
what cause can be assigned of so wide-spread and predominant an Error? I
answer, First, that upon a narrow inquiry, it will not perhaps be found, so
many as is imagined do really believe the Existence of Matter, or Things
without the Mind. Strictly speaking, to believe that which involves a
Contradiction, or has no meaning in it, is impossible, and whether the
foregoing Expressions are not of that sort, I refer it to the impartial
Examination of the Reader. In one Sense, indeed, Men may be said to believe
that Matter Exists, i. e. they act as if the immediate Cause of their
Sensations, which affects them every moment, and is so nearly present to them,
were some senseless unthinking Being. But that they should clearly apprehend
any meaning marked by those Words, and form thereof a Settled Speculative
Opinion, is what I am not able to conceive. This is not the only Instance
wherein Men impose upon themselves, by Imagining they believe those
Propositions they have often heard, tho at Bottom they have no meaning in them.

55. But Secondly, Tho we should grant a Notion to be never so universally and
steadfastly adhered to, yet this is but a weak Argument of its truth, to whoever
considers what a vast number of Prejudices and false Opinions are every where
embraced, with the utmost tenaciousness by the unreflecting (which are the
far-greater) part of Mankind. There was a time when the Antipodes and Motion of
the Earth, were looked upon as monstrous Absurdities, even by Men of Learning:
And if it be considered what a small proportion they bear to the rest of
Mankind, we shall find that at this Day, those Notions have gained but a very
inconsiderable footing in the World.

56. But it is demanded, that we assign a cause of this Prejudice, and account
for its obtaining in the World. To this I answer, That Men knowing they
perceived several Ideas, whereof they themselves were not the Authors, as not
being excited from within, nor depending on the operation of their Wills, this
made 'em maintain, those Ideas or Objects of Perception had an Existence
independent of, and without the Mind, without ever dreaming that a
Contradiction was involved in those Words. But Philosphers having plainly seen,
that the immediate Objects of Perception do not Exist without the Mind, they in
some degree corrected the mistake of the Vulgar, but at the same time run into
another which seems no less Absurd, viz. that there are certain Objects really
Existing without the Mind, or having a subsistence distinct from being
perceived, of which our Ideas are only Images or Resemblance, imprinted by
those Objects on the Mind. And this Notion of the Philosophers ows its Origin
to the same cause with the former, namely their being conscious that they were
not the Authors of their own Sensations, which they evidently knew were
imprinted from without, and which therefore must have some cause, distinct from
the Minds on which they are imprinted.

57. But why they should suppose the Ideas of Sense to be excited in us, by
things in their likeness, and not rather have recourse to Spirit which alone
can act, may be accounted for, First, because they were not aware of the
Repugnancy there is, as well in supposing things like unto our Ideas Existing
without, as in attributing to them Power or Activity. Secondly, because the
supreme Spirit which Excites those Ideas in our Minds, is not marked out and
limited to our view by any particular, finite Collection of sensible Ideas, as
Human Agents are by their Size, Complexion, Limbs, Motions, etc. And Thirdly,
because his Operations are regular and uniform. Whenever the Course of Nature
is interrupted by a Miracle, Men are ready to own the presence of a Superior
Agent. But when we see things go on in the ordinary Course, they do not Excite
in us any Reflection, their Order and Concatenation, tho it be an Argument of
the greatest Wisdom, Power, and Goodness in their Creator, is yet so constant
and familiar to us, that we do not think 'em the immediate effects of a Free
Spirit: especially since Inconstancy and Mutability in acting, tho it be an
Imperfection, is looked on as a mark of Freedom.

58 Tenthly, It will be objected, that the Notions we advance are inconsistent
with several sound Truths in Philosophy and Mathematics. For Example, The
Motion of the Earth is now universally admitted by Astronomers, as a Truth
grounded on the clearest and most convincing Reasons. But on the foregoing
Principles there can be no such thing. For Motion being only an Idea, it
follows that if it be not perceived it Exists not, but the Motion of the Earth
is not perceived by Sense. I Answer, That Tenent, if rightly understood, will
be found to agree with the Principles we have premised: For the Question,
whether the Earth moves or no, amounts in reality to no more than this, viz.
whether we have reason to conclude, from what has been observed by
Astronomers, that if we were placed in such and such Circumstances, and such or
such a Position and Distance, both from the Earth and Sun, we should perceive
the former to move among the Choir of the Planets, and appearing in all
respects like one of them: And this, by the Established Rules of Nature, which
we have no reason to mistrust, is reasonably collected from the Phenomenon.

59. We may from the Experience we have had, of the Train and Succession of
Ideas in our Minds, often make, I will not say uncertain Conjectures, but, sure
and well grounded Predictions, concerning the Ideas we shall be affected with
pursuant to a great Train of Actions, and be enabled to pass a right Judgment
of what would have appeared to us, in case we were placed in Circumstances,
very different from those we are in at present. Herein consists the Knowledge of
Nature, which may preserve its use and certainty very consistently with what
has been said. It will be easy, to apply this to whatever Objections of the
like sort may be drawn, from the Magnitude of the Stars, or any other
Discoveries in Astronomy or Nature.

60. In the eleventh Place, it will be demanded to what purpose serves that
curious Organization of Plants, and the admirable Mechanism in the Parts of
Animals; might not Vegetables grow, and shoot forth Leaves and Blossoms, and
Animals perform all their Motions, as well without, as with all that variety of
Internal Parts so elegantly contrived and put together, which being Ideas, have
nothing Powerful or Operative in them, nor have any necessary connection with
the effects ascribed to them? If it be a Spirit that immediately produces every
effect by a fiat, or act of his will, we must think all that is fine and
artificial in the Works, whether of Man or Nature, to be made in vain. By this
Doctrine, tho an Artist has made the Spring and Wheels, and every Movement of a
Watch, and adjusted them in such a manner, as he knew would produce the Motions
he designed; yet he must think all this done to no purpose, and that it is an
Intelligence which directs the Index, and points to the Hour of the Day. If so,
why may not the Intelligence do it, without his being at the pains of making
the Movements, and putting them together? Why does not an empty Case serve as
well as another; and how comes it to pass, that whenever there is any Fault in
the going of a Watch, there is some corresponding Disorder to be found in the
Movements, which being mended by a skilful Hand, all is right again? The like
may be said of all the Clock-work of Nature, great part whereof is so
wonderfully Fine and Subtle, as scarce to be discerned by the best Microscope.
In short it will be asked, how upon our Principles any tolerable Account can be
given, or any final Cause assigned of an innumerable multitude of Bodies and
Machines, framed with the most exquisite Art, which in the common Philosophy
have very apposite Uses assigned them, and serve to explain abundance of
Phenomenon.

61. To all which, I answer, First, That tho there were some Difficulties
relating to the administration of Providence, and the Uses by it assigned to
the several parts of Nature, which I could not solve by the foregoing
Principles, yet this Objection could be of small weight against the truth and
certainty of those Things, which may be proved a Priori, with the utmost
Evidence and Rigor of Demonstration. Secondly, But neither are the received
Principles free from the like Difficulties; for it may still be demanded, to
what end God should take those round-about Methods of effecting things by
Instruments and Machines, which no one can deny might have been effected by the
mere command of his Will, without all that apparatus: Nay, if we narrowly
consider it, we shall find the Objection may be retorted with greater force, on
those who hold the Existence of those Machines without the Mind; for it has
been made evident, that Solidity, Bulk, Figure, Motion, etc. have no Activity
or Efficacy in them, so as to be capable of producing any one effect in Nature,
vid. Sect. XXV. whoever therefore supposes them to Exist (allowing the
Supposition possible) when they are not perceived, does it manifestly to no
purpose, since the only use that is assigned to them, as they Exist
unperceived, is that they produce those perceivable Effects which, in truth,
cannot be ascribed to any thing but Spirit.

62 But to come nigher the Difficulty, it must be observed, that tho the
Fabrication of all those Parts and Organs be not absolutely necessary to the
producing any Effect, yet it is necessary to the producing of things in a
constant, regular way, according to the Laws of Nature. There are certain
general Laws, that run through the whole Chain of Natural Effects, these are
learned by the Observation and Study of Nature, and are by Men applied as well
to the framing artificial Things, for the Use and Ornament of Life, as to the
explaining the various Phenomenon, which Explication consists only in showing
the Conformity, any particular Phenomenon has to the general Laws of Nature,
or, which is the same thing, in discovering the Uniformity, there is in the
Production of natural Effects, as will be evident to whoever shall attend to
the several Instances, wherein Philosophers pretend to account for Appearances.
That there is a great and conspicuous Use in these regular, constant Methods of
working, observed by the Supreme Agent, has been shown in Sect. XXXI. and it is
no less visible, that a particular Size, Figure, Motion and Disposition of
Parts are necessary, tho not absolutely to the producing any Effect yet to the
producing it according to the Standing, Mechanical Laws of Nature. Thus, for
Instance, It cannot be denied that God, or the Intelligence that sustains and
rules the ordinary course of Things, might if He were minded to produce a
Miracle, cause all the Motions on the Dial-plate of a Watch, tho no Body had
ever made the Movements, and put them in it: But yet if he will act agreeably
to the Rules of Mechanism, by him for wise Ends established and maintained in
the Creation, it is necessary that those Actions of the Watchmaker, whereby he
makes the Movements and rightly adjusts them, precede the production of the
aforesaid Motions, as also that any disorder in them be attended with the
Perception of some corresponding Disorder, in the Movements, which being once
Corrected all is right again.

63. It may, indeed, on some Occasions be necessary, that the Author of Nature
display his overruling Power, in producing some Appearance out of the ordinary
Series of Things. Such Exceptions from the general Rules of Nature, are proper
to surprise and awe Men into an acknowledgment of the of the Divine Being: But
then they are to be used but seldom, otherwise there is a plain reason, why
they should fail of that Effect. Besides, God seems to choose the convincing
our Reason of his Attributes by the works of Nature, which discover so much
Harmony and Contrivance in their Make, and are such plain Indications of Wisdom
and Beneficence in their Author, rather than to astonish us into a belief of
his Being by anomalous and surprising Events.

64. To set this Matter in a yet clearer Light, I shall observe that what has
been objected in Sect. LX. amounts in reality to no more than this. Ideas are
not any how and at random produced, there being a certain Order and Connection
between them, like to that of Cause and Effect: There are also several
Combinations of them, made in a very Regular and Artificial Manner, which seem
like so many Instruments in the hand of Nature, that being hid as it were
behind the Scenes, have a secret Operation in producing those Appearances,
which are seen on the Theater of the World, being themselves discernible only
to the curious Eye of the Philosopher. But since one Idea cannot be the Cause
of another, to what purpose is that Connection? And since those Instruments,
being barely inefficacious Perceptions in the Mind, are not subservient to the
Production of Natural Effects; it is demanded why they are made, or, in other
Words, what reason can be assigned, why God should make us upon a close
inspection into His Works, behold so great variety of Ideas, so artfully laid
together, and so much according to Rule: It not being imaginable, that he would be
at the Expense (if one may so speak) of all that Art and Regularity to no
purpose.

65. To all which my Answer is, First, That the Connection of Ideas does not
imply the Relation of Cause and Effect, but only of a Mark or Sign with the
Thing signified. The Fire which I see, is not the Cause of the Pain I suffer
upon my approaching it, but the Mark that forewarns me of it. In like manner
the Noise that I hear is not the Effect of this or that Motion, or collision of
the ambient Bodies, but the Sign thereof. Secondly, The reason why Ideas are
formed into Machines, i. e. artificial and regular Combinations, is the same
with that for combining Letters into Words. That a few Original Ideas may be
made to signify, a great number of Effects and Actions, it is necessary they be
variously combined together: And to the end their Use be permanent and
universal, these Combinations must be made by Rule, and with wise Contrivance.
By this means abundance of Information is conveyed unto us, concerning what we
are to expect from such and such Actions, and what Methods are proper to be
taken, for the Exciting such and such Ideas: Which in effect, is all that I
conceive to be distinctly meant, when it is said that by discerning the Figure,
Texture, and Mechanism of the inward Parts of Bodies, whether Natural or
Artificial, we may attain to know the several Uses and Properties depending
thereon, or the Nature of the Thing.

66. Hence it is evident, that those Things, which under the Notion of a Cause
cooperating or concurring to the production of Effects, are altogether
inexplicable, and run us into great Absurdities, may be very naturally
explained, and have a proper and obvious Use assigned 'em, when they are
considered only as Marks, or Signs for our Information. And it is the searching
after, and endeavoring to understand this Language (if I may so call it) of
the Author of Nature, that ought to be the Employment of the Natural
Philosopher; and not the pretending to explain Things by Corporeal Causes,
which Doctrine seems to have too much estranged the Minds of Men, from that
active Principle, that supreme and wise Spirit, in whom we Live, Move, and have
our Being.

67 In the Twelfth place, it may perhaps be objected, that tho it be clear from
what has been said, that there can be no such thing as an Inert, Senseless,
Extended, Solid, Figured, Moveable Substance Existing without the Mind, such as
Philosophers describe Matter: Yet if any Man shall leave out of his Idea of
Matter, the positive Ideas of Extension, Figure, Solidity and Motion, and say
that he means only by that word, an Inert, Senseless Substance that Exists
without the Mind or unperceived, which is the Occasion of our Ideas, or at the
presence whereof God is pleased to excite Ideas in us: It does not appear, but
that Matter taken in this Sense may possibly Exist. In Answer to which I say,
First, That it seems no less Absurd to suppose a Substance without Accidents,
than it is to suppose Accidents without a Substance. But Secondly, Tho we
should grant this unknown Substance may possibly Exist, yet where can it be
supposed to be? That it Exists not in the Mind is agreed, and that it Exists
not in Place is no less certain; since all Place or Extension Exists only in
the Mind as has been already proved. It remains therefore that it Exists no
where at all.

68. Let us examine a little, the description that is here given us of Matter.
It neither acts, nor perceives, nor is perceived: For this is all that is meant
by saying it is an Inert, Senseless, Unknown Substance, which is a Definition
entirely made up of Negatives, excepting only the relative Notion of its
standing under or Supporting: But then it must be observed that it Supports
nothing at all; and how nearly this comes to the description of a nonentity, I
desire may be considered. But say you it is the unknown occasion, at the
presence of which, Ideas are Excited in us by the will of God. Now I would fain
know, how any thing can be present to us, which is neither perceivable by Sense
nor Reflection, nor capable of producing any Idea in our Minds, nor is at all
extended, nor has any Form, nor Exists in any place. The words to be present,
when thus applied, must needs be taken in some abstract and strange Meaning,
and which I am not able to comprehend.

69. Again, let us examine what is meant by Occasion: So far as I can gather
from the common Use of Language, that Word signifies, either the Agent which
produces any Effect, or else something that is observed to accompany, or go
before it, in the ordinary course of things. But when it is applied to Matter
as above described, it can be taken in neither of those Senses. For Matter is
said to be Passive and Inert, and so cannot be an Agent or Efficient Cause. It
is also unperceivable as being devoid of all Sensible Qualities, and so cannot
be the Occasion of our Perceptions in the latter Sense: As when the burning my
Finger, is said to be the Occasion of the Pain that attends it. What therefore
can be meant by calling Matter an Occasion? This Term is either used in no
Sense at all, or else in some very distant from its received Signification

70. You will perhaps say that Matter, tho it be not perceived by us, is
nevertheless perceived by GOD, to whom it is the Occasion of Exciting Ideas in
our Minds. For, say you, since we observe our Sensations to be imprinted in an
orderly and constant manner, it is but reasonable to suppose, there are certain
Constant, and Regular Occasions of their being produced. That is to say, that
there are certain permanent, and distinct parcels of Matter, corresponding to
our Ideas, which tho they do not excite them in our Minds, or any wise
immediately affect us, as being altogether Passive and Unperceivable to Us,
they are nevertheless to GOD, by whom they are Perceived, as it were so many
Occasions, to remind him when and what Ideas, to imprint on our Minds: that so
things may go on in a constant, uniform manner.

71. In answer to this I observe, that, as the Notion of Matter is here Stated,
the Question is no longer concerning the Existence of a Thing distinct from
Spirit and Idea, from Perceiving and being Perceived: But whether there are not
certain Ideas, of I know not what Sort, in the Mind of GOD, which are so many
Marks or Notes, that direct him how to produce Sensations in our Minds, in a
constant and regular Method: Much after the same manner, as a Musician is
directed by the Notes of Music, to produce that harmonious train and
composition of Sound, which is called a Tune; tho they who Hear the Music do
not Perceive the Notes, and may be entirely ignorant of them. But this Notion
of Matter (which after all is the only intelligible one that I can pick, from
what is said of unknown Occasions) seems too extravagant to deserve a
Confutation. Besides, it is in effect no Objection against what we have
advanced, viz. that there is no senseless, unperceived Substance.

72. If we follow the Light of Reason, we shall, from the constant uniform
Method of our Sensations, collect the Goodness and Wisdom of the Spirit who
excites them in our Minds. But this is all that I can see reasonably concluded
from thence. To me, I say, it is evident that the Being of a Spirit infinitely
Wise, Good, and Powerful is abundantly sufficient, to explain all the
Appearances of Nature. But as for Inert, Senseless Matter, nothing that I
perceive has any the least Connection with it, or leads to the Thoughts of it.
And I would fain see any one Explain, any the meanest Phenomenon in Nature by
it, or show any manner of Reason, tho in the lowest Rank of Probability, that
he can have for its Existence; or even make any tolerable Sense or Meaning of
that Supposition. For as to its being an Occasion, we have, I think, evidently
shown that with regard to us it is no Occasion: It remains therefore that it
must be, if at all, the Occasion to GOD of exciting Ideas in us; and what this
amounts to we have just now seen.

73. It is worth while to reflect a little, on the Motives which induced Men to
suppose the Existence of Material Substance; that so having observed the
gradual Ceasing, and Expiration of those Motives or Reasons, we may
proportionably withdraw the Assent that was grounded on them. First, therefore,
it was thought that Color, Figure, Motion, and the rest of the Sensible
Qualities or Accidents, did really Exist without the Mind; and for this reason,
it seemed needful to suppose some unthinking Substratum, or Substance wherein
they did Exist, since they could not be conceived to Exist by themselves.
Afterward, in process of time, Men being convinced that Colors, Sounds, and
the rest of the Sensible, Secondary Qualities had no Existence without the
Mind, they stripped this Substratum or material Substance of those Qualities,
leaving only the Primary Ones, Figure, Motion, etc. which they still conceived
to Exist without the Mind, and consequently, to stand in need of a material
Support. But it having been shown, that none, even of these, can possibly Exist
otherwise than in a Spirit or Mind which perceives them, it follows, that we
have no longer any reason, to suppose the being of Matter. Nay, that it is
utterly impossible there should be any such thing, so long as that Word is
taken to denote, an unthinking Substratum of Qualities or Accidents, wherein
they Exist without the Mind.

74. But tho it be allowed by the Materialists, themselves, that Matter was
thought of only for the sake of supporting Accidents; and the reason entirely
ceasing, one might expect the Mind should naturally, and without any reluctance
at all, quit the belief of what was solely grounded thereon. Yet the Prejudice
is riveted so deeply in our Thoughts, that we can scarce tell how to part with
it, and are therefore inclined, since the Thing it self is indefensible, at
least to retain the Name; which we apply to, I know not what, abstracted and
indefinite Notions of Being, Occasion, etc. tho without any show of Reason, at
least so far as I can see. For what is there, I beseech you, on our part, or
what do we perceive amongst all the Ideas, Sensations, Notions, which are
imprinted on our Minds, either by Sense or Reflection, from whence may be
inferred the Existence of an inert, thoughtless, unperceived Occasion? and on
the other hand, on the part of an All-sufficient Spirit, what can there be that
should make us believe, or even suspect, he is directed by an inert Occasion to
excite Ideas in our Minds?

75. It is a very extraordinary Instance of the force of Prejudice, and much to
be lamented, that the Mind of Man retains so great a Fondness, against all the
evidence of Reason, for a stupid, thoughtless Somewhat, by the interposition
whereof it would, as it were, skreen it self, from the Providence of God, and
remove it farther off from the Affairs of the World. But tho we do the utmost
we can, to secure the belief of Matter, tho when Reason forsakes us, we
endeavor to support our Opinion on the bare possibility of the Thing, and tho
we Indulge our selves in the full Scope, of an Imagination not regulated by
Reason, to make out that poor Possibility, yet the Up-shot of all is, that
there certain unknown Ideas in the Mind of God; for this, if any thing, is all
that I conceive to be meant by Occasion with regard to God. And this, at the
Bottom, is no longer contending for the Thing, but for the Name.

76. Whether therefore there are such Ideas in the Mind of GOD, and whether
they may be called by the name Matter I shall not dispute. But if you stick to the
Notion of an unthinking Substance, or Support of Extension, Motion, etc. then
to me it is most evidently impossible, there should be any such thing. Since it
is a plain Repugnancy, that those Qualities should Exist in or be supported by
an unperceiving Substance.

77. But say you, tho it be granted that there is no thoughtless support of
Extension, and the other Qualities or Accidents which we Perceive; yet there
may, perhaps, be some Inert, Unperceiving Substance, or Substratum of some
other Qualities, as incomprehensible to us as Colors are to a Man born Blind,
because we have not a Sense adapted to them. But if we had a new Sense, we
should possibly no more doubt of their Existence, than a Blind-man made to See
does of the Existence of Light and Colors. I answer, First, if what you mean
by the word Matter be only the unknown Support of unknown Qualities, it is no
matter whether there is such a thing or no; since it no way concerns us: And
for my part, I do not see the Advantage there is in disputing about we know not
what, and we know not why.

78. But, Secondly, if we had a new Sense it could only furnish us with new
Ideas or Sensations: And then we should have the same reason, against their
Existing in an unperceiving Substance, that has been already offered with
relation to Figure, Motion, Color, etc. Qualities, as has been shown, are
nothing else but Sensations or Ideas, which Exist only in a Mind perceiving
them; and this is true not only of the Ideas we are acquainted with at present,
but likewise of all possible Ideas whatsoever.

79. But you will insist, what if I have no reason to believe the Existence of
Matter, what if I cannot assign any use to it, or explain any thing by it, or
even conceive what is meant by that Word? Yet still it is no Contradiction to
say that Matter Exists, and that this Matter is in general a Substance, or
Occasion of Ideas; tho, indeed, to go about to unfold the meaning, or adhere to
any particular Explication of those Words, may be attended with great
Difficulties. I answer, when Words are used without a Meaning, you may put them
together as you please, without danger of running into a Contradiction. You may
say, for Example, that twice Two is equal to Seven, so long as you declare you
do not take the Words of that Proposition in their usual Acception, but for
Marks of you know not what. And by the same reason you may say, there is an
inert, thoughtless Substance without Accidents, which is the occasion of our
Ideas. And we shall understand just as much by one Proposition, as the other.

80. In the last place, you will say, What if we give up the Cause of material
Substance, and stand to it, that Matter is an unknown Somewhat, neither
Substance nor Accident, Spirit nor Idea, Inert, Thoughtless, Indivisible,
Immovable, Unextended, Existing in no Place? For, say you, Whatever may be
urged against Substance or Occasion, or any other positive or relative Notion
of Matter has no place at all, so long as this negative Definition of Matter
is adhered to. I answer you may, if so it shall seem good, use the word Matter
in the same Sense, that other Men use Nothing, and so make those Terms
convertible in your Style. For after all, this is what appears to me to be the
Result of that Difinition, the Parts whereof when I consider with Attention,
either collectively, or separate from each other, I do not find that there is
any kind of Effect or Impression made on my Mind, different from what is
excited by term Nothing.

81. Upon this, you will Reply that in the foresaid Definition, is included, what
does sufficiently distinguish it from nothing, the positive, abstract Idea of
Quiddity, Entity, or Existence. I own indeed, that those who pretend to the
Faculty of framing Abstract, General Ideas, do talk as if they had such an
Idea, which is, say they, the most abstract and general Notion of all, that is,
to me, the most Incomprehensible of all Others. That there are a great variety
of Spirits of different Orders and Capacities, whose Faculties, both in Number
and Extent, are far exceeding those the Author of my Being has bestowed on me,
I see no reason to deny. And for me, to pretend to determine, by my own few,
stinted, narrow Inlets of Perception, what Ideas the inexhaustible Power of the
SUPREME SPIRIT may Imprint upon 'em, were certainly the utmost Folly and
Presumption. Since there may be, for ought that I know, innumerable sorts of
Ideas or Sensations, as different from one another, and from all that I have
perceived, as Colors are from Sounds. But how ready soever I may be, to
acknowledge the Scantiness of my Comprehension, with regard to the endless
variety of Spirits and Ideas, that may possibly Exist, yet for any one to
pretend to a Notion of Entity or Existence, abstracted from Spirit and Idea,
from Perceiving and being Perceived, is, I suspect, a downright Repugnancy nnd
Trifling with Words. It remains that we consider the Objections, which may
possibly be made on the part of Religion.

82. Some there are who think, that tho the Arguments for the real Existence of
Bodies, which are drawn from Reason, be allowed not to amount to Demonstration,
yet the Holy Scriptures are so clear in the Point, as will sufficiently
convince every good Christian, that Bodies do really Exist, and are something
more than mere Ideas; there being in Holy Writ innumerable Facts related, which
evidently suppose the reality of Timber, and Stone, Mountains, and Rivers, and
Cities, and Human Bodies, etc. To which I Answer, that no sort of Writings,
whatever Sacred or Profane, which use those and the like Words in the Vulgar
Acceptance, or so as to have a meaning in 'em, are in danger of having their
Truth called in question by our Doctrine. That all those Things do really
Exist, that there are Bodies, even Corporeal Substances, when taken in the
Vulgar Sense, has been shown to be agreeable to our Principles: And the
difference betwixt Things and Ideas, Realities and Chimeras, has been
distinctly Explained, vid. Sect. XXIX, XXX, XXXIII, XXXVI, etc. And I do not
think, that either what Philosophers call Matter, or the Existence of Objects
without the Mind is any where mentioned in Scripture.

83. Again, whether there be, or be not External Things, it is agreed on all
hands, that the proper Use of Words, is the marking our Conceptions, or Things
only as they are Known and Perceived by us; whence it plainly follows, that in
the Tenants we have laid down, there is nothing inconsistent with the right Use
and Significancy of Language and that Discourse of what kind soever, so far as
it is Intelligible, remains Undisturbed. But all this seems so very manifest,
from what has been largely set forth in the Premises, that it is needless to
insist any farther on it.

84. But it will be urged, that Miracles do, at least, lose much of their
Stress and Import, by our Principles. What must we think of Moses's Rod, was it
not really turned into a Serpent, or was there only a Change of Ideas in the
Minds of the Spectators? And can it be supposed, that our Savior did no more
at the Marriage Feast in Cana, than impose on the Sight, and Smell, and Taste
of the Guests, so as to create in them the Appearance or Idea only of Wine? The
same may be said of all other Miracles: Which, in consequence of the foregoing
Principles, must be looked upon only as so many Cheats, or Illusions of Fancy.
To this I Reply, that the Rod was changed into a real Serpent, and the Water
into real Wine. That this does not, in the least, contradict what I have
elsewhere said, will be evident from Sect. XXXIV, and XXXV. But this Business
of Real and Imaginary has been already so plainly and fully Explained, and so
often Referred to, and the Difficulties about it are so easily Answered from
what has gone before, that it were an Affront to the Reader's Understanding, to
resume the Explication of it in this place. I shall only observe, that if at
Table all who were present should See, and Smell, and Taste, and Drink Wine,
and find the effects of it, with me there could be no doubt of it is Reality. So
that, at Bottom, the Scruple concerning real Miracles has no place at all on
ours, but only on the received Principles, and consequently makes rather for,
than against what has been said.

85. Having done with the Objections, which I endeavored to propose in the
clearest Light, and gave them all the Force and Weight I could, we proceed in
the next place to take a view of our Tenants in their Consequences. Some of
these appear at first Sight, as that several Difficult and obscure Questions,
on which abundance of Speculation has been thrown away, are entirely banished
from Philosophy. Whether Corporeal Substance can think: Whether Matter be
infinitely Divisible: And how it Operates on Spirit; these and the like
Inquiries have given infinite Amusement to Philosophers, in all Ages. But
depending on the Existence of Matter, they have no longer any place on our
Principles. Many other Advantages there are, as well with regard to Religion as
the Sciences, which it is easy for any one to deduce, from what has been
premised. But this will appear more plainly in the Sequel.

86. From the Principles we have laid down, it follows, Human Knowledge many
naturally be reduced to two Heads, that of Ideas, and that of Spirits. Of each
of these I shall treat in Order. And first as to Ideas or Unthinking Things,
our Knowledge of these has been very much obscured, and confounded, and we have
been led into very dangerous Errors, by supposing a twofold Existence of the
Objects of Sense, the one Intelligible, or in the Mind, the other Real and
without the Mind: Whereby Unthinking Things are thought, to have a natural
Subsistence of their own, distinct from being perceived by Spirits. This which,
if I mistake not, has been shown to be a most groundless and absurd Notion, is
the very Root of Skepticism; for so long as Men thought that Real Things
subsisted without the Mind, and that their Knowledge was only so far forth Real
as it was conformable to real Things, it follows, they could not be certain,
that they had any real Knowledge at all. For how can it be known, that the
Things which are Perceived, are conformable to those which are not Perceived,
or Exist without the Mind?

87. Color, Figure, Motion, Extension and the like, considered only as so many
Sensations in the Mind, are perfectly known, there being nothing in them which
is not Perceived. But if they are looked on as Notes or Images, refered to
Things or Archetypes Existing without the Mind, then are we involved all in
Skepticism. We see only the Appearances, and not the real Qualities of Things.
What may be the Extension, Figure, or Motion of any Thing really and
absolutely, or in it self, its impossible for us to know, but only the
proportion or relation they bear to our Senses. Things remaining the same, our
Ideas vary, and which of them, or even whether any of them at all, represent
the true Quality really Existing in the Thing, it is out of our Reach to
determine. So that, for ought we know, all we See, Hear, and Feel, may be only
Phantome and vain Chimera, and not at all agree with the Real Things, Existing
in Rerum Natura. All this Skeptical Cant follows, from our supposing a
difference between Things and Ideas, and that the former have a Subsistence
without the Mind, or Unperceived. It were easy to dilate on this Subject, and
show how the Arguments urged by Skeptics in all Ages, depend on the supposition
of External Objects. But this is too obvious to need being insisted on.

88. So long as we attribute a real Existence to Unthinking Things, distinct
from their being perceived, it is not only impossible, for us to know with
evidence the Nature of any real, unthinking Being, but even that it Exists.
Hence it is, that we see Philosophers distrust their Senses, and doubt of the
Existence of Heaven and Earth, of every thing they See or Feel, even of their
own Bodies. And after all their laboring and struggle of Thought, they are
forced to own, we cannot attain to any self-evident, or demonstrative Knowledge,
of the Existence of sensible Things. But all this Doubtfulness, which so
Bewilders and Confounds the Mind, and makes Philosophy ridiculous in the Eyes
of the World, vanishes if we annex a meaning to our Words, and not amuse our
selves with the terms Absolute, External, Exist, etc. signifying we know not
what. For my part, I can as well doubt of my own Being, as of the Being of
those things, which I actually perceive by Sense: It being a manifest
Contradiction, that any sensible Object should be immediately perceived by
Sight or Touch, and, at the same time, have no Existence in Nature, since the
very Existence of an unthinking Being, consists in being perceived.

89. Nothing seems of more Importance, toward Erecting a firm System of sound
and real Knowledge, which may be Proof against the Assaults of Skepticism, than
to lay the beginning in a distinct Explication, of what is meant by Thing,
Reality, Existence: For in vain shall we Dispute, concerning the real Existence
of Things, or pretend to any Knowledge thereof, so long as we have not fixed the
meaning of those Words. Thing or Being is the most general Name of all, it
comprehends under it two Kinds entirely distinct and heterogeneous, and which
have nothing common but the Name, viz. Spirits and Ideas. The former are
Active, Indivisible, Incorruptible Substances: The latter are Inert, Fleeting,
Perishable Passions, or Dependent Beings, which subsist not by themselves, but
are supported by, or Exist in Minds or Spiritual Substances.

90. Ideas imprinted on the Senses are real Things, or do really Exist, this we
do not deny, but we deny they can subsist without the Minds which perceive
them, or that they are Resemblances of any Archetypes Existing without the
Mind: Since the very Being of a Sensation or Idea consists in being perceived,
and an Idea can be like nothing but an Idea. Again the Things perceived by
Sense may be termed External, with regard to their Origin, in that they are
not generated from within, by the Mind it self, but imprinted by a Spirit
distinct from that which perceives them. Sensible Objects may likewise be said
to be without the Mind, in another sense, namely when they Exist in some other
Mind. Thus when I shut my Eyes, the Things I saw may still Exist, but it must
be in another Mind.

91. It were a mistake to think, that what is here said derogates in the least,
from the Reality of Things. It is acknowleg'd on the received Principles, that
Extension, Motion, and in a Word, all sensible Qualities have need of a
Support, as not being able to subsist by themselves. But the Objects perceived
by Sense, are allowed to be nothing but Combinations of those Qualities, and
consequently cannot subsist by themselves. Thus far it is agreed on all hands.
So that in denying the Things perceived by Sense, an Existence independent of a
Substance, or Support wherein they may Exist, we detract nothing from the
received Opinion of their Reality, and are guilty of no Innovation in that
respect. All the Difference is, that according to us the Unthinking Beings
perceived by Sense, have no Existence distinct from being Perceived, and cannot
therefore Exist in any other Substance, than those Unextended, Indivisible
Substances, or Spirits, which act, and think, and perceive them: Whereas
Philosophers vulgarly hold, the Sensible Qualities do Exist in an Inert,
Extended, Unperceiving Substance, which they call Matter, to which they
attribute a Natural Subsistence, exterior to all Thinking Beings, or distinct
from being perceived by any Mind whatsoever, even the Eternal Mind of the
CREATOR, wherein they suppose only Ideas of the Corporeal Substances created by
him. If indeed they allow them to be at all Created.

92. For as we have shown the Doctrine of Matter or Corporeal Substance, to
have been the main Pillar and Support of Skepticism, so likewise upon the same
Foundation have been raised all the Impious Schemes of Atheism and Irreligion.
Nay so great a difficulty has it been thought, to conceive Matter produced out
of Nothing, that the most Celebrated among the Ancient Philosophers, even of
these who maintained the Being of a GOD, have thought Matter to be Uncreated
and Coeternal with him. How great a Friend material Substance has been to
Atheists in all Ages, were needless to relate. All their monstrous Systems have
so visible and necessary a dependence on it, that when this Cornerstone is
once removed, the whole Fabric cannot choose but fall to the Ground. insomuch
that it is no longer worth while, to bestow a particular Consideration on the
Absurdities of every wretched Sect of Atheists.

93. That Impious and Profane Persons, should readily fall in with those
Systems, which favor their Inclinations, by deriding Immaterial Substance, and
supposing the Soul to be Divisible, and subject to Corruption as the Body,
which exclude all Freedom, Intelligence, and Design from the Formation of
Things, and instead thereof make a Self-existent, Stupid, Unthinking Substance
the Root and Origin of all Beings. That they should hearken to those who deny
a Providence, or Inspection of a Superior Mind over the Affairs of the World,
attributing the whole Series of Events either to Blind Chance, or Fatal
Necessity arising from the Impulse of one Body on another. All this is very
natural. And on the other hand, when Men of better Principles observe the
Enemies of Religion lay so great a Stress on Vnthinking Matter; and all of them
use so much Industry and Artifice to reduce every thing to it; methinks they
should Rejoice to see them Deprived of their grand Support, and driven from
that only Fortress, without which your Epicureans, Hobbists, and the like, have
not even the Shadow of a Pretense, but become the most cheap and easy Triumph
in the World.

94. The Existence of Matter, or Bodies unperceived, has not only been the main
Support of Atheists and Fatalists, but on the Principle does Idolatry likewise
in all its various Forms, depend. Did Men but consider that the Sun, Moon, and
Stars and every other Object of the Senses, are only so many Sensations in
their Minds, which have no other Existence but barely being Perceived:
Doubtless they would never fall down, and worship their own Ideas. But rather
address their Homage to that ETERNAL INVISIBLE MIND which produces and sustains
all Things.

95. The same absurd Principle, by mingling it self with the Articles of our
Faith, has occasioned no small Difficulties to Christians. For Example, about
the Resurrection, how many Scruples and Objections have been raised by
Socinians and Others? But do not the most plausible of them depend on the
supposition, that a Body is denominated the same, with regard not to the Form
or that which is perceived by Sense, but the Material Substance, which remains
the same under several Forms? Take away this Material Substance, about the
Identity whereof all the Dispute is, and mean by Body what every plain,
ordinary Person means by that Word, viz. that which is immediately Seen and
Felt, which is only a Combination of sensible Qualities, or Ideas: And then
their most unanswerable Objections come to nothing.

96. Matter being once expelled out of Nature, drags with it so many Skeptical
and Impious Notions, such an incredible number of Disputes and puzling
Questions, which have been Thorns in the sides of Divines, as well as
Philosophers, and made so much fruitless Work for Mankind; that if the
Arguments we have produced against it, are not found equal to Demonstration (as
to me they evidently seem) yet I am sure all Friends to Knowledge, Peace, and
Religion have reason to wish they were.

97. Beside the external Existence of the Objects of Perception, another great
Source of Errors and Difficulties, with regard to Ideal Knowledge, is the
Doctrine of Abstract Ideas, such as it has been set forth in the Introduction.
The plainest things in the World, those we are most intimately acquainted with,
and perfectly know, when they are considered in an Abstract way, appear
strangely difficult and incomprehensible. Time, Place, and Motion, taken in
particular, or concrete, are what every Body knows; but having passed through the
Hands of a Metaphysician, they become too Abstract and Fine, to be apprehended
by Men of ordinary Sense. Bid your Servant meet you at such a Time, in such a
Place, and he shall never stay to deliberate on the meaning of those Words: In
conceiving that particular Time and Place, or the Motion by which he is to get
thither, he finds not the least Difficulty. But if Time be taken, exclusive of
all those particular Actions and Ideas that diversifie the Day, merely for the
Continuation of Existence, or Duration in Abstract, then it will perhaps Gravel
even a Philosopher to comprehend it.

98. For my own part, whenever I attempt to frame a simple Idea of Time,
abstracted from the succession of Ideas in my Mind, which flows uniformly, and
is participated by all Beings, I am lost and embrangled in inextricable
Difficulties. I have no Notion of it at all, only I hear others say, it is
infinitely Divisible, and speak of it in such a manner, as leads me to harbor
odd Thoughts of my Existence: Since that Doctrine lays one under an absolute
necessity, of thinking, either that he passes away innumerable Ages without a
Thought, or else that he is annihilated every moment of his Life: Both which
seem equally absurd. Time therefore being nothing, abstracted from the
Successon of Ideas in our Minds, it follows, that the Duration of any Finite
Spirit must be estimated, by the Number of Ideas or Actions succeeding each
other, in that same Spirit or Mind. Hence it is a plain Consequence that, the
Soul always thinks: And in truth whoever shall go about to divide in his
Thoughts, or abstract the Existence of a Spirit from its Cogitation will, I
believe, find it no easy Task.

99. So likewise, when we attempt to abstract Extension and Motion, from all
other Qualities, and consider them by themselves,, we presently lose sight of
'em, and run into great Extravagancies. Hence spring those odd Paradoxes, that
the Fire is not Hot, nor the Wall White, etc. or that Heat and Color are in
the Objects, nothing but Figure and Motion. All which depend on a twofold
Abstraction: First it is supposed that Extension, for example, may be
abstracted from all other sensible Qualities; and Secondly, that the Entity of
Extension, may be abstracted from its being Perceived. But whoever shall
reflect, and take care to understand what he says, will, if I mistake not,
acknowledge that all sensible Qualities are alike Sensations, and alike Real,
that where the Extension is, there is the Color too, i. e. in his Mind, and
that their Archetypes, can exist only in some other Mind. And that the Objects
of Sense are nothing but those Sensations combined, blended or (if one may so
speak) concreted together: None of all which can be supposed to Exist
unperceived. And that, consequently, the Wall is as truly White, as it is
Extended, and in the same Sense.

100. What it is for a Man to be Happy, or an Object Good, every one may think
he knows. But to frame an Abstract Idea of Happiness, prescinded from all
particular Pleasure, or of Goodness, from every thing that is Good, this is
what few can pretend to. So likewise, a Man may be Just and Virtuous, without
having precise Ideas of Justice and Virtue. The opinion that those and the like
Words, stand for General Notions abstracted from all particular Persons and
Actions, seems to have rendered Morality very difficult, and the Study thereof
of small use to Mankind. And, in effect, one may make a great progress in
School-Ethics, without ever being the wiser or better Man for it, or knowing
how to behave himself in the affairs of Life, more to the Advantage of himself,
or his Neighbors, than he did before. This Hint may suffice, to let any one
see, the Doctrine of Abstraction, has not a little contributed, toward
spoiling the most useful Parts of Knowledge.

101. The two great Provinces of Speculative Science, conversant about Ideas
received from Sense, are Natural Philosophy and Mathematics; with regard to
each of these I shall make some Observations. And first I shall say somewhat of
Natural Philosophy. On this Subject it is, that the Skeptics triumph: All that
stock of Arguments they produce to depreciate our Faculties, and make Mankind
appear Ignorant and Low, are drawn principally from this Head, namely, that we
are under an Invincible Blindness, as to the True and Real Nature of Things.
This they exaggerate, and love to enlarge on. We are miserably Banter'd, say
they, by our Senses, and amused only with the Outside and Show of Things. The
real Essence, the internal Qualities, and Constitution of every the meanest
Object, is hid from our view; something there is, in every drop of Water, every
grain of Sand, which it is beyond the Power of Human Understanding, to Fathom
or Comprehend. But it is evident from what has been shown, that all this
Complaint is groundless, and that we are influenced by False Principles, to
that degree as to mistrust our Senses, and think we know nothing, of those
things which we perfectly comprehend.

102. One great Inducement, to our pronouncing our selves Ignorant of the
Nature of Things, is, the current Opinion that every thing includes within it
self, the Cause of its Properties: Or that there is in each Object, an inward
Essence, which is the Source whence its discernible Qualities flow, and whereon
they depend. Some have pretended to account for Appearances by Occult
Qualities, but of late they are mostly resolved into Mechanical Causes. viz.
the Figure, Motion, Weight, etc. of insensible Particles: Whereas, in truth,
there is no other Agent or Efficient Cause than Spirit, it being evident, that
Motion, as well as all other Ideas, is perfectly Inert. vid. Sect. XXV. Hence,
to endeavor to explain the production of Colors, Sounds, etc. by Figure,
Motion, Magnitude and the like, must needs be labor in vain. And accordingly,
we see the Attempts of that Kind, are not at all satisfactory. Which may be
said, in general, of those Instances, wherein one Idea or Quality is assigned
for the Cause of another. I need not say, how many Hypotheses and Speculations
are left out, and how much the study of Nature is Abridged by this Doctrine.

103. The great Mechanical Principle now in Vogue is Attraction. That a Stone
falls to the Earth, or the Sea swells toward the Moon, may to some appear
sufficiently explained thereby. But how are we Enlightened by being told this
is done by Attraction? Is it that, that Word signifies the manner of the
Tendency, and that it is by the mutual drawing of Bodies, instead of their
being impelled or protruded toward each other? But nothing is determined of
the Manner or Action, and it may as truly (for ought we know) be termed Impulse
or Protrusion as Attraction. Again, the Parts of Steel we see cohere firmly
together, and this also is accounted for by Attraction; but in this, as in the
other Instances, I do not perceive, that any thing is signified besides the
Effect it self; for as to the manner of the Action whereby it is produced, or
the Cause which produces it, these are not so much as aimed at.

104. Indeed, if we take a view of the several Phenomenon, and compare them
together, we may observe some likeness and conformity between them. For
Example, in the Falling of a Stone to the Ground, In the Rising of the Sea
toward the Moon, in Cohesion, Crystallization, etc. there is something alike,
namely an Union or Mutual Approach of Bodies. So that any one of these, or the
like Phenomenon, may not seem Strange, or Surprising, to a Man woh has nicely
observed and compared the Effects of Nature. For that only is thought so which
is uncommon, or a thing by it self, and out of the ordinary Course of our
Observation. That Bodies should tend toward the Center of the Earth, is not
thought strange, because it is what we perceive every moment of our Lives. But
that they should have a like Gravitation toward the Center of the Moon, may
seem odd and unaccountable to most Men, because it is discerned only in the
Tides. But a Philosopher, whose Thoughts take in a larger compass of Nature,
having observed a certain similitude of Appearances, as well in the Heavens as
the Earth, that argue innumerable Bodies to have a mutual Tendency toward each
other, which he denotes by the general Name Attraction, whatever can be reduced
to that he thinks justly accounted for. Thus he explains the Tides, by the
Attraction of the Terraqueous Globe toward the Moon, which to him does not
appear odd or anomalous, but only a particular Example of a general Rule or Law
of Nature.

105. If, therefore, we consider the Difference there is betwixt Natural
Philosophers, and other Men, with regard to their Knowledge of the Phenomenon,
we shall find it consists, not in an exacter Knowledge of the efficient Cause
that produces them, for that can be no other than the Will of a Spirit, but
only in a greater Largeness of Comprehension, whereby Analogies, Harmonies, and
Agreements are discovered in the Works of Nature, and the particular Effects
explained, i. e. reduced to general Rules, vid. Sect. LXII. which Rules
grounded on the Analogy, and Uniformness observed in the Production of Natural
Effects, are most agreeable, and sought after by the Mind, for that they extend
our Prospect beyond what is present, and near to us, and enable us to make very
probable Conjectures, touching Things that may have happened at very great
distances of Time and Place, as well as to predict Things to come; which sort
of Endeavor toward Omniscience, is much affected by the Mind.

106. But we should proceed warily in such Things, for we are apt to lay too
great a Stress on Analogies, and to the prejudice of Truth, humor that
Eagerness of the Mind, whereby it is carried to extend its Knowledge into
general Theoremes. For Example, In the business of Gravitation, or mutual
Attraction, because it appears in many Instances, some are straightway for
pronouncing it Universal; and that to Attract, and be Attracted by, every other
Body is an Essential Quality, inherent in all Bodies whatsoever. Whereas, its
evident the Fixed Stars have no such Tendency toward each other; and so far is
that Gravitation, from being Essential to Bodies, that, in some Instances a
quite contrary Principle seems to show it self: As in the Perpendicular Growth
of Plants, and the Elasticity of the Air. There is nothing Necessary or
Essential in the Case, but it depends entirely on the Will of the Governing
Spirit, who causes certain Bodies to cleave together, or tend toward each
other, according to various Laws; whilst he keeps others at a fixed Distance;
and to some he gives a quite contrary Tendency to fly asunder, just, as he sees
convenient.

107. After what has been premised, I think we may lay down the following
Conclusions. First, It Is plain, Philosophers amuse themselves in vain, when
they inquire for any Natural, Efficient Cause, distinct from a Mind or Spirit.
Secondly, Considering the whole Creation is the Workmanship of a Wise and Good
Agent, it should seem to become Philosophers, to employ their Thoughts
(contrary to what some hold) about the Final Causes of Things: For besides that
this would prove a very pleasing Entertainment to the Mind, it might be of
great Advantage, in that it not only discovers to us the Attributes of the
CREATOR, but may also direct us in several Instances to the proper Uses and
Applications of Things; and I must confess, I see no reason, why pointing out
the various Ends, to which Natural Things are adapted, and for which they were
originally, with unspeakable Wisdom, contrived, should not be thought one good
way of accounting for them, and altogether worthy a Philosopher. Thirdly, from
what has been premised no reason can be drawn, why the History of Nature should
not still be studied, and Observations and Experiments made, which, that they
are of use to Mankind, and enable us to draw any general Conclusions, is not
the Result of any immutable Habitudes, or Relations between Things themselves,
but only of GOD'S Goodness and Kindness to Men, in the Administration of the
World. vid. Sect. XXX and XXXI. Fourthly, By a diligent Observation of the
Phenomenon within our View, we may discover the general Laws of Nature, and
from them deduce the other Phenomenon, I do not say Demonstrate; for all
Deductions of that kind, depend on a Supposition that the Author of Nature
always operates uniformly, and in a constant observance of those Rules, we take
for Principles: Which we cannot evidently know.

108. It appears from Sect. LXVI, etc. that the steady, consistent Methods of
Nature, may not unfitly be Styled the Language of its Author, whereby he
discovers his Attributes to our View, and directs us how to act for the
Convenience and Felicity of Life. And to me, those Men who frame General Rules
from the Phenomenon, and afterward derive the Phenomenon from those Rules,
seem to be Grammarians, and their Art the Grammar of Nature. Two ways there are
of Learning a Language, either by Rule or by Practice: A Man may be well read
in the Language of of Nature, without understanding the Grammar of it, or being
able to say, by what Rule a Thing is so or so. And as it is very possible to
Write Improperly, through too strict an Observance of General Grammar-rules: So
in Arguing from General Laws of Nature, it is not impossible we may stretch the
Analogy too far, and by that means run into Mistakes.

109. To carry on the resemblance, as in reading other Books, a Wise Man will
choose to fix his Thoughts, on the Sense and apply it to Use, rather than lay
them out in Grammatical Remarks on the Language; so in perusing the Volume of
Nature, methinks it is beneath the Dignity of the Mind, to affect an Exactness,
in reducing each particular Phenomenon to general Rules, or show how it
follows from them. We should propose to our selves nobler Views, namely to
recreate and exalt the Mind, with a prospect of the Beauty, Order, Extent, and
Variety of Natural Things: Hence, by proper Inferences, to enlarge our Notions
of the Grandeur, Wisdom, and Beneficence of the CREATOR: And lastly, to make
the several Parts of the Creation, so far as in us lies, subservient to the
Ends they were designed for, GOD'S Glory, and the Sustentation and Comfort of
our Selves and Fellow Creatures.

110. The best Grammar of the kind we are speaking of, will be easily
acknowleg'd to be a Treatise of Mechanics, demonstrated and applied to Nature,
by a Philosopher of a Neighboring Nation whom all the World Admire. I shall
not take upon me to make Remarks, on the Performance of that Extraordinary
Person: Only some Things he has advanced, so directly opposite to the Doctrine
we have hitherto laid down, that we should be wanting, in the regard due to the
Authority of so great a Man, did we not take some notice of them. In the
Entrance of that justly admired Treatise, Time, Space and Motion, are
distinguished into Absolute and Relative, True and Apparent, Mathematical and
Vulgar: Which Distinction, as it is at large explained by the Author, does
suppose those Quantities to have an Existence without the Mind: And that they
are ordinarily conceived with relation to sensible Things, to which
nevertheless, in their own Nature, they bear no Relation at all.

111. As for Time, as it is there taken in an absolute or abstracted Sense, for
the Duration or Perseverance of the Existence of Things, I have nothing more to
add concerning it, after what has been already said, on that Subject. For the
rest, this Celebrated Author holds there is an Absolute Space, which, being
unperceivable to Sense, remains in it self similar and immovable: And Relative
Space to be the measure thereof, which being moveable, and defined by its
Situation in respect of Sensible Bodies, is vulgarly taken for Immovable
Space. Place he Defines, to be that Part of Space which is occupied by any
Body. And according as the Space is Absolute or Relative, so also is the Place.
Absolute Motion is said to be the Translation of a Body, from Absolute Place to
Absolute Place, as Relative Motion is, from one Relative Place to another. Now
because the Parts of Absolute Space, do not fall under our Senses, instead of
them we are obliged to use their Sensible Measures: And so define both Place
and Motion with respect to Bodies, which we regard as immovable. But it is
said, in Philosophical Matters we must Abstract from our Senses, since it may
be, that none of those Bodies, which seem to be quiescent, are truly so: And
the same thing which is moved Relatively, may be really at rest. As likewise
one and the same Body may be in Relative Rest and Motion, or even moved with
contrary Relative Motions, At the same time, according as its place is
variously defined. All which Ambiguity is to be found in the apparent Motions,
but not at all in the true or absolute, which should therefore he alone
regarded in Philosophy. And the True, we are told, are distinguished from
Apparent or Relative Motions, by the following Properties. First, In True or
Absolute Motion, all Parts which preserve the same Position with respect to the
Whole, partake of the Motions of the Whole. Secondly, The Place being moved,
that which is placed therein is also moved: So that a Body moving in a place
which is in Motion, does participate the Motion of its Place. Thirdly, True
Motion is never generated or changed, otherwise then by Force impressed on the
Body it self. Fourthly, True Motion is always changed, by Force impressed on
the Body moved. Fifthly, In Circular Motion barely Relative, there is no
Centrifugal Force, which nevertheless in that which is True or Absolute, is
proportional to the Quantity of Motion.

112. But notwithstanding what has been said, I must confess, it does not
appear to me, that there can be any Motion other than Relative, So that to
conceive Motion, there must be at least conceived two Bodies, whereof the
Distance or position in regard to each other is varied. Hence if there was one
only Body in being, it could not possibly be moved. This to me seems very
evident, in that the Idea I have of Motion does necessarily involve relation
it. Whether others can conceive it otherwise, a little Attention may satisfy
them.

113. But though in every Motion, it be necessary to conceive more Bodies than
one, yet it may be that one only is moved, namely that on which the Force
causing the change, in the Distance or Situation of the Bodies, is impressed.
For however some may define Relative Motion, so as to term that Body moved,
which changes its Distance from some other Body, whether the Force causing that
Change were impressed on it, or no: Yet I cannot assent to this, for since we
are told, Relative Motion is that which is perceived by Sense, and regarded in
the ordinary Affairs of Life, it follows that every Man of common Sense knows
what it is, as well as the best Philosopher: Now I ask any one, whether in his
Sense of Motion, as he walks along the Streets, the Stones he passes over may
be said to move, because they change Distance with his Feet? To me it appears,
that tho Motion includes a Relation of one thing to another, yet it is not
necessary, that each term of the Relation be denominated from it. As a Man may
think of somewhat which does not think, so a Body may be moved to, or from,
another Body which which is not, therefore, it self in Motion, I mean Relative
Motion, for other I am not able to conceive.

114. As the Place happens to be variously defined, the Motion which is related
to it varies. A Man in a Ship may be said to be Quiescent, with relation to the
sides of the Vessel, and yet move, with relation to the Land. Or he may move
Eastward in respect of the one, and Westward in respect of the other. In the
common Affairs of Life, Men never go beyond the Earth, to define the place of
any Body: And what is quiescent in respect of that, is accounted absolutely to
be so. But Philosophers, who have a greater Extent of Thought, and juster
Notions of the System of Things, discover even the Earth it self to be moved.
In order therefore to fix their Notions, they seem to conceive the Corporeal
World as Finite, and the utmost, unmoved Walls or Shell thereof to be the
Place, whereby they estimate True Motions. If we sound our own Conceptions, I
believe we may find all the Absolute Motion we can frame an Idea of, to be at
Bottom no other than Relative Motion thus defined. For as I have already said,
absolute Motion exclusive of all external Relation is incomprehensible: And to
this kind of Relative Motion, all the abovementioned Properties, Causes, and
Effects ascribed to Absolute Motion will, if I mistake not, be found to agree.
As to what is said of the Centifugal Force, that it does not at all belong to
Circular, Relative Motion: I do not see how this follows from the Experiment
which is brought to prove it. See Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica,
p. 9. in Schol. Def. VIII. For the Water in the Vessel, at that time wherein it
is said to have the greatest Relative, Circular Motion, has, I think, no Motion
at all: As is plain from the foregoing Section.

115. For, to denominate a Body Moved, it is requisite, first, that it change
its Distance or Situation with regard to some other Body, Secondly, that the
force occasioning that Change be impressed on it. If either of these be
wanting, I do not think that agreeably to the Sense of Mankind, or the
Propriety of Language, a Body can be said to be in Motion. I grant, indeed,
that it is possible for us to think a Body, which we see change its Distance
from some other, to be moved, though it have no force impressed on it, (in which
Sense there may be apparent Motion,) but then it is, because the Force causing
the change of Distance, is imagined by us to be impressed on that Body thought
to move. Which, indeed, shows we are capable of mistaking a thing to be in
Motion which is not, but does not prove that, in the common acceptance of
Motion, a Body is moved merely because it changes Distance from another; since
as soon as we are undeceived, and find that the moving Force was not
communicated to it, we no longer hold it to be moved. So on the other hand,
when one only Body (the Parts whereof preserve a given Position between
themselves) is imagined to Exist; some there are who think that it can be moved
all manner of ways, though without any change of Distance or Situation to any
other Bodies; which we should not deny, if they meant only that it might have
an impressed Force, which, upon the bare creation of other Bodies, would
produce a Motion of any certain Quantity and Determination. But that an actual
Motion (distinct from the impressed Force, or Power productive of Change of
Place in case there were Bodies present whereby to define it) can Exist in such
a single Body, I must confess I am not able to comprehend.

116. From what has been said, it follows, that the Philosophic Consideration
of Motion, does not imply the being of an Absolute Space, distinct from that
which is perceived by Sense, and related to Bodies: Which that it cannot Exist
without the Mind, is clear upon the same Principles, that demonstrate the like
of all other Objects of Sense. And, perhaps, if we inquire narrowly into the
Matter, we shall find we cannot even frame an Idea of Pure Space, exclusive of
all Body. This I must confess, is above my Capacity, as being a most Abstract
Idea. When I excite a Motion in some part of my Body, if it be Free or without
Resistance, I say there is Space: But if I find a Resistance, then I say there
is Body: and in proportion as the Resistance to Motion is lesser or greater, I
say the Space is more or less Pure. So that when I speak of pure or empty
Space, it is not to be supposed, that the Word Space stands for an Idea
distinct from, or conceivable without Body and Motion. Though indeed, we are apt
to think, every Noun Substantive stands for a distinct Idea, that may be
separated from all others: Which has occasioned infinite Mistakes. When
therefore supposing all the World to be Annihilated besides my own Body, I say
there still remains Pure Space: Thereby nothing else is meant, but only that I
conceive it possible, for the Limbs of my Body to be moved on all sides,
without the least Resistance: But if that too were Annihilated, then there
could be no Motion, and consequently no Space. Some, perhaps, may think the
Sense of Seeing does furnish 'em with the Idea of Pure Space; but it is plain
from what we have elsewhere shown, that the Ideas of Space and Distance are not
obtained by that Sense. See the Essay concerning Vision.

117. What is here laid down seems to put an end, to all those Disputes, and
Difficulties, that have sprung up amongst the Learned concerning the nature of
Pure Space. But the chief Advantage arising from it, is, that we are freed from
that dangerous Dilemma, to which several, who have employed their Thoughts on
that Subject, imagine themselves reduced. viz. of thinking either that Real
Space is GOD, or else that there is something beside GOD which is Eternal,
Uncreated, Infinite, Indivisible, Immutable, etc. Both which may justly be
thought pernicious and absurd Notions. It is certain that not a few Divines, as
well as Philosophers of great Note, have, from the Difficulty they found in
conceiving, either Limits or Annihilation of Space, concluded it must be
Divine. And some of late, have set themselves particularly to show, the
Incommunicable Attributes of GOD agree to it. Which Doctrine, how unworthy
soever it may seem of the Divine Nature, yet, I must confess, I do not See how
we can get clear of it, so long as we adhere to the received Opinions.

118. Hitherto of Natural Philosophy: We come now to make some Inquiry
concerning that other great Branch of Speculative Knowledge, viz. Mathematics.
These, how Celebrated soever they may be, for their clearness and certainty of
Demonstration, which is hardly any where else to be found, cannot nevertheless
be supposed altogether free from Mistakes, if so be that in their Principles
there lurks some secret Error, which is common to the Professors of those
Sciences with the rest of Mankind. Mathematicians, though they deduce their
Theorems from a great Height of Evidence, yet their first Principles are
limited by the consideration of Quantity: And they do not ascend into any
Inquiry concerning those Transcendental Maxims, which influence all the
particular Sciences, each Part whereof, Mathematics not excepted, does
consequently participate of the Errors involved in them. That the Principles
laid down by Mathematicians are true, and their way of Deduction from those
Principles clear and incontestable, we do not deny. But we hold, there may be
certain Erroneous Maxims of greater Extent than the Object of Mathematics, and,
for that reason, not expressly mentioned, though tacitly supposed throughout the
whole progress of that Science; and that the ill effects of those secret,
unexamin'd Errors are diffused through all the Branches thereof. To be plain, we
suspect the Mathematicians are no less deeply concerned than other Men, in the
Errors arising from the Doctrine of Abstract, General Ideas, and the Existence
of Objects without the Mind.

119. Arithmetic has been thought to have for its Object, Abstract Ideas of
Number. Of which to understand the Properties and mutual Habitudes, is supposed
no mean part of Speculative Knowledge. The Opinion of the pure and intellectual
Nature of Numbers in Abstract, has made 'em in esteem with those Philosophers,
who seem to have affected an uncommon Fineness and Elevation of Thought. It
has set a Price on the most trifling Numerical Speculations, which in practice
are of no use, but serve only for Amusement. And has heretofore so far
infected the Minds of some, that they have dreamt of mighty Mysteries involved
in Numbers, and attempted the Explication of Natural Things by them. But if we
narrowly inquire into our own Thoughts, and consider what has been premised, we
may perhaps entertain a low Opinion of those high Flights and Abstractions, and
look on all Inquiries about Numbers, only as so many difficiles nugae, so far
as they are not subservient to practice, and promote the benefit of Life.

120. Unity in Abstract we have before considered vid. Sect. XIII. from which
and what has been said in the Introduction, it plainly follows, there is not
any such Idea. But Number being defined a Collection of Unites, we may conclude
that, if there be no such thing as Unity or Unite in Abstract, there are no
Ideas of Number in Abstract denoted by the Numeral Names and Figures. The
Theories, therefore, in Arithmetic, if they are abstracted from the Names and
Figures, as likewise from all Use and Practice, as well as from the particular
things numbered, can be supposed to have nothing at all for their Object. Hence
we may see, how entirely the Science of Numbers is subordinate to Practice, and
how jejune and trifling it becomes, when considered as a matter of mere
Speculation.

121. However, since there may be some, who, deluded by the specious Show of
Discovering Abstracted Verities, waste their time in Arithmetical Theoremes and
Problemes, which have not any Use: It will not be amiss, if we more fully
consider, and expose the Vanity of that Pretense; And this will plainly appear,
by taking a view of Arithmetic in its Infancy, and observing what it was that
originally put Men on the Study of that Science, and to what Scope they
directed it. It is natural to think that at first, Men, for ease of Memory and
help of Computation, made use of Counters, or in writing of Single Strokes,
Points or the like, each whereof was made to signify an Unite i. e. some one
thing of whatever Kind they had occasion to reckon. Afterward, they found out
the more compendious ways, of making one Character stand in place of several
Strokes, or Points. And lastly, the Notation of the Arabians or Indians came
into use, wherein by the repetition of a few Characters or Figures, and varying
the Signification of each Figure according to the the place it obtains, all
Numbers may be most aptly expressed: Which seems to have been done in Imitation
of Language, so that an exact Analogy is observed betwixt the Notation by
Figures, and Names, the nine simple Figures answering the nine first numeral
Names, and Places in the former corresponding to Denominations in the latter.
And agreeably to those Conditions of the simple and local Value of Figures,
were contrived Methods of finding from the given Figures or Marks of the Parts,
what Figures and how placed, are proper to denote the whole or vice versa. And
having found the sought Figures, the same Rule or Analogy being observed
throughout, it is easy to read them into Words; and so the Number becomes
perfectly known. For then the Number of any particular Things is said to be
known, when we know the Name or Figures (with their due arangement) that
according to the standing Analogy belong to them. For these Signs being known,
we can by the Operations of Arithmetic, know the Signs of any Part of the
particular Sums signified by them; and thus computing in Signs, (because of the
connection established betwixt them and the distinct multitudes of Things,
whereof one is taken for an Unite, we may be able rightly to sum Up, Divide,
and Proportion the things Themselves that we intend to Number.

122. In Arithmetic, therefore, we regard not the Things but the Signs, which
nevertheless are not regarded for their own sake, but because they direct us
how to act with relation to Things, and dispose rightly of them. Now agreeably
to what we have before observed, of words in general ( vid. Sect. XIX Introd.)
it happens here likewise, that abstract Ideas are thought to be signified by
Numeral Names or Characters, while they do not suggest Ideas of particular
Things to our Minds. I shall not at present, enter into a more particular
Dissertation on this Subject, but only observe that it is evident from what has
been said, those Things which pass for abstract Truths and Theorems concerning
Numbers, are, in reality, conversant about no Object distinct from particular
numerable Things, except only Names and Characters, which originally came to be
considered, on no other account but their being Signs, or capable to represent
aptly, whatever particular Things Men had need to compute. Whence it follows,
that to study them for their own sake would be just as wise, and to as good
purpose, as if a Man neglecting the true Use or original Intention and
subserviency of Language, should spend his time in impertinent Criticisms upon
Words, or Reasonings and Controversies purely Verbal.

123. From Numbers we proceed to speak of Extension, which is the Object of
Geometry. The Infinite Divisibility of Finite Extension though it is not expressly
laid down, either as an Axiom or Theoreme in the Elements of that Science, yet,
is throughout the same every where supposed, and thought to have so inseparable
and essential a Connection, with the Principles and Demonstrations in Geometry,
that Mathematicians never admit it into Doubt, or make the least Question of
it. And as this Notion is the Source from whence do spring, all those Amusing
Geometrical Paradoxes, which have such a direct Repugnancy to the plain, common
Sense of Mankind, and are admitted with so much Reluctance, into a Mind not yet
debauched by Learning: So is it the principal occasion of all that nice and
extreme Subtilty, which renders the Study of Mathematics so very difficult and
tedious. Hence, if we can make it appear, that no Finite Extension contains
innumerable Parts, or is infinitely Divisible, it follows that we shall at once
clear the Science of Geometry, from a great number of Difficulties and
Contradictions which have ever been esteemed a Reproach to Human Reason, and
withal make the Attainment thereof, a business of much less Time and Pains,
then it hitherto has been.

124. Every particular, Finite Extension, which may possibly be the Object of
our Thought, is an Idea Existing only in the Mind, and consequently each Part
thereof must be perceived. If, therefore, I cannot perceive innumerable Parts,
in any Finite Extension that I consider, it is certain they are not contained
in it: But it is evident, that I cannot distinguish innumerable Parts in any
particular Line, Surface, or Solid, which I either perceive by Sense, or Figure
to my self in my Mind: Wherefore I conclude they are not contained in it.
Nothing can be plainer to me, than that the Extensions I have in View, are no
other than my own Ideas, and it is no less plain, that I cannot resolve any one
of my Ideas, into an infinite Number of other Ideas, that is, that they are not
infinitely Divisible. If by Finite Extension be meant something distinct from a
Finite Idea: I declare I do not know what that is, and so cannot affirm or deny
any thing of it. But if the terms Extension, Parts, etc. are taken in any Sense
conceivable i. e. for Ideas; then to say, a Finite Quantity or Extension
consists of Parts infinite in Number, is so manifest and glaring a
Contradiction, that every one at first sight acknowleges it to be so. And it is
impossible, it should ever gain the assent of any reasonable Creature, who is
not brought to it by gentle and slow Degrees, as a Pagan Convert to the belief
of Transubstantiation. Ancient and rooted Prejudices do often pass into
Principles: And those Propositions which once obtain the force and credit of a
Principle, are not only themselves, but likewise whatever's deducible from
them, thought privileged from all Examination. And there is no Absurdity so
gross, which, by this means, the Mind of Man may not be prepared to swallow.

125. He whose Understanding is prepossest with the Doctrine of Abstract,
general Ideas, may be easily persuaded, that (whatever be thought of the Ideas
of Sense,) Extension in Abstract is infinitely Divisible. And any one, who
thinks the Objects of Sense Exist without the Mind, will not stick to affirm, a
Line but an Inch long may contain innumerable Parts, really Existing, tho too
small to be discerned. These Errors are grafted, as well in the Minds of
Geometricians, as of other Men, and have a like influence on their Reasonings;
and it were no difficult thing, to show how the Arguments from Geometry made
use of to support the infinite divisibility of Extension, are bottomed on them.
But this, if it be thought necessary, we may hereafter find a proper place to
treat of in a particular manner. At present we shall only observe in general,
whence it is the Mathematicians are all so fond and tenacious of that Doctrine.

126. It has been observed in another place, that the Theorems and
Demonstrations in Geometry are conversant about Universal Ideas. vid. Sect. XV.
Introd. Where it is explained in what Sense this ought to be understood,
namely, the particular Lines and Figures included in the Diagram, are supposed
to stand for innumerable Others of different Sizes, or, in other Words, the
Geometer considers them abstracting from their Magnitude, which does not imply,
that he forms an Abstract Idea, but only that he cares not what the particular
Magnitude is, whether Great or Small, but looks on that as a thing indifferent
to the Demonstration: Hence it follows, that a Line in the Scheme, but an Inch
long, must be spoken of, as though it contained ten-thousand Parts, since it is
regarded, not in it self, but as it is universal, and it is universal only in
its Signification, whereby it represents innumerable Lines greater than it
self, in which may be distinguished ten-thousand Parts or more, though there may
not in it. After this manner, the properties of the Lines signified are (by a
very usual Figure) transferred to the Sign, and thence, through Mistake, thought
to appertain to it considered in its own nature.

127. Because there is no number of Parts so great, but its possible there may
be a Line containing more, the Inch-line is said to contain Parts more than any
assignable Number; which is true, not of the Inch taken absolutely, but only
for the things signified by it. But Men not retaining that Distinction in their
Thoughts, slide into a belief, that the small particular Line described on
Paper contains in it self Parts innumerable. There is no such thing as the
ten-thousandth Part of an Inch; but there is of a Mile or Diameter of the
Earth, which may be signified by that Inch. When therefore, I Delineate a
Triangle on Paper, and take one side not above an Inch, for Example, in length
to be the Radius: This I consider as divided into 10000 or 100000 Parts, or
more. For though the ten-thousandth Part of that Line, considered in it self, is
nothing at all, and consequently may be neglected without any Error or
Inconveniency; yet these described Lines being only Marks, standing for greater
Quantities, whereof, it may be, the ten-thousandth Part is very considerable,
it follows that, to prevent notable Errors in Practice, the Radius must be
taken of 10000 Parts, or more.

128. From what has been said the reason is plain why, to the end any Theorem
become universal in its Use, its necessary we speak of the Lines described on
Paper, as though they contained Parts which really they do not. In doing of
which, if we examine the matter thoroughly, we shall, perhaps, discover that we
cannot conceive an Inch it self as consisting of, or being divisible into, a
thousand Parts, but only some other Line which is far greater than an Inch, and
represented by it. And that when we say a Line is infinitely Divisible. We mean
(if we mean any thing) a Line which is infinitely Great. What we have here
observed seems to be the chief Cause, why, to suppose the infinite divisibility
of Finite Extension, has been thought necessary in Geometry.

129. The several Absurdities and Contradictions which flowed from this false
Principle might, one would think, have been esteemed so many Demonstrations
against it. But, by I know not what Logic, it is held that Proofs a posteriori
are not to be admitted, against Propositions relating to Infinity. As though, it
were not impossible, even for an Infinite Mind, to reconcile Contradictions. Or
as if any thing Absurd and Repugnant could have a necessary connection with
Truth, or flow from it. But whoever considers the weakness of this Pretense,
will think it was contrived on purpose, to humor the Laziness of the Mind,
which had rather acquiesce in an indolent Skepticism, than be at the Pains, to
go through with a severe Examination of those Principles it has ever embraced
for true.

130. Of late the Speculations about Infinites have run so high, and grown to
such strange Notions, as have occasioned no small Scruples and Disputes, among
the Geometers of the present Age. Some there are of great Note, who not content
with holding, that Finite Lines may be divided into an Infinite number of
Parts, do yet farther maintain, that each of those Infinitesimals is it self
subdivisible, into an infinity of other Parts, or Infinitesimals of a second
Order, and so on ad infinitum. These, I say, assert, there are Infinitesimals
of infinitesimals of Infinitesimals, etc. without ever coming to an end. So
that, according to them an Inch does not barely contain an infinite number of
Parts, but an Infinity of an Infinity of an Infinity ad infinitum of Parts.
Others there be who hold, all orders of Infinitesimals below the first to be
nothing at all, thinking it, with good reason, Absurd, to imagine there is any
positive Quantity or Part of Extension, which, though multiplied Infinitely, can
never equal the smallest given Extension. And yet on the other hand, it seems
no less Absurd, to think the Square, Cube, or other Power of a positive, real
Root, should it self be nothing at all; which they, who hold Infinitesimals of
the first Order, denying all of the subsequent Orders, are obliged to maintain.

131. Have we not, therefore, reason to conclude, they are both in the wrong,
and that there is in effect no such thing as Parts infinitely Small, or an
infinite number of Parts contained in any Finite Quantity? But you will say, that
if this Doctrine obtains, it will follow, the very Foundations of Geometry are
destroyed: And those Great Men who, have raised that Science to so astonishing
an Height, have been all the while building a Castle in the Air. To this it may
be Replied, that whatever is useful in Geometry, and promotes the benefit of
Human Life, does still remain firm and unshaken on our Principles. That Science
considered as Practical, will rather rereive Advantage, than any Prejudice from
what has been said. But to set this in a due Light, and show how Lines and
Figures may be measured, and their Properties investigated, without supposing
Finite Extension to be infinitely Divisible, may be the proper Business of
another place. For the rest, though it should follow that some of the more
intricate and subtle Parts of Speculative Mathematics may be pared of, without
any prejudice to Truth; yet I do not see, what Damage will be thence derived to
Mankind. On the contrary, I think it were highly to be wished, that Men of the
greatest Abilities and most obstinate Application, would draw off their
Thoughts from those Amusements, and employ them in the study of such Things, as
lie nearer the concerns of Life, or have a more direct Influence on the Manners.

132. If it be said that several Theorems undoubtedly true, are discovered by
methods in which Infinitesimals are made use of, which could never have been,
if their Existence included a contradiction in it. I answer, that upon a
thorough Examination it will not be found, that in any Instance it is necessary
to make use of or conceive Infinitesimal Parts of finite Lines, or even
Quantities less than the Minimum Sensibile: Nay it will be evident this is
never done, it being impossible. And whatever Mathematicians may think of
Fluxions or the Differential Calculus and the like, a little Reflection will
show them, that in working by those Methods, they do not conceive or imagine
Lines or Surfaces less than what are perceivable to Sense. They may, indeed,
call those little and almost Insensible Quantities Infinitesimals or
Infinitesimals of Infinitesimals, if they please: But at Bottom this is all,
they being in truth Finite, nor does the Solution of Problemes require the
supposing any other. But this will be more clearly made out hereafter.

133. By what we have hitherto said, it is plain that very numerous and and
important Errors have taken their Rise, from those false Principles which were
impugned in the foregoing Parts of this Treatise. And the Opposites of those
erroneous Tenants, at the same time, appear to be most fruitful Principles,
from whence do flow innumerable Consequences highly advantageous, to true
Philosophy as well as to Religion. Particularly, Matter or the Absolute
Existence of Corporeal Objects, have been shown to be that wherein the most
avowed and pernicious Enemies of all Knowledge, whether Human or Divine, have
ever placed their chief Strength and Confidence. And surely, if by
distinguishing the real Existence of unthinking Things from their being
perceived, and allowing them a Subsistence of their own out of the Minds of
Spirits, no one thing is explained in Nature, but, on the contrary, a great
many inexplicable Difficulties arise: If the Supposition of Matter is barely
precarious, as not being grounded on so much as one single Reason: If its
Consequences cannot endure the light of Examination and free Inquiry, but
skreen themselves under the dark and general pretense of Infinites being
Incomprehensible: If withal the Removal of this Matter be not attended with the
least evil Consequence, if it be not even missed in the World, but every thing
as well, nay much easier conceived without it: If in fine, both Skeptics and
Atheists are for ever silenced upon supposing only Spirits and Ideas, and this
Scheme of Things is perfectly agreeable both to Reason and Religion: Methinks
we may expect it should be admitted and firmly embraced, though it were proposed
only as an Hypothesis, and the Existence of Matter had been allowed possible,
which yet, I think, we have evidently demonstrated that it is not.

134. True it is, that in consequence of the foregoing Principles, several
Disputes and Speculations, which are esteemed no mean Parts of Learning, are
rejected as useless, and in effect conversant about nothing at all. But how
great a Prejudice soever against our Notions, this may give to those who have
already been deeply Engaged, and made large Advances in Studies of that Nature:
Yet by Others, we hope it will not be thought any just ground of Dislike, to
the Principles and Tenants herein laid down, that they abridge the labor of
Study, and make Human Sciences far more Clear, Compendious, and Attainable than
they were before.

135. Having dispatched what we intended to say concerning the knowledge of
Ideas, the Method we proposed leads us, in the next place, to treat of Spirits:
With regard to which, perhaps, Human Knowledge is not so deficient as is
vulgarly imagined. The great Reason that is assigned, for our being thought
Ignorant of the nature of Spirits, is, our not having an Idea of it. But surely
it ought not to be looked on as a defect in a Human Understanding, that it does
not perceive the Idea of Spirit, if it is manifestly impossible there should be
any such Idea. And this if I mistake not, has been demonstrated in Sect XXVII
to which I shall here add that a Spirit has been shown to be the only
Substance, or Support wherein Unthinking Beings or Ideas can Exist: But that
this Substance which supports or perceives Ideas, should it self be an Idea or
like an Idea is evidently Absurd.

136. It will perhaps be said, that, we want a Sense (as some have imagined)
proper to know Substances withal, which if we had, we might know our own Soul,
as we do a Triangle. To this I answer, that in case we had a new Sense bestowed
upon us, we could only receive thereby some new Sensations or Ideas of Sense.
But, I believe, no Body will say, that what he means by the terms Soul and
Substance, is only some particular sort of Idea or Sensation. We may therefore
infer, that, all things duly considered, it is not more reasonable to think our
Faculties defective, in that they do not furnish us with an Idea of Spirit, or
Active, Thinking Substance, than it would be if we should blame them for not
being able to comprehend a round Square.

137. From the opinion that Spirits are to be known after the manner of an Idea
or Sensation, have risen many absurd and heterodox Tenants, and much Skepticism
about the Nature of the Soul. It Is even probable, that this Opinion may have
produced a doubt in some, whether they had any Soul at all distinct from their
Body, since upon inquiry they could not find they had an Idea of it. That an
Idea which is Inactive, and the Existence whereof consists in being Perceived,
should be the Image or Likeness of an Agent subsisting by it self, seems to
need no other Refutation, than barely attending to what is meant by those
Words. But, perhaps, you will say, that though an Idea cannot resemble a Spirit, in
its Thinking, Acting, or Subsisting by it self, yet it may in some other
respects: And it is not necessary, that an Idea or Image be in all respects
like the Original.

138. I answer, If it does not in those mentioned, it is impossible it should
represent it in any other thing. Do but leave out the Power of Willing,
Thinking, and Perceiving Ideas, and there remains nothing else wherein the Idea
can be like a Spirit. For by the Word Spirit we mean only that which Thinks,
Wills, and Perceives, this, and this alone, constitutes the Signification of
that Term. If, therefore, it is impossible that any degree of those Powers,
should be represented in an Idea or Notion, it is evident there can be no Idea
or Notion of a Spirit.

139. But it will be objected, that if there is no Idea signified by the terms
Soul, Spirit, and Substance, they are wholly insignificant, or have no meaning
in 'em. I answer those Words do mean or signify a real Thing, which is neither
an Idea nor like an Idea, but that which perceives Ideas, and Wills, and
Reasons about them. What I am my self, that which I denote by the term I, is
the same with what is meant by Soul, or Spiritual Substance. But if I should
say, that I was nothing, or that I was an Idea or Notion, nothing could be more
evidently Absurd than either of these Propositions. You Will perhaps, insist,
that this is only Quarrelling at a Word, and that since the immediate
significations of other Names, are by common consent called Ideas, no reason
can be assigned, why that which is signified by the name Spirit or Soul may not
partake in the same Appellation. I answer, all the Unthinking Objects of the
Mind agree, in that they are entirely Passive, and their Existence consists
only in being perceived: Whereas a Soul or Spirit is an active being, whose
Existence consists not in Being perceived, but in perceiving Ideas and
Thinking. It is, therefore, necessary in order to prevent Equivocation and
confounding Natures perfectly disagreeing and unlike, that we distinguish
between Spirit and Idea. Vid. Sect. XXVII.

140. In a large Sense, indeed, we may be said to have an Idea of Spirit, that
is, we understand the meaning of the Word otherwise we could not affirm or deny
any thing of it. Moreover, as we conceive the Ideas that are in the Minds of
other Spirits, by means of our own, which we suppose to be Resemblances of
them. So we know other Spirits by means of our own Soul, which, in that Sense,
is the Image or Idea of them, it having a like respect to other Spirits, that
Blueness or Heat by me perceived has to those Ideas perceived by another.

141. The natural Immortality of the Soul is a necessary Consequence of the
foregoing Doctrine. But before we attempt to prove this, it is fit that we
explain the meaning of that Tenent. It must not be supposed, that they who
assert the natural Immortality of the Soul are of opinion, that, it is
absolutely incapable of Annihilation, even by the infinite power of the
CREATOR, who first gave it Being. But only that it is not liable to be broken,
or dissolved, by the ordinary Laws of Nature or Motion. They indeed, who hold
the Soul of Man to be only a thin, vital Flame, or System of animal Spirits,
make it Perishing and Corruptible as the Body, since there is nothing more
easily dissipated than such a Being, which it is naturally impossible should
survive the Ruin of the Tabernacle, wherein it is enclosed. And this Notion has
been greedily embraced, and cherished by the worst Part of Mankind, as the most
effectual Antidote against all Impressions of Virtue and Religion. But it has
been made evident, that Bodies, of what frame or Texture soever, are barely
passive Ideas in the Mind, which is more distant and heterogeneous from them,
than Light is from Darkness. We have shown that the Soul is Indivisible,
Incorporeal, Unextended, and it is consequently Incorruptible. Nothing can be
plainer, than that the Motions, Changes, Decays, and Dissolutions which we
hourly see befall natural Bodies (and which is what we mean by the course of
Nature) cannot possibly affect an Active, Simple, Uncompounded Substance: Such
a being, therefore, is Indissoluble by the force of Nature, that is to say, the
Soul of Man is naturally Immortal.

142. After what has been said, it is, I suppose, plain that our Souls are not
to be known in the same manner as senseless, inactive Objects, or by way of
Idea. Spirits and Ideas are things so wholly different, that when we say, they
Exist, they are Known, or the like, these Words must not be thought to signify
any thing common to both Natures. There is nothing alike or common in them: And
to expect, that by any multiplication or enlargement of our Faculties, we may
be enabled to know a Spirit as we do a Triangle, seems as Absurd as if we
should hope to see a Sound. This is inculcated because I imagine it may be of
Moment, toward clearing several important Questions, and preventing some very
dangerous Errors concerning the Nature of the Soul.

143. It will not be amiss to add, that the Doctrine of Abstract Ideas has had
no small share, in rendering those Sciences Intricate and obscure, which are
particularly conversant about Spiritual Things. Men have imagined they could
frame abstract Notions, of the Powers and Acts of the Mind, and consider them
prescinded, as well from the Mind or Spirit it self, as from their respective
Objects and Effects. Hence a great number of dark and ambiguous Terms, presumed
to stand for abstract Notions, have been introduced into Metaphysics and
Morality, and from these have grown Infinite Distractions and Disputes amongst
the Learned.

144. But nothing seems more to have contributed, toward engaging Men in
Controversies and Mistakes, with regard to the Nature and Operations of the
Mind, than the being used to speak of those things, in Terms borrowed from
sensible Ideas. For Example, The Will is termed the Motion of the Soul: This
infuses a Belief, that the Mind of Man is as a Ball in Motion, impelled and
determined by the Objects of Sense, as necessarily as that is by the Stroke of
a Racket. Hence arise endless Scruples and Errors of dangerous Consequence in
Morality. All which, I doubt not, may be cleared, and Truth appear Plain,
Uniform, and Consistent, could but Philosophers be prevailed on, to depart from
some received prejudices and modes of Speech, and retiring into themselves
attentively consider their own meaning. But the Difficulties arising on this
Head, demand a more particular Disquisition, than suits with the Design of this
Treatise.

145. From what has been said, it is plain, that we cannot know the Existence of
other Spirits, otherwise than by their Operations, or the Ideas by them excited
in us. I perceive several Motions, Changes, and Combinations of Ideas, that
inform me there are certain particular Agents, like my self, which accompany
them, and concur in their Production. Hence, the Knowledge I have of other
Spirits is not immediate, as is the Knowledge of my Ideas, but depending on the
Intervention of Ideas, by me referred to Agents or Spirits distinct from my
self, as Effects or concomitant Signs.

146. But though there be some things which convince us, Human Agents are
concerned in producing them; yet it is evident to every one, that those things
which are called the works of Nature, i. e. the far greater part of the Ideas
or Sensations perceived by us, are not produced by, or dependent on, the Wills
of Men. There is therefore some other Spirit that causes them, since it is
repugnant that they should subsist by themselves. See Sect. XXIX. But if we
attentively consider the constant Regularity, Order, and Concatenation of
Natural Things, the surprising Magnificence, Beauty and Perfection of the
larger, and the Exquisite Contrivance of the smaller Parts of the Creation,
together with the exact Harmony and Correspondence of the whole, but, above
all, the never enough admired Laws of Pain and Pleasure, and the Instincts or
natural Inclinations, Appetites, and Passions of Animals, I say if we consider
all these things, and at the same time attend to the meaning and import of the
Attributes One, Eternal, Infinitely Wise, Good and Perfect, we shall clearly
perceive that they belong to the aforesaid Spirit, who works all in all, and by
whom all things consist.

147. Hence it is evident, that GOD, is known as certainly and immediately as
any other Mind or Spirit whatsoever, distinct from our selves. We may even
assert, that the Existence of GOD is far more evidently perceived than the
Existence of Men; because the Effects of Nature are infinitely more numerous
and considerable, than those ascribed to Human Agents. There is not any one
Mark that denotes a Man, or Effect produced by him, which does not more
strongly evince the Being of that Spirit, who is the Author of Nature. For it
is evident that in affecting other Persons, the will of Man has no other
Object, than barely the Motion of the Limbs of his Body, but that such a Motion
should be attended by, or excite, any Idea in the Mind of another, depends
wholly on the Will of the CREATOR. He alone it is who, upholding all things by
the word of his Power, maintains that Intercourse between Spirits, whereby they
are able to perceive the Existence of each other. And yet this pure and clear
Light which enlightens every one, is it self invisible to the greatest part of
Mankind.

148 It seems to be a general Pretense of the Unthinking Herd, that they cannot
see GOD. Could we but see him, say they, as we see a Man, we should believe
that he is, and believing obey his Commands. But alas we need only open our
Eyes to see the Sovereign Lord of all Things, with a more full and clear view
than we do any one of our Fellow Creatures. Not that I imagine, we see GOD (as
some will have it) by a direct and immediate View, or see Corporeal Things, not
by themselves but, by seeing that which represents them in the Essence of GOD,
which Doctrine is, I must confess, to me Incomprehensible. But I shall explain
my Meaning. A Human Spirit or Person is not perceived by Sense, as not being an
Idea; when therefore we see the Color, Size, Figure, and Motions of a Man, we
perceive only certain Sensations or Ideas excited in our own Minds: And these,
being exhibited to our view in sundry, distinct Collections serve to mark out
unto us the Existence of Finite, and Created Spirits like our selves. Hence
it is plain, we do not see a Man, if by Man is meant that which Lives, Moves,
Perceives, and Thinks as we do: But only such a certain Collection of Ideas, as
directs us to think there is a distinct Principle of Thought and Motion, like
to our selves, accompanying and represented by it. And after the same manner we
see GOD; all the difference is, that, whereas some one finite and narrow
assemblage of Ideas denotes a particular Human Mind, whithersoever we direct
our view, we do at all times and in all places, perceive manifest Tokens of the
Divinity: Every thing we See, Hear, Feel or any wise perceive by Sense, being a
Sign or Effect of the Power of GOD: as is our Perception of those very Motions,
which are produced by Men.

149. It Is therefore plain, that nothing can be more evident to any one that is
capable of the least Reflection, than the Existence of GOD, or a Spirit who is
intimately present to our Minds, producing in them all that variety of Ideas or
Sensations, which continually affect us, on whom we have an absolute and entire
Dependence, in short in whom we Live, and Move, and have our Being. That the
Discovery of this great Truth which lies so near and obvious to the Mind,
should be attained to by the Reason of so very few, is a sad instance of the
Stupidity and Inattention of Men, who, tho they are Surrounded with such clear
manifestations of the Deity, are yet so little affected by them, that they
seem, as it were, blinded with excess of Light.

150. But you will say has Nature no share in the Production of Natural Things,
and must they be all ascribed to the immediate and sole Operation of GOD? I
answer, if by Nature is meant only the visible Series of Effects, or Sensations
imprinted on our Minds, according to certain fixed and general Laws: Then it is
plain, that Nature taken in this Sense cannot produce any thing at all. But if
by Nature is meant some Being distinct from GOD, as well as from the Laws of
Nature, and things perceived by Sense, I must confess, that Word is to me an
empty Sound, without any intelligible Meaning annexed to it. Nature, in this
Acceptance, is a vain Chimera introduced by those Heathens, who had not just
Notions of the Omnipresence and infinite Perfection of GOD. But it is more
unaccountable, that it should be received among Christians professing belief in
the Holy Scriptures, which constantly ascribe those Effects to the immediate
Hand of GOD, that Heathen Philosophers are wont to impute to Nature. The LORD,
he causes the Vapors to ascend; he makes Lightnings with Rain; he brings
forth the Wind out of his Treasures. Jerem. Chap. 10. v. 13. He turns the
shadow of Death into the Morning, and makes the Day dark with Night. Amos
Chap. 5. v. 8. He visits the Earth, and makes it soft with Showers: He
blesses the Springing thereof, and crowns the Year with his Goodness; so
that the Pastures are clothed with Flocks, and the Valleys are covered over
with Corn. See Psalm. 65. But notwithstanding that this is the constant Language
of Scripture; yet we have I know not what Aversion from believing, that GOD
concerns himself so nearly in our Affairs. Fain would we suppose him at a great
distance off, and substitute some blind, unthinking Deputy in his stead, tho
(if we may believe Saint Paul) he be not far from every one of us.

151. It will, I doubt not, be objected, that the slow, gradual and round-about
Methods observed in the Production of Natural Things, do not seem to have for
their Cause the immediate Hand of an Almighty Agent. Besides, Monsters,
untimely Births, Fruits blasted in the Blossom, Rains falling in desert Places,
Miseries incident to Human Life, and the like, are so many arguments that the
whole frame of Nature, is not immediately actuated and superintended by a
Spirit of infinite Wisdom and Goodness. But the Answer to this Objection is in
a good measure plain from Sect. LXII, it being visible, that the aforesaid
Methods of Nature are absolutely necessary, in order to working by the most
simple and general Rules, and after a steady and consistent Manner; which
argues both the Wisdom and Goodness of GOD. For, it does hence follow, that the
Finger of GOD is not so conspicuous to the resolved and careless Sinner, which
gives him an oppertunity to harden in his Impiety, and grow ripe for Vengeance.
vid. Sect. LVII. Such is the Artificial Contrivance of this mighty Machine of
Nature, that whilst its Motions and various Phenomenon strike on our Senses,
the Hand which actuates the whole is it self unperceivable to Men of Flesh and
Blood. Verily (says the Prophet) thou art a GOD that hidest thy self. Isaiah
Chap. 45. ver. 15. But tho the Lord conceal himself from the Eyes of the
Sensual and Lazy, who will not be at the least expense of Thought; yet to an
unbiassed and attentive Mind, nothing can be more plainly legible, than the
intimate Presence of an All-wise Spirit, who Fashions, Regulates, and Sustains
the whole System of Beings. Secondly, It is clear from what we have elsewhere
observed, that the Operating according to general and stated Laws, is so
necessary for our Guidance in the affairs of Life, and letting us into the
Secret of Nature, that without it, all Reach and Compass of Thought, all Human
Sagacity and Design could serve to no manner of Purpose: It were even
impossible, there should be any such Faculties or Powers in the Mind, vid.
Sect. XXXI. Which one Consideration abundantly out-ballances whatever
particular Inconveniences may thence arise.

152. But we should further consider, that the very Blemishes and Defects of
Nature are not without their Use, in that they make an agreeable sort of
Variety, and augment the Beauty of the rest of the Creation, as Shades in a
Picture serve to set off the brighter and more enlightened Parts. We would
likewise do well to examine, whether our taxing the Waste of Seeds and
Embryo's, and accidental Destruction of Plants and Animals, before they come to
full Maturity, as an Imprudence in the Author of Nature, be not the effect of
Prejudice, contracted by our Familiarity with impotent and saving Mortals. In
Man, indeed, a thrifty Management of those Things, which he cannot procure
without much Pains and Industry, may be esteemed Wisdom. But we must not
imagine, that the inexplicably fine Machine of an Animal or Vegetable, costs
the Great CREATOR any more Pains or Trouble in its Production, than a Pebble
does: nothing being more evident, than that an Omnipotent Spirit, can
indifferently produce every thing, by a mere Fiat or act of his Will. Hence it
is plain, that the splendid Profusion of Natural Things should not be
interpreted, Weakness or Prodigality in the Agent who produces them, but rather
be looked on as an Argument of the Riches of his Power.

153. As for the mixture of Pain or Uneasiness which is in the World, pursuant
to the General Laws of Nature, and the Actions of Finite, Imperfect Spirits;
This, in the State we are in at present, is indispensibly necessary to our
Well-being. But our Prospects are too narrow: We take, for Instance, the Idea
of some one particular Pain into our Thoughts, and account it Evil; whereas if
we enlarge our View, so as to comprehend the various Ends, Connexions, and
Dependencies of things, on what Occasions and in what Proportions, we are
affected with Pain and Pleasure, the Nature of Human Freedom, and the Design
with which we are put into the World; we shall be forced to acknowledge that
those particular Things, which considered in themselves appear to be Evil, have
the Nature of Good, when considered as linked with the whole System of Beings.

154. From what has been said it will be manifest to any Considering Person,
that it is merely for want of attention and comprehensiveness of Mind that there
are any Favorers of Atheism or the Manichaean Heresy to be found. Little and
unreflecting Souls may, indeed, Burlesque the Works of Providence, the Beauty
and Order whereof they have not Capacity, or will not be at the Pains, to
comprehend. But those who are Masters of any justness and extent of Thought and
are withal used to reflect, can never sufficiently admire the Divine Traces of
Wisdom and Goodness, that shine throughout the Economy of Nature. But what
Truth is there which glares so strongly on the Mind, that by an aversion of
Thought, a wilful shutting of the Eyes, we may not escape seeing it, at least
with a full and direct view? Is it therefore to be wondered at, if the
generality of Men, who are ever intent on Business or Pleasure, and little used
to fix or open the Eye of their Mind, should not have all that Conviction and
Evidence of the Being of GOD, which might be expected in Reasonable Creatures?

155. We should rather admire, that Men can be found so Stupid as to neglect,
than that neglecting they should be unconvinced of, such an evident and
momentous Truth. And yet it is to be feared that too mamy of Parts and Leisure,
who live in Christian Countries, are merely through a supine and dreadful
Negligence sunk into a sort of Demy-Atheism. They cannot say there is not a GOD,
but neither are they convinced that there is. For what else can it be but some
lurking Infidelity, some secret misgivings of Mind, with regard to the
Existence and Attributes of GOD, which permits Sinners to grow and harden in
Impiety? Since it is downright impossible, that a Soul pierced and enlightened
with a thorough Sense of the Omnipresence, Holiness, and Justice of that
Almighty Spirit, should persist in a remorsless Violation of his Laws. We
ought, therefore, earnestly to meditate and dwell on those important Points;
that so we may attain Conviction without all Scruple, that the Eyes of the LORD
are in every place beholding the Evil and the Good; that he is with us and
keeps us in all places whither we go, and gives us Bread to eat and Raiment
to put on; that he is present and conscious to our innermost Thoughts; in fine,
that we have a most absolute and immediate Dependence on Him. A clear View of
which great Truths cannot choose but fill our Hearts, with an awful
Circumspection and holy Fear, which is the strongest Incentive to Virtue, and
the best Guard against Vice.

156. For after all, what deserves the first place in our Studies, is the
Consideration of GOD, and our Duty; which to promote as it was the the main
drift and design of my Labors, so shall I esteem them altogether useless and
ineffectual, if, by what I have said I cannot inspire my Readers with a pious
Sense of the Presence of GOD: And having shown the Falseness or Vanity of those
barren Speculations, which make the chief Employment of Learned Men, the better
dispose them to reverence and embrace the Salutary Truths of the GOSPEL, which
to Know and to Practice, is the highest Perfection of Human Nature.

FINIS.

