AN ESSAY Toward a New Theory OF VISION.

By GEORGE BERKELEY, M. A. Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin.

DUBLIN: Printed by AARON RHAMES, at the Back of Dick's Coffee-House, for
JEREMY PEPYAT, Bookseller in Skinner-Row, MDCCIX.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Percivale, Bart. ONE OF Her Majesty's Most
Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL IN THE Kingdom of Ireland.
SIR,
I Could not, without doing Violence to my Self, forbear upon this Occasion, to
give some public Testimony of the Great and Well-grounded Esteem I have
conceived for You, ever since I had the Honor and Happiness of Your
Acquaintance. The outward Advantages of Fortune, and the early Honors with
which You are Adorned, together with the Reputation You are known to have,
amongst the Best and most Considerable Men, may well imprint Veneration and
Esteem, on the Minds of those who behold You from a Distance. But these are not
the chief Motives, that Inspire me with the Respect I bear You. A nearer
Approach has given me the View of something in Your Person, infinitely beyond
the External Ornaments of Honor and Estate. I mean, an Intrinsic Stock of
Virtue and good Sense, a True Concern for Religion, and disinterested Love of
Your Country. Add to these an uncommon proficiency in the best, and most useful
Parts of Knowledge; together with (what in my Mind is a Perfection of the first
Rank) a surpassing Goodness of Nature. All which I have Collected, not from the
uncertain Reports of Fame but, from my own Experience. Within these few Months,
that I have the Honor to be known unto You, the many delightful Hours I have
passed in Your Agreeable and Improving Conversation, have afforded me the
opportunity of Discovering in You many Excellent Qualities, which at once fill
me with Admiration and Esteem. That one at those Years, and in those
Circumstances of Wealth and Greatness, should continue Proof against the Charms
of Luxury, and those Criminal Pleasures, so fashionable and predominant in the
Age we live in. That He should preserve a sweet and modest Behavior, free from
that insolent and assuming Air, so familiar to those who are placed above the
ordinary Rank of Men. That He should manage a great Fortune with that Prudence
and Inspection, and at the same time, expend it with that Generosity and
Nobleness of Mind, as to show Himself equally remote, from a sordid Parsimony,
and a lavish, inconsiderate Profusion of the good Things He is entrusted with.
This, surely, were Admirable and Praise worthy. But that He should moreover by
an impartial Exercise of His Reason, and constant Perusal of the Sacred
Scriptures, endeavor to attain a right Notion of the Principles of Natural and
Revealed Religion. That He should with the Concern of a true Patriot have the
Interest of the Public at Heart, and omit no means of Informing Himself what
may be Prejudicial, or Advantageous to his Country, in order to prevent the
one, and promote the other. In fine, that by a constant Application to the most
severe and useful Studies, by a strict Observation of the Rules of Honor and
Virtue, by frequent and serious Reflections on the mistaken Measures of the
World, and the true End and Happiness of Mankind, He should in all respects
qualify Himself, bravely to run the Race that is set before Him, to deserve the
Character of Great and Good in this Life, and be ever Happy hereafter. This
were amazing, and almost incredible. Yet all this, and more than this, SIR,
might I justly say of you; did either your Modesty permit, or your Character
stand in Need of it. I know it might deservedly be thought a Vanity in me, to
imagine that any thing coming from so obscure a Hand as mine, could add a
luster to your Reputation. But I am withal sensible, How far I advance the
Interest of my own, by laying hold on this Opportunity to make it known, that I
am admitted into some degree of Intimacy, with a Person of Your Exquisite
Judgment. And with that View, I have ventured to make You an Address of this
Nature, which, the Goodness I have ever experienced in You inclines me to hope,
will meet with a favorable Reception at Your Hands. Though I must own, I have
Your Pardon to ask, for touching on what may, possibly, be Offensive to a
Virtue You are possessed of in a very distinguishing Degree. Excuse me, SIR, if
it was out of my Power, to mention the Name of SIR JOHN PERCIVALE, without
paying some Tribute to that Extraordinary and surprising Merit, whereof I have
so lively and affecting an Idea, and which, I am sure, cannot be exposed in too
full a light for the Imitation of Others. Of late, I have been agreeably
employed in considering the most Noble, Pleasant, and Comprehensive of all the
Senses. The fruit of that (Labor shall I call it or) Diversion is what I now
Present You with, in Hopes it may give some Entertainment to one who, in the
midst of Business and Vulgar Enjoyments, preserves a Relish for the more
Refined Pleasures of Thought and Reflection. My Thoughts concerning Vision have
led me into some Notions, so far out of the common Road, that it had been
improper to Address them to one of a narrow and contracted Genius. But You,
SIR, being Master of a large and free Understanding, raised above the Power of
those Prejudices that enslave the far greater Part of Mankind, may deservedly
be thought a proper Patron for an Attempt of this Kind. Add to this, that You
are no less disposed to Forgive, than qualified to discern, whatever Faults may
occur in it. Nor do I think You defective in any one Point necessary to form an
Exact Judgment on the most abstract and difficult Things, so much as in a just
Confidence of Your own Abilities. And in this one Instance, give me leave to
say, You show a manifest weakness of Judgment. With Relation to the following
Essay, I shall only add, that I beg Your Pardon for laying a Trifle of that
Nature in your Way, at a time when you are engaged in the Important Affairs of
the Nation, and desire you to think, that I am with all Sincerity and Respect

SIR, Your most Faithful And most Humble Servant George Berkeley.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. Design. II. Distance of it self Invisible. III. Remote Distance
perceived rather by Experience, than by Sense. IV. Near Distance thought to be
perceived by the Angle of the Optic Axes. V. Difference between this and the
former manner of perceiving Distance. VI. Also by Diverging Rays. VII. This
depends not on Experience. VIII. These the common Accounts, but not
satisfactory. IX. Some Ideas perceived by the mediation of others. X. No Idea
which is not it self perceived, can be the means of perceiving another. XI.
Distance perceived by means of some other Idea. XII. Those Lines and Angles
mentioned in Optics, are not themselves perceived. XIII. Hence the Mind does
not perceive Distance by Lines and Angles. XIV. Also because they have no real
Existence. XV. And because they are insufficient to explain the Phoenomena.
Sect. XVI. The Ideas that suggest Distance are 1 st. the Sensation arising from
the turn of the Eyes. XVII. Betwixt which and Distance there is no necessary
Connection. XVIII. Scarce room for mistake in this matter. XIX. No regard had to
the Angle of the Optic Axes. XX. Judgment of Distance made with both Eyes, the
Result of Experience. XXI. 2dly, Confusedness of Appearance. XXII. This the
occasion of those Judgments attributed to diverging Rays. XXIII. Objection
Answered. XXIV. What deceives the Writers of Optics in this matter. XXV. The
Cause, why one Idea may suggest another. XXVI. This applied to Confusion and
Distance. XXVII. 3dly, The straining of the Eye. XXVIII. The Occasions which
suggest Distance, have in their own Nature no Relation to it. XXIX. A difficult
Case proposed by Dr. Barrow as repugnant to all the known Theories. XXX. This
Case contradicts a received Principle in Catoptrics. XXXI. It is shown to agree
with the Principles we have laid down. XXXII. This Phenomenon Illustrated.
XXXIII. It confirms the Truth of the Principle whereby it is explained. XXXIV.
Vision when Distinct, and when Confused. XXXV. The different Effects of
Parallel, Diverging and Converging Rays. XXXVI. How Converging, and Diverging
Rays come to suggest the same Distance. Sect. XXXVII. A Person extreme Purblind
would judge aright in the forementioned Case. XXXVIII. Lines and Angles why
useful in Optics. XXXIX. The not understanding this, a cause of Mistake. XL. A
Query proposed by Mr. Molyneux in his Dioptrics, considered. XLI. One Born
Blind would not at first have any Idea of Distance by Sight. XLII. This not
agreeable to the common Principles. XLIII. The proper Objects of Sight, not
without the Mind, nor the Images of any thing without the Mind. XLIV. This more
fully explained. XLV. In what Sense we must be understood to see Distance and
external Things. XLVI. Distance and Things placed at a Distance, not otherwise
perceived by the Eye than by the Ear. XLVII. The Ideas of Sight more apt to be
confounded with the Ideas of Touch than those of Hearing are. XLVIII. How this
comes to pass. XLIX. Strictly speaking, we never see and feel the same thing.
L. Objects of Sight twofold Mediate and Immediate. LI. These hard to separate
in our Thoughts. LII. The received Accounts of our perceiving Magnitude by
Sight, false. LIII. Magnitude perceived as immediately, as Distance. LIVE. Two
kinds of sensible Extension, neither of which is infinitely Divisible. Sect.
LV. The Tangible Magnitude of an Object Steady, the Visible not. LVI. By what
means, Tangible Magnitude is perceived by Sight. LVII. This farther enlarged
on. LVIII. No necessary Connection between Confusion or Faintness of Appearance,
and small or great Magnitude. LIX. The Tangible Magnitude of an Object, more
heeded than the Visible; and why. LX. An Instance of this. LXI. Men do not
Measure by Visible Feet or Inches. LXII, No necessary Connection between Visible
and Tangible Extension. LXIII. Greater Visible Magnitude might signify Lesser
Tangible Magnitude. LXIV. The Judgments we make of Magnitude depend altogether
on Experience. LXV. Distance and Magnitude seen as Shame or Anger. LXVI. But we
are prone to think otherwise, and why. LXVII. The Moon seems greater in the
Horizon, than in the Meridian. LXVIII. The cause of this Phoenomenon, assigned.
LXIX. The Horizontal Moon, why greater at one time than another. LXX. The
Account we have given, proved to be true. LXXI. And confirmed, by the Moon's
appearing greater in a Mist. LXXII. Objection answered. LXXIII. The way wherein
Faintness suggests greater Magnitude Illustrated. Sect. LXXIV. Appearance of
the Horizontal Moon, why thought difficult to explain. LXXV. Attempts toward
the Solution of it made by several, but in vain. LXXVI. The Opinion of Dr.
Wallis. LXXVII. It is shown to be unsatisfactory. LXXVIII. How Lines and Angles
may be of use in computing apparent Magnitudes. LXXIX. One born Blind, being
made to See, what Judgment he would make of Magnitude. LXXX. The Minimum Visibile
the same to all Creatures. LXXXI. Objection Answered. LXXXII. The Eye at all
times, perceives the same number of visible Points. LXXXIII. Two Imperfections
in the Visive Faculty. LXXXIV. Answering to which, we may conceive two
Perfections. LXXXV. In neither of these two Ways do Microscopes improve the
Sight. LXXXVI. The Case of Microscopical Eyes, considered. LXXXVII. The Sight,
admirably adapted to the ends of Seeing. LXXXVIII. Difficulty concerning Erect
Vision. LXXXIX. The common way of Explaining it XC. The same shown to be false.
XCI. Not distinguishing between Ideas of Sight and Touch, Cause of Mistake, in
this matter. XCII. The Case of one Born Blind, proper to be considered. Sect.
XCIII. Such a one might by Touch, attain (...) have Ideas of Upper and Lower.
XCIV. Which Modes of Situation he would attribute on^^ to things Tangible. XCV.
He Would not at first Sight think any thing he saw High or Low, Erect or Inverted.
XCVI. This Illustrated by an Example. XCVII. By what means he would come to
denominate Visible Objects, high or low, etc. XCVIII. Why he should think those
Objects highest, which are Painted on the lowest part of his Eye and vice
versa. XCIX. How he would perceive by Sight, the Situation of External Objects.
C. Our propension to think the contrary, no Argume^^ against what has been
said. CI. Objection. CII. Answer CIII. An Object could not be known at first
Sight (...) the Color. CIV. Nor by the Magnitude thereof. CV. Nor by the
Figure. CVI. In the first act of Vision, no Tangible Thing would be suggested
by Sight. CVII. Difficulty proposed concerning Number. CVIII. Number of things
Visible, would not at first Sight suggest the like number of things Tangible.
CIX. Number, the Creature of the Mind. CX. One Born Blind would not at fir^^
Sight, number Visible Things as others do. CXI. The Situation of any Object,
determined with respect only to Objects of the same Sense. CXII. No Distance,
great or small, between a Visible and Tangible Thing. Sect. CXIII. The not
observing this, cause of Difficulty in Erect Vision. CXIV. Which otherwise
includes nothing unaccountable. CXV. What is meant by the Pictures being
inverted. CXVI. Cause of Mistake in this Matter. CXVII. Images in the Eye, not
Pictures of external Objects. CXVIII. In what Sense they are Pictures. CXIX. In
this Affair we must carefully distinguish between Ideas of Sight and Touch.
CXX. Difficult to explain by Words the true Theory of Vision. CXXI. The
Question, whether there is any Idea common to Sight and Touch, stated. CXXII.
Abstract Extension inquired into. CXXIII. It is Incomprehensible. CXXIV.
Abstract Extension not the Object of Geometry. CXV. The general Idea of a
Triangle, considered. CXXVI. Vacuum or pure Space, not common to Sight and
Touch. CXXVII. There is no Idea or kind of Idea, common to both Senses.
CXXVIII. First Argument in Proof hereof. CXXIX. Second Argument. CXXX. Visible
Figure and Extension, not distinct Ideas from Color. CXXXI. Third Argument.
CXXXII. Confirmation drawn from Mr. Molyneux's Problem of a Sphere and a Cube,
published by Mr. Lock. Sect. CXXXIII. Which is falsely solved, if the common
Supposition be true. CXXXIV. More might be said in proof of our Tenent, but
this suffices CXXXV. Farther Reflection, on the foregoing Problem. CXXXVI. The
same thing does not affect both sight and Touch. CXXXVII. The same Idea of
Motion not common to Sight and Touch. CXXXVIII. The way wherein we apprehend
Motion by Sight, easily collected from what has been said. CXXXIX. Qu. How
Visible and Tangible Ideas came to have the same Name if not of the same Kind.
CXL. This accounted for without supposing them of the same Kind. CXLI. Obj.
That a Tangible Square is liker to a Vible Square than to a Visible Circle.
CXLII. Answ. That a Visible Square is fitter than a Visible Circle, to
represent a Tangible Square. CXLIII. But it does not hence follow, that a
Visible Square is like a Tangible Square. CXLIV. Why we are more apt to
confound Visible with Tangible Ideas, than other Signs with the Things
signified. CXLV. Several other Reasons hereof, assigned. CXLVI. Reluctance in
rejecting any Opinion, no Argument of its Truth, CXLVII. Proper Objects of
Vision the Language of ing Nature CXLVIII. In it there is much admirable, and
deservour Attention. CXLIX. Question proposed, concerning the Object of
Geometry. Sect. CL. At first View, we are apt to think Visible Extension the
Object of Geometry. CLI. Visible Extension shown not to be the Object of
Geometry. CLII. Words may as well be thought the Object of Geometry, as Visible
Extension. CLIII. It is proposed to enquire, what Progress an Intelligence that
could see, but not feel, might make in Geometry. CLIV. He cannot understand
those Parts which relate to Solids, and their Surfaces, and Lines generated by
their Section. CLV. Nor even the Elements of plain Geometry. CLVI. The proper
Objects of Sight incapable of being managed as Geometrical Figures. CLVII. The
Opinion of those who hold plain Figures to be the Immediate Objects of Sight,
considered. CLVIII. Plains no more the immediate Objects of Sight, than Solids.
CLIX. Difficult to enter precisely into the Thoughts of the above mentioned
Intelligence. CLX. The Object of Geometry, its not being sufficiently
understood, cause of Difficulty and useless Labor in that Science.
ERRATA.
PAge 41. l. 18, dele this. p. 64. l. 20, r. and. p. 72. l. 12. r. emancipate.
p. 94. l. 13. r. Objects. p. 100. l. 8. r. nothing. p. 102. l. 25. r.
acquiesced. p. 153. l. 19. r. Homogeneous. p. 167. l. 2. r. Figures. p. 168 l.
24. for this, r. their. p. 170. l. 2. r. it is.

AN ESSAY TOWARD A New Theory of Vision.
I. Design.
MY Design is to show the manner, wherein we perceive by Sight the Distance,
Magmtude, and Situation of Objects. Also to consider the Difference there is
betwixt the Ideas of Sight and Touch, and whether there be any Idea common to
both Senses. In treating of all which, it seems to me, the Writers of Optics
have proceeded on wrong Principles.

II. Distance of it self Invisible.
It is, I think, agreed by all that Distance of it self, and immediately cannot
be seen. For Distance being a Line directed end-wise to the Eye, it projects
only one Point in the Fund of the Eye. Which Point remains invariably the same,
whether the Distance be longer or shorter.

III. Remote Distance perceived rather by Experience, than by Sense.
I find it also acknowledged, that the Estimate we make of the Distance of
Objects considerably remote, is rather an Act of Judgment grounded on
Experience, than of Sense. For Example, When I perceive a great number of
intermediate Objects, such as Houses, Fields, Rivers, and the like, which I
have experienced to take up a considerable Space; I thence form a Judgment or
Conclusion, that the Object I see beyond them is at a great Distance. Again,
when an Object appears Faint and Small, which at a near Distance I have
experienced to make a vigorous and large Appearance; I instantly conclude it to
be far off. And this, it is evident, is the result of Experience; without which,
from the Faintness and Littleness, I should not have inferred any thing
concerning the Distance of Objects.

IV. Near Distance thought to be perceived by the Angle of the Optic Axes.
But when an Object is placed at so near a Distance, as that the Interval
between the Eyes bears any sensible Proportion to it. It is the received
Opinion that the two Optic Axes (the Fancy that we see only with one Eye at
once being exploded) concurring at the Object do there make an Angle, by means
of which, according as it is Greater or Lesser, the Object is perceived to be
nearer or farther off.

V. Difference between this and the former manner of perceiving Distance.
Betwixt which, and the foregoing manner of Estimating Distance, there is this
remarkable Difference. That whereas, there was no apparent, necessary Connection
between small Distance and a large and strong Appearance, or between great
Distance, and a little and faint Appearance. Yet there appears a very necessary
Connection between an obtuse Angle and near Distance, and an acute Angle and
farther Distance. It does not in the least depend upon Experience, but may be
evidently known by any one before he had experienced it, that the nearer the
Concurrence of the Optic Axes, the greater the Angle, and the remoter their
Concurrence is, the lesser will be the Angle comprehended by them.

VI. Also by Diverging Rays.
There is another way, mentioned by the Optic Writers, whereby they will have
us judge of those Distances, in respect of which, the breadth of the Pupil has
any sensible bigness. And that is the greater or lesser Divergency of the Rays,
which issuing from the visible Point, do fall on the Pupil: That Point being
judged nearest, which is seen by most diverging Rays; and that remoter, which
is seen by less diverging Rays. And so on, the apparent Distance still
increasing, as the Divergency of the Rays decreases, till at length it becomes
infinite, when the Rays that fall on the Pupil are to Sense Parallel. And after
this manner it is said we perceive Distances when we look only with one Eye.

VII. This depends not on Experience.
In this Case also, it is plain we are not beholding to Experience: It being a
certain, necessary Truth, that the nearer the direct Rays falling on the Eye
approach to a Parallelism, the farther off is the Point of their Intersection,
or the visible Point from whence they flow.

VIII. These the common Accounts, but not satisfactory.
I have here set down the common, current Accounts that are given of our
perceiving near Distances by Sight, which, though they are unquestionably
received for true by Mathematicians, and accordingly made use of by them in
determining the apparent Places of Objects, do nevertheless seem to me very
unsatisfactory: And that for these following Reasons.

IX. Some Ideas perceived by the mediation of others.
First, It is evident that when the Mind perceives any Idea, not immediately
and of it self, it must be by the means of some other Idea. Thus, for Instance,
the Passions which are in the Mind of another, are of themselves, to me
invisible. I may nevertheless perceive them by Sight, though not immediately yet,
by means of the Colors they produce in the Countenance. We do often see Shame
or Fear in the Looks of a Man, by perceiving the Changes of his Countenance to
Red or Pale.

X. No Idea which is not it self perceived, can be the means of perceiving
another.
Moreover it is evident, that no Idea which is not it self perceived, can be to
me the means of perceiving any other Idea. If I do not perceive the Redness or
Paleness of a Man's Face themselves, it is impossible I should perceive by them
the Passions which are in his Mind.

XI. Distance perceived by means of some other Idea.
Now from Sect. II. It Is plain that Distance is in it is own nature
imperceivable, and yet it is perceived by Sight. It remains therefore, that it
be brought into view by means of some other Idea, that is it self immediately
perceived in the Act of Vision.

XII. Those Lines and Angles mentioned in Optics, are not themselves perceived.
But those Lines and Angles, by means whereof Mathematicians pretend to explain
the Perception of Distance, are themselves not at all perceived, nor are they
in Truth, ever thought of by those unskilful in Optics. I appeal to any ones
Experience, whether upon Sight of an Object, he compute it is Distance by the
bigness of the Angle, made by the meeting of the two Optic Axes? Or whether he
ever think of the greater or lesser Divergency of the Rays, which arrive from
any Point to his Pupil. Nay, whether it be not perfectly impossible for him to
perceive by Sense, the various Angles wherewith the Rays according to their
greater, or lesser Divergence do fall on his Eye. Every one is himself the best
Judge of what he perceives, and what not. In vain shall all the Mathematicians
in the World tell me, that I perceive certain Lines and Angles which introduce
into my Mind the various Ideas of Distance; so long as I my self am conscious
of no such thing.

XIII, Hence the Mind does not perceive Distance by Lines and Angles
Since therefore those Angles and Lines are not themselves perceived by Sight,
it follows from Sect. X. that the Mind does not by them judge of the Distance
of Objects.

XIV. Also because they have no real Existence.
Secondly, The Truth of this Assertion will be, yet, farther evident to any one
that considers those Lines and Angles have no real Existence in Nature, being
only an Hypothesis framed by Mathematicians, and by them introduced into
Optics, that they might treat of that Science in a Geometrical way.

XV. And because they are insufficient to explain the Phenomenon.
The Third and Last Reason I shall give for my Rejecting that Doctrine, is,
that though we should grant the real Existence of those Optic Angles, etc. and
that it was possible for the Mind to perceive them; yet these Principles would
not be found sufficient to explain the Phenomenon of Distance. As shall be
shown hereafter.

XVI. The Ideas that suggest Distance are 1 st. the Sensation arising from the
turn of the Eyes.
Now, It being already shown that Distance is suggested to the Mind, by the
Mediation of some other Idea which is it self perceived in the Act of Seeing.
It remains that we enquire what Idea, or Sensations there be that attend
Vision, unto which we may suppose the Ideas of Distance are connected, and by
which they are introduced into the Mind. And First, It is certain by
Experience, that when we look at a near Object with both Eyes, according as it
approaches, or recedes from us, we alter the Disposition of our Eyes, by
lessening or widening the Interval between the Pupils. This Disposition or Turn
of the Eyes is attended with a Sensation, which seems to me, to be that which
in this Case brings the Idea of greater, or lesser Distance into the Mind.

XVII. Betwixt which and Distance there is no necessary Connection.
Not, that their is any natural or necessary Connection between the Sensation we
perceive by the Turn of the Eyes, and greater or lesser Distance. But because
the Mind has by constant Experience, found the different Sensations
corresponding to the different Dispositions of the Eyes, to be attended each,
with a Different Degree of Distance in the Object: There has grown an Habitual
or Customary Connection, between those two sorts of Ideas. So that the Mind no
sooner perceives the Sensation arising from the different Turn it gives the
Eyes, in order to bring the Pupils nearer, or farther asunder; but it withal
perceives the different Idea of Distance which was wont to be connected with
that Sensation. Just as upon hearing a certain Sound, the Idea is immediately
suggested to the Understanding, which Custom had united with it.

XVIII. Scarce room for Mistake in this matter.
Nor do I see, how I can easily be mistaken in this Matter. I know evidently
that Distance is not perceived of it self. That by consequence, it must be
perceived by means of some other Idea which is immediately perceived, and
varies with the different Degrees of Distance. I know also that the Sensation
arising from the Turn of the Eyes is of it self, immediately perceived, and
various Degrees thereof are connected with different Distances; which never
fail to accompany them into my Mind, when I view an Object distinctly with both
Eyes, whose Distance is so small that in respect of it, the Interval between
the Eyes has any considerable Magnitude.

XIX. No regard had to the Angle of the Optic Axes.
I know it is a received Opinion, that by altering the disposition of the Eyes,
the Mind perceives whether the Angle of the Optic Axes is made greater or
lesser. And that accordingly by a kind of Natural Geometry, it judges the Point
of their Intersection to be nearer, or farther off. But that this is not true,
I am convinced by my own Experience. Since I am not conscious, that I make any
such use of the Perception I have by the Turn of my Eyes. And for me to make
those Judgments, and draw those Conclusions from it, without knowing that I do
so, seems altogether incomprehensible.

XX. Judgment of Distance made with both Eyes, the Result of Experience.
From all which it plainly follows, that the Judgment we make of the Distance
of an Object, viewed with both Eyes, is entirely the Result of Experience. If
we had not constantly found certain Sensations arising from the various
Disposition of the Eyes, attended with certain degrees of Distance. We should
never make those sudden Judgments from them, concerning the Distance of
Objects; no more than we would pretend to judge of a Man's Thoughts, by his
pronouncing Words we had never heard before.

XXI. 2dly, Confusedness of Appearance.
Secondly, An Object placed at a certain Distance from the Eye, to which the
breadth of the Pupil bears a considerable Proportion, being made to approach,
is seen more confusedly. And the nearer it is brought, the more confused
Appearance it makes. And this being found constantly to be so, there arises in
the Mind an Habitual Connection between the several Degrees of Confusion and
Distance. The greater Confusion still implying the lesser Distance, and the
lesser Confusion, the greater Distance of the Object.

XXII. This the occasion of those Judgments attributed to diverging Rays.
This confused Appearance of the Object, does therefore seem to me to be the
Medium, whereby the Mind judges of Distance in those Cases, wherein the most
approved Writers of Optics will have it judge, by the different Divergency,
with which the Rays flowing from the Radiating Point fall on the Pupil. No Man,
I believe, will pretend to see or feel those imaginary Angles, that the Rays
are supposed to form according to their various Inclinations on his Eye. But he
cannot choose seeing whether the Object appear more, or less confused. It is
therefore a manifest Consequence from what has been Demonstrated, that instead
of the greater, or lesser Divergency of the Rays, the Mind makes use of the
greater or lesser Confusedness of the Appearance, thereby to determine the
apparent Place of an Object.

XXIII. Objection answered.
Nor does it avail to say, there is not any necessary Connection between
confused Vision, and Distance great, or small. For I ask any Man, What
necessary Connection he Sees, between the Redness of a Blush and Shame? And yet
no sooner shall he behold that Color to arise in the Face of another. But it
brings into his Mind the Idea of that Passion which has been observed to
accompany it.

XXIV. What deceives the Writers of Optics in this matter.
What seems to have misled the Writers of Optics in this Matter is, that they
imagine Men judge of Distance, as they do of a Conclusion in Mathematics;
betwixt which and the Premises, it is indeed absolutely requisite there be an
apparent, necessary Connection. But it is far otherwise, in the sudden Judgments
Men make of Distance. We are not to think, that Brutes and Children, or even
grown reasonable Men, whenever they perceive an Object to approach, or depart
from them, do it by virtue of Geometry and Demonstration.

XXV. The Cause, why one Idea may suggest another.
That one Idea may suggest another to the Mind, it will suffice that they have
been observed to go together; without any demonstration of the necessity of
their Coexistence, or without so much as knowing what it is that makes them so
to Coexist. Of this there are innumerable Instances, of which no one can be
Ignorant.

XXVI. This applied to Confusion and Distance.
Thus greater Confusion having been constantly attended with nearer Distance,
no sooner is the former Idea perceived, but it suggests the latter to our
Thoughts. And if it had been the ordinary Course of Nature, that the farther
off an Object were placed, the more Confused it should appear. It is certain,
the very same Perception that now makes us think an Object approaches, would
then have made us to imagine it went farther off. That Perception, abstracting
from Custom and Experience, being equally fitted to produce the Idea of great
Distance, or small Distance, or no Distance at all.

XXVII. 3 dly, The straining of the Eye.
Thirdly, an Object being placed at the Distance above specified, and brought
nearer to the Eye, we may nevertheless prevent, at least for some time, the
Appearance's growing more confused, by straining the Eye. In which Case, that
Sensation supplys the place of confused Vision, in aiding the Mind to judge of
the Distance of the Object. It being esteemed so much the nearer, by how much
the effort, or straining of the Eye in order to distinct Vision, is greater.

XXVIII. The Occasions which suggest Distance, have in their own Nature no
Relation to it.
I have here set down those Sensations or Ideas, that seem to me to be the
constant and general Occasions of introducing into the Mind, the different
Ideas of near Distance. It Is true in most Cases, that diverse other
Circumstances contribute to frame our Idea of Distance, viz. the particular
Number, Size, Kind, etc. of the things seen. Concerning which as well as all
other the forementioned Occasions which suggest Distance, I shall only observe,
they have none of them, in their own Nature, any Relation or Connection with it.
Nor is it possible, they should ever signify the various Degrees thereof,
otherwise than as by Experience they have been found to be connected with them.

XXIX. A difficult Case proposed by Dr. Barrow as repugnant to all the known
Theories.
I shall proceed upon these Principles to account for a Phenomenon, which has
hitherto strangely puzzled the Writers of Optics, and is so far from being
accounted for by any of their Theories of Vision, that it is, by their own
Confession, plainly repugnant to them. And of Consequence, if nothing else
could be objected, were alone sufficient to bring their Credit in Question. The
whole Difficulty I shall lay before you in the Words of the Learned Doctor
Barrow, with which he concludes his Optic Lectures.

Haec sunt, quae circa partem Opticae praecipue Mathematicam dicenda mihi
suggessit meditatio. Circa reliquas, (quae (...) sunt, adeoque saepiuscule pro
certis principiis plausibiles conjecturas venditare necessum habent) nihil fere
quicquam admodum verisimile succurrit, a pervulgatis (ab iis, inquam, quae
Keplerus, Scheinerus, Cartesius, and post illos alii tradiderunt) alienum aut
diversum. Atqui tacere malo, quam toties oblatam cramben reponere. Proinde
receptui cano; nec ita tamen ut prorsus discedam, anteaquam improbam quandam
difficultatem (pro sinceritate quam and vobis and veritati debeo minime
dissimulandam) in medium protulero, quae doctrinae nostrae, hactenus
inculcatae, se objicit adversam, ab ea saltem nullam admittit solutionem. Illa,
breviter, talis est: Lenti vel Speculo cavo EBF exponatur punctum visibile A,
ita Distans ut Radii ex A manantes ex inflectione versus axem A B cogantur.
Sitque radiationis Limes (seu puncti A imago, qualem supra passim statuimus)
punctum Z. Inter hoc autem and inflectentis verticem B uspiam positus
concipiatur Oculus. Quaeri jam potest ubi loci debeat punctum A apparere?
Retrorsum ad punctum Z videri non fert Natura (cum omnis impressio sensum
afficiens proveniat a partibus A) ac experientia reclamat. Nostris autem e
placitis consequi vide tur, ipsum ad parts anticas apparens, ab intervallo
longissime dissito, (quod and maximum sensibile quodvis Intervallum quodammodo
exsuperet) apparere. Cum enim quo Radiis minus divergentibus attingitur
Objectum, eo (seclusis utique praenotionibus and praejudiciis) longius abesse
sentiatur; et quod Parallelos ad Oculum Radios projicit, remotissime positum
aestimetur. Exigere Ratio videtur, ut quod convergentibus radiis apprehenditur,
adhuc magis, si fieri posset, quoad apparentiam elongetur. Quin and circa Casum
hunc generatim inquiri possit, quidnam omnino sit, quod apparentem puncti A
locum determinet, faciatque quod constanti ratione nunc propius, nunc remotius
appareat? Cui itidem dubio, nihil quicquam ex hactenus dictorum Analogia,
responderi posse videtur, nisi debere punctum A perpetuo longissime semotum
videri. Verum experientia secus attestatur, illud pro diversa Oculi inter
puncta B, Z, positione vary distans; nunquam fere (si unquam) longinquius ipso
A libere spectato, subinde vero multo propinquius adparere; quinimo, quo oculum
appellentes radii magis convergunt eo speciem Objecti propius accedere. Nempe,
si puncto B admoveatur Oculus, suo (ad lentem) fere nativo in loco conspicitur
punctum A (vel aeque distans, ad Speculum;) ad O reductus oculus ejusce speciem
appropinquantem cernit; ad P adhuc vicinius ipsum existimat; ac ita sensun,
donec alicubi tandem, velut ad Q, constituto oculo objectum sum propinquum
apparens, in meram confusionem incipiat evanescere, Quae sane cuncta rationibus
atque decretis nostris repugnare videntur, aut cum iis saltem parum amice
conspirant. Neque nostram tantum suntentiam pulsat boc experimentum; at ex
aequo caeteras quas xorim omnes; veterem imprimis ac vulgatam, nostrae prae
reliquis affinem ita convellere videtur, ut ejus vi coactus doctissimus A.
Tacquetus isti principio (cui pene soli totam inaedificaverat Catoptricam suam)
ceu infido ac inconstanti renunciarit, adeoque suam ipse doctrinam
labefactarit; id tamen, opinor, minime facturus, si rem totam inspexisset
penitius, atque difficultatis fundum attigisset. Apud me vero non ita pollet
haec, nec eousque praepollebit ulla difficultas, ut ab iis quae manifest
rationi consentanea video, discedam; praesertim quum ut hic accidit, ejusmodi
difficultas in singularis cujuspiam casus disparitate fundetur. Nimirum in
praesente casu peculiare quiddam, naturae subtilitati involutum, delitescit,
aegre fortassis, nisi perfectius explorato videndi modo, detegendum. Circa quod
nil, fateor, hactenus excogitare potui, quod adblandiretur animo meo, nedum
plane satisfaceret. Vobis itaque nodum hunc, utinam feliciore conatu,
resolvendum committo. In English as follows.

I have here delivered what my Thoughts have suggested to me, concerning that
part of Optics which is more properly Mathematical. As for the other parts of
that Science (which being rather Physical, do consequently abound with
plausible Conjectures, instead of certain Principles) there has in them scarce
any thing occurred to my Observation, different from what has been already said
by Kepler, Scheinerus, Descartes, etc. And, methinks, I had better say nothing
at all, than repeat that which has been so often said by others. I think it
therefore high time to take my leave of this Subject. But before I quit it for
good and all, the fair and ingenuous Dealing that I owe both to You and to
Truth, obliges me to acquaint you with a certain untoward Difficulty, which
seems directly opposite to the Doctrine I have been hitherto inculcating, at
least, admits of no Solution from it. In short it is this. Before the double
Unequal Glass or Concave Speculum EBF, let the Point A be placed, at such a
Distance that the Rays proceeding from A, after Refraction or Reflection, be
brought to Unite somewhere in the Ax AB. And suppose the Point of Union ( i. e.
the Image of the Point A, as has been already set forth) to be Z; between
which and B, the Vertex of the Glass or Speculum, conceive the Eye to be any
where placed. The Question now is, Where the Point A ought to appear.
Experience shows that it does not appear behind at the Point Z, and it were
contrary to Nature that it should; since all the Impression which affects the
Sense comes from toward A. But from our Tenants it should seem to follow, that
it would appear before the Eye at a vast Distance off, so great as should in
some Sort, surpass all sensible Distance. For since if we exclude all
Anticipations and Prejudices, every Object appears by so much the farther off,
by how much the Rays it sends to the Eye are less Diverging. And that Object is
thought to be most remote, from which Parallel Rays proceed unto the Eye.
Reason would make one think, that Object should appear, at yet a greater
Distance, which is seen by converging Rays. Moreover it may in general be asked
concerning this Case, what it is that determines the apparent Place of the
Point A, and makes it to appear after a constant manner, sometimes nearer, at
other times farther off? To which doubt, I see nothing that can be answered
agreeable to the Principles we have laid down, except only that the Point A
ought always to appear extremely remote. But on the contrary, we are assured by
Experience that the Point A appears variously Distant, according to the
different Situations of the Eye between the Points B and Z. And that it does
almost never (if at all) seem farther off, than it would if it were beheld by
the naked Eye, but on the contrary, it does sometimes appear much nearer. Nay,
it is even certain, that by how much the Rays falling on the Eye do more
converge, by so much the nearer does the Object seem to approach. For the Eye
being placed close to the Point B, the Object A appears nearly in it is own
natural Place, if the Point B is taken in the Glass, or at the same Distance,
if in the Speculum. The Eye being brought back to O, the Object seems to draw
near. And being come to P it beholds it still nearer. And so on by little and
little, till at length the Eye being placed somewhere, suppose at Q, the Object
appearing extremely near, begins to vanish into mere Confusion. All which does
seem Repugnant to our Principles, at least, not rightly to agree with them. Nor
is our Tenent alone struck at by this Experiment, but likewise all others that
ever came to my Knowledge are, every whit as much, endangered by it. The
ancient one especially (which is most commonly received, and comes nearest to
mine) seems to be so effectually overthrown thereby, that the most learned
Tacquet has been forced to reject that Principle, as false and uncertain, on
which alone he had built almost his whole Catoptrics, and consequently by
taking away the Foundation, has himself pulled down the Superstructure he had
raised on it. Which nevertheless, I do not believe he would have done, had he
but considered the whole matter more thoroughly, and examined the Difficulty to
the bottom. But as for me, neither this, nor any other Difficulty shall have so
great an Influence on me, as to make me renounce that which I know to be
manifestly agreeable to Reason. Especially when, as it here falls out, the
Difficulty is founded in the peculiar Nature of a certain odd and particular
Case. For in the present Case something peculiar lies hid, which being involved
in the Subtilty of Nature will, perhaps, hardly be discovered till such Time,
as the manner of Vision is more perfectly made known. Concerning which, I must
own, I have hitherto been able to find out nothing that has the least show of
Probability, not to mention Certainty. I shall therefore, leave this Knot to be
united by you, wishing you may have better Success in it than I have had.

XXX. This Case contradicts a received Principle in Catoptrics.
The ancient and received Principle which Dr. Barrow here mentions, as the main
Foundation of Tacquet's Catoptrics, is that, every visible Point seen by
Reflection from a Speculum, shall appear placed at the Intersection of the
reflected Ray, and the Perpendicular of Incidence. Which Intersection in the
present Case, happening to be behind the Eye, it greatly shakes the Authority
of that Principle, whereon the aforementioned Author proceeds throughout his
whole Catoptrics, in determining the apparent Place of Objects seen by
Reflection from any kind of Speculum.

XXXI. It is shown to agree with the Principles we have laid down.
Let us now see how this Phenomenon agrees with our Tenants. The Eye the
nearer it is placed to the Point B in the above Figures, the more distinct is
the Appearance of the Object; but as it recedes to O, the Appearance grows more
Confused; and at P it sees the Object yet more Confused; and so on till the Eye
being brought back to Z sees the Object in the greatest Confusion of all.
Wherefore by Sect. XXI. the Object should seem to approach the Eye gradually,
as it recedes from the Point B, viz. at O it should (in consequence of the
Principle I have laid down in the aforesaid Section) seem nearer than it did at
B, and at P nearer than at O, and at Q nearer than at P; and so on, till it
quite vanishes at Z. Which is the very matter of Fact, as any one that pleases
may easily satisfy himself by Experiment.

XXXII. This Phenomenon Illustrated.
This Case is much the same, as if we should suppose an Englishman to meet a
Foreigner, who used the same Words with the English, but in a direct contrary
Signification. The Englishman would not fail to make a wrong Judgment, of the
Ideas annexed to those Sounds, in the Mind of him that used them. Just so, in
the present Case the Object speaks (if I may so say) with Words that the Eye is
well acquainted with, viz. Confusions of Appearance; but whereas heretofore the
greater Confusions were always wont to signify nearer Distances, they have in
this Case a direct, contrary Signification, being connected with the greater
Distances. Whence it follows, that the Eye must unavoidably be mistaken, since
it will take the Confusions in the Sense it has been used to, which is directly
opposed to the True.

XXXIII. It confirms the Truth of the Principle whereby it is explained.
This Phenomenon as it entirely subverts the Opinion of those, who will have
us judge of Distance by Lines and Angles, on which Supposition it is altogether
inexplicable, so it seems to me no small Confirmation, of the Truth of that
Principle whereby it is explained. But in order to a more full Explication of
this Point, and to show how far the Hypothesis of the Mind's judging, by the
various Divergency of Rays, may be of use in determining the apparent Place of
an Object, it will be necessary to premise some few Things, which are already
well known to those who have any Skill in Dioptrics.

XXXIV. Vision when Distinct, and when Confused.
First, Any radiating Point is then distinctly seen, when the Rays proceeding
from it are, by the refractive Power of the Crystalline, accurately reunited in
the Retina, or Fund of the Eye. But if they are reunited, either before they
arrive at the Retina, or after they have past it, then there is confused Vision.

XXXV. The different Effects of Parallel, Diverging and Converging Rays.
Secondly, Suppose in the adjacent Figures NP represent an Eye duly framed, and
retaining its natural Figure. In Fig. 1. the Rays falling nearly Parallel on
the Eye, are by the Crystalline AB refracted, so as their Focus, or Point of
Union F falls exactly on the Retina. But if Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

Fig. 3.

the Rays fall sensibly diverging on the Eye, as in Fig. 2. then their Focus
falls beyond the Retina: Or if the Rays are made to converge by the Lens QS,
before they come at the Eye, as in Fig. 3. their Focus F will fall before the
Retina. In which two last Cases, it is evident from the foregoing Section, that
the Appearance of the Point Z is confused. And by how much the greater is the
Convergency, or Divergency of the Rays falling on the Pupil, by so much the
farther will the Point of their reunion be from the Retina, either before or
behind it, and consequently the Point Z will appear, by so much, the more
Confused. And this, by the Bye, may show us the difference between Confused,
and Faint Vision. Confused Vision is, when the Rays proceedings from each
distinct Point of the Object, are not accurately recollected in one
corresponding Point on the Retina; but take up some Space thereon. So that Rays
from different Points become mixed, and confused together. This is opposed to
distinct Vision, and attends near Objects. Faint Vision is, when by reason of
the Distance of the Object, or grossness of the interjacent Medium, few Rays
arrive from the Object to the Eye. This is opposed to vigorous, or clear
Vision, and attends remote Objects. But to return.

XXXVI. How Converging, and Diverging Rays come to suggest the same Distance.
The Eye, or (to speak truly) the Mind perceiving only the Confusion it self,
without ever considering the Cause from which it proceeds, does constantly
annex the same Degree of Distance, to the same Degree of Confusion. Whether
that Confusion be occasioned by Converging, or by Diverging Rays, it matters
not. Whence it follows, that the Eye viewing the Object Z through the Glass QS
(which by Refraction causes the Rays ZQ, ZS, etc. to converge) should judge it
to be at such a Nearness, at which if it were placed, it would radiate on the
Eye with Rays diverging to that Degree, as would produce the same Confusion,
which is now produced by Converging Rays, i. e. would cover a Portion of the
Retina equal to DC. vid. Fig. 3. Sup. But then this must be understood (to use
Dr. Barrow's Phrase) Seclusis praenotionibus and praejudiciis, In case, we
abstract from all other Circumstances of Vision, such as the Figure, Size,
Faintness, etc. of the visible Objects; all which do ordinarily concur to form
our Idea of Distance; the Mind having, by frequent Experience, observed their
several Sorts or Degrees, to be connected with various Distances.

XXXVII. A Person extreme Purblind would judge aright in the forementioned Case.
It plainly follows from what has been said, that a Person perfectly Purblind (
i. e. that could not see an Object distinctly, but when placed close to his
Eye) would not make the same wrong Judgment that others do, in the
forementioned Case. For, to him, greater Confusions constantly suggesting
greater Distances, he must, as he recedes from the Glass, and the Object grows
more Confused, judge it to be at a farther Distance, contrary to what they do,
who have had the Perception of the Object's growing more Confused, connected
with the Idea of Approach.

XXXVIII. Lines and Angles why useful in Optics.
Hence also it does appear, there may be good use of computation by Lines and
Angles in Optics; not, that the Mind judges of Distance immediately by them,
but because it judges by somewhat which is connected with them, and to the
determination whereof, they may be subservient. Thus the Mind judging of the
Distance of an Object, by the Confusedness of it is Appearance; and this
Confusedness being greater or lesser to the naked Eye, according as the Object
is seen by Rays more, or less Diverging; it follows, that a Man may make use of
the Divergency of the Rays, in computing the apparent Distance, though not for
it is own sake, yet on account of the Confusion with which it is connected. But,
so it is, the Confusion it self is entirely neglected by Mathematicians, as
having no necessary relation with Distance, such as the greater or lesser
Angles of Divergency are conceived to have. And these (especially for that they
fall under Mathematical Computation) are alone regarded, in determining the
apparent Places of Objects, as though they were the sole and immediate Cause of
the Judgments the Mind makes of Distance. Whereas, in Truth, they should not at
all be regarded in themselves, or any otherwise, than as they are supposed to
be the Cause of Confused Vision.

XXXIX. The not understanding this, a cause of Mistake.
The not considering of this has been a fundamental and perplexing Oversight.
For Proof whereof, we need go no farther than the Case before us. It having
been observed, that the most Diverging Rays brought into the Mind the Idea of
nearest Distance, and that still, as the Divergency decreased, the Distance
increased; and it being thought, the connection between the various Degrees of
Divergency, and Distance, was immediate; this naturally leads one to conclude,
from an ill grounded Analogy, that Converging Rays shall make an Object appear
at an immense Distance: And that, as the Convergency increases, the Distance
(if it were possible,) should do so likewise. That this was the Cause of Dr.
Barrow's Mistake, is evident from his own Words which we have Quoted. Whereas,
had the learned Doctor observed, that Diverging and Converging Rays, how
opposite soever they may seem, do nevertheless agree in producing the same
effect, viz. Confusedness of Vision, greater Degrees whereof are produced
indifferently, either as the Divergency, or Convergency of the Rays increases.
And that it is by this effect, which is the same in both, that either the
Divergency, or Convergency is perceived by the Eye. I say, had he but
considered this, it is certain he would have made a quite contrary Judgment, and
rightly concluded, that those Rays which fall on the Eye with greater degrees
of Convergency should make the Object from whence they proceed, appear by so
much the nearer. But it is plain, it was impossible for any Man to attain to a
right Notion of this Matter, so long as he had regard only to Lines and Angles;
and did not apprehend the true Nature of Vision, and how far it was of
Mathematical Consideration.

XL. A Query proposed by Mr. Molyneux in his Dioptrics, considered.
Before we dismiss this this Subject, it is fit we take Notice of a Query,
relating thereto, proposed by the Ingenious Mr. Molyneux, in his Treatise of
Dioptrics, Par. 1. Prop. 31. Sect. 9. where speaking of the Difficulty we have
been explaining, he has these Words, And so he ( i. e. Dr. Barrow) leaves this
Difficulty to the Solution of Others, which I (after so great an Example) shall
do likewise; but with the Resolution of the same admirable Author of not
quitting the evident Doctrine which we have before laid down, for determining
the Locus Objecti, on account of being Pressed by one Difficulty, which seems
inexplicable till a more intimate Knowledge of the Visive Faculty be obtained
by Mortals. In the mean time, I propose it to the Consideration of the
Ingenious, Whether the Locus Apparens of an Object placed as in this 9th
Section, be not as much before the Eye, as the distinct Base is behind the Eye?
To which Query we may venture to answer in the Negative. For in the present
Case, the Rule for determining the Distance of the distinct Base, or respective
Focus from the Glass, is this. As the difference between the Distance of the
Object and Focus is to the Focus or Focal Length So the Distance of the Object
from the Glass to the Distance of the respective Focus or Distinct Base from
the Glass. Vid. Molyneux Dioptr. Par. 1. Prop. 5. Let us now suppose the Object
to be placed at the Distance of the Focal Length, and one half of the Focal
Length from the Glass, and the Eye close to the Glass. Hence it will follow by
the Rule, that the Distance of the Distinct Base behind the Eye is double the
true Distance of the Object before the Eye. If therefore Mr. Molyneux's
Conjecture held good, it would follow, that the Eye should see the Object,
twice as far off as it really is. And in other Cases, at three or four times
it is due Distance or more. But this manifestly contradicts Experience; the
Object never appearing, at farthest, beyond its due Distance. Whatever
therefore is built on this Supposition ( vid. Corol. 1. Prop. 57. ibid.) comes
to the Ground along with it.

XLI. One Born Blind would not at first have any Idea of Distance by Sight.
From what has been premised, it is a manifest Consequence, that a Man Born
Blind, being made to see would at first, have no Idea of Distance by Sight. The
Sun and Stars, the remotest Objects as well as the nearer would all seem to be
in his Eye, or rather in his Mind. The Objects intromitted by Sight, would seem
to him (as in truth they are) no other than a new Set of Thoughts or
Sensations, each whereof is as near to him, as the Perceptions of Pain or
Pleasure, or the most inward Passions of his Soul. For our judging Objects
perceived by Sight to be at any Distance, or without the Mind, is ( vid. Sect.
XXVIII.) entirely the effect of Experience, which one in those Circumstances
could not yet have attained to.

XLII. This not agreeable to the common Principles.
It is indeed otherwise upon the common Supposition, that Men judge of Distance
by the Angle of the Optic Axes, just as one in the Dark, or a Blind-Man by the
Angle comprehended by two Sticks, one whereof he held in each Hand. For if this
were true, it would follow that one Blind from his Birth, being made to See,
should stand in need of no new Experience, in order to perceive Distance by
Sight. But that this is False, has, I think, been sufficiently demonstrated.

XLIII. The proper Objects of Sight, not without the Mind, nor the Images of
any thing without the Mind.
And perhaps, upon a strict Inquiry we shall not find, that even those, who
from their Birth have grown up in a continued Habit of Seeing, are
irrecoverably prejudiced on the other side, viz. in thinking what they See to
be at a Distance from them. For at this time it seems agreed on all Hands, by
those who have had any thoughts of that Matter, that Colors, which are the
proper and immediate Object of Sight, are not without the Mind. But then say
you, by Sight we have also the Ideas of Extension, and Figure, and Motion; all
which may well be thought without, and at some Distance from the Mind, though
Color should not. In answer to this, I appeal to any Man's Experience, whether
the visible Extension of any Object do not appear as near to him, as the Color
of that Object; Nay, whether they do not both seem to be in the very same
Place. Is not the Extension we see Colored, and is it possible for us, so much
as in Thought, to separate and abstract Color from Extension? Now, where the
Extension is, there surely is the Figure, and there the Motion too. I speak of
those which are perceived by Sight.

XLIV. This more fully explained.
But for a fuller Explication of this Point, and to show that the immediate
Objects of Sight are not so much as the Ideas or Resemblances of things placed
at a Distance, it is requisite we look nearer into the Matter, and carefully
observe what is meant in common Discourse, when one says, that which he sees is
at a Distance from him. Suppose, for Example, That looking at the Moon I should
say, it were Fifty or Sixty Semidiameters of the Earth distant from me. Let us
see what Moon this is spoken of. It Is plain it cannot be the visible Moon, or
any thing like the visible Moon, or that which I see, which is only a round,
luminous Plain, of about Thirty visible Points in Diameter. For in case I am
carried, from the place where I stand directly toward the Moon; it is manifest
the Object varies, still as I go on; and by the time that I am advanced Fifty
or Sixty Semidiameters of the Earth, I shall be so far from being near a small,
round, luminous Flat, that I shall perceive nothing like it; this Ob-ject
having long since disappeared, and if I would recover it, it must be by going
back to the Earth from whence I set out. Again, Suppose I perceive by Sight the
faint and obscure Idea of something, which I doubt whether it be a Man, or a
Tree, or a Tower; but judge it to be at the Distance of about a Mile. It Is
plain I cannot mean, that what I see is a Mile off, or that it is the Image or
Likeness of any thing which is a Mile off. Since that every Step I take toward
it, the Appearance alters, and from being Obscure, Small, and Faint grows,
Clear, Large, and Vigorous. And when I come to the Mile's end, that which I saw
first is quite lost, neither do I find any thing in the likeness of it.

XLV. In what Sense we must be understood to see Distance and external Things.
In these, and the like Instances, the truth of the Matter, I find, stands
thus. Having of a long time, experienced certain Ideas, perceivable by Touch,
as Distance, Tangible Figure, and Solidity to have been connected with certain
Ideas of Sight, I do upon perceiving these Ideas of Sight, forthwith conclude
what Tangible Ideas are, by the wonted, ordinary course of Nature like to
follow. Looking at an Object I perceive a certain Visible Figure, and Color
with some degree of Faintness and other Circumstances; which, from what I have
formerly observed, determine me to think, that if I advance forward so many
Paces, Miles, etc. I shall be affected with such, and such Ideas of Touch. So
that in truth, and strictness of Speech, I neither see Distance it self, nor
any thing that I take to be at a Distance. I say, neither Distance, nor things
placed at a Distance are themselves, or their Ideas, truly perceived by Sight.
This I am persuaded of, as to what concerns my self. And I believe whoever will
look narrowly into his own Thoughts, and examine what he means by saying, he
sees this, or that thing at a Distance, will agree with me that, what he sees
only suggests to his Understanding, that after having passed a certain
Distance, to be measured by the Motion of his Body, which is perceivable by
Touch, he shall come to perceive such, and such Tangible Ideas which have been
usually connected with such and such Visible Ideas. But that one might be
deceived by these suggestions of Sense, and that there is no necessary
Connection, between Visible, and Tangible Ideas suggested by them, we need go no
farther than the next Looking-Glass or Picture, to be convinced. Note, that
when I speak of Tangible Ideas, I take the Word Idea for any the immediate
Object of Sense, or Understanding, in which large Signification it is commonly
used by the Moderns.

XLVI. Distance and Things placed at a Distance, not otherwise perceived by the
Eye than by the Ear.
From what we have shown it is a manifest Consequence, that the Ideas of Space,
Outness, and things placed at a Distance are not, strictly speaking, the Object
of Sight. They are no otherwise perceived by the Eye, than by the Ear. Sitting
in my Study I hear a Coach drive along the Streets. I look through the Casement
and see it. I walk out and enter into it. Thus, common Speech would incline one
to think, I heard, saw, and touched the same Thing, viz. the Coach. It is,
nevertheless, certain, the Ideas intromitted by each Sense are widely
different, and distinct from each other; but having been observed constantly to
go together, they are spoken of as one and the same thing. By the variation of
the Noise, I perceive the different Distances of the Coach, and know that it
approaches before I look out. Thus by the Ear I perceive Distance, just after
the same manner, as I do by the Eye.

XLVII. The Ideas of Sight more apt to be confounded with the Ideas of Touch
than those of Hearing are.
I do not, nevertheless, say I hear Distance, in like manner as I say that I
see it, the Ideas perceived by Hearing not being so apt to be confounded with
the Ideas of Touch, as those of Sight are. So likewise, a Man is easily
convinced that Bodies, and external Things are not properly the Object of
Hearing, but only Sounds, by the Mediation whereof the Idea of this or that
Body, or Distance is suggested to his Thoughts. But then one is with more
difficulty, brought to discern the difference there is, betwixt the Ideas of
Sight and Touch: Though it be certain, a Man no more Sees and Feels the same
Thing, than he Hears and Feels the same Thing.

XLVIII. How this comes to pass.
One Reason of which seems to be this. It is thought a great Absurdity to
imagine that one, and the same thing, should have any more than one Extension,
and one Figure. But the Extension and Figure of a Body, being let into the Mind
two ways, and that indifferently, either by Sight, or Touch, it seems to follow
that we see the same Extension, and the same Figure which we Feel.

XLIX. Strictly speaking, we never see and feel the same thing.
But if we take a close and accurate View of the Matter, it must be
acknowledged, that we never See and Feel one and the same thing. That which is
Seen is one thing, and that which is felt is another. If the Visible Figure and
Extension be not the same, with the Tangible Figure and Extension, we are not
to infer, that one and the same thing has diverse Extensions. The true
Consequence is, that the Objects of Sight and Touch are two distinct things. It
may perhaps, require some Thought, rightly to conceive this Distinction. And
the difficulty seems not a little increased, because the Combination of Visible
Ideas has constantly the same Name, as the Combination of Tangible Ideas
wherewith it is connected. Which does of necessity arise from the use, and end
of Language.

L. Objects of Sight twofold Mediate and Immediate.
In order therefore to treat accurately, and unconfusedly of Vision, we must
bear in Mind, that there are two sorts of Objects apprehended by the Eye: The
one, primarily and immediately, the other, secondarily and by intervention of
the former. Those of the first sort neither are, nor appear to be without the
Mind, or at any distance off. They may, indeed, grow Greater, or Smaller, more
Confused, or more Clear, or more Faint. But, they do not, cannot Approach, or
even seem to Approach, or Recede from us. Whenever we say an Object is at a
Distance, whenever we say, it draws near, or goes farther off; we must always
mean it of the latter sort, which properly belong to the Touch, and are not so
truly perceived, as suggested, by the Eye, in like manner as Thoughts by the
Ear.

LI. These hard to separate, in our Thoughts.
No sooner do we hear the Words of a familiar Language pronounced in our Ears,
but the Ideas corresponding thereto present themselves to our Minds. In the
very same instant, the Sound and the Meaning enter the Understanding. So
closely are they United, that it is not in our Power to keep out the one, except
we exclude the other also. We even act in all respects, as though we heard the
very Thoughts themselves. So likewise, the Secondary Objects, or those which
are only suggested by Sight, do often more strongly affect us, and are more
regarded than the proper Objects of that Sense; along with which they enter
into the Mind, and with which they have a far more strict and near Connection,
than Ideas have with Words. Hence it is, we find it so difficult to
discriminate, between the immediate and mediate Objects of Sight, and are so
prone to attribute to the former, what belongs only to the latter. They are, as
it were, most closely twisted, blended, and incorporated together. And the
Prejudice is confirmed, and riveted in our Thoughts, by a long tract of Time,
by the use of Language, and want of Reflection. However, I doubt not, but any
one that shall attentively consider what we have already said, and shall say
upon this Subject before we have done, (especially if he pursue it in his own
Thoughts) may be able to deliver himself from that Prejudice. Sure I am, it is
worth some Attention, to whoever would understand the true nature of Vision.

LII. The received Accounts of our perceiving Magnitude by Sight false
I have now done with Distance, and proceed to show, how it is, that we
perceive by Sight, the Magnitude of Objects. It is the Opinion of some, that we
do it by Angles, or by Angles in Conjuction with Distance. But neither Angles,
nor Distance being perceivable by Sight: And the things we see being, in truth,
at no Distance from us; it follows, that as we have demonstrated Lines and
Angles not to be the Medium, the Mind makes use of in apprehending the Apparent
Place, so neither are they, the Medium whereby it apprehends the Apparent
Magnitude of Objects.

LIII. Magnitude perceived as immediately, as Distance.
It is well known that the same Extension, at a near Distance, shall subtend a
greater Angle, and at a farther Distance, a lesser Angle. And by this Principle
(we are told) the Mind estimates the Magnitude of an Object, comparing the
Angle under which it is seen, with its Distance, and thence infering the
Magnitude thereof. What inclines Men to this Mistake (beside the Humor of
making one see by Geometry) is, that the same Perceptions or Ideas which
suggest Distance, do also suggest Magnitude. But if we examine it, we shall
find they suggest the latter, as immediately as the former. I say, they do not
first suggest Distance, and then leave it to the Judgment to use that as a
Medium, whereby to collect the Magnitude; but they have as close, and immediate
a Connection with the Magnitude, as with the Distance; and suggest Magnitude as
independently of Distance, as they do Distance independently of Magnitude. All
which will be evident, to whoever considers whathas been already said, and what
follows.

LIVE. Two kinds of sensible Extension, neither of which is infinitely Divisible.
It has been shown, there are two sorts of Objects apprehended by Sight; each
whereof has its distinct Magnitude, or Extension. The one, properly Tangible,
i. e. to be perceived and measured by Touch, and not immediately falling under
the Sense of Seeing. The other, properly and immediately Visible, by Mediation
of which, the former is brought in View. Each of these Magnitudes are greater
or lesser, according as they contain in them more or fewer Points; they being
made up of Points or Minimums. For, whatever may be said of Extension in
Abstract, it is certain sensible Extension is not infinitely Divisible. There
is a Minimum Tangibile, and a Minimum Visibile, beyond which Sense cannot
perceive. This, every ones Experience will inform him.

LV. The Tangible Magnitude of an Object steady, the Visible not.
The Magnitude of the Object which exists without the Mind, and is at a
Distance, continues always invariably the same. But the Visible Object still
changing as you approach to, or recede from the Tangible Object, it has no
fixed and determinate Greatness. Whenever therefore, we speak of the Magnitude
of any thing, for Instance a Tree or a House, we must mean the Tangible
Magnitude, otherwise there can be nothing steady, and free from Ambiguity
spoken of it. Now, though the Tangible and Visible Magnitude do, in truth, belong
to two distinct Objects: I shall nevertheless (especially since those Objects
are called by the same Name, and are observed to coexist) to avoid tediousness
and singularity of Speech, sometimes speak of them, as belonging to one and the
same thing.

LVI. By what means, Tangible Magnitude is perceived by Sight.
Now in order to discover by what means, the Magnitude of Tangible Objects is
perceived by Sight; I need only reflect on what Passes in my own Mind. And
observe what those things be, which introduce the Ideas of greater or lesser
into my Thoughts, when I look on any Object. And these I find to be, First, the
Magnitude or Extension of the Visible Object, which being immediately perceived
by Sight, is connected with that other which is Tangible, and placed at a
Distance. Secondly, The Confusion or Distinctness. And, Thirdly, The
Vigorousness or Faintness of the aforesaid Visible Appearance. Caeteris
paribus, by how much the greater or lesser, do I conclude the Tangible Object
to be. But, be the Idea immediately perceived by Sight never so large, yet if
it be withal Confused, I judge the Magnitude of the thing to be but small. If
it be Distinct and Clear, I judge it greater. And if it be Faint, I apprehend
it to be yet greater. What is here meant, by Confusion and Faintness, has been
Explained in Sect. XXXV.

LVII. This farther enlarged on.
Moreover, the Judgments we make of Greatness do, in like manner as those of
Distance, depend on the Disposition of the Eyes, also on the Figure, Number of
intermediate Objects, and other Circumstances that have been observed to attend
great, or small Tangible Magnitudes. Thus, for Instance, The very same Quantity
of Visible Extension, which in the Figure of a Tower, does suggest the Idea of
great Magnitude, shall, in the Figure of a Man, suggest the Idea of much
smaller Magnitude. That this is owing to the Experience we have had, of the
usual Bigness of a Tower and a Man, no one, I suppose, need be told.

LVIII. No necessary Connection between, Confusion or Faintness of Appearance,
and small or great Magnitude.
It is also evident, that Confusion, Faintness, etc. have no more a necessary
Connection with little or great Magnitude, than they have with little or great
Distance. As they suggest the latter, so they suggest the former to our Minds.
And, by Consequence, if it were not for Experience, we should no more judge a
faint or confused Appearance to be connected, with great or little Magnitude,
than we should that it was connected with great or little Distance.

LIX. The Tangible Magnitude of an Object, more heeded than the Visible; and
why.
Nor will it be found, that great or small Visible Magnitude has any necessary
Relation to great or small Tangible Magnitude: So that the one may certainly,
and infallibly be inferred from the other. But, before we come to the Proof of
this, it is fit we consider the difference there is, betwixt the Extension and
Figure which is the proper Object of Touch, and that other which is termed
Visible; and how the former is principally, though not immediately, taken notice
of, when we look at any Object. This has been before mentioned, but we shall
here enquire into the Cause thereof. We regard the Objects that environ us, in
proportion as they are adapted to benefit, or injure our own Bodies, and
thereby, produce in our Minds the Sensations of Pleasure, or Pain. Now Bodies
operating on our Organs, by an immediate Application: And the Hurt and
Advantage arising therefrom, depending altogether on the Tangible, ang not at
all on the Visible, Qualities of any Object. This is a plain Reason, why those
should be regarded by us much more than these. And for this End, chiefly, the
Visive Sense seems to have been bestowed on Animals, viz. that by the
Perception of Visible Ideas (which in themselves are not capable of affecting,
or any wise altering the Frame of their Bodies) they may be able to foresee
(from the Experience they have had, what Tangible Ideas are connected with
such, and such Visible Ideas) the Damage or Benefit which is like to ensue,
upon the Application of their own Bodies to this, or that Body which is at a
Distance. Which Foresight, how necessary it is to the preservation of an
Animal, every ones Experience can inform him. Hence it is, that when we look at
an Object, the Tangible Figure and Extension thereof are principally attended
to; whilst there is small heed taken of the Visible Figure and Magnitude,
which, though more immediately perceived, do less sensibly affect us, and are not
fitted to produce any Alteration in our Bodies.

LX. An Instance of this.
That the Matter of Fact is true, will be evident to any one, who considers
that a Man placed at Ten Foot Distance, is thought as great, as if he were
placed at the Distance only of Five Foot; which is true, not with Relation to
the Visible, but Tangible greatness of the Object. The Visible Magnitude being
far greater, at one Station, than it is at the other.

LXI. Men do not Measure by Visible Feet or Inches.
Inches, Feet, etc. are settled, stated Lengths, whereby we measure Objects,
and estimate their Magnitude, we say, for Example, an Object appears to be Six
Inches, or Six Foot long. Now, that this cannot be meant of Visible Inchches,
etc. is evident, because a Visible Inch is it self no constant, determinate
Magnitude, and cannot, therefore, serve to mark out, and determine the Magnitude
of any other thing. Take an Inch marked upon a Ruler; view it, successively, at
the Distance of Half a Foot, a Foot, a Foot and a Half, etc. from the Eye; at
each of which, and at all the intermediate Distances, the Inch shall have a
different Visible Extension, i. e. there shall be more or fewer Points
discerned in it. Now I ask which of all these various Extensions, is that
Stated, determinate one, that is agreed on, for a common Measure of other
Magnitudes? No reason can be assigned, why we should pitch on one, more than
another. And except there be some invariable, determinate Extension fixed on,
to be marked by the Word Inch, it is plain, it can be used to little Purpose;
and to say, a Thing contains this or that Number of Inches, shall imply no more
than that it is extended, without bringing any particular Idea of that
Extension into the Mind. Farther, an Inch and a Foot, from different Distances,
shall both exhibit the same Visible Magnitude, and yet at the same time, you
shall say, that one seems several times greater than the other. From all which
it is manifest, that the Judgments we make of the Magnitude of Objects by
Sight, are altogether in reference to their Tangible Extension. Whenever we say
an Object is Great, or Small, of this or that determinate Measure, I say, it
must be meant of the Tangible, and not the Visible Extension, which, though
immediately perceived, is nevertheless little taken Notice of.

LXII. No necessary Conexion between Visible and Tangible Extension.
Now, that there is no necessary Connection, between these two Distinct
Extensions is evident from hence. Because our Eyes might have been framed in
such a manner, as to be able to see nothing but what were less than the Minimum
Tangibile. In which Case, it is not impossible we might have perceived all the
Immediate Objects of Sight, the very same that we do now. But unto those
Visible Appearances, there would not be Connected those different Tangible
Magnitudes, that are now. Which shows, the Judgments we make of the Magnitude
of Things placed at a Distance, from the various Greatness of the Immediate
Objects of Sight, do not arise from any Essential or Necessary, but only a
Customary Tie, which has been observed betwixt them.

LXIII. Greater Visible Magnitude might signify Lesser Tangible Magnitude
Moreover, it is not only certain, that any Idea of Sight might not have been
Connected, with this or that Idea of Touch, we now observe to accompany it: But
also, that the greater Visible Magnitudes might have been Connected with, and
Introduced into our Minds, lesser Tangible Magnitudes, and Vice Versa. Nay,
that it often is so, we have daily Experience; that Object which makes a strong
and large Appearance, not seeming near so great, as another the Visible
Magnitude whereof is much less, but more faint.

LXIV. The Judgments we make of Magnitude depend altogether on Experience
From which, and from Sect. LVII, and LVIII. it is manifest, that as we do not
perceive the Magnitude of Objects immediately by Sight, so neither do we
perceive them, by the Mediation of any thing which has a necessary Connection
with them. Those Ideas that now suggest unto us, the various Magnitudes of
External Objects, before we touch them, might possibly have suggested no such
thing: Or they might have signified them, in a direct, contrary manner, so that
the very same Ideas, on the Perception whereof we judge an Object to be small,
might as well have served to make us conclude it great. Those Ideas being in
their own Nature, equally fitted to bring into our Minds the Idea of Small, or
Great, or no Size at all of outward Objects. Just as the Words of any Language
are in their own Nature, indifferent to signify this, or that thing, or
nothing at all.

LXV. Distance and Magnitude seen as Shame or Anger.
As we see Distance, so we see Magnitude. And we see both, in the same way that
we see Shame or Anger, in the Looks of a Man. Those Passions are themselves
Invisible, they are nevertheless let in by the Eye along with Colors, and
alterations of Countenance, which are the immediate Object of Vision: And which
signify them for no other Reason, than barely because they have been observed
to accompany them. Without which Experience, we should no more have taken
Blushing for a Sign of Shame, than of Gladness.

LXVI. But we are prone to think otherwise, and why.
We are nevertheless exceeding Prone to imagine, those things which are
perceived only by the Mediation of others, to be themselves the immediate
Objects of Sight: Or, at least, to have in their own Nature a Fitness to be
suggested by them, before ever they had been experienced to Coexist with them.
From which prejudice every one, perhaps, will not find it easy to emanicipate
himself, by any the clearest Convictions of Reason. And there are some Grounds
to think, that if there was one only invariable, and universal Language in the
World, and that Men were born with the Faculty of speaking it; it would be the
Opinion of some, that the Ideas in other Men's Minds were properly perceived by
the Ear, or had at least a necessary and inseparable Tie with the Sounds that
were affixed to them. All which seems to arise, from want of a due Application
of our Discerning Faculty, thereby to Discriminate between the Ideas that are
in our Understandings, and consider them apart from each other; which would
preserve us from confounding those that are different, and make us to see what
Ideas do, and what do not include, or imply this or that other Idea.

LXVII. The Moon seems greater in the Horizon than in the Meridian.
There is a Celebrated Phenomenon, the Solution whereof I shall attempt to
give, by the Principles that have been laid down, in reference to the manner
wherein we apprehend by Sight, the Magnitude of Objects. It is as follows. The
apparent Magnitude of the Moon when placed in the Horizon, is much greater than
when it is in the Meridian. Though the Angle under which the Diameter of the Moon
is seen, be not observed greater in the former Case, than in the latter.
Moreover, the Horizontal Moon does not constantly appear of the same Bigness,
but at some times seems far greater than at others.

LXVIII. The cause of this Phenomenon, assigned.
Now in order to explicate the reason, of the Moon's appearing greater than
ordinary in the Horizon; it must be observed, that the Particles which compose
our Atmosphaere, do intercept the Rays of Light, proceeding from any Object to
the Eye; and by how much the greater is the Portion of Atmosphaere, interjacent
between the Object and the Eye, by so much the more are the Rays intercepted;
and by consequence, the Appearance of the Object rendered more Faint: Every
Object appearing more Vigorous or more Faint, in Proportion as it sends more
or fewer Rays unto the Eye. Now, between the Eye, and the Moon, when situated
in the Horizon, there lies a far greater Quantity of Atmosphaere, than there
does when the Moon is in the Meridian. Whence it comes pass, that the
Appearance of the Horizontal Moon is fainter, and therefore by Sect. LVI, it
should be thought bigger in that Situation, than in the Meridian, or in any
other Elevation above the Horizon.

LXIX. The Horizontal Moon, why greater at one time than another.
Farther, The Air being variously impregnated, sometimes more and sometimes
less, with Vapors and Exhalations fitted to retund and intercept the Rays of
Light; it follows, that the Appearance of the Horizontal Moon has not always
an equal Faintness; and by Consequence, that Luminary, though in the very same
Situation, is at one time judged greater than at another.

LXX. The Account we have given, proved to be true.
That we have here given the true Account of the Phenomenon of the Horizontal
Moon, will, I suppose, be farther Evident to any one from the following
Considerations. First, It Is plain, that which in this Case suggests the Idea of
greater Magnitude, must be something which is it self perceived; for, that
which is unperceived cannot suggest to our Perception any other thing.
Secondly, It must be something that does not constantly remain the same, but is
subject to some Change or Variation, since the Appearance of the Horizontal
Moon varies, being at one time greater than at another. Thirdly, It must not
lie in the External Circumjacent or Intermediate Objects but be an Affection of
the very Visible Moon it self: Since by looking through a Tube, when all other
Objects are excluded from Sight, the Appearance is as great as ever. And yet,
Fourthly, It cannot be the Visible Figure or Magnitude, since that remains the
same, or is rather lesser, by how much the Moon is nearer to the Horizon. It
remains therefore, that the true Cause is that Affection or Alteration of the
Visible Appearance, which proceeds from the greater Paucity of Rays arriving at
the Eye, and which I term Faintness: Since this answers all the forementioned
Conditions, and I am not conscious of any other Perception that does.

LXXI. And confirmed, by the Moon's appearing greater in a Mist.
Add to this, that in misty Weather it is a common Observation, that the
Appearance of the Horizontal Moon is far larger than usual, which greatly
conspires with, and strengthens our Opinion. Neither would it prove, in the
least, Irreconcilable with what we have said: If the Horizontal Moon should
chance sometime to seem enlarged beyond its usual Extent, even in more Serene
Weather. For we must not only have regard to the Mist, which happens to be in
the place where we stand; we ought also to take into our Thoughts, the whole
Sum of Vapors and Exhalations, which lie betwixt the Eye and the Moon: All
which cooperating to render the Appearance of the Moon more Faint, and thereby
increase it is Magnitude, it may chance to appear greater than it usually does,
even in the Horizontal Position, at a time when, though there be no extraordinary
Fog or Haziness, just in the place where we stand, yet, the Air between the Eye
and the Moon, taken all together, may be loaded with a greater quantity of
interspersed Vapors and Exhalations, than at other times.

LXXII. Objection answered.
It may be Objected, That in Consequence of our Principles, the Interposition
of a Body in some degree Opaque, which may Intercept a great Part of the Rays
of Light, should render the Appearance of the Moon in the Meridian as large, as
when it is viewed in the Horizon. To which I answer, it is not Faintness any how
applied, that suggests greater Magnitude. There being no necessary, but only an
experimental Connection between those two things: It follows, that the
Faintness, which enlarges the Appearance, must be applied in such Sort, and
with such Circumstances, as have been observed to attend the Vision of great
Magnitudes. When from a Distance (I speak with the Vulgar) we behold great
Objects, the Particles of the intermediate Air and Vapors, which are
themselves unperceivable, do interrupt the Rays of Light, and thereby render
the Appearance less Strong and Vivid; now, Faintness of Appearance caused in
this Sort, has been experienced to coexist with great Magnitude. But, when it
is caused by the Interposition of an Opaque, sensible Body, this Circumstance
alters the Case; so that a Faint Appearance this way caused, does not suggest
greater Magnitude, because it has not been experienced to coexist with it.

LXXIII. The way wherein Faintness suggests greater Magnitude Illustrated.
Faintness, as well as all other Ideas or Perceptions, which suggest Magnitude
or Distance, does it in the same way, that Words suggest the Notions to which
they are annexed. Now, it is known, a Word pronounced with certain
Circumstances, or in a certain Context with other Words, has not always the
same Import and Signification, that it has when pronounced in some other
Circumstances, or different Context of Words. This well considered may,
perhaps, prevent some Objections that might otherwise be made, against what we
have offered as the true Explication of the Appearance of the Horizontal Moon.

LXXIV. Appearance of the Horizontal Moon, why thought difficult to explain.
If we attentively consider the Phenomenon before us, we shall find the not
discerning between the Mediate, and Immediate Objects of Sight, to be the chief
Cause of the Difficulty that occurs in the Explication of it. The Magnitude of
the Visible Moon, or that which is the proper and immediate Object of Vision,
is no greater when the Moon is in the Horizon, than when it is in the Meridian.
How comes it, therefore, to seem greater in one Situation than the other? What
is it can put this Cheat on the Understanding? It has no other Perception of
the Moon, than what it gets by Sight: And that which is seen is of the same
Extent, I say, the Visible Appearance has the very same, or, rather, a lesser
Magnitude when the Moon is viewed in the Horizontal, than when in the
Meridional Position: And yet it is Esteemed greater in the former, than in the
latter. Herein consists the Difficulty; which does Vanish, and admit of a most
easy Solution, if we consider that, as the Visible Moon is not greater in the
Horizon, than in the Meridian, so neither is it thought to be so. It has been
already shown, that in any act of Vision, the Visible Object absolutely, or in
it self, is little taken notice of, the Mind still carrying its View from that
to some Tangible Ideas, which have been observed to be Connected with it, and
by that means, come to be suggested by it. So that when a thing is said to
appear Great, or Small, or whatever Estimate be made of the Magnitude of any
Thing; this is meant, not of the Visible, but, of the Tangible Object. This
duly considered, it will be no hard matter to reconcile, the seeming
Contradiction there is, that the Moon should appear of a different Bigness, the
visible Magnitude thereof remaining still the same. For by Sect. LVI. the very
same visible Extension, with a different Faintness, shall suggest a different
Tangible Extension. When, therefore, the Horizontal Moon is said to appear
greater than the Meridional Moon; this must be understood, not of a greater
Visible Extension, but of a greater Tangible Extension; which, by reason of the
more than ordinary Faintness of the Visible Appearance, is suggested to the
Mind along with it.

LXXV. Attempts toward the Solution of it made by several, but in vain.
Many Attempts have been made by Learned Men, to account for this Appearance.
Gassendus, Descartes, Hobbs, and several others, have employed their Thoughts
on that Subject: But how fruitless and unsatisfactory their Endeavors have
been, is sufficiently shown by Mr. Molyneux, vid. Philos. Trans. Numb. 187, p.
314. where you may see their several Opinions at large set forth and confuted,
not without some Surprise at the gross Blunders, that Ingenious Men have been
forced into, by endeavoring to reconcile this Appearance with the ordinary
Principles of Optics. Since the Writing of which Discourse, there has been
Published in the Transactions, Numb. 187, p. 323. another Paper relating to the
same Affair, by the Celebrated Dr. Wallis, wherein he pretends to account for
that Phenomenon; which, though it seems not to contain any thing new, or
different from what had been said before by others, I shall nevertheless
consider in this place.

LXXVI. The Opinion of Dr. Wallis.
His Opinion in short is this. We judge not of the Magnitude of an Object by
the Optic Angle alone, but by the Optic Angle in Conjunction with the Distance,
Hence, though the Angle remain the same, or even becomes less; yet if withal the
Distance seem to have been increased, the Object shall appear greater. Now, one
way whereby we estimate the Distance of any thing, is by the Number and Extent
of the intermediate Objects: When therefore the Moon is seen in the Horizon,
the Variety of Fields, Houses, etc. together with the large Prospect of the
wide-extended Land, or Sea, that lies between the Eye and the utmost Limb of
the Horizon, suggest unto the Mind the Idea of greater Distance, and
consequently magnify the Appearance. And this, according to Dr. Wallis, is the
true Account of the extraordinary Largeness attributed by the Mind to the
Horizontal Moon, at a time when the Angle subtended by its Diameter, is not one
jot greater than it used to be.

LXXVII. It is shown to be unsatisfactory.
With reference to this Opinion, not to repeat what has been already said
concerning Distance, I shall only observe, First, That if the Prospect of
interjacent Objects be that which suggests the Idea of farther Distance, and
this Idea of farther Distance be the Cause, that brings into the Mind the Idea
of greater Magnitude; it should hence follow, that if one looked at the
Horizontal Moon from behind a Wall, it would appear no bigger than ordinary.
For in that Case, the Wall interposing, cuts off all that Prospect of Sea and
Land, etc. which might otherwise increase the apparent Distance, and thereby
the apparent Magnitude of the Moon. Nor will it suffice to say, the Memory does
even then suggest all that Extent of Land, etc. which lies within the Horizon;
which Suggestion occasions a sudden Judgment of Sense, that the Moon is farther
off, and larger than usual. For ask any Man, who from such a Station beholding
the Horizontal Moon, shall think her greater than usual, whether he have at
that time in his Mind any Idea of the intermediate Objects, or long Tract of
Land that lies between his Eye and the extreme Edge of the Horizon? And whether
it be that Idea which is the Cause of his making the aforementioned Judgment?
He will, without doubt, reply in the Negative, and declare the Horizontal Moon
shall appear greater than the Meridional, though he never thinks of all or any of
those things that lie between him and it. And as for the Absurdity of any
Idea's introducing into the Mind another, whilst it self is not perceived, this
has already fallen under our Observation, and is too evident to need any
farther Enlargement on it. Secondly, It seems impossible by this Hypothesis, to
account for the Moon's appearing in the very same Situation, at one time
greater than at another. Which, nevertheless, has been shown to be very
agreeable to the Principles we have laid down, and receives a most easy and
natural Explication from them.

LXXVIII. How Lines and Angles may be of use in computing apparent Magnitudes.
This Phenomenon of the Horizontal Moon is a clear Instance of the
Insufficiency of Lines and Angles, for explaining the way wherein the Mind
perceives, and estimates the Magnitude of outward Objects. There is,
nevertheless, a use of Computation by them, in order to determine the apparent
Magnitude of things, so far as they have a Connection with, and are Proportional
to those other Ideas, or Perceptions which are the true and immediate Occasions
that suggest to the Mind the apparent Magnitude of Things. But this in general
may, I think, be observed concerning Mathematical Computation in Optics: That
it can hardly be very Precise and Exact, since the Judgments we make of the
Magnitude of External Things, do often depend on several Circumstances, which
are not Proportional to, or capable of being defined by Lines and Angles.

LXXIX. One born Blind, being made to See, what Judgment he would make of Magnitude.
From what has been said we may safely deduce this Consequence, viz. That a Man
born Blind, and made to See, would, at first opening of his Eyes, make a very
different Judgment of the Magnitude of Objects intromitted by them, from what
others do. He would not consider the Ideas of Sight with reference to, or as
having any Connection with the Ideas of Touch. His View of them being entirely
terminated within themselves, he can no otherwise judge them Great or Small,
than as they contain a greater or lesser Number of Visible Points. Now, it
being certain, that any Visible Point can cover or exclude from View, only one
other Visible Point, it follows, that whatever Object intercepts the View of
another, has an equal Number of Visible Points with it; and consequently they
shall both, by him, be thought to have the same Magnitude. Hence, it is evident,
one in those Circumstances would judge his Thumb, with which he might hide a
Tower, or hinder its being seen, equal to that Tower, or his Hand, the
Interposition whereof might conceal the Firmament from his View, equal to the
Firmament. How great an Inequality soever there may, in our Apprehensions, seem
to be betwixt those two things: because of the customary and close Connection,
that has grown up in our Minds between the Objects of Sight and Touch, whereby
the very different and distinct Ideas of those two Senses, are so blended and
confounded together, as to be mistaken for one and the same thing; out of which
Prejudice, we cannot totally extricate our selves, without some Labor and
Striving of Thought.

LXXX. The Minimum Visibile the same to all Creatures.
For the better clearing up the Nature of Vision, and setting the manner
wherein we perceive Magnitudes in a due Light, I shall proceed to make some
Observations concerning Matters relating thereto, whereof the want of
Reflection, and duly separating between Tangible and Visible Ideas, is apt to
create in us mistaken and confused Notions. And, First, I shall observe that
the Minimum Visibile is exactly equal in all Beings whatsoever, that are
endowed with the Visive Faculty. No exquisite Formation of the Eye, no peculiar
Sharpness of Sight, can make it less in one Creature, than in another. For it
not being distinguishable into Parts, nor in any wise consisting of them, it
must necessarily be the same to all. For suppose it otherwise, and that the
Minimum Visibile of a Mite, for Instance, be less than the Minimum Visibile of
a Man; the latter, therefore, may by Detraction of some part be made equal to
the former: It does, therefore, consist of Parts: Which is inconsistent with
the Notion of a Minimum Visibile, or Point.

LXXXI. Objection answered.
It will, perhaps, be objected, that the Minimum Visibile of a Man does really,
and in it self, contain Parts whereby it surpasses that of a Mite, though they
are not perceivable by the Man. To which I answer, the Minimum Visibile having
(in like manner as all other the Proper and Immediate Objects of Sight) been
shown not to have any Existence without the Mind of him who sees it, it
follows, there cannot be any part of it that is not actually perceived, and
therefore Visible. Now, for any Object to contain several distinct, visible
Parts, and at the same time to be a Minimum Visibile, is a manifest
Contradiction.

LXXXII. The Eye at all times, perceives the same number of visible Points.
Of these Visible Points we see at all times an equal Number. It is every whit
as great when our View is contracted, and bounded by near Objects, as when it
is extended to larger and remoter ones. For it being impossible, that one
Minimum Visibile should obscure, or keep out of Sight, more than one other;
it is a plain Consequence, that when my View is on all sides bounded by the
Walls of my Study, I see just as many visible Points, as I could, in case that
by the Removal of the Study-Walls, and all other Obstructions, I had a full
Prospect of the circumjacent Fields, Mountains, Sea, and open Firmament. For,
so long as I am shut up within the Walls, by their Interposition every Point of
the External Object is covered from my View. But each Point that is seen, being
able to cover or exclude from Sight, one only other corresponding Point: It
follows, that whilst my Sight is confined to those narrow Walls, I see as many
Points, or Minima Visibilia, as I should, were those Walls away, by looking on
all the External Objects, whose Prospect is intercepted by them. Whenever,
therefore, we are said to have a greater Prospect at one time than another;
this must be understood with relation, not to the proper and immediate, but the
secondary and mediate Objects of Vision, which, as has been shown, do properly
belong to the Touch.

LXXXIII Two Imperfections in the Visive Faculty.
The Visive Faculty considered, with reference to it is immediate Objects, may
be found to Labor of two Defects. First, In respect of the Extent or Number of
visible Points that are at once perceivable by it, which is narrow and limited
to a certain Degree. It can take in at one View but a certain, determinate
Number of Minima Visibilia, beyond which it cannot extend it is Prospect.
Secondly, Our Sight is defective in that its View is not only narrow, but also,
for the most part, confused. Of those things that we take in at one Prospect,
we can see but a few at once clearly and unconfusedly. And the more we fix our
Sight on any one Object, by so much the Darker and more Indistinct shall the
rest appear.

LXXXIV Answering to which, we may conceive two Perfections.
Corresponding to these two Defects of Sight, we may imagine as many
Perfections, viz. 1 st. That of comprehending in one View, a greater number of
Visible Points. 2 dly, Of being able to View them all equally, and at once,
with the utmost Clearness and Distinction. That these Perfections are not
actually in some Intelligences, of a different Order and Capacity from ours, it
is impossible for us to know.

LXXXV. In neither of these two Ways do Microscopes improve the Sight.
In neither of these two Ways, do Microscopes contribute to the improvement of
Sight. For, when we look through a Microscope, we neither see more Visible
Points, nor are the Collateral Points more Distinct, than when we look with the
naked Eye, at Objects placed in a due Distance. A Microscope brings us, as it
were, into a new World: It presents us with a new Scene of Visible Objects,
quite different from what we behold with the naked Eye. But herein consists the
most remarkable Difference, viz. That whereas the Objects perceived by the Eye
alone have a certain Connection with Tangible Objects, whereby we are taught to
Foresee what will ensue, upon the Approach or Application of distant Objects to
the Parts of our own Body, which much conduces to it is Preservation; there is
not the like Connection between things Tangible and those Visible Objects, that
are perceived by help of a fine Microscope.

LXXXVI The Case of Microscopical Eyes, considered.
Hence it is evident, that were our Eyes turned into the Nature of Microscopes,
we should not be much benefited by the Change. We should be deprived of the
forementioned Advantage we at present receive by the Visive Faculty; and have
left us only the empty Amusement of Seeing, without any other benefit arising
from it. But in that Case, it will perhaps be said, our Sight would be endued
with a far greater Sharpness and Penetration than it now has. But I would fain
know wherein consists that Sharpness, which is esteemed so great an Excellency
of Sight. It is certain from what we have already shown, that the Minimum
Visibile is never Greater, or Lesser, but in all Cases constantly the same. And
in the Case of Microscopical Eyes, I see only this difference, viz. that upon
the Ceasing of a certain observable Connection, betwixt the diverse Perceptions
of Sight and Touch, which before enabled us to regulate our Actions by the Eye:
It would now be rendered utterly unserviceable to that Purpose. Which whether
it be a desirable Perfection, or no, I leave it to any one to determine.

LXXXVII The Sight, admirably adapted to the ends of Seeing.
Upon the whole, my Opinion is, That if we consider the Use and End of Sight,
together with the present State and Circumstances of our Being, we shall not
find any great Cause, to complain of any Defect or Imperfection in it, or
easily conceive how it could be mended. With such admirable Wisdom is that
Faculty contrived, both for the Pleasure and Convenience of Life.

LXXXVIII Difficulty concerning Erect Vision.
Having finished what I intended to say, concerning the Distance and Magnitude
of Objects, I come now to treat of the Manner, wherein the Mind perceives by
Sight their Situation. Among the Discoveries of the last Age, it is reputed
none of the least, that the manner of Vision has been more clearly Explained,
than ever it had been before. There is, at this Day, no one Ignorant, that the
Pictures of External Objects are Painted on the Retina, or Fund of the Eye.
That we can see no thing which is not so Painted. And that, according as the
Picture is more Distinct or Confused, so also is the Perception we have of the
Object. But then in this Explication of Vision, there occurs one mighty
Difficulty. The Objects are Painted in an inverted Order on the Bottom of the
Eye: The upper part of any Object being Painted on the lower part of the Eye,
and the lower part of the Object, on the upper part of the Eye. And so also as
to Right and Left. Since therefore the Pictures are thus inverted, it is
demanded how it comes to pass, that we see the Objects erect and in their
natural Posture?

LXXXIX The common way of explaining it.
In answer to this Difficulty, we are told, that the Mind perceiving an impulse
of a Ray of Light, on the upper part of the Eye, considers this Ray as coming
in a direct Line, from the lower part of the Object; and in like manner tracing
the Ray that strikes on the lower part of the Eye, it is directed to the upper
part of the Object. Thus in the adjacent Figure, C the lower Point of the
Object ABC is projected on c the upper part of the Eye. So likewise, the
highest Point A is projected on a the lowest part of the Eye; which makes the
Representation cba inverted. But the Mind considering the Stroke that is made
on c as coming in the straight Line C c from the lower End of the Object; and
the Stroke or Impulse on a, as coming in the Line Aa from the upper End of the
Object, is directed to make a right Judgment of the Situation of the Object
ABC, notwithstanding the Picture of it be inverted. Moreover, this is
illustrated by conceiving a Blind Man, who holding in his Hands two Sticks that
cross each other, does with them touch the extremities of an Object, placed in
a perpendicular Situation. It is certain, this Man will judge that to be the
upper part of the Object, which he touches with the Stick held in the undermost
Hand, and that to be the lower part of the Object, which he touches with the
Stick in his uppermost Hand. This is the common Explication of the erect
Appearance of Objects, which is generally received and acquiesed in, being (as
Mr. Molyneux tells us, Dioptr. par. 2. c. 7. p. 289.) allowed by all Men as
Satisfactory.

XC. The same shown to be false.
But how reasonable and satisfactory soever, this account may be thought by
others, to me certainly it does not seem, in any degree, True. Did I perceive
those Impulses, Decussations, and Directions of the Rays of Light, in like
manner as has been set forth, then, indeed, it would not at first view be
altogether void of Probability. And there might be some Pretense for the
Comparison of the Blind-Man and his cross Sticks. But the Case is far
otherwise. I know very well that I perceive no such thing. And of Consequence,
I cannot thereby make an Estimate of the Situation of Objects. Moreover I
appeal to any one's Experience, whether he be conscious to himself, that he
thinks on the Intersection made by the Radious Pencils, or pursue the Impulses
they give in right Lines, whenever he perceives by Sight the Position of any
Object? To me it seems evident, that Crossing and Tracing of the Rays, etc. is
never thought on by Children, Idiots, or in Truth by any other, save only those
who have applied themselves to the Study of Optics. And for the Mind to judge
of the Situation of Objects, by those things, without perceiving them, or to
perceive them without knowing it, take which you please, it is Perfectly beyond
my Comprehension. Add to this, that the explaining the manner of Vision by the
Example of cross Sticks, and Hunting for the Object along the Axes of the
Radious Pencils, does suppose the proper Objects of Sight to be perceived at a
Distance from us, contrary to what has been Demonstrated. We may therefore,
venture to pronounce this Opinion concerning the way wherein the Mind perceives
the Erect Appearance of Objects, to be of a Piece with those other Tenants of
Writers in Optics, which in the foregoing Parts of this Treatise, we have had
occasion to Examine and Refute.

XCI. Not distinguishing between Ideas of Sight and Touch, Cause of Mistake, in
this Matter.
It remains, therefore, that we look for some other Explication of this
Difficulty. And I believe it not impossible to find one, provided we Examine it
to the Bottom, and carefully distinguish between the Ideas of Sight and Touch;
which cannot be too often inculcated in treating of Vision. But more especially
throughout the consideration of this Affair, we ought to carry that Distinction
in our Thoughts. For that from want of a right Understanding thereof, the
Difficulty of Explaining Erect Vision seems chiefly to arise.

XCII. The Case of one Born Blind, proper to be considered.
But in order to Disentangle our Minds, from whatever Prejudices we may
entertain with relation to the Subject in hand: Nothing seems more apposite,
than the taking into our Thoughts the Case of one Born Blind, and afterward,
when grown up, made to see. And though, perhaps, it may not be a Task altogether
easy, and familiar to us, to divest our selves entirely of the Experiences
received from Sight. So as to be able to put our Thoughts exactly in the
Posture of such a one's. We must, nevertheless, as far as possible, endeavor
to frame true Conceptions, of what might reasonably be supposed to pass in his
Mind.

XCIII. Such a one might by Touch, attain to have Ideas of Upper and Lower.
It is certain, that a Man actually Blind, and who had continued so from his
Birth, would by the Sense of Feeling attain to have Ideas of Upper and Lower.
By the Motion of his Hand he might discern the Situation of any Tangible Object
placed within his Reach. That part on which he felt himself supported, or
toward which he perceived his Body to gravitate, he would term Lower, and the
contrary to this Upper. And accordingly denominate whatsoever Objects he
touched.

XCIV. Which Modes of Situation he would attribute only to things Tangible.
But then, whatever Judgments he makes concerning the Situation of Objects, are
confined to those only that are perceivable by Touch. All those things that are
intangible, and of a spiritual Nature, his Thoughts and Desires, his Passions,
and in general all the Modifications of his Soul, to these he would never apply
the Terms Upper and Lower, except only in a Metaphorical Sense. He may,
perhaps, by way of Allusion, speak of High or Low Thoughts. But those Terms in
their proper Signification, would never be applied to any thing, that was not
conceived to exist without the Mind. For a Man Born Blind, and remaining in the
same State, could mean nothing else by the Words Higher and Lower, than a
greater or lesser Distance from the Earth: Which Distance he would measure by
the Motion or Application of his Hand, or some other Part of his Body. It is,
therefore, evident, that all those things which, in respect of each other,
would by him be thought Higher or Lower, must be such as were conceived to
exist without his Mind, in the ambient Space.

XCV. He Would not at first Sight think any thing he saw, High or Low, Erect or
Inverted.
Whence it plainly follows, that such a one, if we suppose him made to See,
would not at first Sight think, that any thing he saw was High or Low, Erect or
Inverted; for it has been already Demonstrated in Sect. XLI, that he would not
think the Things he perceived by Sight to be at any Distance from him, or
without his Mind. The Objects to which he had hitherto been used to apply the
Terms Up and Down, High and Low, were such only as affected, or were some way
perceived by his Touch. But the proper Objects of Vision make a new Set of
Ideas, perfectly distinct and different from the former, and which can in no
sort make themselves perceived by Touch. There is, therefore, nothing at all
that could induce him to think those Terms applicable to them. Nor would he
ever think it, till such time as he had observed their Connection with Tangible
Objects, and the same Prejudice begin to insinuate it self into his
Understanding, which from their Infancy had grown up in the Understandings of
other Men.

XCVI. This Illustrated by an Example.
To set this Matter in a clearer Light, I shall make use of an Example. Suppose
the abovementioned Blind Person do, by his Touch, perceive a Man to stand
Erect. Let us enquire into the manner of this. By the application of his Hand
to the several Parts of a Human Body, he had perceived different Tangible
Ideas, which being collected into sundry complex ones have distinct Names
annexed to them. Thus one Combination of a certain Tangible Figure, Bulk, and
Consistency of Parts is called the Head, another the Hand, a Third the Foot,
and so of the rest. All which Complex Ideas could, in his Understanding, be
made up only of Ideas perceivable by Touch. He had also by his Touch obtained
an Idea of Earth or Ground, toward which he perceives the Parts of his Body to
have a natural Tendency. Now, by Erect nothing more being meant, than that
perpendicular Position of a Man, wherein his Feet are nearest to the Earth: If
the Blind Person by moving his Hand, over the Parts of the Man who stands
before him, do perceive the Tangible Ideas that compose the Head, to be
farthest from, and those that compose the Feet to be nearest to, that other
Combination of Tangible Ideas which he calls Earth: He will denominate that Man
Erect. But if we suppose him on a sudden to receive his Sight, and that he
behold a Man standing before him: It Is evident, in that Case, he would neither
judge the Man he sees, to be Erect nor Inverted; for he never having known
those Terms applied to any other, save Tangible Things, or which existed in the
Space without him, and what he sees neither being Tangible, nor perceived as
existing without, he could not know that in propriety of Language, they were
applicable to it.

XCVII. By what means he would come to denominate Visible Objects high or low, etc.
Afterward, when upon turning his Head or Eyes, up and down, to the right and
left, he shall observe the Visible Objects to change, and shall also attain to
know, that they are called by the same Names, and Connected with the Objects
perceived by Touch; then, indeed, he will come to speak of them, and their
Situation, in the the same Terms that he has been used to apply to Tangible
Things. And those that he perceives by turning up his Eyes, he will call Upper,
and those that by turning down his Eyes, he will call Lower.

XCVIII. Why he should think those Objects highest, which are Painted on the
lowest part of his Eye, and vice versa.
And this seems to me the true Reason, why he should think those Objects
uppermost that are Painted on the lower part of his Eye. For, by turning the
Eye up they shall be distinctly seen; as likewise, they that are Painted on the
highest part of the Eye shall be distinctly seen, by turning the Eye down, and
are for that Reason esteemed lowest. For we have shown that to the immediate
Objects of Sight, considered in themselves, he would not attribute the Terms High
and Low. It must therefore be on account of some Circumstances, which are
observed to attend them. And these, it is plain, are the Actions of turning the
Eye up and down, which suggest a very obvious Reason, why the Mind should
denominate the Objects of Sight accordingly High or Low. And without this
Motion of the Eye, this turning it up and down in order to discern different
Objects, doubtless Erect, Inverse, and other the like Terms relating to the
Position of Tangible Objects, would never have been transferred, or in any
degree apprehended to belong to the Ideas of Sight: The mere act of Seeing
including nothing in it to that Purpose, whereas the different Situations of
the Eye, naturally direct the Mind to make a suitable Judgment, of the
Situation of Objects intromitted by it.

XCIX. How he would perceive by Sight the Situation of External Objects.
Farther, when he has by Experience learned the Connection there is, between the
several Ideas of Sight and Touch, he will be able, by the Perception he has of
the Situation of Visible Things in respect of one another, to make a sudden and
true Estimate, of the Situation of Outward, Tangible things corresponding to
them. And thus it is, he shall perceive by Sight the Situation of External
Objects, which do not properly fall under that Sense.

C. Our propension to think the contrary, no Argument against what has been
said.
I know we are very prone to think, that if just made to see, we should judge
of the Situation of Visible Things as we do now. But, we are also as prone to
think, that at first Sight, we should in the same way apprehend the Distance
and Magnitude of Objects, as we do now. Which has been shown to be a false and
groundless Persuasion. And for the like Reasons, the same Censure may be past
on the positive Assurance, that most Men, before they have thought sufficiently
of the Matter, might have of their being able to determine by the Eye, at first
view, whether Objects were Erect or Inverse.

CI. Objection.
It will, perhaps, be objected to our Opinion, that a Man, for instance, being
thought Erect, when his Feet are next the Earth, and inverted, when his Head is
next the Earth, it does hence follow, that by the mere act of Vision, without
any Experience or altering the Situation of the Eye, we should have determined
whether he were Erect or Inverted. For both the Earth it self, and the Limbs of
the Man who stands thereon, being equally perceived by Sight: One cannot choose
seeing, what part of the Man is nearest the Earth, and what part farthest from
it, i. e. whether he be Erect or Inverted.

CII. Answer.
To which I answer, the Ideas which constitute the Tangible Earth and Man, are
entirely different from those which constitute the Visible Earth and Man. Nor
was it possible, by virtue of the Visive Faculty alone, without super-adding
any Experience of Touch, or altering the Position of the Eye, ever to have
known, or so much as suspected, there had been any Relation or Connection
between them. Hence, a Man at first view would not denominate any thing he saw
Earth, or Head, or Foot. And consequently, he could not tell by the mere act of
Vision, whether the Head or Feet were nearest the Earth. Nor, indeed, would he
have thereby any thought of Earth or Man, Erect or Inverse, at all. Which will
be made yet more evident, if we nicely observe, and make a particular
Comparison between the Ideas of both Senses.

CIII. An Object could not be known at first Sight by the Color.
That which I see is only variety of Light and Colors. That which I feel, is
Hard or Soft, Hot or Cold, Rough or Smooth. What Similitude, what Connection
have those Ideas with these? Or how is it possible, that any one should see
reason, to give one and the same Name, to combinations of Ideas so very
different, before ever he had experienced their Coexistence? We do not find
there is any necessary Connection, betwixt this or that Tangible Quality, and
any Color whatsoever. And we may sometimes perceive Colors, where there is
nothing to be felt. All which does make it manifest, that no Man at first
receiving of his Sight, would know there was any Agreement between this or that
particular Object of his Sight, and any Object of Touch he had been already
acquainted with. The Colors therefore of the Head, would to him no more
suggest the Idea of Head, than they would the Idea of Feet.

CIV. Nor by the Magnitude thereof.
Farther, we have at large shown ( vid. Sect. LXIII and LXIV.) there is no
discoverable, necessary Connection, between any given Visible Magnitude, and any
one particular Tangible Magnitude. But that it is entirely the result of Custom
and Experience, and depends on foreign and accidental Circumstances, that we
can by the Perception of Visible Extension inform our selves, what may be the
Extension of any Tangible Object connected therewith. Hence, it is certain that
neither the Visible Magnitude of Head or Foot, would bring along with them into
the Mind, at first opening of the Eyes, the respective Tangible Magnitudes of
those Parts.

CV. Nor by the Figure
By the foregoing Section it is plain, the Visible Figure of any Part of the
Body, has no necessary Connection with the Tangible Figure thereof, so as at
first Sight to suggest it to the Mind. For Figure is the Termination of
Magnitude. Whence it follows, that no Visible Magnitude having, in it is own
Nature, an aptness to suggest any one particular Tangible Magnitude, so neither
can any Visible Figure, be inseparably Connected with its corresponding
Tangible Figure: So as of it self, and in a way prior to Experience it might
suggest it to the Understanding. This will be farther evident, if we consider
that what seems Smooth and Round to the Touch, may to Sight, if viewed through a
Microscope, seem quite otherwise.

CVI. In the first act of Vision, no Tangible Thing would be suggested by Sight.
From all which laid together, and duly considered, we may clearly deduce this
Inference, viz. In the first act of Vision, no Idea entering by the Eye, would
have a perceivable Connection with the Ideas to which the Names Earth, Man,
Head, Foot, etc. were annexed, in the Understanding of a Person Blind from his
Birth: So as in any sort to introduce them into his Mind, or make themselves be
called by the same Names, and reputed the same things with them, as afterward
they come to be.

CVII. Difficulty proposed concerning Number.
There does, nevertheless, remain one Difficulty, which to some perhaps, may
seem to press hard on our Opinion, and deserve not to be passed over. For though
it be granted, that neither the Color, Size, nor Figure of the Visible Feet,
have any necessary Connection with the Ideas that compose the Tangible Feet, so
as to bring them at first sight, into my Mind, or make me in danger of
confounding them, before I had been used to, and for some time experienced
their Connection. Yet thus much seems undeniable. Namely, that the Number of the
Visible Feet, being the same with that of the Tangible Feet: I may from hence,
without any Experience of Sight, reasonably conclude that they represent, or
are connected with the Feet rather than the Head. I say, it seems the Idea of
Two Visible Feet will sooner suggest to the Mind, the Idea of Two Tangible Feet
than of one Head. So that the Blind Man upon first reception of the Visive
Faculty might know, which were the Feet or Two, and which, the Head or One.

CVIII. Number of things Visible, would not, at first Sight, suggest the like
number of things Tangible.
In order to get clear of this seeming Difficulty, we need only observe, that
Diversity of Visible Objects does not necessarily infer, Diversity of Tangible
Objects, corresponding to them. A Picture Painted with great variety of
Colors, affects the Touch in one uniform manner. It is therefore evident, that
I do not by any necessary Consecution, independent of Experience, judge of the
number of things Tangible, from the number of things Visible. I should not
therefore at first opening my Eyes conclude, that because I see Two, I shall
feel Two. How therefore can I, before Experience teaches me, know that the
Visible Legs, because Two, are connected with the Tangible Legs: Or the Visible
Head, because One, connected with the Tangible Head? The Truth on it is, the
things I see are so very different, and heterogeneous from the things I feel:
That the Perception of the one, would never have suggested the other to my
Thoughts, or enabled me to pass the least Judgment thereon, until I had
Experienced their Connection.

CIX. Number the Creature of the Mind.
But for a fuller Illustration of this Matter, it ought to be considered, that
Number (however some may reckon it amongst the Primary Qualities) is nothing
fixed, and settled, really existing in things themselves. It is entirely the
Creature of the Mind, considering, either a Simple Idea by it self, or any
Combination of Simple Ideas to which it gives one Name, and so makes it pass
for an Unite. According as the Mind variously Combines it is Ideas, the Unite
varies. And as the Unite, so the Number, which is only a Collection of Unites,
does also vary. We call a Window one, a Chimney one; and yet a House in which
there are many Windows, and many Chimneys, has an equal right to be called one.
And many Houses go to the making of one City. In these and the like Instances,
it is evident the Unite constantly relates to the particular Draughts the Mind
makes of it is Ideas, to which it affixes Names, and wherein it includes more or
less, as best suits it is own Ends and Purposes. Whatever therefore the Mind
considers as one, that is an Unite. Every Combination of Ideas is considered as
one thing by the Mind, and in token thereof, is marked by one Name. Now, this
Naming and Combining together of Ideas is perfectly Arbitrary, and done by the
Mind in such sort, as Experience shows it to be most convenient. Without which,
our Ideas had never been collected into such sundry, distinct Combinations, as
they now are.

CX. One Born Blind would not at first Sight, number Visible Things as others
do.
Hence it follows, that a Man Born Blind, and afterward, when grown up, made
to see, would not in the first act of Vision, parcel out the Ideas of Sight,
into the same distinct Collections that others do, who have experienced which
do regularly coexist and are proper to be bundled up together under one Name.
He would not, for Example, make into one Complex Idea, and thereby esteem an
unite all those particular Ideas which constitute the Visible Head, or Foot.
For there can be no Reason assigned why he should do so, barely upon his seeing
a Man stand upright before him. There crowd into his Mind, the Ideas which
compose the Visible Man, in company with all the other Ideas of Sight perceived
at the same time. But all these Ideas offered at once to his View, he would not
distribute into sundry, distinct Combinations: till such time, as by observing
the Motion of the Parts of the Man, and other Experiences he comes to know,
which are to be separated, and which to be collected together.

CXI. The Situation of any Object, determined with respect only to Objects of
the same Sense.
From what has been premised, it is plain the Objects of Sight and Touch make,
if I may so say, two Sets of Ideas, which are widely different from each other.
To Objects of either Kind, we indifferently attribute the Terms High and Low,
Right and Left, and such like, denoting the Position or Situation of things.
But then we must well observe, that the Position of any Object is determined,
with respect only to Objects of the same Sense. We say any Object of Touch is
High or Low, according as it is more or less distant from the Tangible Earth.
And in like manner, we denominate any Object of Sight High or Low, in
proportion as it is more or less Distant, from the Visible Earth. But to define
the Situation of Visible Things, with relation to the Distance they bear from
any Tangible Thing, or vice versa: This were absurd and perfectly
unintelligible. For all Visible Things are equally in the Mind, and take up no
part of the External Space: And, consequently, are Equidistant from any
Tangible Thing which exists without the Mind.

CXII. No Distance great or small, between a Visible and Tangible Thing.
Or rather, to speak truly, the proper Objects of Sight are at no Distance,
neither near nor far, from any Tangible Thing. For if we inquire narrowly into
the Matter, we shall find, that those things only are compared together in
respect of Distance, which exist after the same manner, or appertain unto the
same Sense. For by the Distance between any Two Points, nothing more is meant
than the Number of intermediate Points. If the given Points are Visible, the
Distance between them is marked out, by the Number of the interjacent Visible
Points: If they are Tangible, the Distance between them is a Line consisting of
Tangible Points. But if they are one Tangible, and the other Visible, the
Distance between them does neither consist of Points perceivable by Sight, nor
by Touch, i. e. it is utterly inconceivable. This, perhaps, will not find an
easy Admission into all Men's Understandings: However, I should gladly be
informed whether it be not True, by any one who will be at the pains to Reflect
a little, and apply it home to his Thoughts.

CXII. The not observing this, cause of difficulty in Erect Vision,
The not observing what has been delivered in the two last Sections, seems to
have occasioned no small part of the Difficulty that occurs in the Business of
Erect Appearances. The Head, which is Painted nearest the Earth, seems to be
farthest from it; and on the other Hand, the Feet, which are Painted farthest
from the Earth, are thought nearest to it. Herein lies the Difficulty, which
vanishes if we express the thing more clearly, and free from Ambiguity, thus.
How comes it that to the Eye, the Visible Head which is nearest the Tangible
Earth, seems farthest from the Earth, and the Visible Feet, which are farthest
from the Tangible Earth, seem nearest the Earth? The Question being thus
proposed, who sees not, the Difficulty is founded on a Supposition, that the
Eye or Visive Faculty, or rather the Soul by means thereof, should judge of the
Situation of Visible Objects, with Reference to their Distance from the
Tangible Earth? Whereas it is evident, the Tangible Earth is not perceived by
Sight: And it has been shown in the two last preceding Sections, that the
Location of Visible Objects is determined only, by the Distance they bear from
one another; and that it is Nonsense to talk of Distance, far or near, between
a Visible and Tangible Thing.

CXIV. Which otherwise includes nothing unaccountable.
If we confine our Thoughts to the proper Objects of Sight, the whole is plain
and easy. The Head is Painted farthest from, and the Feet nearest to the
Visible Earth: And so they appear to be. What is there strange or unaccountable
in this? Let us suppose the Pictures in the Fund of the Eye, to be the
immediate Objects of Sight. The Consequence is, that things should appear in
the same Posture they are Painted in. And is it not so? The Head which is seen,
seems farthest from the Earth which is seen; and the Feet, which are seen, seem
nearest to the Earth which is seen. And just so they are Painted.

CXV. What is meant by the Pictures being inverted.
But, say you, the Picture of the Man is inverted, and yet the Appearance is
Erect. I ask what mean you by the Picture of the Man, or, which is the same
thing, the Visible Man's being inverted? You tell me it is inverted, because the
Heels are uppermost, and the Head undermost? Explain me this. You say, that by
the Head's being undermost, you mean that it is nearest to the Earth; and by
the Heels being uppermost, that they are farthest from the Earth. I ask again,
what Earth you mean? You cannot mean the Earth that is Painted on the Eye, or
the Visible Earth. For the Picture of the Head is farthest from the Picture of
the Earth; and the Picture of the Feet nearest to the Picture of the Earth; and
accordingly, the Visible Head is farthest from the Visible Earth, and the
Visible Feet, nearest to it. It remains, therefore, that you mean the Tangible
Earth: And so determine the Situation of Visible Things, with respect to
Tangible Things; contrary to what has been demonstrated in Sect. CXI. and
CXII. The two distinct Provinces of Sight and Touch should be considered apart,
and as though their Objects had no Intercourse, no manner of Relation to one
another, in point of Distance or Position.

CXVI. Cause of Mistake in this Matter.
Farther, What greatly contributes to make us mistake in this Matter is, that
when we think of the Pictures in the Fund of the Eye, we imagine our selves
looking on the Fund of another's Eye, or another looking on the Fund of our own
Eye, and beholding the Pictures Painted thereon. Suppose two Eyes A and B: A
from some distance looking on the Pictures in B sees them inverted, and for
that reason concludes they are inverted in B. But this is wrong. There are
projected in little on the Bottom of A, the Images of the Pictures of, suppose,
Man, Earth, etc. which are Painted on B. And besides these, the Eye B it self,
and the Objects which environ it, together with another Earth are projected in
a larger Size on A. Now, by the Eye A, these larger Images are deemed the true
Objects, and the lesser only Pictures in miniature. And it is with respect to
those greater Images, that it determines the Situation of the smaller Images.
So that comparing the little Man with the great Earth, A judges him inverted,
or that the Feet are farthest from, and the Head nearest to the great Earth.
Whereas, if A compare the little Man with the little Earth, then he will appear
Erect, i. e. his Head shall seem farthest from, and his Feet nearest to the
little Earth. But we must consider that B does not see two Earths, as A does:
It sees only what is represented by the little Pictures in A, and consequently
shall judge the Man Erect. For, in truth, the Man in B is not inverted, for
there the Feet are next the Earth. But it is the Representation of it in A
which is inverted, for there, the Head of the Representation of the Picture of
the Man in B, is next the Earth, and the Feet farthest from the Earth, meaning
the Earth which is without the Representation of the Pictures in B. For if you
take the little Images of the Pictures in B, and consider them by themselves,
and with respect only to one another, they are all Erect and in their natural
Posture.

CXVII. Images in the Eye, not Pictures of external Objects.
Farther, there lies a Mistake, in our imagining that the Pictures of External
Objects are Painted on the Bottom of the Eye. It has been shown, there is no
resemblance between the Ideas of Sight, and things Tangible. It has likewise
been demonstrated, that the proper Objects of Sight do not exist without the
Mind. Whence it clearly follows, that the Pictures Painted on the Bottom of the
Eye, are not the Pictures of External Objects. Let any one consult his own
Thoughts, and then tell me, what Affinity, what Likeness there is, between that
certain Variety and Disposition of Colors, which constitute the Visible Man,
or Picture of a Man, and that other Combination of far different Ideas,
sensible by Touch, which compose the Tangible Man. But if this be the Case, how
come they to be accounted Pictures or Images, since that supposes them to copy
or represent some Originals or other?

CXVIII. In what Sense they are Pictures
To which I answer. In the forementioned Instance, the Eye A takes the little
Images, included within the Representation of the other Eye B, to be Pictures
or Copies, whereof the Archetypes are not things existing without but, the
larger Pictures projected on it is own Fund: And which by A are not thought
Pictures, but the Originals or true Things themselves. Though if we suppose a
third Eye C, from a due distance to behold the Fund of A: Then, indeed, the
things projected thereon shall, to C, seem Pictures or Images, in the same
Sense that those projected on B do to A.

CXIX. In this Affair we must carefully distinguish between Ideas of Sight and
Touch.
Rightly to conceive the Business in hand, we must carefully distinguish
between the Ideas of Sight and Touch, between the Visible and Tangible Eye, for
certainly on the Tangible Eye, nothing either is or seems to be Painted. Again,
the Visible Eye, as well as all other Visible Objects, has been shown to exist
only in the Mind, which perceiving its own Ideas, and comparing them together,
does call some Pictures in respect of others. What has been said being rightly
comprehended and laid together, does, I think, afford a full and genuine
Explication of the Erect Appearance of Objects, which Phenomenon, I must
confess, I do not see how it can be explained, by any Theories of Vision
hitherto made public.

CXX. Difficult to explain by Words the true Theory of Vision.
In treating of these things, the use of Language is apt to occasion some
Obscurity and Confusion, and create in us wrong Ideas. For Language being
accomodated to the common Notions and Prejudices of Men, it is scarce possible
to deliver the naked and precise Truth, without great Circumlocution,
Impropriety, and (to an unwary Reader) seeming Contradictions. I do therefore,
once for all, desire whoever shall think it worth his while, to understand what
I have written concerning Vision, that he would not stick in this or that Phrase,
or manner of Expression; but heartily collect my meaning from the whole Sum and
Tenor of my Discourse; and laying aside the Words, as much as possible,
consider the bare Notions themselves, and then judge whether they are agreeable
to Truth and his own Experience, or no.

CXXI. The Question, whether there is any Idea common to Sight and Touch,
stated.
We have shown the way wherein the Mind by Mediation of Visible Ideas, does
perceive or apprehend the Distance, Magnitude and Situation of Tangible
Objects. I come now to enquire more particularly, concerning the Difference
betwixt the Ideas of Sight and Touch, which are called by the same Names; and
see whether there be any Idea common to both Senses. From what we have at large
set forth and demonstrated in the foregoing parts of this Treatise, it is plain
there is no one self-same numerical Extension, perceived both by Sight and
Touch. But that the particular Figures and Extensions perceived by Sight,
however they may be called by the same Names, and reputed the same Things, with
those perceived by Touch, are nevertheless different, and have an Existence
very distinct and Separate from them. So that the Question is not now
concerning the same numerical Ideas, but whether there be any one and the same
sort or Species of Ideas equally perceivable to both Senses? Or, in other
Words, whether Extension, Figure, and Motion perceived by Sight, are not
specifically distinct from Extension, Figure and Motion perceived by Touch.

CXXII. Abstract Extension inquired into.
But, before I come more particularly to Discuss this Matter, I find it proper
to take into my Thoughts Extension in Abstract: For of this there is much talk,
and I am apt to think, that when Men speak of Extension as being an Idea common
to Two Senses, it is with a secret Supposition, that we can single out
Extension from all other Tangible and Visible Qualities, and frame thereof an
Abstract Idea, which Idea they will have common both to Sight and Touch. We are
therefore to understand by Extension in Abstract, an Idea of Extension, v. g. a
Line or Surface, entirely stripped of all other sensible Qualities and
Circumstances that might determine it to any particular Existence. It is
neither Black, nor White, nor Red, nor has it any Color at all, or any
Tangible Quality whatsoever. And consequently it is of no finite, determinate
Magnitude. For, that which bounds or distinguishes one Extension from another,
is some Quality or Circumstance wherein they disagree.

CXXIII. It is incomprehensible.
Now I do not find that I can perceive, imagine, or any wise frame in my Mind
such an abstract Idea, as is here spoken of. A Line, or Surface which is
neither Black, nor White, nor Blue, nor Yellow, etc. Nor Long, nor Short, nor
Rough, nor Smooth, nor Square, nor Round, etc. is perfectly incomprehensible.
This I am sure of as to my self, how far the Faculties of other Men may reach,
they best can tell.

CXXIV. Abstract Extension not the Object of Geometry.
I know it is commonly said, that the Object of Geometry is Abstract Extension.
To this I cannot agree, for Geometry contemplates Figures: Now, Figure is the
Termination of Magnitude, but we have shown that Extension in Abstract has no
finite, determinate Magnitude, whence it clearly follows that it can have no
Figure, and consequently is not the Object of Geometry. I know it is a Tenent
as well of the Modern as the Ancient Philosophers, that all general Truths are
concerning Universal, Abstract Ideas, without which, we are told, there could
be no Science, no Demonstration of any general Proposition in Geometry. But it
were no hard matter, did I think it necessary to my present Purpose, to show
that Propositions and Demonstrations in Geometry might be Universal, though they
who make 'em, never think of Abstract general Ideas of Triangles or Circles.

CXV. The general Idea of a Triangle, considered.
After reiterated Efforts and pangs of Thought, in order to apprehend the
general Idea of v. g. a Triangle, I have found it altogether incomprehensible.
And surely if any one were able to let that Idea into my Mind, it must be the
deservedly admired Author of the Essay concerning Human Understanding: He, who
has so far distinguished himself from the generality of Writers, by the
Clearness and Significancy of what he Says. Let us therefore see how that great
Man describes the general, or, which is the same thing, the Abstract Idea of a
Triangle. It must be, ( says he) neither Oblique, nor Rectangle, neither
Equilateral, Equicrural, nor Scalenon; but all and none of these at once. In
effect it is somewhat imperfect that cannot exist; an Idea, wherein some Parts
of several different and inconsistent Ideas are put together. Essay on Hum.
Understand. b. iv. c. 7. s. 9. This is the Idea, which he thinks needful, for
the enlargement of Knowledge, which is the Subject of Mathematical
Demonstration, and without which we could never come to know any general
Proposition concerning Triangles. Sure I am, if this be the Case, it is
impossible for me to attain to know even the first Elements of Geometry: Since
I have not the Faculty to frame in my Mind such an Idea as is here described.
That Author acknowledges it does require some Pains and Skill to Form this
general Idea of a Triangle, ibid. But had he called to mind what he says in
another place, viz. that Ideas of mixed Modes wherein any inconsistent Ideas
are put together, cannot so much as exist in the Mind, i. e. be conceived, vid.
b. iii. c. 10. s. 33. ibid. I say, had this occurred to his Thoughts, it is not
improbable he would have owned it above all the Pains and Skill he was Master of,
to form the abovementioned Idea of a Triangle, which is made up of manifest,
staring Contradictions. That a Man of such a clear Understanding, who thought
so much, and so well, and laid so great a Stress on Clear and Determinate
Ideas, should nevertheless talk at this rate, seems very surprising. But my
Wonder is lessened when I consider, that the Source whence this Opinion of
Abstract Figures and Extension flows, is the prolific Womb which has brought
forth innumerable Errors and Difficulties, in all Parts of Philosophy, and in
all the Sciences. But this Matter, taken in its full Extent, were a Subject too
vast and comprehensive to be insisted on in this place. I shall only observe
that your Metaphysicians, and Men of Speculation, seem to have Faculties
distinct from those of ordinary Men; when they talk of General or Abstracted
Triangles and Circles, etc. and so peremptorily declare them to be the Subject,
of all the Eternal, Immutable, Universal Truths, in Geometry. And so much for
Extension in Abstract.

CXXVI. Vacuum or pure Space, not common to Sight and Touch.
Some, perhaps, may think pure Space, Vacuum, or Trine Dimension to be equally
the Object of Sight and Touch. But though we have a very great Propension, to
think the Ideas of Outness and Space to be the immediate Object of Sight; yet,
if I mistake not, in the foregoing Parts of this Essay, That has been clearly
Demonstrated to be a mere Delusion, arising from the quick and sudden
Suggestion of Fancy, which so closely Connects the Idea of Distance with those
of Sight, that we are apt to think it is it self a proper and immediate Object
of that Sense, till Reason corrects the Mistake.

CXXVII. There is no Idea or kind of Idea, common to both Senses.
It having been shown, that there are no Abstract Ideas of Figure, and that it
is impossible for us, by any Precision of Thought, to frame an Idea of
Extension separate from all other Visible and Tangible Qualities, which shall
be common both to Sight and Touch: The Question now remaining is, whether the
particular Extensions, Figures, and Motions perceived by Sight be of the same
Kind, with the particular Extensions, Figures, and Motions perceived by Touch?
In answer to which, I shall venture to lay down the following Proposition, viz.
The Extension, Figures, and Motions perceived by Sight are specifically
Distinct from the Ideas of Touch, called by the same Names, nor is there any
such thing as an Idea, or kind of Idea common to both Senses. This Proposition
may, without much Difficulty, be collected from what has been said in several
Places of this Essay. But, because it seems so remote from, and contrary to,
the received Notions and settled Opinion of Mankind; I shall attempt to
demonstrate it more particularly, and at large, by the following Arguments.

CXXVIII. First Argument in Proof hereof.
First, When upon Perception of an Idea, I range it under this or that sort; it
is because it is perceived after the same manner, or because it has a Likeness
or Conformity with, or affects me in the same way as the Ideas of the sort I
rank it under. In short, it must not be entirely new, but have something in it
Old, and already perceived by me: It must, I say, have so much, at least, in
common with the Ideas I have before known and named, as to make me give it the
same Name with them. But it has been, if I mistake not, clearly made out, that
a Man Born Blind would not, at first reception of his Sight, think the things
he saw were of the same Nature with the Objects of Touch, or had any thing in
common with them; but that they were a new Set of Ideas, perceived in a new
manner, and entirely different from all he had ever perceived before. So that
he would not call them by the same Name, nor repute them to be of the same
Sort, with any thing he had hitherto known. And surely, the Judgment of such an
unprejudiced Person is more to be relied on in this Case, than the Sentiments
of the generality of Men: Who in this, as in almost every thing else, suffer
themselves to be guided by Custom, and the erroneous Suggestions of Prejudice,
rather than Reason and sedate Reflection.

CXXIX. Second Argument.
Secondly, Light and Colors are allowed by all to constitute a Sort or
Species, entirely different from the Ideas of Touch: Nor will any Man, I
presume, say they can make themselves perceived by that Sense. But there is no
other immediate Object of Sight, besides Light and Colors. It is therefore a
direct Consequence, that there is no Idea common to both Senses.

CXXX. Visible Figure and Extension, not distinct Ideas from Color.
It is, I know, a prevailing Opinion, even amongst those who have Thought and
Writ most Accurately concerning our Ideas, and the Ways whereby they enter into
the Understanding, that something more is perciev'd by Sight, than barely Light
and Colors with their Variations. The Excellent Mr. Lock terms Sight The
most Comprehensive of all our Senses, conveying to our Minds the Ideas of Light
and Colors, which are peculiar only to that Sense; and also the far different
Ideas of Space, Figure, and Motion. Essay on Hum. Understand. b. ii. c. 9. s.
9. Space or Distance, we have shown, is no otherwise the Object of Sight than
of Hearing. vid. Sect. XLVI. And as for Figure and Extension, I leave it to any
one, that shall calmly attend to his own clear and distinct Ideas, to decide
whether he has any Idea intromitted immediately and properly by Sight, save
only Light and Colors. Or whether it be possible for him, to frame in his Mind
a distinct Abstract Idea of Visible Extension, or Figure, exclusive of all
Color; and on the other hand, whether he can conceive Color without Visible
Extension. For my own part, I must confess, I am not able to attain so great a
nicety of Abstraction. I know very well that, in a strict Sense, I see nothing
but Light and Colors, with their several Shades and Variations. He who beside
these, does also perceive by Sight Ideas far different and distinct from them,
has that Faculty in a degree more perfect and comprehensive than I can pretend
to. I own indeed, that by the mediation of Light and Colors, other far
different Ideas are suggested to my Mind. But then, upon this Score, I see no
reason why the Sight should be thought more Comprehensive than the Hearing:
Which beside Sounds, which are peculiar to that Sense, does by their Mediation
suggest, not only Space, Figure, and Motion, but also, all other Ideas
whatsoever that can be signified by Words.

CXXXI. Third Argument.
Thirdly, It is, I think, an Axiom universally received, that Quantities of the
same Kind may be added together, and make one entire Sum. Mathematicians add
Lines together; but they do not add a Line to a Solid, or conceive it as making
one Sum with a Surface. These three Kinds of Quantity being thought incapable
of any such mutual Addition, and consequently of being compared together, in
the several ways of Proportion, are by them, for that reason, esteemed entirely
Disparate and Heterogeneous. Now let any one try in his Thoughts, to add a
Visible Line or Surface to a Tangible Line or Surface. So as to conceive them
making one continued Sum or Whole. He that can do this, may think 'em
Homogenuous; but he that cannot must, by the foregoing Anxiom, think them
Heterogeneous. I acknowledge my self to be of the latter Sort. A Blue, and and
a Red Line I can conceive added together into one Sum, and making one continued
Line; but to make, in my Thoughts, one continued Line of a Visible and Tangible
Line added together is, I find, a Task far more difficult, and even
insurmountable by me: And I leave it to the Reflection and Experience of every
particular Person, to determine for himself.

CXXXII. Confirmation drawn from Mr. Molyneux's Problem of a Sphere and a Cube,
published by Mr. Lock.
A further Confirmation of our Tenent may be drawn from the Solution of Mr.
Molyneux's Problem, published by Mr. Lock in his Essay. Which I shall set down
as it there lies, together with Mr. Locke's Opinion of it. Suppose a Man Born
Blind, and now Adult, and taught by his Touch to distinguish between a Cube,
and a Sphere of the same Metal, and nighly of the same Bigness, so as to tell,
when he felt one and the other, which is the Cube, and which the Sphere. Suppose
then the Cube and Sphere placed on a Table, and the Blind Man to be made to
See: Quaere, Whether by his Sight, before he Touched them, he could now
distinguish, and tell, which is the Globe, which the Cube. To which the acute
and judicious Proposer Answers: Not. For though he has obtained the experience
of, how a Globe, how a Cube affects his Touch; yet he has not yet attained the
Experience, that what affects his Touch so or so, must affect his Sight so or
so: Or that a protuberant Angle in the Cube, that pressed his Hand unequally,
shall appear to his Eye, as it does in the Cube. I agree with this thinking
Gentleman, whom I am proud to call my Friend, in his Answer to this his
Problem; and am of opinion, that the Blind Man, at first Sight, would not be
able with certainty to say, which was the Globe, which the Cube, whilst he only
saw them. Essay on Human Understand. b. ii. c. 9. s. 8.

CXXXIII. Which is falsely solved, if the common Supposition be true.
Now, if a Square Surface perceived by Touch be of the same Sort, with a Square
Surface perceived by Sight: It is certain the Blind Man here mentioned might
know a Square Surface, as soon as he saw it. It is no more but introducing into
his Mind, by a new Inlet, an Idea he has been already well acquainted with.
Since therefore he is supposed to have known by his Touch, that a Cube is a
Body terminated by Square Surfaces; and that a Sphere is not terminated by
Square Surfaces: Upon the Supposition that a Visible and Tangible Square differ
only in Numero, it follows, that he might know, by the unerring Mark of the
Square Surfaces, which was the Cube, and which not, whilst he only saw them. We
must therefore allow, either that Visible Extension and Figures are
Specifically distinct, from Tangible Extension and Figures, or else, that the
Solution of this Problem, given by those two very thoughtful and ingenious Men,
is wrong.

CXXXIV. More might be said in proof of our Tenent, but this suffices.
Much more might be laid together in Proof of the Proposition I have advanced.
But what has been said is, if I mistake not, sufficient to convince any one
that shall yield a reasonable Attention. And, as for those that will not be at
the Pains of a little Thought, no Multiplication of Words will ever suffice to
make them understand the Truth, or rightly conceive my Meaning.

CXXXV. Farther Reflection, on the foregoing Problem.
I cannot let go the abovementioned Problem, without some Reflection on it. It
has been made evident, that a Man Blind from his Birth would not, at first
Sight, denominate any thing he saw by the Names, he had been used to
appropriate to Ideas of Touch. vid. Sect. CVI. Cube, Sphere, Table, are Words
he has known applied to Things perceivable by Touch, but to Things perfectly
Intangible he never knew them applied. Those Words, in their wonted
application, always marked out to his Mind Bodies, or Solid Things which were
perceived by the Resistance they gave. But there is no Solidity, no Resistance
or Protrusion perceived by Sight. In short, the Ideas of Sight are all new
Perceptions, to which there be no Names annexed in his Mind; he cannot,
therefore, understand what is said to him concerning them. And to ask, of the
two Bodies he saw placed on the Table, which was the Sphere, which the Cube?
Were, to him, a Question down right Bantering and Unintelligible: Nothing he
sees being able to suggest to his Thoughts, the Idea of Body, Distance, or, in
general, of any thing he had already known.

CXXXVI The same thing does not affect both Sight and Touch.
It Is a Mistake, to think the same thing affects both Sight and Touch. If the
same Angle or Square which is the Object of Touch, be also the Object of
Vision: What should hinder the Blind Man, at first Sight, from knowing it? For
though the manner wherein it affects the Sight, be different from that wherein it
affected his Touch; yet, there being, beside this Manner or Circumstance, which
is new and unknown, the Angle or Figure which is old and known, he cannot choose
but discern it.

CXXXVII Tho same Idea of Motion not common to Sight and Touch.
Visible Figure and Extension having been demonstrated, to be of a Nature
entirely Different and Heterogeneous, from Tangible Figure and Extension, it
remains that we inquire concerning Motion. Now, that Visible Motion is not of
the same Sort with Tangible Motion, seems to need no farther Proof, it being an
evident Corollary from what we have shown, concerning the Difference there is
betwixt Visible and Tangible Extension. But for a more full and express Proof
hereof, we need only observe, that one who had not yet experienced Vision,
would not, at first Sight, know Motion. Whence it clearly follows, that Motion
perceivable by Sight is of a Sort distinct from Motion perceivable by Touch.
The Antecedent I prove thus. By Touch he could not perceive any Motion, but
what was up or down, to the right or left, nearer or farther from him; besides
these, and their several Varieties or Complications, it is impossible he should
have any Idea of Motion. He would not therefore think any thing to be Motion,
or give the name Motion to any Idea, which he could not range under some or
other, of those particular Kinds thereof. But from Sect. XCV. it is plain that
by the mere act of Vision, he could not know Motion upwards or downwards, to
the right or left, or in any other possible Direction. From which I conclude,
he would not know Motion at all at first Sight. As for the Idea of Motion in
Abstract, I shall not waste Paper about it, but leave it to my Reader, to make
the best he can on it. To me it is perfectly Unintelligible.

CXXXVIII The way wherein we apprehend Motion by Sight, easily collected from
what has been said.
The Consideration of Motion, may furnish a new Field for Inquiry. But since
the manner wherein the Mind apprehends by Sight, the Motion of Tangible
Objects, with the various Degrees thereof, may be easily collected, from what
has been said concerning the manner, wherein that Sense does suggest their
various Distances, Magnitudes, and Situations; I shall not enlarge any farther
on this Subject: But proceed to enquire what may be alleged, with greatest
appearance of Reason, against the Proposition we have Demonstrated to be true.
For where there is so much Prejudice to be encountered, a bare and naked
Demonstration of the Truth will scarce suffice. We must also, satisfy the
Scruples that Men may Start, in favor of their preconceiv'd Notions, show
whence the Mistake arises, how it came to spread, and carefully disclose and
root out those false Persuasions, that an early Prejudice might have implanted
in the Mind.

CXXXIX. Qu. How Visible and Tangible Ideas came to have the same Name if not
of the same Kind.
First, Therefore, it will be demanded, how Visible Extension and Figures come
to be called by the same Name, with Tangible Extension and Figures, if they are
not of the same Kind with them? It must be something more than Humor or
Accident, that could occasion a Custom so constant and universal as this, which
has obtained in all Ages and Nations of the World, and amongst all Ranks of
Men, the Learned as well as the Illiterate.

CXL. This accounted for without supposing them of the same Kind.
To which I Answer, we can no more Argue e. g. a Visible and Tangible Square to
be of the same Species, from their being called by the same Name; than we can,
that a Tangible Square and the Monosyllable consisting of Six Letters, whereby
it is marked, are of the same Species, because they are both called by the same
Name. It is customary to call written Words, and the Things they signify, by
the same Name: For Words not being regarded in their own Nature, or otherwise
than as they are marks of Things, it had been superfluous, and beside the
design of Language, to have given them Names distinct from those of the Things
marked by them. The same Reason holds here also. Visible Figures are the marks
of Tangible Figures, and from Sect. LIX, it is plain, that in themselves they
are little regarded, or upon any other Score than for their Connection with
Tangible Figures, which by Nature they are ordained to signify. And because
this Language of Nature does not vary, in different Ages or Nations, hence it
is that, in all Times and Places, Visible Figures are called by the same Names,
as the respective Tangible Figures suggested by them: And not because they are
alike, or of the same sort with them.

CXLI. Obj. That a Tangible Square is liker to a Visible Square than to a
Visible Circle.
But say you, surely a Tangible Square is liker to a Visible Square than to a
Visible Circle: It has four Angles, and as many Sides; so also has the Visible
Square, but the Visible Circle has no such thing, being bounded by one uniform
Curve, without right Lines or Angles; which makes it unfit to represent the
Tangible Square, but very fit to represent the Tangible Circle. Whence it
clearly follows, that Visible Figures are Patterns of, or of the same Species
with, the respective Tangible Figures represented by them; that they are like
unto them, and of their own Nature fitted to represent them as being of the
same sort; and that they are in no respect arbitrary Signs, as Words.

CXLII. Ans. That a Visible Square is fitter than a Visible Circle, to
represent a Tangible Square.
I Answer it must be acknowledged, the Visible Square is fitter than the
Visible Circle to represent the Tangible Square, but then it is not because
it is liker, or more of a Species with it. But, because the Visible Square
contains in it several distinct Parts, whereby to mark the several distinct,
corresponding Parts of a Tangible Square, whereas the Visible Circle does not.
The Square perceived by Touch has four distinct, equal Sides, so also has it
four distinct, equal Angles. It is therefore necessary, that the Visible Figure
which shall be most proper to mark it, contain four distinct, equal Parts
corresponding to the four Sides of the Tangible Square; as likewise four other
distinct and equal Parts, whereby to denote the four equal Angles of the
Tangible Square. And accordingly we see the Visible Figures contain in them
distinct Visible Parts answering to the distinct Tangible Parts of the Figures
signified, or suggested by them.

CXLIII. But it does not hence follow, that a Visible Square is like a Tangible
Square.
But it will not hence follow, that any Visible Figure is like unto, or of the
same Species with, its corresponding Tangible Figure, unless it be also shown,
that not only the Number, but also the Kind of the Parts be the same in both.
To Illustrate this, I observe that Visible Figures represent Tangible Figures,
much after the same manner that written Words do Sounds. Now, in this respect,
Words are not Arbitrary, it not being indifferent, what written Word stands for
any Sound. But it is requisite, that each Word contain in it as many distinct
Characters, as there are Variations in the Sound it stands for. Thus, the
single Letter a is proper to mark one simple uniform Sound; and the Word
Adultery is accommodated to represent the Sound annexed to it, in the Formation
whereof, there being Eight different Collisions, or Modifications of the Air by
the Organs of Speech, each of which produces a difference of Sound, it was fit,
the Word representing it should consist of as many distinct Characters, thereby
to mark each particular Difference or Part of the whole Sound. And yet no Body,
I presume, will say, the single Letter a or the Word Adultery are like unto, or
of the same Species with, the respective Sounds by them Represented. It is
indeed Arbitrary that, in general, Letters of any Language represent Sounds at
all; but when that is once agreed, it is not Arbitrary what Combination of
Letters shall represent this or that particular Sound. I leave this with the
Reader to pursue, and apply it in his own Thoughts.

CXLIV. Why we are more apt to confound Visible with Tangible Ideas, than other
Signs with the Things signified.
It must be confessed, that we are not so apt to confound other Signs with the
Things signified, or to think them of the same Species, as we are Visible and
Tangible Ideas. But a little Consideration will show us how this may well be,
without our supposing them of a like Nature. These Signs are constant and
universal, this Connection with Tangible Ideas has been learnt, at our first
Entrance into the World, and ever since, almost every Moment of our Lives, it
has been occurring to our Thoughts, and fastening and striking deeper on our
Minds. When we observe that Signs are variable and of Human Institution, when
we remember, there was a time they were not connected in our Minds, with those
things they now so readily suggest; but, that their Signification was learned
by the slow Steps of Experience. This preserves us from confounding them. But,
when we find the same Signs suggest the same Things all over the World; when we
know they are not of Human Institution, and cannot remember that we ever
learned their Signification; but think that at first Sight they would have
suggested to us, the same Things they do now: All this persuades us they are of
the same Species as the Things respectively represented by them, and that is by
a natural Resemblance they suggest them to our Minds.

CXLV. Several other Reasons hereof, assigned.
Add to this, that whenever we make a nice Survey of any Object, successively
directing the Optic Axis to each Point thereof; there are certain Lines and
Figures described by the Motion of the Head or Eye; which, being in Truth
perceived by Feeling, do, nevertheless, so mix themselves, as it were, with the
Ideas of Sight, that we can scarce think but they appertain to that Sense.
Again, the Ideas of Sight enter into the Mind, several at once more distinct
and unmingled, than is usual in the other Senses beside the Touch. Sounds, for
Example, perceived at the same Instant, are apt to coalesce, if I may so say,
into one Sound. But we can perceive at the same time great variety of Visible
Objects, very separate and distinct from each other. Now Tangible Extension
being made up, of several distinct coexistent parts, we may hence gather
another Reason, that may dispose us to imagine a Likeness, or Analogy, between
the immediate Objects of Sight and Touch. But nothing, certainly, does more
contribute to blend and confound them together, than the strict and close
Connection they have with each other. We cannot open our Eyes, but the Ideas of
Distance, Bodies, and Tangible Figures are suggested by them. So swift, and
sudden, and unperceived is the Transit from Visible to Tangible Ideas; that we
can scarce forbear thinking 'em equally the immediate Object of Vision.

CXLVI. Reluctance in rejecting any Opinion, no Argument of its Truth.
The Prejudice which is grounded on these, and whatever other Causes may be
assigned thereof, sticks so fast on our Understandings, that it is impossible
without obstinate Striving, and Labor of the Mind, to get entirely clear of
it. But then the Reluctance we find, in rejecting any Opinion, can be no
Argument of its Truth, to whoever considers what has been already shown, with
regard to the Prejudices we entertain concerning the Distance, Magnitude, and
Situation of Objects: Prejudices so familiar to our Minds, so confirmed and
inveterate, as they will hardly give way to the clearest Demonstration.

CXLVII. Proper Objects of Vision, the Language of Nature.
Upon the whole, I think we may fairly conclude, that the proper Objects of
Vision constitute the Universal Language of Nature, whereby we are instructed
how to regulate our Actions, in order to attain those things, that are
necessary to the Preservation and Well-being of our Bodies, as also to avoid
whatever may be hurtful and destructive of them. It Is by their Information that
we are principally guided in all the Transactions and Concerns of Life. And the
manner wherein they signify, and mark out unto us the Objects which are at a
distance, is the same with that of Languages and Signs of Human Appointment;
which do not suggest the things signified, by any Likeness or Identity of
Nature, but only by an Habitual Connection, that Experience has made us to
observe between 'em.

CXLVIII In it there is much admirable, and deserving our attention.
Suppose one who had always continued Blind, be told by his Guide, that after
he has advanced so many Steps, he shall come to the Brink of a Precipice, or be
stopped by a Wall; must not this to him seem very admirable and surprising? He
cannot conceive how it is possible for Mortals, to frame such Predictions as
these, which to him would seem as strange and unaccountable, as Prophesy does
to others. Even they who are Blessed with the Visive Faculty, may (though
Familiarity make it less observed) find therein sufficient Cause of Admiration.
The wonderful Art and Contrivance wherewith it is adjusted, to those Ends and
Purposes for which it was apparently designed, the vast Extent, Number, and
Variety of Objects that are, at once, with so much Ease, and Quickness, and
Pleasure, suggested by it: All these afford Subject for much and pleasing
Speculation; and may, if any thing, give us some Glimmering, Analogous,
Praenotion of Things, that are placed beyond the certain Discovery, and
Comprehension of our present State.

CXLIX. Question proposed, concerning the Object of Geometry.
I do not design to trouble my self much with drawing Corollaries, from the
Doctrine I have hitherto laid down. If it bears the Test, others may, so far as
they shall think convenient, employ their Thoughts in extending it farther, and
applying it to whatever Purposes it may be subservient to. Only, I cannot
forbear making some Inquiry concerning the Object of Geometry, which the
Subject we have been upon does naturally lead one to. We have shown there is no
such Idea, as that of Extension in Abstract, and that there are two kinds of
sensible Extension and Figures, which are entirely Distinct and Heterogeneous
from each other. Now, it is natural to enquire which of these is the Object of
Geometry.

CL. At first View, we are apt to think Visible Extension the Object of
Geometry.
Some things there are which, at first sight, incline one to think Geometry
conversant about Visible Extension. The constant use of the Eyes, both in the
Practical and Speculative Parts of that Science, does very much induce us
thereto. It would, without doubt, seem odd to a Mathematician, to go about to
convince him, the Diagrams he saw upon Paper were not the Figures, or even the
Likeness of the Figures, which make the Subject of the Demonstration. The
contrary being held an unquestionable Truth, not only by Mathematicians, but
also by those who apply themselves more particularly to the Study of Logic; I
mean, who consider the Nature of Science, Certainty, and Demonstration: It
being by them assigned as one Reason, of the extraordinary Clearness and
Evidence of Geometry, that in that Science the Reasonings are free from those
Inconveniences, which attend the use of Arbitrary Signs. The very Ideas
themselves being Copied out, and exposed to View upon Paper. But, by the bye,
how well this agrees with what they likewise assert, of Abstract Ideas being
the Object of Geometrical Demonstration, I leave to be considered.

CLI. Visible Extension shown not to be the Object of Geometry.
To come to a Resolution in this Point, we need only observe what has been said
in Sect. LIX, LX, LXI; where it is shown, that Visible Extensions in themselves
are little regarded, and have no settled determinate Greatness; and that Men
measure altogether, by the Application of Tangible Extension to Tangible
Extension. All which makes it evident, that Visible Extension and Figures are
not the Object of Geometry.

CLII. Words may as well be thought the Object of Geometry, as Visible
Extension.
It is, therefore, plain that Visible Figures are of the same Use in Geometry,
that Words are. And the one may as well be accounted the Object of that
Science, as the other; neither of them being any otherwise concerned therein,
than as they represent or suggest to the Mind the particular Tangible Figures
connected with them. There is, indeed, this Difference betwixt the
Signification of Tangible Figures by Visible Figures, and of Ideas by Words.
That whereas the Latter is variable and uncertain, depending altogether on the
Arbitrary Appointment of Men; the Former is fixed, and immutably the same, in
all Times and Places. A Visible Square, for Instance, suggests to the Mind the
same Tangible Figure in Europe, that it does in America. Hence it is, that the
Voice of Nature, which speaks to our Eyes, is not liable to that
Misinterpretation and Ambiguity, that Languages of Human Contrivance are
unavoidably subjected to. From which may, in some measure, be derived that
peculiar Evidence and Clearness of Geometrical Demonstrations.

CLIII. It is proposed to enquire, what Progress an Intelligence that could
see, but not feel, might make in Geometry.
Though what has been said may suffice to show what ought to be determined, with
relation to the Object of Geometry; I shall nevertheless, for the fuller
Illustration thereof, take into my Thoughts the Case of an Intelligence, or
Unbody'd Spirit, which is supposed to see perfectly well, i. e. to have a clear
Perception of the proper and immediate Objects of Sight, but to have no Sense
of Touch. Whether there be any such Being in Nature or no, is beside my Purpose
to enquire. It suffices, that the Supposition contains no Contradiction in it.
Let us now examine, what Proficiency such a one may be able to make in
Geometry. Which Speculation will lead us more clearly to see, whether the Ideas
of Sight can possibly be the Object of that Science.

CLIV. He cannot understand those parts which relate to Solids, and their
Surfaces and Lines generated by their Section.
First, then it is certain, the aforesaid Intelligence could have no Idea of a
Solid, or Quantity of three Dimensions; which follows from its not having any
Idea of Distance. We indeed are prone to think, that we have by Sight the Ideas
of Space and Solids, which arises from our imagining that we do, strictly
speaking, see Distance, and some parts of an Object at a greater Distance than
others, which has been demonstrated to be the Effect of the Experience we have
had, what Ideas of Touch are connected with such and such Ideas attending
Vision. But the Intelligence here spoken of is supposed to have no Experience
of Touch. He would not, therefore, judge as we do, nor have any Idea of
Distance, Outness, or Profundity, nor consequently of Space or Body, either
immediately or by Suggestion. Whence it is plain, he can have no Notion of
those parts of Geometry, which relate to the Mensuration of Solids, and their
Unequal or Concave Surfaces, and contemplate the Properties of Lines generated
by the Section of a Solid. The conceiving of any part whereof, is beyond the
Reach of his Faculties.

CLV. Nor even the Elements of plain Geometry.
Farther, he cannot comprehend the manner wherein Geometers describe a right
Line or Circle: The Rule and Compass with their Use, being things of which it is
impossible he should have any Notion. Nor is it an easier matter for him, to
conceive the placing of one Plain or Angle on another, in order to prove their
Equality. Since that supposes some Idea of Distance, or External Space. All
which makes it evident, our pure Intelligence could never attain to know, so
much as the first Elements of plain Geometry. And, perhaps, upon a nice
Enquiry, it will be found, he cannot even have an Idea of Plain Figures, any
more than he can of Solids. Since some Idea of Distance is necessary, to form
the Idea of a Geometrical Plain, as will appear to whoever shall reflect a
little on it.

CLVI. The proper Objects of Sight incapable of being managed as Geometrical
Figures.
All that is properly perceived by the Visive Faculty, amounts to no more than
Colors with their Variations, and different Proportions of Light and Shade.
But, the perpetual Mutability, and Fleetingness of those immediate Objects of
Sight, render them incapable of being managed after the manner of Geometrical
Figures; nor is it in any Degree useful that they should. It Is true, there be
diverse of 'em perceived at once; and more of some, and less of others. But
accurately to compute their Magnitude, and assign precise determinate
Proportions, between Things so Variable and Inconstant, if we suppose it
possible to be done, must yet be a very trifling and insignificant Labor.

CLVII. The Opinion of those who hold plain Figures to be the immediate Objects
of Sight, considered.
I must confess, it seems to be the Opinion of some very Ingenious Men, that
flat or plain Figures are immediate Objects of Sight, though they acknowledge
Solids are not. And this Opinion of their's is grounded on what is observed in
Painting, wherein (say they) the Ideas immediately imprinted in the Mind, are
only of Plains variously colored, which by a sudden Act of the Judgment are
changed into Solids. But, with a little Attention we shall find the Plains here
mentioned, as the immediate Objects of Sight, are not Visible, but Tangible
Plains. For when we say that Pictures are Plains, we mean thereby, that they
appear to the Touch Smooth and Uniform. But then this Smoothness and
Uniformity, or, in other Words, this Plainness of the Picture, is not perceived
immediately by Vision: For it appears to the Eye Various and Multiform.

CLVIII. Plains, no more the immediate Objects of Sight, than Solids.
From all which we may conclude, that Plains are no more the immediate Object
of Sight than Solids. What we strictly see are not Solids, nor yet Plains
variously colored; they are only Diversity of Colors. And some of these
suggest to the Mind Solids, and others Plain Figures; just as they have been
experienced to be connected with the one, or the other. So that we see Plains,
in the same way that we see Solids: Both being equally suggested by the
immediate Objects of Sight, which accordingly are themselves Denominated Plains
and Solids. But though they are called by the same Names, with the Things marked
by them, they are nevertheless of a Nature entirely different, as has been
Demonstrated.

CLIX. Difficult to enter precisely into the Thoughts of the above mentioned
Intelligence.
What has been said is, if I mistake not, sufficient to Decide the Question we
proposed to Examine, concerning the Ability of a pure Spirit, such as we have
described, to know Geometry. It is, indeed, no easy matter for us to enter
precisely into the Thoughts of such an Intelligence; because we cannot, without
great Pains, cleverly Separate, and Disintangle in our Thoughts, the proper
Objects of Sight, from those of Touch, which are Connected with them. This,
indeed, in a complete Degree, seems scarce possible to be performed. Which will
not seem strange to us, if we consider how hard it is, for any one to hear the
Words of his Native Language, which is familiar to him, pronounced in his Ears
without understanding them. Though he endeavor to disunite the meaning from the
Sound, it will nevertheless intrude into his Thoughts, and he shall find it
extreme Difficult, if not impossible, to put himself exactly in the Posture of
a Foreigner, that never learnt the Language, so as to be affected barely with
the Sounds themselves, and not perceive the Signification annexed to them.

CXL. The Object of Geometry, its not being sufficiently understood, cause of
Difficulty and useless Labor in that Science.
By this time, I suppose, it is clear that neither Abstract, nor Visible
Extension makes the Object of Geometry. The not discerning of which might,
perhaps, have created some Difficulty, and useless Labor in Mathematics. Sure
I am, that somewhat relating thereto has occurred to my Thoughts, which, though
after the most anxious and repeated Examination I am forced to think it true,
does, nevertheless, seem so far out of the common road of Geometry, that I know
not, whether it may not be thought Presumption, if I should make it public in
an Age, wherein that Science has received such mighty Improvements by new
Methods; great Part whereof, as well as of the Ancient Discoveries, may perhaps
lose their Reputation, and much of that Ardor, with which Men study the
Abstruse and Fine Geometry be abated, if what to me, and those few to whom I
have imparted it, seems evidently True, should really prove to be so.

FINIS.

