THE HISTORY OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. By EDWARD GIBBON, Esquire
VOLUME THE SECOND. A NEW EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR W. STRAHAN; AND T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.

MDCCLXXXIII.

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
CHAP. XI. Reign of Claudius. -- Defeat of the Goths. -- Victories, Triumph,
and Death of Aurelian.
A. D. 268 AUREOLUS invades Italy, is defeated and besieged at Milan Page 2
Death of Gallienus Page 4 Character and Elevation of the Emperor Claudius ib.
A. D. 268 Death of Aureolus Page 7 Clemency and Justice of Claudius Page 8 He
undertakes the Reformation of the Army ib. A. D. 269 The Goths invade the
Empire Page 9 Distress and Firmness of Claudius Page 11 His Victory over the
Goths ib. A. D. 270 Death of the Emperor, who recommends Aurelian for his
Successor Page 14 The Attempt and Fall of Quintilius Page 15 Origin and
Services of Aurelian ib. Aurelian's successful Reign Page 16 His severe
Discipline Page 17 He concludes a Treaty with the Goths Page 18 He resigns to
them the Province of Dacia Page 19 A. D. 270 The Alemannic War Page 21 The
Alemanni invade Italy Page 24 They are at last vanquished by Aurelian Page 25
A. D. 271 Superstitious Ceremonies Page 26 Fortifications of Rome Page 27
Aurelian suppresses the two Usurpers Page 28 Succession of Usurpers in Gaul
Page 29 A. D. 271 The Reign and Defeat of Tetricus Page 30 A. D. 272 Character
of Zenobia Page 32 Her Beauty and Learning Page 33 Her Valor ib. She revenges
her Husband's Death Page 34 She reigns over the East and Egypt Page 35 A. D.
272 The Expedition of Aurelian Page 37 The Emperor defeats the Palmyrenians in
the Battles of Antioch and Emesa ib. The State of Palmyra Page 39 It is
besieged by Aurelian Page 40 A. D. 273 Aurelian becomes Master of Zenobia, and
of the City Page 41 Behavior of Zenobia Page 42 Rebellion and Ruin of Palmyra
Page 44 Aurelian suppresses the Rebellion of Firmus in Egypt, ib. A. D. 274
Triumph of Aurelian Page 45 His Treatment of Tetricus and Zenobia Page 48 His
Magnisicence and Devotion Page 49 He suppresses a Sedition at Rome Page 50
Observations upon it Page 51 Cruelty of Aurelian Page 53 A. D. 275 He marches
into the East, and is assassinated Page 55
CHAP. XII. Conduct of the Army and Senate after the Death of Aurelian. --
Reigns of Tacitus, Probus, Carus, and his Sons.
Extraordinary Contest between the Army and the Senate for the Choice of an
Emperor Page 57 A. D. 275 A peaceful Interregnum of eight Months Page 59 The
Consul assembles the Senate Page 60 Character of Tacitus Page 61 He is elected
Emperor Page 63 He accepts the Purple ib. Authority of the Senate Page 64 Their
Joy and Confidence Page 66 A. D. 276 Tacitus is acknowledged by the Army Page
67 The Alani invade Asia, and are repulsed by Tacitus Page 68 A. D. 276 Death
of the Emperor Tacitus Page 69 Usurpation and Death of his Brother Florianus
Page 70 Their family subsists in Obscurity Page 71 Character and Elevation of
the Emperor Probus Page 72 His respectful Conduct toward the Senate Page 73 A.
D. Victories of Probus over the Barbarians 75 A. D. 277 He delivers Gaul from
the Invasion of the Germans Page 77 He carries his Arms into Germany Page 79 He
builds a Wall from the Rhine to the Danube Page 80 Introduction and Settlement
of the Barbarians Page 82 Daring Enterprise of the Franks Page 84 A. D. 279
Revolt of Saturninus in the East Page 85 A. D. 280 -- of Bonosus and Proculus
in Gaul Page 87 A. D. 281 Triumph of the Emperor Probus Page 88 His Discipline
ib. A. D. 282 His Death Page 90 Election and Character of Carus Page 91 The
Sentiments of the Senate and People Page 92 Carus defeats the Sarmatians, and
marches into the East Page 93 A. D. 283 He gives Audience to the Persian
Ambassadors Page 94 A. D. 283 His Victories and extraordinary Death Page 95 He
is succeeded by his two Sons, Carinus and Numerian Page 97 A. D. 284 Vices of
Carinus Page 98 He celebrates the Roman Games Page 100 Spectracles of Rome Page
101 The Amphitheatre Page 103 Return of Numerian with the Army from Persia Page
106 Death of Numerian Page 108 A. D. 284 Election of the Emperor Diocletian
Page 109 A. D. 285 Defeat and Death of Carinus Page 110
CHAP. XIII. The Reign of Diocletian and his three Associates, Maximian,
Galerius, and Constantius. -- General Re-establishment of Order and
Tranquillity. -- The Persian War, Victory and Triumph. -- The new Form of
Administration. -- Abdication and Retirement of Diocletian and Maximian.
A. D. 285 Elevation and Character of Diocletian Page 112 His Clemency and
Victory Page 114 A. D. 286 Association and Character of Maximian Page 115 A. D.
292 Association of two Caesar's, Galerius and Constantius Page 118 Departments
and Harmony of the four Princes Page 119 Series of Events Page 120 A. D. 287
State of the Peasants of Gaul ib. Their Rebellion and Chastisement Page 122 A.
D. 287 Revolt of Carausius in Britain Page 123 Importance of Britain Page 124
Power of Carausius Page 125 A. D. 289 Acknowledged by the other Emperors Page
126 A. D. 294 His Death Page 127 A. D. 296 Recovery of Britain by Constantius
Page 128 Defense of the Frontiers Page 129 Fortifications ib. Dissentions of
the Barbarians Page 130 Conduct of the Emperors ib. Valor of the Caesar's Page
131 Treatment of the Barbarians Page 132 Wars of Africa and Egypt Page 133 A.
D. 296 Conduct of Diocletian in Egypt Page 134 He suppresses Books of Alchymy
Page 137 Novelty and Progress of that Art ib. The Persian War Page 138 A. D.
282 Tiridates the Armenian ib. A. D. 286 His Restoration to the Throne of
Armenia Page 140 State of the Country ib. Revolt of the People and Nobles ib.
Story of Mamgo Page 141 The Persians recover Armenia Page 143 A. D. 296 War
between the Persians and the Romans Page 144 Defeat of Galerius ib. His
Reception by Diocletian Page 146 A. D. 297 Second Campaign of Galerius ib. His
Victory Page 147 His Behavior to his royal Captives Page 148 Negotiation for
Peace ib. Speech of the Persian Ambassador Page 149 Answer of Galerius Page 150
Moderation of Diocletian Page 151 Conclusion of a Treaty of Peace ib. Articles
of the Treaty Page 152 The Aboras fixed as the Limits between the Empires Page
153 Cession of five Provinces beyond the Tigris ib. Armenia Page 154 Iberia
Page 155 A. D. 303 Triumph of Diocletian and Maximian Page 156 Long Absence of
the Emperors from Rome Page 157 Their Residence at Milan Page 158 -- at
Nicomedia Page 159 Debasement of Rome and of the Senate Page 160 New Bodies of
Guards, Jovians and Herculians Page 161 Civil Magistracies laid aside Page 163
Imperial Dignity and Titles ib. Diocletian assumes the Diadem, and introduces
the Persian Ceremonial Page 165 New Form of Administration, two Augusti, and
two Caesar's Page 167 Increase of Taxes Page 169 Abdication of Diocletian and
Maximian Page 170 Resemblance to Charles the Fifth Page 171 A. D. 304 Long
Illness of Diocletian Page 172 His Prudence ib. Compliance of Maximian Page 173
Retirement of Diocletian at Salona Page 174 His Philosophy Page 175 A. D. 313
His Death Page 176 Description of Salona and the adjacent Country Page 177 Of
Diocletian's Palace Page 179 Decline of the Arts Page 181 -- of Letters ib. The
new Platonists Page 182
CHAP. XIV. Troubles after the Abdication of Diocletian. -- Death of
Constantius. -- Elevation of Constantine and Maxentius. -- Six Emperors at the
same Time. -- Death of Maximian and Galerius. -- Victories of Constantine over
Maxentius and Licinius. -- Reunion of the Empire under the Authority of
Constantine.
A. D. 305 -- 323. Period of civil Wars and Confusion Page 185 Character and
Situation of Constantius ib. Of Galerius Page 187 The Two Caesar's, Severus and
Maximin Page 188 Ambition of Galerius disappointed by two Revolutions Page 190
A. D. 274 Birth, Education, and Escape of Constantine ib. A. D. 306 Death of
Constantius, and Elevation of Constantine Page 193 He is acknowledged by
Galerius, who gives him only the Title of Caesar, and that of Augustus to
Severus Page 195 The Brothers and Sisters of Constantine Page 196 Discontent of
the Romans at the Apprehension of Taxes Page 197 A. D. 306 Maxentius declared
Emperor at Rome Page 199 Maximian re-assumes the Purple Page 200 A. D. 307
Defeat and Death of Severus Page 201 Maximian gives his Daughter Fausta, and
the Title of Augustus, to Constantine Page 203 Galerius invades Italy ib. His
Retreat Page 206 A. D. 307 Elevation of Licinius to the Rank of Augustus Page
207 Elevation of Maximian Page 208 A. D. 308 Six Emperors ib. Misfortunes of
Maximin Page 209 A. D. 310 His Death Page 212 A. D. 311 Death of Galerius ib.
His Dominion shared between Maximin and Licinius Page 214 A. D. 306 -- 312.
Administration of Constantine in Gaul ib. Tyranny of Maxentius in Italy and
Africa Page 216 A. D. 312 Civil War between Constantine and Maxentius Page 219
Preparations Page 221 Constantine passes the Alps Page 222 Battle of Turin Page
224 Siege and Battle of Verona Page 225 Indolence and Fears of Maxentius Page
228 A. D. 312 Victory of Constantine near Rome Page 230 His Reception Page 233
His Conduct at Rome Page 235 A. D. 313 His Alliance with Licinius Page 237 War
between Maximin and Licinius ib. The Defeat of Maximin Page 238 His Death Page
239 Cruelty of Licinius ib. Unfortunate Fate of the Empress Valeria and her
Mother Page 240 Quarrel between Constantine and Licinius Page 244 First civil
War between them Page 245 A. D. 314 Quarrel between Constantine and Licinius
Page 214 First civil War between them Page 245 A. D. 314 Battle of Cibalis Page
246 Battle of Mardia Page 247 Treaty of Peace Page 249 A. D. 315 -- 323.
General Peace, and Laws of Constantine Page 250 A. D. 322 The Gothic War Page
253 A. D. 323 Second civil War between Constantine and Licinius Page 255 A. D.
323 Battle of Hadrianople Page 258 Siege of Byzantium, and naval Victory of
Crispus Page 260 Battle of Chrysopolis Page 262 Submission and Death of
Licinius ib. A. D. 324 Reunion of the Empire Page 264
CHAP. XV. The Progress of the Christian Religion, and the Sentiments, Manners,
Numbers, and Condition of the primitive Christians.
Importance of the Inquiry Page 265 Its Difficulties ib. Five Causes of the
Growth of Christianity Page 266 I. THE FIRST CAUSE. Zeal of the Jews Page 267
Its gradual Increase Page 269 Their Religion better suited to Defense than to
Conquest Page 271 More liberal Zeal of Christianity Page 273 Obstinacy and
Reasons of the believing Jews Page 275 The Nazarene Church of Jerusalem Page
277 The Ebionites Page 279 The Gnostics Page 282 Their Sects, Progress, and
Influence Page 284 The Demons considered as the Gods of Antiquity Page 287
Abhorrence of the Christians for Idolatry Page 289 Ceremonies ib. Arts Page 291
Festivals Page 292 Zeal for Christianity Page 293 II. THE SECOND CAUSE. The
Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul among the Philosophers Page 294 Among
the Pagans of Greece and Rome Page 296 Among the Barbarians and the Jews Page
298 Among the Christians Page 300 Approaching End of the World ib. Doctrine of
the Milennium Page 301 Conflagration of Rome and of the World Page 304 The
Pagans devoted to eternal Punishment Page 306 Were often converted by their
Fears Page 308 III. THE THIRD CAUSE. Miraculous Powers of the primitive Church
Page 309 Their Truth contested Page 311 Our Perplexity in defining the
miraculous Period Page 312 Use of the Primitive Miracles Page 314 IV. THE
FOURTH CAUSE. Virtues of the first Christians Page 315 Effects of their
Repentance Page 316 Care of their Reputation Page 317 Morality of the Fathers
Page 319 Principles of human Nature Page 320 The primitive Christians condemn
Pleasure and Luxury Page 321 Their Sentiments concerning Marriage and Chastity
Page 323 Their Aversion to the Business of War and Government Page 326 V. THE
FIFTH CAUSE. The Christians active in the Government of the Church Page 328 Its
primitive Freedom and Equality Page 329 Institution of Bishops as Presidents of
the College of Presbyters Page 331 Provincial Councils Page 334 Union of the
Church Page 335 Progress of Episcopal Authority ib. Pre-eminence of the
Metropolitan Churches Page 337 Ambition of the Roman Pontiff Page 338 Laity and
Clergy Page 340 Oblations and Revenue of the Church Page 341 Distribution of
the Revenue Page 345 Excommunication Page 348 Public Penance Page 350 The
Dignity of Episcopal Government Page 351 Recapitulation of the Five Causes Page
353 Weakness of Polytheism ib. The Skepticism of the Pagan World proved
favorable to the new Religion Page 355 And to the Peace and Union of the Roman
Empire Page 357 Historical View of the Progress of Christianity Page 358 In the
East Page 359 The Church of Antioch Page 360 In Egypt Page 362 In Rome Page 364
In Africa and the Western Provinces Page 366 Beyond the Limits of the Roman
Empire Page 368 General Proportion of Christians and Pagans Page 371 A. D.
Whether the first Christians were mean and ignorant, ib. Some Exceptions with
regard to Learning Page 372 -- with regard to Rank and Fortune Page 374
Christianity most favorably received by the Poor and Simple Page 375 Rejected
by some eminent Men of the first and second centuries ib. Their Neglect of
Prophecy Page 377 -- of Miracles Page 378 General Silence concerning the
Darkness of the Passion ib,
CHAP. XVI. The Conduct of the Roman Government toward the Christians, from
the Reign of Nero to that of Constantine.
Christianity persecuted by the Roman Emperors Page 381 Inquiry into their
Motives Page 383 Rebellious Spirit of the Jews Page 384 Toleration of the
Jewish Religion Page 385 The Jews were a People which followed, the Christians
a Sect which deserted, the Religion of their Fathers Page 387 Christianity
accused of Atheism, and mistaken by the People and Philosophers Page 389 The
Union and Assemblies of the Christians considered as a dangerous Conspiracy
Page 392 Their Manners calumniated Page 394 Their imprudent Defense Page 396
Idea of the Conduct of the Emperors toward the Christians Page 398 They
neglected the Christians as a Sect of Jews Page 400 The Fire of Rome under the
Reign of Nero Page 403 Cruel Punishment of the Christians as the Incendiaries
of the City Page 405 Remarks on the Passage of Tacitus relative to the
Persecution of the Christians by Nero Page 407 Oppression of the Jews and
Christians by Domitian Page 412 Execution of Clemens the Consul Page 415
Ignorance of Pliny concerning the Christians Page 417 Trajan and his Successors
establish a legal Mode of proceeding against them Page 418 Popular Clamours
Page 420 Trials of the Christians Page 422 Humanity of the Roman Magistrates
Page 424 Inconsiderable Number of Martyrs Page 426 Example of Cyprian, Bishop
of Carthage Page 428 His Danger and Flight Page 429 A. D. 257 His Banishment
Page 430 His Condemnation Page 432 His Martyrdom Page 433 Various Incitements
to Martyrdom Page 435 Ardour of the first Christians Page 437 Gradual
Relaxation Page 440 Three Methods of escaping Martyrdom ib. Alternatives of
Severity and Toleration Page 443 The ten Persecutions ib. Supposed Edicts of
Tiberius and Marcus Antoninus Page 444 A. D. 180 State of the Christians in the
Reigns of Commodus and Severus Page 446 A. D. 211 -- 249. Of the Successors of
Severus Page 448 A. D. 244 Of Maximin, Philip, and Decius Page 451 A. D. 253 --
260. Of Valerian, Gallienus, and his Successors Page 453 A. D. 260 Paul of
Samosata, his Manners Page 454 A. D. 270 He is degraded from the Sea of Antioch
Page 456 A. D. 274 The Sentence is executed by Aurelian Page 457 A. D. 284 --
303. Peace and Prosperity of the Church under Diocletian Page 458 Progress of
Zeal and Superstition among the Pagans Page 460 Maximian and Galerius punish a
few Christian Soldiers Page 463 Galerius prevails on Diocletian to begin a
general Persecution Page 465 A. D. 303 Demolition of the Church of Nicomedia
Page 467 The first Edict against the Christians Page 468 Zeal and Punishment of
a Christian Page 470 Fire of the Palace of Nicomedia imputed to the Christians
Page 471 Execution of the first Edict Page 472 Demolition of the Churches Page
474 Subsequent Edicts Page 476 A. D. 303 -- 311. General Idea of the
Persecution Page 477 In the Western Provinces, under Constantius and
Constantine Page 478 In Italy and Africa, under Maximian and Severus; and under
Maxentius 480, Page 481 In Illyricum and the East under Galerius and Maximin
Page 483 A. D. 311 Galerius publishes an Edict of Toleration Page 484 Peace of
the Church Page 486 Maximin prepares to renew the Persecution Page 487 A. D.
313 End of the Persecutions Page 489 Probable Account of the Sufferings of the
Martyrs and Confessors ib. Number of Martyrs Page 492 Conclusion Page 495
THE HISTORY OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.
CHAP. XI. Reign of Claudius. -- Defeat of the Goths. -- Victories, Triumph,
and Death, of Aurelian.
UNDER the deplorable reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, the empire was
oppressed and almost destroyed by the soldiers, the tyrants, and the
barbarians. It was saved by a series of great princes, who derived their
obscure origin from the martial provinces of Illyricum. Within a period of
about thirty years, Claudius, Aurelian, Probus, Diocletian and his colleagues,
triumphed over the foreign and domestic enemies of the state, re-established,
with the military discipline, the strength of the frontiers, and deserved the
glorious title of Restorers of the Roman world.

The removal of an effeminate tyrant made way for a succession of heroes. The
indignation of the people imputed all their calamities to Gallienus, Aureolus
invades Italy, is defeated and besieged at Milan.
and the far greater part were, indeed, the consequence of his dissolute
manners and careless administration. He was even destitute of a sense of
honor, which so frequently supplies the absence of public virtue; and as long
as he was permitted to enjoy the possession of Italy, a victory of the
barbarians, the loss of a province, or the rebellion of a general, seldom
disturbed the tranquil course of his pleasures. At length, a considerable army,
stationed on the Upper Danube, A. D. 268.
invested with the Imperial purple their leader Aureolus; who disdaining a
confined and barren reign over the mountains of Rhaetia, passed the Alps,
occupied Milan, threatened Rome, and challenged Gallienus to dispute in the
field the sovereignty of Italy. The emperor, provoked by the insult, and
alarmed by the instant danger, suddenly exerted that latent vigor, which
sometimes broke through the indolence of his temper. Forcing himself from the
luxury of the palace, he appeared in arms at the head of his legions, and
advanced beyond the Po to encounter his competitor. The corrupted name of
Pontirolo Pons Aureoli, thirteen miles from Bergamo, and thirty-two from Milan.
See Cluver. Italia Antiq. tom. i. p. 245. Near this place, in the year 1703,
the obstinate battle of Cassano was fought between the French and Austrians.
The excellent relation of the Chevalier de Folard, who was present, gives a
very distinct idea of the ground. See Polybe de Folard, tom. iii. p. 223 -- 248.
still preserves the memory of a bridge over the Adda, which, during the
action, must have proved an object of the utmost importance to both armies. The
Rhaetian usurper, after receiving a total defeat and a dangerous wound, retired
into Milan. The siege of that great city was immediately formed; the walls were
battered with every engine in use among the ancients; and Aureolus, doubtful of
his internal strength, and hopeless of foreign succors, already anticipated
the fatal consequences of unsuccessful rebellion.

His last resource was an attempt to seduce the loyalty of the besiegers. He
scattered libels through their camp, inviting the troops to desert an unworthy
master, who sacrificed the public happiness to his luxury, and the lives of his
most valuable subjects to the slightest suspicions. The arts of Aureolus
diffused fears and discontent among the principal officers of his rival. A
conspiracy was formed by Heraclianus the Praetorian prefect, by Marcian, a
general of rank and reputation, and by Cecrops, who commanded a numerous body
of Dalmatian guards. The death of Gallienus was resolved; and notwithstanding
their desire of first terminating the siege of Milan, the extreme danger which
accompanied every moment's delay, obliged them to hasten the execution of their
daring purpose. At a late hour of the night, but while the emperor still
protracted the pleasures of the table, an alarm was suddenly given, that
Aureolus, at the head of all his forces, had made a desperate sally from the
town; Gallienus, who was never deficient in personal bravery, started from his
silken couch, and, without allowing himself time either to put on his armor or
to assemble his guards, he mounted on horseback, and rode full speed toward the
supposed place of the attack. Encompassed by his declared or concealed enemies,
he soon, amidst the nocturnal tumult, received a mortal dart from an uncertain
hand. Before he expired, a patriotic A. D. 268. March 20. Death of Gallienus.
sentiment rising in the mind of Gallienus, induced him to name a deserving
successor, and it was his last request, that the Imperial ornaments should be
delivered to Claudius, who then commanded a detached army in the neighborhood
of Pavia. The report at least was diligently propagated, and the order
cheerfully obeyed by the conspirators, who had already agreed to place Claudius
on the throne. On the first news of the emperor's death, the troops expressed
some suspicion and resentment, till the one was removed, and the other
assuaged, by a donative of twenty pieces of gold to each soldier. They then
ratified the election, and acknowledged the merit of their new sovereign On the
death of Gallienus, see Trebellius Pollio in Hist. August. p. 181. Zosimus, l.
i. p. 37. Zonaras, l. xii. p. 634. Eutrop. ix. 11. Aurelius Victor in Epitom.
Victor in Caesar. I have compared and blended them all, but have chiefly
followed Aurelius Victor, who seems to have had the best memoirs.
.

The obscurity which covered the origin of Character and elevation of the
emperor Claudius.
Claudius, though it was afterward embellished by some flattering fictions
Some supposed him, oddly enough, to be a bastard of the younger Gordian. Others
took advantage of the province of Dardania, to deduce his origin from Dardanus,
and the ancient kings of Troy.
, sufficiently betrays the meanness of his birth. We can only discover that he
was a native of one of the provinces bordering on the Danube; that his youth
was spent in arms, and that his modest valor attracted the favor and
confidence of Decius. The senate and people already considered him as an
excellent officer, equal to the most important trusts; and censured the
inattention of Valerian, who suffered him to remain in the subordinate station
of a tribune. But it was not long before that emperor distinguished the merit
of Claudius, by declaring him general and chief of the Illyrian frontier, with
the command of all the troops in Thrace, Maesia, Dacia, Pannonia, and Dalmatia,
the appointments of the prefect of Egypt, the establishment of the proconsul
of Africa, and the sure prospect of the consulship. By his victories over the
Goths, he deserved from the senate the honor of a statue, and excited the
jealous apprehensions of Gallienus. It was impossible that a soldier could
esteem so dissolute a sovereign, nor is it easy to conceal a just contempt.
Some unguarded expressions which dropped from Claudius, were officiously
transmitted to the royal ear. The emperor's answer to an officer of confidence,
describes in very lively colors his own character and that of the times. There
is not any thing capable of giving me more serious concern, than the
intelligence contained in your last dispatch Notoria, a periodical and official
dispatch which the Emperors received from the frumentarii, or agents dispersed
through the provinces. Of these we may speak hereafter.
: that some malicious suggestions have indisposed toward us the mind of our
friend and parent Claudius. As you regard your allegiance, use every means to
appease his resentment, but conduct your negotiation with secrecy; let it not
reach the knowledge of the Dacian troops; they are already provoked, and it
might inflame their fury. I myself have sent him some presents: be it your care
that he accept them with pleasure. Above all, let him not suspect that I am
made acquainted with his imprudence. The fear of my anger might urge him to
desperate counsels Hist. August. p. 208. Gallienus describes the plate,
vestments, etc. like a man who loved and understood those splendid trifles.
. The presents which accompanied this humble epistle, in which the monarch
solicited a reconciliation with his discontented subject, consisted of a
considerable sum of money, a splendid wardrobe, and a valuable service of
silver and gold plate. By such arts Gallienus softened the indignation, and
dispelled the fears, of his Illyrian general; and, during the remainder of that
reign, the formidable sword of Claudius was always drawn in the cause of a
master whom he despised. At last, indeed, he received from the conspirators the
bloody purple of Gallienus: but he had been absent from their camp and
counsels; and however he might applaud the deed, we may heartily presume that
he was innocent of the knowledge of it Julian (Orat. i. p. 6.) affirms that
Claudius acquired the empire in a just and even holy manner. But we may
distrust the partiality of a kinsman.
. When Claudius ascended the throne, he was about fifty-four years of age.

The siege of Milan was still continued, and Aureolus soon discovered, that the
success of his artifices had only raised up a more determined Death of Aureolus.
adversary. He attempted to negociate with Claudius a treaty of alliance and
partition. Tell him, replied the intrepid emperor, that such proposals should
have been made to Gallienus; he, perhaps, might have listened to them with
patience, and accepted a colleague as despicable as himself Hist. August. p.
203. There are some trifling differences concerning the circumstances of the
last defeat and death of Aureolus.
. This stern refusal, and a last unsuccessful effort, obliged Aureolus to yield
the city and himself to the discretion of the conqueror. The judgment of the
army pronounced him worthy of death, and Claudius, after a feeble resistance,
consented to the execution of the sentence. Nor was the zeal of the senate less
ardent in the cause of their new sovereign. They ratified, perhaps with a
sincere transport of zeal, the election of Claudius; and as his predecessor had
shown himself the personal enemy of their order, they exercised under the name
of justice a severe revenge against his friends and family. The senate was
permitted to discharge the ungrateful office of punishment, and the emperor
reserved for himself the pleasure and merit of obtaining by his intercession a
general act of indemnity Aurelius Victor in Gallien. The people loudly prayed
for the damnation of Gallienus. The senate decreed that his relations and
servants should be thrown down headlong from the Gemonian stairs. An obnoxious
officer of the revenue had his eyes torn out whilst under examination.
.

Such ostentatious clemency discovers less of the real character of Claudius,
than a trifling circumstance in which he seems to have consulted only Clemency
and justice of Claudius.
the dictates of his heart. The frequent rebellions of the provinces had
involved almost every person in the guilt of treason, almost every estate in
the case of confiscation; and Gallienus often displayed his liberality, by
distributing among his officers the property of his subjects. On the accession
of Claudius, an old woman threw herself at his feet, and complained that a
general of the late emperor had obtained an arbitrary grant of her patrimony.
This general was Claudius himself, who had not entirely escaped the contagion
of the times. The emperor blushed at the reproach, but deserved the confidence
which she had reposed in his equity. The confession of his fault was
accompanied with immediate and ample restitution Zonaras, l. xii. p. 137.
.

In the arduous task which Claudius had undertaken, He undertakes the
reformation of the army.
of restoring the empire to its ancient splendor, it was first necessary to
revive among his troops a sense of order and obedience. With the authority of a
veteran commander, he represented to them, that the relaxation of discipline
had introduced a long train of disorders, the effects of which were at length
experienced by the soldiers themselves; that a people ruined by oppression, and
indolent from despair, could no longer supply a numerous army with the means of
luxury, or even of subsistence; that the danger of each individual had
increased with the despotism of the military order, since princes who tremble
on the throne, will guard their safety by the instant sacrifice of every
obnoxious subject. The emperor expatiated on the mischiefs of a lawless caprice
which the soldiers could only gratify at the expense of their own blood; as
their seditious elections had so frequently been followed by civil wars, which
consumed the flower of the legions either in the field of battle or in the
cruel abuse of victory. He painted in the most lively colors the exhausted
state of the treasury, the desolation of the provinces, the disgrace of the
Roman name, and the insolent triumph of rapacious barbarians. It was against
those barbarians, he declared, that he intended to point the first effort of
their arms. Tetricus might reign for a while over the West, and even Zenobia
might preserve the dominion of the East Zonaras on this occasion mentions
Posthumus; but the registers of the senate (Hist. August. p. 203.) prove that
Tetricus was already emperor of the western provinces.
. These usurpers were his personal adversaries; nor could he think of indulging
any private resentment till he had saved an empire, whose impending ruin would,
unless it was timely prevented, crush both the army and the people.

The various nations of Germany and Sarmatia, who fought under the Gothic
standard, had already A. D. 269. The Goths invade the empire.
collected an armament more formidable than any which had yet issued from the
Euxine. On the banks of the Niester, one of the great rivers that discharge
themselves into that sea, they constructed a fleet of two thousand, or even of
six thousand vessels The Augustan History mentions the smaller, Zonaras the
larger, number; the lively fancy of Montesquieu induced him to prefer the
latter.
; numbers which, however incredible they may seem, would have been insufficient
to transport their pretended army of three hundred and twenty thousand
barbarians. Whatever might be the real strength of the Goths, the vigor and
success of the expedition were not adequate to the greatness of the
preparations. In their passage through the Bosphorus, the unskilful pilots were
overpowered by the violence of the current; and while the multitude of their
ships were crowded in a narrow channel, many were dashed against each other, or
against the shore. The barbarians made several descents on the coasts both of
Europe and Asia; but the open country was already plundered, and they were
repulsed with shame and loss from the fortified cities which they assaulted. A
spirit of discouragement and division arose in the fleet, and some of their
chiefs sailed away toward the islands of Crete and Cyprus; but the main body
pursuing a more steady course, anchored at length near the foot of mount Athos,
and assaulted the city of Thessalonica, the wealthy capital of all the
Macedonian provinces. Their attacks, in which they displayed a fierce but
artless bravery, were soon interrupted by the rapid approach of Claudius,
hastening to a scene of action that deserved the presence of a warlike prince
at the head of the remaining powers of the empire. Impatient for battle, the
Goths immediately broke up their camp, relinquished the siege of Thessalonica,
left their navy at the foot of mount Athos, traversed the hills of Macedonia,
and pressed forwards to engage the last defense of Italy.

We still possess an original letter addressed by Claudius to the senate and
people on this memorable Distress and firmness of Claudius.
occasion. Conscript fathers, says the emperor, know that three hundred and
twenty thousand Goths have invaded the Roman territory. If I vanquish them,
your gratitude will reward my services. Should I fall, remember that I am the
successor of Gallienus. The whole republic is fatigued and exhausted. We shall
fight after Valerian, after Ingenuus, Regillianus, Lollianus, Posthumus,
Celsus, and a thousand others, whom a just contempt for Gallienus provoked into
rebellion. We are in want of darts, of spears, and of shields. The strength of
the empire, Gaul, and Spain, are usurped by Tetricus, and we blush to
acknowledge that the archers of the East serve under the banners of Zenobia.
Whatever we shall perform, will be sufficiently great Trebell. Pollio in Hist.
August. p. 204.
. The melancholy firmness of this epistle announces a hero careless of his
fate, conscious of his danger, but still deriving a well-grounded hope from the
resources of his own mind.

The event surpassed his own expectations and those of the world. By the most
signal victories His victory over the Goths.
he delivered the empire from this host of barbarians, and was distinguished by
posterity under the glorious appellation of the Gothic Claudius. The imperfect
historians of an irregular war Hist. August. in Claud. Aurelian. et Prob.
Zosimus, l. i. p. 38 -- 42. Zonaras, l. xii. p. 638. Aurel. Victor in Epitom.
Victor Junior in Caesar. Eutrop. ix. 11. Eusebius. in Chron.
do not enable us to describe the order and circumstances of his exploits; but,
if we could be indulged in the allusion, we might distribute into three acts
this memorable tragedy. I. The decisive battle was fought near Naissus, a city
of Dardania. The legions at first gave way, oppressed by numbers, and dismayed
by misfortunes. Their ruin was inevitable, had not the abilities of their
emperor prepared a seasonable relief. A large detachment rising out of the
secret and difficult passes of the mountains, which, by his order, they had
occupied, suddenly assailed the rear of the victorious Goths. The favorable
instant was improved by the activity of Claudius. He revived the courage of his
troops, restored their ranks, and pressed the barbarians on every side. Fifty
thousand men are reported to have been slain in the battle of Naissus. Several
large bodies of barbarians, covering their retreat with a moveable
fortification of wagons, retired, or rather escaped, from the field of
slaughter. II. We may presume that some insurmountable difficulty, the fatigue,
perhaps, or the disobedience, of the conquerors, prevented Claudius from
completing in one day the destruction of the Goths. The war was diffused over
the provinces of Maesia, Thrace, and Macedonia, and its operations drawn out
into a variety of marches, surprises, and tumultuary engagements, as well by
sea as by land. When the Romans suffered any loss, it was commonly occasioned
by their own cowardice or rashness; but the superior talents of the emperor,
his perfect knowledge of the country, and his judicious choice of measures as
well as officers, assured on most occasions the success of his arms. The
immense booty, the fruit of so many victories, consisted for the greater part
of cattle and slaves. A select body of the Gothic youth was received among the
Imperial troops; the remainder was sold into servitude; and so considerable was
the number of female captives, that every soldier obtained to his share two or
three women. A circumstance from which we may conclude, that the invaders
entertained some designs of settlement as well as of plunder; since even in a
naval expedition they were accompanied by their families. III. The loss of
their fleet, which was either taken or sunk, had intercepted the retreat of the
Goths. A vast circle of Roman posts distributed with skill, supported with
firmness, and gradually closing toward a common center, forced the barbarians
into the most inaccessible parts of mount Haemus, where they found a safe
refuge, but a very scanty subsistence. During the course of a rigorous winter,
in which they were besieged by the emperor's troops, famine and pestilence,
desertion and the sword, continually diminished the imprisoned multitude. On
the return of spring, nothing appeared in A. D. 270.
arms except a hardy and desperate band, the remnant of that mighty host which
had embarked at the mouth of the Niester.

The pestilence which swept away such numbers of the barbarians, at length
proved fatal to March. Death of the emperor, who recommends Aurelian for his
successor.
their conqueror. After a short but glorious reign of two years, Claudius
expired at Sirmium, amidst the tears and acclamations of his subjects. In his
last illness, he convened the principal officers of the state and army, and in
their presence recommended Aurelian, one of his generals, as the most deserving
of the throne, and the best qualified to execute the great design which he
himself had been permitted only to undertake. The virtues of Claudius, his
valor, affability According to Zonaras (l. xii. p. 638.), Claudius, before his
death, invested him with the purple; but this singular fact is rather
contradicted than confirmed by other writers.
, justice, and temperance, his love of fame and of his country, place him in
that short list of emperors who added luster to the Roman purple. Those
virtues, however, were celebrated with peculiar zeal and complacency by the
courtly writers of the age of Constantine, who was the great grandson of
Crispus, the elder brother of Claudius. The voice of flattery was soon taught
to repeat, that the gods, who so hastily had snatched Claudius from the earth,
rewarded his merit and piety by the perpetual establishment of the empire in
his family See the life of Claudius by Pollio, and the orations of Mamertinus,
Eumenius, and Julian. See likewise the Caesar's of Julian, p. 313. In Julian it
was not adulation, but superstition and vanity.
.

Notwithstanding these oracles, the greatness of the Flavian family (a name
which it had pleased them to assume) was deferred above twenty The attempt and
fall of Quintilius.
years, and the elevation of Claudius occasioned the immediate ruin of his
brother Quintilius, who possessed not sufficient moderation or courage to
descend into the private station to which the patriotism of the late emperor
had condemned him. Without delay or reflection, he assumed the purple at
Aquileia, where he commanded a considerable force; and though his reign lasted
only seventeen days, he had time to obtain the sanction of the senate, and to
experience a mutiny of the troops. As soon as he was informed that the great
army of the Danube had invested the well-known valor of Aurelian with Imperial
power, he sunk under the fame and merit of his rival; and ordering his veins to
be opened, prudently April.
withdrew himself from the unequal contest Zosimus, l. i. p. 42. Pollio (Hist.
August. p. 207.) allows him virtues, and says, that like Pertinax he was killed
by the licentious soldiers. According to Dexippus, he died of a disease.
.

The general design of this work will not permit us minutely to relate the
actions of every Origin and services of Aurelian.
emperor after he ascended the throne, much less to deduce the various fortunes
of his private life. We shall only observe, that the father of Aurelian was a
peasant of the territory of Sirmium, who occupied a small farm, the property of
Aurelius, a rich senator. His warlike son inlisted in the troops as a common
soldier, successively rose to the rank of a centurion, a tribune, the prefect
of a legion, the inspector of the camp, the general, or, as it was then called,
the duke, of a frontier; and at length, during the Gothic war, exercised the
important office of commander in chief of the cavalry. In every station he
distinguished himself by matchless valor Theoclius (as quoted in the Augustan
History, p. 211.) affirms, that in one day he killed, with his own hand,
forty-eight Sarmatians, and in several subsequent engagements nine hundred and
fifty. This heroic valor was admired by the soldiers, and celebrated in their
rude songs, the burden of which was mill, mill, mill occidit.
, rigid discipline, and successful conduct. He was invested with the consulship
by the emperor Valerian, who styles him, in the pompous language of that age,
the deliverer of Illyricum, the restorer of Gaul, and the rival of the Scipios.
At the recommendation of Valerian, a senator of the highest rank and merit,
Ulpius Crinitus, whose blood was derived from the same source as that of
Trajan, adopted the Pannonian peasant, gave him his daughter in marriage, and
relieved with his ample fortune the honorable poverty which Aurelian had
preserved inviolate Acholius (ap. Hist. August. p. 213.) describes the ceremony
of the adoption, as it was performed at Byzantium, in the presence of the
emperor and his great officers.
.

The reign of Aurelian lasted only four years Aurelian's successful reign.
and about nine months; but every instant of that short period was filled by
some memorable achievement. He put an end to the Gothic war, chastised the
Germans who invaded Italy, recovered Gaul, Spain, and Britain out of the hands
of Tetricus, and destroyed the proud monarchy which Zenobia had erected in the
East, on the ruins of the afflicted empire.

It was the rigid attention of Aurelian, even to the minutest articles of
discipline, which bestowed His severe discipline.
such uninterrupted success on his arms. His military regulations are contained
in a very concise epistle to one of his inferior officers, who is commanded to
enforce them, as he wishes to become a tribune, or as he is desirous to live.
Gaming, drinking, and the arts of divination, were severely prohibited.
Aurelian expected that his soldiers should be modest, frugal, and laborious;
that their armor should be constantly kept bright, their weapons sharp, their
clothing and horses ready for immediate service; that they should live in their
quarters with chastity and sobriety, without damaging the corn fields, without
stealing even a sheep, a fowl, or a bunch of grapes, without exacting from
their landlords, either salt, or oil, or wood. The public allowance, continues
the emperor, is sufficient for their support; their wealth should be collected
from the spoil of the enemy, not from the tears of the provincials Hist.
August. p. 211. This laconic epistle is truly the work of a soldier; it abounds
with military phrases and words, some of which cannot be understood without
difficulty. Ferramenta samiata is well explained by Salmasius. The former of
the words means all weapons of offense, [and is contrasted with Arma, defensive
armor. The latter signifies keen and well sharpened.
. A single instance will serve to display the rigor, and even cruelty, of
Aurelian. One of the soldiers had seduced the wife of his host. The guilty
wretch was fastened to two trees forcibly drawn toward each other, and his
limbs were torn asunder by their sudden separation. A few such examples
impressed a salutary consternation. The punishments of Aurelian were terrible;
but he had seldom occasion to punish more than once the same offense. His own
conduct gave a sanction to his laws, and the seditious legions dreaded a chief
who had learned to obey, and who was worthy to command.

The death of Claudius had revived the fainting spirit of the Goths. The troops
which guarded the passes of Mount Haemus, and the He concludes a treaty with
the Goths,
banks of the Danube, had been drawn away by the apprehension of a civil war;
and it seems probable that the remaining body of the Gothic and Vandalic tribes
embraced the favorable opportunity, abandoned their settlements of the
Ukraine, traversed the rivers, and swelled with new multitudes the destroying
host of their countrymen. Their united numbers were at length encountered by
Aurelian, and the bloody and doubtful conflict ended only with the approach of
night Zosim. l. i. p. 45.
. Exhausted by so many calamities, which they had mutually endured and
inflicted during a twenty years war, the Goths and the Romans consented to a
lasting and beneficial treaty. It was earnestly solicited by the barbarians,
and cheerfully ratified by the legions, to whose suffrage the prudence of
Aurelian referred the decision of that important question. The Gothic nation
engaged to supply the armies of Rome with a body of two thousand auxiliaries,
consisting entirely of cavalry, and stipulated in return an undisturbed
retreat, with a regular market as far as the Danube, provided by the emperor's
care, but at their own expense. The treaty was observed with such religious
fidelity, that when a party of five hundred men straggled from the camp in
quest of pluner, the king or general of the barbarians commanded that the
guilty leader should be apprehended and shot to death with darts, as a victim
devoted to the sanctity of their engagements. It is, however, not unlikely,
that the precaution of Aurelian, who had exacted as hostages the sons and
daughters of the Gothic chiefs, contributed something to this pacific temper.
The youths he trained in the exercise of arms, and near his own person: to the
damsels he gave a liberal and Roman education, and by bestowing them in
marriage on some of his principal officers, gradually introduced between the
two nations the closest and most endearing connexions Dexippus (ap. Excerpta
Legate. p. 12.) relates the whole transaction under the name of Vandals.
Aurelian married one of the Gothic ladies to his general Bonosus, who was able
to drink with the Goths and discover their secrets. Hist. August. p. 247.
.

But the most important condition of peace was and resigns to them the province
of Dacia.
understood rather than expressed in the treaty. Aurelian withdrew the Roman
forces from Dacia, and tacitly relinquished that great province to the Goths
and Vandals Hist. August. p. 222. Eutrop. ix. 15. Sextus Rufus, c. 9.
Lactantius de mortibus Persecutorum, c. 9.
. His manly judgment convinced him of the solid advantages, and taught him to
despise the seeming disgrace, of thus contracting the frontiers of the
monarchy. The Dacian subjects, removed from those distant possessions which
they were unable to cultivate or defend, added strength and populousness to the
southern side of the Danube. A fertile territory, which the repetition of
barbarous inroads had changed into a desert, was yielded to their industry, and
a new province of Dacia still preserved the memory of Trajan's conquests. The
old country of that name detained, however, a considerable number of its
inhabitants, who dreaded exile more than a Gothic master The Walachians still
preserve many traces of the Latin language, and have boasted, in every age, of
their Roman descent. They are surrounded by, but not mixed with, the
barbarians. See a Memoir of M. d'Anville on ancient Dacia, in the Academy of
Inscriptions, tom. xxx.
. These degenerate Romans continued to serve the empire, whose allegiance they
had renounced, by introducing among their conquerors the first notions of
agriculture, the useful arts, and the conveniences of civilized life. An
intercourse of commerce and language was gradually established between the
opposite banks of the Danube; and after Dacia became an independent state, it
often proved the firmest barrier of the empire against the invasions of the
savages of the North. A sense of interest attached these more settled
barbarians to the alliance of Rome, and a permanent interest very frequently
ripens into sincere and useful friendship. This various colony, which filled
the ancient province, and was insensibly blended into one great people, still
acknowledged the superior renown and authority of the Gothic tribe, and claimed
the fancied honor of a Scandinavian origin. At the same time the lucky though
accidental resemblance of the name of Gaeta, infused among the credulous Goths
a vain persuation, that, in a remote age, their own ancestors, already seated
in the Dacian provinces, had received the instructions of Zamolxis, and checked
the victorious arms of Sesostis and Darius See the first chapter of Jornandes.
The Vandals however (c. 22.) maintained a short independence between the rivers
Marisia and Crissia (Maros and Keres) which fell into the Teiss.
.

While the vigorous and moderate conduct of The Alemannie war.
Aurelian restored the Illyrian frontier, the nation of the Alemanni Dexippus,
p. 7 -- 12. Zosimus, l. 1. p. 43. Vopiscus in Aurelian. in Hist. August.
However these historians differ in names (Alemanni, Juthungi, and Marcomanni),
it is evident that they mean the same people, and the same war; but it requires
some care to conciliate and explain them.
violated the conditions of peace, which either Gallienus had purchased, or
Claudius had imposed, and inflamed by their impatient youth, suddenly flew to
arms. Forty thousand horse appeared in the field Cantoclarus, with his usual
accuracy, chooses to translate three hundred thousand: his version is equally
repugnant to sense and to grammar.
, and the numbers of the infantry doubled those of the cavalry We may remark,
as an instance of bad taste, that Dexippus applies to the light infantry of the
Alemanni the technical terms proper only to the Grecian phalanx.
. The first objects of their avarice were a few cities of the Rhaetian
frontier; but their hopes soon rising with success, the rapid march of the
Alemanni traced a line of devastation from the Danube to the Po In Dexippus, we
at present read Rhodanus; M. de Valois very judiciously alters the word to
Eridanus.
.

The emperor was almost at the same time A. D. 270. September.
informed of the irruption, and of the retreat, of the barbarians. Collecting
an active body of troops, he marched with silence and celerity along the skirts
of the Hercynian forest; and the Alemanni, laden with the spoils of Italy,
arrived at the Danube, without suspecting, that on the opposite bank, and in an
advantageous post, a Roman army lay concealed and prepared to intercept their
return. Aurelian indulged the fatal security of the barbarians, and permitted
about half their forces to pass the river without disturbance and without
precaution. Their situation and astonishment gave him an easy victory; his
skilful conduct improved the advantage. Disposing the legions in a semicircular
form, he advanced the two horns of the crescent across the Danube, and wheeling
them on a sudden toward the center, enclosed the rear of the German host. The
dismayed barbarians, on whatsoever side they cast their eyes, beheld with
despair, a wasted country, a deep and rapid stream, a victorious and implacable
enemy.

Reduced to this distressed condition, the Alemanni no longer disdained to sue
for peace. Aurelian received their ambassadors at the head of his camp, and
with every circumstance of A MAP of the Parts of EUROPE and ASIA, adjacentto
CONSTANTINOPLE.
martial pomp that could display the greatness and discipline of Rome. The
legions stood to their arms in well-ordered ranks and awful silence. The
principal commanders, distinguished by the ensigns of their rank, appeared on
horseback on either side of the Imperial throne. Behind the throne, the
consecrated images of the emperor, and his predecessors The emperor Claudius
was certainly of the number; but we are ignorant how far this mark of respect
was extended; if to Caesar and Augustus, it must have produced a very awful
spectacle; a long line of the masters of the world.
, the golden eagles, and the various titles of the legions, engraved in letters
of gold, were exalted in the air on lofty pikes covered with silver. When
Aurelian assumed his seat, his manly grace and majestic figure Vopiscus in
Hist. August. p. 210.
taught the barbarians to revere the person as well as the purple of their
conqueror. The ambassadors fell prostrate on the ground in silence. They were
commanded to rise, and permitted to speak. By the assistance of interpreters
they extenuated their perfidy, magnified their exploits, expatiated on the
vicissitudes of fortune and the advantages of peace, and, with an ill-timed
confidence, demanded a large subsidy, as the price of the alliance which they
offered to the Romans. The answer of the emperor was stern and imperious. He
treated their offer with contempt, and their demand with indignation,
reproached the barbarians, that they were as ignorant of the arts of war as of
the laws of peace, and finally dismissed them with the choice only of
submitting to his unconditioned mercy, or awaiting the utmost severity of his
resentment Dexippus gives them a subtle and prolix oration, worthy of a Grecian
sophist.
. Aurelian had resigned a distant province to the Goths; but it was dangerous
to trust or to pardon these perfidious barbarians, whose formidable power kept
Italy itself in perpetual alarms.

Immediately after this conference, it should The Alemanni invade Italy,
seem that some unexpected emergency required the emperor's presence in
Pannonia. He devolved on his lieutenants the care of finishing the destruction
of the Alemanni, either by the sword, or by the surer operation of famine. But
an active despair has often triumphed over the indolent assurance of success.
The barbarians, finding it impossible to traverse the Danube and the Roman
camp, broke through the posts in their rear, which were more feebly or less
carefully guarded; and with incredible diligence, but by a different road,
returned toward the mountains of Italy Hist. August. p. 215.
. Aurelian, who considered the war as totally extinguished, received the
mortifying intelligence of the escape of the Allemanni, and of the ravage which
they already committed in the territory of Milan. The legions were commanded to
follow, with as much expedition as those heavy bodies were capable of exerting,
the rapid flight of an enemy, whose infantry and cavalry moved with almost
equal swiftness. A few days afterward the emperor himself marched to the
relief of Italy, at the head of a chosen body of auxiliaries (among whom were
the hostages and cavalry of the Vandals), and of all the Praetorian guards who
had served in the wars on the Danube Dexippus, p. 12.
.

As the light troops of the Alemanni had spread and are at last vanquished by
Aurelian.
themselves from the Alps to the Apennine, the incessant vigilance of Aurelian
and his officers was exercised in the discovery, the attack, and the pursuit of
the numerous detachments. Notwithstanding this desultory war, three
considerable battles are mentioned, in which the principal force of both armies
was obstinately engaged Victor Junior, in Aurelian.
. The success was various. In the first, fought near Placentia, the Romans
received so severe a blow, that, according to the expression of a writer
extremely partial to Aurelian, the immediate dissolution of the empire was
apprehended Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 216.
. The crafty barbarians, who had lined the woods, suddenly attacked the legions
in the dusk of the evening, and, it is most probable, after the fatigue and
disorder of a long march. The fury of their charge was irresistible; but at
length, after a dreadful slaughter, the patient firmness of the emperor rallied
his troops, and restored, in some degree, the honor of his arms. The second
battle was fought near Fano in Umbria; on the spot which, five hundred years
before, had been fatal to the brother of Hannibal The little river or rather
torrent of Metaurus near Fano, has been immortalized, by finding such an
historian as Livy, and such a poet as Horace.
. Thus far the successful Germans had advanced along the Aemilian and Flaminian
way, with a design of sacking the defenseless mistress of the world. But
Aurelian, who, watchful for the safety of Rome, still hung on their rear, found
in this place the decisive moment, of giving them a total and irretrievable
defeat It is recorded by an inscription found at Pezaro. See Gruter. cclxxvi. 3.
. The flying remnant of their host was exterminated in a third and last battle
near Pavia; and Italy was delivered from the inroads of the Alemanni.

Fear has been the original parent of superstition, Superstitious ceremonies.
and every new calamity urges trembling mortals to deprecate the wrath of their
invisible enemies. Though the best hope of the republic was in the valor and
conduct of Aurelian, yet such was the public consternation, when the barbarians
were hourly expected at the gates of Rome, that, by a decree of the senate, the
Sibylline books were consulted. Even the emperor himself, from a motive either
of religion or of policy, recommended this salutary measure, chided the
tardiness of the senate One should imagine, he said, that you were assembled in
a Christian church, not in the temple of all the gods.
, and offered to supply whatever expense, whatever animals, whatever captives
of any nation, the gods should require. Notwithstanding this liberal offer, it
does not appear, that any human victims expiated with their blood the sins of
the Roman people. The Sibylline books enjoined ceremonies of a more harmless
nature, processions of priests A. D. 271. January 11.
in white robes, attended by a chorus of youths and virgins; lustrations of the
city and adjacent country; and sacrifices, whose powerful influence disabled
the barbarians from passing the mystic ground on which they had been
celebrated. However puerile in themselves, these superstitious arts were
subservient to the success of the war; and if, in the decisive battle of Fano,
the Alemanni fancied they saw an army of specter combating on the side of
Aurelian, he received a real and effectual aid from this imaginary
reinforcement Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 215, 216. gives a long account of
these ceremonies, from the Registers of the senate.
.

But whatever confidence might be placed in Fortifications of Rome.
ideal ramparts, the experience of the past, and the dread of the future,
induced the Romans to construct fortifications of a grosser and more
substantial kind. The seven hills of Rome had been surrounded, by the
successors of Romulus, with an ancient wall of more than thirteen miles Plin.
Hist. Nature. iii. 5. To confirm our idea, we may observe, that for a long time
Mount Caelius was a grove of oaks, and Mount Viminal was overrun with osiers;
that, in the fourth century, the Aventine was a vacant and solitary eetirement;
that, till the time of Augustus, the Esquiline was an unwholesome
buryingground; and that the numerous inequalities, remarked by the ancients in
the Quirinal, sufficiently prove that it was not covered with buildings. Of the
seven hills, the Capitoline and Palatine only, with the adjacent valleys, were
the primitive habitation of the Roman people. But this subject would require a
dissertation.
. The vast enclosure may seem disproportioned to the strength and numbers of
the infant state. But it was necessary to secure an ample extent of pasture and
arable land, against the frequent and sudden incursions of the tribes of
Latium, the perpetual enemies of the republic. With the progress of Roman
greatness, the city and its inhabitants gradually increased, filled up the
vacant space, pierced through the useless walls, covered the field of Mars,
and, on every side, followed the public highways in long and beautiful suburbs
Exspatiantia tecta multas addidere urbes, is the expression of Pliny.
. The extent of the new walls, erected by Aurelian, and finished in the reign
of Probus, was magnified by popular estimation to near fifty Hist. August. p.
222. Both Lipsius and Isaac Vossius have eagerly embraced this measure.
, but is reduced by accurate measurement to about twenty-one, miles See
Nardini, Roma Antica, l. i. c. 8.
. It was a great but melancholy labor, since the defense of the capital
betrayed the decline of the monarchy. The Romans of a more prosperous age, who
trusted to the arms of the legions the safety of the frontier camps Tacit.
Hist. iv. 23.
, were very far from entertaining a suspicion, that it would ever become
necessary to fortify the seat of empire against the inroads of the barbarians
For Aurelian's walls, see Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 216. 222. Zosimus, l. i.
p. 43. Eutropius, ix. 15. Aurel. Victor in Aurelian. Victor Junior in Aurelian.
Eusebius. Hieronym. et Idatius in Chronic.
.

The victory of Claudius over the Goths, and Aurelian suppresses the two
usurpers.
the success of Aurelian against the Alemanni, had already restored to the arms
of Rome their ancient superiority over the barbarous nations of the North. To
chastise domestic tyrants, and to reunite the dismembered parts of the empire,
was a task reserved for the second of those warlike emperors. Though he was
acknowledged by the senate and people, the frontiers of Italy, Africa,
Illyricum, and Thrace, confined the limits of his reign. Gaul, Spain, and
Britain, Egypt, Syria, and Asia Minor, were still possessed by two rebels, who
alone, out of so numerous a list, had hitherto escaped the dangers of their
situation; and to complete the ignominy of Rome, these rival thrones had been
usurped by women.

A rapid succession of monarchs had arisen and Succession of usurpers in Gaul.
fallen in the provinces of Gaul. The rigid virtues of Posthumus served only to
hasten his destruction. After suppressing a competitor, who had assumed the
purple at Mentz, he refused to gratify his troops with the plunder of the
rebellious city; and, in the seventh year of his reign, became the victim of
their disappointed avarice His competitor was Lollianus, or Aelianus, if indeed
these names mean the same person. See Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 1177.
. The death of Victorinus, his friend and associate, was occasioned by a less
worthy cause. The shining accomplishments The character of this prince by
Julius Aterianus (ap. Hist. August. p. 187.) is worth transcribing, as it seems
fair and impartial. Victorino qui post Junium Posthumium Gallias rexit neminem
existimo praeferendum; non in virtute Trajanum; non Antoninum in clementia; non
in gravitate Nervam; non in gubernando aerario Vespasianum; non in Censura
totius vitae ac severitate militari Pertinacem vel Severum. Sed omnia haec
libido et cupiditas voluptatis mulierariae sic perdidit, ut nemo audeat
virtutes ejus in literas mittere quem constat omnium judicio meruisse puniri.
of that prince were stained by a licentious passion, which he indulged in acts
of violence, with too little regard to the laws of society, or even to those of
love He ravished the wife of Attitianus, an actuary, or army agent. Hist.
August. p. 186. Aurel. Victor in Aurelian.
. He was slain at Cologne, by a conspiracy of jealous husbands, whose revenge
would have appeared more justifiable, had they spared the innocence of his son.
After the murder of so many valiant princes, it is somewhat remarkable, that a
female for a long time controlled the fierce legions of Gaul, and still more
singular, that she was the mother of the unfortunate Victorinus. The arts and
treasures of Victoria enabled her successively to place Marius and Tetricus on
the throne, and to reign with a manly vigor under the name of those dependent
emperors. Money of copper, of silver, and of gold, was coined in her name; she
assumed the titles of Augusta and Mother of the Camps: her power ended only
with her life; but her life was perhaps shortened by the ingratitude of
Tetricus Pollio assigns her an article among the thirty tyrants. Hist. August.
p. 200.
.

When, at the instigation of his ambitious patroness, The reign and defeat of
Tetricus.
Tetricus assumed the ensigns of royalty, he was governor of the peaceful
province of Aquitaine, an employment suited to his character and education. He
reigned four or five years over Gaul, Spain, and Britain, the slave and
sovereign of a licentious army, whom he dreaded, and by whom he was despised.
The valor and fortune of Aurelian at length opened the prospect of a
deliverance. He ventured to disclose his melancholy situation, and conjured the
emperor to hasten to the relief of his unhappy A. D. 271. Summer.
rival. Had this secret correspondence reached the ears of the soldiers, it
would most probably have cost Tetricus his life; nor could he resign the
scepter of the West, without committing an act of treason against himself. He
affected the appearances of a civil war, led his forces into the field against
Aurelian, posted them in the most disadvantageous manner, betrayed his own
counsels to the enemy, and with a few chosen friends deserted in the beginning
of the action. The rebel legions, though disordered and dismayed by the
unexpected treachery of their chief, defended themselves with desperate valor,
till they were cut in pieces almost to a man, in this bloody and memorable
battle, which was fought near Chalons in Champagne Pollio in Hist. August. p.
196. Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 220. The two Victors, in the lives of
Gallienus and Aurelian. Eutrop. ix. 13. Eusebius. in Chron. Of all these writers,
only the two last (but with strong probability) place the fall of Tetricus
before that of Zenobia. M. de Boze (in the Academy of Inscriptions, tom. xxx.)
does not wish, and Tillemont (tom. iii. p. 1189.) does not dare, to follow
them. I have been fairer than the one, and bolder than the other.
. The retreat of the irregular auxiliaries, Franks and Batavians Victor Junior
in Aurelian. Eumenius mentions Batavicae; some critics, without any reason,
would fain alter the word to Bagaudicae.
, whom the conqueror soon compelled or persuaded to repass the Rhine, restored
the general tranquillity, and the power of Aurelian was acknowledged from the
wall of Antoninus to the columns of Hercules.

As early as the reign of Claudius, the city of Autun, alone and unassisted,
had ventured to declare against the legions of Gaul. After a siege of seven
months, they stormed and plundered that unfortunate city, already wasted by
famine Eumen. in Vet. Panegyr. iv. 8.
. Lions, on the contrary, had resisted with obstinate disaffection the arms of
Aurelian. We read of the punishment of Lions Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 246.
Autun was not restored till the reign of Dioclesian. See Eumenius de
restaurandis scholis.
, but there is not any mention of the rewards of Autun. Such, indeed, is the
policy of civil war: severely to remember injuries, and to forget the most
important services. Revenge is profitable, gratitude is expensive.

Aurelian had no sooner secured the person and provinces of Tetricus, than he
turned his arms A. D. 272. Character of Zenobia;
against Zenobia, the celebrated queen of Palmyra and the East. Modern Europe
has produced several illustrious women who have sustained with glory the weight
of empire; nor is our own age destitute of such distinguished characters. But
if we except the doubtful achievements of Semiramis, Zenobia is perhaps the
only female, whose superior genius broke through the servile indolence imposed
on her sex by the climate and manners of Asia Almost every thing that is said
of the manners of Odenathus and Zenobia, is taken from their lives in the
Augustan History, by Trebellius Pollio, see p. 192. 198.
. She claimed her descent from the Macedonian kings of Egypt, equalled in
beauty her ancestor Cleopatra, and far surpassed that princess in chastity She
never admitted her husband's embraces but for the sake of posterity. If her
hopes were baffled, in the ensuing month she reiteterated the experiment.
and valor. her beauty and learning;
Zenobia was esteemed the most lovely as well as the most heroic of her sex.
She was of a dark complexion (for in speaking of a lady, these trifles become
important). Her teeth were of a pearly whiteness, and her large black eyes
sparkled with uncommon fire, tempered by the most attractive sweetness. Her
voice was strong and harmonious. Her manly understanding was strengthened and
adorned by study. She was not ignorant of the Latin tongue, but possessed in
equal perfection the Greek, the Syriac, and the Egyptian languages. She had
drawn up for her own use an epitome of oriental history, and familiarly
compared the beauties of Homer and Plato under the tuition of the sublime
Longinus.

This accomplished woman gave her hand to her valor.
Odenathus, who from a private station raised himself to the dominion of the
East. She soon became the friend and companion of a hero. In the intervals of
war, Odenathus passionately delighted in the exercise of hunting; he pursued
with ardour the wild beasts of the desert, lions, panthers, and bears; and the
ardour of Zenobia in that dangerous amusement was not inferior to his own. She
had inured her constitution to fatigue, disdained the use of a covered
carriage, generally appeared on horseback in a military habit, and sometimes
marched several miles on foot at the head of the troops. The success of
Odenathus was in a great measure ascribed to her incomparable prudence and
fortitude. Their splendid victories over the Great King, whom they twice
pursued as far as the gates of Ctesiphon, laid the foundations of their united
fame and power. The armies which they commanded, and the provinces which they
had saved, acknowledged not any other sovereigns than their invincible chiefs.
The senate and people of Rome revered a stranger who had avenged their captive
emperor, and even the insensible son of Valerian accepted Odenathus for his
legitimate colleague.

After a successful expedition against the Gothic She revenges her husband's
death,
plunderers of Asia, the Palmyrenian prince returned to the city of Emesa in
Syria. Invincible in war, he was there cut off by domestic treason, and his
favorite amusement of hunting was the cause, or at least the occasion, of his
death Hist. August. p. 192, 193. Zosimus, l. i. p. 36. Zonaras, l. xii. p. 633.
The last is clear and probable, the others confused and inconsistent. The text
of Syncellus, if not corrupt, is absolute nonsense.
. His nephew, Maeonius, presumed to dart his javelin before that of his uncle;
and though admonished of his error, repeated the same insolence. As a monarch,
and as a sportsman, Odenathus was provoked, took away his horse, a mark of
ignominy among the barbarians, and chastised the rash youth by a short
confinement. The offense was soon forgot, but the punishment was remembered;
and Maeonius, with a few daring associates, assassinated his uncle in the midst
of a great entertainment. Herod, the son A. D. 250.
of Odenathus, though not of Zenobia, a young man of a soft and effeminate
temper Odenathus and Zenobia often sent him, from the spoils of the enemy,
presents of gems and toys, which he received with infinite delight.
, was killed with his father. But Maeonius obtained only the pleasure of
revenge by this bloody deed. He had scarcely time to assume the title of
Augustus, before he was sacrificed by Zenobia to the memory of her husband Some
very unjust suspicions have been cast on Zenobia, as if she was accessory to
her husband's death.
.

With the assistance of his most faithful friends, and reigns over the East and
Egypt.
she immediately filled the vacant throne, and governed with manly counsels
Palmyra, Syria, and the East, above five years. By the death of Odenathus, that
authority was at an end which the senate had granted him only as a personal
distinction; but his martial widow, disdaining both the senate and Gallienus,
obliged one of the Roman generals, who was sent against her, to retreat into
Europe, with the loss of his army and his reputation Hist. August. p. 180, 181.
. Instead of the little passions which so frequently perplex a female reign,
the steady administration of Zenobia was guided by the most judicious maxims of
policy. If it was expedient to pardon, she could calm her resentment: if it was
necessary to punish, she could impose silence on the voice of pity. Her strict
economy was accused of avarice; yet on every proper occasion she appeared
magnificent and liberal. The neighboring states of Arabia, Armenia, and
Persia, dreaded her enmity, and solicited her alliance. To the dominions of
Odenathus, which extended from the Euphrates to the frontiers of Bithynia, his
widow added the inheritance of her ancestors, the populous and fertile kingdom
of Egypt. The emperor Claudius acknowledged her merit, and was content, that,
while he pursued the Gothic war, she should assert the dignity of the empire in
the East See in Hist. August. p. 198. Aurelian's testimony to her merit; and
for the conquest of Egypt, Zosimus, l. i. p. 39, 40.
. The conduct, however, of Zenobia, was attended with some ambiguity; nor is it
unlikely that she had conceived the design of erecting an independent and
hostile monarchy. She blended with the popular manners of Roman princes the
stately pomp of the courts of Asia, and exacted from her subjects the same
adoration that was paid to the successors of Cyrus. She bestowed on her three
sons Timolaus, Herennianus, and Vaballathus. It is supposed that the two former
were already dead before the war. On the last, Aurelian bestowed a small
province of Armenia with the title of King; several of his medals are still
extant. See Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 1190.
a Latin education, and often showed them to the troops adorned with the
Imperial purple. For herself she reserved the diadem, with the splendid but
doubtful title of Queen of the East.

When Aurelian passed over into Asia, against an adversary whose sex alone
could render her an object of contempt, his presence restored obedience The
expedition of Aurelian. A. D. 272.
to the province of Bithynia, already shaken by the arms and intrigues of
Zenobia Zosimus, l. i. p. 44.
. Advancing at the head of his legions, he accepted the submission of Ancyra,
and was admitted into Tyana after an obstinate siege, by the help of a
perfidious citizen. The generous though fierce temper of Aurelian abandoned the
traitor to the rage of the soldiers: a superstitious reverence induced him to
treat with lenity the countrymen of Apollonius the philosopher Vopiscus (in
Hist. August. p. 217.) gives us an authentic letter, and a doubtful vision of
Aurelian. Apollonius of Tyana was born about the same time as Jesus Christ. His
life (that of the former) is related in so fabulous a manner by his disciples,
that we are at a loss to discover whether he was a sage, an impostor, or a
fanatic.
. Antioch was deserted on his approach, till the emperor, by his salutary
edicts, recalled the fugitives, and granted a general pardon to all who, from
necessity rather than choice, had been engaged in the service of the
Palmyrenian queen. The unexpected mildness of such a conduct reconciled the
minds of the Syrians, and, as far as the gates of Emesa, the wishes of the
people seconded the terror of his arms Zosimus, l. i. p. 46.
.

Zenobia would have ill deserved her reputation, had she indolently permitted
the emperor The emperor defeats the Palmyrenians in the battles of Antioch and
Emesa.
of the West to approach within an hundred miles of her capital. The fate of
the East was decided in two great battles; so similar in almost every
circumstance, that we can scarcely distinguish them from each other, except by
observing that the first was fought near Antioch At a place called Immae.
Eutropius, Sextus Rufus, and Jerome, mention only this first battle.
, and the second near Emesa Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 217. mentions only the
second.
. In both, the queen of Palmyra animated the armies by her presence, and
devolved the execution of her orders on Zabdas, who had already signalized his
military talents by the conquest of Egypt. The numerous forces of Zenobia
consisted for the most part of light archers, and of heavy cavalry clothed in
complete steel. The Moorish and Illyrian horse of Aurelian were unable to
sustain the ponderous charge of their antagonists. They fled in real or
affected disorder, engaged the Palmyrenians in a laborious pursuit, harassed
them by a desultory combat, and at length discomfited this impenetrable but
unwieldy body of cavalry. The light infantry, in the mean time, when they had
exhausted their quivers, remaining without protection against a closer onset,
exposed their naked sides to the swords of the legions. Aurelian had chosen
these veteran troops, who were usually stationed on the Upper Danube, and whose
valor had been severely tried in the Alemannic war Zosimus, l. i. p. 44 -- 48.
His account of the two battles is clear and circumstantial.
. After the defeat of Emesa, Zenobia found it impossible to collect a third
army. As far as the frontier of Egypt, the nations subject to her empire had
joined the standard of the conqueror, who detached Probus, the bravest of his
generals, to possess himself of the Egyptian provinces. Palmyra was the last
resource of the widow of Odenathus. She retired within the walls of her
capital, made every preparation for a vigorous resistance, and declared with
the intrepidity of a heroine, that the last moment of her reign and of her life
should be the same.

Amid the barren deserts of Arabia, a few cultivated The state of Palmyra.
spots rise like islands out of the sandy ocean. Even the name of Tadmor, or
Palmyra, by its signification in the Syriac as well as in the Latin language,
denoted the multitude of palm trees which afforded shade and verdure to that
temperate region. The air was pure, and the soil, watered by some invaluable
springs, was capable of producing fruits as well as corn. A place possessed of
such singular advantages, and situated at a convenient distance It was five
hundred and thirty-seven miles from Seleucia, and two hundred and three from
the nearest coast of Syria, according to the reckoning of Pliny, who, in a few
words (Hist. Nature. v. 21.), gives an excellent description of Palmyra.
between the gulf of Persia and the Mediterranean, was soon frequented by the
caravans which conveyed to the nations of Europe a considerable part of the
rich commodities of India. Palmyra insensibly increased into an opulent and
independent city, and connecting the Roman and the Parthian monarchies by the
mutual benefits of commerce, was suffered to observe an humble neutrality, till
at length, after the victories of Trajan, the little republic sunk into the
bosom of Rome, and flourished more than one hundred and fifty years in the
subordinate though honorable rank of a colony. It was during that peaceful
period, if we may judge from a few remaining inscriptions, that the wealthy
Palmyrenians constructed those temples, palaces, and porticos of Grecian
architecture, whose ruins, scattered over an extent of several miles, have
deserved the curiosity of our travelers. The elevation of Odenathus and
Zenobia appeared to reflect new splendor on their country, and Palmyra, for a
while, stood forth the rival of Rome: but the competition was fatal, and ages
of prosperity were sacrificed to a moment of glory Some English travelers from
Aleppo discovered the ruins of Palmyra, about the end of the last century. Our
curiosity has since been gratified in a more splendid manner by Messieurs Wood
and Dawkins. For the history of Palmyra, we may consult the masterly
dissertation of Dr. Halley in the Philosophical Transactions; Lowthorp's
Abridgment, vol. iii. p. 518.
.

In his march over the sandy desert between It is besieged by Aurelian,
Emesa and Palmyra, the emperor Aurelian was perpetually harassed by the Arabs;
nor could he always defend his army, and especially his baggage, from those
flying troops, of active and daring robbers, who watched the moment of
surprise, and eluded the slow pursuit of the legions. The siege of Palmyra was
an object far more difficult and important, and the emperor, who, with
incessant vigor, pressed the attacks in person, was himself wounded with a
dart. The Roman people, says Aurelian, in an original letter, speak with
contempt of the war which I am waging against a woman. They are ignorant both
of the character and of the power of Zenobia. It is impossible to enumerate her
warlike preparations, of stones, of arrows, and of every species of missile
weapons. Every part of the walls is provided with two or three balistae, and
artificial fires are thrown from her military engines. The fear of punishment
has armed her with a desperate courage. Yet still I trust in the protecting
deities of Rome, who have hitherto been favorable to all my undertakings
Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 218.
. Doubtful, however, of the protection of the gods, and of the event of the
siege, Aurelian judged it more prudent to offer terms of an advantageous
capitulation; to the queen, a splendid retreat; to the citizens, their ancient
privileges. His proposals were obstinately rejected, and the refusal was
accompanied with insult.

The firmness of Zenobia was supported by the who becomes master of Zenobia and
of the city.
hope, that in a very short time famine would compel the Roman army to repass
the desert; and by the reasonable expectation that the kings of the East, and
particularly the Persian monarch, would arm in the defense of their most
natural ally. But fortune and the perseverance of Aurelian overcame every
obstacle. The death of Sapor, which happened about this time From a very
doubtful chronology I have endeavored to extract the most probable date.
, distracted the councils of Persia, and the inconsiderable succors that
attempted to relieve Palmyra, were easily intercepted either by the arms or the
liberality of the emperor. From every part of Syria, a regular succession of
convoys safely arrived in the camp, which was increased by the return of Probus
with his victorious troops from the conquest of Egypt. It was then that Zenobia
resolved to fly. She mounted the fleetest of her dromedaries Hist. August. p.
218. Zosimus, l. i. p. 50. Though the camel is a heavy beast of burden, the
dromedary, who is either of the same or of a kindred species, is used by the
natives of Asia and Africa on all occasions which require celerity. The Arabs
affirm, that he will run over as much ground in one day, as their fleetest
horses can perform in eight or ten. See Buffon Hist. Naturelle, tom. xi. p.
222, and Shaw's Travels, p. 167.
, and had already reached the banks of the Euphrates, about sixty miles from
Palmyra, when she was overtaken by the pursuit of Aurelian's light horse,
seized, and brought back a captive to the feet of the emperor. A. D. 273.
Her capital soon afterward surrendered, and was treated with unexpected
lenity. The arms, horses, and camels, with an immense treasure of gold, silver,
silk, and precious stones, were all delivered to the conqueror, who leaving
only a garrison of six hundred archers, returned to Emesa, and employed some
time in the distribution of rewards and punishments at the end of so memorable
a war, which restored to the obedience of Rome those provinces that had
renounced their allegiance since the captivity of Valerian.

When the Syrian queen was brought into the presence of Aurelian, he sternly
asked her, How Behavior of Zenobia.
she had presumed to rise in arms against the emperors of Rome! The answer of
Zenobia was a prudent mixture of respect and firmness. Because I disdained to
consider as Roman emperors an Aureolus or a Gallienus. You alone I acknowledge
as my conqueror and my sovereign Pollio in Hist. p. 199.
. But as female fortitude is commonly artificial, so it is seldom steady or
consistent. The courage of Zenobia deserted her in the hour of trial; she
trembled at the angry clamours of the soldiers, who called aloud for her
immediate execution, forgot the generous despair of Cleopatra, which she had
proposed as her model, and ignominiously purchased life by the sacrifice of her
fame and her friends. It was to their counsels which governed the weakness of
her sex, that she imputed the guilt of her obstinate resistance; it was on
their heads that she directed the vengeance of the cruel Aurelian. The fame of
Longinus, who was included among the numerous and perhaps innocent victims of
her fear, will survive that of the queen who betrayed, or the tyrant who
condemned him. Genius and learning were incapable of moving a fierce unlettered
soldier, but they had served to elevate and harmonise the soul of Longinus.
Without uttering a complaint, he calmly followed the executioner, pitying his
unhappy mistress, and bestowing comfort on his afflicted friends Vopiscus in
Hist. August. p. 219. Zosimus, l. i. p. 51.
.

Returning from the conquest of the East, Aurelian had already crossed the
Streights which divide Europe from Asia, when he was provoked Rebellion and
ruin of Palmyra.
by the intelligence that the Palmyrenians had massacred the governor and
garrison which he had left among them, and again erected the standard of
revolt. Without a moment's deliberation, he once more turned his face toward
Syria. Antioch was alarmed by his rapid approach, and the helpless city of
Palmyra felt the irresistible weight of his resentment. We have a letter of
Aurelian himself, in which he acknowledges Hist. August. p. 219.
, that old men, women, children, and peasants, had been involved in that
dreadful execution, which should have been confined to armed rebellion; and
although his principal concern seems directed to the re-establishment of a
temple of the Sun, he discovers some pity for the remnant of the Palmyrenians,
to whom he grants the permission of rebuilding and inhabiting their city. But
it is easier to destroy than to restore. The seat of commerce, of arts, and of
Zenobia, gradually sunk into an obscure town, a trifling fortress, and at
length a miserable village. The present citizens of Palmyra, consisting of
thirty or forty families, have erected their mud cottages within the spacious
court of a magnificent temple.

Another and a last labor still awaited the indefatigable Aurelian suppresses
the rebellion of Firmus in Egypt.
Aurelian; to suppress a dangerous though obscure rebel, who, during the revolt
of Palmyra, had arisen on the banks of the Nile. Firmus, the friend and ally,
as he proudly styled himself, of Odenathus and Zenobia, was no more than a
wealthy merchant of Egypt. In the course of his trade to India, he had formed
very intimate connexions with the Saracens and the Blemmyes, whose situation on
either coast of the Red Sea gave them an easy introduction into the Upper
Egypt. The Egyptians he inflamed with the hope of freedom, and, at the head of
their furious multitude, broke into the city of Alexandria, where he assumed
the Imperial purple, coined money, published edicts, and raised an army, which,
as he vainly boasted, he was capable of maintaining from the sole profits of
his paper trade. Such troops were a feeble defense against the approach of
Aurelian; and it seems almost unnecessary to relate, that Firmus was routed,
taken, tortured, and put to death. Aurelian might now congratulate the senate,
the people, and himself, that in little more than three years, he had restored
universal peace and order to the Roman world See Vopiscus in Hist. August. p.
220. 242. As an instance of luxury, it is observed, that he had glass windows.
He was remarkable for his strength and appetite, his courage and dexterity.
From the letter of Aurelian, we may justly infer, that Firmus was the last of
the rebels, and consequently that Tetricus was already suppressed.
.

Since the foundation of Rome, no general had A. D 274.
more nobly deserved a triumph than Aurelian; Triumph of Aurelian.
nor was a triumph ever celebrated with superior pride and magnificence See the
triumph of Aurelian, described by Vopiscus. He relates the particulars with his
usual minuteness; and, on this occasion, they happen to be interesting. Hist.
August. 220.
. The pomp was opened by twenty elephants, four royal tigers, and above two
hundred of the most curious animals from every climate of the North, the East,
and the South. They were followed by sixteen hundred gladiators, devoted to the
cruel amusement of the amphitheatre. The wealth of Asia, the arms and ensigns
of so many conquered nations, and the magnificent plate and wardrobe of the
Syrian queen, were disposed in exact symmetry or artful disorder. The
ambassadors of the most remote parts of the earth, of Aethiopia, Arabia,
Persia, Bactriana, India, and China, all remarkable by their rich or singular
dresses, displayed the fame and power of the Roman emperor, who exposed
likewise to the public view the presents that he had received, and particularly
a great number of crowns of gold, the offerings of grateful cities. The
victories of Aurelian were attested by the long train of captives who
reluctantly attended his triumph, Goths, Vandals, Sarmatians, Alemanni, Franks,
Gauls, Syrians, and Egyptians. Each people was distinguished by its peculiar
inscription, and the title of Amazons was bestowed on ten martial heroines of
the Gothic nation who had been taken in arms Among barbarous nations, women
have often combated by the side of their husbands. But it is almost impossible,
that a society of Amazons should ever have existed either in the old or new
world.
. But every eye, disregarding the crowd of captives, was fixed on the emperor
Tetricus, and the queen of the East. The former, as well as his son, whom he
had created Augustus, was dressed in Gallic trowsers The use of Braccae,
breeches, or trowsers, was still considered in Italy as a Gallic and Barbarian
fashion. The Romans, however, had made great advances toward it. To encircle
the legs and thighs with fasciae, or bands, was understood, in the time of
Pompey and Horace, to be a proof of ill health or effeminacy. In the age of
Trajan, the custom was confined to the rich and luxurious. It gradually was
adopted by the meanest of the people. See a very curious note of Casaubon, ad
Sueton, in August. c. 82.
, a saffron tunic, and a robe of purple. The beauteous figure of Zenobia was
confined by fetters of gold; a slave supported the gold chain which encircled
her neck, and she almost fainted under the intolerable weight of jewels. She
preceded on foot the magnificent chariot, in which she once hoped to enter the
gates of Rome. It was followed by two other chariots, still more sumptuous, of
Odenathus and of the Persian monarch. The triumphal car of Aurelian (it had
formerly been used by a Gothic king) was drawn, on this memorable occasion,
either by four stags or by four elephants Most probably the former; the latter,
seen on the medals of Aurelian, only denote (according to the learned Cardinal
Noris) an oriental victory.
. The most illustrious of the senate, the people, and the army, closed the
solemn procession. Unfeigned joy, wonder, and gratitude, swelled the
acclamations of the multitude; but the satisfaction of the senate was clouded
by the appearance of Tetricus; nor could they suppress a rising murmur, that
the haughty emperor should thus expose to public ignominy the person of a Roman
and a magistrate The expression of Calphurnius (Eclog. i. 50.), Nullos ducet
captiva triumphos, as applied to Rome, contains a very manifest allusion and
censure.
.

But however, in the treatment of his unfortunate rivals, Aurelian might
indulge his pride, His treatment of Tetricus and Zenobia.
he behaved toward them with a generous clemency, which was seldom exercised
by the ancient conquerors. Princes who, without success, had defended their
throne or freedom, were frequently strangled in prison, as soon as the
triumphal pomp ascended the Capitol. These usurpers, whom their defeat had
convicted of the crime of treason, were permitted to spend their lives in
affluence and honorable repose. The emperor presented Zenobia with an elegant
villa at Tibur, or Tivoli, about twenty miles from the capital; the Syrian
queen insensibly sunk into a Roman matron, her daughters married into noble
families, and her race was not yet extinct in the fifth century Vopiscus in
Hist. August. p. 199. Hieronym. in Chron. Prosper in Chron. Baronius supposes
that Zenobius, bishop of Florence in the time of St. Ambrose, was of her family.
. Tetricus and his son were re-instated in their rank and fortunes. They
erected on the Caelian hill a magnificent palace, and as soon as it was
finished, invited Aurelian to supper. On his entrance, he was agreeably
surprised with a picture which represented their singular history. They were
delineated offering to the emperor a civic crown and the scepter of Gaul, and
again receiving at his hands the ornaments of the senatorial dignity. The
father was afterward invested with the government of Lucania Vopisc. in Hist.
August. p. 222. Eutropius, ix. 13. Victor Junior. But Pollio in Hist. August.
p. 196, says, that Tetricus was made corrector of all Italy.
, and Aurelian, who soon admitted the abdicated monarch to his friendship and
conversation, familiarly asked him, Whether it were not more desirable to
administer a province of Italy, than to reign beyond the Alps? The son long
continued a respectable member of the senate; nor was there any one of the
Roman nobility more esteemed by Aurelian, as well as by his successors Hist.
August. p. 197.
.

So long and so various was the pomp of Aurelian's His magnificence and
devotion.
triumph, that although it opened with the dawn of day, the slow majesty of the
procession ascended not the Capitol before the ninth hour; and it was already
dark when the emperor returned to the palace. The sestival was protracted by
theatrical representations, the games of the circus, the hunting of wild
beasts, combats of gladiators, and naval engagements. Lieral donatives were
distributed to the army and people, and several institutions, agreeable or
beneficial to the city, contributed to perpetuate the glory of Aurelian. A
considerable portion of his oriental spoils was consecrated to the gods of
Rome; the Capitol, and every other temple, glittered with the offerings of his
ostentatious piety; and the temple of the Sun alone received above fifteen
thousand pounds of gold Vopiscus in Hist. August. 222. Zosimus, l. i. p. 56. He
placed in it the images of Belus and of the Sun, which he had brought from
Palmyra. It was dedicated in the fourth year of his reign (Eusebius. in Chron.),
but was most assuredly begun immediately on his accession.
. This last was a magnificent structure, erected by the emperor on the side of
the Quirinal hill, and dedicated, soon after the triumph, to that deity whom
Aurelian adored as the parent of his life and fortunes. His mother had been an
inferior priestess in a chapel of the Sun; a peculiar devotion to the god of
Light, was a sentiment which the fortunate peasant imbibed in his infancy; and
every step of his elevation, every victory of his reign, fortified superstition
by gratitude See in the Augustan History, p. 210, the omens of his fortune. His
devotion to the Sun appears in his letters, on his medals, and is mentioned in
the Caesar's of Julian. Commentaire de Spanheim, p. 109.
.

The arms of Aurelian had vanquished the foreign and domestic foes of the
Republic. We He suppresses a sedition at Rome.
are assured, that, by his salutary rigor, crimes and factions, mischievous
arts and pernicious connivance, the luxuriant growth of a feeble and oppressive
government, were eradicated throughout the Roman world Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 221.
. But if we attentively reflect how much swifter is the progress of corruption
than its cure, and if we remember that the years abandoned to public disorders
exceeded the months allotted to the martial reign of Aurelian, we must confess
that a few short intervals of peace were insufficient for the arduous work of
reformation. Even his attempt to restore the integrity of the coin, was opposed
by a formidable insurrection. The emperor's vexation breaks out in one of his
private letters. Surely, says he, the gods have decreed that my life should be
a perpetual warfare. A sedition within the walls has just now given birth to a
very serious civil war. The workmen of the mint, at the instigation of
Felicissimus, a slave to whom I had entrusted an employment in the finances,
have risen in rebellion. They are at length suppressed; but seven thousand of
my soldiers have been slain in the contest, of those troops whose ordinary
station is in Dacia, and the camps along the Danube Hist. August. p. 222.
Aurelian calls those soldiers Hiberi Riparienses, Castriani, and Dacisci.
. Other writers, who confirm the same fact, add likewise, that it happened soon
after Aurelian's triumph; that the decisive engagement was fought on the
Caelian hill; that the workmen of the mint had adulterated the coin; and that
the emperor restored the public credit, by delivering out good money in
exchange for the bad, which the people was commanded to bring into the treasury
Zosimus, l. i. p. 56. Eutropius, ix. 14. Aurel. Victor.
.

We might content ourselves with relating this Observations upon it.
extraordinary transaction, but we cannot dissemble how much in its present
form it appears to us inconsistent and incredible. The debasement of the coin
is indeed well suited to the administration of Gallienus; nor is it unlikely
that the instruments of the corruption might dread the inflexible justice of
Aurelian. But the guilt, as well as the profit, must have been confined to a
few; nor is it easy to conceive by what arts they could arm a people whom they
had injured, against a monarch whom they had betrayed. We might naturally
expect, that such miscreants should have shared the public detestation, with
the informers and the other ministers of oppression; and that the reformation
of the coin should have been an action equally popular with the destruction of
those obsolete accounts, which by the emperor's orders were burnt in the forum
of Trajan Hist. August. p. 222. Aurel. Victor.
. In an age when the principles of commerce were so imperfectly understood, the
most desirable end might perhaps be effected by harsh and injudicious means;
but a temporary grievance of such a nature can scarcely excite and support a
serious civil war. The repetition of intolerable taxes, imposed either on the
land or on the necessaries of life, may at last provoke those who will not, or
who cannot, relinquish their country. But the case is far otherwise in every
operation which, by whatsoever expedients, restores the just value of money.
The transient evil is soon obliterated by the permanent benefit, the loss is
divided among multitudes; and if a few wealthy individuals experience a
sensible diminution of treasure, with their riches, they at the same time lose
the degree of weight and importance which they derived from the possession of
them. However Aurelian might choose to disguise the real cause of the
insurrection, his reformation of the coin could only furnish a faint pretense
to a party already powerful and discontented. Rome, though deprived of freedom,
was distracted by faction. The people, toward whom the emperor, himself a
plebeian, always expressed a peculiar fondness, lived in perpetual dissension
with the senate, the equestrian order, and the Praetorian guards It already
raged before Aurelian's return from Egypt. See Vopiscus, who quotes an original
letter. Hist. August. p. 244.
. Nothing less than the firm though secret conspiracy of those orders, of the
authority of the first, the wealth of the second, and the arms of the third,
could have displayed a strength capable of contending in battle with the
veteran legions of the Danube, which, under the conduct of a martial sovereign,
had achieved the conquest of the West and of the East.

Whatever was the cause or the object of this Cruelty of Aurelian.
rebellion, imputed with so little probability to the workmen of the mint,
Aurelian used his victory with unrelenting rigor Vopiscus in Hist. August. p.
222. The two Victors. Eutropius, ix. 14. Zosimus (l. i. p. 43.) mentions only
three senators, and places their death before the eastern war.
. He was naturally of a severe disposition. A peasant and a soldier, his nerves
yielded not easily to the impressions of sympathy, and he could sustain without
emotion the sight of tortures and death. Trained from his earliest youth in the
exercise of arms, he set too small a value on the life of a citizen, chastised
by military execution the slightest offenses, and transferred the stern
discipline of the camp into the civil administration of the laws. His love of
justice often became a blind and furious passion; and whenever he deemed his
own or the public safety endangered, he disregarded the rules of evidence, and
the proportion of punishments. The unprovoked rebellion with which the Romans
rewarded his services, exasperated his haughty spirit. The noblest families of
the capital were involved in the guilt or suspicion of this dark conspiracy. A
hasty spirit of revenge urged the bloody prosecution, and it proved fatal to
one of the nephews of the emperor. The executioners (if we may use the
expression of a contemporary poet) were fatigued, the prisons were crowded, and
the unhappy senate lamented the death or absence of its most illustrious
members Nulla catenati feralis pompa senatus
Carnificum lassabit opus; nec carcere pleno
Infelix raros numerab^t curia Patres.
Calphurn. Eclog. i. 60.


. Nor was the pride of Aurelian less offensive to that assembly than his
cruelty. Ignorant or impatient of the restraints of civil institutions, he
disdained to hold his power by any other title than that of the sword, and
governed by right of conquest an empire which he had saved and subdued
According to the younger Victor, he sometimes wore the diadem. Deus and Dominus
appear on his medals.
.

It was observed by one of the most sagacious of the Roman princes, that the
talents of his predecessor Aurelian, were better suited to the command He
marches into the East, and is assassinated.
of an army, than to the government of an empire It was the observation of
Diocletian. See Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 224.
. Conscious of the character in which Nature and experience had enabled him to
excel, he again took the field a few months after his triumph. It was expedient
to exercise the restless A. D. 274. October.
temper of the legions in some foreign war, and the Persian monarch, exulting
in the shame of Valerian, still braved with impunity the offended majesty of
Rome. At the head of an army, less formidable by its numbers than by its
discipline and valor, the emperor advanced as far as the Streights which
divide Europe from Asia. He there experienced, that the most absolute power is
a weak defense against the effects of despair. He had threatened one of his
secretaries who was accused of extortion; and it was known that he seldom
threatened in vain. The last hope which remained for the criminal, was to
involve some of the principal officers of the army in his danger, or at least
in his fears. Artfully counterfeiting his master's hand, he showed them, in a
long and bloody list, their own names devoted to death. Without suspecting or
examining the fraud, they resolved to secure their lives by the murder of the
emperor. On his march, between Byzantium and Heraclea, Aurelian was suddenly
attacked by the conspirators, whose stations gave them a right to surround his
person, and, after a short resistance, fell by the hand of Mucapor, a general
whom he had always loved and trusted. He died A. D. 275. January.
regretted by the army, detested by the senate, but universally acknowledged as
a warlike and fortunate prince, the useful though severe reformer of a
degenerate state Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 221. Zosimus, l. i. p. 57.
Eutrop. ix. 15. The two Victors.
.

CHAP. XII. Conduct of the Army and Senate after the Death of Aurelian. --
Reigns of Tacitus, Probus, Carus, and his Sons.
SUCH was the unhappy condition of the Roman emperors, that, whatever might be
their conduct, their fate was commonly the same. A Extraordinary contest
between the army and the senate for the choice of an emperor.
life of pleasure or virtue, of severity or mildness, of indolence or glory,
alike led to an untimely grave; and almost every reign is closed by the same
disgusting repetition of treason and murder. The death of Aurelian, however, is
remarkable by its extraordinary consequences. The legions admired, lamented,
and revenged, their victorious chief. The artifice of his perfidious secretary
was discovered and punished. The deluded conspirators attended the funeral of
their injured sovereign, with sincere or well-feigned contrition, and submitted
to the unanimous resolution of the military order, which was signified by the
following epistle. The brave and fortunate armies to the senate and people of
Rome. The crime of one man, and the error of many, have deprived us of the late
emperor Aurelian. May it please you, venerable lords and fathers! to place him
in the number of the gods, and to appoint a successor whom your judgment shall
declare worthy of the Imperial purple! None of those, whose guilt or misfortune
have contributed to our loss, shall ever reign over us Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 222. Aurelius Victor mentions a formal deputation from the troops to
the senate.
. The Roman senators heard, without surprise, that another emperor had been
assassinated in his camp: they secretly rejoiced in the fall of Aurelian; but
the modest and dutiful address of the legions, when it was communicated in full
assembly by the consul, diffused the most pleasing astonishment. Such honors
as fear and perhaps esteem could extort, they liberally poured forth on the
memory of their deceased sovereign. Such acknowledgments as gratitude could
inspire, they returned to the faithful armies of the republic, who entertained
so just a sense of the legal authority of the senate in the choice of an
emperor. Yet, notwithstanding this flattering appeal, the most prudent of the
assembly declined exposing their safety and dignity to the caprice of an armed
multitude. The strength of the legions was, indeed, a pledge of their
sincerity, since those who may command are seldom reduced to the necessity of
dissembling; but could it naturally be expected, that a hasty repentance would
correct the inveterate habits of fourscore years? Should the soldiers relapse
into their accustomed seditions, their insolence might disgrace the majesty of
the senate, and prove fatal to the object of its choice. Motives like these
dictated a decree, by which the election of a new emperor was referred to the
suffrage of the military order.

The contention that ensued is one of the best attested, but most improbable
events in the history of mankind Vopiscus, our principal authority, wrote at
Rome, sixteen years only after the death of Aurelian; and, besides the recent
notoriety of the facts, constantly draws his materials from the Journals of the
Senate, and the original papers of the Ulpian library. Zosimus and Zonaras
appear as ignorant of this transaction as they were in general of the Roman
constitution.
. The troops, as if satiated A. D. 275. Feb. 3.
with the exercise of power, again conjured the A peaceful interregnum of eight
months.
senate to invest one of its own body with the Imperial purple. The senate
still persisted in its refusal; the army in its request. The reciprocal offer
was pressed and rejected at least three times, and whilst the obstinate modesty
of either party was resolved to receive a master from the hands of the other,
eight months insensibly elapsed: an amazing period of tranquil anarchy, during
which the Roman world remained without a sovereign, without an usurper, and
without a sedition. The generals and magistrates appointed by Aurelian
continued to execute their ordinary functions; and it is observed, that a
proconsul of Asia was the only considerable person removed from his office, in
the whole course of the interregnum.

An event somewhat similar, but much less authentic, is supposed to have
happened after the death of Romulus, who, in his life and character, bore some
affinity with Aurelian. The throne was vacant during twelve months, till the
election of a Sabine philosopher, and the public peace was guarded in the same
manner, by the union of the several orders of the state. But, in the time of
Numa and Romulus, the arms of the people were controlled by the authority of
the Patricians; and the balance of freedom was easily preserved in a small and
virtuous community Live. i. 17. Dionys. Halicarn. l. ii. p. 115. Plutarch in
Numa, p. 60. The first of these writers relates the story like an orator, the
second like a lawyer, and the third like a moralist, and none of them probably
without some intermixture of fable.
. The decline of the Roman state, far different from its infancy, was attended
with every circumstance that could banish from an interregnum the prospect of
obedience and harmony: an immense and tumultuous capital, a wide extent of
empire, the servile equality of despotism, an army of four hundred thousand
mercenaries, and the experience of frequent revolutions. Yet, notwithstanding
all these temptations, the discipline and memory of Aurelian still restrained
the seditious temper of the troops, as well as the fatal ambition of their
leaders. The flower of the legions maintained their stations on the banks of
the Bosphorus, and the Imperial standard awed the less powerful camps of Rome
and of the provinces. A generous though transient enthusiasm seemed to animate
the military order; and we may hope that a few real patriots cultivated the
returning friendship of the army and the senate, as the only expedient capable
of restoring the republic to its ancient beauty and vigor.

On the twenty-fifth of September, near eight months after the murder of
Aurelian, the consul A. D. 275. Sept. 25.
convoked an assembly of the senate, and reported The consul assembles the
senate.
the doubtful and dangerous situation of the empire. He slightly insinuated,
that the precarious loyalty of the soldiers depended on the chance of every
hour, and of every accident; but he represented, with the most convincing
eloquence, the various dangers that might attend any farther delay in the
choice of an emperor. Intelligence, he said, was already received, that the
Germans had passed the Rhine, and occupied some of the strongest and most
opulent cities of Gaul. The ambition of the Persian king kept the East in
perpetual alarms; Egypt, Africa, and Illyricum, were exposed to foreign and
domestic arms, and the levity of Syria would prefer even a female scepter to
the sanctity of the Roman laws. The consul then addressing himself to Tacitus,
the first of the senators Vopiscus (in Hist. August. p. 227.) calls him primae
sententiae consularis; and soon afterward Princeps senatus. It is natural to
suppose, that the monarchs of Rome, disdaining that humble title, resigned it
to the most ancient of the senators.
, required his opinion on the important subject of a proper candidate for the
vacant throne.

If we can prefer personal merit to accidental greatness, we shall esteem the
birth of Tacitus Character of Tacitus.
more truly noble than that of kings. He claimed his descent from the
philosophic historian, whose writings will instruct the last generations of
mankind The only objection to this genealogy, is, that the historian was named
Cornelius, the emperor, Claudius. But under the lower empire, surnames were
extremely various and uncertain.
. The senator Tacitus was then seventy-five years of age Zonaras, l. xii. p.
637. The Alexandrian Chronicle, by an obvious mistake, transfers that age to
Aurelian.
. The long period of his innocent life was adorned with wealth and honors. He
had twice been invested with the consular dignity In the year 273, he was
ordinary consul. But he must have been Suffectus many years before, and most
probably under Valerian.
, and enjoyed with elegance and sobriety his ample patrimony of between two and
three millions sterling Bis millies octingenties. Vopiscus in Hist. August. p.
229. This sum, according to the old standard, was equivalent to eight hundred
and forty thousand Roman pounds of silver, each of the value of three pounds
sterling. But in the age of Tacitus, the coin had lost much of its weight and
purity.
. The experience of so many princes, whom he had esteemed or endured, from the
vain follies of Elagabalus to the useful rigor of Aurelian, taught him to form
a just estimate of the duties, the dangers, and the temptations, of their
sublime station. From the assiduous study of his immortal ancestor he derived
the knowledge of the Roman constitution, and of human nature After his
accession, he gave orders that ten copies of the historian should be annually
transcribed and placed in the public libraries. The Roman libraries have long
since perished, and the most valuable part of Tacitus was preserved in a single
MS. and discovered in a monastery of Westphalia. See Bail, Dictionnaire, Art.
Tacit, and Lipsius ad Annal. ii. 9.
. The voice of the people had already named Tacitus as the citizen the most
worthy of empire. The ungrateful rumor reached his ears, and induced him to
seek the retirement of one of his villas in Campania. He had passed two months
in the delightful privacy of Baiae, when he reluctantly obeyed the summons of
the consul to resume his honorable place in the senate, and to assist the
republic with his counsels on this important occasion.

He arose to speak, when, from every quarter of the house, he was saluted with
the names of He is elected emperor,
Augustus and Emperor. Tacitus Augustus, the gods preserve thee, we choose thee
for our sovereign, to thy care we entrust the republic and the world. Accept
the empire from the authority of the senate. It is due to thy rank, to thy
conduct, to thy manners. As soon as the tumult of acclamations subsided,
Tacitus attempted to decline the dangerous honor, and to express his wonder,
that they should elect his age and infirmities to succeed the martial vigor of
Aurelian. Are these limbs, conscript fathers! fitted to sustain the weight of
armor, or to practice the exercises of the camp? The variety of climates, and
the hardships of a military life, would soon oppress a feeble constitution,
which subsists only by the most tender management. My exhausted strength
scarcely enables me to discharge the duty of a senator; how insufficient would
it prove to the arduous labors of war and government? Can you hope, that the
legions will respect a weak old man, whose days have been spent in the shade of
peace and retirement? Can you desire that I should ever find reason to regret
the favorable opinion of the senate Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 227.
?

The reluctance of Tacitus, and it might possibly and accepts the purple.
be sincere, was encountered by the affectionate obstinacy of the senate. Five
hundred voices repeated at once, in eloquent confusion, that the greatest of
the Roman princes, Numa, Trajan, Hadrian, and the Antonines, had ascended the
throne in a very advanced season of life; that the mind, not the body, a
sovereign, not a soldier, was the object of their choice; and that they
expected from him no more than to guide by his wisdom the valor of the
legions. These pressing though tumultuary instances were seconded by a more
regular oration of Metius Falconius, the next on the consular bench to Tacitus
himself. He reminded the assembly of the evils which Rome had endured from the
vices of headstrong and capricious youths, congratulated them on the election
of a virtuous and experienced senator, and, with a manly, though perhaps a
selfish, freedom, exhorted Tacitus to remember the reasons of his elevation,
and to seek a successor, not in his own family, but in the republic. The speech
of Falconius was enforced by a general acclamation. The emperor elect submitted
to the authority of his country, and received the voluntary homage of his
equals. The judgment of the senate was confirmed by the consent of the Roman
people, and of the Praetorian guards Hist. August. p. 228. Tacitus addressed
the Praetorians by the appellation of sanctissimi milites, and the people by
that of sacratissimi Quirites.
.

The administration of Tacitus was not unworthy of his life and principles. A
grateful Authority of the senate.
servant of the senate, he considered that national council as the author, and
himself as the subject, of the laws In his manumissions he never exceeded the
number of an hundred, as limited by the Caninian law, which was enacted under
Augustus, and at length repealed by Justinian. See Casaubon ad locum Vopisci.
. He studied to heal the wounds which Imperial pride, civil discord, and
military violence, had inflicted on the constitution, and to restore, at least,
the image of the ancient republic, as it had been preserved by the policy of
Augustus, and the virtues of Trajan and the Antonines. It may not be useless to
recapitulate some of the most important prerogatives which the senate appeared
to have regained by the election of Tacitus See the lives of Tacitus,
Florianus, and Probus, in the Augustan History; we may be well assured, that
whatever the soldier gave, the senator had already given.
. 1. To invest one of their body, under the title of emperor, with the general
command of the armies and the government of the frontier provinces. 2. To
determine the list, or as it was then styled, the College of Consuls. They were
twelve in number, who, in successive pairs, each, during the space of two
months, filled the year, and represented the dignity of that ancient office.
The authority of the senate, in the nomination of the consuls, was exercised
with such independent freedom, that no regard was paid to an irregular request
of the emperor in favor of his brother Florianus. The senate, exclaimed
Tacitus, with the honest transport of a patriot, understand the character of a
prince whom they have chosen. 3. To appoint the proconsuls and presidents of
the provinces, and to confer on all the magistrates their civil jurisdiction.
4. To receive appeals through the intermediate office of the prefect of the
city from all the tribunals of the empire. 5. To give force and validity, by
their decrees, to such as they should approve of the emperor's edicts. 6. To
these several branches of authority, we may add some inspection over the
finances, since, even in the stern reign of Aurelian, it was in their power to
divert a part of the revenue from the public service Vopiscus in Hist. August.
p. 216. The passage is perfectly clear; yet both Casaubon and Salmasius wish to
correct it.
.

Circular epistles were sent, without delay, to Their joy and confidence.
all the principal cities of the empire, Treves, Milan, Aquileia, Thessalonica,
Corinth, Athens, Antioch, Alexandria, and Carthage, to claim their obedience,
and to inform them of the happy revolution, which had restored the Roman senate
to its ancient dignity. Two of these epistles are still extant. We likewise
possess two very singular fragments of the private correspondence of the
senators on this occasion. They discover the most excessive joy, and the most
unbounded hopes. Cast away your indolence, it is thus that one of the senators
addresses his friend, emerge from your retirements of Baiae and Puteoli. Give
yourself to the city, to the senate. Rome flourishes, the whole republic
flourishes. Thanks to the Roman army, to an army truly Roman; at length, we
have recovered our just authority, the end of all our desires. We hear appeals,
we appoint proconsuls, we create emperors; perhaps too we may restrain them --
to the wise, a word is sufficient Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 230. 232, 233.
The senators celebrated the happy restoration with hecatombs and public
rejoicings.
. These lofty expectations were, however, soon disappointed; nor, indeed, was
it possible, that the armies and the provinces should long obey the luxurious
and unwarlike nobles of Rome. On the slightest touch, the unsupported fabric of
their pride and power fell to the ground. The expiring senate displayed a
sudden luster, blazed for a moment, and was extinguished for ever.

All that had yet passed at Rome was no more than a theatrical representation,
unless it was ratified A. D. 276. Tacitus is acknowledged by the army.
by the more substantial power of the legions. Leaving the senators to enjoy
their dream of freedom and ambition, Tacitus proceeded to the Thracian camp,
and was there, by the Praetorian prefect, presented to the assembled troops,
as the prince whom they themselves had demanded, and whom the senate had
bestowed. As soon as the prefect was silent, the emperor addressed himself to
the soldiers with eloquence and propriety. He gratified their avarice by a
liberal distribution of treasure, under the names of pay and donative. He
engaged their esteem by a spirited declaration, that although his age might
disable him from the performance of military exploits, his counsels should
never be unworthy of a Roman general, the successor of the brave Aurelian Hist.
August. p. 228.
.

Whilst the deceased emperor was making preparations for a second expedition
into the East, The Alani invade Asia, and are repulsed by Tacitus.
he had negociated with the Alani, a Scythian people, who pitched their tents
in the neighborhood of the lake Moeotis. Those barbarians, allured by presents
and subsidies, had promised to invade Persia with a numerous body of light
cavalry. They were faithful to their engagements; but when they arrived on the
Roman frontier, Aurelian was already dead, the design of the Persian war was at
least suspended, and the generals, who, during their interregnum, exercised a
doubtful authority, were unprepared either to receive or to oppose them.
Provoked by such treatment, which they considered as trifling and perfidious,
the Alani had recourse to their own valor for their payment and revenge; and
as they moved with the usual swiftness of Tartars, they had soon spread
themselves over the provinces of Pontus, Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Galatia. The
legions, who from the opposite shores of the Bosphorus could almost distinguish
the flames of the cities and villages, impatiently urged their general to lead
them against the invaders. The conduct of Tacitus was suitable to his age and
station. He convinced the barbarians, of the faith, as well as of the power, of
the empire. Great numbers of the Alani, appeased by the punctual discharge of
the engagements which Aurelian had contracted with them, relinquished their
booty and captives, and quietly retreated to their own deserts, beyond the
Phasis. Against the remainder who refused peace, the Roman emperor waged, in
person, a successful war. Seconded by an army of brave and experienced
veterans, in a few weeks he delivered the provinces of Asia from the terror of
the Scythian invasion Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 230. Zosimus, l. i. p. 57.
Zonaras, l. xii. p. 637. Two passages in the life of Probus (p. 236. 238.)
convince me, that these Scythian invaders of Pontus were Alani. If we may
believe Zosimus (l. i. p. 58.), Florianus pursued them as far as the Cimmerian
Bosphorus. But he had scarcely time for so long and difficult an expedition.
.

But the glory and life of Tacitus were of short Death of the emperor Tacitus.
duration. Transported, in the depth of winter, from the soft retirement of
Campania, to the foot of mount Caucasus, he sunk under the unaccustomed
hardships of a military life. The fatigues of the body were aggravated by the
cares of the mind. For a while, the angry and selfish passions of the soldiers
had been suspended by the enthusiasm of public virtue. They soon broke out with
redoubled violence, and raged in the camp, and even in the tent, of the aged
emperor. His mild and amiable character served only to inspire contempt, and he
was incessantly tormented with factions which he could not assuage, and by
demands which it was impossible to satisfy. Whatever flattering expectations he
had conceived of reconciling the public disorders, Tacitus soon was convinced,
that the licentiousness of the army disdained the feeble restraint of laws, and
his last hour was hastened by anguish and disappointment. It may be doubtful
whether the soldiers imbrued their hands in the blood of this innocent prince
Eutropius and Aurelius Victor only say that he died; Victor Junior adds, that
it was of a fever. Zosimus and Zonaras affirm, that he was killed by the
soldiers. Vopiscus mentions both accounts, and seems to hesitate. Yet surely
these jarring opinions are easily reconciled.
. It is certain, that their insolence was the cause of his death. He expired at
Tyana in Cappadocia, after a reign of only six months and A. D. 276. April 12.
about twenty days According to the two Victors, he reigned exactly two hundred
days.
.

The eyes of Tacitus were scarcely closed, before Usurpation and death of his
brother Florianus.
his brother Florianus showed himself unworthy to reign, by the hasty
usurpation of the purple, without expecting the approbation of the senate. The
reverence for the Roman constitution, which yet influenced the camp and the
provinces, was sufficiently strong to dispose them to censure, but not to
provoke them to oppose, the precipitate ambition of Florianus. The discontent
would have evaporated in idle murmurs, had not the general of the East, the
heroic Probus, boldly declared himself the avenger of the senate. The contest,
however, was still unequal; nor could the most able leader, at the head of the
effeminate troops of Egypt and Syria, encounter, with any hopes of victory, the
legions of Europe, whose irresistible strength appeared to support the brother
of Tacitus. But the fortune and activity of Probus triumphed over every
obstacle. The hardy veterans of his rival, accustomed to cold climates,
sickened and consumed away in the sultry heats of Cilicia, where the summer
proved remarkably unwholesome. Their numbers were diminished by frequent
desertion, the passes of the mountains were feebly defended; Tarsus opened its
gates, and the soldiers of Florianus, when they had permitted him to enjoy the
Imperial title about three months, delivered the empire from civil war by the
easy sacrifice of July.
a prince whom they despised Hist. August. p. 231. Zosimus, l. i. p. 58, 59.
Zonaras, l. xii. p. 637. Aurelius Victor says, that Probus assumed the empire
in Illyricum; an opinion which (though adopted by a very learned man) would
throw that period of history into inextricable confusion.
.

The perpetual revolutions of the throne had so Their family subsists in
obscurity.
perfectly erased every notion of hereditary right, that the family of an
unfortunate emperor was incapable of exciting the jealousy of his successors.
The children of Tacitus and Florianus were permitted to descend into a private
station, and to mingle with the general mass of the people. Their poverty
indeed became an additional safeguard to their innocence. When Tacitus was
elected by the senate, he resigned his ample patrimony to the public service
Hist. August. p. 229.
, an act of generosity specious in appearance, but which evidently disclosed
his intention of transmitting the empire to his descendants. The only
consolation of their fallen state, was the remembrance of transient greatness,
and a distant hope, the child of a flattering prophecy, that at the end of a
thousand years, a monarch of the race of Tacitus should arise, the protector of
the senate, the restorer of Rome, and the conqueror of the whole earth He was
to send judges to the Parthians, Persians, and Sarmatians, a president to
Taprobana, and a proconsul to the Roman island (supposed by Casaubon and
Salmasius to mean Britain). Such a history as mine (says Vopiscus with proper
modesty) will not subsist a thousand years to expose or justify the prediction.
.

The peasants of Illyricum, who had already Character and elevation of the
emperor Probus.
given Claudius and Aurelian to the sinking empire, had an equal right to glory
in the elevation of Probus For the private life of Probus, see Vopiscus in
Hist. August. p. 234-237.
. Above twenty years before, the emperor Valerian, with his usual penetration,
had discovered the rising merit of the young soldier, on whom he conferred the
rank of tribune, long before the age prescribed by the military regulations.
The tribune soon justified his choice, by a victory over a great body of
Sarmatians, in which he saved the life of a near relation of Valerian; and
deserved to receive from the emperor's hand the collars, bracelets, spears, and
banners, the mural and the civic crown, and all the honorable rewards reserved
by ancient Rome for successful valor. The third, and afterward the tenth,
legion were entrusted to the command of Probus, who, in every step of his
promotion, showed himself superior to the station which he filled. Africa and
Pontus, the Rhine, the Danube, the Euphrates, and the Nile, by turns afforded
him the most splendid occasions of displaying his personal prowess and his
conduct in war. Aurelian was indebted to him for the conquest of Egypt, and
still more indebted for the honest courage with which he often checked the
cruelty of his master. Tacitus, who desired by the abilities of his generals to
supply his own deficiency of military talents, named him commander in chief of
all the eastern provinces, with five times the usual salary, the promise of the
consulship, and the hope of a triumph. When Probus ascended the Imperial
throne, he was about forty-four years of age According to the Alexandrian
Chronicle, he was fifty at the time of his death.
; in the full possession of his fame, of the love of the army, and of a mature
vigor of mind and body.

His acknowledged merit, and the success of His respectful conduct toward the
senate.
his arms against Florianus, left him without an enemy or a competitor. Yet, if
we may credit his own professions, very far from being desirous of the empire,
he had accepted it with the most sincere reluctance. But it is no longer in my
power, says Probus, in a private letter, to lay down a title so full of envy
and of danger. I must continue to personate the character which the soldiers
have imposed upon me The letter was addressed to the Praetorian prefect, whom
(on condition of his good behavior) he promised to continue in his great
office. See Hist. August. p. 237.
. His dutiful address to the senate displayed the sentiments, or at least the
language, of a Roman patriot; When you elected one of your order, conscript
fathers! to succeed the emperor Aurelian, you acted in a manner suitable to
your justice and wisdom. For you are the legal sovereigns of the world, and the
power which you derive from your ancestors, will descend to your posterity.
Happy would it have been, if Florianus, instead of usurping the purple of his
brother, like a private inheritance, had expected what your majesty might
determine, either in his favor, or in that of any other person. The prudent
soldiers have punished his rashness. To me they have offered the title of
Augustus. But I submit to your clemency my pretensions and my merits Vopiscus
in Hist. August. p. 237. The date of the letter is assuredly faulty. Instead of
Non. Februar. we may read Non. August.
. When this respectful epistle was read by the consul, A. D. 276. August 3.
the senators were unable to disguise their satisfaction, that Probus should
condescend thus humbly to solicit a scepter which he already possessed. They
celebrated with the warmest gratitude his virtues, his exploits, and above all
his moderation. A decree immediately passed, without a dissenting voice, to
ratify the election of the eastern armies, and to confer on their chief all the
several branches of the Imperial dignity: the names of Caesar and Augustus, the
title of Father of his country, the right of making in the same day three
motions in the senate Hist. August. p. 238. It is odd, that the senate should
treat Probus less favorably than Marcus Antoninus. That prince had received,
even before the death of Pius, Jus quintae relationis. See Capitolin. in Hist.
August. p. 24.
, the office of Pontifex Maximus, the tribunitian power, and the proconsular
command; a mode of investiture, which, though it seemed to multiply the
authority of the emperor, expressed the constitution of the ancient republic.
The reign of Probus corresponded with this fair beginning. The senate was
permitted to direct the civil administration of the empire. Their faithful
general asserted the honor of the Roman arms, and often laid at their feet
crowns of gold and barbaric trophies, the fruits of his numerous victories See
the dutiful letter of Probus to the senate, after his German victories. Hist.
August. p. 239.
. Yet, whilst he gratified their vanity, he must secretly have despised their
indolence and weakness. Though it was every moment in their power to repeal the
disgraceful edict of Gallienus, the proud successors of the Scipios patiently
acquiesced in their exclusion from all military employments. They soon
experienced, that those who refuse the sword, must renounce the scepter.

The strength of Aurelian had crushed on every side the enemies of Rome. After
his death they Victories of Probus over the barbarians.
seemed to revive with an increase of fury and of numbers. They were again
vanquished by the active vigor of Probus, who, in a short reign of about six
years The date and duration of the reign of Probus are very correctly
ascertained by Cardinal Noris, in his learned work, De Epochis Syro-Macedonum,
p. 96 -- 105. A passage of Eusebius connects the second year of Probus, with
the aeras of several of the Syrian cities.
, equalled the fame of ancient heroes, and restored peace and order to every
province of the Roman world. The dangerous frontier of Rhaetia he so firmly
secured, that he left it without the suspicion of an enemy. He broke the
wandering power of the Sarmatian tribes, and by the terror of his arms
compelled those barbarians to relinquish their spoil. The Gothic nation courted
the alliance of so warlike an emperor Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 239.
. He attacked the Isaurians in their mountains, besieged and took several of
their strongest castles Zosimus (l. i. p. 62 -- 65.) tells a very long and
trifling story of Lycius the Isaurian robber.
, and flattered himself that he had for ever suppressed a domestic foe, whose
independence so deeply wounded the majesty of the empire. The troubles excited
by the usurper Firmus in the Upper Egypt, had never been perfectly appeased,
and the cities of Ptolemais and Coptos, fortified by the alliance of the
Blemmyes, still maintained an obscure rebellion. The chastisement of those
cities, and of their auxiliaries the savages of the South, is said to have
alarmed the court of Persia Zosim. l. i. p. 65. Vopiscus in Hist. August. p.
239, 240. But it seems incredible, that the defeat of the Savages of Aethiopia
could affect the Persian monarch.
, and the Great King sued in vain for the friendship of Probus. Most of the
exploits which distinguished his reign, were achieved by the personal valor
and conduct of the emperor, insomuch that the writer of his life expresses some
amazement how, in so short a time, a single man could be present in so many
distant wars. The remaining actions he entrusted to the care of his
lieutenants, the judicious choice of whom forms no inconsiderable part of his
glory. Carus, Diocletian, Maximian, Constantius, Galerius, Asclepiodatus,
Annibalianus, and a crowd of other chiefs, who afterward ascended or supported
the throne, were trained to arms in the severe school of Aurelian and Probus
Besides these well-known chiefs, several others are named by Vopiscus (Hist.
August. p. 241.), whose actions have not reached our knowledge.
.

But the most important service which Probus A. D. 277.
rendered to the republic, was the deliverance of He delivers Gaul from the
invasion of the Germans,
Gaul, and the recovery of seventy flourishing cities oppressed by the
barbarians of Germany, who, since the death of Aurelian, had ravaged that great
province with impunity See the Caesar's of Julian, and Hist. August. p. 238.
240, 241.
. Among the various multitude of those fierce invaders, we may distinguish,
with some degree of clearness, three great armies, or rather nations,
successively vanquished by the valor of Probus. He drove back the Francs into
their morasses; a descriptive circumstance from whence we may infer, that the
confederacy known by the manly appellation of Free, already occupied the flat
maritime country, intersected and almost overflown by the stagnating waters of
the Rhine, and that several tribes of the Frisians and Batavians had acceded to
their alliance. He vanquished the Burgundians, a considerable people of the
Vandalic race. They had wandered in quest of booty from the banks of the Oder
to those of the Seine. They esteemed themselves sufficiently fortunate to
purchase, by the restitution of all their booty, the permission of an
undisturbed retreat. They attempted to elude that article of the treaty. Their
punishment was immediate and terrible Zosimus, l. i. p. 62. Hist. August. p.
240. But the latter suppose the punishment inflicted with the consent of their
kings; if so, it was partial, like the offense.
. But of all the invaders of Gaul, the most formidable were the Lygians, a
distant people who reigned over a wide domain on the frontiers of Poland and
Silesia See Cluver. Germania Antiqua, l. iii. Ptolemy places in their country
the city of Calisia, probably Calish in Silesia.
. In the Lygian nation, the Arii held the first rank by their numbers and
fierceness. The Arii (it is thus that they are described by the energy of
Tacitus) study to improve by art and circumstances the innate terrors of their
barbarism. Their shields are black, their bodies are painted black. They choose
for the combat the darkest hour of the night. Their host advances, covered as
it were with a funereal shade Feralis umbra, is the expression of Tacitus: it
is surely a very bold one
; nor do they often find an enemy capable of sustaining so strange and infernal
an aspect. Of all our senses, the eyes are the first vanquished in battle
Tacit. Germ. (c. 43.)
. Yet the arms and discipline of the Romans easily discomfited these horrid
phantoms. The Lygii were defeated in a general engagement, and Semno, the most
renowned of their chiefs, fell alive into the hands of Probus. That prudent
emperor, unwilling to reduce a brave people to despair, granted them an
honorable capitulation, and permitted them to return in safety to their native
country. But the losses which they suffered in the march, the battle, and the
retreat, broke the power of the nation: nor is the Lygian name ever repeated in
the history either of Germany or of the empire. The deliverance of Gaul is
reported to have cost the lives of four hundred thousand of the invaders; a
work of labor to the Romans, and of expense to the emperor, who gave a piece
of gold for the head of every barbarian Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 238.
. But as the fame of warriors is built on the destruction of human kind, we may
naturally suspect, that the sanguinary account was multiplied by the avarice of
the soldiers, and accepted without any very severe examination by the liberal
vanity of Probus.

Since the expedition of Maximin, the Roman and carries his arms into Germany.
generals had confined their ambition to a defensive war against the nations of
Germany, who perpetually pressed on the frontiers of the empire. The more
daring Probus pursued his Gallic victories, passed the Rhine, and displayed his
invincible eagles on the banks of the Elbe and the Neckar. He was fully
convinced, that nothing could reconcile the minds of the barbarians to peace,
unless they experienced in their own country the calamities of war. Germany,
exhausted by the ill success of the last emigration, was astonished by his
presence. Nine of the most considerable princes repaired to his camp, and fell
prostrate at his feet. Such a treaty was humbly received by the Germans, as it
pleased the conqueror to dictate. He exacted a strict restitution of the
effects and captives which they had carried away from the provinces; and
obliged their own magistrates to punish the more obstinate robbers who presumed
to detain any part of the spoil. A considerable tribute of corn, cattle, and
horses, the only wealth of barbarians, was reserved for the use of the
garrisons which Probus established on the limits of their territory. He even
entertained some thoughts of compelling the Germans to relinquish the exercise
of arms, and to trust their differences to the justice, their safety to the
power, of Rome. To accomplish these salutary ends, the constant residence of an
Imperial governor, supported by a numerous army, was indispensably requisite.
Probus therefore judged it more expedient to defer the execution of so great a
design; which was indeed rather of specious than solid utility Hist. August. p.
238, 239. Vopiscus quotes a letter from the emperor to the senate, in which he
mentions his design of reducing Germany into a province.
. Had Germany been reduced into the state of a province, the Romans, with
immense labor and expense, would have acquired only a more extensive boundary
to defend against the fiercer and more active barbarians of Scythia.

Instead of reducing the warlike natives of He builds a wall from the Rhine to
the Danube.
Germany to the condition of subjects, Probus contented himself with the humble
expedient of raising a bulwark against their inroads. The country, which now
forms the circle of Swabia, had been left desert in the age of Augustus by the
emigration of its ancient inhabitants Strabo, l. vii. According to Velleius
Paterculus (ii. 108.), Maroboduus led his Marcomanni into Bohemia: Cluverius
(German. Antiq. iii. 8.) proves that it was from Swabia.
. The fertility of the soil soon attracted a new colony from the adjacent
provinces of Gaul. Crowds of adventurers, of a roving temper and of desperate
fortunes, occupied the doubtful possession, and acknowledged, by the payment of
tithes, the majesty of the empire These settlers from the payment of tithes
were denominated, Decumates. Tacif. Germania, c. 29.
. To protect these new subjects, a line of frontier garrisons was gradually
extended from the Rhine to the Danube. About the reign of Hadrian, when that
mode of defense began to be practiced, these garrisons were connected and
covered by a strong intrenchment of trees and palisades. In the place of so
rude a bulwark, the emperor Probus constructed a stone-wall of a considerable
height, and strengthened it by towers at convenient distances. From the
neighborhood of Newstadt and Ratisbon on the Danube, it stretched across
hills, valleys, rivers, and morasses, as far as Wimpfen on the Necker, and at
length terminated on the banks of the Rhine, after a winding course of near two
hundred miles See Notes de l'Abbe de la Bleterie a la Germany de Tacit, p.
183. His account of the wall is chiefly borrowed (as he says himself) from the
Alsatia Illustrata of Schoepflin.
. This important barrier, uniting the two mighty streams that protected the
provinces of Europe, seemed to fill up the vacant space through which the
barbarians, and particularly the Alemanni, could penetrate with the greatest
facility into the heart of the empire. But the experience of the world from
China to Britain, has exposed the vain attempt of fortifying any extensive
tract of country See Recherches sur les Chinois et les Egyptiens, tom. ii. p.
81 -- 102. The anonymous author is well acquainted with the globe in general,
and with Germany in particular: with regard to the latter, he quotes a work of
M. Hanselman; but he seems to confound the wall of Probus, designed against the
Alemanni, with the fortification of the Mattiaci, constructed in the
neighborhood of Francfort against the Catti.
. An active enemy, who can select and vary his points of attack, must, in the
end, discover some feeble spot or some unguarded moment. The strength, as well
as the attention, of the defenders is divided; and such are the blind effects
of terror on the firmest troops, that a line broken in a single place is almost
instantly deserted. The fate of the wall which Probus erected, may confirm the
general observation. Within a few years after his death, it was overthrown by
the Alemanni. Its scattered ruins, universally ascribed to the power of the
Demon, now serve only to excite the wonder of the Swabian peasant.

Among the useful conditions of peace imposed Introduction and settlement of
the barbarians.
by Probus on the vanquished nations of Germany, was the obligation of
supplying the Roman army with sixteen thousand recruits, the bravest and most
robust of their youth. The emperor dispersed them through all the provinces,
and distributed this dangerous reinforcement in small bands of fifty or sixty
each, among the national troops; judiciously observing, that the aid which the
republic derived from the barbarians, should be felt but not seen He
distributed about fifty or sixty Barbarians to a Numerus, as it was then
called, a corpse with whose established number we are not exactly acquainted.
. Their aid was now become necessary. The feeble elegance of Italy and the
internal provinces could no longer support the weight of arms. The hardy
frontier of the Rhine and Danube still produced minds and bodies equal to the
labors of the camp; but a perpetual series of wars had gradually diminished
their numbers. The infrequency of marriage, and the ruin of agriculture,
affected the principles of population, and not only destroyed the strength of
the present, but intercepted the hope of future generations. The wisdom of
Probus embraced a great and beneficial plan of replenishing the exhausted
frontiers, by new colonies of captive or fugitive barbarians, on whom he
bestowed lands, cattle, instruments of husbandry, and every encouragement that
might engage them to educate a race of soldiers for the service of the
republic. Into Britain, and most probably into Cambridgeshire Camden's
Britannia, Introduction, p. 136.; but he speaks from a very doubtful conjecture.
, he transported a considerable body of Vandals. The impossibility of an escape
reconciled them to their situation, and in the subsequent troubles of that
island, they approved themselves the most faithful servants of the state
Zosimus, l. i. p. 62. According to Vopiscus, another body of Vandals was less
faithful.
. Great numbers of Franks and Gepidae were settled on the banks of the Danube
and the Rhine. An hundred thousand Bastarnae, expelled from their own country,
cheerfully accepted an establishment in Thrace, and soon imbibed the manners
and sentiments of Roman subjects Hist. August. p. 240. They were probably
expelled by the Goths. Zosim. l. i. p. 66.
. But the expectations of Probus were too often disappointed. The impatience
and idleness of the barbarians could ill brook the slow labors of agriculture.
Their unconquerable love of freedom, rising against despotism, provoked them
into hasty rebellions, alike fatal to themselves and to the provinces Hist.
August. p. 240.
; nor could these artificial supplies, however repeated by succeeding emperors,
restore the important limit of Gaul and Illyricum to its ancient and native
vigor.

Of all the barbarians who abandones their Daring enterprise of the Franks.
new settlements, and disturbed the public tranquillity, a very small number
returned to their own country. For a short season they might wander in arms
through the empire; but in the end they were surely destroyed by the power of a
warlike emperor. The successful rashness of a party of Franks was attended,
however, with such memorable consequences, that it ought not to be passed
unnoticed. They had been established by Probus, on the seacoast of Pontus,
with a view of strengthening the frontier against the inroads of the Alani. A
fleet stationed in one of the harbors of the Euxine, fell into the hands of
the Franks; and they resolved, through unknown seas, to explore their way from
the mouth of the Phasis to that of the Rhine. They easily escaped through the
Bosphorus and the Hellespont, and cruizing along the Mediterranean, indulged
their appetite for revenge and plunder, by frequent descents on the
unsuspecting shores of Asia, Greece, and Africa. The opulent city of Syracuse,
in whose port the navies of Athens and Carthage had formerly been sunk, was
sacked by a handful of barbarians, who massacred the greatest part of the
trembling inhabitants. From the island of Sicily, the Franks proceeded to the
columns of Hercules, trusted themselves to the ocean, coasted round Spain and
Gaul, and steering their triumphant course through the British channel, at
length finished their surprising voyage, by landing in safety on the Batavian
or Frisian shores Panegyr. Vet. v. 18. Zosimus, l. i. p. 66.
. The example of their success, instructing their countrymen to conceive the
advantages, and to despise the dangers, of the sea, pointed out to their
enterprising spirit, a new road to wealth and glory.

Notwithstanding the vigilance and activity of Probus, it was almost impossible
that he could at Revolt of Saturninus in the East;
once contain in obedience every part of his wide-extended dominions. The
barbarians, who broke their chains, had seized the favorable opportunity of a
domestic war. When the emperor marched to the relief of Gaul, he devolved the
command of the East on Saturninus. That general, a man of merit and experience,
was driven into rebellion by the absence of his sovereign, the levity of the
Alexandrian people, the pressing instances of his friends, and his own fears;
but from the moment of his elevation, he never entertained a hope of empire, or
even of life. Alas! he said, the republic has lost a useful servant, and the
rashness of an hour has destroyed the services of many years. You know not,
continued he, the misery of sovereign power; a sword is perpetually suspended
over our head. We dread our very guards, we distrust our companions. The choice
of action or of repose is no longer in our disposition, nor is there any age,
or character, or conduct, that can protect us from the censure of envy. In thus
exalting me to the throne, you have doomed me to a life of cares, and to an
untimely fate. The only consolation which remains is, the assurance that I
shall not fall alone Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 245, 246. The unfortunate
orator had studied rhetoric at Carthage, and was therefore more probably a Moor
(Zosim. l. i. p. 60.) than a Gaul, as Vopiscus calls him.
. But as the former part of his prediction was verified by the victory, so the
latter was disappointed by the clemency of Probus. That amiable prince
attempted even to save the unhappy Saturninus from the fury of the soldiers. He
had more than once solicited the usurper himself, to place some confidence in
the mercy of a sovereign who so highly esteemed his character, A. D. 279.
that he had punished, as a malicious informer, the first who related the
improbable news of his defection Zonaras, l. xii. p. 638.
. Saturninus might, perhaps, have embraced the generous offer, had he not been
restrained by the obstinate distrust of his adherents. Their guilt was deeper,
and their hopes more sanguine, than those of their experienced leader.

The revolt of Saturninus was scarcely extinguished A. D. 280. of Bonosus and
Proculus in Gaul.
in the East, before new troubles were excited in the West, by the rebellion of
Bonosus and Proculus in Gaul. The most distinguished merit of those two
officers was their respective prowess, of the one in the combats of Bacchus, of
the other in those of Venus A very surprising instance is recorded of the
prowess of Proculus. He had taken one hundred Sarmatian virgins. The rest of
the story he must relate in his own language; Ex his una nocte december inivi:
omnes tamen, quod in me erat, mulieres intra dies quindecim reddidi. Vopiscus
in Hist. August. p. 246.
, yet neither of them were destitute of courage and capacity, and both
sustained, with honor, the august character which the fear of punishment had
engaged them to assume, till they sunk at length beneath the superior genius of
Probus. He used the victory with his accustomed moderation, and spared the
fortunes as well as the lives of their innocent families Proculus, who was a
native of Albengue on the Genoese coast, armed two thousand of his own slaves.
His riches were great, but they were acquired by robbery. It was afterward a
saying of his family, Nec latrones esse, nec principes sibi placere. Vopiscus
in Hist. August. p. 247.
.

The arms of Probus had now suppressed all the foreign and domestic enemies of
the state. His mild but steady administration confirmed the A. D. 281.
re-establishment of the public tranquillity; nor Triumph of the emperor Probus.
was there left in the provinces a hostile barbarian, a tyrant, or even a
robber, to revive the memory of past disorders. It was time that the emperor
should revisit Rome, and celebrate his own glory and the general happiness. The
triumph due to the valor of Probus was conducted with a magnificence suitable
to his fortune, and the people who had so lately admired the trophies of
Aurelian, gazed with equal pleasure on those of his heroic successor Hist.
August. p. 240.
. We cannot, on this occasion, forget the desperate courage of about fourscore
Gladiators, reserved with near six hundred others, for the inhuman sports of
the amphitheatre. Disdaining to shed their blood for the amusement of the
populace, they killed their keepers, broke from the place of their confinement,
and filled the streets of Rome with blood and confusion. After an obstinate
resistance, they were overpowered and cut in pieces by the regular forces; but
they obtained at least an honorable death, and the satisfaction of a just
revenge Zosim. l. i. p. 66.
.

The military discipline which reigned in the His discipline.
camps of Probus, was less cruel than that of Aurelian, but it was equally
rigid and exact. The latter had punished the irregularities of the soldiers
with unrelenting severity, the former prevented them by employing the legions
in constant and useful labors. When Probus commanded in Egypt, he executed
many considerable works for the splendor and benefit of that rich country. The
navigation of the Nile, so important to Rome itself, was improved; and temples,
bridges, porticoes, and palaces, were constructed by the hands of the soldiers,
who acted by turns as architects, as engineers, and as husbandmen Hist. August.
p. 236.
. It was reported of Hannibal, that, in order to preserve his troops from the
dangerous temptations of idleness, he had obliged them to form large
plantations of olive trees along the coast of Africa Aurel. Victor in Prob. But
the policy of Hannibal, unnoticed by any more ancient writer, is
irreconcilable with the history of his life. He left Africa when he was nine
years old, returned to it when he was forty-five, and immediately lost his army
in the decisive battle of Zama. Livius, xxx. 37.
. From a similar principle, Probus exercised his legions in covering, with rich
vineyards, the hills of Gaul and Pannonia, and two considerable spots are
described, which were entirely dug and planted by military labor Hist. August.
p. 240. Eutrop. ix. 17. Aurel. Victor in Prob. Victor Junior. He revoked the
prohibition of Domitian, and granted a general permission of planting vines to
the Gauls, the Britons, and the Pannonians.
. One of these, known under the name of Mount Almo, was situated near Sirmium,
the country where Probus was born, for which he ever retained a partial
affection, and whose gratitude he endeavored to secure, by converting into
tillage a large and unhealthy tract of marshy ground. An army thus employed,
constituted perhaps the most useful, as well as the bravest, portion of Roman
subjects.

But in the prosecution of a favorite scheme, the best of men, satisfied with
the rectitude of His death.
their intentions, are subject to forget the bounds of moderation; nor did
Probus himself sufficiently consult the patience and disposition of his fierce
legionaries Julian bestows a severe, and indeed excessive, censure on the
rigor of Probus, who, as he thinks, almost deserved his fate.
. The dangers of the military profession seem only to be compensated by a life
of pleasure and idleness; but if the duties of the soldier are incessantly
aggravated by the labors of the peasant, he will at last sink under the
intolerable burden, or shake it off with indignation. The imprudence of Probus
is said to have inflamed the discontent of his troops. More attentive to the
interests of mankind than to those of the army, he expressed the vain hope,
that, by the establishment of universal peace, he should soon abolish the
necessity of a standing and mercenary force Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 241.
He lavishes on this idle hope a large stock of very foolish eloquence.
. The unguarded expression proved fatal to him. In one of the hottest days of
summer, as he severely urged the unwholesome labor of draining the marshes of
Sirmium, the soldiers, impatient of fatigue, on a sudden threw down their
tools, grasped their arms, and broke out into a furious mutiny. The emperor,
conscious of his danger, took refuge in a lofty tower, constructed for the
purpose of surveying the progress of the work Turris ferrata. It seems to have
been a moveable tower, and cased with iron.
. The tower was instantly forced, and a thousand swords were plunged at once
into the bosom of the unfortunate Probus. A. D. 282, August.
The rage of the troops subsided as soon as it had been gratified. They then
lamented their fatal rashness, forgot the severity of the emperor, whom they
had massacred, and hastened to perpetuate, by an honorable monument, the
memory of his virtues and victories Probus, et vere probus situs est: Victor
omnium gentium Barbararum: victor etiam tyrannorum.
.

When the legions had indulged their grief Election and character of Carus.
and repentance for the death of Probus, their unanimous consent declared
Carus, his Praetorian prefect, the most deserving of the Imperial throne.
Every circumstance that relates to this prince appears of a mixed and doubtful
nature. He gloried in the title of Roman Citizen; and affected to compare the
purity of his blood, with the foreign and even barbarous origin of the
preceding emperors; yet the most inquisitive of his contemporaries, very far
from admitting his claim, have variously deduced his own birth, or that of his
parents, from Illyricum, from Gaul, or from Africa Yet all this may be
conciliated. He was born at Narbonne in Illyricum, confounded by Eutropius with
the more famous city of that name in Gaul. His father might be an African, and
his mother a noble Roman. Carus himself was educated in the capital. See
Scaliger, Animadversion. ad Eusebius. Chron. p. 241.
. Though a soldier, he had received a learned education; though a senator, he
was invested with the first dignity of the army; and in an age, when the civil
and military professions began to be irrecoverably separated from each other,
they were united in the person of Carus. Notwithstanding the severe justice
which he exercised against the assassins of Probus, to whose favor and esteem
he was highly indebted, he could not escape the suspicion of being accessory to
a deed from whence he derived the principal advantage. He enjoyed, at least
before his elevation, an acknowledged character of virtue and abilities Probus
had requested of the senate an equestrian statue and a marble palace, at the
public expense, as a just recompense of the singular merit of Carus. Vopiscus
in Hist. August. p. 249.
; but his austere temper insensibly degenerated into moroseness and cruelty;
and the imperfect writers of his life almost hesitate whether they shall not
rank him in the number of Roman tyrants Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 242. 249.
Julian excludes the emperor Carus and both his sons from the banquet of the
Caesar's.
. When Carus assumed the purple, he was about sixty years of age, and his two
sons Carinus and Numerian had already attained the season of manhood John
Malela, tom. i. p. 401. But the authority of that ignorant Greek is very
slight. He ridiculously derives from Carus, the city of Carrhae, and the
province of Caria, the latter of which is mentioned by Homer.
.

The authority of the senate expired with Probus The sentiments of the senate
and people.
; nor was the repentance of the soldiers displayed by the same dutiful regard
for the civil power, which they had testified after the unfortunate death of
Aurelian. The election of Carus was decided without expecting the approbation
of the senate, and the new emperor contented himself with announcing, in a cold
and stately epistle, that he had ascended the vacant throne Hist. August. p.
249. Carus congratulated the senate, that one of their own order was made
emperor.
. A behavior so very opposite to that of his amiable predecessor, afforded no
favorable presage of the new reign; and the Romans, deprived of power and
freedom, asserted their privilege of licentious murmurs Hist. August. p. 242.
. The voice of congratulation and flattery was not however silent; and we may
still peruse, with pleasure and contempt, an eclogue, which was composed on the
accession of the emperor Carus. Two shepherds, avoiding the noontide heat,
retire into the cave of Faunus. On a spreading beech they discover some recent
characters. The rural deity had described, in prophetic verses, the felicity
promised to the empire, under the reign of so great a prince. Faunus hails the
approach of that hero, who, receiving on his shoulders the sinking weight of
the Roman world, shall extinguish war and faction, and once again restore the
innocence and security of the golden age See the first eclogue of Calphurnius.
The design of it is preferred by Fontenelle, to that of Virgil's Pollio. See
tom. iii. p. 148.
.

It is more than probable, that these elegant Carus defeats the Sarmatians, and
marches into the East;
trifles never reached the ears of a veteran general, who, with the consent of
the legions, was preparing to execute the long suspended design of the Persian
war. Before his departure for this distant expedition, Carus conferred on his
two sons, Carinus and Numerian, the title of Caesar, and investing the former
with almost an equal share of the Imperial power, directed the young prince,
first to suppress some troubles which had arisen in Gaul, and afterward to fix
the seat of his residence at Rome, and to assume the government of the western
provinces Hist. August. p. 353. Eutropius, ix. 18. Pagi Annal.
. The safety of Illyricum was confirmed by a memorable defeat of the
Sarmatians; sixteen thousand of those barbarians remained on the field of
battle, and the number of captives amounted to twenty thousand. The old
emperor, animated with the fame and prospect of victory, pursued his march, in
the midst of winter, through the countries of Thrace and Asia Minor, and at
length, with his younger son Numerian, arrived on the confines of the Persian
monarchy. There, encamping on the summit of a lofty mountain, he pointed out to
his troops the opulence and luxury of the enemy whom they were about to invade.

The successor of Artaxerxes, Varanes or Bahram, A. D. 283.
though he had subdued the Segestans, one he gives audience to the Persian
ambassadors.
of the most warlike nations of Upper Asia Agathias, l. iv. p. 135. We find one
of his sayings in the Bibliotheque Orientale of M. d'Herbelot. The definition
of humanity includes all other virtues.
, was alarmed at the approach of the Romans, and endeavored to retard their
progress by a negotiation of peace. His ambassadors entered the camp about
sunset, at the time when the troops were satisfying their hunger with a frugal
repast. The Persians expressed their desire of being introduced to the presence
of the Roman emperor. They were at length conducted to a soldier, who was
seated on the grass. A piece of stale bacon and a few hard pease composed his
supper. A coarse woollen garment of purple was the only circumstance that
announced his dignity. The conference was conducted with the same disregard of
courtly elegance. Carus, taking off a cap which he wore to conceal his
baldness, assured the ambassadors, that, unless their master acknowledged the
superiority of Rome, he would speedily render Persia as naked of trees, as his
own head was destitute of hair Synesius tells this story of Carinus; and it is
much more natural to understand it of Carus, than (as Petavius and Tillemont
choose to do) of Probus.
. Notwithstanding some traces of art and preparation, we may discover in this
scene the manners of Carus, and the severe simplicity which the martial
princes, who succeeded Gallienus, had already restored in the Roman camps. The
ministers of the Great King trembled and retired.

The threats of Carus were not without effect. He ravaged Mesopotamia, cut in
pieces whatever His victories and extraordinary death.
opposed his passage, made himself master of the great cities of Seleucia and
Ctesiphon (which seemed to have surrendered without resistance), and carried
his victorious arms beyond the Tigris Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 250.
Eutropius, ix. 18. The two Victors.
. He had seized the favorable moment for an invasion. The Persian councils
were distracted by domestic factions, and the greater part of their forces were
detained on the frontiers of India. Rome and the East received with transport
the news of such important advantages. Flattery and hope painted, in the most
lively colors, the fall of Persia, the conquest of Arabia, the submission of
Egypt, and a lasting deliverance from the inroads of the Scythian nations To
the Persian victory of Carus, I refer the dialogue of the Philopatris, which
has so long been an object of dispute among the learned. But to explain and
justify my opinion, would require a dissertation.
. But the reign of Carus was destined to expose the vanity of predictions. They
were scarcely uttered before A. D. 283. Dec. 25.
they were contradicted by his death; an event attended with such ambiguous
circumstances, that it may be related in a letter from his own secretary to the
prefect of the city. Carus, says he, our dearest emperor, was confined by
sickness to his bed, when a furious tempest arose in the camp. The darkness
which overspread the sky was so thick, that we could no longer distinguish each
other; and the incessant flashes of lightning took from us the knowledge of all
that passed in the general confusion. Immediately after the most violent clap
of thunder, we heard a sudden cry, that the emperor was dead; and it soon
appeared, that his chamberlains, in a rage of grief, had set fire to the royal
pavillion, a circumstance which gave rise to the report that Carus was killed
by lightning. But, as far as we have been able to investigate the truth, his
death was the natural effect of his disorder Hist. August. p. 250. Yet
Eutropius, Festus, Rufus, the two Victors, Jerome, Sidonius Apollinaris,
Syncellus, and Zonaras, all ascribe the death of Carus to lightning.
.

The vacancy of the throne was not productive of any disturbance. The ambition
of the aspiring He is succeeded by his two sons Carinus and Numerian.
generals was checked by their mutual fears, and young Numerian, with his
absent brother Carinus, were unanimously acknowledged as Roman emperors. The
public expected that the successor of Carus would pursue his father's
footsteps, and without allowing the Persians to recover from their
consternation, would advance sword in hand to the palaces of Susa and Ecbatana
See Nemesian. Cynegeticon, v. 71, etc.
. But the legions, however strong in numbers and discipline, were dismayed by
the most abject superstition. Notwithstanding all the arts that were practiced
to disguise the manner of the late emperor's death, it was found impossible to
remove the opinion of the multitude, and the power of opinion is irresistible.
Places or persons struck with lightning were considered by the ancients with
pious horror, as singularly devoted to the wrath of Heaven See Festus and his
commentators, on the word Scribonianum. Places struck with lightning, were
surrounded with a wall: things were buried with mysterious ceremony.
. An oracle was remembered, which marked the river Tigris as the fatal boundary
of the Roman arms. The troops, terrified with the fate of Carus and with their
own danger, called aloud on young Numerian to obey the will of the gods, and to
lead them away from this inauspicious scene of war. The feeble emperor was
unable to subdue their obstinate prejudice, and the Persians wondered at the
unexpected retreat of a victorious enemy Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 250.
Aurelius Victor seems to believe the prediction, and to approve the retreat.
.

The intelligence of the mysterious fate of the A. D. 384. Vices of Carinus.
late emperor, was soon carried from the frontiers of Persia to Rome; and the
senate, as well as the provinces, congratulated the accession of the sons of
Carus. These fortunate youths were strangers, however, to that conscious
superiority, either of birth or of merit, which can alone render the possession
of a throne easy, and as it were natural. Born and educated in a private
station, the election of their father raised them at once to the rank of
princes; and his death, which happened about sixteen months afterward, left
them the unexpected legacy of a vast empire. To sustain with temper this rapid
elevation, an uncommon share of virtue and prudence was requisite; and Carinus,
the elder of the brothers, was more than commonly deficient in those qualities.
In the Gallic war, he discovered some degree of personal courage Nemesian.
Cynegeticon, v. 69. He was a contemporary, but a poet.
; but from the moment of his arrival at Rome, he abandoned himself to the
luxury of the capital, and to the abuse of his fortune. He was soft yet cruel;
devoted to pleasure, but destitute of taste; and though exquisitely susceptible
of vanity, indifferent to the public esteem. In the course of a few months, he
successively married and divorced nine wives, most of whom he left pregnant;
and notwithstanding this legal inconstancy, found time to indulge such a
variety of irregular appetites, as brought dishonor on himself and on the
noblest houses of Rome. He beheld with inveterate hatred all those who might
remember his former obscurity, or censure his present conduct. He banished, or
put to death, the friends and counselors whom his father had placed about him,
to guide his inexperienced youth; and he persecuted with the meanest revenge
his school-fellows and companions, who had not sufficiently respected the
latent majesty of the emperor. With the senators, Carinus affected a lofty and
regal demeanor, frequently declaring, that he designed to distribute their
estates among the populace of Rome. From the dregs of that populace, he
selected his favorites, and even his ministers. The palace, and even the
Imperial table, was filled with singers, dancers, prostitutes, and all the
various retinue of vice and folly. One of his door-keepers Cancellarius. This
word, so humble in its original, has by a singular fortune rose into the title
of the first great office of state in the monarchies of Europe. See Casaubon
and Salmasius, ad Hist. August. p. 253.
he entrusted with the government of the city. In the room of the Praetorian
prefect, whom he put to death, Carinus substituted one of the ministers of his
looser pleasures. Another who possessed the same, or even a more infamous,
title to favor, was invested with the consulship. A confidential secretary,
who had acquired uncommon skill in the art of forgery, delivered the indolent
emperor, with his own consent, from the irksome duty of signing his name.

When the emperor Carus undertook the Persian war, he was induced, by motives
of affection as well as policy, to secure the fortunes of his family, by
leaving in the hands of his eldest son the armies and provinces of the West.
The intelligence which he soon received of the conduct of Carinus, filled him
with shame and regret; nor had he concealed his resolution of satisfying the
republic by a severe act of justice, and of adopting, in the place of an
unworthy son, the brave and virtuous Constantius, who at that time was governor
of Dalmatia. But the elevation of Constantius was for a while deferred; and as
soon as the father's death had released Carinus from the control of fear or
decency, he displayed to the Romans the extravagancies of Elagabalus,
aggravated by the cruelty of Domitian Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 253, 254.
Eutropius, ix. 19. Victor Junior. The reign of Diocletian indeed was so long
and prosperous, that it must have been very unfavourable to the reputation of
Carinus.
.

The only merit of the administration of Carinus that history could record or
poetry celebrate, He celebrates the Roman games.
was the uncommon splendor with which, in his own and his brother's name, he
exhibited the Roman games of the theater, the circus, and the amphitheatre.
More than twenty years afterward, when the courtiers of Diocletian represented
to their frugal sovereign the fame and popularity of his munificent
predecessor, he acknowledged, that the reign of Carinus had indeed been a reign
of pleasure Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 254. He calls him Carus, but the sense
is sufficiently obvious, and the words were often confounded.
. But this vain prodigality, which the prudence of Diocletian might justly
despise, was enjoyed with surprise and transport by the Roman people. The
oldest of the citizens, recollecting the spectacles of former days, the
triumphal pomp of Probus or Aurelian, and the secular games of the emperor
Philip, acknowledged that they were all surpassed by the superior magnificence
of Carinus See Calphurnius, Eclog. vii. 43. We may observe, that the spectacles
of Probus were still recent, and that the poet is seconded by the historian.
.

The spectacles of Carinus may therefore be Spectacles of Rome.
best illustrated by the observation of some particulars, which history has
condescended to relate concerning those of his predecessors. If we confine
ourselves solely to the hunting of wild beasts, however we may censure the
vanity of the design or the cruelty of the execution, we are obliged to
confess, that neither before nor since the time of the Romans, so much art and
expense have ever been lavished for the amusement of the people The philosopher
Montaigne (Essais, l. iii. 6.) gives a very just and lively view of Roman
magnificence in these spectacles.
. By the order of Probus, a great quantity of large trees, torn up by the
roots, were transplanted into the midst of the circus. The spacious and shady
forest was immediately filled with a thousand ostriches, a thousand stags, a
thousand fallow deer, and a thousand wild boars; and all this variety of game
was abandoned to the riotous impetuosity of the multitude. The tragedy of the
succeeding day consisted in the massacre of an hundred lions, an equal number
of lionesses, two hundred leopards, and three hundred bears Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 240.
. The collection prepared by the younger Gordian for his triumph, and which his
successor exhibited in the secular games, was less remarkable by the number
than by the singularity of the animals. Twenty zebras displayed their elegant
forms and variegated beauty to the eyes of the Roman people They are called
Onagri; but the number is too inconsiderable for mere wild-asses. Cuper (de
Elephantis Exercitat. ii. 7.) has proved from Oppian, Dion, and an anonymous
Greek, that zebras had been seen at Rome. They were brought from some island of
the ocean, perhaps Madagascar.
. Ten elks, and as many camelopards, the loftiest and most harmless creatures
that wander over the plains of Sarmatia and Aethiopia, were contrasted with
thirty African hyaenas, and ten Indian tigers, the most implacable savages of
the torrid zone. The unoffending strength with which Nature has endowed the
greater quadrupeds, was admired in the rhinoceros, the hippopotamus of the Nile
Carinus gave an hippopotamus (see Calphurn. Eclog. vii. 66.). In the latter
spectacles, I do not recollect any crocodiles, of which Augustus once exhibited
thirty-six. -- Dion Cassius, l. lv. p. 781.
, and a majestic troop of thirty-two elephants Capitolin. in Hist. August. p.
164, 165. We are not acquainted with the animals whom he calls archeleontes,
some read argoleontes, others agrioleontes: both corrections are very nugatory.
. While the populace gazed with stupid wonder on the splendid show, the
naturalist might indeed observe the figure and properties of so many different
species, transported from every part of the ancient world into the amphitheatre
of Rome. But this accidental benefit, which science might derive from folly, is
surely insufficient to justify such a wanton abuse of the public riches. There
occurs, however, a single instance in the first Punic war, in which the senate
wisely connected this amusement of the multitude with the interest of the
state. A considerable number of elephants, taken in the defeat of the
Carthaginian army, were driven through the circus by a few slaves, armed only
with blunt javelins Plin. Hist. Nature. viii. 6. from the annals of Piso.
. The useful spectacle served to impress the Roman soldier with a just contempt
for those unwieldy animals; and he no longer dreaded to encounter them in the
ranks of war.

The hunting or exhibition of wild beasts, was The amphitheatre.
conducted with a magnificence suitable to a people who styled themselves the
masters of the world; nor was the edifice appropriated to that entertainment
less expressive of Roman greatness. Posterity admires, and will long admire,
the awful remains of the amphitheatre of Titus, which so well deserved the
epithet of Colossal See Maffei, Verona Illustrata, p. iv. l. i. c. 2.
. It was a building of an elliptic figure, five hundred and sixty-four feet in
length, and four hundred and sixty-seven in breadth, founded on fourscore
arches, and rising, with four successive orders of architecture, to the height
of one hundred and forty feet Maffei, l. ii. c. 2. The height was very much
exaggerated by the ancients. It reached almost to the heavens, according to
Calphurnius (Eclog. vii. 23.), and surpassed the ken of human sight, according
to Ammianus Marcellinus (xvi. 10.). Yet how trifling to the great pyramid of
Egypt, which rises 500 feet perpendicular!
. The outside of the edifice was encrusted with marble, and decorated with
statues. The slopes of the vast concave, which formed the inside, were filled
and surrounded with sixty or eighty rows of seats of marble likewise, covered
with cushions, and capable of receiving with ease above fourscore thousand
spectators According to different copies of Victor, we read 77,000, or 87,000
spectators; but Maffei (l. ii. c. 12.) finds room on the open sents for no more
than 34,000. The remainder were contained in the upper covered galleries.
. Sixty-four vomitories (for by that name the doors were very aptly
distinguished) poured forth the immense multitude; and the entrances, passages,
and stair-cases, were contrived with such exquisite skill, that each person,
whether of the senatorial, the equestrian, or the plebeian order, arrived at
his destined place without trouble or confusion See Maffei, l. ii. c. 5 -- 12.
He treats the very difficult subject with all possible clearness, and like an
architect, as well as an antiquarian.
. Nothing was omitted which, in any respect, could be subservient to the
convenience and pleasure of the spectators. They were protected from the sun
and rain by an ample canopy, occasionally drawn over their heads. The air was
continually refreshed by the playing of fountains, and profusely impregnated by
the grateful scent of aromatics. In the center of the edifice, the arena, or
stage, was strewed with the finest sand, and successively assumed the most
different forms. At one moment it seemed to rise out of the earth, like the
garden of the Hesperides, and was afterward broken into the rocks and caverns
of Thrace. The subterraneous pipes conveyed an inexhaustible supply of water;
and what had just before appeared a level plain, might be suddenly converted
into a wide lake, covered with armed vessels, and replenished with the monsters
of the deep Calphurn. Eclog. vii. 64. 73. These lines are curious, and the
whole Eclogue has been of infinite use to Maffei. Calphurnius, as well as
Martial (see his first book), was a poet; but when they described the
amphitheatre, they both wrote from their own senses, and to those of the Romans.
. In the decoration of these scenes, the Roman emperors displayed their wealth
and liberality; and we read on various occasions, that the whole furniture of
the amphitheatre consisted either of silver, or of gold, or of amber Consult.
Plin. Hist. Nature. xxxiii. 16. xxxvii. 11.
. The poet who describes the games of Carinus, in the character of a shepherd
attracted to the capital by the fame of their magnificence, affirms, that the
nets designed as a defense against the wild beasts, were of gold wire; that the
porticoes were gilded, and that the belt or circle which divided the several
ranks of spectators from each other, was studded with a precious Mosaic of
beautiful stones Balteus en gemmis, en in lita porticus auro. Certatim radiant,
etc. Calphurn. vii.
.

In the midst of this glittering pageantry, the A. D. 284. Sept. 12.
emperor Carinus, secure of his fortune, enjoyed the acclamations of the
people, the flattery of his courtiers, and the songs of the poets, who, for
want of a more essential merit, were reduced to celebrate the divine graces of
his person Et Martis vultus et Apollinis esse putavi, says Calphurnius; but
John Malela, who had perhaps seen pictures of Carinus, describes him as thick,
short, and white, tom. i. p. 403.
. In the same hour, but at the distance of nine hundred miles from Rome, his
brother expired; and a sudden revolution transferred into the hands of a
stranger the scepter of the house of Carus With regard to the time when these
Roman games were celebrated, Scaliger, Salmasius, and Cuper, have given
themselves a great deal of trouble to perplex a very clear subject.
.

The sons of Carus never saw each other after Return of Numerian with the army
from Persia.
their father's death. The arrangements which their new situation required,
were probably deferred till the return of the younger brother to Rome, where a
triumph was decreed to the young emperors, for the glorious success of the
Persian war Nemesianus (in the Cynegeticons) seems to anticipate in his fancy
that auspicious day.
. It is uncertain whether they intended to divide between them the
administration, or the provinces, of the empire; but it is very unlikely that
their union would have proved of any long duration. The jealousy of power must
have been inflamed by the opposition of characters. In the most corrupt of
times, Carinus was unworthy to live: Numerian deserved to reign in a happier
period. His affable manners and gentle virtues secured him, as soon as they
became known, the regard and affections of the public. He possessed the elegant
accomplishments of a poet and orator, which dignify as well as adorn the
humblest and the most exalted station. His eloquence, however it was applauded
by the senate, was formed not so much on the model of Cicero, as on that of the
modern declaimers; but in an age very far from being destitute of poetical
merit, he contended for the prize with the most celebrated of his
contemporaries, and still remained the friend of his rivals; a circumstance
which evinces either the goodness of his heart, or the superiority of his
genius He won all the crowns from Nemesianus, with whom he vied in didactic
poetry. The senate eracted a statue to the son of Carus, with a very ambiguous
inscription, To the most powerful of orators. See Vopiscus in Hist. August. p.
251.
. But the talents of Numerian were rather of the contemplative, than of the
active kind. When his father's elevation reluctantly forced him from the shade
of retirement, neither his temper nor his pursuits had qualified him for the
command of armies. His constitution was destroyed by the hardships of the
Persian war; and he had contracted, from the heat of the climate A more natural
cause, at least, than that assigned by Vopiscus (Hist. August. p. 251.),
incessantly weeping for his father's death.
, such a weakness in his eyes, as obliged him, in the course of a long retreat,
to confine himself to the solitude and darkness of a tent or litter. The
administration of all affairs, civil as well as military, was devolved on
Arrius Aper, the Praetorian prefect, who, to the power of his important
office, added the honor of being father-in-law to Numerian. The Imperial
pavilion was strictly guarded by his most trusty adherents; and during many
days, Aper delivered to the army the supposed mandates of their invisible
sovereign In the Persian war, Aper was suspected of a design to betray Carus.
Hist. August. p. 250.
.

It was not till eight months after the death of Death of Numerian.
Carus, that the Roman army, returning by slow marches from the banks of the
Tigris, arrived on those of the Thracian Bosphorus. The legions halted at
Chalcedon in Asia, while the court passed over to Heraclea, on the European
side of the Propontis We are obliged to the Alexandrian Chronicle, p. 274, for
the knowledge of the time and place where Diocletian was elected emperor.
. But a report soon circulated through the camp, at first in secret whispers,
and at length in loud clamours, of the emperor's death, and of the presumption
of his ambitious minister, who still exercised the sovereign power in the name
of a prince who was no more. The impatience of the soldiers could not long
support a state of suspense. With rude curiosity they broke into the Imperial
tent, and discovered only the corpse of Numerian Hist. August. p. 251. Eutrop.
ix. 88. Hieronym. in Chron. According to these judicious writers, the death of
Numerian was discovered by the stench of his dead body. Could no aromatics be
found in the Imperial household?
. The gradual decline of his health might have induced them to believe that his
death was natural; but the concealment was interpreted as an evidence of guilt,
and the measures which Aper had taken to secure his election, became the
immediate occasion of his ruin. Yet, even in the transport of their rage and
grief, the troops observed a regular proceeding, which proves how firmly
discipline had been re-established by the martial successors of Gallienus. A
general assembly of the army was appointed to be held at Chalcedon, whither
Aper was transported in chains, as a prisoner and a criminal. A vacant tribunal
was erected in the midst of the camp, and the generals and tribunes formed a
great military council. They soon announced to the multitude, that their A. D.
284. Sept. 17.
choice had fallen on Diocletian, commander of the domestics or body-guards, as
the person the Election of the emperor Diocletian.
most capable of revenging and succeeding their beloved emperor. The future
fortunes of the candidate depended on the chance or conduct of the present
hour. Conscious that the station which he had filled, exposed him to some
suspicions, Diocletian ascended the tribunal, and raising his eyes toward the
Sun, made a solemn profession of his own innocence, in the presence of that
all-seeing Deity Aurel. Victor. Eutropius, ix. 20. Hieronym. in Chron.
. Then, assuming the tone of a sovereign and a judge, he commanded that Aper
should be brought in chains to the foot of the tribunal. This man, said he, is
the murderer of Numerian; and, without giving him time to enter on a dangerous
justification, drew his sword, and buried it in the breast of the unfortunate
prefect. A charge supported by such decisive proof, was admitted without
contradiction, and the legions, with repeated acclamations, acknowledged the
justice and authority of the emperor Diocletian Vopiscus in Hist. August. p.
252. The reason why Diocletian killed Aper (a wild boar), was founded on a
prophecy and a pun, as foolish as they are well known.
.

Before we enter upon the memorable reign of Defeat and death of Carinus.
that prince, it will be proper to punish and dismiss the unworthy brother of
Numerian. Carinus possessed arms and treasures sufficient to support his legal
title to the empire. But his personal vices overbalanced every advantage of
birth and situation. The most faithful servants of the father despised the
incapacity, and dreaded the cruel arrogance, of the son. The hearts of the
people were engaged in favor of his rival, and even the senate was inclined to
prefer an usurper to a tyrant. The arts of Diocletian inflamed the general
discontent; and the winter was employed in secret intrigues, and open
preparations for a civil war. In the spring, the forces of the East and of the
West encountered A. D. 285. May.
each other in the plains of Margus, a small city of Maesia, in the
neighborhood of the Danube Eutropius marks its situation very accurately; it
was between the Mons Aureus and Viminiacum. M. d'Anville (Geographie Ancienne,
tom. i. p. 304.) places Margus at Kastolatz in Servia, a little below Belgrade
and Semendria.
. The troops, so lately returned from the Persian war, had acquired their glory
at the expense of health and numbers, nor were they in a condition to contend
with the unexhausted strength of the legions of Europe. Their ranks were
broken, and, for a moment, Diocletian despaired of the purple and of life. But
the advantage which Carinus had obtained by the valor of his soldiers, he
quickly lost by the infidelity of his officers. A tribune, whose wife he had
seduced, seized the opportunity of revenge, and by a single blow extinguished
civil discord in the blood of the adulterer Hist. August. p. 254. Eutropius,
ix. 20. Aurelius Victor. Victor in Epitome.
.

CHAP. XIII. The reign of Diocletian and his three Associates, Maximian,
Galerius, and Constantius. -- General Re-establishment of Order and
Tranquillity. -- The Persian War, Victory, and Triumph. -- The new Form of
Administration. -- Abdication and Retirement of Diocletian and Maximian.
AS the reign of Diocletian was more illustrious than that of any of his
predecessors, so was his birth more abject and obscure. Elevation and character
of Diocletian.
The strong claims of merit and of violence had frequently superseded the ideal
prerogatives of nobility; but a distinct line of separation was A. D. 285.
hitherto preserved between the free and the servile part of mankind. The
parents of Diocletian had been slaves in the house of Anulinus, a Roman
senator; nor was he himself distinguished by any other name, than that which he
derived from a small town in Dalmatia, from whence his mother deduced her
origin Eutrop. ix. 19. Victor in Epitom. The town seems to have been properly
called Doclia, from a small tribe of Illyrians (see Cellarius, Geograph.
Antiqua, tom. i. p. 393.); and the original name of the fortunate slave was
probably Docles; he first lengthened it to the Grecian harmony of Diocles, and
at length to the Roman majesty of Diocletianus. He likewise assumed the
Patrician name of Valerius, and it is usually given him by Aurelius Victor.
. It is, however, probable, that his father obtained the freedom of the family,
and that he soon acquired an office of scribe, which was commonly exercised by
persons of his condition See Dacier on the sixth satire of the second book of
Horace. Cornel. Nepos, in Vit. Eumen. c. 1.
. Favorable oracles, or rather the consciousness of superior merit, prompted
his aspiring son to pursue the profession of arms and the hopes of fortune; and
it would be extremely curious to observe the gradation of arts and accidents
which enabled him in the end to fulfill those oracles, and to display that merit
to the world. Diocletian was successively promoted to the government of Maesia,
the honors of the consulship, and the important command of the guards of the
palace. He distinguished his abilities in the Persian war; and, after the death
of Numerian, the slave, by the confession and judgment of his rivals, was
declared the most worthy of the Imperial throne. The malice of religious zeal,
whilst it arraigns the savage fierceness of his colleague Maximian, has
affected to cast suspicions on the personal courage of the emperor Diocletian
Lactantius (or whoever was the author of the little treatise De Mortibus
Persecutorum) accuses Diocletian of timidity in two places, c. 7, 8. In chap.
9, he says of him, "erat in omni tumultu meticulosus et animi disjectus."
. It would not be easy to persuade us of the cowardice of a soldier of fortune,
who acquired and preserved the esteem of the legions, as well as the favor of
so many warlike princes. Yet even calumny is sagacious enough to discover and
to attack the most vulnerable part. The valor of Diocletian was never found
inadequate to his duty or to the occasion; but he appears not to have possessed
the daring and generous spirit of a hero, who courts danger and fame, disdains
artifice, and boldly challenges the allegiance of his equals. His abilities
were useful rather than splendid; a vigorous mind, improved by the experience
and study of mankind; dexterity and application in business; a judicious
mixture of liberality and economy, of mildness and rigor; profound
dissimulation under the disguise of military frankness; steadiness to pursue
his ends; flexibility to vary his means; and above all, the great art of
submitting his own passions, as well as those of others, to the interest of his
ambition, and of coloring his ambition with the most specious pretenses of
justice and public utility. Like Augustus, Diocletian may be considered as the
founder of a new empire. Like the adopted son of Caesar, he was distinguished
as a statesman rather than as a warrior; nor did either of those princes employ
force, whenever their purpose could be effected by policy.

The victory of Diocletian was remarkable for His clemency and victory.
its singular mildness. A people accustomed to applaud the clemency of the
conqueror, if the usual punishments of death, exile, and confiscation were
inflicted with any degree of temper and equity, beheld, with the most pleasing
astonishment, a civil war, the flames of which were extinguished in the field
of battle. Diocletian received into his confidence Aristobulus, the principal
minister of the house of Carus, respected the lives, the fortunes, and the
dignity of his adversaries, and even continued in their respective stations the
greater number of the servants of Carinus In this encomium, Aurelius Victor
seems to convey a just, though indirect, censure of the cruelty of Constantius.
It appears from the Fasti, that Aristobulus remained prefect of the city, and
that he ended with Diocletian, the consulship which he had commenced with
Carinus.
. It is not improbable that motives of prudence might assist the humanity of
the artful Dalmatian; of these servants, many had purchased his favor by
secret treachery; in others, he esteemed their grateful fidelity to an
unfortunate master. The discerning judgment of Aurelian, of Probus, and of
Carus, had filled the several departments of the state and army with officers
of approved merit, whose removal would have injured the public service, without
promoting the interest of the successor. Such a conduct, however, displayed to
the Roman world the fairest prospect of the new reign, and the emperor affected
to confirm this favorable prepossession, by declaring, that, among all the
virtues of his predecessors, he was the most ambitious of imitating the humane
philosophy of Marcus Antoninus Aurelius Victor styles Diocletian, "Parentem
potius quam Dominum." See Hist. August. p. 30.
.

The first considerable action of his reign seemed Association and character of
Maximian.
to evince his sincerity as well as his moderation. After the example of
Marcus, he gave himself a colleague in the person of Maximian, A. D 286. April
1.
on whom he bestowed at first the title of Caesar, and afterward that of
Augustus The question of the time when Maximian received the honors of Caesar
and Augustus has divided modern critics, and given occasion to a great deal of
learned wrangling. I have followed M. de Tillemont (Histoire des Empereurs,
tom, iv. p. 500 -- 505.), who has weighed the several reasons and difficulties
with his scrupulous accuracy.
. But the motives of his conduct, as well as the object of his choice, were of
a very different nature from those of his admired predecessor. By investing a
luxurious youth with the honors of the purple, Marcus had discharged a debt of
private gratitude, at the expense, indeed, of the happiness of the state. By
associating a friend and a fellow-soldier to the labors of government,
Diocletian, in a time of public danger, provided for the defense both of the
East and of the West. Maximian was born a peasant, and, like Aurelian, in the
territory of Sirmium. Ignorant of letters In an oration delivered before him
(Panegyr. Vet. ii. 8.), Mamertinus expresses a doubt whether his hero, in
imitating the conduct of Hannibal and Scipio, had ever heard of their names.
From thence we may fairly infer, that Maximian was more desirous of being
considered as a soldier than as a man of letters: and it is in this manner that
we can often translate the language of flattery into that of truth.
, careless of laws, the rusticity of his appearance and manners still betrayed
in the most elevated fortune the meanness of his extraction. War was the only
art which he professed. In a long course of service he had distinguished
himself on every frontier of the empire; and though his military talents were
formed to obey rather than to command, though, perhaps, he never attained the
skill of a consummate general, he was capable, by his valor, constancy, and
experience, of executing the most arduous undertakings. Nor were the vices of
Maximian less useful to his benefactor. Insensible to pity, and fearless of
consequences, he was the ready instrument of every act of cruelty which the
policy of that artful prince might at once suggest and disclaim. As soon as a
bloody sacrifice had been offered to prudence or to revenge, Diocletian, by his
seasonable intercession, saved the remaining few whom he had never designed to
punish, gently censured the severity of his stern colleague, and enjoyed the
comparison of a golden and an iron age, which was universally applied to their
opposite maxims of government. Notwithstanding the difference of their
characters, the two emperors maintained, on the throne, that friendship which
they had contracted in a private station. The haughty turbulent spirit of
Maximian, so fatal afterward to himself and to the public peace, was
accustomed to respect the genius of Diocletian, and confessed the ascendant of
reason over brutal violence Lactantius de M. P. c. 8. Aurelius Victor. As among
the Panegyrics, we find orations pronounced in praise of Maximian, and others
which flatter his adversaries at his expense, we derive some knowledge from the
contrast.
. From a motive either of pride or superstition, the two emperors assumed the
titles, the one of Jovius, the other of Herculius. Whilst the motion of the
world (such was the language of their venal orators) was maintained by the
all-seeing wisdom of Jupiter, the invincible arm of Hercules purged the earth
from monsters and tyrants See the second and third Panegyrics, particularly
iii. 3. 10. 14. but it would be tedious to copy the diffuse and affected
expressions of their false eloquence. With regard to the titles, consult Aurel.
Victor, Lactantius de M. P. c. 52. Spanheim de Usu Numisinatum, etc. Dissertat.
xii. 8.
.

But even the omnipotence of Jovius and Herculius Association of two Caesar's.
was insufficient to sustain the weight of the public administration. The
prudence of Diocletian discovered, that the empire, assailed Galerius and
Constantius.
on every side by the barbarians, required on every side the presence of a
great army, and of A. D. 292. March 1.
an emperor. With this view he resolved once more to divide his unwieldy power,
and with the inferior title of Caesar's, to confer on two generals of approved
merit an equal share of the sovereign authority Aurelius Victor. Victor in
Epitome. Eutrop. ix. 22. Lactant. de M. P. c. 8. Hieronym. in Chron.
. Galerius, surnamed Armentarius, from his original profession of a herdsman,
and Constantius, who from his pale complexion had acquired the denomination of
Chlorus It is only among the modern Greeks that Tillemont can discover his
appellation of Chlorus. Any remarkable degree of paleness seems inconsistent
with the rubor mentioned in Panegyric, v. 19.
, were the two persons invested with the second honors of the Imperial purple.
In describing the country, extraction, and manners of Herculius, we have
already delineated those of Galerius, who was often, and not improperly, styled
the younger Maximian, though, in many instances both of virtue and ability, he
appears to have possessed a manifest superiority over the elder. The birth of
Constantius was less obscure than that of his colleagues. Eutropius, his
father, was one of the most considerable nobles of Dardania, and his mother was
the niece of the emperor Claudius Julian, the grandson of Constantius, boasts
that his family was derived from the warlike Maesians. Misopogon, p. 348. The
Dardanians dwelt on the edge of Maesia.
. Although the youth of Constantius had been spent in arms, he was endowed with
a mild and amiable disposition, and the popular voice had long since
acknowledged him worthy of the rank which he at last attained. To strengthen
the bonds of political, by those of domestic union, each of the emperors
assumed the character of a father to one of the Caesar's, Diocletian to
Galerius, and Maximian to Constantius; and each obliging them to repudiate
their former wives, bestowed his daughter in marriage on his adopted son
Galerius married Valeria, the daughter of Diocletian; if we speak with
strictness, Theodora, the wife of Constantius, was daughter only to the wife of
Maximian. Spanheim Dissertat. xi. 2.
. These four princes distributed among themselves the wide extent of the Roman
empire. The defense of Departments and harmony of the four princes.
Gaul, Spain This division agrees with that of the four praefectures; yet there
is some reason to doubt whether Spain was not a province of Maximian. See
Tillemont, tom. iv. p. 517.
, and Britain, was entrusted to Constantius: Galerius was stationed on the
banks of the Danube, as the safeguard of the Illyrian provinces. Italy and
Africa were considered as the department of Maximian; and for his peculiar
portion, Diocletian reserved Thrace, Egypt, and the rich countries of Asia.
Every one was sovereign within his own jurisdiction; but their united authority
extended over the whole monarchy; and each of them was prepared to assist his
colleagues with his counsels or presence. The Caesar's, in their exalted rank,
revered the majesty of the emperors, and the three younger princes invariably
acknowledged, by their gratitude and obedience, the common parent of their
fortunes. The suspicious jealousy of power found not any place among them; and
the singular happiness of their union has been compared to a chorus of music,
whose harmony was regulated and maintained by the skilful hand of the first
artist Julian in Caesarib. p. 315. Spanheim's notes to the French translation,
p. 122.
.

This important measure was not carried into Series of events.
execution till about six years after the association of Maximian, and that
interval of time had not been destitute of memorable incidents. But we have
preferred, for the sake of perspicuity, first to describe the more perfect form
of Diocletian's government, and afterward to relate the actions of his reign,
following rather the natural order of the events, than the dates of a very
doubtful chronology.

The first exploit of Maximian, though it is mentioned in a few words by our
imperfect writers, A. D. 287. State of the peasants of Gaul.
deserves, from its singularity, to be recorded in a history of human manners.
He suppressed the peasants of Gaul, who, under the appellation of Bagaudae The
general name of Bagaudae (in the signification of Rebels) continued till the
fifth century in Gaul. Some critics derive it from a Celtic word Bagad, a
tumultuous assembly. Scaliger ad Eusebius. Du Cange Glossar.
, had risen in a general insurrection; very similar to those, which in the
fourteenth century successively afflicted both France and England Chronique de
Froissart, vol. i. c. 182. ii. 73 -- 79. The naivete of his story is lost in
our best modern writers.
. It should seem, that very many of those institutions, referred by an easy
solution to the feudal system, are derived from the Celtic barbarians. When
Caesar subdued the Gauls, that great nation was already divided into three
orders of men; the clergy, the nobility, and the common people. The first
governed by superstition, the second by arms, but the third and last was not of
any weight or account in their public councils. It was very natural for the
Plebeians, oppressed by debt, or apprehensive of injuries, to implore the
protection of some powerful chief, who acquired over their persons and
property, the same absolute rights as, among the Greeks and Romans, a master
exercised over his slaves Caesar de Bell. Gallic. vi. 13. Orgetorix, the
Helvetian, could arm for his defense a body of ten thousand slaves.
. The greatest part of the nation was gradually reduced into a state of
servitude; compelled to perpetual labor on the estates of the Gallic nobles,
and confined to the soil, either by the real weight of fetters, or by the no
less cruel and forcible restraints of the laws. During the long series of
troubles which agitated Gaul, from the reign of Gallienus to that of
Diocletian, the condition of these servile peasants was peculiarly miserable;
and they experienced at once the complicated tyranny of their masters, of the
barbarians, of the soldiers, and of the officers of the revenue Their
oppression and misery are acknowledged by Eumenius (Panegyr. vi. 8.), Gallias
efferatus injuriis.
.

Their patience was at last provoked into despair. Their rebellion,
On every side they rose in multitudes, armed with rustic weapons, and with
irresistible fury. The ploughman became a foot soldier, the shepherd mounted on
horseback, the deserted villages and open towns were abandoned to the flames,
and the ravages of the peasants equalled those of the fiercest barbarians
Panegyr. Vet. ii. 4. Aurelius Victor.
. They asserted the natural rights of men, but they asserted those rights with
the most savage cruelty. The Gallic nobles justly dreading their revenge,
either took refuge in the fortified cities, or fled from the wild seen of
anarchy. The peasants reigned without control; and two of their most daring
leaders had the folly and rashness to assume the Imperial ornaments Aelianus
and Amandus. We have medals coined by them. Goltzius in These. R. A. p. 117. 121.
. Their power soon expired at the approach of the legions. The strength of
union and discipline obtained an easy victory over a licentious and divided
multitude Levibus proeliis domuit. Eutrop. ix. 20.
. A severe retaliation was inflicted and chastisement.
on the peasants who were found in arms: the affrighted remnant returned to
their respective habitations, and their unsuccessful effort for freedom served
only to confirm their slavery. So strong and uniform is the current of popular
passions, that we might almost venture, from very scanty materials, to relate
the particulars of this war; but we are not disposed to believe that the
principal leaders Aelianus and Amandus were Christians The fact rests indeed on
very slight authority, a life of St. Babolinus, which is probably of the
seventh century. See Duchesne Scriptores Rer. Francicar. tom. i. p. 662.
, or to insinuate, that the rebellion, as [it] happened in the time of Luther,
was occasioned by the abuse of those benevolent principles of Christianity,
which inculcate the natural freedom of mankind.

Maximian had no sooner recovered Gaul from A. D. 287.
the hands of the peasants, than he lost Britain by Revolt of Carausius in
Britain.
the usurpation of Carausius. Ever since the rash but successful enterprise of
the Franks under the reign of Probus, their daring countrymen had constructed
squadrons of light brigantines, in which they incessantly ravaged the provinces
adjacent to the ocean Aurelius Victor calls them Germans. Eutropius (ix. 21.)
gives them the name of Saxons. But Eutropius lived in the ensuing century, and
seems to use the language of his own times.
. To repel their desultory incursions, it was found necessary to create a naval
power; and the judicious measure was prosecuted with prudence and vigor.
Gessoriacum, or Boulogne, in the straights of the British channel, was chosen
by the emperor for the station of the Roman fleet; and the command of it was
entrusted to Carausius, a Menapian of the meanest origin The three expressions
of Eutropius, Aurelius Victor, and Eumenius, "vilissime natus," "Bataviae
alumnus," and "Menapiae civis," give us a very doubtful account of the birth of
Carausius. Dr. Stukely, however, (Hist. of Carausius, p. 62.) chooses to make
him a native of St. David's, and a prince of the blood royal of Britain. The
former idea he had found in Richard of Cirencester, p. 44.
, but who had long signalized his skill as a pilot, and his valor as a
soldier. The integrity of the new admiral corresponded not with his abilities.
When the German pirates sailed from their own harbors, he connived at their
passage, but he diligently intercepted their return, and appropriated to his
own use an ample share of the spoil which they had acquired. The wealth of
Carausius was, on this occasion, very justly considered as an evidence of his
guilt; and Maximian had already given orders for his death. But the crafty
Menapian foresaw and prevented the severity of the emperor. By his liberality
he had attached to his fortunes the fleet which he commanded, and secured the
barbarians in his interest. From the port of Boulogne he sailed over to
Britain, persuaded the legion, and the auxiliaries which guarded that island,
to embrace his party, and boldly assuming, with the Imperial purple, the title
of Augustus, defied the justice and the arms of his injured sovereign Panegyr.
v. 12. Britain at this time was secure, and slightly guarded.
.

When Britain was thus dismembered from the Importance of Britain.
empire, its importance was sensibly felt, and its loss sincerely lamented. The
Romans celebrated, and perhaps magnified, the extent of that noble island,
provided on every side with convenient harbors; the temperature of the
climate, and the fertility of the soil, alike adapted for the production of
corn or of vines; the valuable minerals with which it abounded; its rich
pastures covered with innumerable flocks, and its woods free from wild beasts
or venomous serpents. Above all, they regretted the large amount of the revenue
of Britain, whilst they confessed, that such a province well deserved to become
the seat of an independent monarchy Panegyr. Vet. v. 11. vii. 9. The orator
Eumenius wished to exalt the glory of the hero (Constantius), with the
importance of the conquest. Notwithstanding our laudable partiality for our
native country, it is difficult to conceive, that, in the beginning of the
fourth century, England deserved all these commendations. A century and half
before, it hardly paid its own establishment. See Appian in Proaem.
. During the space of seven years, it was possessed Power of Carausius,
by Carausius; and fortune continued propitious to a rebellion, supported with
courage and ability. The British emperor defended the frontiers of his
dominions against the Caledonians of the North, invited, from the continent, a
great number of skilful artists, and displayed, on a variety of coins that are
still extant, his taste and opulence. Born on the confines of the Franks, he
courted the friendship of that formidable people, by the flattering imitation
of their dress and manners. The bravest of their youth he enlisted among his
land or sea forces; and in return for their useful alliance, he communicated to
the barbarians the dangerous knowledge of military and naval arts. Carausius
still preserved the possession of Boulogne and the adjacent country. His fleets
rode triumphant in the channel, commanded the mouths of the Seine and of the
Rhine, ravaged the coasts of the ocean, and diffused beyond the columns of
Hercules the terror of his name. Under his command, Britain, destined in a
future age to obtain the empire of the sea, already assumed its natural and
respectable station of a maritime power As a great number of medals of
Carausius are still preserved, he is become a very favorite object of
antiquarian curiosity, and every circumstance of his life and actions has been
investigated with sagacious accuracy. Dr. Stukely in particular has devoted a
large volume to the British emperor. I have used his materials, and rejected
most of his fanciful conjectures.
.

By seizing the fleet of Boulogne, Carausius had deprived his master of the
means of pursuit A. D. 289. acknowledged by the other emperors.
and revenge. And when, after a vast expense of time and labor, a new armament
was launched into the water When Mamertinus pronounced his first panegyric, the
naval preparations of Maximian were completed; and the orator presaged an
assured victory. His silence in the second Panegyric, might alone inform us,
that the expedition had not succeeded.
, the Imperial troops, unaccustomed to that element, were easily baffled and
defeated by the veteran sailors of the usurper. This disappointed effort was
soon productive of a treaty of peace. Diocletian and his colleague, who justly
dreaded the enterprising spirit of Carausius, resigned to him the sovereignty
of Britain, and reluctantly admitted their perfidious servant to a
participation of the Imperial honors Aurelius Victor, Eutropius, and the
medals (Pax Auggg.) inform us of this temporary reconciliation: though I will
not presume (as Dr. Stukely has done, Medallic History of Carausius, p. 86,
etc.) to insert the identical articles of the treaty.
. But the adoption of the two Caesar's restored new vigor to the Roman arms;
and while the Rhine was guarded by the presence of Maximian, his brave
associate Constantius assumed the conduct of the British war. His first
enterprise was against the important place of Boulogne. A stupendous mole,
raised across the entrance of the harbor, intercepted all hopes of relief. The
town surrendered after an obstinate A. D. 292.
defense; and a considerable part of the naval strength of Carausius fell into
the hands of the besiegers. During the three years which Constantius employed
in preparing a fleet adequate to the conquest of Britain, he secured the coast
of Gaul, invaded the country of the Franks, and deprived the usurper of the
assistance of those powerful allies.

Before the preparations were finished, Constantius A. D. 294.
received the intelligence of the tyrant's His death.
death, and it was considered as a sure presage of the approaching victory. The
servants of Carausius imitated the example of treason, which he had given. He
was murdered by his first minister Alectus, and the assassin succeeded to his
power and to his danger. But he possessed not equal abilities either to
exercise the one, or to repel the other. He beheld, with anxious terror, the
opposite shores of the continent, already filled with arms, with troops, and
with vessels; for Constantius had very prudently divided his forces, that he
might likewise divide the attention and resistance of the enemy. The attack was
at length made by the principal squadron, A. D. 296.
which, under the command of the prefect Recovery of Britain by Constantius.
Asclepiodatus, an officer of distinguished merit, had been assembled in the
mouth of the Seine. So imperfect in those times was the art of navigation, that
orators have celebrated the daring courage of the Romans, who ventured to set
sail with a side-wind, and on a stormy day. The weather proved favorable to
their enterprise. Under the cover of a thick fog, they escaped the fleet of
Alectus, which had been stationed off the Isle of Wight to receive them, landed
in safety on some part of the western coast, and convinced the Britons, that a
superiority of naval strength will not always protect their country from a
foreign invasion. Asclepiodatus had no sooner disembarked the Imperial troops,
than he set fire to his ships; and, as the expedition proved fortunate, his
heroic conduct was universally admired. The usurper had posted himself near
London, to expect the formidable attack of Constantius, who commanded in person
the fleet of Boulogne; but the descent of a new enemy required his immediate
presence in the West. He performed this long march in so precipitate a manner,
that he encountered the whole force of the prefect with a small body of
harassed and disheartened troops. The engagement was soon terminated by the
total defeat and death of Allectus; a single battle, as it has often happened,
decided the fate of this great island; and when Constantius landed on the
shores of Kent, he found them covered with obedient subjects. Their
acclamations were loud and unanimous; and the virtues of the conqueror may
induce us to believe, that they sincerely rejoiced in a revolution, which,
after a separation of ten years, restored Britain to the body of the Roman
empire With regard to the recovery of Britain, we obtain a few hints from
Aurelius Victor and Eutropius.
.

Britain had none but domestic enemies to Defense of the frontiers.
dread; and as long as the governors preserved their fidelity, and the troops
their discipline, the incursions of the naked savages of Scotland or Ireland
could never materially affect the safety of the province. The peace of the
continent, and the defense of the principal rivers which bounded the empire,
were objects of far greater difficulty and importance. The policy of
Diocletian, which inspired the councils of his associates, provided for the
public tranquillity, by encouraging a spirit of dissension among the
barbarians, and by strengthening the fortifications of the Roman limit. In the
East he fixed Fortifications.
a line of camps of Egypt to the Persian dominions, and, for every camp, he
instituted an adequate number of stationary troops, commanded by their
respective officers, and supplied with every kind of arms, from the new
arsenals which he had formed at Antioch, Emesa, and Damascus John Malela, in
Chron. Antiochen, tom. i. p. 408, 409.
. Nor was the precaution of the emperor less watchful against the well-known
valor of the barbarians of Europe. From the mouth of the Rhine to that of the
Danube, the ancient camps, towns, and citadels, were diligently reestablished,
and, in the most exposed places, new ones were skilfully constructed; the
strictest vigilance was introduced among the garrisons of the frontier, and
every expedient was practiced that could render the long chain of
fortifications firm and impenetrable Zosim. l. i. p. 3. That partial historian
seems to celebrate the vigilance of Diocletian, with a design of exposing the
negligence of Constantine; we may, however, listen to an orator, "Nam quid ego
alarm et cohortium castra percenseam, toto Rheni et Istri et Euphratis limite
restituta." Panegyr. Vet. iv. 18.
. A barrier so respectable was seldom violated, and the barbarians often turned
against each other their disappointed rage. The Goths, the Vandals, the
Gepidae, Dissentions of the barbarians.
the Burgundians, the Alemanni, wasted each others strength by destructive
hostilities, and whosoever vanquished, they vanquished the enemies of Rome. The
subjects of Diocletian enjoyed the bloody spectacle, and congratulated each
other, that the mischiefs of civil war were now experienced only by the
barbarians Ruunt omnes in sanguinem suum populi, quibus non contigit esse
Romany, obstinataeque feritatis poenas nunc sponte persolvunt. Panegyr. Vet.
iii. 16. Mamertinus illustrates the fact, by the example of almost all the
nations of the world.
.

Notwithstanding the policy of Diocletian, it was impossible to maintain an
equal and undisturbed Conduct of the emperors.
tranquillity during a reign of twenty years, and along a frontier of many
hundred miles. Sometimes the barbarians suspended their domestic animosities,
and the relaxed vigilance of the garrisons sometimes gave a passage to their
strength or dexterity. Whenever the provinces were invaded, Diocletian
conducted himself with that calm dignity which he always affected or possessed;
reserved his presence for such occasions as were worthy of his interposition,
never exposed his person or reputation to any unnecessary danger, ensured his
success by every means that prudence could suggest, and displayed, with
ostentation, the consequences of his victory. In wars of a more difficult
nature, and more doubtful event, he employed the rough valor of Maximian, and
that faithful soldier was content to ascribe his own victories to the wise
counsels and auspicious influence of his benefactor. But after the adoption of
the two Caesar's, the emperors themselves retiring to a Valor of the Caesar's.
less laborious scene of action, devolved on their adopted sons the defense of
the Danube and of the Rhine. The vigilant Galerius was never reduced to the
necessity of vanquishing an army of barbarians on the Roman territory He
complained, though not with the strictest truth; "Jam fluxisse annos quindecim
in quibus, in Illyrico, ad ripam Danubii relegatus cum gentibus barbaris
luctaret." Lactant. de M. P. c. 18.
. The brave and active Constantius delivered Gaul from a very furious inroad of
the Alemanni; and his victories of Langres and Vindonissa appear to have been
actions of considerable danger and merit. As he traversed the open country with
a feeble guard, he was encompassed on a sudden by the superior multitude of the
enemy. He retreated with difficulty toward Langres; but, in the general
consternation, the citizens refused to open their gates, and the wounded prince
was drawn up the wall by the means of a rope. But on the news of his distress,
the Roman troops hastened from all sides to his relief, and before the evening
he had satisfied his honor and revenge by the slaughter of six thousand
Alemanni In the Greek text of Eusebius, we read six thousand, a number which I
have preferred to the sixty thousand of Jerome, Orosius, Eutropius, and his
Greek translator Paeanius.
. From the monuments of those times, the obscure traces of several other
victories over the barbarians of Sarmatia and Germany might possibly be
collected; but the tedious search would not be rewarded either with amusement
or with instruction.

The conduct which the emperor Probus had Treatment of the barbarians.
adopted in the disposal of the vanquished, was imitated by Diocletian and his
associates. The captive barbarians, exchanging death for slavery, were
distributed among the provincials, and assigned to those districts (in Gaul,
the territories of Amiens, Beauvais, Cambray, Treves, Langres, and Troyes, are
particularly specified Panegyr. Vet. vii. 21.
) which had been depopulated by the calamities of war. They were usefully
employed as shepherds and husbandmen, but were denied the exercise of arms,
except when it was found expedient to enrol them in the military service. Nor
did the emperors refuse the property of lands, with a less servile tenure, to
such of the barbarians as solicited the protection of Rome. They granted a
settlement to several colonies of the Carpi, the Bastarnae, and the Sarmatians;
and, by a dangerous indulgence, permitted them in some measure to retain their
national manners and independence There was a settlement of the Sarmatians in
the neighborhood of Treves, which seems to have been deserted by those lazy
Barbarians: Ausonius speaks of them in his Moselle. Unde iter ingrediens
nemorosa per avia solum,
Et nulla humani spectans vestigia cultus
--
Arvaque Sauromatum nuper metata colonis.
There was a town of the Carpi in the Lower Maesia.


. Among the provincials, it was a subject of flattering exultation, that the
barbarian, so lately an object of terror, now cultivated their lands, drove
their cattle to the neighboring fair, and contributed by his labor to the
public plenty. They congratulated their masters on the powerful accession of
subjects and soldiers; but they forgot to observe, that multitudes of secret
enemies, insolent from favor, or desperate from oppression, were introduced
into the heart of the empire See the rhetorical exultation of Eumenius.
Panegyr. vii. 9.
.

While the Caesar's exercised their valor on the Wars of Africa and Egypt.
banks of the Rhine and Danube, the presence of the emperors was required on
the southern confines of the Roman world. From the Nile to mount Atlas, Africa
was in arms. A confederacy of five Moorish nations issued from their deserts to
invade the peaceful provinces Scaliger (Animadvers, ad Eusebius. p. 243.) decides
in his usual manner, that the Quinque gentiani, or five African nations, were
the five great cities, the Pentapolis of the inoffensive province of Cyrene.
. Julian had assumed the purple at Carthage After his defeat, Julian stabbed
himself with a dagger, and immediately leaped into the flames. Victor in
Epitome.
. Achilleus at Alexandria, and even the Blemmyes, renewed, or rather continued,
their incursions into the Upper Egypt. Scarcely any circumstances have been
preserved of the exploits of Maximian, in the western parts of Africa; but it
appears by the event, that the progress of his arms was rapid and decisive,
that he vanquished the fiercest barbarians of Mauritania, and that he removed
them from the mountains, whose inaccessible strength had inspired their
inhabitants with a lawless confidence, and habituated them to a life of rapine
and violence Tu ferocissimos Mauritaniae populos inaccessis montium jugis et
naturali munitione fidentes, expugnasti, recipisti, transtulisti. Panegyr. Vet.
vi. 8.
. A. D. 296.
Diocletian, on his side, opened the campaign in Conduct of Diocletian in Egypt.
Egypt by the siege of Alexandria, cut off the aqueducts which conveyed the
waters of the Nile into every quarter of that immense city See the description
of Alexandria, in Hirtius de Bell. Alexandrin. c. 5.
, and rendering his camp impregnable to the sallies of the besieged multitude,
he pushed his reiterated attacks with caution and vigor. After a siege of
eight months, Alexandria, wasted by the sword and by fire, implored the
clemency of the conqueror; but it experienced the full extent of his severity.
Many thousands of the citizens perished in a promiscuous slaughter, and there
were few obnoxious persons in Egypt who escaped a sentence either of death, or
at least of exile Eutrop. ix. 24. Orosius, vii. 25. John Malela in Chron.
Antioch. p. 409, 410. Yet Eumenius assures us, that Egypt was pacified by the
clemency of Diocletian.
. The fate of Eusiris and of Coptos was still more melancholy than that of
Alexandria; those proud cities, the former distinguished by its antiquity, the
latter enriched by the passage of the Indian trade, were utterly destroyed by
the arms and by the severe order of Diooletian Eusebius (in Chron.) places
their destruction several years sooner, and at a time when Egypt itself was in
a state of rebellion against the Romans.
. The character of the Egyptian nation, insensible to kindness, but extremely
susceptible of fear, could alone justify this excessive rigor. The seditions
of Alexandria had often affected the tranquillity and subsistence of Rome
itself. Since the usurpation of Firmus, the province of Upper Egypt,
incessantly relapsing into rebellion, had embraced the alliance of the savages
of Aechiopia. The number of the Blemmyes, scattered between the island of Meroe
and the Red Sea, was very inconsiderable, their disposition was unwarlike,
their weapons rude and inoffensive Strabo, l. xvii. p. 1. 172. Pomponius Mela,
l. i. c. 4. His words are curious, "Intra, si credere libet, vix homines
magisque semiferi; Aegipanes, et Blemmyes, et Satyri."
. Yet in the public disorders these barbarians, whom antiquity, shocked with
the deformity of their figure, had almost excluded from the human species,
presumed to rank themselves among the enemies of Rome Ausus sese inserere
fortunae et provocare arma Romana.
. Such had been the unworthy allies of the Egyptians; and while the attention
of the state was engaged in more serious wars, their vexatious inroads might
again harass the repose of the province. With a view of opposing to the
Blemmyes a suitable adversary, Diocletian persuaded the Nobatae, or people of
Nubia, to remove from their ancient habitations in the deserts of Lybia, and
resigned to them an extensive but unprofitable territory above Syene and the
cataracts of the Nile, with the stipulation, that they should ever respect and
guard the frontier of the empire. The treaty long subsisted; and till the
establishment of Christianity introduced stricter notions of religious worship,
it was annually ratified by a solemn sacrifice in the isle of Elephantine, in
which the Romans, as well as the barbarians, adored the same visible or
invisible powers of the universe See Procopius de Bell. Persic. l. i. c. 19.
.

At the same time that Diocletian chastised the past crimes of the Egyptians,
he provided for their future safety and happiness by many wise regulations
which were confirmed and enforced under the succeeding reigns He fixed the
public allowance of corn for the people of Alexandria, at two millions of
medimni; about four hundred thousand quarters. Chron. Paschal. p. 276. Procop.
Hist. Arcan. c. 26.
. One very remarkable edict, which he published, instead of being condemned as
the effect of jealous tyranny, deserves to be applauded as an act of prudence
and humanity. He caused a diligent inquiry to be made for all the He suppresses
books of alchymy.
ancient books which treated of the admirable art of making gold and silver,
and without pity committed them to the flames; apprehensive, as we are assured,
lest the opulence of the Egyptians should inspire them with confidence to rebel
against the empire John Antioch in Excerp. Valesian. p. 834. Suidas in
Diocletian.
. But if Diocletian had been convinced of the reality of that valuable art, far
from extinguishing the memory, he would have converted the operation of it to
the benefit of the public revenue. It is much more likely, that his good sense
discovered to him the folly of such magnificent pretensions, and that he was
desirous of preserving the reason and fortunes of his subjects from the
mischievous Novelty and progress of that art.
pursuit. It may be remarked, that these ancient books, so liberally ascribed
to Pythagoras, to Solomon, or to Hermes, were the pious frauds of more recent
adepts. The Greeks were inattentive either to the use or to the abuse of
chemistry. In that immense register, where Pliny has deposited the discoveries,
the arts, and the errors of mankind, there is not the least mention of the
transmutation of metals; and the persecution of Diocletian is the first
authentic event in the history of alchymy. The conquest of Egypt by the Arabs
diffused that vain science over the globe. Congenial to the avarice of the
human heart, it was studied in China as in Europe, with equal eagerness, and
with equal success. The darkness of the middle ages ensured a favorable
reception to every tale of wonder, and the revival of learning gave new vigor
to hope, and suggested more specious arts of deception. Philosophy, with the
aid of experience, has at length banished the study of alchymy; and the present
age, however desirous of riches, is content to seek them by the humbler means
of commerce and industry See a short history and confutation of Alchymy, in the
works of that philosophical compiler, La Mothe le Vayer, tom. i. p. 327-353.
.

The reduction of Egypt was immediately followed The Persian war.
by the Persian war. It was reserved for the reign of Diocletian to vanquish
that powerful nation, and to extort a confession from the successors of
Artaxerxes, of the superior majesty of the Roman empire.

We have observed under the reign of Valerian, that Armenia was subdued by the
perfidy and the Tiridates the Armenian.
arms of the Persians, and that, after the assassination of Chosroes, his son
Tiridates, the infant heir of the monarchy, was saved by the fidelity of his
friends, and educated under the protection of the emperors. Tiridates derived
from his exile such advantages as he could never have obtained on the throne of
Armenia; the early knowledge of adversity, of mankind, and of the Roman
discipline. He signalized his youth by deeds of valor, and displayed a
matchless dexterity, as well as strength, in every martial exercise, and even
in the less honorable contests of the Olympian games See the education and
strength of Tiridates in the Armenian history of Moses of Chorene, l. ii. c.
76. He could seize two wild bulls by the horns, and break them off with his
hands.
. Those qualities were more nobly exerted in the defense of his benefactor
Licinius If we give credit to the younger Victor, who supposes that in the year
323, Licinius was only sixty years of age, he could scarcely be the same person
as the patron of Tiridates; but we know from much better authority (Eusebius.
Hist. Ecclesiast. l. x. c. 8.), that Licinius was at that time in the last
period of old age: sixteen years before, he is represented with gray hairs, and
as the contemporary of Galerius. See Lactant. c. 32. Licinius was probably born
about the year 250.
. That officer, in the sedition A. D. 282.
which occasioned the death of Probus, was exposed to the most imminent danger,
and the enraged soldiers were forcing their way into his tent, when they were
checked by the single arm of the Armenian prince. The gratitude of Tiridates
contributed soon afterward to his restoration. I icinius was in every station
the friend and companion of Galerius, and the merit of Galerius, long before he
was raised to the dignity of Caesar, had been known and esteemed by Diocletian.
In the third year of that emperor's reign, Tiridates was invested with the
kingdom of Armenia. The justice of the measure was not less evident than its
expediency. It was time to rescue from the usurpation of the Persian monarch an
important territory, which, since the reign of Nero, had been always granted
under the protection of the empire to a younger branch of the house of Arsaces
See the sixty-second and sixty-third books of Dion Cassius.
.

When Tiridates appeared on the frontiers of Armenia, he was received with an
unfeigned transport of joy and loyalty. During twenty-six A. D. 286.
years, the country had experienced the real and His restoration to the throne
of Armenia.
imaginary hardships of a foreign yoke. The Persian monarchs adorned their new
conquest with magnificent buildings; but those monuments had been erected at
the expense of the people, and were abhorred as badges of slavery. The
apprehension of a revolt had inspired the most rigorous precautions: oppression
had been State of the country.
aggravated by insult, and the consciousness of the public hatred had been
productive of every measure that could render it still more implacable. We have
already remarked the intolerant spirit of the Magian religion. The statues of
the deified kings of Armenia, and the sacred images of the sun and moon, were
broke in pieces by the zeal of the conqueror; and the perpetual fire of Ormuzd
was kindled and preserved upon an altar erected on the summit of mount Bagavan
Moses of Chorene, Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 74. The statues had been erected by
Valarsaces, who reigned in Armenia about 130 years before Christ, and was the
first king of the family of Arsaces (see Moses Hist. Armen. l. ii. 2, 3.). The
deification of the Arsacides is mentioned by Justin (xli. 5.) and by Ammianus
Marcellinus (xxiii. 6.).
. It was natural, that a people exasperated by so many injuries, should arm
with zeal in the cause Revolt of the people and nobles.
of their independence, their religion, and their hereditary sovereign. The
torrent bore down every obstacle, and the Persian garrisons retreated before
its fury. The nobles of Armenia flew to the standard of Tiridates, all alleging
their past merit, offering their future service, and soliciting from the new
king those honors and rewards from which they had been excluded with disdain
under the foreign government The Armenian nobility was numerous and powerful.
Moses mentions many families which were distinguished under the reign of
Valarsaces (l. ii. 7.), and which still subsisted in his own time, about the
middle of the fifth century. See the preface of his Editors.
. The command of the army was bestowed on Artavasdes, whose father had saved
the infancy of Tiridates, and whose family had been massacred for that generous
action. The brother of Artavasdes obtained the government of a province. One of
the first military dignities was conferred on the fatrap Otas, a man of
singular temperance and fortitude, who presented to the king, his sister She
was named Chosroiduchta, and had not the os patulum like other women. (Hist.
Armen. l. ii. c. 79.) I do not understand the expression.
and a considerable treasure, both of which, in a sequestered fortress, Otas
had preserved from violation. Among the Armenian nobles appeared Story of Mamgo.
an ally, whose fortunes are too remarkable to pass unnoticed. His name was
Mamgo, his origin was Scythian, and the horde which acknowledged his authority,
had encamped a very few years before on the skirts of the Chinese empire In the
Armenian History (l. ii. 78.), as well as in the Geography (p. 367.), China is
called Zenia, or Zenastan. It is characterized by the production of silk, by
the opulence of the natives, and by their love of peace, above all the other
nations of the earth.
, which at that time extended as far as the neighborhood of Sogdiana Vou-ti,
the first emperor of the seventh dynasty, who then reigned in China, had
political transactions with Fergana, a province of Sogdiana, and is said to
have received a Roman embassy (Histoire des Huns, tom. i. p. 38.). In those
ages the Chinese kept a garrison at Kashgar, and one of their generals, about
the time of Trajan, marched as far as the Caspian sea. With regard to the
intercourse between China and the western countries, a curious memoir of M. de
Guignes may be consulted, in the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxxii. p. 355.
. Having incurred the displeasure of his master, Mamgo, with his followers,
retired to the banks of the Oxus, and implored the protection of Sapor. The
emperor of China claimed the fugitive, and alleged the rights of sovereignty.
The Persian monarch pleaded the laws of hospitality, and with some difficulty
avoided a war, by the promise that he would banish Mamgo to the uttermost parts
of the West; a punishment, as he described it, not less dreadful than death
itself. Armenia was chosen for the place of exile, and a large district was
assigned to the Scythian horde, on which they might feed their flocks and
herds, and remove their encampment from one place to another, according to the
different seasons of the year. They were employed to repel the invasion of
Tiridates; but their leader, after weighing the obligations and injuries which
he had received from the Persian monarch, resolved to abandon his party. The
Armenian prince, who was well acquainted with the merit as well as power of
Mamgo, treated him with distinguished respect; and by admitting him into his
confidence, acquired a brave and faithful servant, who contributed very
effectually to his restoration See Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 81.
.

For a while, fortune appeared to favor the The Persians recover Armenia.
enterprising valor of Tiridates. He not only expelled the enemies of his
family and country from the whole extent of Armenia, but in the prosecution of
his revenge he carried his arms, or at least his incursions, into the heart of
Assyria. The historian, who has preserved the name of Tiridates from oblivion,
celebrates, with a degree of national enthusiasm, his personal prowess; and, in
the true spirit of eastern romance, describes the giants and the elephants that
fell beneath his invincible arm. It is from other information that we discover
the distracted state of the Persian monarchy, to which the king of Armenia was
indebted for some part of his advantages. The throne was disputed by the
ambition of contending brothers; and Hormuz, after exerting without success the
strength of his own party, had recourse to the dangerous assistance of the
barbarians who inhabited the banks of the Caspian Sea Ipsos Persas ipsumque
Regem ascitis Saccis, et Russis, et Gellis, petit frater Ormies. Panegyric.
Vet. iii. 1. The Saccae were a nation of wandering Scythians, who encamped
toward the sources of the Oxus and the Jaxartes. The Gelli were the
inhabitants of Ghilan along the Caspian sea, and who so long, under the name of
Dilemites, infested the Persian monarchy. See d'Herbelot, Bibliotheque
Orientale.
. The civil war was, however, soon terminated, either by a victory, or by a
reconciliation; and Narses, who was universally acknowledged as king of Persia,
directed his whole force against the foreign enemy. The contest then became too
unequal; nor was the valor of the hero able to withstand the power of the
monarch. Tiridates, a second time expelled from the throne of Armenia, once
more took refuge in the court of the emperors. Narses soon reestablished his
authority over the revolted province; and loudly complaining of the protection
afforded by the Romans to rebels and fugitives, aspired to the conquest of the
East Moses of Chorene takes no notice of this second revolution, which I have
been obliged to collect from a passage of Ammianus Marcellinus (l. xxiii. 5.).
Lactantius speaks of the ambition of Narses, "Concitatus domesticis exemplis
avi sui Saporis ad occupandum orientem magnis copiis inhiabat." De Mort.
Persecut. c. 9.
.

Neither prudence nor honor could permit the War between the Persians and the
Romans.
emperors to forsake the cause of the Armenian king, and it was resolved to
exert the force of the empire in the Persian war. Diocletian, with A. D. 296.
the calm dignity which he constantly assumed, fixed his own station in the
city of Antioch, from whence he prepared and directed the military operations
We may readily believe, that Lactantius ascribes to cowardice the conduct of
Diocletian. Julian, in his oration, says, that he remained with all the forces
of the empire; a very hyperbolical expression.
. The conduct of the legions was entrusted to the intrepid valor of Galerius,
who, for that important purpose, was removed from the banks of the Danube to
those of the Euphrates. The armies soon encountered each other in the Defeat of
Galerius.
plains of Mesopotamia, and two battles were fought with various and doubtful
success: but the third engagement was of a more decisive nature; and the Roman
army received a total overthrow, which is attributed to the rashness of
Galerius, who, with an inconsiderable body of troops, attacked the innumerable
host of the Persians Our five abbreviators, Eutropius, Festus, the two Victors,
and Orosius, all relate the last and great battle; but Orosius is the only one
who speaks of the two former.
. But the consideration of the country that was the scene of action, may
suggest another reason for his defeat. The same ground on which Galerius was
vanquished, had been rendered memorable by the death of Crassus, and the
slaughter of ten legions. It was a plain of more than sixty miles, which
extended from the hills of Carrhae to the Euphrates; a smooth and barren
surface of sandy desert, without a hillock, without a tree, and without a
spring of fresh water The nature of the country is finely described by
Plutarch, in the life of Crassus, and by Xenophon, in the first book of the
Anabasis.
. The steady infantry of the Romans, fainting with heat and thirst, could
neither hope for victory if they preserved their ranks, nor break their ranks
without exposing themselves to the most imminent danger. In this situation they
were gradually encompassed by the superior numbers, harassed by the rapid
evolutions, and destroyed by the arrows of the barbarian cavalry. The king of
Armenia had signalized his valor in the battle, and acquired personal glory by
the public misfortune. He was pursued as far as the Euphrates; his horse was
wounded, and it appeared impossible for him to escape the victorious enemy. In
this extremity Tiridates embraced the only refuge which he saw before him: he
dismounted and plunged into the stream. His armor was heavy, the river very
deep, and at those parts at least half a mile in breadth See Foster's
Dissertation in the second volume of the translation of the Anabasis by
Spelman; which I will venture to recommend as one of the best versions extant.
; yet such was his strength and dexterity, that he reached in safety the
opposite bank Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 76. I have transferred this exploit of
Tiridates from an imaginary defeat to the real one of Galerius.
. With regard to the Roman general, we are ignorant of the circumstances of his
escape; but when he returned to Antioch, Diocletian received him, not with the
tenderness His reception by Diocletian.
of a friend and colleague, but with the indignation of an offended sovereign.
The haughtiest of men, clothed in his purple, but humbled by the sense of his
fault and misfortune, was obliged to follow the emperor's chariot above a mile
on foot, and to exhibit, before the whole court, the spectacle of his disgrace
Ammian. Marcellin. l. xiv. The mile, in the hands of Eutropius (ix. 24.), of
Festus (c. 25.), and of Orosius (vii. 25.), easily increased to several miles.
.

As soon as Diocletian had indulged his private Second campaign of Galerius.
resentment, and asserted the majesty of supreme power, he yielded to the
submissive entreaties of the Caesar, and permitted him to retrieve his own A.
D. 297.
honor as well as that of the Roman arms. In the room of the unwarlike troops
of Asia, which had most probably served in the first expedition, a second army
was drawn from the veterans and new levies of the Illyrian frontier, and a
considerable body of Gothic auxiliaries were taken into the Imperial pay
Aurelius Victor. Jornandes de Rebus Geticis, c. 21.
. At the head of a chosen army of twenty-five thousand men, Galerius again
passed the Euphrates; but, instead of exposing his legions in the open plains
of Mesopotamia, he advanced through the mountains of Armenia, where he found
the inhabitants devoted to his cause, and the country as favorable to the
operations of infantry, as it was inconvenient for the motions of cavalry
Aurelius Victor says, "Per Armeniam in hosts contendit, que ferme sola, seu
facilior vincendi via est." He followed the conduct of Trajan, and the idea of
Julius Caesar.
. Adversity had confirmed the Roman discipline, while the barbarians, His
victory.
elated by success, were become so negligent and remiss, that in the moment
when they least expected it, they were surprised by the active conduct of
Galerius, who, attended only by two horsemen, had with his own eyes secretly
examined the state and position of their camp. A surprise, especially in the
nightime, was for the most part fatal to a Persian army. Their horses were
tied, and generally shackled, to prevent their running away; and if an alarm
happened, a Persian had his housing to fix, his horse to bridle, and his
corslet to put on, before he could mount Xenophon's Anabasis, l. iii. For that
reason the Persian cavalry encamped sixty stadia from the enemy.
. On this occasion, the impetuous attack of Galerius spread disorder and dismay
over the camp of the barbarians. A slight resistance was followed by a dreadful
carnage, and, in the general confusion, the wounded monarch (for Narses
commanded his armies in person) fled toward the deserts of Media. His
sumptuous tents, and those of his satraps, afforded an immense booty to the
conqueror; and an incident is mentioned, which proves the rustic but martia
ignorance of the legions in the elegant superfluities of life. A bag of shining
leather filled with pearls, fell into the hands of a private soldier; he
carefully preserved the bag, but he threw away its contents, judging, that
whatever was of no use could not possibly be of any value The story is told by
Ammianus, l. xxii. Instead of saccum some read scutum.
. The principal loss of Narses was and behavior to his royal captives.
of a much more affecting nature. Several of his wives, his sisters, and
children, who had attended the army, were made captives in the defeat. But
though the character of Galerius had in general very little affinity with that
of Alexander, he imitated, after his victory, the amiable behavior of the
Macedonian toward the family of Darius. The wives and children of Narses were
protected from violence and rapine, conveyed to a place of safety, and treated
with every mark of respect and tenderness, that was due from a generous enemy,
to their age, their sex, and their royal dignity The Persians confessed the
Roman superiority in morals as well as in arms. Eutrop. ix. 24. But this
respect and gratitude of enemies is very seldom to be found in their own
accounts.
.

While the East anxiously expected the decision of this great contest, the
emperor Diocletian, Negotiation for peace.
having assembled in Syria a strong army of observation, displayed from a
distance the resources of the Roman power, and reserved himself for any future
emergency of the war. On the intelligence of the victory, he condescended to
advance toward the frontier; with a view of moderating, by his presence and
counsels, the pride of Galerius. The interview of the Roman princes at Nisibis
was accompanied with every expression of respect on one side, and of esteem on
the other. It was in that city that they soon afterward gave audience to the
ambassador of the Great King The account of the negotiation is taken from the
fragments of Peter the Patrician, in the Excerpta Legationum published in the
Byzantine Collection. Peter lived under Justinian; but it is very evident, by
the nature of his materials, that they are drawn from the most authentic and
respectable writers.
. The power, or at least the spirit of Narses, had been broken by his last
defeat; and he considered an immediate peace as the only means that could stop
the progress of the Roman arms. He dispatched Apharban, a servant who possessed
his favor and confidence, with a commission to negociate a treaty, or rather
to receive whatever conditions the conqueror should impose. Apharban opened the
conference by expressing Speech of the Persian ambassador.
his master's gratitude for the generous treatment of his family, and by
soliciting the liberty of those illustrious captives. He celebrated the valor
of Galerius without degrading the reputation of Narses, and thought it no
dishonor to confess the superiority of the victorious Caesar, over a monarch
who had surpassed in glory all the princes of his race. Notwithstanding the
justice of the Persian cause, he was empowered to submit the present
differences to the decision of the emperors themselves; convinced as he was,
that, in the midst of prosperity, they would not be unmindful of the
vicissitudes of fortune. Apharban concluded his discourse in the style of
eastern allegory, by observing that the Roman and Persian monarchies were the
two eyes of the world, which would remain imperfect and mutilated if either of
them should be put out.

It well becomes the Persians, replied Galerius, Answer of Galerius.
with a transport of fury, which seemed to convulse his whole frame, it well
becomes the Persians to expatiate on the vicissitudes of fortune, and calmly to
read us lectures on the virtues of moderation. Let them remember their own
moderation toward the unhappy Valerian. They vanquished him by fraud, they
treated him with indignity. They detained him till the last moment of his life
in shameful captivity, and after his death they exposed his body to perpetual
ignominy. Softening, however, his tone, Galerius insinuated to the ambassador,
that it had never been the practice of the Romans to trample on a prostrate
enemy; and that, on this occasion, they should consult their own dignity,
rather than the Persian merit. He dismissed Apharban with a hope, that Narses
would soon be informed on what conditions he might obtain, from the clemency of
the emperors, a lasting peace, and the restoration of his wives and children.
In this conference we may discover the fierce passions of Galerius, as well as
his deference to the superior wisdom and authority of Diocletian. The ambition
of the former grasped at the conquest of the East, and had proposed to reduce
Persia into the state of a province. The prudence of the latter, who adhered
Moderation of Diocletian.
to the moderate policy of Augustus and the Antonines, embraced the favorable
opportunity of terminating a successful war by an honorable and advantageous
peace Adeo Victor (says Aurelius) ut ni Valerius, cujus nutu omnia gerebantur,
abnuisset, Romani fasces in provinciam novam ferrentur. Verum pars terrarum
tamen nobis utilior quaesita.
.

In pursuance of their promise, the emperors soon afterward appointed Sicorius
Probus, one Conclusion
of their secretaries, to acquaint the Persian court with their final
resolution. As the minister of peace, he was received with every mark of
politeness and friendship; but, under the pretense of allowing him the
necessary repose after so long a journey, the audience of Probus was deferred
from day to day; and he attended the slow motions of the king, till at length
he was admitted to his presence, near the river Asprudus in Media. The secret
motive of Narses in this delay, had been to collect such a military force, as
might enable him, though sincerely desirous of peace, to negociate with the
greater weight and dignity. Three persons only assisted at this important
conference, the minister Apharban, the prefect of the guards, and an officer
who had commanded on the Armenian frontier He had been governor of Sumium (Pet.
Patricius in Excerpt. Legate. p. 30.). This province seems to be mentioned by
Moses of Chorene (Geograph. p. 360.), and lay to the East of Mount Ararat.
. The first condition proposed by the ambassador, is not at present of a very
intelligible nature; that the city of Nisibis might be established for the
place of mutual exchange, or, as we should formerly have termed it, for the
staple of trade, between the two empires. There is no difficulty in conceiving
the intention of the Roman princes to improve their revenue by some restraints
upon commerce; but as Nisibis was situated within their own dominions, and as
they were masters both of the imports and exports, it should seem, that such
restraints were the objects of an internal law, rather than of a foreign
treaty. To render them more effectual, some stipulations were probably required
on the side of the king of Persia, which appeared so very repugnant either to
his interest or to his dignity, that Narses could not be persuaded to subscribe
them. As this was the only article to which he refused his consent, it was no
longer insisted on; and the emperors either suffered the trade to flow in its
natural channels, or contented themselves with such restrictions, as it
depended on their own authority to establish.

As soon as this difficulty was removed, a solemn peace was concluded and
ratified between and articles of the treaty.
the two nations. The conditions of a treaty so glorious to the empire, and so
necessary to Persia, may deserve a more peculiar attention, as the history of
Rome presents very few transactions of a similar nature; most of her wars
having either been terminated by absolute conquest, or waged against barbarians
ignorant of the use of letters. I. The Aboras, or, as it is called by Xenophon,
The Aboras fixed as the limits between the empires.
the Araxes, was fixed as the boundary between the two monarchies By an error
of the geographer Ptolemy, the position of Singara is removed from the Aboras
to the Tigris, which may have produced the mistake of Peter, in assigning the
latter river for the boundary, instead of the former. The line of the Roman
frontier traversed, but never followed, the course of the Tigris.
. That river, which rose near the Tigris, was increased a few miles below
Nisibis, by the little stream of the Mygdonius, passed under the walls of
Singara, and fell into the Euphrates at Circesium, a frontier town, which, by
the care of Diocletian, was very strongly fortified Procopius de Edificiis, l.
ii. c. 6.
. Mesopotamia, the object of so many wars, was ceded to the empire; and the
Persians, by this treaty, renounced all pretensions to that great province. II.
They relinquished Cession of five provinces beyond the Tigris.
to the Romans five provinces beyond the Tigris Three of the provinces,
Zabdicene, Arzanene, and Carduene, are allowed on all sides. But instead of the
other two, Peter (in Excerpt. Leg. p. 30.) inserts Rehimene and Sophene. I have
preferred Ammianus (l. xxv. 7.), because it might be proved, that Sophene was
never in the hands of the Persians, either before the reign of Diocletian, or
after that of Jovian. For want of correct maps, like those of M. d'Anville,
almost all the moderns, with Tillemont and Valesius at their head, have
imagined, that it was in respect to Persia, and not to Rome, that the five
provinces were situate beyond the Tigris.
. Their situation formed a very useful barrier, and their natural strength was
soon improved by art and military skill. Four of these, to the north of the
river, were districts of obscure fame and inconsiderable extent; Intiline,
Zabdicene, Arzanene, and Moxoene: but on the east of the Tigris, the empire
acquired the large and mountainous territory of Carduene, the ancient seat of
the Carduchians, who preserved for many ages their manly freedom in the heart
of the despotic monarchies of Asia. The ten thousand Greeks traversed their
country, after a painful march, or rather engagement, of seven days; and it is
confessed by their leader, in his incomparable relation of the retreat, that
they suffered more from the arrows of the Carduchians, than from the power of
the Great King Xenophon's Anabasis, l. iv. Their bows were three cubits in
length, their arrows two; they rolled down stones that were each a wagon load.
The Greeks found a great many villages in that rude country.
. Their posterity, the Curds, with very little alteration either of name or
manners, acknowledged the nominal sovereignty of the Turkish sultan. III. It
Armenia.
is almost needless to observe, that Tiridates, the faithful ally of Rome, was
restored to the throne of his fathers, and that the rights of the Imperial
supremacy were fully asserted and secured. The limits of Armenia were extended
as far as the fortress of Sintha in Media, and this increase of dominion was
not so much an act of liberality as of justice. Of the provinces already
mentioned beyond the Tigris, the four first had been dismembered by the
Parthians from the crown of Armenia According to Eutropius (vi. 9. as the text
is represented by the best MSS.), the city of Tigranocerta was in Arzanene. The
names and situation of the other three may be faintly traced.
; and when the Romans acquired the possession of them, they stipulated, at the
expense of the usurpers, an ample compensation, which invested their ally with
the extensive and fertile country of Atropatene. Its principal city, in the
same situation perhaps as the modern Tauris, was frequently honored with the
residence of Tiridates; and as it sometimes bore the name of Ecbatana, he
imitated, in the buildings and fortifications, the splendid capital of the
Medes Compare Herodotus, l. i. c. 97. with Moses Choronens. Hist. Armen. l. ii.
c. 84. and the map of Armenia given by his editors.
. IV. The country of Iberia was Iberia.
barren, its inhabitants rude and savage. But they were accustomed to the use
of arms, and they separated from the empire barbarians much fiercer and more
formidable than themselves. The narrow defiles of Mount Caucasus were in their
hands, and it was in their choice, either to admit or to exclude the wandering
tribes of Sarmatia, whenever a rapacious spirit urged them to penetrate into
the richer climates of the South Hiberi, locorum potentes, Caspia via Sarmatam
in Armenios raptim effundunt. Tacit. Annal. vi. 34. See Strabon. Geograph. l.
xi. p. 764.
. The nomination of the kings of Iberia, which was resigned by the Persian
monarch to the emperors, contributed to the strength and security of the Roman
power in Asia Peter Patricius (in Excerpt. Leg. p. 30.) is the only writer who
mentions the Iberian article of the treaty.
. The East enjoyed a profound tranquillity during forty years; and the treaty
between the rival monarchies was strictly observed till the death of Tiridates;
when a new generation, animated with different views and different passions,
succeeded to the government of the world; and the grandson of Narses undertook
a long and memorable war against the princes of the house of Constantine.

The arduous work of rescuing the distressed Triumph of Diocletian and Maximian.
empire from tyrants and barbarians had now been completely achieved by a
succession of Illyrian peasants. As soon as Diocletian entered into the A. D.
303. Nov. 20.
twentieth year of his reign, he celebrated that memorable era, as well as the
success of his arms, by the pomp of a Roman triumph Eusebius. in Chron. Pagi ad
annum. Till the discovery of the treatise De Mortibus Persecutorum, it was not
certain that the triumph and the Vincenalia were celebrated at the same time.
. Maximian, the equal partner of his power, was his only companion in the glory
of that day. The two Caesar's had fought and conquered, but the merit of their
exploits was ascribed, according to the rigor of ancient maxims, to the
auspicious influence of their fathers and emperors At the time of the
Vincenalia, Galerius seems to have kept his station on the Danube. See Lactant.
de M. P. c. 38.
. The triumph of Diocletian and Maximian was less magnificent perhaps than
those of Aurelian and Probus, but it was dignified by several circumstances of
superior fame and good fortune. Africa and Britain, the Rhine, the Danube, and
the Nile, furnished their respective trophies; but the most distinguished
ornament was of a more singular nature, a Persian victory followed by an
important conquest. The representations of rivers, mountains, and provinces,
were carried before the Imperial car. The images of the captive wives, the
sisters, and the children of the Great King, afforded a new and grateful
spectacle to the vanity of the people Eutropius (ix. 27.) mentions them as a
part of the triumph. As the persons had been restored to Narses, nothing more
than their images could be exhibited.
. In the eyes of posterity this triumph is remarkable, by a distinction of a
less honorable kind. It was the last that Rome ever beheld. Soon after this
period, the emperors ceased to vanquish, and Rome ceased to be the capital of
the empire.

The spot on which Rome was founded, Long absence of the emperors from Rome.
had been consecrated by ancient ceremonies and imaginary miracles. The
presence of some god, or the memory of some hero, seemed to animate every part
of the city, and the empire of the world had been promised to the Capitol Livy
gives us a speech of Camillus on that subject (v. 51 -- 55.), full of eloquence
and sensibility, in opposition to a design of removing the seat of government
from Rome to the neighboring city of Veii.
. The native Romans felt and confessed the power of this agreeable illusion. It
was derived from their ancestors, had grown up with their earliest habits of
life, and was protected, in some measure, by the opinion of political utility.
The form and the seat of government were intimately blended together, nor was
it esteemed possible to transport the one without destroying the other Julius
Caesar was reproached with the intention of removing the empire to Ilium or
Alexandria. See Sueton. in Caesar. c. 79. According to the ingenious conjecture
of Le Fevre and Dacier, the third ode of the third book of Horace was intended
to divert Augustus from the execution of a similar design.
. But the sovereignty of the capital was gradually annihilated in the extent of
conquest; the provinces rose to the same level, and the vanquished nations
acquired the name and privileges, without imbibing the partial affections, of
Romans. During a long period, however, the remains of the ancient constitution,
and the influence of custom, preserved the dignity of Rome. The emperors,
though perhaps of African or Illyrian extraction, respected their adopted
country, as the seat of their power, and the center of their extensive
dominions. The emergencies of war very frequently required their presence on
the frontiers; but Diocletian and Maximian were the first Roman princes who
fixed, in time of peace, their ordinary residence in the provinces; and their
conduct, however it might be suggested by private motives, was justified by
very specious considerations of policy. The court of the emperor of the West
was, for Their residence at Milan
the most part, established at Milan, whose situation, at the foot of the Alps,
appeared far more convenient than that of Rome, for the important purpose of
watching the motions of the barbarians of Germany. Milan soon assumed the
splendor of an Imperial city. The houses are described as numerous and
well built; the manners of the people as polished and liberal. A circus, a
theater, a mint, a palace, baths, which bore the name of their founder
Maximian; porticoes adorned with statues, and a double circumference of walls,
contributed to the beauty of the new capital; nor did it seem oppressed even by
the proximity of Rome See Aurelius Victor, who likewise mentions the buildings
erected by Maximian at Carthage, probably during the Moorish war. We shall
insert some verses of Ausonius de Clar. Urb. v. Et Mediolani mira omnia: copia
rerum;
Innumerae cultaeque domus; facunda virorum
Ingenia, et mores laeti, tum duplice muro
Amplificata loci species; populique voluptas
Circus; et inclusi moles cuneata Theatri
Templa, Palatinaeque arces, opulensque Moneta,
Et regio Herculei celebris sub honor lavacri.
Cunctaque marmoreis ornata Perystyla signis;
Moeniaque in valli formam circumdata labro,
Omnia quae magnis operum velut aemula formis
Excellunt: nec junctae premit vicinia Romae.

. To rival the majesty of Rome was the ambition likewise of Diocletian, who
employed his leisure, and Nicomedia.
and the wealth of the East, in the embellishment of Nicomedia, a city placed
on the verge of Europe and Asia, almost at an equal distance between the Danube
and the Euphrates. By the taste of the monarch, and at the expense of the
people, Nicomedia acquired, in the space of a few years, a degree of
magnificence which might appear to have required the labor of ages, and became
inferior only to Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, in extent or populousness
Lactant. de M. P. c. 17. Libanius, Orat. viii. p. 203.
. The life of Diocletian and Maximian was a life of action, and a considerable
portion of it was spent in camps, or in their long and frequent marches; but
whenever the public business allowed them any relaxation, they seem to have
retired with pleasure to their favorite residences of Nicomedia and Milan.
Till Diocletian, in the twentieth year of his reign, celebrated his Roman
triumph, it is extremely doubtful whether he ever visited the ancient capital
of the empire. Even on that memorable occasion his stay did not exceed two
months. Disgusted with the licentious familiarity of the people, he quitted
Rome with precipitation thirteen days before it was expected that he should
have appeared in the senate, invested with the ensigns of the consular dignity
Lactant. de M. P. c. 17. On a similar occasion Ammianus mentions the dicacitas
plebis, as not very agreeable to an Imperial ear. (See l. xvi. c. 10.)
.

The dislike expressed by Diocletian toward Debasement of Rome and of the
senate.
Rome and Roman freedom, was not the effect of momentary caprice, but the
result of the most artful policy. That crafty prince had framed a new system of
Imperial government, which was afterward completed by the family of
Constantine; and as the image of the old constitution was religiously preserved
in the senate, he resolved to deprive that order of its small remains of power
and consideration. We may recollect, about eight years before the elevation of
Diocletian, the transient greatness, and the ambitious hopes, of the Roman
senate. As long as that enthusiasm prevailed, many of the nobles imprudently
displayed their zeal in the cause of freedom; and after the successors of
Probus had withdrawn their countenance from the republican party, the senators
were unable to disguise their impotent resentment. As the sovereign of Italy,
Maximian was entrusted with the care of extinguishing this troublesome, rather
than dangerous, spirit, and the task was perfectly suited to his cruel temper.
The most illustrious members of the senate, whom Diocletian always affected to
esteem, were involved, by his colleague, in the accusation of imaginary plots;
and the possession of an elegant villa, or a well cultivated estate, was
interpreted as a convincing evidence of guilt Lactantius accuses Maximian of
destroying fictis criminationibus lumina senatus (De M. P. c. 8.). Aurelius
Victor speaks very doubtfully of the faith of Diocletian toward his friends.
. The camp of the Praetorians, which had so long oppressed, began to protect,
the majesty of Rome; and as those haughty troops were conscious of the decline
of their power, they were naturally disposed to unite their strength with the
authority of the senate. By the prudent measures of Diocletian, the numbers of
the Praetorians were insensibly reduced, their privileges abolished Truncatae
vires urbis, imminuto praetoriarum cohortium atque in armis vulgi numero.
Aurelius Victor. Lactantius attributes to Galerius the prosecution of the same
plan (c. 26.).
, and their place supplied by two New bodies of guards, Jovians and Herculians.
faithful legions of Illyricum, who, under the new titles of Jovians and
Herculians, were appointed to perform the service of the Imperial guards They
were old corpse stationed in Illyricum; and according to the ancient
establishment, they each consisted of six thousand men. They had acquired much
reputation by the use of the plumbatae, or darts loaded with lead. Each soldier
carried five of these, which he darted from a considerable distance, with great
strength and dexterity. See Vegetius, i. 17.
. But the most fatal though secret wound, which the senate received from the
hands of Diocletian and Maximian, was inflicted by the inevitable operation of
their absence. As long as the emperors resided at Rome, that assembly might be
oppressed, but it could scarcely be neglected. The successors of Augustus
exercised the power of dictating whatever laws their wisdom or caprice might
suggest; but those laws were ratified by the sanction of the senate. The model
of ancient freedom was preserved in its deliberations and decrees; and wise
princes, who respected the prejudices of the Roman people, were in some measure
obliged to assume the language and behavior suitable to the general and first
magistrate of the republic. In the armies and in the provinces, they displayed
the dignity of monarchs; and when they fixed their residence at a distance from
the capital, they for ever laid aside the dissimulation which Augustus had
recommended to his successors. In the exercise of the legislative as well as
the executive power, the sovereign advised with his ministers, instead of
consulting the great council of the nation. The name of the senate was
mentioned with honor till the last period of the empire; the vanity of its
members was still flattered with honorary distinctions See the Theodosian Code,
l. vi. tit. ii. with Godefroy's commentary.
; but the assembly which had so long been the source, and so long the
instrument of power, was respectfully suffered to sink into oblivion. The
senate of Rome, losing all connection with the Imperial court and the actual
constitution, was left a venerable but useless monument of antiquity on the
Capitoline hill.

When the Roman princes had lost sight of the senate and of their ancient
capital, they easily Civil magistracies laid aside.
forgot the origin and nature of their legal power. The civil offices of
consul, of proconsul, of censor, and of tribune, by the union of which it had
been formed, betrayed to the people its republican extraction. Those modest
titles were laid aside See the 12th dissertation in Spanheim's excellent work
de Usu Numismatum. From medals, inscriptions, and historians, he examines every
title separately, and traces it from Augustus to the moment of its disappearing.
; and if they still distinguished their high station by the appellation of
Emperor, or IMPERATOR, that word was understood in a new and more dignified
sense, and no longer denoted the general of the Roman armies, but the sovereign
of the Roman world. The name of Emperor, which was at first of a military
nature, Imperial dignity and titles.
was associated with another of a more servile kind. The epithet of DOMINUS, or
Lord, in its primitive signification, was expressive, not of the authority of a
prince over his subjects, or of a commander over his soldiers, but of the
despotic power of a master over his domestic slaves Pliny (in Panegyr. c. 3.
55, etc.) speaks of Dominus with execration, as synonymous to Tyrant, and
opposite to Prince. And the same Pliny regularly gives that title (in the tenth
book of the epistles) to his friend rather than master, the virtuous Trajan.
This strange contradiction puzzles the commentators, who think, and the
translators, who can write.
. Viewing it in that odious light, it had been rejected with abhorrence by the
first Caesar's. Their resistance insensibly became more feeble, and the name
less odious; till at length the style of our Lord and Emperor, was not only
bestowed by flattery, but was regularly admitted into the laws and public
monuments. Such lofty epithets were sufficient to elate and satisfy the most
excessive vanity; and if the successors of Diocletian still declined the title
of King, it seems to have been the effect not so much of their moderation as of
their delicacy. Wherever the Latin tongue was in use (and it was the language
of government throughout the empire), the Imperial title, as it was peculiar to
themselves, conveyed a more respectable idea than the name of King, which they
must have shared with an hundred barbarian chieftains; or which, at the best,
they could derive only from Romulus or from Tarquin. But the sentiments of the
East were very different from those of the West. From the earliest period of
history, the sovereigns of Asia had been celebrated in the Greek language by
the title of BASILEUS, or King; and since it was considered as the first
distinction among men, it was soon employed by the servile provincials of the
East, in their humble addresses to the Roman throne Synesius de Regno, Edit.
Petav. p. 15. I am indebted for this quotation to the Abbe de la Bleterie.
. Even the attributes, or at least the titles of the DIVINITY, were usurped by
Diocletian and Maximian, who transmitted them to a succession of Christian
emperors See Vendale de Consecratione, p. 354, etc. It was customary for the
emperors to mention (in the preamble of laws) their numen, sacred majesty,
divine oracles, etc. According to Tillemont, Gregory of Nazianzen complains
most bitterly of the profanation, especially when it was practiced by an Arian
emperor.
. Such extravagant compliments, however, soon lose their impiety by losing
their meaning; and when the ear is once accustomed to the sound, they are heard
with indifference as vague though excessive prosessions of respect.

From the time of Augustus to that of Diocletian, Diocletian assumes the
diadem, and introduces the Persian ceremonial.
the Roman princes conversing in a familiar manner among their fellow-citizens,
were saluted only with the same respect that was usually paid to senators and
magistrates. Their principal distinction was the Imperial or military robe of
purple; whilst the senatorial garment was marked by a broad, and the equestrian
by a narrow, band or stripe of the same honorable color. The pride, or rather
the policy, of Diocletian, engaged that artful prince to introduce the stately
magnificence of the court of Persia See Spanheim de Usu Numismat. Dissertat.
xii.
. He ventured to assume the diadem, an ornament detested by the Romans as the
odious ensign of royalty, and the use of which had been considered as the most
desperate act of the madness of Caligula. It was no more than a broad white
fillet set with pearls, which encircled the emperor's head. The sumptuous robes
of Diocletian and his successors were of silk and gold; and it is remarked with
indignation, that even their shoes were studded with the most precious gems.
The access to their sacred person was every day rendered more difficult, by the
institution of new forms and ceremonies. The avenues of the palace were
strictly guarded by the various schools, as they began to be called, of
domestic officers. The interior apartments were entrusted to the jealous
vigilance of the eunuchs; the increase of whose numbers and influence was the
most infallible symptom of the progress of despotism. When a subject was at
length admitted to the Imperial presence, he was obliged, whatever might be his
rank, to fall prostrate on the ground, and to adore, according to the eastern
fashion, the divinity of his lord and master Aurelius Victor. Eutropius ix. 26.
It appears by the Panegyrists, that the Romans were soon reconciled to the name
and ceremony of adoration.
. Diocletian was a man of sense, who, in the course of private as well as
public life, had formed a just estimate both of himself and of mankind: nor is
it easy to conceive, that in substituting the manners of Persia to those of
Rome, he was seriously actuated by so mean a principle as that of vanity. He
flattered himself, that an ostentation of splendor and luxury would subdue the
imagination of the multitude; that the monarch would be less exposed to the
rude license of the people and the soldiers, as his person was secluded from
the public view; and that habits of submission would insensibly be productive
of sentiments of veneration. Like the modesty affected by Augustus, the state
maintained by Diocletian was a theatrical representation; but it must be
confessed, that of the two comedies, the former was of a much more liberal and
manly character than the latter. It was the aim of the one to disguise, and the
object of the other to display, the unbounded power which the emperors
possessed over the Roman world.

Ostentation was the first principle of the new New form of administration, two
Augusti, and two Caesar's.
system instituted by Diocletian. The second was division. He divided the
empire, the provinces, and every branch of the civil as well as military
administration. He multiplied the wheels of the machine of government, and
rendered its operations less rapid but more secure. Whatever advantages, and
whatever defects might attend these innovations, they must be ascribed in a
very great degree to the first inventor; but as the new frame of policy was
gradually improved and completed by succeeding princes, it will be more
satisfactory to delay the consideration of it till the season of its full
maturity and perfection The innovations introduced by Diocletian, are chiefly
deduced, 1st, from some very strong passages in Lactantius; and, 2dly, from the
new and various offices, which, in the Theodosian code, appear already
established in the beginning of the reign of Constantine.
. Reserving, therefore, for the reign of Constantine a more exact picture of
the new empire, we shall content ourselves with describing the principal and
decisive outline, as it was traced by the hand of Diocletian. He had associated
three colleagues in the exercise of the supreme power; and as he was convinced
that the abilities of a single man were inadequate to the public defense, he
considered the joint administration of four princes not as a temporary
expedient, but as a fundamental law of the constitution. It was his intention,
that the two elder princes should be distinguished by the use of the diadem,
and the title of Augusti: that, as affection or esteem might direct their
choice, they should regularly call to their assistance two subordinate
colleagues; and that the Caesar's, rising in their turn to the first rank,
should supply an uninterrupted succession of emperors. The empire was divided
into four parts. The East and Italy were the most honorable, the Danube and
the Rhine the most laborious stations. The former claimed the presence of the
Augusti, the latter were entrusted to the administration of the Caesar's. The
strength of the legions was in the hands of the four partners of sovereignty,
and the despair of successively vanquishing four formidable rivals, might
intimidate the ambition of an aspiring general. In their civil government, the
emperors were supposed to exercise the undivided power of the monarch, and
their edicts, inscribed with their joint names, were received in all the
provinces, as promulgated by their mutual councils and authority.
Notwithstanding these precautions, the political union of the Roman world was
gradually dissolved, and a principle of division was introduced, which, in the
course of a few years, occasioned the perpetual separation of the eastern and
western empires.

The system of Diocletian was accompanied Increase of taxes.
with another very material disadvantage, which cannot even at present be
totally overlooked; a more expensive establishment, and consequently an
increase of taxes, and the oppression of the people. Instead of a modest family
of slaves and freedmen, such as had contented the simple greatness of Augustus
and Trajan, three or four magnificent courts were established in the various
parts of the empire, and as many Roman kings contended with each other and with
the Persian monarch for the vain superiority of pomp and luxury. The number of
ministers, of magistrates, of officers, and of servants, who filled the
different departments of the state, was multiplied beyond the example of former
times; and (if we may borrow the warm expression of a contemporary), when the
proportion of those who received, exceeded the proportion of those who
contributed, the provinces were oppressed by the weight of tributes Lactant. de
M. P. c. 7.
. From this period to the extinction of the empire, it would be easy to deduce
an uninterrupted series of clamours and complaints. According to his religion
and situation, each writer chooses either Diocletian, or Constantine, or Valens,
or Theodosius, for the object of his invectives; but they unanimously agree in
representing the burden of the public impositions, and particularly the
land tax and capitation, as the intolerable and increasing grievance of their
own times. From such a concurrence, an impartial historian, who is obliged to
extract truth from satire, as well as from panegyric, will be inclined to
divide the blame among the princes whom they accuse, and to ascribe their
exactions much less to their personal vices, than to the uniform system of
their administration. The emperor Diocletian was indeed the author of that
system; but during his reign, the growing evil was confined within the bounds
of modesty and discretion, and he deserves the reproach of establishing
pernicious precedents, rather than of exercising actual oppression Indicta lex
nova quae sane illorum temporum modestia tolerabilis, in perniciem processit.
Aurel. Victor, who has treated the character of Diocletian with good sense,
though in bad Latin.
. It may be added, that his revenues were managed with prudent economy; and
that after all the current expenses were discharged, there still remained in
the Imperial treasury an ample provision either for judicious liberality or for
any emergency of the state.

It was in the twenty-first year of his reign that Diocletian executed his
memorable resolution of Abdication of Diocletian and Maximian.
abdicating the empire; an action more naturally to have been expected from the
elder or the younger Antoninus, than from a prince who had never practiced the
lessons of philosophy either in the attainment or in the use of supreme power.
Diocletian acquired the glory of giving to the world the first example of a
resignation Solus omnium, post conditum Romanum Imperium, qui extanto fastigio
sponte ad privatae vitae statum civilitatemque remearet. Eutrop. ix. 28.
, which has not been very frequently imitated by succeeding monarchs. The
parallel of Charles the Fifth, Resemblance to Charles the Fifth.
however, will naturally offer itself to our mind, not only since the eloquence
of a modern historian has rendered that name so familiar to an English reader,
but from the very striking resemblance between the characters of the two
emperors, whose political abilities were superior to their military genius, and
whose specious virtues were much less the effect of nature than of art. The
abdication of Charles appears to have been hastened by the vicissitude of
fortune; and the disappointment of his favorite schemes urged him to
relinquish a power which he found inadequate to his ambition. But the reign of
Diocletian had flowed with a tide of uninterrupted success; nor was it till
after he had vanquished all his enemies, and accomplished all his designs, that
he seems to have entertained any serious thoughts of resigning the empire.
Neither Charles nor Diocletian were arrived at a very advanced period of life;
since the one was only fifty-five, and the other was no more than fifty-nine
years of age; but the active life of those princes, their wars and journies,
the cares of royalty, and their application to business, had already impaired
their constitution, and brought on the infirmities of a premature old age The
particulars of the journey and illness are taken from Lactantius (c. 17.), who
may sometimes be admitted as an evidence of public facts, though very seldom of
private anecdotes.
.

Notwithstanding the severity of a very cold and rainy winter, Diocletian left
Italy soon after A. D. 304. Long illness of Diocletian.
the ceremony of his triumph, and began his progress toward the East round the
circuit of the Illyrian provinces. From the inclemency of the weather, and the
fatigue of the journey, he soon contracted a slow illness; and though he made
easy marches, and was generally carried in a close litter, his disorder, before
he arrived at Nicomedia, about the end of the summer, was become very serious
and alarming. During the whole winter he was confined to his palace; his danger
inspired a general and unaffected concern; but the people could only judge of
the various alterations of his health, from the joy or consternation which they
discovered in the countenances and behavior of his attendants. The rumor of
his death was for some time universally believed, and it was supposed to be
concealed, with a view to prevent the troubles that might have happened during
the absence of the Caesar Galerius. At length, however, on the first of March,
Diocletian once more appeared in public, but so pale and emaciated, that he
could scarcely have been recognized by those to whom his person was the most
familiar. It was time to put an end to the painful struggle, which he had His
prudence.
sustained during more than a year, between the care of his health and that of
his dignity. The former required indulgence and relaxation, the latter
compelled him to direct, from the bed of sickness, the administration of a
great empire. He resolved to pass the remainder of his days in honorable
repose, to place his glory beyond the reach of fortune, and to relinquish the
theater of the world to his younger and more active associates Aurelius Victor
ascribes the abdication, which had been so variously accounted for, to two
causes. 1st, Diocletian's contempt of ambition; and 2dly, His apprehension of
impending troubles. One of the panegyrists (vi. 9.) mentions the age and
infirmities of Diocletian, as a very natural reason for his retirement.
.

The ceremony of his abdication was performed in a spacious plain, about three
miles from Nicomedia. The emperor ascended a lofty throne, and in a speech,
full of reason and dignity, declared his intention, both to the people and to
the soldiers who were assembled on this extraordinary occasion. As soon as he
had divested A. D. 305. May 1.
himself of the purple, he withdrew from the gazing multitude; and traversing
the city in a covered chariot, proceeded, without delay, to the favorite
retirement which he had chosen in his native country of Dalmatia. On the same
Compliance of Maximian.
day, which was the first of May The difficulties as well as mistakes attending
the dates both of the year and of the day of Diocletian's abdication, are
perfectly cleared up by Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. p. 525. Note
19, and by Pagi ad annum.
, Maximian, as it had been previously concerted, made his resignation of the
Imperial dignity at Milan. Even in the splendor of the Roman triumph,
Diocletian had meditated his design of abdicating the government. As he wished
to secure the obedience of Maximian, he exacted from him, either a general
assurance that he would submit his actions to the authority of his benefactor,
or a particular promise that he would descend from the throne, whenever he
should receive the advice and the example. This engagement, though it was
confirmed by the solemnity of an oath before the altar of the Capitoline
Jupiter See Panegyr. Veter. vi. 9. The oration was pronounced after Maximian
had reassumed the purple.
, would have proved a feeble restraint on the fierce temper of Maximian, whose
passion was the love of power, and who neither desired present tranquillity nor
future reputation. But he yielded, however reluctantly, to the ascendant which
his wiser colleague had acquired over him, and retired, immediately after his
abdication, to a villa in Lucania, where it was almost impossible that such an
impatient spirit could find any lasting tranquillity.

Diocletian, who, from a servile origin, had Retirement of Diocletian at Salona.
raised himself to the throne, passed the nine last years of his life in a
private condition. Reason had dictated, and content seems to have accompanied,
his retreat, in which he enjoyed for a long time the respect of those princes
to whom he had resigned the possession of the world Eumenius pays him a very
fine compliment: At enim divinum illum virum, qui primus imperium et
participavit et posuit, consilii et facti sui non poenitet; nec amisisse se
putat quod sponte transcripsit. Felix beatusque vere quem vestra, tantorum
principum, colunt obsequia privatum. Panegyr. Vet. vii. 15.
. It is seldom that minds, long exercised in business, have formed any habits
of conversing with themselves, and in the loss of power they principally regret
the want of occupation. The amusements of letters and of devotion, which afford
so many resources in solitude, were incapable of fixing the attention of
Diocletian; but he had preserved, or at least he soon recovered, a taste for
the most innocent as well as natural pleasures, and his leisure hours were
sufficiently employed in building, planting, and gardening. His answer to
Maximian is deservedly celebrated. He was solicited by that restless old man to
reassume His philosophy,
the reins of government, and the Imperial purple. He rejected the temptation
with a smile of pity, calmly observing, that if he could show Maximian the
cabbages which he had planted with his own hands at Salona, he should no longer
be urged to relinquish the enjoyment of happiness for the pursuit of power We
are obliged to the younger Victor for this celebrated bon mot. Eutropius
mentions the thing in a more general manner.
. In his conversations with his friends, he frequently acknowledged, that of
all arts, the most difficult was the art of reigning; and he expressed himself
on that favorite topic with a degree of warmth which could be the result only
of experience. How often, was he accustomed to say, is it the interest of four
or five ministers to combine together to deceive their sovereign! Secluded from
mankind by his exalted dignity, the truth is concealed from his knowledge; he
can see only with their eyes, he hears nothing but their misrepresentations. He
confers the most important offices upon vice and weakness, and disgraces the
most virtuous and deserving among his subjects. By such infamous arts, added
Diocletian, the best and wisest princes are sold to the venal corruption of
their courtiers Hist. August. p. 223, 224. Vopiscus had learned this
conversation from his father.
. A just estimate of greatness, and the assurance of immortal fame, improve our
relish for the pleasures of retirement; but the Roman emperor had filled too
important a character in the world, to enjoy without alloy the comforts and
security of a private condition. It was impossible that he could remain
ignorant of the troubles which afflicted the empire after his abdication. It
was impossible that he could be indifferent to their consequences. Fear,
sorrow, and discontent, sometimes pursued him into the solitude of Salona. His
tenderness, or at least his pride, was deeply wounded by the misfortunes of his
wife and daughter; and the last moments of Diocletian were embittered by some
affronts, which Licinius and Constantine might have spared the father of so
many emperors, and the first author of their own fortune. A report, though of a
very and death. A. D. 313.
doubtful nature, has reached our times, that he prudently withdrew himself
from their power by a voluntary death The younger Victor slightly mentions the
report. But as Diocletian had disobliged a powerful and successful party, his
memory has been loaded with every crime and misfortune. It has been affirmed
that he died raving mad, that he was condemned as a criminal by the Roman
senate, etc.
.

Before we dismiss the consideration of the life Description of Salona and the
adjacent country.
and character of Diocletian, we may, for a moment, direct our view to the
place of his retirement. Salona, a principal city of his native province of
Dalmatia, was near two hundred Roman miles (according to the measurement of the
public highways) from Aquileia and the confines of Italy, and about two hundred
and seventy from Sirmium, the usual residence of the emperors whenever they
visited the Illyrian frontier See the Itiner. p. 269. 272. Edit. Wessel.
. A miserable village still preserves the name of Salona; but so late as the
sixteenth century, the remains of a theater, and a confused prospect of broken
arches and marble columns, continued to attest its ancient splendor The Abate
Fortis, in his Viaggio in Dalmazia, p. 43. (printed at Venice in the year 1774,
in two small volumes in quarto) quotes a MS. account of the antiquities of
Salona, composed by Giambattista Giustiniani about the middle of the xvith
century.
. About six or seven miles from the city, Diocletian constructed a magnificent
palace, and we may infer, from the greatness of the work, how long he had
meditated his design of abdicating the empire. The choice of a spot which
united all that could contribute either to health or to luxury, did not require
the partiality of a native. The soil was dry and fertile, the air is pure and
wholesome, and though extremely hot during the summer months, this country
seldom feels those sultry and noxious winds, to which the coasts of Istria and
some parts of Italy are exposed. The views from the palace are no less
beautiful than the soil and climate were inviting. Toward the west lies the
fertile shore that stretches along the Hadriatic, in which a number of small
islands are scattered in such a manner, as to give this part of the sea the
appearance of a great lake. On the north side lies the bay, which led to the
ancient city of Salona; and the country beyond it, appearing in sight, forms a
proper contrast to that more extensive prospect of water, which the Hadriatic
presents both to the south and to the east. Toward the north, the view is
terminated by high and irregular mountains, situated at a proper distance, and,
in many places, covered with villages, woods, and vineyards Adam's antiquities
of Diocletian's palace at Spalatro, p. 6. We may add a circumstance or two from
the Abate Fortis: the little stream of the Hyader, mentioned by Lucan, produces
most exquisite trout, which a sagacious writer, perhaps a monk, supposes to
have been one of the principal reasons that determined Diocletian in the choice
of his retirement. Fortis, p. 45. The same author (p. 38.) observes, that a
taste for agriculture is reviving at Spalatro; and that an experimental farm
has lately been established near the city, by a society of Gentlemen.
.

Though Constantine, from a very obvious prejudice, affects to mention the
palace of Diocletian with contempt Constantin. Orat. ad Coetum Sanct. c. 25. In
this sermon, the emperor, or the bishop who composed it for him, affects to
relate the miserable end of all the persecutors of the church.
, yet one of their successors, Of Diocletian's palace.
who could only see it in a neglected and mutilated state, celebrates its
magnificence in terms of the highest admiration Constantin. Porphyr. de Statu
Imper. p. 86.
. It covered an extent of ground consisting of between nine and ten English
acres. The form was quadrangular, flanked with sixteen towers. Two of the sides
were near six hundred, and the other two near seven hundred feet in length. The
whole was constructed of a beautiful freestone, extracted from the
neighboring quarries of Trau or Tragutium, and very little inferior to marble
itself. Four streets, intersecting each other at right angles, divided the
several parts of this great edifice, and the approach to the principal
apartment was from a very stately entrance, which is still denominated the
Golden Gate. The approach was terminated by a peristylium of granite columns,
on one side of which we discover the square temple of Aesculapius, on the other
the octagon temple of Jupiter. The latter of those deities Diocletian revered
as the patron of his fortunes, the former as the protector of his health. By
comparing the present remains with the precepts of Vitruvius, the several parts
of the building, the baths, bedchamber, the atrium, the basilica, and the
Cyzicene, Corinthian, and Egyptian halls, have been described with some degree
of precision, or at least of probability. Their forms were various, their
proportions just, but they were all attended with two imperfections, very
repugnant to our modern notions of taste and convenience. These stately rooms
had neither windows nor chimnies. They were lighted from the top (for the
building seems to have consisted of no more than one story), and they received
their heat by the help of pipes that were conveyed along the walls. The range
of principal apartments was protected toward the south-west, by a portico of
five hundred and seventeen feet long, which must have formed a very noble and
delightful walk, when the beauties of painting and sculpture were added to
those of the prospect.

Had this magnificent edifice remained in a solitary country, it would have
been exposed to the ravages of time; but it might, perhaps, have escaped the
rapacious industry of man. The village of Aspalathus D'Anville, Geographie
Ancienne, tom. i. p. 162.
, and long afterward the provincial town of Spalatro, have grown out of its
ruins. The golden gate now opens into the marketplace. St. John the Baptist
has usurped the honors of Aesculapius: and the temple of Jupiter, under the
protection of the Virgin, is converted into the cathedral church. For this
account of Diocletian's palace, we are principally indebted to an ingenious
artist of our own time and country, whom a very liberal curiosity carried into
the heart of Dalmatia Messieurs Adam and Clerisseau, attended by two
draughtsmen, visited Spalatro in the month of July 1757. The magnificent work
which their journey produced, was published in London seven years afterward.
. But there is room to suspect, that the elegance of his designs and engraving
has somewhat flattered the objects which it was their purpose to represent. We
Decline of the arts.
are informed by a more recent and very judicious traveller, that the awful
ruins of Spalatro are not less expressive of the decline of the arts, than of
the greatness of the Roman empire in the time of Diocletian I shall quote the
words of the Abate Fortis. E'bastevolmente nota agli amatori dell'Architettura,
e dell'Antichita, l'opera del Signor ADAMS, che a donato molto a que' superbi
vestigi coll'abituale eleganza del suo toccalapis e del bulino. In generale la
rozzezza del scalpello, e'l cativo gusto del secolo vi gareggiano colla
magnificenza del fabricato. See Viaggio in Dalmazia, p. 40.
. If such was indeed the state of architecture, we must naturally believe that
painting and sculpture had experienced a still more sensible decay. The
practice of architecture is directed by a few general and even mechanical
rules. But sculpture, and above all, painting, propose to themselves the
imitation not only of the forms of nature, but of the characters and passions
of the human soul. In those sublime arts, the dexterity of the hand is of
little avail, unless it is animated by fancy, and guided by the most correct
taste and observation.

It is almost unnecessary to remark, that the Of letters.
civil distractions of the empire, the license of the soldiers, the inroads of
the barbarians, and the progress of despotism, had proved very unfavourable to
genius, and even to learning. The succession of Illyrian princes restored the
empire, without restoring the sciences. Their military education was not
calculated to inspire them with the love of letters; and even the mind of
Diocletian, however active and capacious in business, was totally uninformed by
study or speculation. The professions of law and physic are of such common use
and certain profit, that they will always secure a sufficient number of
practitioners, endowed with a reasonable degree of abilities and knowledge; but
it does not appear that the students in those two faculties appeal to any
celebrated masters who have flourished within that period. The voice of poetry
was silent. History was reduced to dry and confused abridgments, alike
destitute of amusement and instruction. A languid and affected eloquence was
still retained in the pay and service of the emperors, who encouraged not any
arts except those which contributed to the gratification of their pride, or the
defense of their power The orator Eumenius was secretary to the emperors
Maximian and Constantius, and Professor of Rhetoric in the college of Autun.
His salary was six hundred thousand sesterces, which, according to the lowest
computation of that age, must have exceeded three thousand pounds a year. He
generously requested the permission of employing it in rebuilding the college.
See his Oration De restaurandis scholis; which, though not exempt from vanity,
may atone for his panegyrics.
.

The declining age of learning and of mankind is marked, however, by the rise
and rapid progress The new Platonists.
of the new Platonists. The school of Alexandria silenced those of Athens; and
the ancient sects enrolled themselves under the banners of the more fashionable
teachers, who recommended their system by the novelty of their method, and the
austerity of their manners. Several of these masters, Ammonius, Plotinus,
Amelius, and Porphyry Porphyry died about the time of Diocletian's abdication.
The life of his master Plotinus, which he composed, will give us the most
complete idea of the genius of the sect, and the manners of its professors.
This very curious piece is inserted in Fabricius, Bibliotheca Graeca, tom. iv.
p. 88-148.
, were men of profound thought, and intense application; but by mistaking the
true object of philosophy, their labors contributed much less to improve than
to corrupt the human understanding. The knowledge that is suited to our
situation and powers, the whole compass of moral, natural, and mathematical
science, was neglected by the new Platonists; whilst they exhausted their
strength in the verbal disputes of metaphysics, attempted to explore the
secrets of the invisible world, and studied to reconcile Aristotle with Plato,
on subjects of which both these philosophers were as ignorant as the rest of
mankind. Consuming their reason in these deep but unsubstantial meditations,
their minds were exposed to illusions of fancy. They flattered themselves that
they possessed the secret of disengaging the soul from its corporeal prison;
claimed a familiar intercourse with demons and spirits; and, by a very
singular revolution, converted the study of philosophy into that of magic. The
ancient sages had derided the popular superstition; after disguising its
extravagance by the thin pretense of allegory, the disciples of Plotinus and
Porphyry became its most zealous defenders. As they agreed with the Christians
in a few mysterious points of faith, they attacked the remainder of their
theological system with all the fury of civil war. The new Platonists would
scarcely deserve a place in the history of science, but in that of the church
the mention of them will very frequently occur.

CHAP. XIV. Troubles after the Abdication of Diocletian. -- Death of
Constantius. -- Elevation of Constantine and Maxentius. -- Six Emperors at the
same Time. -- Death of Maximian and Galerius. -- Victories of Constantine over
Maxentius and Licinius. -- Reunion of the Empire under the Authority of
Constantine.
THE balance of power established by Diocletian subsisted no longer than while
it was sustained by the firm and dexterous hand of Period of civil wars and
confusion.
the founder. It required such a fortunate mixture of different tempers and
abilities, as could scarcely be found or even expected a second time; A. D. 305
-- 323.
two emperors without jealousy, two Caesar's without ambition, and the same
general interest invariably pursued by four independent princes. The abdication
of Diocletian and Maximian was succeeded by eighteen years of discord and
confusion. The empire was afflicted by five civil wars; and the remainder of
the time was not so much a state of tranquillity as a suspension of arms
between several hostile monarchs, who, viewing each other with an eye of fear
and hatred, strove to increase their respective forces at the expense of their
subjects.

As soon as Diocletian and Maximian had resigned the purple, their station,
according to the Character and situation of Constantius.
rules of the new constitution, was filled by the two Caesar's, Constantius and
Galerius, who immediately assumed the title of Augustus M. de Montesquieu
(Considerations sur la Grandeur et la Decadence des Romans, c. 17.) supposes,
on the authority of Orosius and Eusebius, that, on this occasion, the empire,
for the first time, was really divided into two parts. It is difficult,
however, to discover in what respect the plan of Galerius differed from that of
Diocletian.
. The honors of seniority and precedence were allowed to the former of those
princes, and he continued, under a new appellation, to administer his ancient
department of Gaul, Spain, and Britain. The government of those ample provinces
was sufficient to exercise his talents, and to satisfy his ambition. Clemency,
temperance, and moderation, distinguished the amiable character of Constantius,
and his fortunate subjects had frequently occasion to compare the virtues of
their sovereign with the passions of Maximian, and even with the arts of
Diocletian Hic non modo amabilis, sed etiam venerabilis Gallis suit; praecipue
quod Diocletiani suspectam prudentiam, et Maximiani sanguinariam violentiam
imperio ejus evaserant. Eutrop. Breviar. x. 1.
. Instead of imitating their eastern pride and magnificence, Constantius
preserved the modesty of a Roman prince. He declared, with unaffected
sincerity, that his most valued treasure was in the hearts of his people, and
that, whenever the dignity of the throne, or the danger of the state, required
any extraordinary supply, he could depend with confidence on their gratitude
and liberality Divitiis Provincialium (mel. provinciarum) ac privatorum
studens, fisci commoda non admodum affectans; ducensque melius publicas opes a
privatis haberi, quam intra unum claustrum reservari. Id. ibid. He carried this
maxim so far, that whenever he gave an entertainment, he was obliged to borrow
a service of plate.
. The provincials of Gaul, Spain, and Britain, sensible of his worth and of
their own happiness, reflected with anxiety on the declining health of the
emperor Constantius, and the tender age of his numerous family, the issue of
his second marriage with the daughter of Maximian.

The stern temper of Galerius was cast in a very different mould; and while he
commanded Of Galerius.
the esteem of his subjects, he seldom condescended to solicit their
affections. His fame in arms, and above all, the success of the Persian war,
had elated his haughty mind, which was naturally impatient of a superior, or
even of an equal. If it were possible to rely on the partial testimony of an
injudicious writer, we might ascribe the abdication of Diocletian to the
menaces of Galerius, and relate the particulars of a private conversation
between the two princes, in which the former discovered as much pusillanimity
as the latter displayed ingratitude and arrogance Lactantius de Mort.
Persecutor. c. 18. Were the particulars of this conference more consistent with
truth and decency, we might still ask, how they came to the knowledge of an
obscure rhetorician? But there are many historians who put us in mind of the
admirable saying of the great Conde to cardinal de Retz; Ces coquins nous font
parler et agir, comme ils auroient fait eux-memes a notre place.
. But these obscure anecdotes are sufficiently refuted by an impartial view of
the character and conduct of Diocletian. Whatever might otherwise have been his
intentions, if he had apprehended any danger from the violence of Galerius, his
good sense would have instructed him to prevent the ignominious contest; and as
he had held the scepter with glory, he would have resigned it without disgrace.

After the elevation of Constantius and Galerius The two Caesar's, Severus and
Maximin.
to the rank of Augusti, two new Caesar's were required to supply their place,
and to complete the system of the Imperial government. Diocletian was sincerely
desirous of withdrawing himself from the world; he considered Galerius, who had
married his daughter, as the firmest support of his family and of the empire;
and he consented, without reluctance, that his successor should assume the
merit as well as the envy of the important nomination. It was fixed without
consulting the interest or inclination of the princes of the West. Each of them
had a son who was arrived at the age of manhood, and who might have been deemed
the most natural candidates for the vacant honor. But the impotent resentment
of Maximian was no longer to be dreaded; and the moderate Constantius, though
he might despise the dangers, was humanely apprehensive of the calamities of
civil war. The two persons whom Galerius promoted to the rank of Caesar, were
much better suited to serve the views of his ambition; and their principal
recommendation seems to have consisted in the want of merit or personal
consequence. The first of these was Daza, or, as he was afterward called,
Maximin, whose mother was the sister of Galerius. The unexperienced youth still
betrayed by his manners and language his rustic education, when, to his own
astonishment as well as that of the world, he was invested by Diocletian with
the purple, exalted to the dignity of Caesar, and entrusted with the sovereign
command of Egypt and Syria Sublatus nuper a pecoribus et silvis (says
Lactantius de M. P. c. 19.) statim Scutarius, continuo Protector, mox Tribunus,
postridie Caesar, accepit Orientem. Aurelius Victor is too liberal in giving
him the whole portion of Diocletian.
. At the same time, Severus, a faithful servant, addicted to pleasure, but not
incapable of business, was sent to Milan, to receive from the reluctant hands
of Maximian the Caesarean ornaments, and the possession of Italy and Africa His
diligence and fidelity are acknowledged even by Lactantius, de M. P. c. 18.
. According to the forms of the constitution, Severus acknowledged the
supremacy of the western emperor; but he was absolutely devoted to the commands
of his benefactor Galerius, who, reserving to himself the intermediate
countries from the confines of Italy to those of Syria, firmly established his
power over three-fourths of the monarchy. In the full confidence, that the
approaching death of Constantius would leave him sole master of the Roman
world, we are assured that he had arranged in his mind a long succession of
future princes, and that he meditated his own retreat from public life, after
he should have accomplished a glorious reign of about twenty years These
schemes, however, rest only on the very doubtful authority of Lactantius, de M.
P. c. 20.
.

But within less than eighteen months, two unexpected revolutions overturned
the ambitious schemes of Galerius. The hopes of uniting the Ambition of
Galerius disappointed by two revolutions.
western provinces to his empire, were disappointed by the elevation of
Constantine, whilst Italy and Africa were lost by the successful revolt of
Maxentius.

I. The fame of Constantine has rendered posterity Birth, education, and escape
of Constantine. A. D. 274.
attentive to the most minute circumstances of his life and actions. The place
of his birth, as well as the condition of his mother Helena, have been the
subject not only of literary but of national disputes. Notwithstanding the
recent tradition, which assigns for her father, a British king, we are obliged
to confess, that Helena was the daughter of an innkeeper This tradition,
unknown to the contemporaries of Constantine, was invented in the darkness of
monasteries, was embellished by Jeffrey of Monmouth, and the writers of the
xiith century, has been defended by our antiquarians of the last age, and is
seriously related in the ponderous history of England, compiled by Mr. Carte
(vol. i. p. 147.). He transports, however, the kingdom of Coil, the imaginary
father of Helena, from Essex to the wall of Antoninus.
; but at the same time we may defend the legality of her marriage, against
those who have represented her as the concubine of Constantius Eutropius (x.
2.) expresses, in a few words, the real truth, and the occasion of the error,
"ex obscuriori matrimonio ejus filius." Zosimus (l. ii. p. 78.) eagerly seized
the most unfavourable report, and is followed by Orosius (vii. 25.), whose
authority is oddly enough overlooked by the indefatigable but partial
Tillemont. By insisting on the divorce of Helena, Diocletian acknowledged her
marriage.
. The great Constantine was most probably born at Naissus, in Dacia There are
three opinions with regard to the place of Constantine's birth. 1. Our English
antiquarians were used to dwell with rapture on the words of his panegyrist;
Britannias illic oriendo nobiles fecisti. But this celebrated passage may be
referred with as much propriety to the accession as to the nativity of
Constantine. 2. Some of the modern Greeks have ascribed the honor of his birth
to Drepanum, a town on the gulf of Nicomedia (Cellarius, tom. ii. p. 174.),
which Constantine dignified with the name of Helenopolis, and Justinian adorned
with many splendid buildings (Procop. de Aedificiis, v. 2.). It is indeed
probable enough, that Helena's father kept an inn at Drepanum; and that
Constantius might lodge there when he returned from a Persian embassy in the
reign of Aurelian. But in the wandering life of a soldier, the place of his
marriage, and the places where his children are born, have very little
connection with each other. 3. The claim of Naissus is supported by the
anonymous writer, published at the end of Ammianus, p. 710, and who in general
copied very good materials; and it is confirmed by Julius Firmicius (de
Astrologia, l. i. c. 4.), who flourished under the reign of Constantine
himself. Some objections have been raised against the integrity of the text,
and the application of the passage of Firmicius; but the former is established
by the best MSS. and the latter is very ably defended by Lipsius de Magnitudine
Romana, l. iv. c. 11. et Supplement.
; and it is not surprising, that in a family and province distinguished only by
the profession of arms, the youth should discover very little inclination to
improve his mind by the acquisition of knowledge Literis minus instructus.
Anonym. ad Ammian. p. 710.
. He was about eighteen years A. D. 292.
of age when his father was promoted to the rank of Caesar; but that fortunate
event was attended with his mother's divorce; and the splendor of an Imperial
alliance reduced the son of Helena to a state of disgrace and humiliation.
Instead of following Constantius in the West, he remained in the service of
Diocletian, signalized his valor in the wars of Egypt and Persia, and
gradually rose to the honorable station of a tribune of the first order. The
figure of Constantius was tall and majestic; he was dexterous in all his
exercises, intrepid in war, affable in peace; in his whole conduct, the active
spirit of youth was tempered by habitual prudence; and while his mind was
engrossed by ambition, he appeared cold and insensible to the allurements of
pleasure. The favor of the people and soldiers, who had named him as a worthy
candidate for the rank of Caesar, served only to exasperate the jealousy of
Galerius; and though prudence might restrain him from exercising any open
violence, an absolute monarch is seldom at a loss how to execute a sure and
secret revenge Galerius, or perhaps his own courage, exposed him to single
combat with a Sarmatian (Anonym. p. 710.) and with a monstrous lion. See
Praxagoras apud Phocium, p. 63. Praxagoras, an Athenian philosopher, had
written a life of Constantine, in two books, which are now lost. He was a
contemporary.
. Every hour increased the danger of Constantine, and the anxiety of his
father, who, by repeated letters, expressed the warmest desire of embracing his
son. For some time the policy of Galerius supplied him with delays and excuses,
but it was impossible long to refuse so natural a request of his associate,
without maintaining his refusal by arms. The permission of the journey was
reluctantly granted, and whatever precautions the emperor might have taken to
intercept a return, the consequences of which, he, with so much reason,
apprehended, they were effectually disappointed by the incredible diligence of
Constantine Zosimus, l. ii. p 78, 79. Lactantius de M. P. c. 24. The former
tells a very foolish story, that Constantine caused all the posthorses, which
he had used, to be hamstrung. Such a bloody execution, without preventing a
pursuit, would have scattered suspicions, and might have stopped his journey.
. Leaving the palace of Nicomedia in the night, he traveled post through
Bithynia, Thrace, Dacia, Pannonia, Italy, and Gaul, and amidst the joyful
acclamations of the people, reached the port of Boulogne, in the very moment
when his father was preparing to embark for Britain Anonym. p. 710. Panegyr.
Veter. vii. 4. But Zosimus, l. ii. p. 79. Eusebius de Vit. Constant. l. i. c.
21. and Lactantius de M. P. c. 24. suppose, with less accuracy, that he found
his father on his deathbed.
.

The British expedition, and an easy victory Death of Constantius, and
elevation of Constantine. A. D. 306. July 25.
over the barbarians of Caledonia, were the last exploits of the reign of
Constantius. He ended his life in the Imperial palace of York, fifteen months
after he had received the title of Augustus, and almost fourteen years and a
half after he had been promoted to the rank of Caesar. His death was
immediately succeeded by the elevation of Constantine. The ideas of inheritance
and succession are so very familiar, that the generality of mankind consider
them as founded, not only in reason, but in nature itself. Our imagination
readily transfers the same principles from private property to public dominion:
and whenever a virtuous father leaves behind him a son whose merit seems to
justify the esteem, or even the hopes of the people, the joint influence of
prejudice and of affection operates with irresistible weight. The flower of the
western armies had followed Constantius into Britain, and the national troops
were reinforced by a numerous body of Alemanni, who obeyed the orders of
Crocus, one of their hereditary chieftains Cunctis qui aderant annitentibus,
sed praecipue Croco (alii Eroco) Alamannorum Rege, auxilii gratia Constantium
comitato, imperium capit. Victor Junior, c. 41. This is perhaps the first
instance of a barbarian king, who assisted the Roman arms with an independent
body of his own subjects. The practice grew familiar, and at last became fatal.
. The opinion of their own importance, and the assurance that Britain, Gaul,
and Spain would acquiesce in their nomination, were diligently inculcated to
the legions by the adherents of Constantine. The soldiers were asked, Whether
they could hesitate a moment between the honor of placing at their head the
worthy son of their beloved emperor, and the ignominy of tamely expecting the
arrival of some obscure stranger, on whom it might please the sovereign of Asia
to bestow the armies and provinces of the West. It was insinuated to them, that
gratitude and liberality held a distinguished place among the virtues of
Constantine; nor did that artful prince show himself to the troops, till they
were prepared to salute him with the names of Augustus and Emperor. The throne
was the object of his desires; and had he been less actuated by ambition, it
was his only means of safety. He was well acquainted with the character and
sentiments of Galerius, and sufficiently apprized, that if he wished to live he
must determine to reign. The decent and even obstinate resistance which he
chose to affect His panegyrist Eumenius (vii. 8.) ventures to affirm, in the
presence of Constantine, that he put spurs to his horse, and tried, but in
vain, to escape from the hands of his soldiers.
, was contrived to justify his usurpation; nor did he yield to the acclamations
of the army, till he had provided the proper materials for a letter, which he
immediately dispatched to the emperor of the East. Constantine informed him of
the melancholy event of his father's death, modestly asserted his natural claim
to the succession, and respectfully lamented, that the affectionate violence of
his troops had not permitted him to solicit the Imperial purple in the regular
and constitutional manner. The first emotions of Galerius were those of
surprise, disappointment, and rage; and as he could seldom restrain his
passions, he loudly threatened, that he would commit to the flames both the
letter and the messenger. But his resentment insensibly He is acknowledged by
Galerius, who gives him only the title of Caesar, and that of Augustus to
Severus.
subsided; and when he recollected the doubtful chance of war, when he had
weighed the character and strength of his adversary, he consented to embrace
the honorable accommodation which the prudence of Constantine had left open to
him. Without either condemning or ratifying the choice of the British army,
Galerius accepted the son of his deceased colleague, as the sovereign of the
provinces beyond the Alps; but he gave him only the title of Caesar, and the
fourth rank among the Roman princes, whilst he conferred the vacant place of
Augustus on his favorite Severus. The apparent harmony of the empire was still
preserved, and Constantine, who already possessed the substance, expected,
without impatience, an opportunity of obtaining the honors, of supreme power
Lactantius de M. P. c. 25. Eumenius (vii. 8.) gives a rhetorical turn to the
whole transaction.
.

The children of Constantius by his second marriage were six in number, three
of either sex, The brothers and sisters of Constantine.
and whose Imperial descent might have solicited a preference over the meaner
extraction of the son of Helena. But Constantine was in the thirtysecond year
of his age, in the full vigor both of mind and body, at the time when the
eldest of his brothers could not possibly be more than thirteen years old. His
claim of superior merit had been allowed and ratified by the dying emperor The
choice of Constantine, by his dying father, which is warranted by reason, and
insinuated by Eumenius, seems to be confirmed by the most unexceptionable
authority, the concurring evidence of Lactantius (de M. P. c. 24.) and of
Libanius (Oration i.); of Eusebius (in Vit. Constantin. l. i. c. 18. 21.) and
of Julian (Oration i.).
. In his last moments, Constantius bequeathed to his eldest son the care of the
safety as well as greatness of the family; conjuring him to assume both the
authority and the sentiments of a father with regard to the children of
Theodora. Their liberal education, advantageous marriages, the secure dignity
of their lives, and the first honors of the state with which they were
invested, attest the fraternal affection of Constantine; and as those princes
possessed a mild and grateful disposition, they submitted without reluctance to
the superiority of his genius and fortune Of the three sisters of Constantine,
Constantia married the emperor Licinius, Anastasia the Caesar Bassianus, and
Eutropia the consul Nepotianus. The three brothers were, Dalmatius, Julius
Constantius, and Annibalianus, of whom we shall have occasion to speak
hereafter.
.

II. The ambitious spirit of Galerius was Discontent of the Romans at the
apprehension of taxes.
scarcely reconciled to the disappointment of his views upon the Gallic
provinces, before the unexpected loss of Italy wounded his pride as well as
power in a still more sensible part. The long absence of the emperors had
filled Rome with discontent and indignation; and the people gradually
discovered, that the preference given to Nicomedia and Milan, was not to be
ascribed to the particular inclination of Diocletian, but to the permanent form
of government which he had instituted. It was in vain that, a few months after
his abdication, his successors dedicated, under his name, those magnificent
baths, whose ruins still supply the ground as well as the materials for so many
churches and convents See Gruter Inscrip. p. 178. The six princes are all
mentioned, Diocletian and Maximian as the senior Augusti and fathers of the
emperors. They jointly dedicate, for the use of their own Romans, this
magnificent edifice. The architects have delineated the ruins of these Thermae;
and the antiquarians, particularly Donatus and Nardini, have ascertained the
ground which they covered. One of the great rooms is now the Carthusian church;
and even one of the porter's lodges is sufficient to form another church, which
belongs to the Feuillans.
. The tranquillity of those elegant recesses of ease and luxury was disturbed
by the impatient murmurs of the Romans; and a report was insensibly circulated,
that the sums expended in erecting those buildings, would soon be required at
their hands. About that time the avarice of Galerius, or perhaps the exigencies
of the state, had induced him to make a very strict and rigorous inquisition
into the property of his subjects for the purpose of a general taxation, both
on their lands and on their persons. A very minute survey appears to have been
taken of their real estates; and wherever there was the slightest suspicion of
concealment, torture was very freely employed to obtain a sincere declaration
of their personal wealth See Lactantius de M. P. c. 26. 31.
. The privileges which had exalted Italy above the rank of the provinces, were
no longer regarded: and the officers of the revenue already began to number the
Roman people, and to settle the proportion of the new taxes. Even when the
spirit of freedom had been utterly extinguished, the tamest subjects have
sometimes ventured to resist an unprecedented invasion of their property; but
on this occasion the injury was aggravated by the insult, and the sense of
private interest was quickened by that of national honor. The conquest of
Macedonia, as we have already observed, had delivered the Roman people from the
weight of personal taxes. Though they had experienced every form of despotism,
they had now enjoyed that exemption near five hundred years; nor could they
patiently brook the insolence of an Illyrian peasant, who, from his distant
residence in Asia, presumed to number Rome among the tributary cities of his
empire. The rising fury of the people was encouraged by the authority, or at
least the connivance, of the senate; and the feeble remains of the Praetorian
guards, who had reason to apprehend their own dissolution, embraced so
honorable a pretense, and declared their readiness to draw their swords in the
service of their oppressed country. It was the wish, and it soon became the
hope, of every citizen, that after expelling from Italy their foreign tyrants,
they should elect a prince who, by the place of his residence, and by his
maxims of government, might once more deserve the title of Roman emperor. The
name, as well as the situation, of Maxentius, determined in his favor the
popular enthusiasm.

Maxentius was the son of the emperor Maximian, Maxentius declared emperor at
Rome. A. D. 306. 28th Oct.
and he had married the daughter of Galerius. His birth and alliance seemed to
offer him the fairest promise of succeeding to the empire; but his vices and
incapacity procured him the same exclusion from the dignity of Caesar, which
Constantine had deserved by a dangerous superiority of merit. The policy of
Galerius preferred such associates, as would never disgrace the choice, nor
dispute the commands of their benefactor. An obscure stranger was therefore
raised to the throne of Italy, and the son of the late emperor of the West was
left to enjoy the luxury of a private fortune in a villa a few miles distant
from the capital. The gloomy passions of his soul, shame, vexation, and rage
were inflamed by envy on the news of Constantine's success; but the hopes of
Maxentius revived with the public discontent, and he was easily persuaded to
unite his personal injury and pretensions with the cause of the Roman people.
Two Praetorian tribunes and a commissary of provisions undertook the management
of the conspiracy; and as every order of men was actuated by the same spirit,
the immediate event was neither doubtful nor difficult. The prefect of the
city, and a few magistrates, who maintained their fidelity to Severus, were
massacred by the guards; and Maxentius, invested with the Imperial ornaments,
was acknowledged by the applauding senate and people as the protector of the
Roman freedom and dignity. It is uncertain whether Maximian was previously
acquainted with the conspiracy; but as soon as the standard of rebellion was
erected at Rome, the old emperor broke from the retirement Maximian re-assumes
the purple.
where the authority of Diocletian had condemned him to pass a life of
melancholy solitude, and concealed his returning ambition under the disguise of
paternal tenderness. At the request of his son and of the senate, he
condescended to reassume the purple. His ancient dignity, his experience, and
his fame in arms, added strength as well as reputation to the party of
Maxentius The vith Panegyric represents the conduct of Maximian in the most
favorable light; and the ambiguous expression of Aurelius Victor, "retractante
diu," may signify, either that he contrived, or that he opposed, the
conspiracy. See Zosimus, l. ii. p. 79. and Lactantius de M. P. c. 26.
.

According to the advice, or rather the orders, of his colleague, the emperor
Severus immediately hastened to Rome, in the full confidence, Defeat and death
of Severus.
that, by his unexpected celerity, he should easily suppress the tumult of an
unwarlike populace, commanded by a licentious youth. But he found on his
arrival the gates of the city shut against him, the walls filled with men and
arms, an experienced general at the head of the rebels, and his own troops
without spirit or affection. A large body of Moors deserted to the enemy,
allured by the promise of a large donative; and, if it be true that they had
been levied by Maximian in his African war, preferring the natural feelings of
gratitude to the artificial ties of allegiance. Anulinus, the Praetorian
prefect, declared himself in favor of Maxentius, and drew after him the most
considerable part of the troops, accustomed to obey his commands. Rome,
according to the expression of an orator, recalled her armies; and the
unfortunate Severus, destitute of force and of counsel, retired, or rather
fled, with precipitation to Ravenna. Here he might for some time have been
safe. The fortifications of Ravenna were able to resist the attempts, and the
morasses that surrounded the town were sufficient to prevent the approach, of
the Italian army. The sea, which Severus commanded with a powerful fleet,
secured him an inexhaustible supply of provisions, and gave a free entrance to
the legions, which, on the return of spring, would advance to his assistance
from Illyricum and the East. Maximian, who conducted the siege in person, was
soon convinced that he might waste his time and his army in the fruitless
enterprise, and that he had nothing to hope either from force or famine. With
an art more suitable to the character of Diocletian than to his own, he
directed his attack, not so much against the walls of Ravenna, as against the
mind of Severus. The treachery which he had experienced, disposed that unhappy
prince to distrust the most sincere of his friends and adherents. The
emissaries of Maximian easily persuaded his credulity, that a conspiracy was
formed to betray the town, and prevailed upon his fears not to expose himself
to the discretion of an irritated conqueror, but to accept the faith of an
honorable capitulation. He was at first received with humanity, and treated
with respect. Maximian conducted the captive emperor to Rome, and gave him the
most solemn assurances that he had secured his life by the resignation of the
purple. But Severus could obtain only an easy death and an Imperial funeral.
When the sentence was A. D. 307. February.
signed to him, the manner of executing it was left to his own choice; he
preferred the favorite mode of the ancients, that of opening his veins: and as
soon as he expired, his body was carried to the sepulcher which had been
constructed for the family of Gallienus The circumstances of this war, and the
death of Severus, are very doubtfully and variously told in our ancient
fragments (see Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. part i. p. 555.). I
have endeavored to extract from them a consistent and probable narration.
.

Though the characters of Constantine and Maxentius had very little affinity
with each other, their situation and interest were the same; and Maximian gives
his daughter Fausta, and the title of Augustus, to Constantine. A. D. 307.
March 31.
prudence seemed to require that they should unite their forces against the
common enemy. Notwithstanding the superiority of his age and dignity, the
indefatigable Maximian passed the Alps, and courting a personal interview with
the sovereign of Gaul, carried with him his daughter Fausta as the pledge of
the new alliance. The marriage was celebrated at Arles with every circumstance
of magnificence; and the ancient colleague of Diocletian, who again asserted
his claim to the western empire, conferred on his son-inlaw and ally the title
of Augustus. By consenting to receive that honor from Maximian, Constantine
seemed to embrace the cause of Rome and of the senate; but his professions were
ambiguous, and his assistance slow and ineffectual. He considered with
attention the approaching contest between the masters of Italy and the emperor
of the East, and was prepared to consult his own safety or ambition in the
event of the war The vith Panegyric was pronounced to celebrate the elevation
of Constantine; but the prudent orator avoids the mention either of Galerius or
of Maxentius. He introduces only one slight allusion to the actual troubles,
and to the majesty of Rome.
.

The importance of the occasion called for the Galerius invades Italy.
presence and abilities of Galerius. At the head of a powerful army collected
from Illyricum and the East, he entered Italy, resolved to revenge the death of
Severus, and to chastise the rebellious Romans; or, as he expressed his
intentions, in the furious language of a barbarian, to extirpate the senate,
and to destroy the people by the sword. But the skill of Maximian had concerted
a prudent system of defense. The invader found every place hostile, fortified,
and inaccessible; and though he forced his way as far as Narni, within sixty
miles of Rome, his dominion in Italy was confined to the narrow limits of his
camp. Sensible of the increasing difficulties of his enterprise, the haughty
Galerius made the first advances toward a reconciliation, and dispatched two
of his most considerable officers to tempt the Roman princes by the offer of a
conference and the declaration of his paternal regard for Maxentius, who might
obtain much more from his liberality than he could hope from the doubtful
chance of war With regard to this negotiation, see the fragments of an
anonymous Historian, published by Valesius at the end of his edition of
Ammianus Marcellinus, p. 711. These fragments have furnished us with several
curious, and as it should seem authentic, anecdotes.
. The offers of Galerius were rejected with firmness, his perfidious friendship
refused with contempt, and it was not long before he discovered, that, unless
he provided for his safety by a timely retreat, he had some reason to apprehend
the fate of Severus. The wealth, which the Romans defended against his
rapacious tyranny, they freely contributed for his destruction. The name of
Maximian, the popular arts of his son, the secret distribution of large sums,
and the promise of still more liberal rewards, checked the ardour, and
corrupted the fidelity of the Illyrian legions; and when Galerius at length
gave the signal of the retreat, it was with some difficulty that he could
prevail on his veterans not to desert a banner which had so often conducted
them to victory and honor. A contemporary writer assigns two other causes for
the failure of the expedition; but they are both of such a nature, that a
cautious historian will scarcely venture to adopt them. We are told that
Galerius, who had formed a very imperfect notion of the greatness of Rome by
the cities of the East, with which he was acquainted, found his forces
inadequate to the siege of that immense capital. But the extent of a city
serves only to render it more accessible to the enemy; Rome had long since been
accustomed to submit on the approach of a conqueror; nor could the temporary
enthusiasm of the people have long contended against the discipline and valor
of the legions. We are likewise informed, that the legions themselves were
struck with horror and remorse, and that those pious sons of the republic
refused to violate the sanctity of their venerable parent Lactantius de M. P.
c. 28. The former of these reasons is probably taken from Virgil's Shepherd;
Illam ego huic nostrae similem Meliboee putavi, etc. Lactantius delights in
these poetical allusions.
. But when we recollect with how much ease, in the more ancient civil wars, the
zeal of party, and the habits of military obedience had converted the native
citizens of Rome into her most implacable enemies, we shall be inclined to
distrust this extreme delicacy of strangers and barbarians, who had never
beheld Italy, till they entered it in a hostile manner. Had they not been
restrained by motives of a more interested nature, they would probably have
answered Galerius in the words of Caesar's veterans; If our general wishes to
lead us to the banks of the Tyber, we are prepared to trace out his camp.
Whatsoever walls he has determined to level with the ground, our hands are
ready to work the engines: nor shall we hesitate, should the name of the
devoted city be Rome itself. These are indeed the expressions of a poet; but of
a poet who has been distinguished and even censured for his strict adherence to
the truth of history Castra super Tusci si ponere Tybridis undas; (jubeas)
Hesperios audax veniam metator in agros.
Tu quoscunque voses in planum effundere muros,
His aries actus disperget saxa lacertis;
Illa licet penitus tolli quam jusseris urbem Roma sit.
Lucan. Pharsal. i. 381.


.

The legions of Galerius exhibit a very melancholy His retreat.
proof of their disposition, by the ravages which they committed in their
retreat. They murdered, they ravished, they plundered, they drove away the
flocks and herds of the Italians, they burnt the villages through which they
passed, and they endeavored to destroy the country which it had not been in
their power to subdue. During the whole march, Maxentius hung on their rear,
but he very prudently declined a general engagement with those brave and
desperate veterans. His father had undertaken a second journey into Gaul, with
the hope of persuading Constantine, who had assembled an army on the frontier,
to join the pursuit and to complete the victory. But the actions of Constantine
were guided by reason and not by resentment. He persisted in the wise
resolution of maintaining a balance of power in the divided empire, and he no
longer hated Galerius, when that aspiring prince had ceased to be an object of
terror Lactantius de M. P. c. 27. Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. The latter insinuates,
that Constantine, in his interview with Maximian, had promised to declare war
against Galerius.
.

The mind of Galerius was the most susceptible Elevation of Licinius to the
rank of Augustus;
of the sterner passions, but it was not however incapable of a sincere and
lasting friendship. Licinius, whose manners as well as character were A. D.
307. Nov. 11.
not unlike his own, seems to have engaged both his affection and esteem. Their
intimacy had commenced in the happier period perhaps of their youth and
obscurity. It had been cemented by the freedom and dangers of a military life;
they had advanced, almost by equal steps, through the successive honors of the
service; and as soon as Galerius was invested with the Imperial dignity, he
seems to have conceived the design of raising his companion to the same rank
with himself. During the short period of his prosperity, he considered the rank
of Caesar as unworthy of the age and merit of Licinius, and rather chose to
reserve for him the place of Constantius, and the empire of the West. While the
emperor was employed in the Italian war, he entrusted his friend with the
defense of the Danube; and immediately after his return from that unfortunate
expedition, he invested Licinius with the vacant purple of Severus, resigning
to his immediate command the provinces of Illyricum M. de Tillemont (Hist. des
Empereurs, tom. iv. part i. p. 559.) has proved, that Licinius, without passing
through the intermediate rank of Caesar, was declared Augustus, the 11th of
November, A. D. 307, after the return of Galerius from Italy.
. The and of Maximin.
news of his promotion was no sooner carried into the East, than Maximin, who
governed, or rather oppressed, the countries of Egypt and Syria, betrayed his
envy and discontent, disdained the inferior name of Caesar, and notwithstanding
the prayers as well as arguments of Galerius, exacted, almost by violence, the
equal title of Augustus Lactantius de M. P. c. 32. When Galerius declared
Licicinius Augustus with himself, he tried to satisfy his younger associates,
by inventing, for Constantine and Maximin (not Maxentius, see Baluze, p. 81.)
the new title of sons of the Augusti. But when Maximin acquainted him that he
had been saluted Augustus by the army, Galerius was obliged to acknowledge him,
as well as Constantine, as equal associates in the Imperial dignity.
. For the first, and indeed for the last time, the Roman world was administered
by six emperors. In the West, Constantine and Maxentius affected Six emperors.
A. D. 308.
to reverence their father Maximian. In the East, Licinius and Maximin honored
with more real consideration their benefactor Galerius. The opposition of
interest, and the memory of a recent war, divided the empire into two great
hostile powers; but their mutual fears produced an apparent tranquillity, and
even a feigned reconciliation, till the death of the elder princes, of
Maximian, and more particularly of Galerius, gave a new direction to the views
and passions of their surviving associates.

When Maximian had reluctantly abdicated the Misfortunes of Maximian.
empire, the venal orators of the times applauded his philosophic moderation.
When his ambition excited, or at least encouraged, a civil war, they returned
thanks to his generous patriotism, and gently censured that love of ease and
retirement which had withdrawn him from the public service See Panegyr. Vet.
vi. 9. Audi doloris nostri liberam vocem, etc. The whole passage is imagined
with artful flattery, and expressed with an easy flow of eloquence.
. But it was impossible, that minds like those of Maximian and his son, could
long possess in harmony an undivided power. Maxentius considered himself as the
legal sovereign of Italy, elected by the Roman senate and people; nor would he
endure the control of his father, who arrogantly declared, that by his name
and abilities the rash youth had been established on the throne. The cause was
solemnly pleaded before the Praetorian guards, and those troops, who dreaded
the severity of the old emperor, espoused the party of Maxentius Lactantius de
M. P. c. 28. Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. A report was spread, that Maxentius was the
son of some obscure Syrian, and had been substituted by the wife of Maximian as
her own child. See Aurelius Victor, Anonym. Valesian. and Panegyr. Vet. ix. 3,
4.
. The life and freedom of Maximian were however respected, and he retired from
Italy into Illyricum, affecting to lament his past conduct, and secretly
contriving new mischiefs. But Galerius, who was well acquainted with his
character, soon obliged him to leave his dominions, and the last refuge of the
disappointed Maximian was the court of his son-in-law Constantine Ab urbe
pulsum, ab Italia fugatum, ab Illyrico repudiatum, tuis provinciis, tuis
copiis, tuo palatio recepisti. Eumen. in Panegyr. Vet. vii. 14.
. He was received with respect by that artful prince, and with the appearance
of filial tenderness by the empress Fausta. That he might remove every
suspicion, he resigned the Imperial purple a second time Lactantius de M. P. c.
29. Yet after the resignation of the purple, Constantine still continued to
Maximian the pomp and honors of the Imperial dignity; and on all public
occasions gave the right hand place to his father-in-law. Panegyr. Vet. vii. 15.
, professing himself at length convinced of the vanity of greatness and
ambition. Had he persevered in this resolution, he might have ended his life
with less dignity indeed than in his first retirement, yet, however, with
comfort and reputation. But the near prospect of a throne brought back to his
remembrance the state from whence he was fallen, and he resolved, by a
desperate effort, either to reign or to perish. An incursion of the Franks had
summoned Constantine, with a part of his army, to the banks of the Rhine; the
remainder of the troops were stationed in the southern provinces of Gaul, which
lay exposed to the enterprises of the Italian emperor, and a considerable
treasure was deposited in the city of Arles. Maximian either craftily invented,
or hastily credited, a vain report of the death of Constantine. Without
hesitation he ascended the throne, seized the treasure, and scattering it with
his accustomed profusion among the soldiers, endeavored to awake in their
minds the memory of his ancient dignity and exploits. Before he could establish
his authority, or finish the negotiation which he appears to have entered into
with his son Maxentius, the celerity of Constantine defeated all his hopes. On
the first news of his perfidy and ingratitude, that prince returned by rapid
marches from the Rhine to the Saone, embarked on the last mentioned river at
Chalons, and at Lions trusting himself to the rapidity of the Rhone, arrived at
the gates of Arles, with a military force which it was impossible for Maximian
to resist, and which scarcely permitted him to take refuge in the neighboring
city of Marseilles. The narrow neck of land which joined that place to the
continent was fortified against the besiegers, whilst the sea was open, either
for the escape of Maximian, or for the succors of Maxentius, if the latter
should choose to disguise his invasion of Gaul, under the honorable pretense of
defending a distressed, or, as he might allege, an injured father. Apprehensive
of the fatal consequences of delay, Constantine gave orders for an immediate
assault; but the scalingladders were found too short for the height of the
walls, and Marseilles might have sustained as long a siege as it formerly did
against the arms of Caesar, if the garrison, conscious either of their fault or
of their danger, had not purchased their pardon by delivering up the city and
the person of Maximian. A secret but irrevocable sentence of death was
pronounced against His death. A. D. 310. February.
the usurper, he obtained only the same favor which he had indulged to
Severus, and it was published to the world, that, oppressed by the remorse of
his repeated crimes, he strangled himself with his own hands. After he had lost
the assistance, and disdained the moderate counsels, of Diocletian, the second
period of his active life was a series of public calamities and personal
mortifications, which were terminated, in about three years, by an ignominious
death. He deserved his fate; but we should find more reason to applaud the
humanity of Constantine, if he had spared an old man, the benefactor of his
father, and the father of his wife. During the whole of this melancholy
transaction, it appears that Fausta sacrificed the sentiments of nature to her
conjugal duties Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. Eumenius in Panegyr. Vet. vii. 16 -- 21.
The latter of these has undoubtedly represented the whole affair in the most
favorable light for his sovereign. Yet even from this partial narrative we may
conclude, that the repeated clemency of Constantine, and the reiterated
treasons of Maximian, as they are described by Lactantius (de M. P. c. 29,
30.), and copied by the moderns, are destitute of any historical foundation.
.

The last years of Galerius were less shameful Death of Galerius. A. D. 311.
May.
and unfortunate; and though he had filled with more glory the subordinate
station of Caesar, than the superior rank of Augustus, he preserved, till the
moment of his death, the first place among the princes of the Roman world. He
survived his retreat from Italy about four years, and wisely relinquishing his
views of universal empire, he devoted the remainder of his life to the
enjoyment of pleasure, and to the execution of some works of public utility,
among which we may distinguish the discharging into the Danube the superfluous
waters of the lake Pelso, and the cutting down the immense forests that
encompassed it; an operation worthy of a monarch, since it gave an extensive
country to the agriculture of his Pannonian subjects Aurelius Victor, c. 40.
But that lake was situated on the Upper Pannonia, near the borders of Noricum;
and the province of Valeria (a name which the wife of Galerius gave to the
drained country) undoubtedly lay between the Drove and the Danube (Sextus
Rufus, c. 9.) I should therefore suspect that Victor has confounded the lake
Pelso with the Volocean marches, or, as they are now called, the lake Sabaton.
It is placed in the heart of Valeria, and its present extent is not less than
12 Hungarian miles (about 70 English) in length, and two in breadth. See
Severini Pannonia, l. i. c. 9.
. His death was occasioned by a very painful and lingering disorder. His body,
swelled by an intemperate course of life to an unwieldy corpulence, was covered
with ulcers, and devoured by innumerable swarms of those insects, who have
given their name to a most loathsome disease Lactantius (de M. P. c. 33.) and
Eusebius (l. viii. c. 16.) describe the symptoms and progress of his disorder
with singular accuracy and apparent pleasure.
; but as Galerius had offended a very zealous and powerful party among his
subjects, his sufferings, instead of exciting their compassion, have been
celebrated as the visible effects of divine justice If any (like the late Dr.
Jortin, Remarks on Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 307 -- 356.) still
delight in recording the wonderful deaths of the persecutors, I would recommend
to their perusal an admirable passage of Grotius (Hist. l. vii. p. 332.)
concerning the last illness of Philip II. of Spain.
. He had no sooner expired in his palace of Nicomedia, than the two emperors
who were indebted for their purple to his favor, began to collect His dominion
shared between Maximin and Licinius.
their forces, with the intention either of disputing, or of dividing, the
dominions which he had left without a master. They were persuaded however to
desist from the former design, and to agree in the latter. The provinces of
Asia fell to the share of Maximin, and those of Europe augmented the portion of
Licinius. The Hellespont and the Thracian Bosphorus formed their mutual
boundary, and the banks of those narrow seas, which flowed in the midst of the
Roman world, were covered with soldiers, with arms, and with fortifications.
The deaths of Maximian and of Galerius reduced the number of emperors to four.
The sense of their true interest soon connected Licinius and Constantine; a
secret alliance was concluded between Maximin and Maxentius, and their unhappy
subjects expected with terror the bloody consequences of their inevitable
dissensions, which were no longer restrained by the fear or the respect which
they had entertained for Galerius See Eusebius, l. ix. 6. 10. Lactantius de M.
P. c. 36. Zosimus is less exact, and evidently confounds Maximian with Maximin.
.

Among so many crimes and misfortunes occasioned Administration of Constantine
in Gaul. A. D. 306 -- 312.
by the passions of the Roman princes, there is some pleasure in discovering a
single action which may be ascribed to their virtue. In the sixth year of his
reign, Constantine visited the city of Autun, and generously remitted the
arrears of tribute, reducing at the same time the proportion of their
assessment, from twenty-five to eighteen thousand heads, subject to the real
and personal capitation See the viiith Panegyr. in which Eumenius displays, in
the presence of Constantine, the misery and the gratitude of the city of Autun.
. Yet even this indulgence affords the most unquestionable proof of the public
misery. This tax was so extremely oppressive, either in itself or in the mode
of collecting it, that whilst the revenue was increased by extortion, it was
diminished by despair: a considerable part of the territory of Autun was left
uncultivated; and great numbers of the provincials rather chose to live as
exiles and outlaws, than to support the weight of civil society. It is but too
probable, that the bountiful emperor relieved, by a partial act of liberality,
one among the many evils which he had caused by his general maxims of
administration. But even those maxims were less the effect of choice than of
necessity. And if we except the death of Maximian, the reign of Constantine in
Gaul seems to have been the most innocent and even virtuous period of his life.
The provinces were protected by his presence from the inroads of the
barbarians, who either dreaded or experienced his active valor. After a signal
victory over the Franks and Alemanni, several of their princes were exposed by
his order to the wild beasts in the amphitheatre of Treves, and the people seem
to have enjoyed the spectacle, without discovering, in such a treatment of
royal captives, any thing that was repugnant to the laws of nations or of
humanity Eutropius, x. 3. Panegyr. Veter. vii. 10, 11, 12. A great number of
the French youth were likewise exposed to the same cruel and ignominious death.
.

The virtues of Constantine were rendered more Tyranny of Maxentius in Italy
and Africa. A. D. 306 -- 312.
illustrious by the vices of Maxentius. Whilst the Gallic provinces enjoyed as
much happiness as the condition of the times was capable of receiving, Italy
and Africa groaned under the dominion of a tyrant as contemptible as he was
odious. The zeal of flattery and faction has indeed too frequently sacrificed
the reputation of the vanquished to the glory of their successful rivals; but
even those writers who have revealed, with the most freedom and pleasure, the
faults of Constantine, unanimously confess, that Maxentius was cruel,
rapacious, and profligate Julian excludes Maxentius from the banquet of the
Caesar's with abhorrence and contempt; and Zosimus (l. ii. p. 85.) accuses him
of every kind of cruelty and profligacy.
. He had the good fortune to suppress a slight rebellion in Africa. The
governor and a few adherents had been guilty; the province suffered for their
crime. The flourishing cities of Cirtha and Carthage, and the whole extent of
that fertile country, were wasted by fire and sword. The abuse of victory was
followed by the abuse of law and justice. A formidable army of sycophants and
delators invaded Africa; the rich and the noble were easily convicted of a
connection with the rebels; and those among them who experienced the emperor's
clemency, were only punished by the confiscation of their estates Zosimus, l.
ii. p. 83 -- 85. Aurelius Victor.
. So signal a victory was celebrated by a magnificent triumph, and Maxentius
exposed to the eyes of the people the spoils and captives of a Roman province.
The state of the capital was no less deserving of compassion than that of
Africa. The wealth of Rome supplied an inexhaustible fund for his vain and
prodigal expenses, and the ministers of his revenue were skilled in the arts of
rapine. It was under his reign that the method of exacting a free gift from the
senators was first invented; and as the sum was insensibly increased, the
pretenses of levying it, a victory, a birth, a marriage, or an Imperial
consulship, were proportionably multiplied The passage of Aurelius Victor
should be read in the following manner. Primus instituto pessimo, munerum
specie, Patres Orator esque pecuniam confer prodigenti sibi cogeret.
. Maxentius had imbibed the same implacable aversion to the senate, which had
characterized most of the former tyrants of Rome: nor was it possible for his
ungrateful temper to forgive the generous fidelity which had raised him to the
throne, and supported him against all his enemies. The lives of the senators
were exposed to his jealous suspicions, the dishonor of their wives and
daughters heightened the gratification of his sensual passions Panegyr. Vet.
ix. 3. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. viii. 14. et in Vit. Constant. i. 33, 34. Rusinus,
c. 17. The virtuous matron, who stabbed herself to escape the violence of
Maxentius, was a Christian, wife to the prefect of the city, and her name was
Sophronia. It still remains a question among the casuists, whether, on such
occasions, suicide is justifiable.
. It may be presumed, that an Imperial lover was seldom reduced to sigh in
vain; but whenever persuasion proved ineffectual, he had recourse to violence;
and there remains one memorable example of a noble matron, who preserved her
chastity by a voluntary death. The soldiers were the only order of men whom he
appeared to respect, or studied to please. He filled Rome and Italy with armed
troops, connived at their tumults, suffered them with impunity to plunder, and
even to massacre, the defenseless people Praetorianis caedem vulgi quondam
annucret, is the vague expression of Aurelius Victor. See more particular,
though somewhat different, accounts of a tumult and massacre, which happened at
Rome, in Eusebius (l. viii. c. 14.) and in Zosimus (l. ii. p. 84.).
; and indulging them in the same licentiousness which their emperor enjoyed,
Maxentius often bestowed on his military favorites the splendid villa, or the
beautiful wife, of a senator. A prince of such a character, alike incapable of
governing either in peace or in war, might purchase the support, but he could
never obtain the esteem, of the army. Yet his pride was equal to his other
vices. Whilst he passed his indolent life, either within the walls of his
palace, or in the neighboring gardens of Sallust, he was repeatedly heard to
declare, that he alone was emperor, and that the other princes were no more
than his lieutenants, on whom he had devolved the defense of the frontier
provinces, that he might enjoy without interruption the elegant luxury of the
capital. Rome, which had so long regretted the absence, lamented, during the
six years of his reign, the presence of her sovereign See in the Panegyrics
(ix. 14.), a lively description of the indolence and vain pride of Maxentius.
In another place, the orator observes, that the riches which Rome had
accumulated in a period of 1060 years, were lavished by the tyrant on his
mercenary bands; redemptis ad civil latrocinium manibus ingesserat.
.

Though Constantine might view the conduct Civil war between Constantine and
Maxentius. A. D. 312.
of Maxentius with abhorrence, and the situation of the Romans with compassion,
we have no reason to presume that he would have taken up arms to punish the
one, or to relieve the other. But the tyrant of Italy rashly ventured to
provoke a formidable enemy, whose ambition had been hitherto restrained by
considerations of prudence, rather than by principles of justice After the
victory of Constantine, it was universally allowed, that the motive of
delivering the republic from a detested tyrant, would, at any time, have
justified his expedition into Italy. Eusebius. in Vit. Constantin. l. i. c. 26.
Panegyr. Vet. ix. 2.
. After the death of Maximian, his titles, according to the established custom,
had been erased, and his statues thrown down with ignominy. His son, who had
persecuted and deserted him when alive, affected to display the most pious
regard for his memory, and gave orders that a similar treatment should be
immediately inflicted on all the statues that had been erected in Italy and
Africa to the honor of Constantine. That wise prince, who sincerely wished to
decline a war, with the difficulty and importance of which he was sufficiently
acquainted, at first dissembled the insult, and sought for redress by the
milder expedients of negotiation, till he was convinced, that the hostile and
ambitious designs of the Italian emperor made it necessary for him to arm in
his own defense. Maxentius, who openly avowed his pretensions to the whole
monarchy of the West, had already prepared a very considerable force to invade
the Gallic provinces on the side of Rhaetia; and though he could not expect any
assistance from Licinius, he was flattered with the hope that the legions of
Illyricum, allured by his presents and promises, would desert the standard of
that prince, and unanimously declare themselves his soldiers and subjects
Zosimus, l. ii. p. 84, 85. Nazarius in Panegyr. x. 7 -- 13.
. Constantine no longer hesitated. He had deliberated with caution, he acted
with vigor. He gave a private audience to the ambassadors, who, in the name of
the senate and people, conjured him to deliver Rome from a detested tyrant;
and, without regarding the timid remonstrances of his council, he resolved to
prevent the enemy, and to carry the war into the heart of Italy See Panegyr.
Vet. ix. 2. Omnibus fere tuis Comitibus et Ducibus non solum tacit
mussantibus, sed etiam aperte timentibus; contra consilia hominum, contra
Haruspicum monita, ipse per temet liberandae urbis tempus venisse sentires. The
embassy of the Romans is mentioned only by Zonaras (l. xiii.) and by Cedrenus
(in Compend. Hist. p. 270.): but those modern Greeks had the opportunity of
consulting many writers which have since been lost, among which we may reckon
the life of Constantine by Praxagoras. Photius (p. 63.) has made a short
extract from that historical work.
.

The enterprise was as full of danger as of glory; and the unsuccessful event
of two former invasions was sufficient to inspire the most serious Preparations.
apprehensions. The veteran troops who revered the name of Maximian, had
embraced in both those wars the party of his son, and were now restrained by a
sense of honor, as well as of interest, from entertaining an idea of a second
desertion. Maxentius, who considered the Praetorian guards as the firmest
defense of his throne, had increased them to their ancient establishment; and
they composed, including the rest of the Italians who were inlisted into his
service, a formidable body of fourscore thousand men. Forty thousand Moors and
Carthaginians had been raised since the reduction of Africa. Even Sicily
furnished its proportion of troops; and the armies of Maxentius amounted to one
hundred and seventy thousand foot, and eighteen thousand horse. The wealth of
Italy supplied the expenses of the war; and the adjacent provinces were
exhausted, to form immense magazines of corn and every other kind of
provisions. The whole force of Constantine consisted of ninety thousand foot
and eight thousand horse Zosimus (l. ii. p. 86.) has given us this curious
account of the forces on both sides. He makes no mention of any naval
armaments, though we are assured (Panegyr. Vet. ix. 25.) that the war was
carried on by sea as well as by land; and that the fleet of Constantine took
possession of Sardinia, Corsica, and the ports of Italy.
; and as the defense of the Rhine required an extraordinary attention during
the absence of the emperor, it was not in his power to employ above half his
troops in the Italian expedition, unless he sacrificed the public safety to his
private quarrel Panegyr. Vet. ix. 3. It is not surprising that the orator
should diminish the numbers with which his sovereign achieved the conquest of
Italy; but it appears somewhat singular, that he should esteem the tyrant's
army at no more than 100,000 men.
. At the head of about forty thousand soldiers, he marched to encounter an
enemy whose numbers were at least four times superior to his own. But the
armies of Rome, placed at a secure distance from danger, were enervated by
indulgence and luxury. Habituated to the baths and theaters of Rome, they took
the field with reluctance, and were chiefly composed of veterans who had almost
forgotten, or of new levies, who had never acquired, the use of arms and the
practice of war. The hardy legions of Gaul had long defended the frontiers of
the empire against the barbarians of the North; and in the performance of that
laborious service, their valor was exercised and their discipline confirmed.
There appeared the same difference between the leaders as between the armies.
Caprice or flattery had tempted Maxentius with the hopes of conquest; but these
aspiring hopes soon gave way to the habits of pleasure and the consciousness of
his inexperience. The intrepid mind of Constantine had been trained from his
earliest youth to war, to action, and to military command.

When Hannibal marched from Gaul into Italy, Constantine passes the Alps.
he was obliged, first, to discover, and then to open, a way over mountains and
through savage nations, that had never yielded a passage to a regular army The
three principal passages of the Alps between Gaul and Italy, are those of Mount
St. Bernard, Mount Cenis, and Mount Genevre. Tradition, and a resemblance of
names (Alps Penninae), had assigned the first of these for the march of
Hannibal (see Simler de Alpibus). The Chevalier de Folard (Polybe, tom. iv.)
and M. d'Anville have led him over Mount Genevre. But notwithstanding the
authority of an experienced officer and a learned geographer, the pretensions
of Mount Cenis are supported in a specious, not to say a convincing, manner by
M. Grosley. Observations sur l'Italie, tom. i. p. 40, etc.
. The Alps were then guarded by nature, they are now fortified by art. Citadels
constructed with no less skill than labor and expense, command every avenue
into the plain, and on that side render Italy almost inaccessible to the
enemies of the king of Sardinia La Brunette near Suse, Demont, Exiles,
Fenestrelles, Coni, etc.
. But in the course of the intermediate period, the generals, who have
attempted the passage, have seldom experienced any difficulty or resistance. In
the age of Constantine, the peasants of the mountains were civilized and
obedient subjects; the country was plentifully stocked with provisions, and the
stupendous highways which the Romans had carried over the Alps, opened several
communications between Gaul and Italy See Ammian. Marcellin. xv. 10. His
description of the roads over the Alps, is clear, lively, and accurate.
. Constantine preferred the road of the Cottian Alps, or, as it is now called,
of mount Cenis, and led his troops with such active diligence, that he
descended into the plain of Piedmont before the court of Maxentius had received
any certain intelligence of his departure from the banks of the Rhine. The city
of Susa, however, which is situated at the foot of Mount Cenis, was surrounded
with walls, and provided with a garrison sufficiently numerous to check the
progress of an invader; but the impatience of Constantine's troops disdained
the tedious forms of a siege. The same day that they appeared before Susa, they
applied fire to the gates, and ladders to the walls; and mounting to the
assault amidst a shower of stones and arrows, they entered the place sword in
hand, and cut in pieces the greatest part of the garrison. The flames were
extinguished by the care of Constantine, and the remains of Susa preserved from
total destruction. About forty miles from thence, a more severe contest awaited
him. A numerous army of Italians was assembled under the lieutenants of
Maxentius in the Battle of Turin.
plains of Turin. Its principal strength consisted in a species of heavy
cavalry, which the Romans, since the decline of their discipline, had borrowed
from the nations of the East. The horses, as well as the men, were clothed in
complete armor, the joints of which were artfully adapted to the motions of
their bodies. The aspect of this cavalry was formidable, their weight almost
irresistible; and as, on this occasion, their generals had drawn them up in a
compact column or wedge, with a sharp point, and with spreading flanks, they
flattered themselves that they should easily break and trample down the army of
Constantine. They might perhaps have succeeded in their design, had not their
experienced adversary embraced the same method of defense, which in similar
circumstances had been practiced by Aurelian. The skilful evolutions of
Constantine divided and baffled this massy column of cavalry. The troops of
Maxentius fled in confusion toward Turin; and as the gates of the city were
shut against them, very few escaped the sword of the victorious pursuers. By
this important service, Turin deserved to experience the clemency and even
favor of the conqueror. He made his entry into the Imperial palace of Milan,
and almost all the cities of Italy between the Alps and the Po not only
acknowledged the power, but embraced with zeal the party, of Constantine
Zosimus as well as Eusebius hasten from the passage of the Alps, to the
decisive action near Rome. We must apply to the two Panegyrics, for the
intermediate actions of Constantine.
.

From Milan to Rome, the Aemilian and Flaminian Siege and battle of Verona.
highways offered an easy march of about four hundred miles; but though
Constantine was impatient to encounter the tyrant, he prudently directed his
operations against another army of Italians, who, by their strength and
position, might either oppose his progress, or, in case of a misfortune, might
intercept his retreat. Ruricius Pompeianus, a general distinguished by his
valor and ability, had under his command the city of Verona, and all the
troops that were stationed in the province of Venetia. As soon as he was
informed that Constantine was advancing toward him, he detached a large body
of cavalry, which was defeated in an engagement near Brescia, and pursued by
the Gallic legions as far as the gates of Verona. The necessity, the
importance, and the difficulties of the siege of Verona, immediately presented
themselves to the sagacious mind of Constantine The Marquis Maffei has examined
the siege and battle of Verona, with that degree of attention and accuracy,
which was due to a memorable action that happened in his native country. The
fortifications of that city, constructed by Gallienus, were less extensive than
the modern walls, and the Amphitheatre was not included within their
circumference. See Verona Illustrata, Part i. p. 142. 150.
The city was accessible only by a narrow peninsula toward the west, as the
other three sides were surrounded by the Adige, a rapid river which covered the
province of Venetia, from whence the besieged derived an inexhaustible supply
of men and provisions. It was not without great difficulty, and after several
fruitless attempts, that Constantine found means to pass the river at some
distance above the city, and in a place where the torrent was less violent. He
then encompassed Verona with strong lines, pushed his attacks with prudent
vigor, and repelled a desperate sally of Pompeianus. That intrepid general,
when he had used every means of defense that the strength of the place or that
of the garrison could afford, secretly escaped from Verona, anxious not for his
own but for the public safety. With indefatigable diligence he soon collected
an army sufficient either to meet Constantine in the field, or to attack him if
he obstinately remained within his lines. The emperor, attentive to the
motions, and informed of the approach, of so formidable an enemy, left a part
of his legions to continue the operations of the siege, whilst, at the head of
those troops on whose valor and fidelity he more particularly depended, he
advanced in person to engage the general of Maxentius. The army of Gaul was
drawn up in two lines, according to the usual practice of war; but their
experienced leader, perceiving that the numbers of the Italians far exceeded
his own, suddenly changed his disposition, and reducing the second, extended
the front of his first line, to a just proportion with that of the enemy. Such
evolutions, which only veteran troops can execute without confusion in a moment
of danger, commonly prove decisive: but as this engagement began toward the
close of the day, and was contested with great obstinacy during the whole
night, there was less room for the conduct of the generals than for the courage
of the soldiers. The return of light displayed the victory of Constantine, and
a field of carnage covered with many thousands of the vanquished Italians.
Their general Pompeianus was found among the slain; Verona immediately
surrendered at discretion, and the garrison was made prisoners of war They
wanted chains for so great a multitude of captives; and the whole council was
at a loss; but the sagacious conqueror imagined the happy expedient of
converting into fetters the swords of the vanquished. Panegyr. Vet. ix. 11.
. When the officers of the victorious army congratulated their master on this
important success, they ventured to add some respectful complaints, of such a
nature, however, as the most jealous monarchs will listen to without
displeasure. They represented to Constantine, that, not contented with
performing all the duties of a commander, he had exposed his own person with an
excess of valor which almost degenerated into rashness; and they conjured him
for the future to pay more regard to the preservation of a life, in which the
safety of Rome and of the empire was involved Panegyr. Vet. ix. 10.
.

While Constantine signalized his conduct and Indolence and fears of Maxentius.
valor in the field, the sovereign of Italy appeared insensible of the
calamities and danger of a civil was which raged in the heart of his dominions.
Pleasure was still the only business of Maxentius. Concealing, or at least
attempting to conceal, from the public knowledge the misfortunes of his arms
Literas calamitatum suarum indices supprimebat. Panegyr. Vet. ix. 15.
, he indulged himself in a vain confidence, which deferred the remedies of the
approaching evil, without deferring the evil itself Remedia malorum potius quam
mala differebat, is the fine censure which Tacitus passes on the supine
indolence of Vitellius.
. The rapid progress of Constantine The Marquis Maffei has made it extremely
probable that Constantine was still at Verona, the 1st of September, A. D. 312,
and that the memorable era of the indictions was dated from his conquest of
the Cisalpine Gaul.
was scarcely sufficient to awaken him from this fatal security; he flattered
himself, that his well-known liberality, and the majesty of the Roman name,
which had already delivered him from two invasions, would dissipate with the
same facility the rebellious army of Gaul. The officers of experience and
ability, who had served under the banners of Maximian, were at length compelled
to inform his effeminate son of the imminent danger to which he was reduced;
and, with a freedom that at once surprised and convinced him, to urge the
necessity of preventing his ruin, by a vigorous exertion of his remaining
power. The resources of Maxentius, both of men and money, were still
considerable. The Praetorian guards felt how strongly their own interest and
safety were connected with his cause; and a third army was soon collected, more
numerous than those which had been lost in the battles of Turin and Verona. It
was far from the intention of the emperor to lead his troops in person. A
stranger to the exercises of war, he trembled at the apprehension of so
dangerous a contest; and as fear is commonly superstitious, he listened with
melancholy attention to the rumors of omens and presages which seemed to
menace his life and empire. Shame at length supplied the place of courage, and
forced him to take the field. He was unable to sustain the contempt of the
Roman people. The circus resounded with their indignant clamours, and they
tumultuously besieged the gates of the palace, reproaching the pusillanimity of
their indolent sovereign, and celebrating the heroic spirit of Constantine See
Panegyr. Vet. xi. 16. Lactantius de M. P. c. 44.
. Before Maxentius left Rome, he consulted the Sibylline books. The guardians
of these ancient oracles were as well versed in the arts of this world, as they
were ignorant of the secrets of fate; and they returned him a very prudent
answer, which might adapt itself to the event, and secure their reputation
whatever should be the chance of arms Illo die hostem Romanorum esse periturum.
The vanquished prince became of course the enemy of Rome.
.

The celerity of Constantine's march has been Victory of Constantine near Rome.
A. D. 312. 28th Oct.
compared to the rapid conquest of Italy by the first of the Caesar's; nor is
the flattering parallel repugnant to the truth of history, since no more than
fifty-eight days elapsed between the surrender of Verona and the final decision
of the war. Constantine had always apprehended that the tyrant would consult
the dictates of fear, and perhaps of prudence; and that, instead of risking his
last hopes in a general engagement, he would shut himself up within the walls
of Rome. His ample magazines secured him against the danger of famine; and as
the situation of Constantine admitted not of delay, he might have been reduced
to the sad necessity of destroying with fire and sword the Imperial city, the
noblest reward of his victory, and the deliverance of which had been the
motive, or rather indeed the pretense, of the civil war See Panegyr. Vet. ix.
16. x. 27. The former of these orators magnifies the hoards of corn, which
Maxentius had collected from Africa and the Islands. And yet, if there is any
truth in the scarcity mentioned by Eusebius (in Vit. Constantin. l. i. c. 36.),
the Imperial granaries must have been open only to the soldiers.
. It was with equal surprise and pleasure, that on his arrival at a place
called Saxa Rubra, about nine miles from Rome Maxentius... tandem urbe in Saxa
Rubra, millia ferme novem aegerrime progressus. Aurelius Victor. See Cellarius
Geograph. Antiq. tom. i. p. 463. Saxa Rubra was in the neighborhood of the
Cremera, a trifling rivulet, illustrated by the valor and glorious death of
the three hundred Fabii.
, he discovered the army of Maxentius prepared to give him battle The post
which Maxentius had taken, with the Tyber in his rear, is very clearly
described by the two Panegyrists, ix. 16. x. 28.
. Their long front filled a very spacious plain, and their deep array reached
to the banks of the Tyber, which covered their rear, and forbade their retreat.
We are informed, and we may believe, that Constantine disposed his troops with
consummate skill, and that he chose for himself the post of honor and danger.
Distinguished by the splendor of his arms, he charged in person the cavalry of
his rival; and his irresistible attack determined the fortune of the day. The
cavalry of Maxentius was principally composed either of unwieldy cuirassiers,
or of light Moors and Numidians. They yielded to the vigor of the Gallic
horse, which possessed more activity than the one, more firmness than the
other. The defeat of the two wings left the infantry without any protection on
its flanks, and the undisciplined Italians fled without reluctance from the
standard of a tyrant whom they had always hated, and whom they no longer
feared. The Praetorians, conscious that their offenses were beyond the reach of
mercy, were animated by revenge and despair. Notwithstanding their repeated
efforts, those brave veterans were unable to recover the victory: they
obtained, however, an honorable death; and it was observed, that their bodies
covered the same ground which had been occupied by their ranks Exceptis
latrocinii illius primis auctoribus, qui desperata venia, locum quem pugnae
sumpserant texere corporibus. Panegyr. Vet. ix. 17.
. The confusion then became general, and the dismayed troops of Maxentius,
pursued by an implacable enemy, rushed by thousands into the deep and rapid
stream of the Tyber. The emperor himself attempted to escape back into the city
over the Milvian bridge, but the crowds which pressed together through that
narrow passage, forced him into the river, where he was immediately drowned by
the weight of his armor A very idle rumor soon prevailed, that Maxentius, who
had not taken any precaution for his own retreat, had contrived a very artful
snare to destroy the army of the pursuers; but that the wooden bridge which was
to have been loosened on the approach of Constantine, unluckily broke down
under the weight of the flying Italians. M. de Tillemont (Hist. des Empereurs,
tom. iv. part i. p. 576.) very seriously examines whether, in contradiction to
common sense, the testimony of Eusebius and Zosimus ought to prevail over the
silence of Lactantius, Nazarius, and the anonymous, but contemporary orator,
who composed the ninth panegyric.
. His body, which had sunk very deep into the mud, was found with some
difficulty the next day. The sight of his head, when it was exposed to the eyes
of the people, convinced them of their deliverance, and admonished them to
receive, with acclamations of loyalty and gratitude, the fortunate Constantine,
who thus achieved by his valor and ability the most splendid enterprise of
his life Zosimus, l. ii. p. 86 -- 88, and the two Panegyrics, the former of
which was pronounced a few months afterward, afford the clearest notion of
this great battle. Lactantius, Eusebius, and even the Epitomes, supply several
useful hints.
.

In the use of victory, Constantine neither deserved His reception,
the praise of clemency, nor incurred the censure of immoderate rigor Zosimus,
the enemy of Constantine, allows (l. ii. p. 88.), that only a few of the
friends of Maxentius were put to death; but we may remark the expressive
passage of Nazarius (Panegyr. Vet. x. 6.), Omnibus qui labefactari statum ejus
poterant cum stirpe deletis. The other orator (Panegyr. Vet. ix. 20, 21.)
contents himself with observing, that Constantine, when he entered Rome, did
not imitate the cruel massacres of Cinna, of Marius, or of Sylla.
. He inflicted the same treatment, to which a defeat would have exposed his own
person and family, put to death the two sons of the tyrant, and carefully
extirpated his whole race. The most distinguished adherents of Maxentius must
have expected to share his fate, as they had shared his prosperity and his
crimes; but when the Roman people loudly demanded a greater number of victims,
the conqueror resisted, with firmness and humanity, those servile clamours
which were dictated by flattery as well as by resentment. Informers were
punished and discouraged; the innocent, who had suffered under the late
tyranny, were recalled from exile, and restored to their estates. A general act
of oblivion quieted the minds and settled the property of the people, both in
Italy and in Africa See the two Panegyrics, and the laws of this and the
ensuing year, in the Theodosian Code.
. The first time that Constantine honored the senate with his presence, he
recapitulated his own services and exploits in a modest oration, assured that
illustrious order of his sincere regard, and promised to re-establish its
ancient dignity and privileges. The grateful senate repaid these unmeaning
professions by the empty titles of honor, which it was yet in their power to
bestow; and without presuming to ratify the authority of Constantine, they
passed a decree to assign him the first rank among the three Augusti who
governed the Roman world Panegyr. Vet. ix. 20. Lactantius de M. P. c. 44.
Maximin, who was confessedly the eldest Caesar, claimed, with some show of
reason, the first rank among the Augusti.
. Games and festivals were instituted to preserve the fame of his victory, and
several edifices raised at the expense of Maxentius, were dedicated to the
honor of his successful rival. The triumphal arch of Constantine still remains
a melancholy proof of the decline of the arts, and a singular testimony of the
meanest vanity. As it was not possible to find in the capital of the empire, a
sculptor who was capable of adorning that public monument; the arch of Trajan,
without any respect either for his memory or for the rules of propriety, was
stripped of its most elegant figures. The difference of times and persons, of
actions and characters, was totally disregarded. The Parthian captives appear
prostrate at the feet of a prince who never carried his arms beyond the
Euphrates; and curious antiquarians can still discover the head of Trajan on
the trophies of Constantine. The new ornaments which it was necessary to
introduce between the vacancies of ancient sculpture, are executed in the
rudest and most unskilful manner Adhuc cuncta opera quae magnifice
construxerat, urbis fanum, atque basilicam, Flavii meritis patres sacravere.
Aurelius Victor. With regard to the theft of Trajan's trophies, consult
Flaminius Vacca, apud Montfaucon, Diarium Italicum, p. 250, and l'Antiquite
Expliquee of the latter, tom. iv. p. 171.
.

The final abolition of the Praetorian guards and conduct at Rome.
was a measure of prudence as well as of revenge. Those haughty troops, whose
numbers and privileges had been restored, and even augmented, by Maxentius,
were for ever suppressed by Constantine. Their fortified camp was destroyed,
and the few Praetorians who had escaped the fury of the sword, were dispersed
among the legions, and banished to the frontiers of the empire, where they
might be serviceable without again becoming dangerous. Praetoriae legiones ac
subsidia factionibus aptiora quam urbi Romae, sublata penitus; simul arma atque
usus indumenti militaris. Aurelius Victor. Zosimus (l. ii. p. 89.) mentions
this fact as an historian; and it is very pompously celebrated in the ninth
Panegyric.
. By suppressing the troops which were usually stationed in Rome, Constantine
gave the fatal blow to the dignity of the senate and people, and the disarmed
capital was exposed without protection to the insults or neglect of its distant
master. We may observe, that in this last effort to preserve their expiring
freedom, the Romans, from the apprehension of a tribute, had raised Maxentius
to the throne. He exacted that tribute from the senate under the name of a free
gift. They implored the assistance of Constantine. He vanquished the tyrant,
and converted the free gift into a perpetual tax. The senators, according to
the declaration which was required of their property, were divided into several
classes. The most opulent paid annually eight pounds of gold, the next class
paid four, the last two, and those whose poverty might have claimed an
exemption, were assessed however at seven pieces of gold. Besides the regular
members of the senate, their sons, their descendants, and even their relations,
enjoyed the vain privileges, and supported the heavy burdens, of the senatorial
order; nor will it any longer excite our surprise, that Constantine should be
attentive to increase the number of persons who were included under so useful a
description Ex omnibus provinciis optimates viros Curiae tuae pigneraveris; ut
Senatus dignitas.... ex totius Orbis flore consisteret. Nazarius in Panegyr.
Vet. x. 35. The word pigneraveris might almost seem maliciously chosen.
Concerning the senatorial tax, see Zosimus, l. ii. p. 115. the second title of
the sixth book of the Theodosian code, with Godefroy's Commentary, and Memoires
de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii. p. 726.
. After the defeat of Maxentius, the victorious emperor passed no more than two
or three months in Rome, which he visited twice during the remainder of his
life, to celebrate the solemn festivals of the tenth and of the twentieth years
of his reign. Constantine was almost perpetually in motion to exercise the
legions, or to inspect the state of the provinces. Treves, Milan, Aquileia,
Sirmium, Naissus, and Thessalonica, were the occasional places of his
residence, till he founded a NEW ROME on the confines of Europe and Asia From
the Theodosian Code, we may now begin to trace the motions of the emperors; but
the dates both of time and place have frequently been altered by the
carelessness of transcribers.
.

Before Constantine marched into Italy, he had His alliance with Licinius. A.
D. 313. March.
secured the friendship, or at least the neutrality, of Licinius, the Illyrian
emperor. He had promised his sister Constantia in marriage to that prince; but
the celebration of the nuptials was deferred till after the conclusion of the
war, and the interview of the two emperors at Milan, which was appointed for
that purpose, appeared to cement the union of their families and interests
Zosimus (l. ii. p. 89.) observes, that before the war, the sister of
Constantine had been betrothed to Licinius. According to the younger Victor,
Diocletian was invited to the nuptials; but having ventured to plead his age
and infirmities, he received a second letter filled with reproaches for his
supposed partiality to the cause of Maxentius and Maximin.
. In the midst of the public festivity they were suddenly obliged to take leave
of each other. An inroad of the Franks summoned Constantine to the Rhine, and
the hostile approach of the sovereign of Asia demanded the immediate presence
of Licinius. Maximin had War between Maximin and Licinius. A. D. 313.
been the secret ally of Maxentius, and without being discouraged by his fate,
he resolved to try the fortune of a civil war. He moved out of Syria toward
the frontiers of Bythynia in the depth of winter. The season was severe and
tempestuous; great numbers of men as well as horses perished in the snow; and
as the roads were broken up by incessant rains, he was obliged to leave behind
him a considerable part of the heavy baggage, which was unable to follow the
rapidity of his forced marches. By this extraordinary effort of diligence, he
arrived, with a harassed but formidable army, on the banks of the Thracian
Bosphorus, before the lieutenants of Licinius were apprised of his hostile
intentions. Byzantium surrendered to the power of Maximin, after a siege of
eleven days. He was detained some days under the walls of Heraclea; and he had
no sooner taken possession of that city, than he was alarmed by the
intelligence, that Licinius had pitched his camp at the distance of only
eighteen miles. After a fruitless negotiation, The defeat, April 30,
in which the two princes attempted to seduce the fidelity of each other's
adherents, they had recourse to arms. The emperor of the East commanded a
disciplined and veteran army of above seventy thousand men, and Licinius, who
had collected about thirty thousand Illyrians, was at first oppressed by the
superiority of numbers. His military skill, and the firmness of his troops,
restored the day, and obtained a decisive victory. The incredible speed which
Maximin exerted in his flight, is much more celebrated than his prowess in the
battle. Twenty-four hours afterward he was seen pale, trembling, and without
his Imperial ornaments, at Nicomedia, one hundred and sixty miles from the
place of his defeat. The wealth of Asia was yet unexhausted; and though the
flower of his veterans had fallen in the late action, he had still power, if he
could obtain time, to draw very numerous levies from Syria and Egypt. But he
and death of the former.

August.


survived his misfortune only three or four months. His death, which happened
at Tarsus, was variously ascribed to despair, to poison, and to the divine
justice. As Maximin was alike destitute of abilities and of virtue, he was
lamented neither by the people nor by the soldiers. The provinces of the East,
delivered from the terrors of civil war, cheerfully acknowledged the authority
of Licinius Zosimus mentions the defeat and death of Maximin as ordinary
events: but Lactantius expatiates on them (de M. P. c. 45 -- 50.), ascribing
them to the miraculous interposition of Heaven. Licinius at that time was one
of the protectors of the church.
.

The vanquished emperor left behind him two Cruelty of Licinius.
children, a boy of about eight, and a girl of about seven, years old. Their
inoffensive age might have excited compassion; but the compassion of Licinius
was a very feeble resource, nor did it restrain him from extinguishing the name
and memory of his adversary. The death of Severianus will admit of less excuse,
as it was dictated neither by revenge nor by policy. The conqueror had never
received any injury from the father of that unhappy youth, and the short and
obscure reign of Severus in a distant part of the empire was already forgotten.
But the execution of Candidianus was an act of the blackest cruelty and
ingratitude. He was the natural son of Galerius, the friend and benefactor of
Licinius. The prudent father had judged him too young to sustain the weight of
a diadem; but he hoped that under the protection of princes, who were indebted
to his favor for the Imperial purple, Candidianus might pass a secure and
honorable life. He was now advancing toward the twentieth year of his age,
and the royalty of his birth, though unsupported either by merit or ambition,
was sufficient to exasperate the jealous mind of Licinius Lactantius de M. P.
c. 50. Aurelius Victor touches on the different conduct of Licinius, and of
Constantine, in the use of victory.
. To these innocent and illustrious victims of his tyranny, we must add the
wife and daughter of the emperor Diocletian. When that prince conferred on
Galerius the title of Caesar, he had given him in marriage his daughter
Valeria, whose melancholy adventures might furnish a very singular subject for
tragedy. She had fulfilled and even surpassed the duties of Unfortunate fate of
the empress Valeria and her mother.
a wife. As she had not any children herself, she condescended to adopt the
illegitimate son of her husband, and invariably displayed toward the unhappy
Candidianus the tenderness and anxiety of a real mother. After the death of
Galerius, her ample possessions provoked the avarice, and her personal
attractions excited the desires, of his successor Maximin The sensual appetites
of Maximin were gratified at the expense of his subjects. His eunuchs, who
forced away wives and virgins, examined their naked charms with anxious
curiosity, lest any part of their body should be found unworthy of the royal
embraces. Coyness and disdain were considered as treason, and the obstinate
fair one was condemned to be drowned. A custom was gradually introduced, that
no person should marry a wife without the permission of the emperor, "ut ipse
in omnibus nuptiis praegustator esset." Lactantius de M. P. c. 38.
. He had a wife still alive, but divorce was permitted by the Roman law, and
the fierce passions of the tyrant demanded an immediate gratification. The
answer of Valeria was such as became the daughter and widow of emperors; but it
was tempered by the prudence which her defenseless condition compelled her to
observe. She represented to the persons whom Maximin had employed on this
occasion, that even if honor could permit a woman of her character and dignity
to entertain a thought of second nuptials, decency at least must forbid her to
listen to his addresses at a time when the ashes of her husband and his
benefactor were still warm; and while the sorrows of her mind were still
expressed by her mourning garments. She ventured to declare, that she could
place very little confidence in the professions of a man, whose cruel
inconstancy was capable of repudiating a faithful and affectionate wife
Lactantius de M. P. c. 39.
. On this repulse, the love of Maximin was converted into fury, and as
witnesses and judges were always at his disposal, it was easy for him to cover
his fury with an appearance of legal proceedings, and to assault the reputation
as well as the happiness of Valeria. Her estates were confiscated, her eunuchs
and domestics devoted to the most inhuman tortures, and several innocent and
respectable matrons, who were honored with her friendship, suffered death, on
a false accusation of adultery. The empress herself, together with her mother
Prisca, was condemned to exile; and as they were ignominiously hurried from
place to place before they were confined to a sequestered village in the
deserts of Syria, they exposed their shame and distress to the provinces of the
East, which, during thirty years, had respected their august dignity.
Diocletian made several ineffectual efforts to alleviate the misfortunes of his
daughter; and, as the last return that he expected for the Imperial purple,
which he had conferred upon Maximin, he entreated that Valeria might be
permitted to share his retirement of Salona, and to close the eyes of her
afflicted father Diocletian at last sent cognatum suum, quendam militarem ac
potentem virum, to intercede in favor of his daughter (Lactantius de M. P. c,
41.). We are not sufficiently acquainted with the history of these times, to
point out the person who was employed.
. He entreated, but as he could no longer threaten, his prayers were received
with coldness and disdain; and the pride of Maximin was gratified, in treating
Diocletian as a suppliant, and his daughter as a criminal. The death of Maximin
seemed to assure the empresses of a favorable alteration in their fortune. The
public disorders relaxed the vigilance of their guard, and they easily found
means to escape from the place of their exile, and to repair, though with some
precaution, and in disguise, to the court of Licinius. His behavior, in the
first days of his reign, and the honorable reception which he gave to young
Candidianus, inspired Valeria with a secret satisfaction, both on her own
account, and on that of her adopted son. But these grateful prospects were soon
succeeded by horror and astonishment, and the bloody executions which stained
the palace of Nicomedia, sufficiently convinced her, that the throne of Maximin
was filled by a tyrant more inhuman than himself. Valeria consulted her safety
by a hasty flight, and, still accompanied by her mother Prisca, they wandered
above fifteen months Valeria quoque per varias provincias quindecim mensibus
plebeio cultu pervagata. Lactantius de M. P. c. 51. There is some doubt whether
we should compute the fifteen months from the moment of her exile, or from that
of her escape. The expression of pervagata seems to denote the latter; but in
that case we must suppose, that the treatise of Lactantius was written after
the first civil war between Licinius and Constantine. See Cuper, p. 254.
through the provinces, concealed in the disguise of plebeian habits. They were
at length discovered at Thessalonica; and as the sentence of their death was
already pronounced, they were immediately beheaded, and their bodies thrown
into the sea. The people gazed on the melancholy spectacle; but their grief and
indignation were suppressed by the terrors of a military guard. Such was the
unworthy fate of the wife and daughter of Diocletian. We lament their
misfortunes, we cannot discover their crimes, and whatever idea we may justly
entertain of the cruelty of Licinius, it remains a matter of surprise, that he
was not contented with some more secret and decent method of revenge Ita illis
pudicitia et conditio exitio fuit. Lactantius de M. P. e. 51. He relates the
misfortunes of the innocent wife and daughter of Diocletian with a very natural
mixture of pity and exultation.
.

The Roman world was now divided between Quarrel between Constantine and
Licinius. A. D. 314.
Constantine and Licinius, the former of whom was master of the West, and the
latter of the East. It might perhaps have been expected that the conquerors,
fatigued with civil war, and connected by a private as well as public alliance,
would have renounced, or at least would have suspended, any farther designs of
ambition. And yet a year had scarcely elapsed after the death of Maximin,
before the victorious emperors turned their arms against each other. The
genius, the success, and the aspiring temper, of Constantine, may seem to mark
him out as the aggressor; but the perfidious character of Licinius justifies
the most unfavourable suspicions, and by the faint light which history reflects
on this transaction The curious reader, who consults the Valesian Fragment, p.
713, will perhaps accuse me of giving a bold and licentious paraphrase; but if
he considers it with attention, he will acknowledge that my interpretation is
probable and consistent.
, we may discover a conspiracy fomented by his arts against the authority of
his colleague. Constantine had lately given his sister Anastasia in marriage to
Bassianus, a man of a considerable family and fortune, and had elevated his new
kinsman to the rank of Caesar. According to the system of government instituted
by Diocletian, Italy, and perhaps Africa, were designed for his department in
the empire. But the performance of the promised favor was either attended with
so much delay, or accompanied with so many unequal conditions, that the
fidelity of Bassianus was alienated rather than secured by the honorable
distinction which he had obtained. His nomination had been ratified by the
consent of Licinius, and that artful prince, by the means of his emissaries,
soon contrived to enter into a secret and dangerous correspondence with the new
Caesar, to irritate his discontents, and to urge him to the rash enterprise of
extorting by violence what he might in vain solicit from the justice of
Constantine. But the vigilant emperor discovered the conspiracy before it was
ripe for execution; and, after solemnly renouncing the alliance of Bassianus,
despoiled him of the purple, and inflicted the deserved punishment on his
treason and ingratitude. The haughty refusal of Licinius, when he was required
to deliver up the criminals, who had taken refuge in his dominions, confirmed
the suspicions already entertained of his perfidy; and the indignities offered
at Aemona, on the frontiers of Italy, to the statues of Constantine, became the
signal of discord between the two princes The situation of Aemona, or, as it is
now called, Laybach, in Carniola (d'Anville Geographie Ancienne, tom. i. p.
187.), may suggest a conjecture. As it lay to the north-east of the Julian
Alps, that important territory became a natural object of dispute between the
sovereigns of Italy and of Illyricum.
.

The first battle was fought near Cibalis, a city of Pannonia, situated on the
river Save, about First civil war between them.
fifty miles above Sirmium Cibalis or Cibalae (whose name is still preserved in
the obscure ruins of Swilei) was situated about fifty miles from Sirmium, the
capital of Illyricum, and about one hundred from Taurunum, or Belgrade, and the
conflux of the Danube and the Save. The Roman garrisons and cities on those
rivers are finely illustrated by M. d'Anville, in a memoir inserted in
l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii.
. From the inconsiderable forces which in this important contest two such
powerful monarchs brought into the Battle of Cibalis. A. D. 315. 8th Oct.
field, it may be inferred, that the one was suddenly provoked, and that the
other was unexpectedly surprised. The emperor of the West had only twenty
thousand, and the sovereign of the East no more than five and thirty thousand,
men. The inferiority of number was, however, compensated by the advantage of
the ground. Constantine had taken post in a defile about half a mile in
breadth, between a steep hill and a deep morass, and in that situation he
steadily expected and repulsed the first attack of the enemy. He pursued his
success, and advanced into the plain. But the veteran legions of Illyricum
rallied under the standard of a leader who had been trained to arms in the
school of Probus and Diocletian. The missile weapons on both sides were soon
exhausted; the two armies, with equal valor, rushed to a closer engagement of
swords and spears, and the doubtful contest had already lasted from the dawn of
the day to a late hour of the evening, when the right wing, which Constantine
led in person, made a vigorous and decisive charge. The judicious retreat of
Licinius saved the remainder of his troops from a total defeat; but when he
computed his loss, which amounted to more than twenty thousand men, he thought
it unsafe to pass the night in the presence of an active and victorious enemy.
Abandoning his camp and magazines, he marched away with secrecy and diligence
at the head of the greatest part of his cavalry, and was soon removed beyond
the danger of a pursuit. His diligence preserved his wife, his son, and his
treasures, which he had deposited at Sirmium. Licinius passed through that
city, and breaking down the bridge on the Save, hastened to collect a new army
in Dacia and Thrace. In his flight he bestowed the precarious title of Caesar
on Valens, his general of the Illyrian frontier Zosimus (l. ii. p. 90, 91.)
gives a very particular account of this battle; but the descriptions of Zosimus
are rhetorical rather than military.
.

The plain of Mardia in Thrace was the theater Battle of Mardia.
of a second battle no less obstinate and bloody than the former. The troops on
both sides displayed the same valor and discipline; and the victory was once
more decided by the superior abilities of Constantine, who directed a body of
five thousand men to gain an advantageous height, from whence, during the heat
of the action, they attacked the rear of the enemy, and made a very
considerable slaughter. The troops of Licinius, however, presenting a double
front, still maintained their ground, till the approach of night put an end to
the combat, and secured their retreat toward the mountains of Macedonia
Zosimus, l. ii. p. 92, 93. Anonym. Valesian. p. 713. The Epitomes furnish some
circumstances; but they frequently confound the two wars between Licinius and
Constantine.
. The loss of two battles, and of his bravest veterans, reduced the fierce
spirit of Licinius to sue for peace. His ambassador Mistrianus was admitted to
the audience of Constantine; he expatiated on the common topics of moderation
and humanity, which are so familiar to the eloquence of the vanquished;
represented, in the most insinuating language, that the event of the war was
still doubtful, whilst its inevitable calamities were alike pernicious to both
the contending parties; and declared, that he was authorized to propose a
lasting and honorable peace in the name of the two emperors his masters.
Constantine received the mention of Valens with indignation and contempt. It
was not for such a purpose, he sternly replied, that we have advanced from the
shores of the western ocean in an uninterrupted course of combats and
victories, that, after rejecting an ungrateful kinsman, we should accept for
our colleague a contemptible slave. The abdication of Valens is the first
article of the treaty Petrus Patricius in Excerpt. Legate. p. 27. If it should
be thought that (...) signifies more properly a son-in-law, we might
conjecture, that Constantine, assuming the name as well as the duties of a
father, had adopted his younger brothers and sisters, the children of Theodora.
But in the best authors (...) sometimes signifies a husband, sometimes a
father-in-law, and sometimes a kinsman in general. See Spanheim Observat. ad
Julian. Orat. i. p. 72.
. It was necessary to accept this humiliating condition, and the unhappy
Valens, after a reign of a few days, was deprived of the purple and of his
life. As soon as this obstacle was removed, the tranquillity of the Roman world
was easily restored. The successive defeats of Licinius had ruined his forces,
but they had displayed his courage and abilities. His situation was almost
desperate, but the efforts of despair are sometimes formidable; and the good
sense of Constantine preferred a great and certain advantage to a third trial
of the chance of arms. He consented Treaty of peace.

December.


to leave his rival, or, as he again styled Licinius, his friend and brother,
in the possession of Thrace, Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt; but the provinces of
Pannonia, Dalmatia, Dacia, Macedonia, and Greece, were yielded to the western
empire, and the dominions of Constantine now extended from the confines of
Caledonia to the extremity of Peloponnesus. It was stipulated by the same
treaty, that three royal youths, the sons of the emperors, should be called to
the hopes of the succession. Crispus and the young Constantine were soon
afterward declared Caesar's in the West, while the younger Licinius was
invested with the same dignity in the East. In this double proportion of
honors, the conqueror asserted the superiority of his arms and power Zosimus,
l. ii. p. 93. Anonym. Valesian. p. 713. Eutropius, x. 5. Aurelius Victor,
Eusebius. in Chron. Sozomen, l. i. c. 2. Four of these writers affirm that the
promotion of the Caesar's was an article of the treaty. It is however certain,
that the younger Constantine and Licinius were not yet born; and it is highly
probable that the promotion was made the 1st of March, A. D. 317. The treaty
had probably stipulated that two Caesar's might be created by the western, and
one only by the eastern emperor; but each of them reserved to himself the
choice of the persons.
.

The reconciliation of Constantine and Licinius, though it was embittered by
resentment and jealousy, by the remembrance of recent injuries, General peace
and laws of Constantine. A. D. 315 -- 323.
and by the apprehension of future dangers, maintained, however, above eight
years, the tranquillity of the Roman world. As a very regular series of the
Imperial laws commences about this period, it would not be difficult to
transcribe the civil regulations which employed the leisure of Constantine. But
the most important of his institutions are intimately connected with the new
system of policy and religion, which was not perfectly established till the
last and peaceful years of his reign. There are many of his laws, which, as far
as they concern the rights and property of individuals, and the practice of the
bar, are more properly referred to the private than to the public jurisprudence
of the empire; and he published many edicts of so local and temporary a nature,
that they would ill deserve the notice of a general history. Two laws, however,
may be selected from the crowd; the one, for its importance, the other, for its
singularity; the former for its remarkable benevolence, the latter for its
excessive severity. 1. The horrid practice, so familiar to the ancients, of
exposing or murdering their newborn infants, was become every day more
frequent in the provinces, and especially in Italy. It was the effect of
distress; and the distress was principally occasioned by the intolerable burden
of taxes, and by the vexatious as well as cruel prosecutions of the officers of
the revenue against their insolent debtors. The less opulent or less
industrious part of mankind, instead of rejoicing in an increase of family,
deemed it an act of paternal tenderness to release their children from the
impending miseries of a life which they themselves were unable to support. The
humanity of Constantine, moved, perhaps, by some recent and extraordinary
instances of despair, engaged him to address an edict to all the cities of
Italy, and afterward of Africa, directing immediate and sufficient relief to
be given to those parents who should produce, before the magistrates, the
children whom their own poverty would not allow them to educate. But the
promise was too liberal, and the provision too vague, to effect any general or
permanent benefit Codex Theodosian. l. xi. tit. 27. tom. iv. p. 188. with
Godefry's observations. See likewise, l. v. tit. 7 -- 8.
. The law, though it may merit some praise, served rather to display than to
alleviate the public distress. It still remains an authentic monument to
contradict and confound those venal orators, who were too well satisfied with
their own situation to discover either vice or misery under the government of a
generous sovereign Omnia foris placita, domi prospera, annonae ubertate,
fructuum copia, etc. Panegyr. Vet. x. 38. This oration of Nazarius was
pronounced on the day of the Quinquennalia of the Caesar's, the 1st of March, A.
D. 321.
. 2. The laws of Constantine against rapes were dictated with very little
indulgence, for the most amiable weaknesses of human nature; since the
description of that crime was applied not only to the brutal violence which
compelled, but even to the gentle seduction which might persuade, an unmarried
woman, under the age of twenty-five, to leave the house of her parents. The
successful ravisher was punished with death; and as if simple death was
inadequate to the enormity of his guilt, he was either burnt alive, or torn in
pieces by wild beasts in the amphitheatre. The virgin's declaration that she
had been carried away with her own consent, instead of saving her lover,
exposed her to share his fate. The duty of a public prosecution was entrusted
to the parents of the guilty or unfortunate maid; and if the sentiments of
Nature prevailed on them to dissemble the injury, and to repair by a subsequent
marriage the honor of their family, they were themselves punished by exile and
confiscation. The slaves, whether male or female, who were convicted of having
been accessory to the rape or seduction, were burnt alive, or put to death by
the ingenious torture of pouring down their throats a quantity of melted lead.
As the crime was of a public kind, the accusation was permitted even to
strangers. The commencement of the action was not limited to any term of years,
and the consequences of the sentence were extended to the innocent offspring of
such an irregular union See the edict of Constantine, addressed to the Roman
people, in the Theodosian Code, l. ix. tit. 24. tom. iii. p. 189.
. But whenever the offense inspires less horror than the punishment, the rigor
of penal law is obliged to give way to the common feelings of mankind. The most
odious parts of this edict were softened or repealed in the subsequent reigns
His son very fairly assigns the true reason of the repeal, Ne sub specie
atrocioris judicii aliqua in ulciscendo crimine dilatio nasceretur. Cod. Theod.
tom. iii. p. 193.
; and even Constantine himself very frequently alleviated, by partial acts of
mercy, the stern temper of his general institutions. Such, indeed, was the
singular humor of that emperor, who showed himself as indulgent, and even
remiss, in the execution of his laws, as he was severe, and even cruel, in the
enacting of them. It is scarcely possible to observe a more decisive symptom of
weakness, either in the character of the prince, or in the constitution of the
government Eusebius (in Vita Constant. l. iii. c. 1.) chooses to affirm, that
in the reign of his hero, the sword of justice hung idle in the hands of the
magistrates. Eusebius himself (l. iv. c. 29. 54.) and the Theodosian Code will
inform us, that this excessive lenity was not owing to the want either of
atrocious criminals or of penal laws.
.

The civil administration was sometimes interrupted The Gothic war.
by the military defense of the empire. Crispus, a youth of the most amiable
character, A. D. 322.
who had received with the title of Caesar the command of the Rhine,
distinguished his conduct, as well as valor, in several victories over the
Franks and Alemanni; and taught the barbarians of that frontier to dread the
eldest son of Constantine, and the grandson of Constantius Nazarius in Panegyr.
Vet. x. The victory of Crispus over the Alemanni, is expressed on some medals.
. The emperor himself had assumed the more difficult and important province of
the Danube. The Goths, who in the time of Claudius and Aurelian had felt the
weight of the Roman arms, respected the power of the empire, even in the midst
of its intestine divisions. But the strength of that warlike nation was now
restored by a peace of near fifty years; a new generation had arisen, who no
longer remembered the misfortunes of ancient days: the Sarmatians of the lake
Moeotis followed the Gothic standard either as subjects or as allies, and their
united force was poured upon the countries of Illyricum. Campona, Margus, and
Bononia, appear to have been the scenes of several memorable sieges and battles
See Zosimus, l. ii. p. 93, 94; though the narrative of that historian is
neither clear nor consistent. The Panegyric of Optatianus (c. 23.) mentions the
alliance of the Sarmatians with the Carpi and Getae, and points out the several
fields of battle. It is supposed, that the Sarmatian games, celebrated in the
month of November, derived their origin from the success of this war.
; and though Constantine encountered a very obstinate resistance, he prevailed
at length in the contest, and the Goths were compelled to purchase an
ignominious retreat, by restoring the booty and prisoners which they had taken.
Nor was this advantage sufficient to satisfy the indignation of the emperor. He
resolved to chastise as well as to repulse the insolent barbarians who had
dared to invade the territories of Rome. At the head of his legions he passed
the Danube, after repairing the bridge which had been constructed by Trajan,
penetrated into the strongest recesses of Dacia In the Caesar's of Julian (p.
329. Commentaire de Spanheim, p. 252.) Constantine boasts, that he had
recovered the province (Dacia) which Trajan had subdued. But it is insinuated
by Silenus, that the conquests of Constantine were like the gardens of Adonis,
which fade and wither almost the moment they appear.
, and when he had inflicted a severe revenge, condescended to give peace to the
suppliant Goths, on condition that, as often as they were required, they should
supply his armies with a body of forty thousand soldiers Jornandes de Rebus
Geticis, c. 21. I know not whether we may entirely depend on his authority.
Such an alliance has a very recent air, and scarcely is suited to the maxims of
the beginning of the fourth century.
. Exploits like these were no doubt honorable to Constantine, and beneficial
to the state; but it may surely be questioned, whether they can justify the
exaggerated assertion of Eusebius, that ALL SCYTHIA, as far as the extremity of
the North, divided as it was into so many names and nations of the most various
and savage manners, had been added by his victorious arms to the Roman empire
Eusebius in Vit. Constantin. l. i. c. 8. This passage, however, is taken from a
general declamation on the greatness of Constantine, and not from any
particular account of the Gothic war.
.

In this exalted state of glory it was impossible Second civil war between
Constantine and Licinius. A. D. 323.
that Constantine should any longer endure a partner in the empire. Confiding
in the superiority of his genius and military power, he determined, without any
previous injury, to exert them for the destruction of Licinius, whose advanced
age and unpopular vices seemed to offer a very easy conquest Constantinus
tamen, vir ingens, et omnia efficere nitens quae animo praeparasset, simul
principatum totius orbis affectans, Licinio bellum intulit. Eutropius, x. 5.
Zosimus, l. ii. p. 89. The reasons which they have assigned for the first civil
war may, with more propriety, be applied to the second.
. But the old emperor, awakened by the approaching danger, deceived the
expectations of his friends as well as of his enemies. Calling forth that
spirit and those abilities by which he had deserved the friendship of Galerius
and the Imperial purple, he prepared himself for the contest, collected the
forces of the East, and soon filled the plains of Hadrianople with his troops,
and the Streights of the Hellespont with his fleet. The army consisted of one
hundred and fifty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand horse; and as the cavalry
was drawn, for the most part, from Phrygia and Cappadocia, we may conceive a
more favorable opinion of the beauty of the horses, than of the courage and
dexterity of their riders. The fleet was composed of three hundred and fifty
galleys of three ranks of oars. An hundred and thirty of these were furnished
by Egypt, and the adjacent coast of Africa. An hundred and ten sailed from the
ports of Phoenicia and the isle of Cyprus; and the maritime countries of
Bithynia, Ionia, and Caria, were likewise obliged to provide an hundred and ten
galleys. The troops of Constantine were ordered to rendezvous at Thessalonica;
they amounted to above an hundred and twenty thousand horse and foot Zosimus,
l. ii. p. 94, 95.
. Their emperor was satisfied with their martial appearance, and his army
contained more soldiers, though fewer men, than that of his eastern competitor.
The legions of Constantine were levied in the warlike provinces of Europe;
action had confirmed their discipline, victory had elevated their hopes, and
there were among them a great number of veterans, who, after seventeen glorious
campaigns under the same leader, prepared themselves to deserve an honorable
dismission by a last effort of their valor Constantine was very attentive to
the privileges and comforts of his fellow-veterans (Conveterani), as he now
began to style them. See the Theodosian Code, l. vii. tit. 20. tom. ii. p. 419.
429.
. But the naval preparations of Constantine were in every respect much inferior
to those of Licinius. The maritime cities of Greece sent their respective
quotas of men and ships to the celebrated harbor of Piraeus, and their united
forces consisted of no more than two hundred small vessels: a very feeble
armament, if it is compared with those formidable fleets which were equipped
and maintained by the republic of Athens during the Peloponnesian war Whilst
the Athenians maintained the empire of the sea, their fleet consisted of three,
and afterward of four, hundred galleys of three ranks of oars, all completely
equipped and ready for immediate service. The arsenal in the port of Piraeus
had cost the republic a thousand talents, about two hundred and sixteen
thousand pounds. See Thucydides de Bell. Peloponn. l. ii. c. 13. and Meursius de
Fortuna Attica, c. 19.
. Since Italy was no longer the seat of government, the naval establishments of
Misenum and Ravenna had been gradually neglected; and as the shipping and
mariners of the empire were supported by commerce rather than by war, it was
natural that they should the most abound in the industrious provinces of Egypt
and Asia. It is only surprising that the eastern emperor, who possessed so
great a superiority at sea, should have neglected the opportunity of carrying
an offensive war into the center of his rival's dominions.

Instead of embracing such an active resolution, Battle of Hadrianople. A. D.
323. July 3.
which might have changed the whole face of the war, the prudent Licinius
expected the approach of his rival in a camp near Hadrianople, which he had
fortified with an anxious care that betrayed his apprehension of the event.
Constantine directed his march from Thessalonica toward that part of Thrace,
till he found himself stopped by the broad and rapid stream of the Hebrus, and
discovered the numerous army of Licinius, which filled the steep ascent of the
hill, from the river to the city of Hadrianople. Many days were spent in
doubtful and distant skirmishes; but at length the obstacles of the passage and
of the attack were removed by the intrepid conduct of Constantine. In this
place we might relate a wonderful exploit of Constantine, which, though it can
scarcely be paralleled either in poetry or romance, is celebrated, not by a
venal orator devoted to his fortune, but by an historian, the partial enemy of
his fame. We are assured that the valiant emperor threw himself into the river
Hebrus, accompanied only by twelve horsemen, and that by the effort or terror
of his invincible arm, he broke, slaughtered, and put to slight a host of an
hundred and fifty thousand men. The credulity of Zosimus prevailed so strongly
over his passion, that among the events of the memorable battle of Hadrianople,
he seems to have selected and embellished, not the most important, but the most
mavelous. The valor and danger of Constantine are attested by a slight wound
which he received in the thigh, but it may be discovered even from an imperfect
narration, and perhaps a corrupted text, that the victory was obtained no less
by the conduct of the general than by the courage of the hero; that a body of
five thousand archers marched round to occupy a thick wood in the rear of the
enemy, whose attention was diverted by the construction of a bridge, and that
Licinius, perplexed by so many artful evolutions, was reluctantly drawn from
his advantageous post to combat on equal ground in the plain. The contest was
no longer equal. His confused multitude of new levies was easily vanquished by
the experienced veterans of the West. Thirty-four thousand men are reported to
have been slain. The fortified camp of Licinius was taken by assault the
evening of the battle; the greater part of the fugitives, who had retired to
the mountains, surrendered themselves the next day to the discretion of the
conqueror; and his rival, who could no longer keep the field, confined himself
within the walls of Byzantium Zosimus, l. ii. p. 95, 96. This great battle is
described in the Valesian fragment (p. 714.) in a clear though concise manner.
"Licinius vero circum Hadrianopolin maximo exercitu latera ardui montis
impleverat; illuc toto agmine Constantinus inflexit. Cum bellum terra marique
traheretur, quamvis per arduum suis nitentibus, attamen disciplina militari et
felicitate, Constantinus Licinii confusum et sine ordine agentem vicit
exercitum; leviter femore sauciatus."
.

The siege of Byzantium, which was immediately Siege of Byzantium, and naval
victory of Crispus.
undertaken by Constantine, was attended with great labor and uncertainty. In
the late civil wars, the fortifications of that place, so justly considered as
the key of Europe and Asia, had been repaired and strengthened; and as long as
Licinius remained master of the sea, the garrison was much less exposed to the
danger of famine than the army of the besiegers. The naval commanders of
Constantine were summoned to his camp, and received his positive orders to
force the passage of the Hellespont, as the fleet of Licinius, instead of
seeking and destroying their feeble enemy, continued inactive in those narrow
streights where its superiority of numbers was of little use or advantage.
Crispus, the emperor's eldest son, was entrusted with the execution of this
daring enterprise, which he performed with so much courage and success, that he
deserved the esteem, and most probably excited the jealousy, of his father. The
engagement lasted two days, and in the evening of the first, the contending
fleets, after a considerable and mutual loss, retired into their respective
harbors of Europe and Asia. The second day about noon a strong south wind
Zosimus, l. ii. p. 97, 98. The current always sets out of the Hellespont; and
when it is assisted by a north wind, no vessel can attempt the passage. A south
wind renders the force of the current almost imperceptible. See Tournefort's
Voyage au Levant, Let. xi.
sprang up, which carried the vessels of Crispus against the enemy, and as the
casual advantage was improved by his skilful intrepidity, he soon obtained a
complete victory. An hundred and thirty vessels were destroyed, five thousand
men were slain, and Amandus, the admiral of the Asiatic fleet, escaped with the
utmost difficulty to the shores of Chalcedon. As soon as the Hellespont was
open, a plentiful convoy of provisions flowed into the camp of Constantine, who
had already advanced the operations of the siege. He constructed artificial
mounds of earth of an equal height with the ramparts of Byzantium. The lofty
towers which were erected on that foundation, galled the besieged with large
stones and darts from the military engines, and the battering rams had shaken
the walls in several places. If Licinius persisted much longer in the defense,
he exposed himself to be involved in the ruin, of the place. Before he was
surrounded he prudently removed his person and treasures to Chalcedon in Asia;
and as he was always desirous of associating companions to the hopes and
dangers of his fortune, he now bestowed the title of Caesar on Martinianus, who
exercised one of the most important offices of the empire Aurelius Victor.
Zosimus, l. ii. p. 98. According to the latter, Martinianus was Magister
Officiorum (he uses the Latin appellation in Greek). Some medals seem to
intimate, that during his short reign he received the title of Augustus.
.

Such were still the resources, and such the Battle of Chrysopolis.
abilities, of Licinius, that, after so many successive defeats, he collected
in Bithynia a new army of fifty or sixty thousand men, while the activity of
Constantine was employed in the siege of Byzantium. The vigilant emperor did
not however neglect the last struggles of his antagonist. A considerable part
of his victorious army was transported over the Bosphorus in small vessels, and
the decisive engagement was sought soon after their landing on the heights of
Chrysopolis, or, as it is now called, of Scutari. The troops of Licinius,
though they were lately raised, ill armed, and worse disciplined, made head
against their conquerors with fruitless but desperate valor, till a total
defeat and the slaughter of five and twenty thousand men irretrievably
determined the fate of their leader Eusebius (in Vita Constantin. l. ii. c. 16,
17.) ascribes this decisive victory to the pious prayers of the emperor. The
Valesian fragment (p. 714.) mentions a body of Gothic auxiliaries, under their
chief Aliquaca, who adhered to the party of Licinius.
. He retired to Submission and death of Licinius.
Nicomedia, rather with the view of gaining some time for negotiation, than
with the hope of any effectual defense. Constantia, his wife and the sister of
Constantine, interceded with her brother in favor of her husband, and obtained
from his policy rather than from his compassion, a solemn promise, confirmed by
an oath, that after the sacrifice of Martinianus, and the resignation of the
purple, Licinius himself should be permitted to pass the remainder of his life
in peace and affluence. The behavior of Constantia, and her relation to the
contending parties, naturally recals the remembrance of that virtuous matron
who was the sister of Augustus, and the wife of Antony. But the temper of
mankind was altered, and it was no longer esteemed infamous for a Roman to
survive his honor and independence. Licinius solicited and accepted the pardon
of his offenses, laid himself and his purple at the feet of his lord and
master, was raised from the ground with insulting pity, was admitted the same
day to the Imperial banquet, and soon afterward was sent away to Thessalonica,
which had been chosen for the place of his confinement Zosimus, l. ii. p. 102.
Victor Junior in Epitome. Anonym. Valesian. p. 714.
. His confinement was soon terminated by death, and it is doubtful whether a
tumult of the soldiers, or a decree of the senate, was suggested as a motive
for his execution. According to the rules of tyranny, he was accused of forming
a conspiracy, and of holding a treasonable correspondence with the barbarians;
but as he was never convicted, either by his own conduct or by any legal
evidence, we may perhaps be allowed, from his weakness, to presume his
innocence Contra religionem sacramenti Thessalonicae privatus occisus est.
Eutropius, x. 6. and his evidence is confirmed by Jerome (in Chronic.) as well
as by Zosimus, l. ii. p. 102. The Valesian writer is the only one who mentions
the soldiers, and it is Zonaras alone who calls in the assistance of the
senate. Eusebius prudently slides over this delicate transaction. But Sozomen,
a century afterward, ventures to assert the treasonable practices of Licinius.
. The memory of Licinius was branded with infamy, his statues were thrown down,
and, by a hasty edict, of such mischievous tendency that it was almost
immediately corrected, all his laws, and all the judicial proceedings of his
reign, were at once abolished See the Theodosian Code, l. 15. tit. 15. tom. v.
p. 404, 405. These edicts of Constantine betray a degree of passion and
precipitancy very unbecoming of the character of a lawgiver.
. By Reunion of the empire. A. D. 324.
this victory of Constantine, the Roman world was again united under the
authority of one emperor, thirty-seven years after Diocletian had divided his
power and provinces with his associate Maximian.

The successive steps of the elevation of Constantine, from his first assuming
the purple at York, to the resignation of Licinius at Nicomedia, have been
related with some minuteness and precision, not only as the events are in
themselves both interesting and important, but still more, as they contributed
to the decline of the empire by the expense of blood and treasure, and by the
perpetual increase, as well of the taxes, as of the military establishment. The
foundation of Constantinople, and the establishment of the Christian religion,
were the immediate and memorable consequences of this revolution.

CHAP. XV. The Progress of the Christian Religion, and the Sentiments, Manners,
Numbers, and Condition, of the primitive Christians.
A CANDID but rational inquiry into the progress and establishment of
Christianity, may be considered as a very essential part of the Importance of
the inquiry.
history of the Roman empire. While that great body was invaded by open
violence, or undermined by slow decay, a pure and humble religion gently
insinuated itself into the minds of men, grew up in silence and obscurity,
derived new vigor from opposition, and finally erected the triumphant banner
of the cross on the ruins of the Capitol. Nor was the influence of Christianity
confined to the period or to the limits of the Roman empire. After a revolution
of thirteen or fourteen centuries, that religion is still professed by the
nations of Europe, the most distinguished portion of human kind in arts and
learning as well as in arms. By the industry and zeal of the Europeans, it has
been widely diffused to the most distant shores of Asia and Africa; and by the
means of their colonies has been firmly established from Canada to Chili, in a
world unknown to the ancients.

But this inquiry, however useful or entertaining, Its difficulties.
is attended with two peculiar difficulties. The scanty and suspicious
materials of ecclesiastical history seldom enable us to dispel the dark cloud
that hangs over the first age of the church. The great law of impartiality too
often obliges us to reveal the imperfections of the uninspired teachers and
believers of the gospel; and, to a careless observer, their faults may seem to
cast a shade on the faith which they professed. But the scandal of the pious
Christian, and the fallacious triumph of the Infidel, should cease as soon as
they recollect not only by whom, but likewise to whom, the Divine Revelation
was given. The theologian may indulge the pleasing task of describing Religion
as she descended from Heaven, arrayed in her native purity. A more melancholy
duty is imposed on the historian. He must discover the inevitable mixture of
error and corruption, which she contracted in a long residence upon earth,
among a weak and degenerate race of beings.

Our curiosity is naturally prompted to inquire Five causes of the growth of
Christianity.
by what means the Christian faith obtained so remarkable a victory over the
established religions of the earth. To this inquiry, an obvious but
satisfactory answer may be returned; that it was owing to the convincing
evidence of the doctrine itself, and to the ruling providence of its great
Author. But as truth and reason seldom find so favorable a reception in the
world, and as the wisdom of Providence frequently condescends to use the
passions of the human heart, and the general circumstances of mankind, as
instruments to execute its purpose; we may still be permitted, though with
becoming submission, to ask, not indeed what were the first, but what were the
secondary causes of the rapid growth of the Christian church. It will, perhaps,
appear, that it was most effectually favored and assisted by the five
following causes: I. The inflexible, and, if we may use the expression, the
intolerant zeal of the Christians, derived, it is true, from the Jewish
religion, but purified from the narrow and unsocial spirit, which, instead of
inviting, had deterred the Gentiles from embracing the law of Moses. II. The
doctrine of a future life, improved by every additional circumstance which
could give weight and efficacy to that important truth. III. The miraculous
powers ascribed to the primitive church. IV. The pure and austere morals of the
Christians. V. The union and discipline of the Christian republic, which
gradually formed an independent and increasing state in the heart of the Roman
empire.

I. We have already described the religious THE FIRST CAUSE. Zeal of the Jews.
harmony of the ancient world, and the facility with which the most different
and even hostile nations embraced, or at least respected, each other's
superstitions. A single people refused to join in the common intercourse of
mankind. The Jews, who under the Assyrian and Persian monarchies, had
languished for many ages the most despised portion of their slaves Dum Assyrios
penes, Medosque, et Persas Oriens fuit, despectissima pars servientium. Tacit.
Hist. v. 8. Herodotus, who visited Asia whilst it obeyed the last of those
empires, slightly mentions the Syrians of Palestine, who, according to their
own confession, had received from Egypt the rite of circumcision. See l. ii. c.
104.
, emerged from obscurity under the successors of Alexander; and as they
multiplied to a surprising degree in the East, and afterward in the West, they
soon excited the curiosity and wonder of other nations Diodorus Siculus, l. xl.
Dion Cassius, l. xxxvii. p. 121. Tacit. Hist. v. 1 -- 9. Justin, xxxvi. 2, 3.
. The sullen obstinacy with which they maintained their peculiar rites and
unsocial manners, seemed to mark them out a distinct species of men, who boldly
professed, or who faintly disguised, their implacable hatred to the rest of
human-kind Tradidit arcano quaecunque volumine Moses,
Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti,
Quaesitos ad fontes solos deducere verpas.
The letter of this law is not to be found in the present volume of Moses. But
the wise, the humane Maimonides openly teaches, that if an idolater fall into
the water, a Jew ought not to save him from instant death. See Basnage,
Histoire des Juifs, l. vi. c. 28.


. Neither the violence of Antiochus, nor the arts of Herod, nor the example of
the circumjacent nations, could ever persuade the Jews to associate with the
institutions of Moses the elegant mythology of the Greeks A Jewish sect, which
indulged themselves in a sort of occasional conformity, derived from Herod, by
whose example and authority they had been seduced, the name of Herodians. But
their numbers were so inconsiderable, and their duration so short, that
Josephus has not thought them worthy of his notice. See Prideaux's Connection,
vol. ii. p. 285.
. According to the maxims of universal toleration, the Romans protected a
superstition which they despised Cicero pro Flacco, c. 28.
. The polite Augustus condescended to give orders, that sacrifices should be
offered for his prosperity in the temple of Jerusalem Philo de Legatione.
Augustus left a foundation for a perpetual sacrifice. Yet he approved of the
neglect which his grandson Caius expressed toward the temple of Jerusalem. See
Sueton. in August. c. 93. and Casaubon's notes on that passage.
; while the meanest of the posterity of Abraham, who should have paid the same
homage to the Jupiter of the Capitol, would have been an object of abhorrence
to himself and to his brethren. But the moderation of the conquerors was
insufficient to appease the jealous prejudices of their subjects, who were
alarmed and scandalized at the ensigns of paganism, which necessarily
introduced themselves into a Roman province See, in particular, Joseph.
Antiquitat. xvii. 6. xviii. 3. and De Bell. Judaic. i. 33. and ii. 9. Edit.
Havercamp.
. The mad attempt of Caligula to place his own statue in the temple of
Jerusalem, was defeated by the unanimous resolution of a people who dreaded
death much less than such an idolatrous profanation Jussi a Caio Caesare,
effigiem ejus in templo locare arma potius sumpsere. Tacit. Hist. v. 9. Philo
and Josephus gave a very circumstantial, but a very rhetorical, account of this
transaction, which exceedingly perplexed the governor of Syria. At the first
mention of this idolatrous proposal, King Agrippa fainted away; and did not
recover his senses till the third day.
. Their attachment to the law of Moses was equal to their detestation of
foreign religions. The current of zeal and devotion, as it was contracted into
a narrow channel, ran with the strength, and sometimes with the fury, of a
torrent.

This inflexible perseverance, which appeared Its gradual increase.
so odious or so ridiculous to the ancient world, assumes a more awful
character, since Providence has deigned to reveal to us the mysterious history
of the chosen people. But the devout and even scrupulous attachment to the
Mosaic religion, so conspicuous among the Jews who lived under the second
temple, becomes still more surprising, if it is compared with the stubborn
incredulity of their forefathers. When the law was given in thunder from Mount
Sinai; when the tides of the ocean, and the course of the planets were
suspended for the convenience of the Israelites; and when temporal rewards and
punishments were the immediate consequences of their piety or disobedience,
they perpetually relapsed into rebellion against the visible majesty of their
Divine King, placed the idols of the nations in the sanctuary of Jehovah, and
imitated every fantastic ceremony that was practiced in the tents of the Arabs,
or in the cities of Phoenicia For the enumeration of the Syrian and Arabian
deities, it may be observed, that Milton has comprised in one hundred and
thirty very beautiful lines, the two large and learned syntagmas, which Seldom
had composed on that abstruse subject.
. As the protection of Heaven was deservedly withdrawn from the ungrateful
race, their faith acquired a proportionable degree of vigor and purity. The
contemporaries of Moses and Joshua had beheld with careless indifference the
most amazing miracles. Under the pressure of every calamity, the belief of
those miracles has preserved the Jews of a later period from the universal
contagion of idolatry; and in contradiction to every known principle of the
human mind, that singular people seems to have yielded a stronger and more
ready assent to the traditions of their remote ancestors, than to the evidence
of their own senses How long will this people provoke me? and how long will it
be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have shown among them?
(Numbers, xiv. 11.) It would be easy, but it would be unbecoming, to justify
the complaint of the Deity from the whole tenor of the Mosaic history.
.

The Jewish religion was admirably fitted for Their religion better suited to
defense than to conquest.
defense, but it was never designed for conquest; and it seems probable that
the number of proselytes was never much superior to that of apostates. The
divine promises were originally made, and the distinguishing rite of
circumcision was enjoined to a single family. When the posterity of Abraham had
multiplied like the sands of the sea, the Deity, from whose mouth they received
a system of laws and ceremonies, declared himself the proper and as it were the
national God of Israel; and with the most jealous care separated his favorite
people from the rest of mankind. The conquest of the land of Canaan was
accompanied with so many wonderful and with so many bloody circumstances, that
the victorious Jews were left in a state of irreconcilable hostility with all
their neighbors. They had been commanded to extirpate some of the most
idolatrous tribes, and the execution of the Divine will had seldom been
retarded by the weakness of humanity. With the other nations they were
forbidden to contract any marriages or alliances, and the prohibition of
receiving them into the congregation, which in some cases was perpetual, almost
always extended to the third, to the seventh, or even to the tenth generation.
The obligation of preaching to the Gentiles the faith of Moses, had never been
inculcated as a precept of the law, nor were the Jews inclined to impose it on
themselves as a voluntary duty. In the admission of new citizens, that unsocial
people was actuated by the selfish vanity of the Greeks, rather than by the
generous policy of Rome. The descendants of Abraham were flattered by the
opinion, that they alone were the heirs of the covenant, and they were
apprehensive of diminishing the value of their inheritance, by sharing it too
easily with the strangers of the earth. A larger acquaintance with mankind,
extended their knowledge without correcting their prejudices; and whenever the
God of Israel acquired any new votaries, he was much more indebted to the
inconstant humor of polytheism than to the active zeal of his own missionaries
All that relates to the Jewish proselytes has been very ably treated by
Basnage, Hist. des Juifs, l. vi. c. 6, 7.
. The religion of Moses seems to be instituted for a particular country as well
as for a single nation; and if a strict obedience had been paid to the order,
that every male, three times in the year, should present himself before the
Lord Jehovah, it would have been impossible that the Jews could ever have
spread themselves beyond the narrow limits of the promised land See Exodus xxiv.
23. Deuteronomy. xvi. 16. the commentators, and a very sensible note in the Universal
History, vol. i. p. 603. edit. fol.
. That obstacle was indeed removed by the destruction of the temple of
Jerusalem; but the most considerable part of the Jewish religion was involved
in its destruction; and the pagans, who had long wondered at the strange report
of an empty sanctuary When Pompey, using or abusing the right of conquest,
entered into the Holy of Holies, it was observed with amazement, Nulla intus
Deum effigy, vacuam sedem et inania arcana. Tacit. Hist. v. 9. It was a
popular saying, with regard to the Jews,

Nil praeter nubes et coeli numen adorant.


, were at a loss to discover what could be the object, or what could be the
instruments, of a worship which was destitute of temples and of altars, of
priests and of sacrifices. Yet even in their fallen state, the Jews, still
asserting their lofty and exclusive privileges, shunned, instead of courting,
the society of strangers. They still insisted with inflexible rigor on those
parts of the law which it was in their power to practice. Their peculiar
distinctions of days, of meats, and a variety of trivial though burdensome
observances, were so many objects of disgust and aversion for the other
nations, to whose habits and prejudices they were diametrically opposite. The
painful and even dangerous rite of circumcision was alone capable of repelling
a willing proselyte from the door of the synagogue A second kind of
circumcision was inflicted on a Samaritan or Egyptian proselyte. The sullen
indifference of the Talmudists, with respect to the conversion of strangers,
may be seen in Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. vi. c. 6.
.

Under these circumstances, Christianity offered More liberal zeal of
Christianity.
itself to the world, armed with the strength of the Mosaic law, and delivered
from the weight of its fetters. An exclusive zeal for the truth of religion,
and the unity of God, was as carefully inculcated in the new as in the ancient
system: and whatever was now revealed to mankind concerning the nature and
designs of the Supreme Being, was fitted to increase their reverence for that
mysterious doctrine. The divine authority of Moses and the prophets was
admitted, and even established, as the firmest basis of Christianity. From the
beginning of the world, an uninterrupted series of predictions had announced
and prepared the long expected coming of the Messiah, who, in compliance with
the gross apprehensions of the Jews, had been more frequently represented under
the character of a King and Conqueror, than under that of a Prophet, a Martyr,
and the Son of God. By his expiatory sacrifice, the imperfect sacrifices of the
temple were at once consummated and abolished. The ceremonial law, which
consisted only of types and figures, was succeeded by a pure and spiritual
worship, equally adapted to all climates, as well as to every condition of
mankind; and to the initiation of blood, was substituted a more harmless
initiation of water. The promise of divine favor, instead of being partially
confined to the posterity of Abraham, was universally proposed to the freeman
and the slave, to the Greek and to the barbarian, to the Jew and to the
Gentile. Every privilege that could raise the proselyte from earth to Heaven,
that could exalt his devotion, secure his happiness, or even gratify that
secret pride, which, under the semblance of devotion, insinuates itself into
the human heart, was still reserved for the members of the Christian church;
but at the same time all mankind was permitted, and even solicited, to accept
the glorious distinction, which was not only proffered as a favor, but imposed
as an obligation. It became the most sacred duty of a new convert to diffuse
among his friends and relations the inestimable blessing which he had received,
and to warn them against a refusal that would be severely punished as a
criminal disobedience to the will of a benevolent but all-powerful deity.

The enfranchisement of the church from the Obstinacy and reasons of the
believing Jews.
bonds of the synagogue, was a work however of some time and of some
difficulty. The Jewish converts, who acknowledged Jesus in the character of the
Messiah foretold by their ancient oracles, respected him as a prophetic teacher
of virtue and religion; but they obstinately adhered to the ceremonies of their
ancestors, and were desirous of imposing them on the Gentiles, who continually
augmented the number of believers. These Judaising Christians seem to have
argued with some degree of plausibility from the divine origin of the Mosaic
law, and from the immutable perfections of its great Author. They affirmed,
that if the Being, who is the same through all eternity, had designed to
abolish those sacred rites which had served to distinguish his chosen people,
the repeal of them would have been no less clear and solemn than their first
promulgation: that, instead of those frequent declarations, which either
suppose or assert the perpetuity of the Mosaic religion, it would have been
represented as a provisionary scheme intended to last only till the coming of
the Messiah, who should instruct mankind in a more perfect mode of faith and of
worship These arguments were urged with great ingenuity by the Jew Orobio, and
refuted with equal ingenuity and candor by the Christian Limborch. See the
Amica Collatio (it well deserves that name), or account of the dispute between
them.
: that the Messiah himself, and his disciples who conversed with him on earth,
instead of authorizing by their example the most minute observances of the
Mosaic law Jesus -- circumcisus erat; cibis utebatur Judaicis; vestitu simili;
purgatos scabie mittebat ad sacerdotes; Paschata et alios dies festos religiose
observabat: Si quos sanavit sabatho, ostendit non tantum ex lege, sed et
exceptis sententiis talia opera sabatho non interdicta. Grotius de veritate
Religionis Christianae, l. v. c. 7. A little afterward (c. 12.), he expatiates
on the condescension of the apostles.
, would have published to the world the abolition of those useless and obsolete
ceremonies, without suffering Christianity to remain during so many years
obscurely confounded among the sects of the Jewish church. Arguments like these
appear to have been used in the defense of the expiring cause of the Mosaic
law; but the industry of our learned divines has abundantly explained the
ambiguous language of the Old Testament, and the ambiguous conduct of the
apostolic teachers. It was proper gradually to unfold the system of the Gospel,
and to pronounce, with the utmost caution and tenderness, a sentence of
condemnation so repugnant to the inclination and prejudices of the believing
Jews.

The history of the church of Jerusalem affords a lively proof of the necessity
of those precautions, and of the deep impression which the Jewish The Nazarene
church of Jerusalem.
religion had made on the minds of its sectaries. The first fifteen bishops of
Jerusalem were all circumcised Jews; and the congregation over which they
presided, united the law of Moses with the doctrine of Christ Paene omnes
Christum Deum sub legis observatione credebant. Sulpicius Severus, ii. 31. See
Eusebius, Hist. Ecclesiast. l. iv. c. 5.
. It was natural that the primitive tradition of a church which was founded
only forty days after the death of Christ, and was governed almost as many
years under the immediate inspection of his apostle, should be received as the
standard of orthodoxy Mosheim de Rebus Christianis ante Constantinum Magnum, p.
153. In this masterly performance, which I shall often have occasion to quote,
he enters much more fully into the state of the primitive church, than he has
an opportunity of doing in his General History.
. The distant churches very frequently appealed to the authority of their
venerable Parent, and relieved her distresses by a liberal contribution of
alms. But when numerous and opulent societies were established in the great
cities of the empire, in Antioch, Alexandria, Ephesus, Corinth, and Rome, the
reverence which Jerusalem had inspired to all the Christian colonies insensibly
diminished. The Jewish converts, or, as they were afterward called, the
Nazarenes, who had laid the foundations of the church, soon found themselves
overwhelmed by the increasing multitudes, that from all the various religions
of polytheism inlisted under the banner of Christ: and the Gentiles, who, with
the approbation of their peculiar apostle, had rejected the intolerable weight
of Mosaic ceremonies, at length refused to their more scrupulous brethren the
same toleration which at first they had humbly solicited for their own
practice. The ruin of the temple, of the city, and of the public religion of
the Jews, was severely felt by the Nazarenes; as in their manners, though not
in their faith, they maintained so intimate a connection with their impious
countrymen, whose misfortunes were attributed by the Pagans to the contempt,
and more justly ascribed by the Christians to the wrath, of the Supreme Deity.
The Nazarenes retired from the ruins of Jerusalem to the little town of Pella
beyond the Jordan, where that ancient church languished above sixty years in
solitude and obscurity Eusebius, l. iii. c. 5. Le Clerc, Hist. Ecclesiast. p.
605. During this occasional absence, the bishop and church of Pella still
retained the title of Jerusalem. In the same manner, the Roman pontiffs resided
seventy years at Avignon; and the patriarchs of Alexandria have long since
transferred their episcopal seat to Cairo.
. They still enjoyed the comfort of making frequent and devout visits to the
Holy City, and the hope of being one day restored to those seats which both
nature and religion taught them to love as well as to revere. But at length,
under the reign of Hadrian, the desperate fanaticism of the Jews filled up the
measure of their calamities; and the Romans, exasperated by their repeated
rebellions, exercised the rights of victory with unusual rigor. The emperor
founded, under the name of Aelia Capitolina, a new city on Mount Sion Dion
Cassius, l. lxix. The exile of the Jewish nation from Jerusalem is attested by
Aristo of Pella (apud Eusebius. l. iv. c. 6.), and is mentioned by several
ecclesiastical writers; though some of them too hastily extend this
interdiction to the whole country of Palestine.
, to which he gave the privileges of a colony; and denouncing the severest
penalties against any of the Jewish people who should dare to approach its
precincts, he fixed a vigilant garrison of a Roman cohort to enforce the
execution of his orders. The Nazarenes had only one way left to escape the
common proscription, and the force of truth was on this occasion assisted by
the influence of temporal advantages. They elected Marcus for their bishop, a
prelate of the race of the Gentiles, and most probably a native either of Italy
or of some of the Latin provinces. At his persuasion, the most considerable
part of the congregation renounced the Mosaic law, in the practice of which
they had persevered above a century. By this sacrifice of their habits and
prejudices, they purchased a free admission into the colony of Hadrian, and
more firmly cemented their union with the Catholic church Eusebius, l. iv. c.
6. Sulpicius Severus, ii. 31. By comparing their unsatisfactory accounts,
Mosheim (p. 327, etc.) has drawn out a very distinct representation of the
circumstances and motives of this revolution.
.

When the name and honors of the church of The Ebionites.
Jerusalem had been restored to Mount Sion, the crimes of heresy and schism
were imputed to the obscure remnant of the Nazarenes, which refused to
accompany their Latin bishop. They still preserved their former habitation of
Pella, spread themselves into the villages adjacent to Damascus, and formed an
inconsiderable church in the city of Boerea, or, as it is now called, of
Aleppo, in Syria Le Clerc. (Hist. Ecclesiast. p. 477. 535.) seems to have
collected from Eusebius, Jerome, Epiphanius, and other writers, all the
principal circumstances that relate to the Nazarenes or Ebionites. The nature
of their opinions soon divided them into a stricter and a milder sect; and
there is some reason to conjecture, that the family of Jesus Christ remained
members, at least, of the latter and more moderate party.
. The name of Nazarenes was deemed too honorable for those Christian Jews, and
they soon received from the supposed poverty of their understanding, as well as
of their condition, the contemptuous epithet of Ebionites Some writers have
been pleased to create an Ebion, the imaginary author of their sect and name.
But we can more safely rely on the learned Eusebius than on the vehement
Tertullian, or the credulous Epiphanius. According to Le Clerc, the Hebrew word
Ebjonim may be translated into Latin by that of Pauperes. See Hist. Ecclesiast.
p. 477.
. In a few years after the return of the church of Jerusalem, it became a
matter of doubt and controversy, whether a man who sincerely acknowledged Jesus
as the Messiah, but who still continued to observe the law of Moses, could
possibly hope for salvation. The humane temper of Justin Martyr inclined him to
answer this question in the affirmative; and though he expressed himself with
the most guarded diffidence, he ventured to determine in favor of such an
imperfect Christian, if he were content to practice the Mosaic ceremonies,
without pretending to assert their general use or necessity. But when Justin
was pressed to declare the sentiment of the church, he confessed that there
were very many among the orthodox Christians, who not only excluded their
Judaising brethren from the hope of salvation, but who declined any intercourse
with them in the common offices of friendship, hospitality, and social life See
the very curious Dialogue of Justin Martyr with the Jew Tryphon. The conference
between them was held at Ephesus, in the reign of Antoninus Pius, and about
twenty years after the return of the church of Pella to Jerusalem. For this
date consult the accurate note of Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. ii.
p. 511.
. The more rigorous opinion prevailed, as it was natural to expect, over the
milder; and an eternal bar of separation was fixed between the disciples of
Moses and those of Christ. The unfortunate Ebionites, rejected from one
religion as apostates, and from the other as heretics, found themselves
compelled to assume a more decided character; and although some traces of that
obsolete sect may be discovered as late as the fourth century, they insensibly
melted away either into the church or the synagogue Of all the systems of
Christianity, that of Abyssinia is the only one which still adheres to the
Mosaic rites (Geddes's Church History of Aethiopia, and Dissertations de le
Grand sur la Relation du P. Lobo.). The eunuch of the queen Candace might
suggest some suspicions; but as we are assured (Socrates, i. 19. Sozomen, ii.
24. Ludolphus, p. 281.), that the Aethiopians were not converted till the
fourth century; it is more reasonable to believe, that they respected the
Sabbath, and distinguished the forbidden meats, in imitation of the Jews, who,
in a very early period, were seated on both sides of the Red Sea. Circumcision
had been practiced by the most ancient Aethiopians, from motives of health and
cleanliness, which seem to be explained in the Recherches Philosophiques sur
les Americains, tom. ii. p. 117.
.

While the orthodox church preserved a just medium between excessive veneration
and improper contempt for the law of Moses, the various The Gnostics.
heretics deviated into equal but opposite extremes of error and extravagance.
From the acknowledged truth of the Jewish religion, the Ebionites had concluded
that it could never be abolished. From its supposed imperfections the Gnostics
as hastily inferred that it never was instituted by the wisdom of the Deity.
There are some objections against the authority of Moses and the prophets,
which too readily present themselves to the skeptical mind; though they can
only be derived from our ignorance of remote antiquity, and from our incapacity
to form an adequate judgment of the divine economy. These objections were
eagerly embraced and as petulantly urged by the vain science of the Gnostics
Beausobre, Histoire du Manicheisme, l. i. c. 3. has stated their objections,
particularly those of Faustus, the adversary of Augustine, with the most learned
impartiality.
. As those heretics were, for the most part, averse to the pleasures of sense,
they morosely arraigned the polygamy of the patriarchs, the gallantries of
David, and the seraglio of Solomon. The conquest of the land of Canaan, and the
extirpation of the unsuspecting natives, they were at a loss how to reconcile
with the common notions of humanity and justice. But when they recollected the
sanguinary list of murders, of executions, and of massacres, which stain almost
every page of the Jewish annals, they acknowledged that the barbarians of
Palestine had exercised as much compassion toward their idolatrous enemies, as
they had ever shown to their friends or countrymen Apud ipsos fides obstinata,
misericordia in promptu: adversus omnes alios hostile odium. Tacit. Hist. v. 4.
Surely Tacitus had seen the Jews with too favorable an eye. The perusal of
Josephus must have destroyed the antithesis.
. Passing from the sectaries of the law to the law itself, they asserted that
it was impossible that a religion which consisted only of bloody sacrifices and
trifling ceremonies, and whose rewards as well as punishments were all of a
carnal and temporal nature, could inspire the love of virtue, or restrain the
impetuosity of passion. The Mosaic account of the creation and fall of man was
treated with profane derision by the Gnostics, who would not listen with
patience to the repose of the Deity after six days labor, to the rib of Adam,
the garden of Eden, the trees of life and of knowledge, the speaking serpent,
the forbidden fruit, and the condemnation pronounced against human kind for the
venal offense of their first progenitors Dr. Burnet (Archaeologia, l. ii. c.
7.) has discussed the first chapters of Genesis with too much wit and freedom.
. The God of Israel was impiously represented by the Gnostics, as a being
liable to passion and to error, capricious in his favor, implacable in his
resentment, meanly jealous of his superstitious worship, and confining his
partial providence to a single people, and to this transitory life. In such a
character they could discover none of the features of the wise and omnipotent
father of the universe The milder Gnostics considered Jehovah, the Creator, as
a Being of a mixed nature between God and the Demon. Others confounded him
with the evil principle. Consult the second century of the general history of
Mosheim, which gives a very distinct, though concise, account of their strange
opinions on this subject.
. They allowed that the religion of the Jews was somewhat less criminal than
the idolatry of the Gentiles; but it was their fundamental doctrine, that the
Christ whom they adored as the first and brightest emanation of the Deity,
appeared upon earth to rescue mankind from their various errors, and to reveal
a new system of truth and perfection. The most learned of the fathers, by a
very singular condescension, have imprudently admitted the sophistry of the
Gnostics. Acknowledging that the literal sense is repugnant to every principle
of faith as well as reason, they deem themselves secure and invulnerable behind
the ample veil of allegory, which they carefully spread over every tender part
of the Mosaic dispensation See Beausobre, Hist. du Manicheisme, l. i. c. 4.
Origin and St. Augustine were among the Allegorists.
.

It has been remarked with more ingenuity Their sects, progress, and influence.
than truth, that the virgin purity of the church was never violated by schism
or heresy before the reign of Trajan or Hadrian, about one hundred years after
the death of Christ Hegesippus, ap. Eusebius. l. iii. 32. iv. 22. Clemens
Alexandrin. Stromat. vii. 17.
. We may observe with much more propriety, that, during that period, the
disciples of the Messiah were indulged in a freer latitude both of faith and
practice, than has ever been allowed in succeeding ages. As the terms of
communion were insensibly narrowed, and the spiritual authority of the
prevailing party was exercised with increasing severity, many of its most
respectable adherents, who were called upon to renounce, were provoked to
assert their private opinions, to pursue the consequences of their mistaken
principles, and openly to erect the standard of rebellion against the unity of
the church. The Gnostics were distinguished as the most polite, the most
learned, and the most wealthy of the Christian name, and that general
appellation which expressed a superiority of knowledge, was either assumed by
their own pride, or ironically bestowed by the envy of their adversaries. They
were almost without exception of the race of the Gentiles, and their principal
founders seem to have been natives of Syria or Egypt, where the warmth of the
climate disposes both the mind and the body to indolent and contemplative
devotion. The Gnostics blended with the faith of Christ many sublime but
obscure tenets, which they derived from oriental philosophy, and even from the
religion of Zoroaster, concerning the eternity of matter, the existence of two
principles, and the mysterious hierarchy of the invisible world In the account
of the Gnostics of the second and third centuries, Mosheim is ingenious and
candid; Le Clerc dull, but exact; Beausobre almost always an apologist; and it
is much to be feared, that the primitive fathers are very frequently
calumniators.
. As soon as they launched out into that vast abyss, they delivered themselves
to the guidance of a disordered imagination; and as the paths of error are
various and infinite, the Gnostics were imperceptibly divided into more than
fifty particular sects See the catalogues of Irenaeus and Epiphanius. It must
indeed be allowed, that those writers were inclined to multiply the number of
sects which opposed the unity of the church.
, of whom the most celebrated appear to have been the Basilidians, the
Valentinians, the Marcionites, and, in a still later period, the Manichaeans.
Each of these sects could boast of its bishops and congregations, of its
doctors and martyrs Eusebius, l. iv. c. 15. Sozomen. l. ii. c. 32. See in
Bail, in the article of Marcion, a curious detail of a dispute on that
subject. It should seem that some of the Gnostics (the Basilidians) declined,
and even refused, the honor of martyrdom. Their reasons were singular and
abstruse. See Mosheim, p. 359.
, and, instead of the four gospels adopted by the church, the heretics produced
a multitude of histories, in which the actions and discourses of Christ and of
his apostles were adapted to their respective tenets See a very remarkable
passage of Origin (Proem. ad Lucan.). That indefatigable writer, who had
consumed his life in the study of the scriptures, relies for their authenticity
on the inspired authority of the church. It was impossible that the Gnostics
could receive our present gospels, many parts of which (particularly in the
resurrection of Christ) are directly, and as it might seem designedly, pointed
against their favorite tenets. It is therefore somewhat singular that Ignatius
(Epist. ad Smyrn. Patr. Apostol. tom. ii. p. 34.) should choose to employ a
vague and doubtful tradition, instead of quoting the certain testimony of the
evangelists.
. The success of the Gnostics was rapid and extensive Faciunt favos et vespae;
faciunt ecclesias et Marcionitae, is the strong expression of Tertullian, which
I am obliged to quote from memory. In the time of Epiphanius (advers. Haereses,
p. 302.) the Marcionites were very numerous in Italy, Syria, Egypt, Arabia, and
Persia.
. They covered Asia and Egypt, established themselves in Rome, and sometimes
penetrated into the provinces of the West. For the most part they arose in the
second century, flourished during the third, and were suppressed in the fourth
or fifth, by the prevalence of more fashionable controversies, and by the
superior ascendant of the reigning power. Though they constantly disturbed the
peace, and frequently disgraced the name, of religion, they contributed to
assist rather than to retard the progress of Christianity. The Gentile
converts, whose strongest objections and prejudices were directed against the
law of Moses, could find admission into many Christian societies, which
required not from their untutored mind any belief of an antecedent revelation.
Their faith was insensibly fortified and enlarged, and the church was
ultimately benefited by the conquests of its most inveterate enemies Augustine
is a memorable instance of this gradual progress from reason to faith. He was,
during several years, engaged in the Manichaean sect.
.

But whatever difference of opinion might subsist The demons considered as the
gods of antiquity.
between the Orthodox, the Ebionites, and the Gnostics, concerning the divinity
or the obligation of the Mosaic law, they were all equally animated by the same
exclusive zeal, and by the same abhorrence for idolatry which had distinguished
the Jews from the other nations of the ancient world. The philosopher, who
considered the system of polytheism as a composition of human fraud and error,
could disguise a smile of contempt under the mask of devotion, without
apprehending that either the mockery, or the compliance, would expose him to
the resentment of any invisible, or, as he conceived them, imaginary powers.
But the established religions of Paganism were seen by the primitive Christians
in a much more odious and formidable light. It was the universal sentiment both
of the church and of heretics, that the demons were the authors, the patrons,
and the objects of idolatry The unanimous sentiment of the primitive church is
very clearly explained by Justin. Martyr. Apolog. Major, by Athenagoras Legate.
c. 22, etc. and by Lactantius, Institut. Divin. ii. 14-19.
. Those rebellious spirits who had been degraded from the rank of angels, and
cast down into the infernal pit, were still permitted to roam upon earth, to
torment the bodies, and to seduce the minds, of sinful men. The demons soon
discovered and abused the natural propensity of the human heart toward
devotion, and, artfully withdrawing the adoration of mankind from their
Creator, they usurped the place and honors of the Supreme Deity. By the
success of their malicious contrivances, they at once gratified their own
vanity and revenge, and obtained the only comfort of which they were yet
susceptible, the hope of involving the human species in the participation of
their guilt and misery. It was confessed, or at least it was imagined, that
they had distributed among themselves the most important characters of
polytheism, one demon assuming the name and attributes of Jupiter, another of
Aesculapius, a third of Venus, and a fourth perhaps of Apollo Tertullian
(Apolog. c. 23.) alleges the confession of the Demons themselves as often as
they were tormented by the Christian exorcists.
; and that, by the advantage of their long experience and aerial nature, they
were enabled to execute, with sufficient skill and dignity, the parts which
they had undertaken. They lurked in the temples, instituted festivals and
sacrifices, invented fables, pronounced oracles, and were frequently allowed to
perform miracles. The Christians, who, by the interposition of evil spirits,
could so readily explain every praeternatural appearance, were disposed and
even desirous to admit the most extravagant fictions of the Pagan mythology.
But the belief of the Christian was accompanied with horror. The most trifling
mark of respect to the national worship he considered as a direct homage
yielded to the demon, and as an act of rebellion against the majesty of God.

In consequence of this opinion, it was the first Abhorrence of the Christians
for idolatry.
but arduous duty of a Christian to preserve himself pure and undefiled by the
practice of idolatry. The religion of the nations was not merely a speculative
doctrine professed in the schools or preached in the temples. The innumerable
deities and rites of polytheism were closely interwoven with every circumstance
of business or pleasure, of public or of private life; and it seemed impossible
to escape the observance of them, without, at the same time, renouncing the
commerce of mankind, and all the offices and amusements of society Tertullian
has written a most severe treatise against idolatry, to caution his brethren
against the hourly danger of incurring that guilt. Recogita sylvam, et quantae
latitant spinae. De Corona Militis, c. 10.
. The important Ceremonies.
transactions of peace and war were prepared or concluded by solemn sacrifices,
in which the magistrate, the senator, and the soldier, were obliged to preside
or to participate The Roman senate was always held in a temple or consecrated
place (Aulus Gellius, xiv. 7.). Before they entered on business, every senator
dropped some wine and frankincense on the altar. Sueton. in August. c. 35.
. The public spectacles were an essential part of the cheerful devotion of the
Pagans, and the gods were supposed to accept, as the most grateful offering,
the games that the prince and people celebrated in honor of their peculiar
festivals See Tertullian, De Spectaculis. This severe reformer shows no more
indulgence to a tragedy of Euripides, than to a combat of gladiators. The dress
of the actors particularly offends him. By the use of the lofty buskin, they
impiously strive to add a cubit to their stature, c. 23.
. The Christian, who with pious horror avoided the abomination of the circus or
the theater, sound himself encompassed with infernal snares in every convivial
entertainment, as often as his friends, invoking the hospitable deities, poured
out libations to each other's happiness The ancient practice of concluding the
entertainment with libations, may be found in every classic. Socrates and
Seneca, in their last moments, made a noble application of this custom.
Postquam stagnum calidae aquae introiit, respergens proximos servorum, addita
voce, libare se liquorem illum Jovi Liberatori. Tacit. Annal. xv. 64.
. When the bride, struggling with well-affected reluctance, was forced in
hymenaeal pomp over the threshold of her new habitation See the elegant but
idolatrous hymn of Catullus, on the nuptials of Manlius and Julia. O Hymen,
Hymenaee Io! Quis huic Deo compararier ausit?
, or when the sad procession of the dead slowly moved toward the funeral pile
The ancient funerals (in those of Misenus and Pallas) are no less accurately
described by Virgil, than they are illustrated by his commentator Servius. The
pile itself was an altar, the flames were fed with the blood of victims, and
all the assistants were sprinkled with lustral water.
; the Christian, on these interesting occasions, was compelled to desert the
persons who were the dearest to him, rather than contract the guilt inherent to
those impious ceremonies. Every art and every trade that was Arts.
in the least concerned in the framing or adorning of idols was polluted by the
stain of idolatry Tertullian de Idololatria, c. 11.
; a severe sentence, since it devoted to eternal misery the far greater part of
the community, which is employed in the exercise of liberal or mechanic
professions. If we cast our eyes over the numerous remains of antiquity, we
shall perceive, that besides the immediate representations of the Gods, and the
holy instruments of their worship, the elegant forms and agreeable fictions
consecrated by the imagination of the Greeks, were introduced as the richest
ornaments of the houses, the dress, and the furniture, of the Pagans See every
part of Montsaucon's Antiquities. Even the reverses of the Greek and Roman
coins were frequently of an idolatrous nature. Here indeed the scruples of the
Christian were suspended by a stronger passion.
. Even the arts of music and painting, of eloquence and poetry, flowed from the
same impure origin. In the style of the fathers, Apollo and the Muses were the
organs of the infernal spirit, Homer and Virgil were the most eminent of his
servants, and the beautiful mythology which pervades and animates the
compositions of their genius, is destined to celebrate the glory of the
demons. Even the common language of Greece and Rome abounded with familiar but
impious expressions, which the imprudent Christian might too carelessly utter,
or too patiently hear Tertullian de Idololatria, c. 20, 21, 22. If a Pagan
friend (on the occasion perhaps of sneezing) used the familiar expression of
"Jupiter bless you," the Christian was obliged to protest against the divinity
of Jupiter.
.

The dangerous temptations which on every Festivals.
side lurked in ambush to surprise the unguarded believer, assailed him with
redoubled violence on the days of solemn festivals. So artfully were they
framed and disposed throughout the year, that superstition always wore the
appearance of pleasure, and often of virtue Consult the most labored work of
Ovid, his imperfect Fasti. He finished no more than the first six months of the
year. The compilation of Macrobius is called the Saturnalia, but it is only a
small part of the first book that bear any relation to the title.
. Some of the most sacred festivals in the Roman ritual were destined to salute
the new calends of January with vows of public and private felicity, to indulge
the pious remembrance of the dead and living, to ascertain the inviolable
bounds of property, to hail, on the return of spring, the genial powers of
fecundity, to perpetuate the two memorable aeras of Rome, the foundation of the
city, and that of the republic, and to restore, during the humane license of
the Saturnalia, the primitive equality of mankind. Some idea may be conceived
of the abhorrence of the Christians for such impious ceremonies, by the
scrupulous delicacy which they displayed on a much less alarming occasion. On
days of general festivity, it was the custom of the ancients to adorn their
doors with lamps and with branches of laurel, and to crown their heads with a
garland of flowers. This innocent and elegant practice might perhaps have been
tolerated as a mere civil institution. But it most unluckily happened that the
doors were under the protection of the household gods, that the laurel was
sacred to the lover of Daphne, and that garlands of flowers, though frequently
worn as a symbol either of joy or mourning, had been dedicated in their first
origin to the service of superstition. The trembling Christians, who were
persuaded in this instance to comply with the fashion of their country, and the
commands of the magistrate, labored under the most gloomy apprehensions, from
the reproaches of their own conscience, the censures of the church, and the
denunciations of divine vengeance Tertullian has composed a defense, or rather
panegyric, of the rash action of a Christian soldier, who, by throwing away his
crown of laurel, had exposed himself and his brethren to the most imminent
danger. By the mention of the emperors (Severus and Caracalla) it is evident,
notwithstanding the wishes of M. de Tillemont, that Tertullian composed his
treatise De Corona, long before he was engaged in the errors of the Montanists.
See Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. iii. p. 384.
.

Such was the anxious diligence which was required Zeal for Christianity.
to guard the chastity of the gospel from the infectious breath of idolatry.
The superstitious observances of public or private rites were carelessly
practiced, from education and habit, by the followers of the established
religion. But as often as they occurred, they afforded the Christians an
opportunity of declaring and confirming their zealous opposition. By these
frequent protestations their attachment to the faith was continually fortified,
and in proportion to the increase of zeal, they combated with the more ardour
and success in the holy war, which they had undertaken against the empire of
the demons.

II. The writings of Cicero In particular, the first book of the Tusculan
Questions, and the treatise De Senectute, and the Somnium Scipionis, contain,
in the most beautiful language, every thing that Grecian philosophy, or Roman
good sense, could possibly suggest on this dark but important object.
represent in the THE SECOND CAUSE. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul
among the philosophers;
most lively colors the ignorance, the errors, and the uncertainty of the
ancient philosophers with regard to the immortality of the soul. When they are
desirous of arming their disciples against the fear of death, they inculcate,
as an obvious, though melancholy position, that the fatal stroke of our
dissolution releases us from the calamities of life; and that those can no
longer suffer who no longer exist. Yet there were a few sages of Greece and
Rome who had conceived a more exalted, and, in some respects, a juster idea of
human nature; though it must be confessed, that, in the sublime inquiry, their
reason had been often guided by their imagination, and that their imagination
had been prompted by their vanity. When they viewed with complacency the extent
of their own mental powers, when they exercised the various faculties of
memory, of fancy, and of judgment, in the most profound speculations, or the
most important labors, and when they reflected on the desire of same, which
transported them into future ages, far beyond the bounds of death and of the
grave; they were unwilling to confound themselves with the beasts of the field,
or to suppose, that a being, for whose dignity they entertained the most
sincere admiration, could be limited to a spot of earth, and to a few years of
duration. With this favorable prepossession they summoned to their aid the
science, or rather the language, of Metaphysics. They soon discovered, that as
none of the properties of matter will apply to the operations of the mind, the
human soul must consequently be a substance distinct from the body, pure,
simple, and spiritual, incapable of dissolution, and susceptible of a much
higher degree of virtue and happiness after the release from its corporeal
prison. From these specious and noble principles, the philosophers who trod in
the footsteps of Plato, deduced a very unjustifiable conclusion, since they
asserted, not only the future immortality, but the past eternity of the human
soul, which they were too apt to consider as a portion of the infinite and
self-existing spirit, which pervades and sustains the universe The
pre-existence of human souls, so far at least as that doctrine is compatible
with religion, was adopted by many of the Greek and Latin fathers. See
Beausobre, Hist. du Manicheisme, l. vi. c. 4.
. A doctrine thus removed beyond the senses and the experience of mankind,
might serve to amuse the leisure of a philosophic mind; or, in the silence of
solitude, it might sometimes impart a ray of comfort to desponding virtue; but
the faint impression which had been received in the schools, was soon
obliterated by the commerce and business of active life. We are sufficiently
acquainted with the eminent persons who flourished in the age of Cicero, and of
the first Caesar's, with their actions, their characters, and their motives, to
be assured that their conduct in this life was never regulated by any serious
conviction of the rewards or punishments of a future state. At the bar and in
the senate of Rome the ablest orators were not apprehensive of giving offense
to their hearers, by exposing that doctrine as an idle and extravagant opinion,
which was rejected with contempt by every man of a liberal education and
understanding See Cicero pro Cluent. c. 61. Caesar ap. Sallust. de Bell.
Catilin. c. 50. Juvenal. Satir. ii. 149. Esse aliquos manes, et subterranea
regna,
--
Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum aere lavantur.

.

Since therefore the most sublime efforts of philosophy among the Pagans of
Greece and Rome;
can extend no farther than feebly to point out the desire, the hope, or, at
most, the probability, of a future state, there is nothing, except a divine
revelation, that can ascertain the existence, and describe the condition of the
invisible country which is destined to receive the souls of men after their
separation from the body. But we may perceive several defects inherent to the
popular religions of Greece and Rome, which rendered them very unequal to so
arduous a task. 1. The general system of their mythology was unsupported by any
solid proofs; and the wisest among the Pagans had already disclaimed its
usurped authority. 2. The description of the infernal regions had been
abandoned to the fancy of painters and of poets, who peopled them with so many
phantoms and monsters, who dispensed their rewards and punishments with so
little equity, that a solemn truth, the most congenial to the human heart, was
oppressed and disgraced by the absurd mixture of the wildest fictions The xith
book of the Odyssey gives a very dreary and incoherent account of the infernal
shades. Pindar and Virgil have embellished the picture; but even those poets,
though more correct than their great model, are guilty of very strange
inconsistencies. See Bail, Responses aux Questions d'un Provincial, part iii.
c. 22.
. 3. The doctrine of a future state was scarcely considered among the devout
polytheists of Greece and Rome as a fundamental article of faith. The
providence of the gods, as it related to public communities rather than to
private individuals, was principally displayed on the visible theater of the
present world. The petitions which were offered on the altars of Jupiter or
Apollo, expressed the anxiety of their worshippers for temporal happiness, and
their ignorance or indifference concerning a future life See the xvith epistle
of the first book of Horace, the xiiith Satire of Juvenal, and the iid Satire
of Persius: these popular discourses express the sentiment and language of the
multitude.
. The important truth of the immortality of the soul was inculcated with more
diligence as well as success in India, in Assyria, in Egypt, and in Gaul; and
since we cannot attribute such a difference among the barbarians;
to the superior knowledge of the barbarians, we must ascribe it to the
influence of an established priesthood, which employed the motives of virtue as
the instrument of ambition If we confine ourselves to the Gauls, we may
observe, that they entrusted, not only their lives, but even their money, to
the security of another world. Vetus ille mos Gallorum occurrit (says Valerius
Maximus, l. ii. c. 6. p. 10.), quos memoria proditur est, pecunias mutuas, quae
his apud inferos redderentur, dare solitos. The same custom is more darkly
insinuated by Mela, l. iii. c. 2. It is almost needless to add, that the
profits of trade hold a just proportion to the credit of the merchant, and that
the Druids derived from their holy profession a character of responsibility,
which could scarcely be claimed by any other order of men.
.

We might naturally expect, that a principle so among the Jews;
essential to religion, would have been revealed in the clearest terms to the
chosen people of Palestine, and that it might safely have been entrusted to the
hereditary priesthood of Aaron. It is incumbent on us to adore the mysterious
dispensations of Providence The right reverend author of the Divine Legation of
Moses assigns a very curious reason for the omission, and most ingeniously
retorts it on the unbelievers.
, when we discover, that the doctrine of the immortality of the soul is omitted
in the law of Moses; it is darkly insinuated by the prophets, and during the
long period which elapsed between the Egyptian and the Babylonian servitudes,
the hopes as well as fears of the Jews appear to have been confined within the
narrow compass of the present life See Le Clear (Prolegomena ad Hist.
Ecclesiast. sect. 1. c. 8.). His authority seems to carry the greater weight,
as he has written a learned and judicious commentary on the books of the Old
Testament.
After Cyrus had permitted the exiled nation to return into the promised land,
and after Ezra had restored the ancient records of their religion, two
celebrated sects, the Sadducees and the Pharisees, insensibly arose at
Jerusalem Joseph. Antiquitat. l. xiii. c. 10. De Bell. Jud. ii. 8. According to
the most natural interpretation of his words, the Sadducees admitted only the
Pentateuch; but it has pleased some modern critics to add the prophets to their
creed, and to suppose, that they contented themselves with rejecting the
traditions of the Pharisees. Dr. Jortin has argued that point in his Remarks on
Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 103.
The former selected from the more opulent and distinguished ranks of society,
were strictly attached to the literal sense of the Mosaic law, and they piously
rejected the immortality of the soul, as an opinion that received no
countenance from the divine book, which they revered as the only rule of their
faith. To the authority of scripture the Pharisees added that of tradition, and
they accepted, under the name of traditions, several speculative tenets from
the philosophy or religion of the eastern nations. The doctrines of fate or
predestination, of angels and spirits, and of a future state of rewards and
punishments, were in the number of these new articles of belief; and as the
Pharisees, by the austerity of their manners, had drawn into their party the
body of the Jewish people, the immortality of the soul became the prevailing
sentiment of the synagogue, under the reign of the Asmonaean princes and
pontiffs. The temper of the Jews was incapable of contenting itself with such a
cold and languid assent as might satisfy the mind of a Polytheist; and as soon
as they admitted the idea of a future state, they embraced it with the zeal
which has always formed the characteristic of the nation. Their zeal, however,
added nothing to its evidence, or even probability: and it was still necessary,
that the doctrine of life and immortality, which had been dictated by nature,
approved by reason, and received by superstition, should obtain the sanction of
divine truth from the authority and example of Christ.

When the promise of eternal happiness was among the Christians.
proposed to mankind, on condition of adopting the faith, and of observing the
precepts of the gospel, it is no wonder that so advantageous an offer should
have been accepted by great numbers of every religion, of every rank, and of
every province in the Roman empire. The ancient Christians were animated by a
contempt for their present existence, and by a just confidence of immortality,
of which the doubtful and imperfect faith of modern ages cannot give us any
adequate notion. In the primitive church, the influence of truth was very
powerfully strengthened Approaching end of the world.
by an opinion, which however it may deserve respect for its usefulness and
antiquity, has not been found agreeable to experience. It was universally
believed, that the end of the world and the kingdom of Heaven, were at hand.
The near approach of this wonderful event had been predicted by the apostles;
the tradition of it was preserved by their earliest disciples, and those who
understood in their literal sense the discourses of Christ himself, were
obliged to expect the second and glorious coming of the Son of Man in the
clouds, before that generation was totally extinguished, which had beheld his
humble condition upon earth, and which might still be witness of the calamities
of the Jews under Vespasian or Hadrian. The revolution of seventeen centuries
has instructed us not to press too closely the mysterious language of prophecy
and revelation; but as long as, for wise purposes, this error was permitted to
subsist in the church, it was productive of the most salutary effects on the
faith and practice of Christians, who lived in the awful expectation of that
moment when the globe itself, and all the various race of mankind, should
tremble at the appearance of their divine judge This expectation was
countenanced by the twenty-fourth chapter of St. Matthew, and by the first
epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. Erasmus removes the difficulty by the
help of allegory and metaphor; and the learned Grotius ventures to insinuate,
that, for wise purposes, the pious deception was permitted to take place.
.

The ancient and popular doctrine of the Millennium Doctrine of the Millennium.
was intimately connected with the second coming of Christ. As the works of the
creation had been finished in six days, their duration in their present state,
according to a tradition which was attributed to the prophet Elijah, was fixed
to six thousand years See Burnet's Sacred Theory, part iii. c. 5. This
tradition may be traced as high as the author of the Epistle of Barnabas, who
wrote in the first century, and who seems to have been half a Jew.
. By the same analogy it was inferred, that this long period of labor and
contention, which was now almost elapsed The primitive church of Antioch
computed almost 6000 years from the creation of the world to the birth of
Christ. Africanus, Lactantius, and the Greek church, have reduced that number
to 5500, and Eusebius has contented himself with 5200 years. These calculations
were formed on the Septuagint, which was universally received during the six
first centuries. The authority of the Vulgate and of the Hebrew text has
determined the moderns, Protestants as well as Catholics, to prefer a period of
about 4000 years; though, in the study of profane antiquity, they often find
themselves streightened by those narrow limits.
, would be succeeded by a joyful Sabbath of a thousand years; and that Christ,
with the triumphant band of the saints and the elect who had escaped death, or
who had been miraculously revived, would reign upon earth till the time
appointed for the last and general resurrection. So pleasing was this hope to
the mind of believers, that the New Jerusalem, the seat of this blissful
kingdom, was quickly adorned with all the gayest colors of the imagination. A
felicity consisting only of pure and spiritual pleasure, would have appeared
too refined for its inhabitants, who were still supposed to possess their human
nature and senses. A garden of Eden, with the amusements of the pastoral life,
was no longer suited to the advanced state of society which prevailed under the
Roman empire. A city was therefore erected of gold and precious stones, and a
supernatural plenty of corn and wine was bestowed on the adjacent territory; in
the free enjoyment of whose spontaneous productions, the happy and benevolent
people was never to be restrained by any jealous laws of exclusive property
Most of these pictures were borrowed from a misinterpretation of Isaiah,
Daniel, and the Apocalypse. One of the grossest images may be found in Irenaeus
(l. v. p. 455.), the disciple of Papias, who had seen the apostle St. John.
. The assurance of such a Millennium, was carefully inculcated by a succession
of fathers from Justin Martyr See the second dialogue of Justin with Tryphon,
and the seventh book of Lactantius. It is unnecessary to allege all the
intermediate fathers, as the fact is not disputed. Yet the curious reader may
consult Daille de Usu Patrum, l. ii. c. 4.
and Irenaeus, who conversed with the immediate disciples of the apostles, down
to Lactantius, who was preceptor to the son of Constantine The testimony of
Justin, of his own faith and that of his orthodox brethren, in the doctrine of
a Millennium, is delivered in the clearest and most solemn manner (Dialog. cum
Tryphonte Jud. p. 177, 178. Edit. Benedictin.). If in the beginning of this
important passage there is any thing like an inconsistency, we may impute it,
as we think proper, either to the author or to his transcribers.
. Though it might not be universally received, it appears to have been the
reigning sentiment of the orthodox believers; and it seems so well adapted to
the desires and apprehensions of mankind, that it must have contributed in a
very considerable degree to the progress of the Christian faith. But when the
edifice of the church was almost completed, the temporary support was laid
aside. The doctrine of Christ's reign upon earth, was at first treated as a
profound allegory, was considered by degrees as a doubtful and useless opinion,
and was at length rejected as the absurd invention of heresy and fanaticism
Dupin, Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, tom. i. p. 223. tom. ii. p. 366. and
Mosheim, p. 720; though the latter of these learned divines is not altogether
candid on this occasion.
. A mysterious prophecy, which still forms a part of the sacred canon, but
which was thought to favor the exploded sentiment, has very narrowly escaped
the proscription of the church In the council of Laodicea (about the year 360)
the Apocalypse was tacitly excluded from the sacred canon, by the same churches
of Asia to which it is addressed; and we may learn from the complaint of
Sulpicius Severus, that their sentence had been ratified by the greater number
of Christians of his time. From what causes then is the Apocalypse at present
so generally received by the Greek, the Roman, and the Protestant churches? The
following ones may be assigned. 1. The Greeks were subdued by the authority of
an impostor, who, in the sixth century, assumed the character of Dionysius the
Areopagite. 2. A just apprehension, that the grammarians might become more
important than the theologians, engaged the council of Trent to fix the seal of
their infallibility on all the books of Scripture, contained in the Latin
Vulgate, in the number of which the Apocalypse was fortunately included. (Fra
Paolo, Istoria del Concilio Tridentino, l. ii.) 3. The advantage of turning
those mysterious prophecies against the Sea of Rome, inspired the protestants
with uncommon veneration for so useful an ally. See the ingenious and elegant
discourses of the present bishop of Litchfield on that unpromising subject.
.

Whilst the happiness and glory of a temporal reign were promised to the
disciples of Christ, Conflagration of Rome and of the world.
the most dreadful calamities were denounced against an unbelieving world. The
edification of the new Jerusalem was to advance by equal steps with the
destruction of the mystic Babylon; and as long as the emperors who reigned
before Constantine persisted in the profession of idolatry, the epithet of
Babylon was applied to the city and to the empire of Rome. A regular series was
prepared of all the moral and physical evils which can afflict a flourishing
nation; intestine discord, and the invasion of the fiercest barbarians from the
unknown regions of the North; pestilence and famine, comets and eclipses,
earthquakes and inundations Lactantius (Institut. Divin. vii. 15, etc.) relates
the dismal tale of futurity with great spirit and eloquence.
. All these were only so many preparatory and alarming signs of the great
catastrophe of Rome, when the country of the Scipios and Caesar's should be
consumed by a flame from Heaven, and the city of the seven hills, with her
palaces, her temples, and her triumphal arches, should be buried in a vast lake
of fire and brimstone. It might, however, afford some consolation to Roman
vanity, that the period of their empire would be that of the world itself;
which, as it had once perished by the element of water, was destined to
experience a second and speedy destruction from the element of fire. In the
opinion of a general conflagration, the faith of the Christian very happily
coincided with the tradition of the East, the philosophy of the Stoics, and the
analogy of Nature; and even the country, which, from religious motives, had
been chosen for the origin and principal scene of the conflagration, was the
best adapted for that purpose by natural and physical causes; by its deep
caverns, beds of sulphur, and numerous volcanoes, of which those of Aetna, of
Vesuvius, and of Lipari, exhibit a very imperfect representation. The calmest
and most intrepid skeptic could not refuse to acknowledge, that the destruction
of the present system of the world by fire, was in itself extremely probable.
The Christian, who founded his belief much less on the fallacious arguments of
reason than on the authority of tradition and the interpretation of scripture,
expected it with terror and confidence as a certain and approaching event; and
as his mind was perpetually filled with the solemn idea, he considered every
disaster that happened to the empire as an infallible symptom of an expiring
world On this subject every reader of taste will be entertained with the third
part of Burnet's Sacred Theory. He blends philosophy, scripture, and tradition,
into one magnificent system; in the description of which, he displays a
strength of fancy not inferior to that of Milton himself.
.

The condemnation of the wisest and most virtuous The Pagans devoted to eternal
punishment.
of the Pagans, on account of their ignorance or disbelief of the divine truth,
seems to offend the reason and the humanity of the present age And yet whatever
may be the language of individuals, it is still the public doctrine of all the
Christian churches; nor can even our own refuse to admit the conclusions which
must be drawn from the viiith and the xviiith of her Articles. The Jansenists,
who have so diligently studied the works of the fathers, maintain this
sentiment with distinguished zeal, and the learned M. de Tillemont never
dismisses a virtuous emperor without pronouncing his damnation. Zuinglius is
perhaps the only leader of a party who has ever adopted the milder sentiment,
and he gave no less offense to the Lutherans than to the Catholics. See
Bossuet, Histoire des Variations des Eglises Protestants, l. ii. c. 19 -- 22.
. But the primitive church, whose faith was of a much firmer consistence,
delivered over, without hesitation, to eternal torture, the far greater part of
the human species. A charitable hope might perhaps be indulged in favor of
Socrates, or some other sages of antiquity, who had consulted the light of
reason before that of the gospel had arisen Justin and Clemens of Alexandria
allow that some of the philosophers were instructed by the Logos; confounding
its double signification, of the human reason, and of the Divine Word.
. But it was unanimously affirmed, that those who, since the birth or the death
of Christ, had obstinately persisted in the worship of the demons, neither
deserved nor could expect a pardon from the irritated justice of the Deity.
These rigid sentiments, which had been unknown to the ancient world, appear to
have infused a spirit of bitterness into a system of love and harmony. The ties
of blood and friendship were frequently torn asunder by the difference of
religious faith; and the Christians, who, in this world, found themselves
oppressed by the power of the Pagans, were sometimes seduced by resentment and
spiritual pride to delight in the prospect of their future triumph. You are
fond of spectacles, exclaims the stern Tertullian, expect the greatest of all
spectacles, the last and eternal judgment of the universe. How shall I admire,
how laugh, how rejoice, how exult, when I behold so many proud monarchs, and
fancied gods, groaning in the lowest abyss of darkness; so many magistrates who
persecuted the name of the Lord, liquefying in fiercer fires than they ever
kindled against the Christians; so many sage philosophers blushing in red hot
flames with their deluded scholars; so many celebrated poets trembling before
the tribunal, not of Minos, but of Christ; so many tragedians, more tuneful in
the expression of their own sufferings; so many dancers --. But the humanity of
the reader will permit me to draw a veil over the rest of this infernal
description, which the zealous African pursues in a long variety of affected
and unfeeling witticisms Tertullian, De Spectaculis, c. 30. In order to
ascertain the degree of authority which the zealous African had acquired, it
may be sufficient to allege the testimony of Cyprian, the doctor and guide of
all the western churches. (See Prudent. Hymn. xiii. 100.) As often as he
applied himself to his daily study of the writings of Tertullian, he was
accustomed to say, " Da mihi magistrum; Give me my master." (Hieronym. de Viris
Illustribus, tom. i. p. 284.)
.

Doubtless there were many among the primitive Were often converted by their
fears.
Christians of a temper more suitable to the meekness and charity of their
profession. There were many who felt a sincere compassion for the danger of
their friends and countrymen, and who exerted the most benevolent zeal to save
them from the impending destruction. The careless Polytheist, assailed by new
and unexpected terrors, against which neither his priests nor his philosophers
could afford him any certain protection, was very frequently terrified and
subdued by the menace of eternal tortures. His fears might assist the progress
of his faith and reason; and if he could once persuade himself to suspect that
the Christian religion might possibly be true, it became an easy task to
convince him that it was the safest and most prudent party that he could
possibly embrace.

III. The supernatural gifts, which even in this THE THIRD CAUSE. Miraculous
powers of the primitive church.
life were ascribed to the Christians above the rest of mankind, must have
conduced to their own comfort, and very frequently to the conviction of
infidels. Besides the occasional prodigies, which might sometimes be effected
by the immediate interposition of the Deity when he suspended the laws of
Nature for the service of religion, the Christian church, from the time of the
apostles and their first disciples Notwithstanding the evasions of Dr.
Middleton, it is impossible to overlook the clear traces of visions and
inspiration, which may be found in the apostolic fathers.
, has claimed an uninterrupted succession of miraculous powers, the gift of
tongues, of vision and of prophecy, the power of expelling demons, of healing
the sick, and of raising the dead. The knowledge of foreign languages was
frequently communicated to the contemporaries of Irenaeus, though Irenaeus
himself was left to struggle with the difficulties of a barbarous dialect
whilst he preached the gospel to the natives of Gaul Irenaeus adv. Haeres.
Proem. p. 3. Dr. Middleton (Free Inquiry, p. 96, etc.) observes, that as this
pretension of all others was the most difficult to support by art, it was the
soonest given up. The observation suits his hypothesis.
. The divine inspiration, whether it was conveyed in the form of a waking or of
a sleeping vision, is described as a favor very liberally bestowed on all
ranks of the faithful, on women as on elders, on boys as well as upon bishops.
When their devout minds were sufficiently prepared by a course of prayer, of
fasting, and of vigils, to receive the extraordinary impulse, they were
transported out of their senses, and delivered in ecstasy what was inspired,
being mere organs of the holy spirit, just as a pipe or flute is of him who
blows into it Athenagoras in Legatione. Justin Martyr, Cohort. ad Gentes.
Tertullian advers. Marcionit. l. iv. These descriptions are not very unlike the
prophetic fury, for which Cicero (de Divinat. ii. 54.) expresses so little
reverence.
. We may add, that the design of these visions was, for the most part, either
to disclose the future history, or to guide the present administration of the
church. The expulsion of the demons from the bodies of those unhappy persons
whom they had been permitted to torment, was considered as a signal though
ordinary triumph of religion, and is repeatedly alleged by the ancient
apologists, as the most convincing evidence of the truth of Christianity. The
awful ceremony was usually performed in a public manner, and in the presence of
a great number of spectators; the patient was relieved by the power or skill of
the exorcist, and the vanquished demon was heard to confess, that he was one
of the fabled gods of antiquity, who had impiously usurped the adoration of
mankind Tertullian (Apolog. c. 23.) throws out a bold defiance to the Pagan
magistrates. Of the primitive miracles, the power of exorcising, is the only
one which has been assumed by Protestants.
. But the miraculous cure of diseases of the most inveterate or even
preternatural kind, can no longer occasion any surprise, when we recollect,
that in the days of Irenaeus, about the end of the second century, the
resurrection of the dead was very far from being esteemed an uncommon event;
that the miracle was frequently performed on necessary occasions, by great
fasting and the joint supplication of the church of the place, and that the
persons thus restored to their prayers, had lived afterward among them many
years Irenaeus adv. Haereses, l. ii. 56, 57. l. v. c. 6. Mr. Dodwell (Dissert.
ad Irenaeum, ii. 42.) concludes, that the second century was still more fertile
in miracles than the first.
. At such a period, when faith could boast of so many wonderful victories over
death, it seems difficult to account for the skepticism of those philosophers,
who still rejected and derided the doctrine of the resurrection. A noble
Grecian had rested on this important ground the whole controversy, and promised
Theophilus, bishop of Antioch, that if he could be gratified with the sight of
a single person who had been actually raised from the dead, he would
immediately embrace the Christian religion. It is somewhat remarkable, that the
prelate of the first eastern church, however anxious for the conversion of his
friend, thought proper to decline this fair and reasonable challenge Theophilus
ad Autolycum, l. i. p. 345. Edit. Benedictin. Paris, 1742.
.

The miracles of the primitive church, after Their truth contested.
obtaining the sanction of ages, have been lately attacked in a very free and
ingenious inquiry Dr. Middleton sent out his Introduction in the year 1747,
published his Free Inquiry in 1749, and before his death, which happened in
1750, he had prepared a vindication of it against his numerous adversaries.
; which, though it has met with the most favorable reception from the Public,
appears to have excited a general scandal among the divines of our own as well
as of the other protestant churches of Europe The university of Oxford
conferred degrees on his opponents. From the indignation of Mosheim (p. 221.),
we may discover the sentiments of the Lutheran divines.
. Our different sentiments on this subject will be much less influenced by any
particular arguments, than by our habits of study and reflection; and above
all, by the degree of the evidence which we have accustomed ourselves to
require for the proof of a miraculous event. The duty of an historian does not
call upon him Our perplexity in defining the miraculous period.
to interpose his private judgment in this nice and important controversy; but
he ought not to dissemble the difficulty of adopting such a theory as may
reconcile the interest of religion with that of reason, of making a proper
application of that theory, and of defining with precision the limits of that
happy period exempt from error and from deceit, to which we might be disposed
to extend the gift of supernatural powers. From the first of the fathers to the
last of the popes, a succession of bishops, of saints, of martyrs, and of
miracles, is continued without interruption, and the progress of superstition
was so gradual and almost imperceptible, that we know not in what particular
link we should break the chain of tradition. Every age bears testimony to the
wonderful events by which it was distinguished, and its testimony appears no
less weighty and respectable than that of the preceding generation, till we are
insensibly led on to accuse our own inconsistency, if in the eighth or in the
twelfth century we deny to the venerable Bede, or to the holy Bernard, the same
degree of confidence which, in the second century, we had so liberally granted
to Justin or to Irenaeus It may seem somewhat remarkable, that Bernard of
Clairvaux, who records so many miracles of his friend St. Malachi, never takes
any notice of his own, which, in their turn, however, are carefully related by
his companions and disciples. In the long series of ecclesiastical history,
does there exist a single instance of a saint asserting that he himself
possessed the gift of miracles?
. If the truth of any of those miracles is appreciated by their apparent use
and propriety, every age had unbelievers to convince, heretics to confute, and
idolatrous nations to convert; and sufficient motives might always be produced
to justify the interposition of Heaven. And yet since every friend to
revelation is persuaded of the reality, and every reasonable man is convinced
of the cessation, of miraculous powers, it is evident that there must have been
some period in which they were either suddenly or gradually withdrawn from the
Christian church. Whatever era is chosen for that purpose, the death of the
apostles, the conversion of the Roman empire, or the extinction of the Arian
heresy The conversion of Constantine is the era which is most usually fixed by
protestants. The more rational divines are unwilling to admit the miracles of
the ivth, whilst the more credulous are unwilling to reject those of the vth
century.
, the insensibility of the Christians who lived at that time will equally
afford a just matter of surprise. They still supported their pretensions after
they had lost their power. Credulity performed the office of faith; fanaticism
was permitted to assume the language of inspiration, and the effects of
accident or contrivance were ascribed to supernatural causes. The recent
experience of genuine miracles should have instructed the Christian world in
the ways of Providence, and habituated their eye (if we may use a very
inadequate expression) to the style of the divine artist. Should the most
skilful painter of modern Italy presume to decorate his feeble imitations with
the name of Raphael or of Correggio, the insolent fraud would be soon
discovered and indignantly rejected.

Whatever opinion may be entertained of the Use of the primitive miracles.
miracles of the primitive church since the time of the apostles, this
unresisting softness of temper, so conspicuous among the believers of the
second and third centuries, proved of some accidental benefit to the cause of
truth and religion. In modern times, a latent and even involuntary skepticism
adheres to the most pious dispositions. Their admission of supernatural truths
is much less an active consent, than a cold and passive acquiescence.
Accustomed long since to observe and to respect the invariable order of Nature,
our reason, or at least our imagination, is not sufficiently prepared to
sustain the visible action of the Deity. But, in the first ages of
Christianity, the situation of mankind was extremely different. The most
curious, or the most credulous, among the Pagans, were often persuaded to enter
into a society, which asserted an actual claim of miraculous powers. The
primitive Christians perpetually trod on mystic ground, and their minds were
exercised by the habits of believing the most extraordinary events. They felt,
or they fancied, that on every side they were incessantly assaulted by demons,
comforted by visions, instructed by prophecy, and surprisingly delivered from
danger, sickness, and from death itself, by the supplications of the church.
The real or imaginary prodigies, of which they so frequently conceived
themselves to be the objects, the instruments, or the spectators, very happily
disposed them to adopt with the same ease, but with far greater justice, the
authentic wonders of the evangelic history; and thus miracles that exceeded not
the measure of their own experience, inspired them with the most lively
assurance of mysteries which were acknowledged to surpass the limits of their
understanding. It is this deep impression of supernatural truths, which has
been so much celebrated under the name of faith; a state of mind described as
the surest pledge of the divine favor and of future felicity, and recommended
as the first or perhaps the only merit of a Christian. According to the more
rigid doctors, the moral virtues, which may be equally practiced by infidels,
are destitute of any value or efficacy in the work of our justification.

IV. But the primitive Christian demonstrated THE FOURTH CAUSE. Virtues of the
first Christians.
his faith by his virtues; and it was very justly supposed that the divine
persuasion which enlightened or subdued the understanding, must, at the same
time, purify the heart and direct the actions of the believer. The first
apologists of Christianity who justify the innocence of their brethren, and the
writers of a later period who celebrate the sanctity of their ancestors,
display, in the most lively colors, the reformation of manners which was
introduced into the world by the preaching of the gospel. As it is my intention
to remark only such human causes as were permitted to second the influence of
revelation, I shall slightly mention two motives which might naturally render
the lives of the primitive Christians much purer and more austere than those of
their Pagan contemporaries, or their degenerate successors; repentance for
their past sins, and the laudable desire of supporting the reputation of the
society in which they were engaged.

It is a very ancient reproach, suggested by the Effects of their repentance.
ignorance or the malice of infidelity, that the Christians allured into their
party the most atrocious criminals, who, as soon as they were touched by a
sense of remorse, were easily persuaded to wash away, in the water of baptism,
the guilt of their past conduct, for which the temples of the gods refused to
grant them any expiation. But this reproach, when it is cleared from
misrepresentation, contributes as much to the honor as it did to the increase
of the church The imputations of Celsus and Julian, with the defense of the
fathers, are very fairly stated by Spanheim, Commentaire sur les Cesars de
Julian, p. 468.
. The friends of Christianity may acknowledge without a blush, that many of the
most eminent saints had been before their baptism the most abandoned sinners.
Those persons, who in the world had followed, though in an imperfect manner,
the dictates of benevolence and propriety, derived such a calm satisfaction
from the opinion of their own rectitude, as rendered them much less susceptible
of the sudden emotions of shame, of grief, and of terror, which have given
birth to so many wonderful conversions. After the example of their Divine
Master, the missionaries of the gospel disdained not the society of men, and
especially of women, oppressed by the consciousness, and very often by the
effects, of their vices. As they emerged from sin and superstition to the
glorious hope of immortality, they resolved to devote themselves to a life, not
only of virtue, but of penitence. The desire of perfection became the ruling
passion of their soul; and it is well known, that while reason embraces a cold
medicrity, our passions hurry us, with rapid violence, over the space which
lies between the most opposite extremes.

When the new converts had been enrolled in Care of their reputation.
the number of the faithful, and were admitted to the sacraments of the church,
they found themselves restrained from relapsing into their past disorders by
another consideration of a less spiritual, but of a very innocent and
respectable nature. Any particular society that has departed from the great
body of the nation, or the religion to which it belonged, immediately becomes
the object of universal as well as invidious observation. In proportion to the
smallness of its numbers, the character of the society may be affected by the
virtue and vices of the persons who compose it; and every member is engaged to
watch with the most vigilant attention over his own behavior, and over that of
his brethren, since, as he must expect to incur a part of the common disgrace,
he may hope to enjoy a share of the common reputation. When the Christians of
Bithynia were brought before the tribunal of the younger Pliny, they assured
the proconsul, that, far from being engaged in any unlawful conspiracy, they
were bound by a solemn obligation to abstain from the commission of those
crimes which disturb the private or public peace of society, from theft,
robbery, adultery, perjury, and fraud Plin. Epist. x. 97.
. Near a century afterward, Tertullian, with an honest pride, could boast,
that very few Christians had suffered by the hand of the executioner, except on
account of their religion Tertullian, Apolog. c. 44. He adds, however, with
some degree of hesitation, "Aut si aliud, jam non Christianus."
. Their serious and sequestered life, averse to the gay luxury of the age,
inured them to chastity, temperance, economy, and all the sober and domestic
virtues. As the greater number were of some trade or profession, it was
incumbent on them, by the strictest integrity and the fairest dealing, to
remove the suspicions which the profane are too apt to conceive against the
appearances of sanctity. The contempt of the world exercised them in the habits
of humility, meekness, and patience. The more they were persecuted, the more
closely they adhered to each other. Their mutual charity and unsuspecting
confidence has been remarked by infidels, and was too often abused by
perfidious friends The philosopher Peregrinus (of whose life and death Lucian
has left us so entertaining an account) imposed, for a long time, on the
credulous simplicity of the Christians of Asia.
.

It is a very honorable circumstance for the Morality of the fathers.
morals of the primitive Christians, that even their faults, or rather errors,
were derived from an excess of virtue. The bishops and doctors of the church,
whose evidence attests, and whose authority might influence, the professions,
the principles, and even the practice, of their contemporaries, had studied the
scriptures with less skill than devotion, and they often received, in the most
literal sense, those rigid precepts of Christ and the apostles, to which the
prudence of succeeding commentators has applied a looser and more figurative
mode of interpretation. Ambitious to exalt the perfection of the gospel above
the wisdom of philosophy, the zealous fathers have carried the duties of
self-mortification, of purity, and of patience, to a height which it is
scarcely possible to attain, and much less to preserve, in our present state of
weakness and corruption. A doctrine so extraordinary and so sublime must
inevitably command the veneration of the people; but it was ill calculated to
obtain the suffrage of those worldly philosophers, who, in the conduct of this
transitory life, consult only the feelings of nature and the interest of
society See a very judicious treatise of Barbeyrac sur la Morale des Peers.
.

There are two very natural propensities which Principles of human nature.
we may distinguish in the most virtuous and liberal dispositions, the love of
pleasure and the love of action. If the former is refined by art and learning,
improved by the charms of social intercourse, and corrected by a just regard to
economy, to health, and to reputation, it is productive of the greatest part
of the happiness of private life. The love of action is a principle of a much
stronger and more doubtful nature. It often leads to anger, to ambition, and to
revenge; but when it is guided by the sense of propriety and benevolence, it
becomes the parent of every virtue; and if those virtues are accompanied with
equal abilities, a family, a state, or an empire, may be indebted for their
safety and prosperity to the undaunted courage of a single man. To the love of
pleasure we may therefore ascribe most of the agreeable, to the love of action
we may attribute most of the useful and respectable, qualifications. The
character in which both the one and the other should be united and harmonised,
would seem to constitute the most perfect idea of human nature. The insensible
and inactive disposition, which should be supposed alike destitute of both,
would be rejected, by the common consent of mankind, as utterly incapable of
procuring any happiness to the individual, or any public benefit to the world.
But it was not in this world that the primitive Christians were desirous of
making themselves either agreeable or useful.

The acquisition of knowledge, the exercise of The primitive Christians condemn
pleasure and luxury.
our reason or fancy, and the cheerful flow of unguarded conversation, may
employ the leisure of a liberal mind. Such amusements, however, were rejected
with abhorrence, or admitted with the utmost caution, by the severity of the
fathers, who despised all knowledge that was not useful to salvation, and who
considered all levity of discourse as a criminal abuse of the gift of speech.
In our present state of existence, the body is so inseparably connected with
the soul, that it seems to be our interest to taste, with innocence and
moderation, the enjoyments of which that faithful companion is susceptible.
Very different was the reasoning of our devout predecessors; vainly aspiring to
imitate the perfection of angels, they disdained, or they affected to disdain,
every earthly and corporeal delight Lactant. Institut. Divin. l. vi. c. 20, 21,
22.
. Some of our senses indeed are necessary for our preservation, others for our
subsistence, and others again for our information, and thus far it was
impossible to reject the use of them. The first sensation of pleasure was
marked as the first moment of their abuse. The unfeeling candidate for Heaven
was instructed, not only to resist the grosser allurements of the taste or
smell, but even to shut his ears against the profane harmony of sounds, and to
view with indifference the most finished productions of human art. Gay apparel,
magnificent houses, and elegant furniture, were supposed to unite the double
guilt of pride and of sensuality: a simple and mortified appearance was more
suitable to the Christian who was certain of his sins and doubtful of his
salvation. In their censures of luxury, the fathers are extremely minute and
circumstantial Consult a work of Clemens of Alexandria, entitled the
Paedagogue, which contains the rudiments of ethics, as they were taught in the
most celebrated of the Christian schools.
; and among the various articles which excite their pious indignation, we may
enumerate false hair, garments of any color except white, instruments of
music, vases of gold or silver, downy pillows (as Jacob reposed his head on a
stone), white bread, foreign wines, public salutations, the use of warm baths,
and the practice of shaving the beard, which, according to the expression of
Tertullian, is a lie against our own faces, and an impious attempt to improve
the works of the Creator Tertullian, de Spectaculis, c. 23. Clemens Alexandrin.
Paedagog. l. iii. c. 8.
. When Christianity was introduced among the rich and the polite, the
observation of these singular laws was left, as it would be at present, to the
few who were ambitious of superior sanctity. But it is always easy, as well as
agreeable, for the inferior ranks of mankind to claim a merit from the contempt
of that pomp and pleasure, which fortune has placed beyond their reach. The
virtue of the primitive Christians, like that of the first Romans, was very
frequently guarded by poverty and ignorance.

The chaste severity of the fathers, in whatever Their sentiments concerning
marriage and chastity.
related to the commerce of the two sexes, flowed from the same principle;
their abhorrence of every enjoyment, which might gratify the sensual, and
degrade the spiritual, nature of man. It was their favorite opinion, that if
Adam had preserved his obedience to the Creator, he would have lived for ever
in a state of virgin purity, and that some harmless mode of vegetation might
have peopled paradise with a race of innocent and immortal beings Beausobre,
Hist. Critique du Manicheisine, l. vii. c. 3. Justin, Gregory of Nyssa,
Augustine, etc. strongly inclined to this opinion.
. The use of marriage was permitted only to his fallen posterity, as a
necessary expedient to continue the human species, and as a restraint, however
imperfect, on the natural licentiousness of desire. The hesitation of the
orthodox casuists on this interesting subject, betrays the perplexity of men,
unwilling to approve an institution, which they were compelled to tolerate Some
of the Gnostic heretics were more consistent; they rejected the use of marriage.
. The enumeration of the very whimsical laws, which they most circumstantially
imposed on the marriage bed, would force a smile from the young, and a blush
from the fair. It was their unanimous sentiment, that a first marriage was
adequate to all the purposes of nature and of society. The sensual connection
was refined into a resemblance of the mystic union of Christ with his church,
and was pronounced to be indissoluble either by divorce or by death. The
practice of second nuptials was branded with the name of a legal adultery; and
the persons who were guilty of so scandalous an offense against Christian
purity, were soon excluded from the honors, and even from the alms, of the
church See a chain of tradition, from Justin Martyr to Jerome, in the Morale
des Peers; c. iv. 6 -- 26.
. Since desire was imputed as a crime, and marriage was tolerated as a defect,
it was consistent with the same principles to consider a state of celibacy as
the nearest approach to the Divine perfection. It was with the utmost
difficulty that ancient Rome could support the institution of six vestals See a
very curious Dissertation on the Vestals, in the Memoires de l'Academie des
Inscriptions, tom. iv. p. 161 -- 227. Notwithstanding the honors and rewards
which were bestowed on those virgins, it was difficult to procure a sufficient
number; nor could the dread of the most horrible death always restrain their
incontinence.
; but the primitive church was filled with a great number of persons of either
sex, who had devoted themselves to the profession of perpetual chastity
Cupiditatem procreandi aut unam scimus aut nullam. Minucius Faelix, c. 31.
Justin. Apolog. Major. Athenagoras in Legate. c. 28. Tertullian de Cultu Foemin.
l. ii.
. A few of these, among whom we may reckon the learned Origin, judged it the
most prudent to disarm the temper Eusebius, l. vi. 8. Before the fame of Origin
had excited envy and persecution, this extraordinary action was rather admired
than censured. As it was his general practice to allegorize scripture; it seems
unfortunate that, in this instance only, he should have adopted the literal
sense.
. Some were insensible and some were invincible against the assaults of the
flesh. Disdaining an ignominious flight, the virgins of the warm climate of
Africa encountered the enemy in the closest engagement; they permitted priests
and deacons to share their bed, and gloried amidst the flames in their
unsullied purity. But insulted Nature sometimes vindicated her rights, and this
new species of martyrdom served only to introduce a new scandal into the church
Cyprian. Epist. 4. and Dodwell Dissertat. Cyprianic. iii. Something like this
rash attempt was long afterward imputed to the founder of the order of
Fontevrault. Bail has amused himself and his readers on that very delicate
subject.
. Among the Christian ascetics, however (a name which they soon acquired from
their painful exercise), many, as they were less presumptuous, were probably
more successful. The loss of sensual pleasure was supplied and compensated by
spiritual pride. Even the multitude of Pagans were inclined to estimate the
merit of the sacrifice by its apparent difficulty; and it was in the praise of
these chaste spouses of Christ that the fathers have poured forth the troubled
stream of their eloquence Dupin (Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, tom. i. p. 195.)
gives a particular account of the dialogue of the ten virgins, as it was
composed by Methodius, bishop of Tire. The praises of virginity are excessive.
. Such are the early traces of monastic principles and institutions, which, in
a subsequent age, have counterbalanced all the temporal advantages of
Christianity The Ascetics (as early as the second century) made a public
profession of mortifying their bodies, and of abstaining from the use of flesh
and wine. Mosheim, p. 310.
.

The Christians were not less averse to the business than to the pleasures of
this world. The defense of our persons and property they knew Their aversion to
the business of war and government.
not how to reconcile with the patient doctrine which enjoined an unlimited
forgiveness of past injuries, and commanded them to invite the repetition of
fresh insults. Their simplicity was offended by the use of oaths, by the pomp
of magistracy, and by the active contention of public life, nor could their
humane ignorance be convinced, that it was lawful on any occasion to shed the
blood of our fellow creatures, either by the sword of justice, or by that of
war; even though their criminal or hostile attempts should threaten the peace
and safety of the whole community See the Morale des Peers. The same patient
principles have been revived since the Reformation by the Socinians, the modern
Anabaptists, and the Quakers. Barclay, the apologist of the Quakers, has
protected his brethren, by the authority of the primitive Christians, p. 542 --
549.
. It was acknowledged, that, under a less perfect law, the powers of the Jewish
constitution had been exercised, with the approbation of Heaven, by inspired
prophets and by anointed kings. The Christians felt and confessed, that such
institutions might be necessary for the present system of the world, and they
cheerfully submitted to the authority of their Pagan governors. But while they
inculcated the maxims of passive obedience, they refused to take any active
part in the civil administration or the military defense of the empire. Some
indulgence might perhaps be allowed to those persons who, before their
conversion, were already engaged in such violent and sanguinary occupations
Tertullian, Apolog. c. 21. De Idololatria, c. 17, 18. Origin contra Celsum, l.
v. p. 253. l. vii. p. 348. l. viii. p. 423 -- 428.
; but it was impossible that the Christians, without renouncing a more sacred
duty, could assume the character of soldiers, of magistrates, or of princes
Tertullian (de Corona Militis, c. 11.) suggests to them the expedient of
deserting; a counsel, which, if it had been generally known, was not very
proper to conciliate the favor of the emperors toward the Christian sect.
. This indolent, or even criminal disregard to the public welfare, exposed them
to the contempt and reproaches of the Pagans, who very frequently asked, what
must be the fate of the empire, attacked on every side by the barbarians, if
all mankind should adopt the pusillanimous sentiments of the new sect As well
as we can judge from the mutilated representation of Origin (l. viii. p. 423.),
his adversary, Celsus, had urged his objection with great force and candor.
? To this insulting question the Christian apologists returned obscure and
ambiguous answers, as they were unwilling to reveal the secret cause of their
security; the expectation that, before the conversion of mankind was
accomplished, war, government, the Roman empire, and the world itself, would be
no more. It may be observed, that, in this instance likewise, the situation of
the first Christians coincided very happily with their religious scruples, and
that their aversion to an active life contributed rather to excuse them from
the service, than to exclude them from the honors, of the state and army.

V. But the human character, however it may be exalted or depressed by a
temporary enthusiasm, will return by degrees to its proper and THE FIFTH CAUSE.
The Christians active in the government of the church.
natural level, and will resume those passions that seem the most adapted to
its present condition. The primitive Christians were dead to the business and
pleasures of the world; but their love of action, which could never be entirely
extinguished, soon revived, and found a new occupation in the government of the
church. A separate society, which attacked the established religion of the
empire, was obliged to adopt some form of internal policy, and to appoint a
sufficient number of ministers, entrusted not only with the spiritual
functions, but even with the temporal direction of the Christian commonwealth.
The safety of that society, its honor, its aggrandisement, were productive,
even in the most pious minds, of a spirit of patriotism, such as the first of
the Romans had felt for the republic, and sometimes, of a similar indifference,
in the use of whatever means might probably conduce to so desirable an end. The
ambition of raising themselves or their friends to the honors and offices of
the church, was disguised by the laudable intention of devoting to the public
benefit, the power and consideration, which, for that purpose only, it became
their duty to solicit. In the exercise of their functions, they were frequently
called upon to detect the errors of heresy, or the arts of faction, to oppose
the designs of perfidious brethren, to stigmatize their characters with
deserved infamy, and to expel them from the bosom of a society, whose peace and
happiness they had attempted to disturb. The ecclesiastical governors of the
Christians were taught to unite the wisdom of the serpent with the innocence of
the dove; but as the former was refined, so the latter was insensibly
corrupted, by the habits of government. In the church as well as in the world,
the persons who were placed in any public station rendered themselves
considerable by their eloquence and firmness, by their knowledge of mankind,
and by their dexterity in business; and while they concealed from others, and
perhaps from themselves, the secret motives of their conduct, they too
frequently relapsed into all the turbulent passions of active life, which were
tinctured with an additional degree of bitterness and obstinacy from the
infusion of spiritual zeal.

The government of the church has often been Its primitive freedom and equality.
the subject as well as the prize of religious contention. The hostile
disputants of Rome, of Paris, of Oxford, and of Geneva, have alike struggled to
reduce the primitive and apostolic model The Aristocratical party in France, as
well as in England, has strenuously maintained the divine origin of bishops.
But the Calvinistical presbyters were impatient of a superior; and the Roman
Pontiff refused to acknowledge an equal. See Fra Paolo.
, to the respective standards of their own policy. The few who have pursued
this inquiry with more candor and impartiality, are of opinion In the history
of the Christian hierarchy, I have, for the most part, followed the learned and
candid Mosheim.
, that the apostles declined the office of legislation, and rather chose to
endure some partial scandals and divisions, than to exclude the Christians of a
future age from the liberty of varying their forms of ecclesiastical government
according to the changes of times and circumstances. The scheme of policy,
which, under their approbation, was adopted for the use of the first century,
may be discovered from the practice of Jerusalem, of Ephesus, or of Corinth.
The societies which were instituted in the cities of the Roman empire, were
united only by the ties of faith and charity. Independence and equality formed
the basis of their internal constitution. The want of discipline and human
learning was supplied by the occasional assistance of the prophets For the
prophets of the primitive church, see Mosheim, Dissertationes ad Hist. Eccles.
pertinentes, tom. ii. p. 132 -- 208.
, who were called to that function without distinction of age, of sex, or of
natural abilities, and who, as often as they felt the divine impulse, poured
forth the effusions of the spirit in the assembly of the faithful. But these
extraordinary gifts were frequently abused or misapplied by the prophetic
teachers. They displayed them at an improper season, presumptuously disturbed
the service of the assembly, and by their pride or mistaken zeal they
introduced, particularly into the apostolic church of Corinth, a long and
melancholy train of disorders See the epistles of St. Paul, and of Clemens, to
the Corinthians.
. As the institution of prophets became useless, and even pernicious, their
powers were withdrawn, and their office abolished. The public functions of
religion were solely entrusted to the established ministers of the church, the
bishops and the presbyters; two appellations which, in their first origin,
appear to have distinguished the same office and the same order of persons. The
name of Presbyter was expressive of their age, or rather of their gravity and
wisdom. The title of Bishop denoted their inspection over the faith and manners
of the Christians who were committed to their pastoral care. In proportion to
the respective numbers of the faithful, a larger or smaller number of these
episcopal presbyters guided each infant congregation with equal authority, and
with united counsels Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, l. vii.
.

But the most perfect equality of freedom requires Institution of bishops as
presidents of the college of presbyters.
the directing hand of a superior magistrate; and the order of public
deliberations soon introduces the office of a president, invested at least with
the authority of collecting the sentiments, and of executing the resolutions,
of the assembly. A regard for the public tranquillity, which would so
frequently have been interrupted by annual or by occasional elections, induced
the primitive Christians to constitute an honorable and perpetual magistracy,
and to choose one of the wisest and most holy among their presbyters to
execute, during his life, the duties of their ecclesiastical governor. It was
under these circumstances that the lofty title of Bishop began to raise itself
above the humble appellation of presbyter; and while the latter remained the
most natural distinction for the members of every Christian senate, the former
was appropriated to the dignity of its new president See Jerome ad Titum, c. 1.
and Epistol. 85. (in the Benedictine edition, 101.) and the elaborate apology
of Blondel, prosententia Hieronymi. The ancient state, as it is described by
Jerome, of the bishop and presbyters of Alexandria, receives a remarkable
confirmation from the patriarch Eutichius (Annal. tom. i. p. 330. Verse.
Pocock); whose testimony I know not how to reject, in spite of all the
objections of the learned Pearson in his Vindiciae Ignatianae, part i. c. 11.
. The advantages of this episcopal form of government, which appears to have
been introduced before the end of the first century See the introduction to the
Apocalypse. Bishops, under the name of angels, were already instituted in seven
cities of Asia. And yet the epistle of Clemens (which is probably of as ancient
a date) does not lead us to discover any traces of episcopacy either at Corinth
or Rome.
, were so obvious, and so important for the future greatness, as well as the
present peace, of Christianity, that it was adopted without delay by all the
societies which were already scattered over the empire, had acquired in a very
early period the sanction of antiquity Nulla Ecclesia sine Episcopo, has been a
fact as well as a maxim since the time of Tertullian and Irenaeus.
, and is still revered by the most powerful churches, both of the East and of
the West, as a primitive and even as a divine establishment After we have
passed the difficulties of the first century, we find the episcopal government
universally established, till it was interrupted by the republican genius of
the Swiss and German reformers.
. It is needless to observe, that the pious and humble presbyters, who were
first dignified with the episcopal title, could not possess, and would probably
have rejected, the power and pomp which now encircles the tiara of the Roman
pontiff, or the mitre of a German prelate. But we may define, in a few words,
the narrow limits of their original jurisdiction, which was chiefly of a
spiritual, though in some instances of a temporal, nature See Mosheim in the
first and second centuries. Ignatius (ad Smyrnaeos, c. 3, etc.) is fond of
exalting the episcopal dignity. Le Clerc (Hist. Eccles. p. 569.) very bluntly
censures his conduct. Mosheim, with a more critical judgment (p. 161.),
suspects the purity even of the smaller epistles.
. It consisted in the administration of the sacraments and discipline of the
church, the superintendency of religious ceremonies, which imperceptibly
increased in number and variety, the consecration of ecclesiastical ministers,
to whom the bishop assigned their respective functions, the management of the
public fund, and the determination of all such differences as the faithful were
unwilling to expose before the tribunal of an idolatrous judge. These powers,
during a short period, were exercised according to the advice of the
presbyteral college, and with the consent and approbation of the assembly of
Christians. The primitive bishops were considered only as the first of their
equals, and the honorable servants of a free people. Whenever the episcopal
chair became vacant by death, a new president was chosen among the presbyters
by the suffrage of the whole congregation, every member of which supposed
himself invested with a sacred and sacerdotal character Nonne et Laici
sacerdotes sumus? Tertullian, Exhort. ad Castitat. c. 7. As the human heart is
still the same, several of the observations which Mr. Hume has made on
Enthusiasm (Essays, vol. i. p. 76, quarto edit.), may be applied even to real
inspiration.
.

Such was the mild and equal constitution by Provincial councils.
which the Christians were governed more than an hundred years after the death
of the apostles. Every society formed within itself a separate and independent
republic: and although the most distant of these little states maintained a
mutual as well as friendly intercourse of letters and deputations, the
Christian world was not yet connected by any supreme authority or legislative
assembly. As the numbers of the faithful were gradually multiplied, they
discovered the advantages that might result from a closer union of their
interest and designs. Toward the end of the second century, the churches of
Greece and Asia adopted the useful institutions of provincial synods, and they
may justly be supposed to have borrowed the model of a representative council
from the celebrated examples of their own country, the Amphictyons, the Achaean
league, or the assemblies of the Ionian cities. It was soon established as a
custom and as a law, that the bishops of the independent churches should meet
in the capital of the province at the stated periods of spring and autumn.
Their deliberations were assisted by the advice of a few distinguished
presbyters, and moderated by the presence of a listening multitude Acta Council.
Carthag. apud Cyprian. Edit. Fell, p. 158. This council was composed of
eighty-seven bishops from the provinces of Mauritania, Numidia, and Africa;
some presbyters and deacons assisted at the assembly; praesente plebis maxima
part.
. Their decrees, which were styled Canons, regulated every important
controversy of faith and discipline; and it was natural to believe that a
liberal effusion of the holy spirit would be poured on the united assembly of
the delegates of the Christian people. The institution of synods was so well
suited to private ambition and to public interest, that in the space of a few
years it was received throughout the whole empire. A regular correspondence
Union of the church.
was established between the provincial councils, which mutually communicated
and approved their respective proceedings; and the catholic church soon assumed
the form, and acquired the strength, of a great soederative republic Aguntur
praeterea per Graecias illas, certis in locis concilia, etc. Tertullian de
Jejuniis, c. 13. The African mentions it as a recent and foreign institution.
The coalition of the Christian churches is very ably explained by Mosheim, p.
164 -- 170.
.

As the legislative authority of the particular Progress of episcopal authority.
churches was insensibly superseded by the use of councils, the bishops
obtained by their alliance a much larger share of executive and arbitrary
power; and as soon as they were connected by a sense of their common interest,
they were enabled to attack, with united vigor, the original rights of their
clergy and people. The prelates of the third century imperceptibly changed the
language of exhortation into that of command, scattered the seeds of future
usurpations, and supplied, by scripture allegories and declamatory rhetoric,
their deficiency of force and of reason. They exalted the unity and power of
the church, as it was represented in the EPISCOPAL OFFICE, of which every
bishop enjoyed an equal and undivided portion Cyprian, in his admired treatise
De Unitate Ecclesiae, p. 75 -- 86.
. Princes and magistrates, it was often repeated, might boast an earthly claim
to a transitory dominion: it was the episcopal authority alone which was
derived from the deity, and extended itself over this and over another world.
The bishops were the vicegerents of Christ, the successors of the apostles, and
the mystic substitutes of the high priest of the Mosaic law. Their exclusive
privilege of conferring the sacerdotal character, invaded the freedom both of
clerical and of popular elections; and if, in the administration of the church,
they still consulted the judgment of the presbyters, or the inclination of the
people, they most carefully inculcated the merit of such a voluntary
condescension. The bishops acknowledged the supreme authority which resided in
the assembly of their brethren; but in the government of his peculiar diocese,
each of them exacted from his flock the same implicit obedience as if that
favorite metaphor had been literally just, and as if the shepherd had been of
a more exalted nature than that of his sheep We may appeal to the whole tenor
of Cyprian's conduct, of his doctrine, and of his Epistles. Le Clerc, in a
short life of Cyprian (Bibliotheque Universelle, tom. xii. p. 207 -- 378.), has
laid him open with great freedom and accuracy.
. This obedience, however, was not imposed without some efforts on one side,
and some resistance on the other. The democratical part of the constitution
was, in many places, very warmly supported by the zealous or interested
opposition of the inferior clergy. But their patriotism received the
ignominious epithets of faction and schism; and the episcopal cause was
indebted for its rapid progress to the labors of many active prelates, who,
like Cyprian of Carthage, could reconcile the arts of the most ambitious
statesman with the Christian virtues which seem adapted to the character of a
saint and martyr If Novatus, Felicissimus, etc. whom the bishop of Carthage
expelled from his church, and from Africa, were not the most detestable
monsters of wickedness, the zeal of Cyprian must occasionally have prevailed
over his veracity. For a very just account of these obscure quarrels, see
Mosheim, p. 497 -- 512.
.

The same causes which at first had destroyed Pre-eminence of the metropolitan
churches.
the equality of the presbyters, introduced among the bishops a pre-eminence of
rank, and from thence a superiority of jurisdiction. As often as in the spring
and autumn they met in provincial synod, the difference of personal merit and
reputation was very sensibly felt among the members of the assembly, and the
multitude was governed by the wisdom and eloquence of the few. But the order of
public proceedings required a more regular and less invidious distinction; the
office of perpetual presidents in the councils of each province, was conferred
on the bishops of the principal city, and these aspiring prelates, who soon
acquired the lofty titles of Metropolitans and Primates, secretly prepared
themselves to usurp over their episcopal brethren the same authority which the
bishops had so lately assumed above the college of presbyters Mosheim, p. 269.
574. Dupin, Antiquae Eccles. Discipline. p. 19, 20.
. Nor was it long before an emulation of pre-eminence and power prevailed among
the metropolitans themselves, each of them affecting to display, in the most
pompous terms, the temporal honors and advantages of the city over which he
presided; the numbers and opulence of the Christians, who were subject to their
pastoral care; the saints and martyrs who had arisen among them, and the purity
with which they preserved the tradition of the faith, as it had been
transmitted through a series of orthodox bishops from the apostle or the
apostolic disciple, to whom the foundation of their church was ascribed
Tertullian, in a distinct treatise, has pleaded against the heretics, the right
of prescription, as it was held by the apostolic churches.
. From every cause either of a civil or of an ecclesiastical nature, it was
easy to foresee that Rome must enjoy the respect, and would soon claim the
obedience, of the provinces. The society of the faithful Ambition of the Roman
pontiff.
bore a just proportion to the capital of the empire; and the Roman church was
the greatest, the most numerous, and, in regard to the West, the most ancient
of all the Christian establishments, many of which had received their religion
from the pious labors of her missionaries. Instead of one apostolic founder,
the utmost boast of Antioch, of Ephesus, or of Corinth, the banks of the Tyber
were supposed to have been honored with the preaching and martyrdom of the two
most eminent among the apostles The journey of St. Peter to Rome is mentioned
by most of the ancients (see Eusebius, ii. 25.), maintained by all the
catholics, allowed by some protestants (see Pearson and Dodwell de Success.
Episcop. Roman.), but has been vigorously attacked by Spanheim (Miscellanea
Sacra, iii. 3.). According to father Hardouin, the monks of the thirteenth
century, who composed the Aeneid, represented St. Peter under the allegorical
character of the Trojan hero.
; and the bishops of Rome very prudently claimed the inheritance of whatsoever
prerogatives were attributed either to the person or to the office of St. Peter
It is in French only, that the famous allusion to St. Peter's name is exact. Tu
es Pierre et sur cette pierre. -- The same is imperfect in Greek, Latin,
Italian, etc. and totally unintelligible in our Teutonic languages.
. The bishops of Italy and of the provinces were disposed to allow them a
primacy of order and association (such was their very accurate expression) in
the Christian aristocracy Irenaeus adv. Haereses, iii. 3. Tertullian de
Praescription. c. 36, and Cyprian Epistol. 27. 55. 71. 75. Le Clerc (Hist.
Eccles. p. 764.) and Mosheim (p. 258. 578.) labor in the interpretation of
these passages. But the loose and rhetorical style of the fathers often appears
favorable to the pretensions of Rome.
. But the power of a monarch was rejected with abhorrence, and the aspiring
genius of Rome experienced from the nations of Asia and Africa, a more vigorous
resistance to her spiritual, than she had formerly done to her temporal,
dominion. The patriotic Cyprian, who ruled with the most absolute sway the
church of Carthage and the provincial synods, opposed with resolution and
success the ambition of the Roman pontiff, artfully connected his own cause
with that of the eastern bishops, and, like Hannibal, sought out new allies in
the heart of Asia See the sharp epistle from Firmilianus bishop of Caesarea, to
Stephen bishop of Rome, ap. Cyprian. Epistol. 75.
. If this Punic war was carried on without any effusion of blood, it was owing
much less to the moderation than to the weakness of the contending prelates.
Invectives and excommunications were their only weapons; and these, during the
progress of the whole controversy, they hurled against each other with equal
fury and devotion. The hard necessity of censuring either a pope, or a saint
and martyr, distresses the modern catholics, whenever they are obliged to
relate the particulars of a dispute, in which the champions of religion
indulged such passions as seem much more adapted to the senate or to the camp
Concerning this dispute of the re-baptism of heretics; see the epistles of
Cyprian, and the seventh book of Eusebius.
.

The progress of the ecclesiastical authority Laity and clergy.
gave birth to the memorable distinction of the laity and of the clergy, which
had been unknown to the Greeks and Romans For the origin of these words, see
Mosheim, p. 141. Spanheim, Hist. Ecclesiast. p. 633. The distinction of Clerus
and Laicus was established before the time of Tertullian.
. The former of these appellations comprehended the body of the Christian
people; the latter, according to the signification of the word, was
appropriated to the chosen portion that had been set apart for the service of
religion; a celebrated order of men which has furnished the most important,
though not always the most edifying, subjects for modern history. Their mutual
hostilities sometimes disturbed the peace of the infant church, but their zeal
and activity were united in the common cause, and the love of power, which
(under the most artful disguises) could insinuate itself into the breasts of
bishops and martyrs, animated them to increase the number of their subjects,
and to enlarge the limits of the Christian empire. They were destitute of any
temporal force, and they were for a long time discouraged and oppressed, rather
than assisted, by the civil magistrate; but they had acquired, and they
employed within their own society, the two most efficacious instruments of
government, rewards and punishments; the former derived from the pious
liberality, the latter from the devout apprehensions, of the faithful.

1. The community of goods, which had so Oblations and revenue of the church.
agreeably amused the imagination of Plato The community instituted by Plato,
is more perfect than that which Sir Thomas More had imagined for his Utopia.
The community of women, and that of temporal goods, may be considered as
inseparable parts of the same system.
, and which subsisted in some degree among the austere sect of the Essenians
Joseph. Antiquitat. xviii. 2. Philo, de Vit. Contemplativ.
, was adopted for a short time in the primitive church. The fervor of the
first proselytes prompted them to sell those worldly possessions, which they
despised, to lay the price of them at the feet of the apostles, and to content
themselves with receiving an equal share out of the general distribution See
the Acts of the Apostles, c. 2. 4, 5. with Grotius's Commentary. Mosheim, in a
particular dissertation, attacks the common opinion with very inconclusive
arguments.
. The progress of the Christian religion relaxed, and gradually abolished this
generous institution, which, in hands less pure than those of the apostles,
would too soon have been corrupted and abused by the returning selfishness of
human nature; and the converts who embraced the new religion were permitted to
retain the possession of their patrimony, to receive legacies and inheritances,
and to increase their separate property by all the lawful means of trade and
industry. Instead of an absolute sacrifice, a moderate proportion was accepted
by the ministers of the gospel; and in their weekly or monthly assemblies,
every believer, according to the exigency of the occasion, and the measure of
his wealth and piety, presented his voluntary offering for the use of the
common fund Justin Martyr, Apolog. Major, c. 89. Tertullian, Apolog. c. 39.
. Nothing, however inconsiderable, was refused; but it was diligently
inculcated, that, in the article of Tithes, the Mosaic law was still of divine
obligation; and that since the Jews, under a less perfect discipline, had been
commanded to pay a tenth part of all that they possessed, it would become the
disciples of Christ to distinguish themselves by a superior degree of
liberality Irenaeus ad Haeres. l. iv. c. 27. 34. Origin in Number. Hom. ii.
Cyprian de Unitat. Eccles. Constitut. Apostol. l. ii. c. 34, 35. with the notes
of Cotelerius. The Constitutions introduce this divine precept, by declaring
that priests are as much above kings, as the soul is above the body. Among the
tythable articles, they enumerate corn, wine, oil, and wool. On this
interesting subject, consult Prideaux's History of Tithes, and Fra-Paolo delle
Materic Beneficiarie; two writers of a very different character.
, and to acquire some merit by resigning a superfluous treasure, which must so
soon be annihilated with the world itself The same opinion which prevailed
about the year one thousand, was productive of the same effects. Most of the
Donations express their motive, "appropinquante mundi fine." See Mosheim's
General History of the Church, vol. i. p. 457.
. It is almost unnecessary to observe, that the revenue of each particular
church, which was of so uncertain and fluctuating a nature, must have varied
with the poverty or the opulence of the faithful, as they were dispersed in
obscure villages, or collected in the great cities of the empire. In the time
of the emperor Decius, it was the opinion of the magistrates, that the
Christians of Rome were possessed of very considerable wealth; that vessels of
gold and silver were used in their religious worship, and that many among their
proselytes had sold their lands and houses to increase the public riches of the
sect, at the expense, indeed, of their unfortunate children, who found
themselves beggars, because their parents had been saints Tum summa cura est
fratribus
(Ut sermo testatur loquax.)
Offerre, fundis venditis
Sestertiorum millia.
Addicta avorum praedia
Foedis sub auctionibus,
Successor exheres gemit
Sanctis egens Parentibus.
Haec occuluntur abditis
Ecclesiarum in Angulis:
Et summa piet as creditur
Nudare dulces liberos.
Prudent. (...). Hymn. 2. The subsequent conduct of the deacon Laurence, only
proves how proper a use was made of the wealth of the Roman church; it was
undoubtedly very considerable; but Fra-Paolo (c. 3.) appears to exaggerate,
when he supposes, that the successors of Commodus were urged to persecute the
Christians by their own avarice, or that of their Praetorian praefects.


. We should listen with distrust to the suspicions of strangers and enemies: on
this occasion, however, they receive a very specious and probable color from
the two following circumstances, the only ones that have reached our knowledge,
which define any precise sums, or convey any distinct idea. Almost at the same
period, the bishop of Carthage, from a society less opulent than that of Rome,
collected an hundred thousand sesterces (above eight hundred and fifty pounds
sterling), on a sudden call of charity to redeem the brethren of Numidia, who
had been carried away captives by the barbarians of the desert Cyprian.
Epistol. 62.
. About an hundred years before the reign of Decius, the Roman church had
received, in a single donation, the sum of two hundred thousand sesterces from
a stranger of Pontus, who proposed to fix his residence in the capital
Tertullian de Prescriptione, c. 30.
. These oblations, for the most part, were made in money; nor was the society
of Christians either desirous or capable of acquiring, to any considerable
degree, the encumbrance of landed property. It had been provided by several
laws, which were enacted with the same design as our statutes of mortmain, that
no real estates should be given or bequeathed to any corporate body, without
either a special privilege or a particular dispensation from the emperor or
from the senate Diocletian gave a rescript, which is only a declaration of the
old law; "Collegium, si nullo speciali privilegio subnixum sit, haereditatem
capere non posse, dubium non est." Fra-Paolo (c. 4.) thinks that these
regulations had been much neglected since the reign of Valerian.
; who were seldom disposed to grant them in favor of a sect, at first the
object of their contempt, and at last of their fears and jealousy. A
transaction however is related under the reign of Alexander Severus, which
discovers that the restraint was sometimes eluded or suspended, and that the
Christians were permitted to claim and to possess lands within the limits of
Rome itself Hist. August. p. 131. The ground had been public; and was now
disputed between the society of Christians, and that of butchers.
. The progress of Christianity, and the civil confusion of the empire,
contributed to relax the severity of the laws, and before the close of the
third century many considerable estates were bestowed on the opulent churches
of Rome, Milan, Carthage, Antioch, Alexandria, and the other great cities of
Italy and the provinces.

The bishop was the natural steward of the Distribution of the revenue.
church; the public stock was entrusted to his care without account or
control; the presbyters were confined to their spiritual functions, and the
more dependent order of deacons was solely employed in the management and
distribution of the ecclesiastical revenue Constitut. Apostol. ii. 35.
. If we may give credit to the vehement declamations of Cyprian, there were too
many among his African brethren, who, in the execution of their charge,
violated every precept, not only of evangelic perfection, but even of moral
virtue. By some of these unfaithful stewards the riches of the church were
lavished in sensual pleasures, by others they were perverted to the purposes of
private gain, of fraudulent purchases, and of rapacious usury Cyprian de
Lapsis, p. 89. Epistol. 65. The charge is confirmed by the 19th and 20th canon
of the council of Illiberis.
. But as long as the contributions of the Christian people were free and
unconstrained, the abuse of their confidence could not be very frequent, and
the general uses to which their liberality was applied, reflected honor on the
religious society. A decent portion was reserved for the maintenance of the
bishop and his clergy; a sufficient sum was allotted for the expenses of the
public worship, of which the feasts of love, the agapae, as they were called,
constituted a very pleasing part. The whole remainder was the sacred patrimony
of the poor. According to the discretion of the bishop, it was distributed to
support widows and orphans, the lame, the sick, and the aged of the community;
to comfort strangers and pilgrims, and to alleviate the misfortunes of
prisoners and captives, more especially when their sufferings had been
occasioned by their firm attachment to the cause of religion See the apologies
of Justin, Tertullian, etc.
. A generous intercourse of charity united the most distant provinces, and the
smaller congregations were cheerfully assisted by the alms of their more
opulent brethren The wealth and liberality of the Romans to their most distant
brethren, is gratefully celebrated by Dionysius of Corinth, ap. Eusebius. l. iv.
c. 23.
. Such an institution, which paid less regard to the merit than to the distress
of the object, very materially conduced to the progress of Christianity. The
Pagans, who were actuated by a sense of humanity, while they derided the
doctrines, acknowledged the benevolence, of the new sect See Lucian in
Peregrin. Julian (Epist. 49.) seems mortified, that the Christian charity
maintains not only their own, but likewise the heathen poor.
. The prospect of immediate relief and of future protection allured into its
hospitable bosom many of those unhappy persons whom the neglect of the world
would have abandoned to the miseries of want, of sickness, and of old age.
There is some reason likewise to believe, that great numbers of infants, who,
according to the inhuman practice of the times, had been exposed by their
parents, were frequently rescued from death, baptized, educated, and maintained
by the piety of the Christians, and at the expense of the public treasure Such,
at least, has been the laudable conduct of more modern missionaries, under the
same circumstances. Above three thousand newborn infants are annually exposed
in the streets of Pekin. See Le Comte Memoires sur la Chine, and the Recherches
sur les Chinois et les Egyptiens, tom. i. p. 61.
.

II. It is the undoubted right of every society to exclude from its communion
and benefits, such among its members as reject or violate those Excommunication.
regulations which have been established by general consent. In the exercise of
this power, the censures of the Christian church were chiefly directed against
scandalous sinners, and particularly those who were guilty of murder, of fraud,
or of incontinence; against the authors, or the followers of any heretical
opinions which had been condemned by the judgment of the episcopal order; and
against those unhappy persons, who, whether from choice or from compulsion, had
polluted themselves after their baptism by any act of idolatrous worship. The
consequences of excommunication were of a temporal as well as a spiritual
nature. The Christian against whom it was pronounced, was deprived of any part
in the oblations of the faithful. The ties both of religious and of private
friendship were dissolved: he found himself a profane object of abhorrence to
the persons whom he the most esteemed, or by whom he had been the most tenderly
beloved; and as far as an expulsion from a respectable society could imprint on
his character a mark of disgrace, he was shunned or suspected by the generality
of mankind. The situation of these unfortunate exiles was in itself very
painful and melancholy; but, as it usually happens, their apprehensions far
exceeded their sufferings. The benefits of the Christian communion were those
of eternal life, nor could they erase from their minds the awful opinion, that
to those ecclesiastical governors by whom they were condemned, the Deity had
committed the keys of Hell and of Paradise. The heretics, indeed, who might be
supported by the consciousness of their intentions, and by the flattering hope
that they alone had discovered the true path of salvation, endeavored to
regain, in their separate assemblies, those comforts, temporal as well as
spiritual, which they no longer derived from the great society of Christians.
But almost all those who had reluctantly yielded to the power of vice or
idolatry, were sensible of their fallen condition, and anxiously desirous of
being restored to the benefits of the Christian communion.

With regard to the treatment of these penitents, two opposite opinions, the
one of justice, the other of mercy, divided the primitive church. The more
rigid and inflexible casuists refused them for ever, and without exception, the
meanest place in the holy community, which they had disgraced or deserted, and
leaving them to the remorse of a guilty conscience, indulged them only with a
faint ray of hope, that the contrition of their life and death might possibly
be accepted by the Supreme Being The Montanists and the Novatians, who adhered
to this opinion with the greatest rigor and obstinacy, found themselves at
last in the number of excommunicated heretics. See the learned and copious
Mosheim, Secul. ii. and iii.
. A milder sentiment was embraced in practice as well as in theory, by the
purest and most respectable of the Christian churches Dionysius ap. Eusebius. iv.
23. Cyprian, de Lapsis.
. The gates of reconciliation and of Heaven were seldom shut against the
returning penitent; but a severe and solemn form of discipline was instituted,
which, while it served to expiate his crime, might powerfully deter the
spectators from the imitation of his example. Humbled by a public confession,
emaciated by Public penance.
fasting, and clothed in sackcloth, the penitent lay prostrate at the door of
the assembly, imploring with tears the pardon of his offenses, and soliciting
the prayers of the faithful Cave's Primitive Christianity, part iii. c. 5. The
admirers of antiquity regret the loss of this public penance.
. If the fault was of a very heinous nature, whole years of penance were
esteemed an inadequate satisfaction to the Divine Justice; and it was always by
slow and painful gradations that the sinner, the heretic, or the apostate, was
readmitted into the bosom of the church. A sentence of perpetual
excommunication was, however, reserved for some crimes of an extraordinary
magnitude, and particularly for the inexcusable relapses of those penitents who
had already experienced and abused the clemency of their ecclesiastical
superiors. According to the circumstances or the number of the guilty, the
exercise of the Christian discipline was varied by the discretion of the
bishops. The councils of Ancyra and Illiberis were held about the same time,
the one in Galatia, the other in Spain; but their respective canons, which are
still extant, seem to breathe a very different spirit. The Galatian, who after
his baptism had repeatedly sacrificed to idols, might obtain his pardon by a
penance of seven years, and if he had seduced others to imitate his example,
only three years more were added to the term of his exile. But the unhappy
Spaniard, who had committed the same offense, was deprived of the hope of
reconciliation, even in the article of death; and his idolatry was placed at
the head of a list of seventeen other crimes, against which a sentence no less
terrible was pronounced. Among these we may distinguish the inexpiable guilt of
calumniating a bishop, a presbyter, or even a deacon See in Dupin, Bibliotheque
Ecclesiastique, tom. ii. p. 304 -- 313, a short but rational exposition of the
canons of those councils, which were assembled in the first moments of
tranquillity, after the persecution of Diocletian. This persecution had been
much less severely felt in Spain than in Galatia; a difference which may, in
some measure, account for the contrast of their regulations.
.

The well-tempered mixture of liberality and rigor, the judicious dispensation
of rewards and The dignity of episcopal government.
punishments, according to the maxims of policy as well as justice, constituted
the human strength of the church. The bishops, whose paternal care extended
itself to the government of both worlds, were sensible of the importance of
these prerogatives, and covering their ambition with the fair pretense of the
love of order, they were jealous of any rival in the exercise of a discipline
so necessary to prevent the desertion of those troops which had inlisted
themselves under the banner of the cross, and whose numbers every day became
more considerable. From the imperious declamations of Cyprian, we should
naturally conclude, that the doctrines of excommunication and penance formed
the most essential part of religion; and that it was much less dangerous for
the disciples of Christ to neglect the observance of the moral duties, than to
despise the censures and authority of their bishops. Sometimes we might imagine
that we were listening to the voice of Moses, when he commanded the earth to
open, and to swallow up, in consuming flames, the rebellious race which refused
obedience to the priesthood of Aaron; and we should sometimes suppose that we
heard a Roman consul asserting the majesty of the republic, and declaring his
inflexible resolution to enforce the rigor of the laws. If such irregularities
are suffered with impunity (it is thus that the bishop of Carthage chides the
lenity of his colleague), if such irregularities are suffered, there is an end
of EPISCOPAL VIGOR Cyprian. Epist. 69.
; an end of the sublime and divine power of governing the church, an end of
Christianity itself. Cyprian had renounced those temporal honors, which it is
probable he would never have obtained; but the acquisition of such absolute
command over the consciences and understanding of a congregation, however
obscure or despised by the world, is more truly grateful to the pride of the
human heart, than the possession of the most despotic power, imposed by arms
and conquest on a reluctant people.

In the course of this important, though perhaps Recapitulation of the five
causes.
tedious, inquiry, I have attempted to display the secondary causes which so
efficaciously assisted the truth of the Christian religion. If among these
causes we have discovered any artificial ornaments, any accidental
circumstances, or any mixture of error and passion, it cannot appear surprising
that mankind should be the most sensibly affected by such motives as were
suited to their imperfect nature. It was by the aid of these causes, exclusive
zeal, the immediate expectation of another world, the claim of miracles, the
practice of rigid virtue, and the constitution of the primitive church, that
Christianity spread itself with so much success in the Roman empire. To the
first of these the Christians were indebted for their invincible valor, which
disdained to capitulate with the enemy whom they were resolved to vanquish. The
three succeeding causes supplied their valor with the most formidable arms.
The last of these causes united their courage, directed their arms, and gave
their efforts that irresistible weight, which even a small band of well-trained
and intrepid volunteers has so often possessed over an undisciplined multitude,
ignorant of the subject, and careless of the event of the war. In the various
religions of Polytheism, some Weakness of polytheism.
wandering fanatics of Egypt and Syria, who addressed themselves to the
credulous superstition of the populace, were perhaps the only order of priests
The arts, the manners, and the vices of the priests of the Syrian goddess, are
very humourously described by Apuleius, in the eighth book of his Metamorphoses.
that derived their whole support and credit from their sacerdotal profession,
and were very deeply affected by a personal concern for the safety or
prosperity of their tutelar deities. The ministers of polytheism, both in Rome
and in the provinces, were, for the most part, men of a noble birth, and of an
affluent fortune, who received, as an honorable distinction, the care of a
celebrated temple, or of a public sacrifice, exhibited, very frequently at
their own expense, the sacred games The office of Asiarch was of this nature,
and it is frequently mentioned in Aristides, the Inscriptions, etc. It was
annual and elective. None but the vainest citizens could desire the honor;
none but the most wealthy could support the expense. See in the Patres Apostol.
tom. ii. p. 200. with how much indifference Philip the Asiarch conducted
himself in the martyrdom of Polycarp. There were likewise Bithyniarchs,
Lyciarchs, etc.
, and with cold indifference performed the ancient rites, according to the laws
and fashion of their country. As they were engaged in the ordinary occupations
of life, their zeal and devotion were seldom animated by a sense of interest,
or by the habits of an ecclesiastical character. Confined to their respective
temples and cities, they remained without any connection of discipline or
government; and whilst they acknowledged the supreme jurisdiction of the
senate, of the college of pontiffs, and of the emperor, those civil magistrates
contented themselves with the easy task of maintaining, in peace and dignity,
the general worship of mankind. We have already seen how various, how loose,
and how uncertain were the religious sentiments of Polytheists. They were
abandoned, almost without control, to the natural workings of a superstitious
fancy. The accidental circumstances of their life and situation determined the
object as well as the degree of their devotion; and as long as their adoration
was successively prostituted to a thousand deities, it was scarcely possible
that their hearts could be susceptible of a very sincere or lively passion for
any of them.

When Christianity appeared in the world, even The skepticism of the Pagan
world proved favorable to the new religion,
these faint and imperfect impressions had lost much of their original power.
Human reason, which by its unassisted strength is incapable of perceiving the
mysteries of faith, had already obtained an easy triumph over the folly of
Paganism; and when Tertullian or Lactantius employ their labors in exposing
its falsehood and extravagance, they are obliged to transcribe the eloquence of
Cicero or the wit of Lucian. The contagion of these skeptical writings had been
diffused far beyond the number of their readers. The fashion of incredulity was
communicated from the philosopher to the man of pleasure or business, from the
noble to the plebeian, and from the master to the menial slave who waited at
his table, and who eagerly listened to the freedom of his conversation. On
public occasions the philosophic part of mankind affected to treat with respect
and decency the religious institutions of their country; but their secret
contempt penetrated through the thin and awkward disguise, and even the people,
when they discovered that their deities were rejected and derided by those
whose rank or understanding they were accustomed to reverence, were filled with
doubts and apprehensions concerning the truth of those doctrines, to which they
had yielded the most implicit belief. The decline of ancient prejudice exposed
a very numerous portion of human kind to the danger of a painful and
comfortless situation. A state of skepticism and suspense may amuse a few
inquisitive minds. But the practice of superstition is so congenial to the
multitude, that if they are forcibly awakened, they still regret the loss of
their pleasing vision. Their love of the mavelous and supernatural, their
curiosity with regard to future events, and their strong propensity to extend
their hopes and fears beyond the limits of the visible world, were the
principal causes which favored the establishment of Polytheism. So urgent on
the vulgar is the necessity of believing, that the fall of any system of
mythology will most probably be succeeded by the introduction of some other
mode of superstition. Some deities of a more recent and fashionable cast might
soon have occupied the deserted temples of Jupiter and Apollo, if, in the
decisive moment, the wisdom of Providence had not interposed a genuine
revelation, fitted to inspire the most rational esteem and conviction, whilst,
at the same time, it was adorned with all that could attract the curiosity, the
wonder, and the veneration of the people. In their actual disposition, as many
were almost disengaged from their artificial prejudices, but equally
susceptible and desirous of a devout attachment; an object much less deserving
would have been sufficient to fill the vacant place in their hearts, and to
gratify the uncertain eagerness of their passions. Those who are inclined to
pursue this reflection, instead of viewing with astonishment the rapid progress
of Christianity, will perhaps be surprised that its success was not still more
rapid and still more universal.

It has been observed, with truth as well as as well as the peace and union of
the Roman empire.
propriety, that the conquests of Rome prepared and facilitated those of
Christianity. In the second chapter of this work we have attempted to explain
in what manner the most civilized provinces of Europe, Asia, and Africa, were
united under the dominion of one sovereign, and gradually connected by the most
intimate ties of laws, of manners, and of language. The Jews of Palestine, who
had fondly expected a temporal deliverer, gave so cold a reception to the
miracles of the divine prophet, that it was found unnecessary to publish, or at
least to preserve, any Hebrew gospel The modern critics are not disposed to
believe what the fathers almost unanimously assert, that St. Matthew composed a
Hebrew gospel, of which only the Greek translation is extant. It seems,
however, dangerous to reject their testimony.
. The authentic histories of the actions of Christ were composed in the Greek
language, at a considerable distance from Jerusalem, and after the Gentile
converts were grown extremely numerous Under the reigns of Nero and Domitian,
and in the cities of Alexandria, Antioch, Rome, and Ephesus. See Mill.
Prolegomena ad Nov. Testament. and Dr. Lardner's fair and extensive collection,
vol. xv.
. As soon as those histories were translated into the Latin tongue, they were
perfectly intelligible to all the subjects of Rome, excepting only to the
peasants of Syria and Egypt, for whose benefit particular versions were
afterward made. The public highways, which had been constructed for the use of
the legions, opened an easy passage for the Christian missionaries from
Damascus to Corinth, and from Italy to the extremity of Spain or Britain; nor
did those spiritual conquerors encounter any of the obstacles which usually
retard or prevent the introduction of a foreign religion into a distant
country. There is the strongest reason to believe, that before the reigns of
Diocletian and Constantine, the faith of Christ had been preached in every
province, and in all the great cities of the empire; but the foundation of the
several Historical view of the progress of Christianity
congregations, the numbers of the faithful who composed them, and their
proportion to the unbelieving multitude, are now buried in obscurity, or
disguised by fiction and declamation. Such imperfect circumstances, however, as
have reached our knowledge concerning the increase of the Christian name in
Asia and Greece, in Egypt, in Italy, and in the West, we shall now proceed to
relate, without neglecting the real or imaginary acquisitions which lay beyond
the frontiers of the Roman empire.

The rich provinces that extend from the in the East.
Euphrates to the Ionian sea, were the principal theater on which the apostle
of the Gentiles displayed his zeal and piety. The seeds of the gospel, which he
had scattered in a fertile soil, were diligently cultivated by his disciples;
and it should seem that, during the two first centuries, the most considerable
body of Christians was contained within those limits. Among the societies which
were instituted in Syria, none were more ancient or more illustrious than those
of Damascus, of Berea or Aleppo, and of Antioch. The prophetic introduction of
the Apocalypse has described and immortalised the seven churches of Asia;
Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira The Alogians (Epiphanius de Haeres. 51.)
disputed the genuineness of the Apocalypse, because the church of Thyatira was
not yet founded. Epiphanius, who allows the fact, extricates himself from the
difficulty, by ingeniously supposing, that St. John wrote in the spirit of
prophecy. See Abauzit Discourse sur l'Apocalypse.
, Sardes, Laodicea, and Philadelphia; and their colonies were soon diffused
over that populous country. In a very early period, the islands of Cyprus and
Crete, the provinces of Thrace and Macedonia, gave a favorable reception to
the new religion; and Christian republics were soon founded in the cities of
Corinth, of Sparta, and of Athens The epistles of Ignatius and Dionysius (ap.
Eusebius. iv. 23.) point out many churches in Asia and Greece. That of Athens
seems to have been one of the least flourishing.
. The antiquity of the Greek and Asiatic churches allowed a sufficient space of
time for their increase and multiplication, and even the swarms of Gnostics and
other heretics serve to display the flourishing condition of the orthodox
church, since the appellation of heretics has always been applied to the less
numerous party. To these domestic testimonies we may add the confession, the
complaints, and the apprehensions of the Gentiles themselves. From the writings
of Lucian, a philosopher who had studied mankind, and who describes their
manners in the most lively colors, we may learn, that, under the reign of
Commodus, his native country of Pontus was filled with Epicureans and
Christians Lucian in Alexandro, c. 25. Christianity however must have been very
unequally diffused over Pontus; since in the middle of the third century there
were no more than seventeen believers in the extensive diocese of Neo-Caesarea.
See M. de Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiast. tom. iv. p. 675. from Basil and
Gregory of Nyssa, who were themselves natives of Cappadocia.
. Within fourscore years after the death of Christ According to the ancients,
Jesus Christ suffered under the consulship of the two Gemini, in the year 29 of
our present era. Pliny was sent into Bithynia (according to Pagi) in the year
110.
, the humane Pliny laments the magnitude of the evil which he vainly attempted
to eradicate. In his very curious epistle to the emperor Trajan, he affirms,
that the temples were almost deserted, that the sacred victims scarcely found
any purchasers, and that the superstition had not only infected the cities, but
had even spread itself into the villages and the open country of Pontus and
Bithynia Plin. Epist. x. 97.
.

Without descending into a minute scrutiny of The church of Antioch.
the expressions, or of the motives of those writers who either celebrate or
lament the progress of Christianity in the East, it may in general be observed,
that none of them have left us any grounds from whence a just estimate might be
formed of the real numbers of the faithful in those provinces. One
circumstance, however, has been fortunately preserved, which seems to cast a
more distinct light on this obscure but interesting subject. Under the reign of
Theodosius, after Christianity had enjoyed, during more than sixty years, the
sunshine of Imperial favor, the ancient and illustrious church of Antioch
consisted of one hundred thousand persons, three thousand of whom were
supported out of the public oblations Chrysostom. Opera, tom. vii. p. 658. 810.
. The splendor and dignity of the queen of the East, the acknowledged
populousness of Caesarea, Seleucia, and Alexandria, and the destruction of two
hundred and fifty thousand souls in the earthquake which afflicted Antioch
under the elder Justin John Malela, tom. ii. p. 144. He draws the same
conclusion with regard to the populousness of Antioch.
, are so many convincing proofs that the whole number of its inhabitants was
not less than half a million, and that the Christians, however multiplied by
zeal and power, did not exceed a fifth part of that great city. How different a
proportion must we adopt when we compare the persecuted with the triumphant
church, the West with the East, remote villages with populous towns, and
countries recently converted to the faith, with the place where the believers
first received the appellation of Christians! It must not, however, be
dissembled, that, in another passage, Chrysostom, to whom we are indebted for
this useful information, computes the multitude of the faithful as even
superior to that of the Jews and Pagans Chrysostom. tom. i. p. 592. I am
indebted for these passages, though not for my inference, to the learned Dr.
Lardner. Credibility of the Gospel History, vol. xii. p. 370.
. But the solution of this apparent difficulty is easy and obvious. The
eloquent preacher draws a parallel between the civil and the ecclesiastical
constitution of Antioch; between the list of Christians who had acquired Heaven
by baptism, and the list of citizens who had a right to share the public
liberality. Slaves, strangers, and infants were comprised in the former; they
were excluded from the latter.

The extensive commerce of Alexandria, and In Egypt.
its proximity to Palestine, gave an easy entrance to the new religion. It was
at first embraced by great numbers of the Therapeutae, or Essenians of the lake
Mareotis, a Jewish sect which had abated much of its reverence for the Mosaic
ceremonies. The austere life of the Essenians, their fasts and
excommunications, the community of goods, the love of celibacy, their zeal for
martyrdom, and the warmth though not the purity of their faith, already offered
a very lively image of the primitive discipline Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l.
2. c. 20, 21, 22, 23. has examined, with the most critical accuracy, the
curious treatise of Philo, which describes the Therapeutae. By proving that it
was composed as early as the time of Augustus, Basnage has demonstrated, in
spite of Eusebius (l. ii. c. 17.), and a crowd of modern Catholics, that the
Therapeutae were neither Christians nor monks. It still remains probable that
they changed their name, preserved their manners, adopted some new articles of
faith, and gradually became the fathers of the Egyptian Ascetics.
. It was in the school of Alexandria that the Christian theology appears to
have assumed a regular and scientifical form; and when Hadrian visited Egypt,
he found a church composed of Jews and of Greeks, sufficiently important to
attract the notice of that inquisitive prince See a letter of Hadrian, in the
Augustan History, p. 245.
. But the progress of Christianity was for a long time confined within the
limits of a single city, which was itself a foreign colony, and till the close
of the second century the predecessors of Demetrius were the only prelates of
the Egyptian church. Three bishops were consecrated by the hands of Demetrius,
and the number was increased to twenty by his successor Heraclas For the
succession of Alexandrian bishops, consult Renaudot's History, p. 24, etc. This
curious fact is preserved by the patriarch Eutychius (Annal. tom. i. p. 334.
Verse. Pocock), and its internal evidence would alone be a sufficient answer to
all the objections which Bishop Pearson has urged in the Vindiciae Ignatianae.
. The body of the natives, a people distinguished by a sullen inflexibility of
temper Ammian. Marcellin. xxii. 16.
, entertained the new doctrine with coldness and reluctance: and even in the
time of Origin, it was rare to meet with an Egyptian who had surmounted his
early prejudices in favor of the sacred animals of his country Origin contra
Celsum, l. i. p. 40.
. As soon, indeed, as Christianity ascended the throne, the zeal of those
barbarians obeyed the prevailing impulsion; the cities of Egypt were filled
with bishops, and the deserts of Thebais swarmed with hermits.

A perpetual stream of strangers and provincials In Rome.
flowed into the capacious bosom of Rome. Whatever was strange or odious,
whoever was guilty or suspected, might hope, in the obscurity of that immense
capital, to elude the vigilance of the law. In such a various conflux of
nations, every teacher, either of truth or of falsehood, every founder, whether
of a virtuous or a criminal association, might easily multiply his disciples or
accomplices. The Christians of Rome, at the time of the accidental persecution
of Nero, are represented by Tacitus as already amounting to a very great
multitude Ingens multitudo is the expression of Tacitus, xv. 44.
, and the language of that great historian is almost similar to the style
employed by Livy, when he relates the introduction and the suppression of the
rites of Bacchus. After the Bacchanals had awakened the severity of the senate,
it was likewise apprehended that a very great multitude, as it were another
people, had been initiated into those abhorred mysteries. A more careful
inquiry soon demonstrated, that the offenders did not exceed seven thousand; a
number indeed sufficiently alarming, when considered as the object of public
justice T. Live. xxxix. 13. 15, 16, 17. Nothing could exceed the horror and
consternation of the senate on the discovery of the Bacchanalians, whose
depravity is described, and perhaps exaggerated, by Livy.
. It is with the same candid allowance that we should interpret the vague
expressions of Tacitus, and in a former instance of Pliny, when they exaggerate
the crowds of deluded fanatics who had forsaken the established worship of the
gods. The church of Rome was undoubtedly the first and most populous of the
empire; and we are possessed of an authentic record which attests the state of
religion in that city about the middle of the third century, and after a piece
of thirty-eight years. The clergy, at that time, consisted of a bishop,
forty-six presbyters, seven deacons, as many subdeacons, forty-two acolythes,
and fifty readers, exorcists, and porters. The number of widows, of the infirm,
and of the poor, who were maintained by the oblations of the faithful, amounted
to fifteen hundred Eusebius, l. vi. c. 43. The Latin translator (M. de Valois)
has though proper to reduce the number of presbyters to fortyfour.
. From reason, as well as from the analogy of Antioch, we may venture to
estimate the Christians of Rome at about fifty thousand. The populousness of
that great capital cannot perhaps be exactly ascertained; but the most modest
calculation will not surely reduce it lower than a million of inhabitants, of
whom the Christians might constitute at the most a twentieth part This
proportion of the presbyters and of the poor, to the rest of the people, was
originally fixed by Burnet (Travels into Italy, p. 168), and is approved by
Moyle (vol. ii. p. 151.). They were both unacquainted with the passage of
Chrysostom, which converts their conjecture almost into a fact.
.

The western provincials appeared to have derived the knowledge of Christianity
from the same source which had diffused among them the language, In Africa and
the western provinces.
the sentiments, and the manners of Rome. In this more important circumstance,
Africa, as well as Gaul, was gradually fashioned to the imitation of the
capital. Yet notwithstanding the many favorable occasions which might invite
the Roman missionaries to visit their Latin provinces, it was late before they
passed either the sea or the Alps Serius trans Alps, religione Dei suscepta.
Sulpicius Severus, l. ii. These were the celebrated martyrs of Lions. See
Eusebius, v. 1. Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom. ii. p. 316. According to the
Donatists, whose assertion is confirmed by the tacit acknowledgment of
Augustine, Africa was the last of the provinces which received the gospel.
Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom. i. p. 754.
; nor can we discover in those great countries any assured traces either of
faith or of persecution that ascend higher than the reign of the Antonines Tum
primum intra Gallias martyria visa. Sulp. Severus, l. ii. With regard to
Africa, see Tertullian ad Scapulam, c. 3. It is imagined, that the Scyllitan
martyrs were the first (Acta Sincera Ruinart. p. 34.). One of the adversaries
of Apuleius seems to have been a Christian. Apolog. p. 496, 497. Edit. Delphin.
. The slow progress of the gospel in the cold climate of Gaul, was extremely
different from the eagerness with which it seems to have been received on the
burning sands of Africa. The African Christians soon formed one of the
principal members of the primitive church. The practice introduced into that
province, of appointing bishops to the most inconsiderable towns, and very
frequently to the most obscure villages, contributed to multiply the splendor
and importance of their religious societies, which during the course of the
third century were animated by the zeal of Tertullian, directed by the
abilities of Cyprian, and adorned by the eloquence of Lactantius. But if, on
the contrary, we turn our eyes toward Gaul, we must content ourselves with
discovering, in the time of Marcus Antoninus, the feeble and united
congregations of Lions and Vienna; and even as late as the reign of Decius, we
are assured, that in a few cities only, Arles, Narbonne, Thoulouse, Limoges,
Clermont, Tours, and Paris, some scattered churches were supported by the
devotion of a small number of Christians Rarae in aliquibus civitatibus
ecclesiae, paucorum Christianorum devotione, resurgerent. Acta Sincera, p. 130.
Gregory of Tours, l. i. c. 28. Mosheim, p. 207. 449. There is some reason to
believe, that, in the beginning of the fourth century, the extensive dioceses
of Liege, of Treves, and of Cologne, composed a single bishopric, which had
been very recently founded, See Memoires de Tillemont, tom. vi. part i. p. 43.
411.
. Silence is indeed very consistent with devotion, but as it is seldom
compatible with zeal, we may perceive and lament the languid state of
Christianity in those provinces which had exchanged the Celtic for the Latin
tongue; since they did not, during the three first centuries, give birth to a
single ecclesiastical writer. From Gaul, which claimed a just pre-eminence of
learning and authority over all the countries on this side of the Alps, the
light of the gospel was more faintly reflected on the remote provinces of Spain
and Britain; and if we may credit the vehement assertions of Tertullian, they
had already received the first rays of the faith, when he addressed his apology
to the magistrates of the emperor Severus The date of Tertullian's Apology is
fixed, in a dissertation of Mosheim, to the year 198.
. But the obscure and imperfect origin of the western churches of Europe has
been so negligently recorded, that if we would relate the time and manner of
their foundation, we must supply the silence of antiquity by those legends
which avarice or superstition long afterward dictated to the monks in the lazy
gloom of their convents In the fifteenth century, there were few who had either
inclination or courage to question whether Joseph of Arimathea founded the
monastery of Glastenbury, and whether Dionysius the Areopagite preferred the
residence of Paris to that of Athens.
. Of these holy romances, that of the apostle St. James can alone, by its
single extravagance, deserve to be mentioned. From a peaceful fisherman of the
lake of Gennesareth, he was transformed into a valorous knight, who charged at
the head of the Spanish chivalry in their battles against the Moors. The
gravest historians have celebrated his exploits; the miraculous shrine of
Compostella displayed his power; and the sword of a military order, assisted by
the terrors of the Inquisition, was sufficient to remove every objection of
profane criticism The stupendous metamorphosis was performed in the ninth
century. See Mariana (Hist. Hispan. l. vii. c. 13. tom. i. p. 285. edit. Hag.
Com. 1733.), who, in every sense, imitates Livy, and the honest detection of
the legend of St. James by Dr. Geddes, Miscellanies, vol. ii. p. 221.
.

The progress of Christianity was not confined Beyond the limits of the Roman
empire.
to the Roman empire; and according to the primitive fathers, who interpret
facts by prophecy, the new religion, within a century after the death of its
divine author, had already visited every part of the globe. There exists not,
says Justin Martyr, a people, whether Greek or Barbarian, or any other race of
men, by whatsoever appellation or manners they may be distinguished, however
ignorant of arts or agriculture, whether they dwell under tents, or wander
about in covered wagons, among whom prayers are not offered up in the name of
a crucified Jesus to the Father and Creator of all things Justin Martyr,
Dialog. cum Tryphon. p. 341. Irenaeus adv. Haeres. l. i. c. 10. Tertullian adv.
Jud. c. 7. See Mosheim, p. 203.
. But this splendid exaggeration, which even at present it would be extremely
difficult to reconcile with the real state of mankind, can be considered only
as the rash sally of a devout but careless writer, the measure of whose belief
was regulated by that of his wishes. But neither the belief, nor the wishes of
the fathers, can alter the truth of history. It will still remain an undoubted
fact, that the barbarians of Scythia and Germany, who afterward subverted the
Roman monarchy, were involved in the darkness of paganism; and that even the
conversion of Iberia, of Armenia, or of Aethiopia, was not attempted with any
degree of success till the scepter was in the hands of an orthodox emperor See
the fourth century of Mosheim's History of the Church. Many, though very
confused circumstances, that relate to the conversion of Iberia and Armenia,
may be found in Moses of Chorene, l. ii. c. 78 -- 89.
. Before that time, the various accidents of war and commerce might indeed
diffuse an imperfect knowledge of the gospel among the tribes of Caledonia
According to Tertullian, the Christian faith had penetrated into parts of
Britain inaccessible to the Roman arms. About a century afterward, Ossian, the
son of Fingal, is said to have disputed, in his extreme old age, with one of
the foreign missionaries, and the dispute is still extant, in verse, and in the
Erse language. See Mr. Macpherson's Dissertation on the Antiquity of Ossian's
Poems, p. 10.
, and among the borderers of the Rhine, the Danube, and the Euphrates The
Goths, who ravaged Asia in the reign of Gallienus, carried away great numbers
of captives; some of whom were Christians, and became missionaries. See
Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiast. tom. iv. p. 44.
. Beyond the last-mentioned river, Edessa was distinguished by a firm and early
adherence to the faith The legend of Abgarus, fabulous as it is, affords a
decisive proof, that many years before Eusebius wrote his history, the greatest
part of the inhabitants of Edessa had embraced Christianity. Their rivals, the
citizens of Carrhae, adhered, on the contrary, to the cause of Paganism, as
late as the sixth century.
. From Edessa, the principles of Christianity were easily introduced into the
Greek and Syrian cities which obeyed the successors of Artaxerxes; but they do
not appear to have made any deep impression on the minds of the Persians, whose
religious system, by the labors of a well-disciplined order of priests, had
been constructed with much more art and solidity than the uncertain mythology
of Greece and Rome According to Bardesanes (ap. Eusebius. Praepar. Evangel.) there
were some Christians in Persia before the end of the second century. In the
time of Constantine (see his Epistle to Sapor, Vit. l. iv. c. 13.) they
composed a flourishing church. Consult Beausobre, Hist. Critique du
Manicheisme, tom. i. p. 180. and the Bibliotheca Orientalis of Assemani.
.

From this impartial though imperfect survey of the progress of Christianity,
it may perhaps seem probable, that the number of its proselytes General
proportion of Christians and Pagans.
has been excessively magnified by fear on the one side, and by devotion on the
other. According to the irreproachable testimony of Origin Origin contra
Celsum, l. viii. p. 424.
, the proportion of the faithful was very inconsiderable when compared with the
multitude of an unbelieving world; but, as we are left without any distinct
information, it is impossible to determine, and it is difficult even to
conjecture, the real numbers of the primitive Christians. The most favorable
calculation, however, that can be deduced from the examples of Antioch and of
Rome, will not permit us to imagine that more than a twentieth part of the
subjects of the empire had enlisted themselves under the banner of the cross
before the important conversion of Constantine. But their habits of faith, of
zeal, and of union, seemed to multiply their numbers; and the same causes which
contributed to their future increase, served to render their actual strength
more apparent and more formidable.

Such is the constitution of civil society, that Whether the first Christians
were mean and ignorant.
whilst a few persons are distinguished by riches, by honors, and by
knowledge, the body of the people is condemned to obscurity, ignorance, and
poverty. The Christian religion, which addressed itself to the whole human
race, must consequently collect a far greater number of proselytes from the
lower than from the superior ranks of life. This innocent and natural
circumstance has been improved into a very odious imputation, which seems to be
less strenuously denied by the apologists, than it is urged by the adversaries,
of the faith; that the new sect of Christians was almost entirely composed of
the dregs of the populace, of peasants and mechanics, of boys and women, of
beggars and slaves, the last of whom might sometimes introduce the missionaries
into the rich and noble families to which they belonged. These obscure teachers
(such was the charge of malice and infidelity) are as mute in public as they
are loquacious and dogmatical in private. Whilst they cautiously avoid the
dangerous encounter of philosophers, they mingle with the rude and illiterate
crowd, and insinuate themselves into those minds, whom their age, their sex, or
their education, has the best disposed to receive the impression of
superstitious terrors Minucius Foelix, c. 8. with Wowerus's notes. Celsus ap.
Origin, l. iii. p. 138. 142. Julian ap. Cyril. l. vi. p. 206. Edit. Spanheim.
,

This unfavourable picture, though not devoid Some exceptions with regard to
learning;
of a faint resemblance, betrays, by its dark coloring and distorted features,
the pencil of an enemy. As the humble faith of Christ diffused itself through
the world, it was embraced by several persons who derived some consequence from
the advantages of nature or fortune. Aristides, who presented an eloquent
apology to the emperor Hadrian, was an Athenian philosopher Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. iv. 3. Hieronym. Epist. 83.
. Justin Martyr had sought divine knowledge in the schools of Zeno, of
Aristotle, of Pythagoras, and of Plato, before he fortunately was accosted by
the old man, or rather the angel, who turned his attention to the study of the
Jewish prophets The story is prettily told in Justin's Dialogues. Tillemont
(Mem. Ecclesiast. tom. ii. p. 334.), who relates it after him, is sure that the
old man was a disguised angel.
. Clemens of Alexandria had acquired much various reading in the Greek, and
Tertullian in the Latin, language. Julius Africanus and Origin possessed a very
considerable share of the learning of their times; and although the style of
Cyprian is very different from that of Lactantius, we might almost discover
that both those writers had been public teachers of rhetoric. Even the study of
philosophy was at length introduced among the Christians, but it was not always
productive of the most salutary effects; knowledge was as often the parent of
heresy as of devotion, and the description which was designed for the followers
of Artemon, may, with equal propriety, be applied to the various sects that
resisted the successors of the apostles. They presume to alter the holy
scriptures, to abandon the ancient rule of faith, and to form their opinions
according to the subtle precepts of logic. The science of the church is
neglected for the study of geometry, and they lose sight of Heaven while they
are employed in measuring the earth. Euclid is perpetually in their hands.
Aristotle and Theophrastus are the objects of their admiration; and they
express an uncommon reverence for the works of Galen. Their errors are derived
from the abuse of the arts and sciences of the infidels, and they corrupt the
simplicity of the gospel by the refinements of human reason Eusebius, v. 28. It
may be hoped, that none, except the heretics, gave occasion to the complaint of
Celsus (ap. Origin, l. ii. p. 77.), that the Christians were perpetually
correcting and altering their Gospels.
.

Nor can it be affirmed with truth, that the with regard to rank and fortune.
advantages of birth and fortune were always separated from the profession of
Christianity. Several Roman citizens were brought before the tribunal of Pliny,
and he soon discovered, that a great number of persons of every order of men in
Bithynia had deserted the religion of their ancestors Plin. Epist. x. 97.
Fuerunt alii similis amentiae, cives Romani -- Multi enim omnis aetatis, omnis
ordinis, utriusque sexus, etiam vocantur in periculum et vocabuntur.
. His unsuspected testimony may, in this instance, obtain more credit than the
bold challenge of Tertullian, when he addresses himself to the fears as well as
to the humanity of the proconsul of Africa, by assuring him, that if he
persists in his cruel intentions, he must decimate Carthage, and that he will
find among the guilty many persons of his own rank, senators and matrons of
noblest extraction, and the friends or relations of his most intimate friends
Tertullian ad Scapulam. Yet even his rhetoric rises no higher than to claim a
tenth part of Carthage.
. It appears, however, that about forty years after-wards the emperor Valerian
was persuaded of the truth of this assertion, since in one of his rescripts he
evidently supposes, that senators, Roman knights, and ladies of quality, were
engaged in the Christian sect Cyprian. Epist. 79.
. The church still continued to increase its outward splendor as it lost its
internal purity; and, in the reign of Diocletian, the palace, the courts of
justice, and even the army, concealed a multitude of Christians, who
endeavored to reconcile the interests of the present, with those of a future,
life.

And yet these exceptions are either too few in Christianity most favorably
received by the poor and simple.
number, or too recent in time, entirely to remove the imputation of ignorance
and obscurity which has been so arrogantly cast on the first proselytes of
Christianity. Instead of employing in our defense the fictions of later ages,
it will be more prudent to convert the occasion of scandal into a subject of
edification. Our serious thoughts will suggest to us, that the apostles
themselves were chosen by providence among the fishermen of Galilee, and that
the lower we depress the temporal condition of the first Christians, the more
reason we shall find to admire their merit and success. It is incumbent on us
diligently to remember, that the kingdom of Heaven was promised to the poor in
spirit, and that minds afflicted by calamity and the contempt of mankind,
cheerfully listen to the divine promise of future happiness; while, on the
contrary, the fortunate are satisfied with the possession of this world; and
the wise abuse in doubt and dispute their vain superiority of reason and
knowledge.

We stand in need of such reflections to comfort Rejected by some eminent men
of the first and second centuries.
us for the loss of some illustrious characters, which in our eyes might have
seemed the most worthy of the heavenly present. The names of Seneca, of the
elder and the younger Pliny, of Tacitus, of Plutarch, of Galen, of the slave
Epictetus, and of the emperor Marcus Antoninus, adorn the age in which they
flourished, and exalt the dignity of human nature. They filled with glory their
respective stations, either in active or contemplative life; their excellent
understandings were improved by study; Philosophy had purified their minds from
the prejudices of the popular superstition; and their days were spent in the
pursuit of truth and the practice of virtue. Yet all these sages (it is no less
an object of surprise than of concern) overlooked or rejected the perfection of
the Christian system. Their language or their silence equally discover their
contempt for the growing sect, which in their time had diffused itself over the
Roman empire. Those among them who condescend to mention the Christians,
consider them only as obstinate and perverse enthusiasts, who exacted an
implicit submission to their mysterious doctrines, without being able to
produce a single argument that could engage the attention of men of sense and
learning Dr. Lardner, in his first and second volume of Jewish and Christian
testimonies, collects and illustrates those of Pliny the younger, of Tacitus,
of Galen, of Marcus Antoninus, and perhaps of Epictetus (for it is doubtful
whether that philosopher means to speak of the Christians). The new sect is
totally unnoticed by Seneca, the elder Pliny, and Plutarch.
.

It is at least doubtful whether any of these philosophers perused the
apologies which the primitive Christians repeatedly published in behalf of
Their neglect of prophecy
themselves and of their religion; but it is much to be lamented that such a
cause was not defended by abler advocates. They expose with superfluous wit and
eloquence, the extravagance of Polytheism. They interest our compassion by
displaying the innocence and sufferings of their injured brethren. But when
they would demonstrate the divine origin of Christianity, they insist much more
strongly on the predictions which announced, than on the miracles which
accompanied, the appearance of the Messiah. Their favorite argument might
serve to edify a Christian or to convert a Jew, since both the one and the
other acknowledge the authority of those prophecies, and both are obliged, with
devout reverence, to search for their sense and their accomplishment. But this
mode of persuasion loses much of its weight and influence, when it is addressed
to those who neither understand nor respect the Mosaic dispensation and the
prophetic style If the famous prophecy of the Seventy Weeks had been alleged to
a Roman philosopher, would he not have replied in the words of Cicero, "Quae
tandem ista auguratio est, annorum potius quam aut mensium aut dierum?" De
Divinatione, ii. 30. Observe with what irreverence Lucian (in Alexandro, c.
13.) and his friend Celsus ap. Origin, (l. vii. p. 327.) express themselves
concerning the Hebrew prophets.
. In the unskilful hands of Justin and of the succeeding apologists, the
sublime meaning of the Hebrew oracles evaporates in distant types, affected
conceits, and cold allegories; and even their authenticity was rendered
suspicious to an unenlightened Gentile, by the mixture of pious forgeries,
which, under the names of Orpheus, Hermes, and the Sibyls The Philosophers, who
derided the more ancient predictions of the Sybils, would easily have detected
the Jewish and Christian forgeries, which have been so triumphantly quoted by
the fathers from Justin Martyr to Lactantius. When the Sibylline verses had
performed their appointed task, they, like the system of the millennium, were
quietly laid aside. The Christian Sibyl had unluckily fixed the ruin of Rome
for the year 195, A. U. C. 948.
, were obtruded on him as of equal value with the genuine inspirations of
Heaven. The adoption of fraud and sophistry in the defense of revelation, too
often reminds us of the injudicious conduct of those poets who load their
invulnerable heroes with a useless weight of cumbersome and brittle armor.

But how shall we excuse the supine inattention and of miracles.
of the Pagan and philosophic world, to those evidences which were presented by
the hand of Omnipotence, not to their reason, but to their senses? During the
age of Christ, of his apostles, and of their first disciples, the doctrine
which they preached was confirmed by innumerable prodigies. The lame walked,
the blind saw, the sick were healed, the dead were raised, demons were
expelled, and the laws of Nature were frequently suspended for the benefit of
the church. But the General silence concerning the darkness of the Passion.
sages of Greece and Rome turned aside from the awful spectacle, and pursuing
the ordinary occupations of life and study, appeared unconscious of any
alterations in the moral or physical government of the world. Under the reign
of Tiberius, the whole earth The fathers, as they are drawn out in battle array
by Dom Calmet (Dissertations sur la Bible, tom. iii. p. 295-308.), seem to
cover the whole earth with darkness, in which they are followed by most of the
moderns.
, or at least a celebrated province of the Roman empire Origin ad Matthew. c. 27.
and a few modern critics, Beza, Le Clerc, Lardner, etc. are desirous of
confining it to the land of Judea.
, was involved in a praeternatural darkness of three hours. Even this
miraculous event, which ought to have excited the wonder, the curiosity, and
the devotion of mankind, passed without notice in an age of science and history
The celebrated passage of Phlegon is now wisely abandoned. When Tertullian
assures the Pagans, that the mention of the prodigy is found in Arcanis (not
Archivis) vestris (see his Apology, c. 21.), he probably appeals to the
Sibylline verses, which relate it exactly in the words of the Gospel.
. It happened during the lifetime of Seneca and the elder Pliny, who must have
experienced the immediate effects, or received the earliest intelligence, of
the prodigy. Each of these philosophers, in a laborious work, has recorded all
the great phenomena of Nature, earthquakes, meteors, comets, and eclipses,
which his indefatigable curiosity could collect Seneca Quaest. Nature. i. 1. 15.
vi. 1. vii. 17. Plin. Hist. Nature. l. ii.
. Both the one and the other have omitted to mention the greatest phenomenon to
which the mortal eye has been witness since the creation of the globe. A
distinct chapter of Pliny Plin. Hist. Nature. ii. 30.
is designed for eclipses of an extraordinary nature and unusual duration; but
he contents himself with describing the singular defect of light which followed
the murder of Caesar, when, during the greatest part of a year, the orb of the
sun appeared pale and without splendor. This season of obscurity, which cannot
surely be compared with the praeternatural darkness of the Passion, had been
already celebrated by most of the poets Virgil Georgic. i. 466. Tibullus, l. i.
Eleg. v. ver. 75. Ovid Metamorph. xv. 782. Lucan. Pharsal. i. 540. The last of
these poets places this prodigy before the civil war.
and historians of that memorable age See a public epistle of M. Antony in
Joseph. Antiquit. xiv. 12. Plutarch in Caesar. p. 471. Appian, Bell. Civil. l.
iv. Dion Cassius, l. xlv. p. 431. Julius Obsequens, c. 128. His little treatise
is an abstract of Livy's prodigies.
.

CHAP. XVI. The Conduct of the Roman Government toward the Christians, from
the Reign of Nero to that of Constantine.
IF we seriously consider the purity of the Christian religion, the sanctity of
its moral precepts, and the innocent as well as austere lives of the greater
Christianity persecuted by the Roman emperors.
number of those, who during the first ages embraced the faith of the gospel,
we should naturally suppose, that so benevolent a doctrine would have been
received with due reverence, even by the unbelieving world; that the learned
and the polite, however they might deride the miracles, would have esteemed the
virtues of the new sect; and that the magistrates, instead of persecuting,
would have protected an order of men who yielded the most passive obedience to
the laws, though they declined the active cares of war and government. If on
the other hand we recollect the universal toleration of Polytheism, as it was
invariably maintained by the faith of the people, the incredulity of
philosophers, and the policy of the Roman senate and emperors, we are at a loss
to discover what new offense the Christians had committed, what new provocation
could exasperate the mild indifference of antiquity, and what new motives could
urge the Roman princes, who beheld without concern a thousand forms of religion
subsisting in peace under their gentle sway, to inflict a severe punishment on
any part of their subjects, who had chosen for themselves a singular but an
inoffensive mode of faith and worship.

The religious policy of the ancient world seems to have assumed a more stern
and intolerant character, to oppose the progress of Christianity. About
fourscore years after the death of Christ, his innocent disciples were punished
with death by the sentence of a proconsul of the most amiable and philosophic
character, and according to the laws of an emperor, distinguished by the wisdom
and justice of his general administration. The apologies which were repeatedly
addressed to the successors of Trajan are filled with the most pathetic
complaints, that the Christians who obeyed the dictates, and solicited the
liberty, of conscience, were alone, among all the subjects of the Roman empire,
excluded from the common benefits of their auspicious government. The deaths of
a few eminent martyrs have been recorded with care; and from the time that
Christianity was invested with the supreme power, the governors of the church
have been no less diligently employed in displaying the cruelty, than in
imitating the conduct, of their Pagan adversaries. To separate (if it be
possible) a few authentic as well as interesting facts from an undigested mass
of fiction and error, and to relate, in a clear and rational manner, the
causes, the extent, the duration, and the most important circumstances of the
persecutions to which the first Christians were exposed, is the design of the
present Chapter.

The sectaries of a persecuted religion, depressed Inquiry into their motives.
by fear, animated with resentment, and perhaps heated by enthusiasm, are
seldom in a proper temper of mind calmly to investigate, or heartily to
appreciate, the motives of their enemies, which often escape the impartial and
discerning view even of those who are placed at a secure distance from the
flames of persecution. A reason has been assigned for the conduct of the
emperors toward the primitive Christians, which may appear the more specious
and probable as it is drawn from the acknowledged genius of Polytheism. It has
already been observed, that the religious concord of the world was principally
supported by the implicit assent and reverence which the nations of antiquity
expressed for their respective traditions and ceremonies. It might therefore be
expected, that they would unite with indignation against any sect or people
which should separate itself from the communion of mankind, and claiming the
exclusive possession of divine knowledge, should disdain every form of worship,
except its own, as impious and idolatrous. The rights of toleration were held
by mutual indulgence: they were justly forfeited by a refusal of the accustomed
tribute. As the payment of this tribute was inflexibly refused by the Jews, and
by them alone, the consideration of the treatment which they experienced from
the Roman magistrates, will serve to explain how far these speculations are
justified by facts, and will lead us to discover the true causes of the
persecution of Christianity.

Without repeating what has been already mentioned, Rebellious spirit of the
Jews.
of the reverence of the Roman princes and governors for the temple of
Jerusalem, we shall only observe, that the destruction of the temple and city
was accompanied and followed by every circumstance that could exasperate the
minds of the conquerors, and authorize religious persecution by the most
specious arguments of political justice and the public safety. From the reign
of Nero to that of Antoninus Pius, the Jews discovered a fierce impatience of
the dominion of Rome, which repeatedly broke out in the most furious massacres
and insurrections. Humanity is shocked at the recital of the horrid cruelties
which they committed in the cities of Egypt, of Cyprus, and of Cyrene, where
they dwelt in treacherous friendship with the unsuspecting natives In Cyrene
they massacred 220,000 Greeks; in Cyprus, 240,000; in Egypt, a very great
multitude. Many of these unhappy victims were sawed asunder, according to a
precedent to which David had given the sanction of his example. The victorious
Jews devoured the flesh, licked up the blood, and twisted the entrails like a
girdle round their bodies. See Dion Cassius, l. lxviii. p. 1145.
; and we are tempted to applaud the severe retaliation which was exercised by
the arms of the legions against a race of fanatics, whose dire and credulous
superstition seemed to render them the implacable enemies not only of the Roman
government, but of humankind Without repeating the well-known narratives of
Josephus, we may learn from Dion (l. lxix. p. 1162.), that in Hadrian's war
580,000 Jews were cut off by the sword, besides an infinite number which
perished by famine, by disease, and by fire.
. The enthusiasm of the Jews was supported by the opinion, that it was unlawful
for them to pay taxes to an idolatrous master; and by the flattering promise
which they derived from their ancient oracles, that a conquering Messiah would
soon arise, destined to break their fetters, and to invest the favorites of
heaven with the empire of the earth. It was by announcing himself as their
long-expected deliverer, and by calling on all the descendants of Abraham to
assert the hope of Israel, that the famous Barchochebas collected a formidable
army, with which he resisted during two years the power of the emperor Hadrian
For the sect of the Zealots, see Basnage, Histoire des Juiss, l. i. c. 17. for
the characters of the Messiah, according to the Rabbis, l. v. c. 11, 12, 13.
for the actions of Barchochebas, l. vii. c. 12.
.

Notwithstanding these repeated provocations, Toleration of the Jewish religion.
the resentment of the Roman princes expired after the victory; nor were their
apprehensions continued beyond the period of war and danger. By the general
indulgence of polytheism, and by the mild temper of Antoninus Pius, the Jews
were restored to their ancient privileges, and once more obtained the
permission of circumcising their children, with the easy restraint, that they
should never confer on any foreign proselyte that distinguishing mark of the
Hebrew race It is to Modestinus, a Roman lawyer (l. vi. regular.), that we are
indebted for a distinct knowledge of the Edict of Antoninus. See Casaubon ad
Hist. August. p. 27.
. The numerous remains of that people, though they were still excluded from the
precincts of Jerusalem, were permitted to form and to maintain considerable
establishments both in Italy and in the provinces, to acquire the freedom of
Rome, to enjoy municipal honors, and to obtain at the same time an exemption
from the burdensome and expensive offices of society. The moderation or the
contempt of the Romans gave a legal sanction to the form of ecclesiastical
police which was instituted by the vanquished sect. The patriarch, who had
fixed his residence at Tiberias, was empowered to appoint his subordinate
ministers and apostles, to exercise a domestic jurisdiction, and to receive
from his dispersed brethren an annual contribution See Basnage, Histoire des
Juifs, l. iii. c. 2, 3. The office of Patriarch was suppressed by Theodosius
the younger.
. New synagogues were frequently erected in the principal cities of the empire;
and the sabbaths, the fasts, and the festivals, which were either commanded by
the Mosaic law, or enjoined by the traditions of the Rabbis, were celebrated in
the most solemn and public manner We need only mention the purim, or
deliverance of the Jews from the rage of Haman, which, till the reign of
Theodosius, was celebrated with insolent triumph and riotous intemperance.
Basnage, Hist. des Juifs, l. vi. c. 17. l. viii. c. 6.
. Such gentle treatment insensibly assuaged the stern temper of the Jews.
Awakened from their dream of prophecy and conquest, they assumed the behavior
of peaceable and industrious subjects. Their irreconcilable hatred of mankind,
instead of flaming out in acts of blood and violence, evaporated in less
dangerous gratifications. They embraced every opportunity of overreaching the
idolaters in trade; and they pronounced secret and ambiguous imprecations
against the haughty kingdom of Edom According to the false Josephus, Tsepho,
the grandson of Esau, conducted into Italy the army of Aeneas, king of
Carthage. Another colony of Idumaeans, flying from the sword of David, took
refuge in the dominions of Romulus. For these, or for other reasons of equal
weight, the name of Edom was applied by the Jews to the Roman empire.
.

Since the Jews, who rejected with abhorrence The Jews were a people which
followed, the Christians a sect which deserted, the religion of their fathers.
the deities adored by their sovereign and by their fellow subjects, enjoyed
however the free exercise of their unsocial religion; there must have existed
some other cause, which exposed the disciples of Christ to those severities
from which the posterity of Abraham was exempt. The difference between them is
simple and obvious; but, according to the sentiments of antiquity, it was of
the highest importance. The Jews were a nation; the Christians were a sect: and
if it was natural for every community to respect the sacred institutions of
their neighbors, it was incumbent on them to persevere in those of their
ancestors. The voice of oracles, the precepts of philosophers, and the
authority of the laws, unanimously enforced this national obligation. By their
lofty claim of superior sanctity, the Jews might provoke the Polytheists to
consider them as an odious and impure race. By disdaining the intercourse of
other nations they might deserve their contempt. The laws of Moses might be for
the most part frivolous or absurd; yet since they had been received during many
ages by a large society, his followers were justified by the example of
mankind; and it was universally acknowledged, that they had a right to practice
what it would have been criminal in them to neglect. But this principle which
protected the Jewish synagogue, afforded not any favor or security to the
primitive church. By embracing the faith of the Gospel, the Christians incurred
the supposed guilt of an unnatural and unpardonable offense. They dissolved the
sacred ties of custom and education, violated the religious institutions of
their country, and presumptuously despised whatever their fathers had believed
as true, or had reverenced as sacred. Nor was this apostasy (if we may use the
expression) merely of a partial or local kind; since the pious deserter who
withdrew himself from the temples of Egypt or Syria, would equally disdain to
seek an asylum in those of Athens or Carthage. Every Christian rejected with
contempt the superstitions of his family, his city, and his province. The whole
body of Christians unanimously refused to hold any communion with the gods of
Rome, of the empire, and of mankind. It was in vain that the oppressed believer
asserted the inalienable rights of conscience and private judgment. Though his
situation might excite the pity, his arguments could never reach the
understanding, either of the philosophic or of the believing part of the Pagan
world. To their apprehensions, it was no less a matter of surprise, that any
individuals should entertain scruples against complying with the established
mode of worship, than if they had conceived a sudden abhorrence to the manners,
the dress, or the language of their native country From the arguments of
Celsus, as they are represented and refuted by Origin (l. v. p. 247-259.), we
may clearly discover the distinction that was made between the Jewish people
and the Christian sect. See in the Dialogue of Minucius Foelix (c. 5, 6.) a
fair and not inelegant description of the popular sentiments, with regard to
the desertion of the established worship.
.

The surprise of the Pagans was soon succeeded Christianity accused of atheism,
and mistaken by the people and philosophers.
by resentment; and the most pious of men were exposed to the unjust but
dangerous imputation of impiety. Malice and prejudice concurred in representing
the Christians as a society of atheists, who, by the most daring attack on the
religious constitution of the empire, had merited the severest animadversion of
the civil magistrate. They had separated themselves (they gloried in the
confession) from every mode of superstition which was received in any part of
the globe by the various temper of polytheism: but it was not altogether so
evident what deity, or what form of worship, they had substituted to the gods
and temples of antiquity. The pure and sublime idea which they entertained of
the Supreme Being escaped the gross conception of the Pagan multitude, who were
at a loss to discover a spiritual and solitary God, that was neither
represented under any corporeal figure or visible symbol, nor was adored with
the accustomed pomp of libations and festivals, of altars and sacrifices Cur
nullas aras habent? templa nulla? nulla nota simulacra? -- Unde autem, vel quis
ille, aut ubi, Deus unicus, solitarius, destitutus? Minucius Foelix, c. 10. The
Pagan interlocutor goes on to make a distinction in favor of the Jews, who had
once a temple, altars, victims, etc.
. The sages of Greece and Rome, who had elevated their minds to the
contemplation of the existence and attributes of the First Cause, were induced
by reason or by vanity to reserve for themselves and their chosen disciples the
privilege of this philosophical devotion It is difficult (says Plato) to
attain, and dangerous to publish, the knowledge of the true God. See the
Theology des Philosophes, in the Abbe d'Olivet's French translation of Tully
de Natura Deorum, tom. i. p. 275.
. They were far from admitting the prejudices of mankind as the standard of
truth, but they considered them as flowing from the original disposition of
human nature; and they supposed that any popular mode of faith and worship
which presumed to disclaim the assistance of the senses, would, in proportion
as it receded from superstition, find itself incapable of restraining the
wanderings of the fancy and the visions of fanaticism. The careless glance
which men of wit and learning condescended to cast on the Christian revelation,
served only to confirm their hasty opinion, and to persuade them, that the
principle, which they might have revered, of the divine unity, was defaced by
the wild enthusiasm, and annihilated by the airy speculations, of the new
sectaries. The author of a celebrated dialogue, which has been attributed to
Lucian, whilst he affects to treat the mysterious subject of the Trinity in a
style of ridicule and contempt, betrays his own ignorance of the weakness of
human reason, and of the inscrutable nature of the Divine perfections The
author of the Philopatris perpetually treats the Christians as a company of
dreaming enthusiasts, (...), etc. and in one place, manifestly alludes to the
vision, in which St. Paul was transported to the third heaven. In another
place, Triephon, who personates a Christian, after deriding the Gods of
Paganism, proposes a mysterious oath,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...), (is the profane answer of Critias), (...)!


.

It might appear less surprising, that the founder of Christianity should not
only be revered by his disciples as a sage and a prophet, but that he should be
adored as a God. The Polytheists were disposed to adopt every article of faith,
which seemed to offer any resemblance, however distant or imperfect, with the
popular mythology; and the legends of Bacchus, of Hercules, and of Aesculapius,
had, in some measure, prepared their imagination for the appearance of the Son
of God under a human form According to Justin Martyr (Apolog. Major, c. 70-85),
the demon, who had gained some imperfect knowledge of the prophecies,
purposely contrived this resemblance, which might deter, though by different
means, both the people and the philosophers from embracing the says of Christ.
. But they were astonished that the Christians should abandon the temples of
those ancient heroes, who, in the infancy of the world, had invented arts,
instituted laws, and vanquished the tyrants or monsters who infested the earth;
in order to choose for the exclusive object of their religious worship, an
obscure teacher, who, in a recent age, and among a barbarous people, had fallen
a sacrifice either to the malice of his own countrymen, or to the jealousy of
the Roman government. The Pagan multitude, reserving their gratitude for
temporal benefits alone, rejected the inestimable present of life and
immortality, which was offered to mankind by Jesus of Nazareth. His mild
constancy in the midst of cruel and voluntary sufferings, his universal
benevolence, and the sublime simplicity of his actions and character, were
insufficient, in the opinion of those carnal men, to compensate for the want of
fame, of empire, and of success; and whilst they refused to acknowledge his
stupendous triumph over the powers of darkness and of the grave, they
misrepresented, or they insulted, the equivocal birth, wandering life, and
ignominious death, of the divine Author of Christianity In the first and second
books of Origin, Celsus treats the birth and character of our Savior with the
most impious contempt. The orator Libanius praises Porphyry and Julian for
consuting the folly of a sect, which styled a dead man of Palestine, God, and
the son of God, Socrates, Hist. Ecclesiast. iii. 23.
.

The personal guilt which every Christian had The union and assemblies of the
Christians considered as a dangerous conspiracy.
contracted, in thus preferring his private sentiment to the national religion,
was aggravated in a very high degree by the number and union of the criminals.
It is well known, and has been already observed, that Roman policy viewed with
the utmost jealousy and distrust any association among its subjects; and that
the privileges of private corporations, though formed for the most harmless or
beneficial purposes, were bestowed with a very sparing hand The emperor Trajan
refused to incorporate a company of 150 fire-men, for the use of the city of
Nicomedia. He disliked all associations. See Plin. Epist. x. 42, 43.
. The religious assemblies of the Christians, who had separated themselves from
the public worship, appeared of a much less innocent nature: they were illegal
in their principle, and in their consequences might become dangerous; nor were
the emperors conscious that they violated the laws of justice, when, for the
peace of society, they prohibited those secret and sometimes nocturnal meetings
The proconsul Pliny had published a general edict against unlawful meetings.
The prudence of the Christians suspended their Agapae; but it was impossible
for them to omit the exercise of public worship.
. The pious disobedience of the Christians made their conduct, or perhaps their
designs, appear in a much more serious and criminal light; and the Roman
princes, who might perhaps have suffered themselves to be disarmed by a ready
submission, deeming their honor concerned in the execution of their commands,
sometimes attempted, by rigorous punishments, to subdue this independent
spirit, which boldly acknowledged an authority superior to that of the
magistrate. The extent and duration of this spiritual conspiracy seemed to
render it every day more deserving of his animadversion. We have already seen
that the active and successful zeal of the Christians had insensibly diffused
them through every province and almost every city of the empire. The new
converts seemed to renounce their family and country, that they might connect
themselves in an indissoluble band of union with a peculiar society, which
every where assumed a different character from the rest of mankind. Their
gloomy and austere aspect, their abhorrence of the common business and
pleasures of life, and their frequent predictions of impending calamities As
the prophecies of the Antichrist, approaching conflagration, etc. provoked
those Pagans whom they did not convert, they were mentioned with caution and
reserve; and the Montanists were censured for disclosing too freely the
dangerous secret. See Mosheim, p. 413.
, inspired the Pagans with the apprehension of some danger, which would arise
from the new sect, the more alarming as it was the more obscure. Whatever, says
Pliny, may be the principle of their conduct, their inflexible obstinacy
appeared deserving of punishment Neque enim dubitabam, quodcunque esset quod
faterentur (such are the words of Pliny), pervicaciam certe et inflexibilem
obstinationem debere puniri.
.

The precautions with which the disciples of Christ performed the offices of
religion were at Their manners calumniated.
first dictated by fear and necessity; but they were continued from choice. By
imitating the awful secresy which reigned in the Eleusinian mysteries, the
Christians had flattered themselves that they should render their sacred
institutions more respectable in the eyes of the Pagan world See Mosheim's
Ecclesiastical History, vol. i. p. 101. and Spanheim, Remarques sur les Caesar's
de Julien, p. 468, etc.
. But the event, as it often happens to the operations of subtle policy,
deceived their wishes and their expectations. It was concluded, that they only
concealed, what they would have blushed to disclose. Their mistaken prudence
afforded an opportunity for malice to invent, and for suspicious credulity to
believe, the horrid tales which described the Christians as the most wicked of
human kind, who practiced in their dark recesses every abomination that a
depraved fancy could suggest, and who solicited the favor of their unknown God
by the sacrifice of every moral virtue. There were many who pretended to
confess or to relate the ceremonies of this abhorred society. It was asserted,
that a newborn infant, entirely covered over with flour, was presented, like
some mystic symbol of initiation, to the knife of the proselyte, who
unknowingly inflicted many a secret and mortal wound on the innocent victim of
his error; that as soon as the cruel deed was perpetrated, the sectaries drank
up the blood, greedily tore asunder the quivering members, and pledged
themselves to eternal secresy, by a mutual consciousness of guilt. It was as
confidently affirmed, that this inhuman sacrifice was succeeded by a suitable
entertainment, in which intemperance served as a provocative to brutal lust;
till, at the appointed moment, the lights were suddenly extinguished, shame was
banished, nature was forgotten; and, as accident might direct, the darkness of
the night was polluted by the incestuous commerce of sisters and brothers, of
sons and of mothers See Justin Martyr, Apolog. i. 35. ii. 14. Athenagoras in
Legation. c. 27. Tertullian, Apolog. c. 7, 8, 9. Minucius Foelix, c. 9, 10. 30,
31. The last of these writers relates the accusation in the most elegant and
circumstantial manner. The answer of Tertullian is the boldest and most
vigorous.
.

But the perusal of the ancient apologies was Their imprudent defense.
sufficient to remove even the slightest suspicion from the mind of a candid
adversary. The Christians, with the intrepid security of innocence, appeal from
the voice of rumor to the equity of the magistrates. They acknowledge, that if
any proof can be produced of the crimes which calumny has imputed to them, they
are worthy of the most severe punishment. They provoke the punishment, and they
challenge the proof. At the same time they urge, with equal truth and
propriety, that the charge is not less devoid of probability, than it is
destitute of evidence; they ask, whether any one can seriously believe that the
pure and holy precepts of the Gospel, which so frequently restrain the use of
the most lawful enjoyments, should inculcate the practice of the most
abominable crimes; that a large society should resolve to dishonor itself in
the eyes of its own members; and that a great number of persons of either sex,
and every age and character, insensible to the fear of death or infamy, should
consent to violate those principles which nature and education had imprinted
most deeply in their minds In the persecution of Lions, some Gentile slaves
were compelled, by the fear of tortures, to accuse their Christian master. The
church of Lions, writing to their brethren of Asia, treat the horrid charge
with proper indignation and contempt. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. v. 1.
. Nothing, it should seem, could weaken the force or destroy the effect of so
unanswerable a justification, unless it were the injudicious conduct of the
apologists themselves, who betrayed the common cause of religion, to gratify
their devout hatred to the domestic enemies of the church. It was sometimes
faintly insinuated, and sometimes boldly asserted, that the same bloody
sacrifices, and the same incestuous festivals, which were so falsely ascribed
to the orthodox believers, were in reality celebrated by the Marcionites, by
the Carpocratians, and by several other sects of the Gnostics, who,
notwithstanding they might deviate into the paths of heresy, were still
actuated by the sentiments of men, and still governed by the precepts of
Christianity See Justin Martyr, Apolog. i. 35. Irenaeus adv. Haeres. i. 24.
Clemens Alexandrin. Stromat. l. iii. p. 438. Eusebius. iv. 8. It would be tedious
and disgusting to relate all that the succeeding writers have imagined, all
that Epiphanius has received, and all that Tillemont has copied. M. de
Beausobre (Hist. du Manicheisme, l. ix. c. 8, 9.) has exposed, with great
spirit, the disingenuous arts of Augustine and Pope Leo I.
. Accusations of a similar kind were retorted upon the church by the
schismatics who had departed from its communion When Tertullian became a
Montanist, he aspersed the morals of the church which he had so resolutely
defended. Sed majoris est Agape, quia per hanc adolescentes tui cum sororibus
dormiunt, appendices scilicet gulae lascivia et luxuria. De Jejuniis, c. 17.
The 35th canon of the council of Illiberis provides against the scandals which
too often polluted the vigils of the church, and disgraced the Christian name,
in the eyes of unbelievers.
, and it was confessed on all sides, that the most scandalous licentiousness of
manners prevailed among great numbers of those who affected the name of
Christians. A Pagan magistrate, who possessed neither leisure nor abilities to
discern the almost imperceptible line which divides the orthodox faith from
heretical pravity, might easily have imagined that their mutual animosity had
extorted the discovery of their common guilt. It was fortunate for the repose,
or at least for the reputation, of the first Christians, that the magistrates
sometimes proceeded with more temper and moderation than is usually consistent
with religious zeal, and that they reported, as the impartial result of their
judicial inquiry, that the sectaries, who had deserted the established worship,
appeared to them sincere in their professions, and blameless in their manners;
however they might incur, by their absurd and excessive superstition, the
censure of the laws Tertullian (Apolog. c. 2.) expatiates on the fair and
honorable testimony of Pliny, with much reason, and some declamation.
.

History, which undertakes to record the transactions Idea of the conduct of
the emperors toward the Christians.
of the past, for the instruction of future, ages; would ill deserve that
honorable office, if she condescended to plead the cause of tyrants, or to
justify the maxims of persecution. It must, however, be acknowledged, that the
conduct of the emperors who appeared the least favorable to the primitive
church, is by no means so criminal as that of modern sovereigns, who have
employed the arm of violence and terror against the religious opinions of any
part of their subjects. From their reflections, or even from their own
feelings, a Charles V. or a Louis XIV. might have acquired a just knowledge of
the rights of conscience, of the obligation of faith, and of the innocence of
error. But the princes and magistrates of ancient Rome were strangers to those
principles which inspired and authorized the inflexible obstinacy of the
Christians in the cause of truth, nor could they themselves discover in their
own breasts, any motive which would have prompted them to refuse a legal, and
as it were a natural, submission to the sacred institutions of their country.
The same reason which contributes to alleviate the guilt, must have tended to
abate the rigor, of their persecutions. As they were actuated, not by the
furious zeal of bigots, but by the temperate policy of legislators, contempt
must often have relaxed, and humanity must frequently have suspended the
execution of those laws, which they enacted against the humble and obscure
followers of Christ. From the general view of their character and motives we
might naturally conclude: I. That a considerable time elapsed before they
considered the new sectaries as an object deserving of the attention of
government. II. That in the conviction of any of their subjects who were
accused of so very singular a crime, they proceeded with caution and
reluctance. III. That they were moderate in the use of punishments; and IV.
That the afflicted church enjoyed many intervals of peace and tranquillity.
Notwithstanding the careless indifference which the most copious and the most
minute of the Pagan writers have shown to the affairs of the Christians In the
various compilation of the Augustan History (a part of which was composed under
the reign of Constantine), there are not six lines which relate to the
Christians; nor has the diligence of Xiphilin discovered their name in the
large history of Dion Cassius.
, it may still be in our power to confirm each of these probable suppositions,
by the evidence of authentic facts.

I. By the wise dispensation of Providence, a They neglected the Christians as
a sect of Jews.
mysterious veil was cast over the infancy of the church, which, till the faith
of the Christians was matured, and their numbers were multiplied, served to
protect them not only from the malice but even from the knowledge of the pagan
world. The slow and gradual abolition of the Mosaic ceremonies afforded a safe
and innocent disguise to the more early proselytes of the Gospel. As they were
far the greater part of the race of Abraham, they were distinguished by the
peculiar mark of circumcision, offered up their devotions in the Temple of
Jerusalem till its final destruction, and received both the Law and the
Prophets as the genuine inspirations of the Deity. The Gentile converts, who by
a spiritual adoption had been associated to the hope of Israel, were likewise
confounded under the garb and appearance of Jews An obscure passage of
Suetonius (in Claud. c. 25.) may seem to offer a proof how strangely the Jews
and Christians of Rome were confounded with each other.
, and as the Polytheists paid less regard to articles of faith than to the
external worship, the new sect, which carefully concealed, or faintly
announced, its future greatness and ambition, was permitted to shelter itself
under the general toleration which was granted to an ancient and celebrated
people in the Roman empire. It was not long, perhaps, before the Jews
themselves, animated with a fiercer zeal and a more jealous faith, perceived
the gradual separation of their Nazarene brethren from the doctrine of the
synagogue; and they would gladly have extinguished the dangerous heresy in the
blood of its adherents. But the decrees of heaven had already disarmed their
malice; and though they might sometimes exert the licentious privilege of
sedition, they no longer possessed the administration of criminal justice; nor
did they find it easy to infuse into the calm breast of a Roman magistrate the
rancour of their own zeal and prejudice. The provincial governors declared
themselves ready to listen to any accusation that might affect the public
safety: but as soon as they were informed, that it was a question not of facts
but of words, a dispute relating only to the interpretation of the Jewish laws
and prophecies, they deemed it unworthy of the majesty of Rome seriously to
discuss the obscure differences which might arise among a barbarous and
superstitious people. The innocence of the first Christians was protected by
ignorance and contempt; and the tribunal of the pagan magistrate often proved
their most assured refuge against the fury of the synagogue See in the xviiith
and xxvth chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, the behavior of Gallio,
proconsul of Achaia, and of Festus, procurator of Judea.
. If indeed we were disposed to adopt the traditions of a too credulous
antiquity, we might relate the distant peregrinations, the wonderful
achievements, and the various deaths of the twelve apostles: but a more
accurate inquiry will induce us to doubt, whether any of those persons who had
been witnesses to the miracles of Christ were permitted beyond the limits of
Palestine, to seal with their blood the truth of their testimony In the time of
Tertullian and Clemens of Alexandria, the glory of martyrdom was confined to
St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. James. It was gradually bestowed on the rest of
the apostles, by the more recent Greeks, who prudently selected for the theater
of their preaching and sufferings, some remote country beyond the limits of the
Roman empire. See Mosheim, p. 81. and Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom.
i. part iii.
. From the ordinary term of human life, it may very naturally be presumed that
most of them were deceased before the discontent of the Jews broke out into
that furious war, which was terminated only by the ruin of Jerusalem. During a
long period, from the death of Christ to that memorable rebellion, we cannot
discover any traces of Roman intolerance, unless they are to be found in the
sudden, the transient, but the cruel persecution, which was exercised by Nero
against the Christians of the capital, thirty-five years after the former, and
only two years before the latter of those great events. The character of the
philosophic historian, to whom we are principally indebted for the knowledge of
this singular transaction, would alone be sufficient to recommend it to our
most attentive consideration.

In the tenth year of the reign of Nero, the The fire of Rome under the reign
of Nero.
capital of the empire was afflicted by a fire which raged beyond the memory or
example of former ages Tacit. Annal. xv. 38 -- 44. Sueton. in Neron. c. 38.
Dion Cassius, l. lxii. p. 1014. Orosius, vii. 7.
. The monuments of Grecian art and of Roman virtue, the trophies of the Punic
and Gallic wars, the most holy temples, and the most splendid palaces, were
involved in one common destruction. Of the fourteen regions or quarters into
which Rome was divided, four only subsisted entire, three were levelled with
the ground, and the remaining seven, which had experienced the fury of the
flames, displayed a melancholy prospect of ruin and desolation. The vigilance
of government appears not to have neglected any of the precautions which might
alleviate the sense of so dreadful a calamity. The Imperial gardens were thrown
open to the distressed multitude, temporary buildings were erected for their
accommodation, and a plentiful supply of corn and provisions was distributed at
a very moderate price The price of wheat (probably of the modius) was reduced
as low as terni Nummi; which would be equivalent to about fifteen shillings the
English quarter.
. The most generous policy seemed to have dictated the edicts which regulated
the disposition of the streets and the construction of private houses; and as
it usually happens, in an age of prosperity, the conflagration of Rome, in the
course of a few years, produced a new city, more regular and more beautiful
than the former. But all the prudence and humanity affected by Nero on this
occasion were insufficient to preserve him from the popular suspicion. Every
crime might be imputed to the assassin of his wife and mother; nor could the
prince, who prostituted his person and dignity on the theater, be deemed
incapable of the most extravagant folly. The voice of rumor accused the
emperor as the incendiary of his own capital; and as the most incredible
stories are the best adapted to the genius of an enraged people, it was gravely
reported, and firmly believed, that Nero, enjoying the calamity which he had
occasioned, amused himself with singing to his lyre the destruction of ancient
Troy We may observe, that the rumor is mentioned by Tacitus with a very
becoming distrust and hesitation, whilst it is greedily transcribed by
Suetonius, and solemnly confirmed by Dion.
. To divert a suspicion, which the power of despotism was unable to suppress,
the emperor resolved to substitute in his own place some fictitious criminals.
With this view (continues Tacitus) he inflicted the most exquisite tortures on
those men, who, under the vulgar appellation of Christians, were already
branded Cruel punishment of the Christians, as the incendiaries of the city.
with deserved infamy. They derived their name and origin from Christ, who in
the reign of Tiberius had suffered death, by the sentence of the procurator
Pontius Pilate This testimony is alone sufficient to expose the anachronism of
the Jews, who place the birth of Christ near a century sooner (Basnage,
Histoire des Juifs, l. v. c. 14, 15.). We may learn from Josephus (Antiquitat.
xviii. 3.), that the procuratorship of Pilate corresponded with the last ten
years of Tiberius, A. D. 27 -- 37. As to the particular time of the death of
Christ, a very early tradition fixed it to the 25th of March, A. D. 29, under
the consulship of the two Gemini (Tertullian adv. Judaeos, c. 8.). This date,
which is adopted by Pagi, cardinal Norris, and Le Clerc, seems, at least, as
probable as the vulgar era, which is placed (I know not from what conjectures)
four years later.
. For a while, this dire superstition was checked; but it again burst forth;
and not only spread itself over Judaea, the first seat of this mischievous
sect, but was even introduced into Rome, the common asylum which receives and
protects, whatever is impure, whatever is atrocious. The confessions of those
who were seized, discovered a great multitude of their accomplices, and they
were all convicted, not so much for the crime of setting fire to the city, as
for their hatred of human kind Odio humani generis convicti. These words may
either signify the hatred of mankind toward the Christians, or the hatred of
the Christians toward mankind. I have preferred the latter sense, as the most
agreeable to the style of Tacitus, and to the popular error, of which a precept
of the Gospel (See Luke xiv. 26.) had been, perhaps, the innocent occasion. My
interpretation is justified by the authority of Lipsius; of the Italian, the
French, and the English translators of Tacitus; of Mosheim (p. 102.), of Le
Clerc (Historia Ecclesiast. p. 427.), of Dr. Lardner (Testimonies, vol. i. p.
345.), and of the bishop of Gloucester (Divine Legation, vol. iii. p. 38.). But
as the word convicti does not unite very happily with the rest of the sentence,
James Gronovius has preferred the reading of conjuncti, which is authorized by
the valuable MS. of Florence.
. They died in torments, and their torments were embittered by insult and
derision. Some were nailed on crosses; others sewn up in the skins of wild
beasts, and exposed to the fury of dogs: others again, smeared over with
combustible materials, were used as torches to illuminate the darkness of the
night. The gardens of Nero were destined for the melancholy spectacle, which
was accompanied with a horse race, and honored with the presence of the
emperor, who mingled with the populace in the dress and attitude of a
charioteer. The guilt of the Christians deserved indeed the most exemplary
punishment, but the public abhorrence was changed into commiseration, from the
opinion that those unhappy wretches were sacrificed, not so much to the public
welfare, as to the cruelty of a jealous tyrant Tacit. Annal. xv. 44.
. Those who survey with a curious eye the revolutions of mankind, may observe,
that the gardens and circus of Nero on the Vatican, which were polluted with
the blood of the first Christians, have been rendered still more famous, by the
triumph and by the abuse of the persecuted religion. On the same spot Nardini
Roma Antica, p. 487. Donatus de Roma Antiqua, l. iii. p. 449.
, a temple, which far surpasses the ancient glories of the Capitol, has been
since erected by the Christian Pontiffs, who, deriving their claim of universal
dominion from an humble fisherman of Galilee, have succeeded to the throne of
the Caesar's, given laws to the barbarian conquerors of Rome, and extended their
spiritual jurisdiction from the coast of the Baltic to the shores of the
Pacific Ocean.

But it would be improper to dismiss this account of Nero's persecution, till
we have made some observations, that may serve to remove the difficulties with
which it is perplexed, and to throw some light on the subsequent history of the
church.

1. The most skeptical criticism is obliged to Remarks on the passage of
Tacitus relative to the persecution of the Christians by Nero.
respect the truth of this extraordinary fact, and the integrity of this
celebrated passage of Tacitus. The former is confirmed by the diligent and
accurate Suetonius, who mentions the punishment which Nero inflicted on the
Christians, a sect of men who had embraced a new and criminal superstition
Sueton. in Nerone, c. 16. The epithet of malefica, which some sagacious
commentators have translated magical, is considered by the more rational
Mosheim as only synonymous to the exitiabilis of Tacitus.
. The latter may be proved by the consent of the most ancient manuscripts; by
the inimitable character of the style of Tacitus; by his reputation, which
guarded his text from the interpolations of pious fraud; and by the purport of
his narration, which accused the first Christians of the most atrocious crimes,
without insinuating that they possessed any miraculous or even magical powers
above the rest of mankind The passage concerning Jesus Christ, which was
inserted into the text of Josephus, between the time of Origin and that of
Eusebius, may furnish an example of no vulgar forgery. The accomplishment of
the prophecies, the virtues, miracles, and resurrection of Jesus, are
distinctly related. Josephus acknowledges that he was the Messiah, and
hesitates whether he should call him a man. If any doubt can still remain
concerning this celebrated passage, the reader may examine the pointed
objections of Le Fevre (Havercamp. Joseph. tom. ii. p. 267 -- 273.), the
labored answers of Daubuz (p. 187 -- 232.), and the masterly reply
(Bibliotheque Ancienne et Modern, tom, vii. p. 237 -- 288.) of an anonymous
critic, whom I believe to have been the learned Abbe de Longuerue.
. 2. Notwithstanding it is probable that Tacitus was born some years before the
fire of Rome See the lives of Tacitus by Lipsius and the Abbe de la Bleterie,
Dictionnaire de Bail a l'article TACIT, and Fabricius, Biblioth. Latin. tom.
ii. p. 386. Edit. Ernest.
, he could derive only from reading and conversation the knowledge of an event
which happened during his infancy. Before he gave himself to the Public, he
calmly waited till his genius had attained its full maturity, and he was more
than forty years of age, when a grateful regard for the memory of the virtuous
Agricola, extorted from him the most early of those historical compositions
which will delight and instruct the most distant posterity. After making a
trial of his strength in the life of Agricola and the description of Germany,
he conceived, and at length executed, a more arduous work; the history of Rome,
in thirty books, from the fall of Nero to the accession of Nerva. The
administration of Nerva introduced an age of justice and prosperity, which
Tacitus had destined for the occupation of his old age Principatum Divi Nervae,
et imperium Trajani, uberiorem securioremque materiam senectuti seposui. Tacit.
Hist. i.
; but when he took a nearer view of his subject, judging, perhaps, that it was
a more honorable, or a less invidious office, to record the vices of past
tyrants, than to celebrate the virtues of a reigning monarch, he chose rather
to relate, under the form of annals, the actions of the four immediate
successors of Augustus. To collect, to dispose, and to adorn a series of
fourscore years, in an immortal work, every sentence of which is pregnant with
the deepest observations and the most lively images, was an undertaking
sufficient to exercise the genius of Tacitus himself during the greatest part
of his life. In the last years of the reign of Trajan, whilst the victorious
monarch extended the power of Rome beyond its ancient limits, the historian was
describing, in the second and fourth books of his annals, the tyranny of
Tiberius See Tacit. Annal. ii. 61. iv. 4.
; and the emperor Hadrian must have succeeded to the throne, before Tacitus, in
the regular prosecution of his work, could relate the fire of the capital and
the cruelty of Nero toward the unfortunate Christians. At the distance of
sixty years, it was the duty of the annalist to adopt the narratives of
contemporaries; but it was natural for the philosopher to indulge himself in
the description of the origin, the progress, and the character of the new sect,
not so much according to the knowledge or prejudices of the age of Nero, as
according to those of the time of Hadrian. 3. Tacitus very frequently trusts to
the curiosity or reflection of his readers to supply those intermediate
circumstances and ideas, which, in his extreme conciseness, he has thought
proper to suppress. We may therefore presume to imagine some probable cause
which could direct the cruelty of Nero against the Christians of Rome, whose
obscurity, as well as innocence, should have shielded them from his
indignation, and even from his notice. The Jews, who were numerous in the
capital, and oppressed in their own country, were a much fitter object for the
suspicions of the emperor and of the people; nor did it seem unlikely that a
vanquished nation, who already discovered their abhorrence of the Roman yoke,
might have recourse to the most atrocious means of gratifying their implacable
revenge. But the Jews possessed very powerful advocates in the palace, and even
in the heart of the tyrant; his wife and mistress, the beautiful Poppaea, and a
favorite player of the race of Abraham, who had already employed their
intercession in behalf of the obnoxious people The player's name was Aliturus.
Through the same channel, Josephus (de Vita sua, c. 3.), about two years
before, had obtained the pardon and release of some Jewish priests who were
prisoners at Rome.
. In their room it. was necessary to offer some other victims, and it might
easily be suggested that, although the genuine followers of Moses were innocent
of the fire of Rome, there had arisen among them a new and pernicious sect of
GALILAEANS, which was capable of the most horrid crimes. Under the appellation
of GALILAEANS, two distinctions of men were confounded, the most opposite to
each other in their manners and principles; the disciples who had embraced the
faith of Jesus of Nazareth The learned Dr. Lardner (Jewish and Heathen
Testimonies, vol. ii. p. 102, 103.) has proved that the name of Galilaeans, was
a very ancient, and perhaps the primitive, appellation of the Christians.
, and the zealots who had followed the standard of Judas the Gaulonite Joseph.
Antiquitat. xviii. 1, 2. Tillemont, Ruin des Juifs, p. 742. The sons of Judas
were crucified in the time of Claudius. His grandson Eleazar, after Jerusalem
was taken, defended a strong fortress with 960 of his most desperate followers.
When the battering ram had made a breach, they turned their swords against
their wives, their children, and at length against their own breasts. They died
to the last man.
. The former were the friends, the latter were the enemies, of humankind; and
the only resemblance between them consisted in the same inflexible constancy,
which, in the defense of their cause, rendered them insensible of death and
tortures. The followers of Judas, who impelled their countrymen into rebellion,
were soon buried under the ruins of Jerusalem; whilst those of Jesus, known by
the more celebrated name of Christians, diffused themselves over the Roman
empire. How natural was it for Tacitus, in the time of Hadrian, to appropriate
to the Christians, the guilt and the sufferings, which he might, with far
greater truth and justice, have attributed to a sect whose odious memory was
almost extinguished! 4. Whatever opinion may be entertained of this conjecture
(for it is no more than a conjecture), it is evident that the effect, as well
as the cause, of Nero's persecution, were confined to the walls of Rome See
Dodwell. Paucitat. Mart. l. xiii. The Spanish Inscription in Gruter, p. 238,
No. 9, is a manifest and acknowledged forgery, contrived by that noted impostor
Cyriacus of Ancona, to flatter the pride and prejudices of the Spaniards. See
Ferreras, Histoire d'Espagne, tom. i. p. 192.
; that the religious tenets of the Galilaeans, or Christians, were never made a
subject of punishment, or even of inquiry; and that, as the idea of their
sufferings was, for a long time, connected with the idea of cruelty and
injustice, the moderation of succeeding princes inclined them to spare a sect,
oppressed by a tyrant, whose rage had been usually directed against virtue and
innocence.

It is somewhat remarkable, that the flames of Oppression of the Jews and
Christians by Domitian.
war consumed almost at the same time the temple of Jerusalem and the Capitol
of Rome The Capitol was burnt during the civil war between Vitellius and
Vespasian, the 19th of December, A. D. 69. On the 10th of August, A. D. 70, the
temple of Jerusalem was destroyed by the hands of the Jews themselves, rather
than by those of the Romans.
; and it appears no less singular, that the tribute which devotion had destined
to the former, should have been converted by the power of an assaulting victor
to restore and adorn the splendor of the latter The new Capitol was dedicated
by Domitian. Sueton, in Domitian. c. 5. Plutarch in Poplicola, tom. i. p. 230.
Edit. Bryan. The gilding alone cost 12,000 talents (above two millions and a
half). It was the opinion of Martial (l. ix. Epigram 3.), that if the emperor
had called in his debts, Jupiter himself, even though he had made a general
auction of Olympus, would have been unable to pay two shillings in the pound.
. The emperors levied a general capitation tax on the Jewish people; and
although the sum assessed on the head of each individual was inconsiderable,
the use for which it was designed, and the severity with which it was exacted,
were considered as an intolerable grievance With regard to the tribute, see
Dion Cassius, l. lxvi. p. 1082, with Reimarus's notes. Spanheim, de Usu
Numismatum, tom. ii. p. 571. and Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. vii. c. 2.
. Since the officers of the revenue extended their unjust claim to many persons
who were strangers to the blood or religion of the Jews, it was impossible that
the Christians, who had so often sheltered themselves under the shade of the
synagogue, should now escape this rapacious persecution. Anxious as they were
to avoid the slightest infection of idolatry, their conscience forbade them to
contribute to the honor of that demon who had assumed the character of the
Capitoline Jupiter. As a very numerous though declining party among the
Christians still adhered to the law of Moses, their efforts to dissemble their
Jewish origin were detected by the decisive test of circumcision Suetonius (in
Domitian. c. 12.) had seen an old man of ninety publicly examined before the
procurator's tribunal. This is what Martial calls, Mentula tributis damnata.
: nor were the Roman magistrates at leisure to inquire into the difference of
their religious tenets. Among the Christians, who were brought before the
tribunal of the emperor, or, as it seems more probable, before that of the
procurator of Judaea, two persons are said to have appeared, distinguished by
their extraction, which was more truly noble than that of the greatest
monarchs. These were the grandsons of St. Jude the apostle, who himself was the
brother of Jesus Christ This appellation was at first understood in the most
obvious sense, and it was supposed, that the brothers of Jesus were the lawful
issue of Joseph and of Mary. A devout respect for the virginity of the mother
of God, suggested to the Gnostics, and afterward to the orthodox Greeks, the
expedient of bestowing a second wife on Joseph. The Latins (from the time of
Jerome) improved on that hint, asserted the perpetual celibacy of Joseph, and
justified by many similar examples the new interpretation that Jude, as well as
Simon and James, who are styled the brothers of Jesus Christ, were only his
first cousins. See Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom. i. part iii. and Beausobre,
Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, l. ii. c. 2.
. Their natural pretensions to the throne of David might perhaps attract the
respect of the people, and excite the jealousy of the governor; but the
meanness of their garb, and the simplicity of their answers, soon convinced him
that they were neither desirous nor capable of disturbing the peace of the
Roman empire. They frankly confessed their royal origin, and their near
relation to the Messiah; but they disclaimed any temporal views, and professed
that his kingdom, which they devoutly expected, was purely of a spiritual and
angelic nature. When they were examined concerning their fortune and
occupation, they showed their hands hardened with daily labor, and declared
that they derived their whole subsistence from the cultivation of a farm near
the village of Cocaba, of the extent of about twenty-four English acres
Thirty-nine (...), squares of an hundred feet each, which, if strictly
computed, would scarcely amount to nine acres. But the probability of
circumstances, the practice of other Greek writers, and the authority of M. de
Valois, incline me to believe that the (...) is used to express the Roman
jugerum.
, and of the value of nine thousand drachms, or three hundred pounds sterling.
The grandsons of St. Jude were dismissed with compassion and contempt Eusebius,
iii. 20. The story is taken from Hegesippus.
.

But although the obscurity of the house of Execution of Clemens the consul.
David might protect them from the suspicions of a tyrant, the present
greatness of his own family alarmed the pusillanimous temper of Domitian, which
could only be appeased by the blood of those Romans whom he either feared, or
hated, or esteemed. Of the two sons of his uncle Flavius Sabinus See the death
and character of Sabinus in Tacitus (Hist. iii. 74, 75.). Sabinus was the elder
brother, and, till the accession of Vespasian, had been considered as the
principal support of the Flavian family.
, the elder was soon convicted of treasonable intentions, and the younger, who
bore the name of Flavius Clemens, was indebted for his safety to his want of
courage and ability Flavium Clementem patruelem suum contemtissimae inertiae...
ex tenuissima suspicione interemit, Sueton, in Domitian, c. 15.
. The emperor, for a long time, distinguished so harmless a kinsman by his
favor and protection, bestowed on him his own niece Domitilla, adopted the
children of that marriage to the hope of the succession, and invested their
father with the honors of the consulship. But he had scarcely finished the
term of his annual magistracy, when on a slight pretense he was condemned and
executed; Domitilla was banished to a desolate island on the coast of Campania
The isle of Pandataria, according to Dion. Bruttius Praesens (apud Eusebius. iii.
18.) banishes her to that of Pontia, which was not far distant from the other.
That difference, and a mistake, either of Eusebius, or of his transcribers,
have given occasion to suppose two Domitillas, the wife and the niece of
Clemens. See Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. ii. p. 224.
; and sentences either of death or of confiscation were pronounced against a
great number of persons who were involved in the same accusation. The guilt
imputed to their charge was that of Atheism and Jewish manners Dion, l. lxvii.
p. 1112. If the Bruttius Praesens, from whom it is probable that he collected
this account, was the correspondent of Pliny (Epistol. vii. 3.), we may
consider him as a contemporary writer.
; a singular association of ideas, which cannot with any propriety be applied
except to the Christians, as they were obscurely and imperfectly viewed by the
magistrates and by the writers of that period. On the strength of so probable
an interpretation, and too eagerly admitting the suspicions of a tyrant as an
evidence of their honorable crime, the church has placed both Clemens and
Domitilla among its first martyrs, and has branded the cruelty of Domitian with
the name of the second persecution. But this persecution (if it deserves that
epithet) was of no long duration. A few months after the death of Clemens, and
the banishment of Domitilla, Stephen, a freedman belonging to the latter, who
had enjoyed the favor, but who had not surely embraced the faith, of his
mistress, assassinated the emperor in his palace Suet. in Domit. c. 17.
Philostratus in Vit. Apollon. l. viii.
. The memory of Domitian was condemned by the senate; his acts were rescinded;
his exiles recalled; and under the gentle administration of Nerva, while the
innocent were restored to their rank and fortunes, even the most guilty either
obtained pardon or escaped punishment Dion, l. lxviii. p. 1118. Plin. Epistol.
iv. 22.
.

II. About ten years afterward, under the reign Ignorance of Pliny concerning
the Christians.
of Trajan, the younger Pliny was entrusted by his friend and master with the
government of Bithynia and Pontus. He soon found himself at a loss to determine
by what rule of justice or of law he should direct his conduct in the execution
of an office the most repugnant to his humanity. Pliny had never assisted at
any judicial proceedings against the Christians, with whose name alone he seems
to be acquainted; and he was totally uninformed with regard to the nature of
their guilt, the method of their conviction, and the degree of their
punishment. In this perplexity he had recourse to his usual expedient, of
submitting to the wisdom of Trajan an impartial, and in some respects, a
favorable, account of the new superstition, requesting the emperor, that he
would condescend to resolve his doubts, and to instruct his ignorance Plin.
Epistol. x. 97. The learned Mosheim expresses himself (p. 147. 232.) with the
highest approbation of Pliny's moderate and candid temper. Notwithstanding Dr.
Lardner's suspicions (see Jewish and Heathen Testimonies, vol. ii. p. 46.), I
am unable to discover any bigotry in his language or proceedings.
. The life of Pliny had been employed in the acquisition of learning, and in
the business of the world. Since the age of nineteen he had pleaded with
distinction in the tribunals of Rome Plin. Epist. v. 8. He pleaded his first
cause A. D. 81; the year after the famous eruptions of Mount Vesuvius, in which
his uncle lost his life.
, filled a place in the senate, had been invested with the honors of the
consulship, and had formed very numerous connexions with every order of men,
both in Italy and in the provinces. From his ignorance therefore we may derive
some useful information. We may assure ourselves, that when he accepted the
government of Bithynia, there were no general laws or decrees of the senate in
force against the Christians; that neither Trajan nor any of his virtuous
predecessors, whose edicts were received into the civil and criminal
jurisprudence, had publicly declared their intentions concerning the new sect;
and that whatever proceedings had been carried on against the Christians, there
were none of sufficient weight and authority to establish a precedent for the
conduct of a Roman magistrate.

The answer of Trajan, to which the Christians Trajan and his successors
establish a legal mode of proceeding against them.
of the succeeding age have frequently appealed, discovers as much regard for
justice and humanity as could be reconciled with his mistaken notions of
religious policy Plin. Epistol. x. 98. Tertullian (Apolog. c. 5.) considers
this rescript as a relaxation of the ancient penal laws, "quas Trajanus ex
part frustratus est:" and yet Tertullian, in another part or his Apologists,
exposes the inconsistency of prohibiting inquiries, and enjoining punishments.
. Instead of displaying the implacable zeal of an inquisitor, anxious to
discover the most minute particles of heresy, and exulting in the number of his
victims, the emperor expresses much more solicitude to protect the security of
the innocent, than to prevent the escape of the guilty. He acknowledges the
difficulty of fixing any general plan; but he lays down two salutary rules,
which often afforded relief and support to the distressed Christians. Though he
directs the magistrates to punish such persons as are legally convicted, he
prohibits them, with a very humane inconsistency, from making any inquiries
concerning the supposed criminals. Nor was the magistrate allowed to proceed on
every kind of information. Anonymous charges the emperor rejects, as too
repugnant to the equity of his government; and he strictly requires, for the
conviction of those to whom the guilt of Christianity is imputed, the positive
evidence of a fair and open accuser. It is likewise probable, that the persons
who assumed so invidious an office, were obliged to declare the grounds of
their suspicions, to specify (both in respect to time and place) the secret
assemblies, which their Christian adversary had frequented, and to disclose a
great number of circumstances, which were concealed with the most vigilant
jealousy from the eye of the profane. If they succeeded in their prosecution,
they were exposed to the resentment of a considerable and active party, to the
censure of the more liberal portion of mankind, and to the ignominy which, in
every age and country, has attended the character of an informer. If, on the
contrary, they failed in their proofs, they incurred the severe and perhaps
capital penalty, which, according to a law published by the emperor Hadrian,
was inflicted on those who falsely attributed to their fellow-citizens the
crime of Christianity. The violence of personal or superstitious animosity
might sometimes prevail over the most natural apprehensions of disgrace and
danger; but it cannot surely be imagined, that accusations of so unpromising an
appearance were either lightly or frequently undertaken by the Pagan subjects
of the Roman empire Eusebius (Hist. Ecclesiast. l. iv. c. 9.) has preserved the
edict of Hadrian. He has likewise (c. 13.) given us one still more favorable
under the name of Antoninus; the authenticity of which is not so universally
allowed. The second Apology of Justin contains some curious particulars
relative to the accusations of Christians.
.

The expedient which was employed to elude Popular clamours.
the prudence of the laws, affords a sufficient proof how effectually they
disappointed the mischievous designs of private malice or superstitious zeal.
In a large and tumultuous assembly the restraints of fear and shame, so
forcible on the minds of individuals, are deprived of the greatest part of
their influence. The pious Christian, as he was desirous to obtain or to escape
the glory of martyrdom, expected, either with impatience or with terror, the
stated returns of the public games and festivals. On those occasions, the
inhabitants of the great cities of the empire were collected in the circus of
the theater, where every circumstance of the place, as well as of the ceremony,
contributed to kindle their devotion, and to extinguish their humanity. Whilst
the numerous spectators, crowned with garlands, perfumed with incense, purified
with the blood of victims, and surrounded with the altars and statues of their
tutelar deities, resigned themselves to the enjoyment of pleasures, which they
considered as an essential part of their religious worship; they recollected
that the Christians alone abhorred the gods of mankind, and by their absence
and melancholy on these solemn festivals, seemed to insult or to lament the
public felicity. If the empire had been afflicted by any recent calamity, by a
plague, a famine, or an unsuccessful war; if the Tyber had, or if the Nile had
not, risen beyond its banks; if the earth had shaken, or if the temperate order
of the seasons had been interrupted, the superstitious Pagans were convinced,
that the crimes and the impiety of the Christians, who were spared by the
excessive lenity of the government, had at length provoked the Divine Justice.
It was not among a licentious and exasperated populace, that the forms of legal
proceedings could be observed; it was not in an amphitheatre, stained with the
blood of wild beasts and gladiators, that the voice of compassion could be
heard. The impatient clamours of the multitude denounced the Christians as the
enemies of gods and men, doomed them to the severest tortures, and venturing to
accuse by name some of the most distinguished of the new sectaries, required
with irresistible vehemence that they should be instantly apprehended and cast
to the lions See Tertullian (Apolog. c. 40.). The acts of the martyrdom of
Polycarp exhibit a lively picture of these tumults, which were usually fomented
by the malice of the Jews.
. The provincial governors and magistrates who presided in the public
spectacles were usually inclined to gratify the inclinations, and to appease
the rage, of the people, by the sacrifice of a few obnoxious victims. But the
wisdom of the emperors protected the church from the danger of these tumultuous
clamours and irregular accusations, which they justly censured as repugnant
both to the firmness and to the equity of their administration. The edicts of
Hadrian and of Antoninus Pius expressly declared, that the voice of the
multitude should never be admitted as legal evidence to convict or to punish
those unfortunate persons who had embraced the enthusiasm of the Christians
These regulations are inserted in the abovementioned edicts of Hadrian and
Pius. See the apology of Melito (apud Eusebius. l. iv. c. 26.)
.

III. Punishment was not the inevitable consequence Trials of the Christians.
of conviction, and the Christians, whose guilt was the most clearly proved by
the testimony of witnesses, or even by their voluntary confession, still
retained in their own power the alternative of life or death. It was not so
much the past offense, as the actual resistance, which excited the indignation
of the magistrate. He was persuaded that he offered them an easy pardon, since
if they consented to cast a few grains of incense upon the altar, they were
dismissed from the tribunal in safety and with applause. It was esteemed the
duty of a humane judge to endeavor to reclaim, rather than to punish, those
deluded enthusiasts. Varying his tone according to the age, the sex, or the
situation of the prisoners, he frequently condescended to set before their eyes
every circumstance which could render life more pleasing, or death more
terrible; and to solicit, nay to entreat, them, that they would show some
compassion to themselves, to their families, and to their friends See the
rescript of Trajan, and the conduct of Pliny. The most authentic acts of the
martyrs abound in these exhortations.
. If threats and persuasions proved ineffectual, he had often recourse to
violence; the scourge and the rack were called in to supply the deficiency of
argument, and every art of cruelty was employed to subdue such inflexible, and,
as it appeared to the Pagans, such criminal, obstinacy. The ancient apologists
of Christianity have censured, with equal truth and severity, the irregular
conduct of their persecutors, who, contrary to every principle of judicial
proceeding, admitted the use of torture, in order to obtain, not a confession,
but a denial, of the crime which was the object of their inquiry In particular,
see Tertullian (Apolog. c. 2, 3.), and Lactantius (Institut. Divin. v. 9.).
Their reasonings are almost the same; but we may discover, that one of these
apologists had been a lawyer, and the other a rhetorician.
. The monks of succeeding ages, who, in their peaceful solitudes, entertained
themselves with diversifying the deaths and sufferings of the primitive
martyrs, have frequently invented torments of a much more refined and ingenious
nature. In particular, it has pleased them to suppose, that the zeal of the
Roman magistrates, disdaining every consideration of moral virtue or public
decency, endeavored to seduce those whom they were unable to vanquish, and
that by their orders the most brutal violence was offered to those whom they
found it impossible to seduce. It is related, that pious females, who were
prepared to despise death, were sometimes condemned to a more severe trial, and
called upon to determine whether they set a higher value on their religion or
on their chastity. The youths to whose licentious embraces they were abandoned,
received a solemn exhortation from the judge, to exert their most strenuous
efforts to maintain the honor of Venus against the impious virgin who refused
to burn incense on her altars. Their violence however was commonly
disappointed, and the seasonable interposition of some miraculous power
preserved the chaste spouses of Christ from the dishonor even of an
involuntary defeat. We should not indeed neglect to remark, that the more
ancient as well as authentic memorials of the church are seldom polluted with
these extravagant and indecent fictions See two instances of this kind of
torture in the Acta Sincera Martyrum, published by Ruinart, p. 160. 399.
Jerome, in his Legend of Paul the Hermit, tells a strange story of a young man,
who was chained naked on a bed of flowers, and assaulted by a beautiful and
wanton courtezan. He quelled the rising temptation by biting off his tongue.
.

The total disregard of truth and probability in Humanity of the Roman
magistrates.
the representation of these primitive martyrdoms was occasioned by a very
natural mistake. The ecclesiastical writers of the fourth or fifth centuries
ascribed to the magistrates of Rome the same degree of implacable and
unrelenting zeal which filled their own breasts against the heretics or the
idolators of their own times. It is not improbable that some of those persons
who were raised to the dignities of the empire, might have imbibed the
prejudices of the populace, and that the cruel disposition of others might
occasionally be stimulated by motives of avarice or of personal resentment The
conversion of his wife provoked Claudius Herminianus, governor of Cappadocia,
to treat the Christians with uncommon severity. Tertullian ad Scapulam, c. 3.
. But it is certain, and we may appeal to the grateful confessions of the first
Christians, that the greatest part of those magistrates who exercised in the
provinces the authority of the emperor, or of the senate, and to whose hands
alone the jurisdiction of life and death was entrusted, behaved like men of
polished manners and liberal educations, who respected the rules of justice,
and who were conversant with the precepts of philosophy. They frequently
declined the odious task of persecution, dismissed the charge with contempt, or
suggested to the accused Christian some legal evasion, by which he might elude
the severity of the laws Tertullian, in his epistle to the governor of Africa,
mentions several remarkable instances of lenity and forbearance, which had
happened within his knowledge.
. Whenever they were invested with a discretionary power Neque enim in
universum aliquid quod quasi certam formam habeat, constitui potest: an
expression of Trajan, which gave a very great latitude to the governors of
provinces.
, they used it much less for the oppression, than for the relief and benefit of
the afflicted church. They were far from condemning all the Christians who were
accused before their tribunal, and very far from punishing with death all those
who were convicted of an obstinate adherence to the new superstition.
Contenting themselves, for the most part, with the milder chastisements of
imprisonment, exile, or slavery in the mines In Metalla damnamur, in insulas
relegemur. Tertullian. Apolog. c. 12. The mines of Numidia contained nine
bishops, with a proportionable number of their clergy and people, to whom
Cyprian addressed a pious epistle of praise and comfort. See Cyprian. Epistol.
76, 77.
, they left the unhappy victims of their justice some reason to hope, that a
prosperous event, the accession, the marriage, or the triumph of an emperor,
might speedily restore them by a general pardon to their former state. The
martyrs, Inconsiderable number of martyrs.
devoted to immediate execution by the Roman magistrates, appear to have been
selected from the most opposite extremes. They were either bishops and
presbyters, the persons the most distinguished among the Christians by their
rank and influence, and whose example might strike terror into the whole sect
Though we cannot receive with entire confidence, either the epistles, or the
acts, of Ignatius (they may be found in the 2d volume of the Apostolic
Fathers), yet we may quote that bishop of Antioch as one of these exemplary
martyrs. He was sent in chains to Rome as a public spectacle: and when he
arrived at Troas, he received the pleasing intelligence, that the persecution
of Antioch was already at an end.
; or else they were the meanest and most abject among them, particularly those
of the servile condition whose lives were esteemed of little value, and whose
sufferings were viewed by the ancients with too careless an indifference Among
the martyrs of Lions (Eusebius. l. v. c. 1.), the slave Blandina was distinguished
by more exquisite tortures. Of the five martyrs so much celebrated in the acts
of Felicitas and Perpetua, two were of a servile, and two others of a very
mean, condition.
. The learned Origin, who, from his experience as well as reading, was
intimately acquainted with the history of the Christians, declares, in the most
express terms, that the number of martyrs was very inconsiderable Origin.
advers. Celsum, l. iii. p. 116. His words deserve to be transcribed. "(...)."
. His authority would alone be sufficient to annihilate that formidable army of
martyrs, whose relics, drawn for the most part from the catacombs of Rome, have
replenished so many churches If we recollect that all the Plebeians of Rome
were not Christians, and that all the Christians were not saints and martyrs,
we may judge with how much safety religious honors can be ascribed to bones or
urns, indiscriminately taken from the public burialplace. After ten centuries
of a very free and open trade, some suspicions have arisen among the more
learned catholics. They now require, as a proof of sanctity and martyrdom, the
letters B. M, a viol full of red liquor, supposed to be blood, or the figure of
a palmtree. But the two former signs are of little weight, and with regard to
the last, it is observed by the critics, 1. That the figure, as it is called,
of a palm, is perhaps a cypress, and perhaps only a stop, the flourish of a
comma, used in the monumental inscriptions. 2. That the palm was the symbol of
victory among the Pagans. 3. That among the Christians it served as the emblem,
not only of martyrdom, but in general of a joyful resurrection. See the epistle
of P. Mabillon, on the worship of unknown saints, and Muratori sopra le
Antichita Italiane, Dissertat. lviii.
, and whose mavelous achievements have been the subject of so many volumes
of Holy Romance As a specimen of these legends, we may be satisfied with 10,000
Christian soldiers crucified in one day, either by Trajan or Hadrian, on mount
Ararat. See Baronius ad Martyrologium Romanum. Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom.
ii. part ii. p. 438. and Geddes's Miscellanies, vol. ii. p. 203. The
abbreviation of MIL. which may signify either soldiers or thousands, is said to
have occasioned some extraordinary mistakes.
. But the general assertion of Origin may be explained and confirmed by the
particular testimony of his friend Dionysius, who, in the immense city of
Alexandria, and under the rigorous persecution of Decius, reckons only ten men
and seven women who suffered for the profession of the Christian name Dionysius
ap Eusebius. l. vi. c. 41. One of the seventeen was likewise accused of robbery.
.

During the same period of persecution, the zealous, Example of Cyprian bishop
of Carthage.
the eloquent, the ambitious Cyprian governed the church, not only of Carthage,
but even of Africa. He possessed every quality which could engage the reverence
of the faithful, or provoke the suspicions and resentment of the Pagan
magistrates. His character as well as his station seemed to mark out that holy
prelate as the most distinguished object of envy and of danger The letters of
Cyprian exhibit a very curious and original picture, both of the man and of the
times. See likewise the two lives of Cyprian, composed with equal accuracy,
though with very different views; the one by Le Clerc (Bibliotheque
Universelle, tom. xii. p. 208-378.), the other by Tillemont, Memoires
Ecclesiastiques, tom. iv. part i. p. 76-459.
. The experience, however, of the life of Cyprian, is sufficient to prove, that
our fancy has exaggerated the perilous situation of a Christian bishop; and
that the dangers to which he was exposed were less imminent than those which
temporal ambition is always prepared to encounter in the pursuit of honors.
Four Roman emperors, with their families, their favorites, and their
adherents, perished by the sword in the space of ten years, during which, the
bishop of Carthage guided by his authority and eloquence the counsels of the
African church. It was only in the third year of his administration, that he
had reason, during a few months, to apprehend the severe edicts of Decius, the
vigilance His danger and flight.
of the magistrate, and the clamours of the multitude, who loudly demanded,
that Cyprian, the leader of the Christians, should be thrown to the lions.
Prudence suggested the necessity of a temporary retreat, and the voice of
prudence was obeyed. He withdrew himself into an obscure solitude, from whence
he could maintain a constant correspondence with the clergy and people of
Carthage; and concealing himself till the tempest was past, he preserved his
life, without relinquishing either his power or his reputation. His extreme
caution did not however escape the censure of the more rigid Christians who
lamented, or the reproaches of his personal enemies who insulted, a conduct
which they considered as a pusillanimous and criminal desertion of the most
sacred duty See the polite but severe epistle of the clergy of Rome, to the
bishop of Carthage (Cyprian, Epist. 8, 9.). Pontius labors with the greatest
care and diligence to justify his master against the general censure.
. The propriety of reserving himself for the future exigencies of the church,
the example of several holy bishops In particular those of Dionysius of
Alexandria, and Gregory Thaumaturgus of Neo-Caesarea. See Eusebius. Hist.
Ecclesiast. l. vi. c. 40. and Memoires de Tillemont, tom. iv. part ii. p. 685.
, and the divine admonitions which, as he declares himself, he frequently
received in visions and ecstasies, were the reasons alleged in his justification
See Cyprian, Epist. 16. and his life by Pontius.
. But his best apology may be found in the cheerful resolution, with which,
about eight years afterward, he suffered death in the cause of religion. The
authentic history of his martyrdom has been recorded with unusual candor and
impartiality. A short abstract therefore of its most important circumstances
will convey the clearest information of the spirit, and of the forms, of the
Roman persecutions We have an original life of Cyprian by the deacon Pontius,
the companion of his exile, and the spectator of his death; and we likewise
possess the ancient proconsular acts of his martyrdom. These two relations are
consistent with each other, and with probability; and what is somewhat
remarkable, they are both unsullied by any miraculous circumstances.
.

When Valerian was consul for the third, and Gallienus for the fourth, time;
Paternus, proconsul A. D. 257. His banishment.
of Africa, summoned Cyprian to appear in his private council chamger. He there
acquainted him with the Imperial mandate which he had just received It should
seem that these were circular orders, sent at the same time to all the
governors. Dionysius (ap. Eusebius. l. vii. c. 11.) relates the history of his own
banishment from Alexandria, almost in the same manner. But as he escaped and
survived the persecution, we must account him either more or less fortunate
than Cyprian.
, that those who had abandoned the Roman religion, should immediately return to
the practice of the ceremonies of their ancestors. Cyprian replied without
hesitation, that he was a Christian and a bishop, devoted to the worship of the
true and only Deity, to whom he offered up his daily supplications for the
safety and prosperity of the two emperors, his lawful sovereigns. With modest
confidence he pleaded the privilege of a citizen, in refusing to give any
answer to some invidious and indeed illegal questions which the proconsul had
proposed. A sentence of banishment was pronounced as the penalty of Cyprian's
disobedience; and he was conducted without delay to Curubis, a free and
maritime city of Zeugitania, in a pleasant situation, a fertile territory, and
at the distance of about forty miles from Carthage See Plin. Hist. Nature. v. 3.
Cellarius, Geograph. Antiq. part iii. p. 96. Shaw's Travels, p. 90.; and for
the adjacent country (which is terminated by Cape Bona, or the promontory of
Mercury), l'Afrique de Marmol. tom. ii. p. 494. There are the remains of an
aqueduct, near Curubis, or Curbis, at present altered into Gurbes; and Dr. Shaw
read an inscription, which styles that city, Colonia Fulvia. The deacon Pontius
(in Vit. Cyprian. c. 12.) calls it "Apricum et competentem locum, hospitium pro
voiuntate secretum, et quicquid apponi eis ante promissum est, qui regnum et
justitiam Dei quaerunt."
. The exiled bishop enjoyed the conveniences of life and the consciousness of
virtue. His reputation was diffused over Africa and Italy; an account of his
behavior was published for the edification of the Christian world See Cyprian.
Epistol. 77. Edit. Fell.
; and his solitude was frequently interrupted by the letters, the visits, and
the congratulations of the faithful. On the arrival of a new proconsul in the
province, the fortune of Cyprian appeared for some time to wear a still more
favorable aspect. He was recalled from banishment; and though not yet
permitted to return to Carthage, his own gardens in the neighborhood of the
capital were assigned for the place of his residence Upon his conversion, he
had sold those gardens for the benefit of the poor. The indulgence of God (most
probably the liberality of some Christian friend) restored them to Cyprian. See
Pontius, c. 15.
.

At length, exactly one year When Cyprian, a twelvemonth before, was sent into
exile, he dreamt that he should be put to death the next day. The event made it
necessary to explain that word, as signifying a year. Pontius, c. 12.
after Cyprian His condemnation.
was first apprehended, Galerius Maximus, proconsul of Africa, received the
Imperial warrant for the execution of the Christian teachers. The bishop of
Carthage was sensible that he should be singled out for one of the first
victims; and the frailty of nature tempted him to withdraw himself by a secret
flight, from the danger and the honor of martyrdom: but soon recovering that
fortitude which his character required, he returned to his gardens, and
patiently expected the ministers of death. Two officers of rank, who were
entrusted with that commission, placed Cyprian between them in a chariot; and
as the proconsul was not then at leisure, they conducted him, not to a prison,
but to a private house in Carthage, which belonged to one of them. An elegant
supper was provided for the entertainment of the bishop, and his Christian
friends were permitted for the last time to enjoy his society, whilst the
streets were filled with a multitude of the faithful, anxious and alarmed at
the approaching fate of their spiritual father Pontius (c. 15.) acknowledges
that Cyprian, with whom he supped, passed the night custodia delicata. The
bishop exercised a last and very proper act of jurisdiction, by directing that
the younger females, who watched in the street, should be removed from the
dangers and temptations of a nocturnal crowd. Act. Proconsularia, c. 2.
. In the morning he appeared before the tribunal of the proconsul, who, after
informing himself of the name and situation of Cyprian, commanded him to offer
sacrifice, and pressed him to reflect on the consequences of his disobedience.
The refusal of Cyprian was firm and decisive; and the magistrate, when he had
taken the opinion of his council, pronounced with some reluctance the sentence
of death. It was conceived in the following terms: That Thascius Cyprianus
should be immediately beheaded, as the enemy of the gods of Rome, and as the
chief and ringleader of a criminal association, which he had seduced into an
impious resistance against the laws of the most holy emperors, Valerian and
Gallienus See the original sentence in the Acts, c. 4. and in Pontius, c. 17.
The latter expresses it in a more rhetorical manner.
. The manner of his execution was the mildest and least painful that could be
inflicted on a person convicted of any capital offense: nor was the use of
torture admitted to obtain from the bishop of Carthage either the recantation
of his principles, or the discovery of his accomplices.

As soon as the sentence was proclaimed, a His martyrdom.
general cry of "We will die with him," arose at once among the listening
multitude of Christians who waited before the palace gates. The generous
effusions of their zeal and affection were neither serviceable to Cyprian nor
dangerous to themselves. He was led away under a guard of tribunes and
centurions, without resistance and without insult, to the place of his
execution, a spacious and level plain near the city, which was already filled
with great numbers of spectators. His faithful presbyters and deacons were
permitted to accompany their holy bishop. They assisted him in laying aside his
upper garment, spread linen on the ground to catch the precious relics of his
blood, and received his orders to bestow five-and-twenty pieces of gold on the
executioner. The martyr then covered his face with his hands, and at one blow
his head was separated from his body. His corpse remained during some hours
exposed to the curiosity of the Gentiles: but in the night it was removed, and
transported in a triumphal procession and with a splendid illumination to the
burial-place of the Christians. The funeral of Cyprian was publicly celebrated
without receiving any interruption from the Roman magistrates; and those among
the faithful who had performed the last offices to his person and his memory,
were secure from the danger of inquiry or of punishment. It is remarkable, that
of so great a multitude of bishops in the province of Africa, Cyprian was the
first who was esteemed worthy to obtain the crown of martyrdom Pontius, c. 19.
M. de Tillemont (Memoires, tom. iv. part i. p. 450. note 50.) is not pleased
with so positive an exclusion of any former martyrs of the episcopal rank.
.

It was in the choice of Cyprian either to die a martyr or to live an apostate:
but on that choice depended the alternative of honor or Various incitements to
martyrdom.
infamy. Could we suppose that the bishop of Carthage had employed the
profession of the Christian faith only as the instrument of his avarice or
ambition, it was still incumbent on him to support the character which he had
assumed Whatever opinion we may entertain of the character or principles of
Thomas Becket, we must acknowledge that he suffered death with a constancy not
unworthy of the primitive martyrs. See Lord Lyttelton's History of Henry II.
vol. ii. p. 592, etc.
; and, if he possessed the smallest degree of manly fortitude, rather to expose
himself to the most cruel tortures, than by a single act to exchange the
reputation of a whole life, for the abhorrence of his Christian brethren and
the contempt of the Gentile world. But if the zeal of Cyprian was supported by
the sincere conviction of the truth of those doctrines which he preached, the
crown of martyrdom must have appeared to him as an object of desire rather than
of terror. It is not easy to extract any distinct ideas from the vague though
eloquent declamations of the Fathers, or to ascertain the degree of immortal
glory and happiness which they confidently promised to those who were so
fortunate as to shed their blood in the cause of religion See in particular the
treatise of Cyprian de Lapsis, p. 87 -- 98. Edit. Fell. The learning of Dodwell
(Dissertat. Cyprianic. xii. xiii.), and the ingenuity of Middleton (Free
Enquiry, p. 162, etc.), have left scarcely any thing to add concerning the
merit, the honors, and the motives of the martyrs.
. They inculcated with becoming diligence, that the fire of martyrdom supplied
every defect and expiated every sin; that while the souls of ordinary
Christians were obliged to pass through a slow and painful purification, the
triumphant sufferers entered into the immediate fruition of eternal bliss,
where, in the society of the patriarchs, the apostles, and the prophets, they
reigned with Christ, and acted as his assessors in the universal judgment of
mankind. The assurance of a lasting reputation upon earth, a motive so
congenial to the vanity of human nature, often served to animate the courage of
the martyrs. The honors which Rome or Athens bestowed on those citizens who
had fallen in the cause of their country, were cold and unmeaning
demonstrations of respect, when compared with the ardent gratitude and devotion
which the primitive church expressed toward the victorious champions of the
faith. The annual commemoration of their virtues and sufferings was observed as
a sacred ceremony, and at length terminated in religious worship. Among the
Christians who had publicly confessed their religious principles, those, who
(as it very frequently happened) had been dismissed from the tribunal or the
prisons of the Pagan magistrates, obtained such honors as were justly due to
their imperfect martyrdom and their generous resolution. The most pious females
courted the permission of imprinting kisses on the fetters which they had worn,
and on the wounds which they had received. Their persons were esteemed holy,
their decisions were admitted with deference, and they too often abused, by
their spiritual pride and licentious manners, the pre-eminence which their zeal
and intrepidity had acquired Cyprian. Epistol. 5, 6, 7. 22. 24. and de Unitat.
Ecclesiae. The number of pretended martyrs has been very much multiplied, by
the custom which was introduced of bestowing that honorable name on confessors.
. Distinctions like these, whilst they display the exalted merit, betray the
inconsiderable number of those who suffered, and of those who died for the
profession of Christianity.

The sober discretion of the present age will Ardour of the first Christians.
more readily censure than admire, but can more easily admire than imitate, the
fervor of the first Christians, who, according to the lively expression of
Sulpicius Severus, desired martyrdom with more eagerness than his own
contemporaries solicited a bishopric Certatim gloriosa in certamina ruebatur;
multique avidius tum martyria gloriosis mortibus quaerebantur, quam nunc
Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus appetuntur. Sulpicius Severus, l. ii. He might
have omitted the word nunc.
. The epistles which Ignatius composed as he was carried in chains through the
cities of Asia, breathe sentiments the most repugnant to the ordinary feelings
of human nature. He earnestly beseeches the Romans, that when he should be
exposed in the amphitheatre, they would not, by their kind but unseasonable
intercession, deprive him of the crown of glory; and he declares his resolution
to provoke and irritate the wild beasts which might be employed as the
instruments of his death See Epist. ad Roman. c. 4, 5. ap. Patres Apostol. tom.
ii. p. 27. It suited the purpose of Bishop Pearson (see Vindiciae Ignatianae,
part ii. c. 9.) to justify by a profusion of examples and authorities, the
sentiments of Ignatius.
. Some stories are related of the courage of martyrs, who actually performed
what Ignatius had intended; who exasperated the fury of the lions, pressed the
executioner to hasten his office, cheerfully leaped into the fires which were
kindled to consume them, and discovered a sensation of joy and pleasure in the
midst of the most exquisite tortures. Several examples have been preserved of a
zeal impatient of those restraints which the emperors had provided for the
security of the church. The Christians sometimes supplied by their voluntary
declaration the want of an accuser, rudely disturbed the public service of
Paganism The story of Polyeuctes, on which Corneille has founded a very
beautiful tragedy, is one of the most celebrated, though not perhaps the most
authentic, instances of this excessive zeal. We should observe, that the 60th
canon of the council of Illiberis refuses the title of martyrs to those who
exposed themselves to death, by publicly destroying the idols.
, and rushing in crowds round the tribunal of the magistrates, called upon them
to pronounce and to inflict the sentence of the law. The behavior of the
Christians was too remarkable to escape the notice of the ancient philosophers;
but they seem to have considered it with much less admiration than
astonishment. Incapable of conceiving the motives which sometimes transported
the fortitude of believers beyond the bounds of prudence or reason, they
treated such an eagerness to die as the strange result of obstinate despair, of
stupid insensibility, or of superstitious phrenzy See Epictetus, l. iv. c. 7.
(though there is some doubt whether he alludes to the Christians) Marcus
Antoninus de Rebus fuis, l. xi. c. 3. Lucian in Peregrin.
. Unhappy men, exclaimed the proconsul Antoninus to the Christians of Asia,
unhappy men, if you are thus weary of your lives, is it so difficult for you to
find ropes and precipices Tertullian ad Scapul. c. 5. The learned are divided
between three persons of the same name, who were all proconsuls of Asia. I am
inclined to ascribe this story to Antoninus Pius, who was afterward emperor;
and who may have governed Asia, under the reign of Trajan.
? He was extremely cautious (as it is observed by a learned and pious
historian) of punishing men who had found no accusers but themselves, the
Imperial laws not having made any provision for so unexpected a case:
condemning therefore a few, as a warning to their brethren, he dismissed the
multitude with indignation and contempt Mosheim, de Rebus Christ. ante
Constantin. p. 235.
. Notwithstanding this real or affected disdain, the intrepid constancy of the
faithful was productive of more salutary effects on those minds which nature or
grace had disposed for the easy reception of religious truth. On these
melancholy occasions, there were many among the Gentiles who pitied, who
admired, and who were converted. The generous enthusiasm was communicated from
the sufferer to the spectators; and the blood of martyrs, according to a
well-known observation, became the seed of the church.

But although devotion had raised, and eloquence continued to inflame, this
fever of the mind, it insensibly gave way to the more natural Gradual
relaxation.
hopes and fears of the human heart, to the love of life, the apprehension of
pain, and the horror of dissolution. The more prudent rulers of the Church
found themselves obliged to restrain the indiscreet ardour of their followers,
and to distrust a constancy which too often abandoned them in the hour of trial
See the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, ap. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. iv. c. 15.
. As the lives of the faithful became less mortified and austere, they were
every day less ambitious of the honors of martyrdom; and the soldiers of
Christ, instead of distinguishing themselves by voluntary deeds of heroism,
frequently deserted their post, and fled in confusion before the enemy whom it
was their duty to resist. There were three methods, however, of escaping the
flames of persecution, which were not attended with an equal degree of guilt:
the first indeed was generally allowed to be innocent; the second was of a
doubtful, or at least of a venial, nature; but the third implied a direct and
criminal apostasy from the Christian faith.

I. A modern inquisitor would hear with surprise, Three methods of escaping
martyrdom.
that whenever an information was given to a Roman magistrate of any person
within his jurisdiction who had embraced the sect of the Christians, the charge
was communicated to the party accused, and that a convenient time was allowed
him to settle his domestic concerns, and to prepare an answer to the crime
which was imputed to him In the second apology of Justin, there is a particular
and very curious instance of this legal delay. The same indulgence was granted
to accused Christians, in the persecution of Decius; and Cyprian (de Lapsis)
expressly mentions the Dies negantibus praestitutus.
. If he entertained any doubt of his own constancy, such a delay afforded him
the opportunity of preserving his life and honor by flight, of withdrawing
himself into some obscure retirement or some distant province, and of patiently
expecting the return of peace and security. A measure so consonant to reason
was soon authorized by the advice and example of the most holy prelates; and
seems to have been censured by few, except by the Montanists, who deviated into
heresy by their strict and obstinate adherence to the rigor of ancient
discipline Tertullian considers flight from persecution, as an imperfect, but
very criminal, apostasy, as an impious attempt to elude the will of God, etc.
etc. He has written a treatise on this subject (see p. 536 -- 544. Edit.
Rigalt.), which is filled with the wildest fanaticism, and the most incoherent
declamation. It is, however, somewhat remarkable, that Tertullian did not
suffer martyrdom himself.
. II. The provincial governors, whose zeal was less prevalent than their
avarice, had countenanced the practice of selling certificates (or libels as
they were called), which attested, that the persons therein mentioned had
complied with the laws, and sacrificed to the Roman deities. By producing these
false declarations, the opulent and timid Christians were enabled to silence
the malice of an informer, and to reconcile in some measure their safety with
their religion. A slight penance atoned for this profane dissimulation The
Libellatici, who are chiefly known by the writings of Cyprian, are described
with the utmost precision, in the copious commentary of Mosheim, p. 483 -- 489.
. III. In every persecution there were great numbers of unworthy Christians,
who publicly disowned or renounced the faith which they had professed; and who
confirmed the sincerity of their abjuration, by the legal acts of burning
incense or of offering sacrifices. Some of these apostates had yielded on the
first menace or exhortation of the magistrate; whilst the patience of others
had been subdued by the length and repetition of tortures. The affrighted
countenances of some betrayed their inward remorse, while others advanced with
confidence and alacrity to the altars of the gods Plin. Epistol. x. 97.
Dionysius Alexandrin. ap. Eusebius. I. vi. c. 41. Ad prima statim verba minantis
inimici maximus fratrum numerus fidem suam prodidit: nec prostiatus est
persecutionis impetu, sed voluntario lapsu seipsum prostravit, Cyprian. Opera,
p. 89. Among these deserters were many priests, and even bishops.
. But the disguise, which fear had imposed, subsisted no longer than the
present danger. As soon as the severity of the persecution was abated, the
doors of the churches were assailed by the returning multitude of penitents,
who detested their idolatrous submission, and who solicited with equal ardour,
but with various success, their readmission into the society of Christians It
was on this occasion that Cyprian wrote his treatise De Lapsis, and many of his
epistles. The controversy concerning the treatment of penitent apostates, does
not occur among the Christians of the preceding century. Shall we ascribe this
to the superiority of their faith and courage, or to our less intimate
knowledge of their history?
.

IV. Notwithstanding the general rules, established for the conviction and
punishment of the Christians, the fate of those sectaries, in an extensive
Alternatives of severity and toleration.
and arbitrary government, must still, in a great measure, have depended on
their own behavior, the circumstances of the times, and the temper of their
supreme as well as subordinate rulers. Zeal might sometimes provoke, and
prudence might sometimes avert or assuage, the superstitious fury of the
Pagans. A variety of motives might dispose the provincial governors either to
enforce or to relax the execution of the laws; and of these motives, the most
forcible was their regard not only for the public edicts, but for the secret
intentions of the emperor, a glance from whose eye was sufficient to kindle or
to extinguish the flames of persecution. As often as any occasional severities
were exercised in the different parts of the empire, the primitive Christians
lamented and perhaps magnified their own sufferings; but the celebrated The ten
persecutions.
number of ten persecutions has been determined by the ecclesiastical writers
of the fifth century, who possessed a more distinct view of the prosperous or
adverse fortunes of the church, from the age of Nero to that of Diocletian. The
ingenious parallels of the ten plagues of Egypt, and of the ten horns of the
Apocalypse, first suggested this calculation to their minds; and in their
application of the faith of prophecy to the truth of history, they were careful
to select those reigns which were indeed the most hostile to the Christian
cause See Mosheim, p. 97. Sulpicius Severus was the first author of this
computation; though he seemed desirous of reserving the tenth and greatest
persecution for the coming of the Antichrist.
. But these transient persecutions served only to revive the zeal, and to
restore the discipline of the faithful: and the moments of extraordinary rigor
were compensated by much longer intervals of peace and security. The
indifference of some princes, and the indulgence of others, permitted the
Christians to enjoy, though not perhaps a legal, yet an actual and public,
toleration of their religion.

The apology of Tertullian contains two very Supposed edicts of Tiberius and
Marcus Antoninus.
ancient, very singular, but at the same time very suspicious instances of
Imperial clemency; the edicts published by Tiberius, and by Marcus Antoninus,
and designed not only to protect the innocence of the Christians, but even to
proclaim those stupendous miracles which had attested the truth of their
doctrine. The first of these examples is attended with some difficulties which
might perplex a skeptical mind The testimony given by Pontius Pilate is first
mentioned by Justin. The successive improvements which the story has acquired
(as it passed through the hands of Tertullian, Eusebius, Epiphanius,
Chrysostom, Orosius, Gregory of Tours, and the authors of the several editions
of the acts of Pilate), are very fairly stated by Dom Calmet, Dissertat. sur
l'Ecriture, tom. iii. p. 651, etc.
. We are required to believe, that Pontius Pilate informed the emperor of the
unjust sentence of death which he had pronounced against an innocent, and, as
it appeared, a divine, person; and that, without acquiring the merit, he
exposed himself to the danger, of martyrdom; that Tiberius, who avowed his
contempt for all religion, immediately conceived the design of placing the
Jewish Messiah among the gods of Rome; that his servile senate ventured to
disobey the commands of their master; that Tiberius, instead of resenting their
refusal, contented himself with protecting the Christians from the severity of
the laws, many years before such laws were enacted, or before the church had
assumed any distinct name or existence; and lastly, that the memory of this
extraordinary transaction was preserved in the most public and authentic
records, which escaped the knowledge of the historians, of Greece and Rome, and
were only visible to the eyes of an African Christian, who composed his apology
one hundred and sixty years after the death of Tiberius. The edict of Marcus
Antoninus is supposed to have been the effect of his devotion and gratitude,
for the miraculous deliverance which he had obtained in the Marcomannic war.
The distress of the legions, the seasonable tempest of rain and hail, of
thunder and of lightning, and the dismay and defeat of the barbarians, have
been celebrated by the eloquence of several Pagan writers. If there were any
Christians in that army, it was natural that they should ascribe some merit to
the servent prayers, which, in the moment of danger, they had offered up for
their own and the public safety. But we are still assured by monuments of brass
and marble, by the Imperial medals, and by the Antonine column, that neither
the prince nor the people entertained any sense of this signal obligation,
since they unanimously attribute their deliverance to the providence of
Jupiter, and to the interposition of Mercury. During the whole course of his
reign, Marcus despised the Christians as a philosopher, and punished them as a
sovereign On this miracle, as it is commonly called, of the thundering legion,
see the admirable criticism of Mr. Moyle, in his Works, vol. ii. p. 81 -- 390.
.

By a singular fatality, the hardships which they had endured under the
government of a State of the Christians in the reigns of Commodus and Severus.
A. D. 180.
virtuous prince, immediately ceased on the accession of a tyrant, and as none
except themselves had experienced the injustice of Marcus, so they alone were
protected by the lenity of Commodus. The celebrated Marcia, the most favored
of his concubines, and who at length contrived the murder of her Imperial
lover, entertained a singular affection for the oppressed church; and though it
was impossible that she could reconcile the practice of vice with the precepts
of the Gospel, she might hope to atone for the frailties of her sex and
profession, by declaring herself the patroness of the Christians Dion Cassius,
or rather his abbreviator Xiphilin, l. lxxii. p. 1206. Mr. Moyle (p. 266.) has
explained the condition of the church under the reign of Commodus.
. Under the gracious protection of Marcia, they passed in safety the thirteen
years of a cruel tyranny; and when the empire was established in the house of
Severus, they formed a domestic but more honorable connection with the new
court. The emperor was persuaded, that, in a dangerous sickness, he had derived
some benefit, either spiritual or physical, from the holy oil, with which one
of his slaves had anointed him. He always treated with peculiar distinction
several persons of both sexes who had embraced the new religion. The nurse as
well as the preceptor of Caracalla were Christians; and if that young prince
ever betrayed a sentiment of humanity, it was occasioned by an incident, which,
however trifling, bore some relation to the cause of Christianity Compare the
life of Caracalla in the Augustan History, with the epistle of Tertullian to
Scapula. Dr. Jortin (Remarks on Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 5, etc.)
considers the cure of Severus, by the means of holy oil, with a strong desire
to convert it into a miracle.
. Under the reign of Severus, the fury of the populace was checked; the rigor
of ancient laws was for some time suspended; and the provincial governors were
satisfied with receiving an annual present from the churches within their
jurisdiction, as the price, or as the reward, of their moderation Tertullian de
Fuga, c. 13. The present was made during the feast of the Saturnalia; and it is
a matter of serious concern to Tertullian, that the faithful should be
confounded with the most infamous professions which purchased the connivance of
the government.
. The controversy concerning the precise time of the celebration of Easter
armed the bishops of Asia and Italy against each other, and was considered as
the most important business of this period of leisure and tranquillity Eusebius.
l. v. c. 23, 24. Mosheim, p. 435 -- 447.
. Nor was the peace A. D. 198.
of the church interrupted, till the increasing numbers of proselytes seem at
length to have attracted the attention, and to have alienated the mind, of
Severus. With the design of restraining the progress of Christianity, he
published an edict, which, though it was designed to affect only the new
converts, could not be carried into strict execution, without exposing to
danger and punishment the most zealous of their teachers and missionaries. In
this mitigated persecution, we may still discover the indulgent spirit of Rome
and of Polytheism, which so readily admitted every excuse in favor of those
who practiced the religious ceremonies of their fathers Judaeos fieri sub gravi
poena vetuit. Idem etiam de Christianis sanxit. Hist. August. p. 70.
.

But the laws which Severus had enacted, soon Of the successors of Severus.
expired with the authority of that emperor; and the Christians, after this
accidental tempest, enjoyed A. D. 211 -- 249.
a calm of thirty-eight years Sulpicius Severus, l. ii. p. 384. This
computation (allowing for a single exception) is confirmed by the history of
Eusebius, and by the writings of Cyprian.
. Till this period they had usually held their assemblies in private houses and
sequestered places. They were now permitted to erect and consecrate convenient
edifices for the purpose of religious worship The antiquity of Christian
churches is discussed by Tillemont (Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. iii. part
ii. p. 68 -- 72.), and by Mr. Moyle (vol. i. p. 378 -- 398). The former refers
the first construction of them to the peace of Alexander Severus; the latter,
to the peace of Gallienus.
; to purchase lands, even at Rome itself, for the use of the community; and to
conduct the elections of their ecclesiastical ministers in so public, but at
the same time in so exemplary a manner, as to deserve the respectful attention
of the Gentiles See the Augustan History, p. 130. The emperor Alexander adopted
their method of publicly proposing the names of those persons who were
candidates for ordination. It is true, that the honor of this practice is
likewise attributed to the Jews.
. This long repose of the church was accompanied with dignity. The reigns of
those princes who derived their extraction from the Asiatic provinces, proved
the most favorable to the Christians; the eminent persons of the sect, instead
of being reduced to implore the protection of a slave or concubine, were
admitted into the palace in the honorable characters of priests and
philosophers; and their mysterious doctrines, which were already diffused among
the people, insensibly attracted the curiosity of their sovereign. When the
empress Mammaea passed through Antioch, she expressed a desire of conversing
with the celebrated Origin, the fame of whose piety and learning was spread
over the East. Origin obeyed so flattering an invitation, and though he could
not expect to succeed in the conversion of an artful and ambitious woman, she
listened with pleasure to his eloquent exhortations, and honorably dismissed
him to his retirement in Palestine Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. vi. c. 21.
Hieronym. de Script. Eccles. c. 54. Mammaea was styled a holy and pious woman,
both by the Christians and the Pagans. From the former, therefore, it was
impossible that she should deserve that honorable epithet.
. The sentiments of Mammaea were adopted by her son Alexander, and the
philosophic devotion of that emperor was marked by a singular but injudicious
regard for the Christian religion. In his domestic chapel he placed the statues
of Abraham, of Orpheus, of Apollonius, and of Christ, as an honor justly due
to those respectable sages who had instructed mankind in the various modes of
addressing their homage to the supreme and universal Deity See the Augustan
History, p. 123. Mosheim (p. 465.) seems to refine too much on the domestic
religion of Alexander. His design of building a public temple to Christ (Hist.
August. p. 129.), and the objection which was suggested either to him, or in
similar circumstances to Hadrian, appear to have no other foundation than an
improbable report, invented by the Christians, and credulously adopted by an
historian of the age of Constantine.
. A purer faith, as well as worship, was openly professed and practiced among
his household. Bishops, perhaps for the first time, were seen at court; and,
after the death of Alexander, when the inhuman Maximin discharged his fury on
the A. D. 235.
favorites and servants of his unfortunate benefactor, a great number of
Christians, of every rank, and of both sexes, were involved in the promiscuous
massacre, which, on their account, has improperly received the name of
Persecution Eusebius. l. vi. c. 28. It may be presumed, that the success of the
Christians had exasperated the increasing bigotry of the Pagans. Dion Cassius,
who composed his history under the former reign, had most probably intended for
the use of his master those counsels of persecution, which he ascribes to a
better age, and to the favorite of Augustus. Concerning this oration of
Maecenas, or rather of Dion, I may refer to my own unbiassed opinion (vol. i.
p. 55. Not. 25.), and to the Abbe de la Bleterie (Memoires de l'Academie, tom.
xxiv. p. 303. tom. xxv. p. 432).
.

Notwithstanding the cruel disposition of Maximin, the effects of his
resentment against the Christians were of a very local and temporary Of
Maximin, Philip, and Decius.
nature, and the pious Origin, who had been proscribed as a devoted victim, was
still reserved to convey the truths of the Gospel to the ear of monarchs
Orosius, l. vii. c. 19. mentions Origin as the object of Maximin's resentment;
and Firmilianus, a Cappadocian bishop of that age, gives a just and confined
idea of this persecution (apud Cyprian. Epist. 75.).
. He addressed several edifying letters to the emperor Philip, to his wife, and
to his A. D. 244.
mother; and as soon as that prince, who was born in the neighborhood of
Palestine, had usurped the Imperial scepter, the Christians acquired a friend
and a protector. The public and even partial favor of Philip toward the
sectaries of the new religion, and his constant reverence for the ministers of
the church, gave some color to the suspicion, which prevailed in his own
times, that the emperor himself was become a convert to the faith The mention
of those princes who were publicly supposed to be Christians, as we find it in
an epistle of Dionysius of Alexandria (ap. Eusebius. l. vii. c. 10.), evidently
alludes to Philip and his family; and forms a contemporary evidence, that such
a report had prevailed; but the Egyptian bishop, who lived at an humble
distance from the court of Rome, expresses himself with a becoming diffidence
concerning the truth of the fact. The epistles of Origin (which were extant in
the time of Eusebius, see l. vi. c. 36.) would most probably decide this
curious, rather than important, question.
; and afforded some grounds for a fable which was afterward invented, that he
had been purified by confession and penance from the guilt contracted by the
murder of his innocent predecessor Eusebius. l. vi. c. 34. The story, as is usual,
has been embellished by succeeding writers, and is confuted, with much
superfluous learning, by Frederick Spanheim (Opera Varia, tom. ii. p. 400,
etc.).
. The fall A. D. 249.
of Philip introduced, with the change of masters, a new system of government,
so oppressive to the Christians, that their former condition, ever since the
time of Domitian, was represented as a state of perfect freedom and security,
if compared with the rigorous treatment which they experienced under the short
reign of Decius Lactantius, de Mortibus Persecutorum, c. 3, 4. After
celebrating the felicity and increase of the church, under a long succession of
good princes; he adds, Extitit post annos plurimos, execrabile animal, Decius,
qui vexaret Ecclesiam.
. The virtues of that prince will scarcely allow us to suspect that he was
actuated by a mean resentment against the favorites of his predecessor, and it
is more reasonable to believe, that in the prosecution of his general design to
restore the purity of Roman manners, he was desirous of delivering the empire
from what he condemned as a recent and criminal superstition. The bishops of
the most considerable cities were removed by exile or death: the vigilance of
the magistrates prevented the clergy of Rome during sixteen months from
proceeding to a new election; and it was the opinion of the Christians, that
the emperor would more patiently endure a competitor for the purple, than a
bishop in the capital Eusebius. l. vi. c. 39. Cyprian. Epistol. 55. The sea of
Rome remained vacant from the martyrdom of Fabianus, the 20th of January, A. D.
250, till the election of Cornelius, the 4th of June, A. D. 251. Decius had
probably left Rome, since he was killed before the end of that year.
. Were it possible to suppose that the penetration of Decius had discovered
pride under the disguise of humility, or that he could foresee the temporal
dominion which might insensibly arise from the claims of spiritual authority,
we might be less surprised, that he should consider the successors of St. Peter
as the most formidable rivals to those of Augustus.

The administration of Valerian was distinguished Of Valerian, Gallienus, and
his successors.
by a levity and inconstancy, ill-suited to the gravity of the Roman Censor. In
the first part of his reign, he surpassed in clemency those A. D. 253 -- 260.
princes who had been suspected of an attachment to the Christian faith. In the
last three years and a half, listening to the insinuations of a minister
addicted to the superstitions of Egypt, he adopted the maxims, and imitated the
severity, of his predecessor Decius Eusebius. l. vii. c. 10. Mosheim (p. 548.) has
very clearly shown, that the Prefect Macrianus, and the Egyptian Magus, are
one and the same person.
. The accession of Gallienus, which increased the calamities of the empire,
restored peace to the church; and the Christians obtained the free exercise of
their religion, by an edict addressed to the bishops, and conceived in such
terms as seemed to acknowledge their office and public character Eusebius (l.
vii. c. 13.) gives us a Greek version of this Latin edict, which seems to have
been very concise. By another edict, he directed, that the Coemeteria should be
restored to the Christians.
. The ancient laws, without being formally repealed, were suffered to sink into
oblivion; and (excepting only some hostile intentions which are attributed to
the emperor Aurelian Eusebius. l. vii. c. 30. Lactantius de M. P. c. 6. Hieronym.
in Chron. p. 177. Orosius, l. vii. c. 23. Their language is in general so
ambiguous and incorrect, that we are at a loss to determine how far Aurelian
had carried his intentions before he was assassinated. Most of the moderns
(except Dodwell, Dissertat. Cyprian. xi. 64.) have seized the occasion of
gaining a few extraordinary martyrs.
) the disciples of Christ passed above forty years in a state of prosperity,
far more dangerous to their virtue than the severest trials of persecution.

The story of Paul of Samosata, who filled the Paul of Samosata, his manners.
metropolitan see of Antioch, while the East was in the hands of Odenathus and
Zenobia, may serve to illustrate the condition and character of A. D. 260.
the times. The wealth of that prelate was a sufficient evidence of his guilt,
since it was neither derived from the inheritance of his fathers, nor acquired
by the arts of honest industry. But Paul considered the service of the church
as a very lucrative profession Paul was better pleased with the title of
Ducenarius, than with that of bishop. The Ducenarius was an Imperial
procurator, so called from his salary of two hundred Sestertia, or 1,600 l. a
year. (See Salmasius ad Hist. August. p. 124.) Some critics suppose, that the
bishop of Antioch had actually obtained such an office from Zenobia, while
others consider it only as a figurative expression of his pomp and insolence.
. His ecclesiastical jurisdiction was venal and rapacious; he extorted frequent
contributions from the most opulent of the faithful, and converted to his own
use a considerable part of the public revenue. By his pride and luxury, the
Christian religion was rendered odious in the eyes of the Gentiles. His council
chamber and his throne, the splendor with which he appeared in public, the
suppliant crowd who solicited his attention, the multitude of letters and
petitions to which he dictated his answers, and the perpetual hurry of business
in which he was involved, were circumstances much better suited to the state of
a civil magistrate Simony was not unknown in those times; and the clergy
sometimes bought what they intended to sell. It appears that the bishopric of
Carthage was purchased by a wealthy matron, named Lucilla, for her servant
Majorinus. The price was 400 Folles. (Monument. Antiq. ad calcem Optati, p.
263.) Every Follis contained 125 pieces of silver, and the whole sum may be
computed at about 2,400 l.
, than to the humility of a primitive bishop. When he harangued his people from
the pulpit, Paul affected the figurative style and the theatrical gestures of
an Asiatic sophist, while the cathedral resounded with the loudest and most
extravagant acclamations in the praise of his divine eloquence. Against those
who resisted his power, or refused to flatter his vanity, the prelate of
Antioch was arrogant, rigid, and inexorable; but he relaxed the discipline, and
lavished the treasures, of the church on his dependent clergy, who were
permitted to imitate their master in the gratification of every sensual
appetite. For Paul indulged himself very freely in the pleasures of the table,
and he had received into the episcopal palace two young and beautiful women, as
the constant companions of his leisure moments If we are desirous of
extenuating the vices of Paul, we must suspect the assembled bishops of the
East of publishing the most malicious calumnies in circular epistles addressed
to all the churches of the empire (ap. Eusebius. l. vii. c. 30.).
.

Notwithstanding these scandalous vices, if Paul He is degraded from the sea of
Antioch.
of Samosata had preserved the purity of the orthodox faith, his reign over the
capital of Syria would have ended only with his life; and A. D. 270.
had a seasonable persecution intervened, an effort of courage might perhaps
have placed him in the rank of saints and martyrs. Some nice and subtle errors,
which he imprudently adopted and obstinately maintained, concerning the
doctrine of the Trinity, excited the zeal and indignation of the eastern
churches His heresy (like those of Noetus and Sabellius, in the same century)
tended to confound the mysterious distinction of the divine persons. See
Mosheim, p. 702, etc.
. From Egypt to the Euxine sea, the bishops were in arms and in motion. Several
councils were held, confutations were published, excommunications were
pronounced, ambiguous explanations were by turns accepted and refused, treaties
were concluded and violated, and at length Paul of Samosata was degraded from
his episcopal character, by the sentence of seventy or eighty bishops, who
assembled for that purpose at Antioch, and who, without consulting the rights
of the clergy or people, appointed a successor by their own authority. The
manifest irregularity of this proceeding increased the numbers of the
discontented faction; and as Paul, who was no stranger to the arts of courts,
had insinuated himself into the favor of Zenobia, he maintained above four
years the possession of the episcopal house and office. The victory of Aurelian
changed the face of the East, and the two contending parties, who applied to
each other the epithets of schism and heresy, were either commanded or
permitted to plead their cause before the tribunal of the conqueror. This
public and very singular trial affords a convincing proof, that the existence,
the property, the privileges, and the internal policy, of the Christians were
acknowledged, if not by the laws, at least by the magistrates of the empire. As
a Pagan and as a soldier, it could scarcely by expected that Aurelian should
enter into the discussion, whether the sentiments of Paul or those of his
adversaries were most agreeable to the true standard of the orthodox faith. His
determination, however, was founded on the general principles of equity and
reason. The sentence is executed by Aurelian.
He considered the bishops of Italy as the most impartial and respectable
judges among the Christians, and as soon as he was informed, that they A. D.
274.
had unanimously approved the sentence of the council, he acquiesced in their
opinion, and immediately gave orders that Paul should be compelled to
relinquish the temporal possessions belonging to an office, of which, in the
judgment of his brethren, he had been regularly deprived. But while we applaud
the justice, we should not overlook the policy, of Aurelian; who was desirous
of restoring and cementing the dependence of the provinces on the capital, by
every means which could bind the interest or prejudices of any part of his
subjects Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. vii. c. 30. We are entirely indebted to
him for the curious story of Paul of Samosata.
.

Amidst the frequent revolutions of the empire, Peace and prosperity of the
church under Diocletian.
the Christians still flourished in peace and prosperity; and notwithstanding a
celebrated era of martyrs has been deduced from the accession of Diocletian
The Era of Martyrs, which is still in use among the Copts and the Abyssinians,
must be reckoned from the 29th of August, A. D. 284.; as the beginning of the
Egyptian year was nineteen days earlier than the real accession of Diocletian.
See Dissertation preliminaire a l'Art de verifier les Dates.
, the new system of policy, introduced A. D. 284 -- 303.
and maintained by the wisdom of that prince, continued, during more than
eighteen years, to breathe the mildest and most liberal spirit of religious
toleration. The mind of Diocletian himself was less adapted indeed to
speculative inquiries, than to the active labors of war and government. His
prudence rendered him averse to any great innovation, and though his temper was
not very susceptible of zeal or enthusiasm, he always maintained an habitual
regard for the ancient deities of the empire. But the leisure of the two
empresses, of his wife Prisca, and of Valeria his daughter, permitted them to
listen with more attention and respect to the truths of Christianity, which in
every age has acknowledged its important obligations to female devotion The
expression of Lactantius (de M. P. c. 15.) "sacrificio pollui coegit," implies
their antecedent conversion to the faith; but does not seem to justify the
assertion of Mosheim (p. 912.), that they had been privately baptized.
. The principal eunuchs, Lucian M. de Tillemont (Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom.
v. part i. p. 11, 12.) has quoted from the Spicilegium of Dom. Luc d'Acheri, a
very curious instruction which bishop Theonas composed for the use of Lucian.
and Dorotheus, Gorgonius and Andrew, who attended the person, possessed the
favor, and governed the household, of Diocletian, protected by their powerful
influence the faith which they had embraced. Their example was imitated by many
of the most considerable officers of the palace, who, in their respective
stations, had the care of the Imperial ornaments, of the robes, of the
furniture, of the jewels, and even of the private treasury; and, though it
might sometimes be incumbent on them to accompany the emperor when he
sacrificed in the temple Lactantius de M. P. c. 10.
, they enjoyed, with their wives, their children, and their slaves, the free
exercise of the Christian religion. Diocletian and his colleagues frequently
conferred the most important offices on those persons, who avowed their
abhorrence for the worship of the gods, but who had displayed abilities proper
for the service of the state. The bishops held an honorable rank in their
respective provinces, and were treated with distinction and respect, not only
by the people, but by the magistrates themselves. Almost in every city, the
ancient churches were found insufficient to contain the increasing multitude of
proselytes; and in their place more stately and capacious edifices were erected
for the public worship of the faithful. The corruption of manners and
principles, so forcibly lamented by Eusebius Eusebius, Hist. Ecclesiast. l.
viii. c. 1. The reader who consults the original, will not accuse me of
heightening the picture. Eusebius was about sixteen years of age at the
accession of the emperor Diocletian.
, may be considered, not only as a consequence, but as a proof, of the liberty,
which the Christians enjoyed and abused under the reign of Diocletian.
Prosperity had relaxed the nerves of discipline. Fraud, envy, and malice,
prevailed in every congregation. The presbyters aspired to the episcopal
office, which every day became an object more worthy of their ambition. The
bishops, who contended with each other for ecclesiastical pre-eminence,
appeared by their conduct to claim a secular and tyrannical power in the
church; and the lively faith which still distinguished the Christians from the
Gentiles, was shown much less in their lives, than in their controversial
writings.

Notwithstanding this seeming security, an attentive Progress of zeal and
superstition among the Pagans.
observer might discern some symptoms that threatened the church with a more
violent persecution than any which she had yet endured. The zeal and rapid
progress of the Christians awakened the Polytheists from their supine
indifference in the cause of those deities, whom custom and education had
taught them to revere. The mutual provocations of a religious war, which had
already continued above two hundred years, exasperated the animosity of the
contending parties. The Pagans were incensed at the rashness of a recent and
obscure sect, which presumed to accuse their countrymen of error, and to devote
their ancestors to eternal misery. The habits of justifying the popular
mythology against the invectives of an implacable enemy, produced in their
minds some sentiments of faith and reverence for a system which they had been
accustomed to consider with the most careless levity. The supernatural powers
assumed by the church inspired at the same time terror and emulation. The
followers of the established religion entrenched themselves behind a similar
fortification of prodigies; invented new modes of sacrifice, of expiation, and
of initiation We might quote, among a great number of instances, the mysterious
worship of Mythras, and the Taurobolia; the latter of which became fashionable
in the time of the Antonines (See a Dissertation of M. de Boze, in the Memoires
de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. ii. p. 443.). The romance of Apuleius is
as full of devotion as of satire.
; attempted to revive the credit of their expiring oracles The impostor
Alexander very strongly recommended the oracle of Trophonius at Mallos, and
those of Apollo, at Claros and Miletus (Lucian, tom. ii. p. 236. Edit. Reitz).
The last of these, whose singular history would furnish a very curious episode,
was consulted by Diocletian before he published his edicts of persecution
(Lactantius, de M. P. c. 11).
; and listened with eager credulity to every impostor, who flattered their
prejudices by a tale of wonders Besides the ancient stories of Pythagoras and
Aristeas; the cures performed at the shrine of Aesculapius, and the fables
related of Apollonius of Tyana, were frequently opposed to the miracles of
Christ; though I agree with Dr. Lardner (see Testimonies, vol. iii. p. 253.
352.), that when Philostratus composed the life of Apollonius, he had no such
intention.
. Both parties seemed to acknowledge the truth of those miracles which were
claimed by their adversaries; and while they were contented with ascribing them
to the arts of magic, and to the power of demons, they mutually concurred in
restoring and establishing the reign of superstition It is seriously to be
lamented, that the Christian fathers, by acknowledging the supernatural, or, as
they deem it, the infernal, part of Paganism, destroy with their own hands the
great advantage which we might otherwise derive from the liberal concessions of
our adversaries.
. Philosophy, her most dangerous enemy, was now converted into her most useful
ally. The groves of the academy, the gardens of Epicurus, and even the portico
of the Stoics, were almost deserted, as so many different schools of skepticism
or impiety Julian (p. 301. Edit. Spanheim) expresses a pious joy, that the
providence of the gods had extinguished the impious sects, and for the most
part destroyed the books of the Pyrrhonians and Epicureans, which had been very
numerous, since Epicurus himself composed no less than 300 volumes. See
Diogenes Laertius, l. x. c. 26.
: and many among the Romans were desirous that the writings of Cicero should be
condemned and suppressed by the authority of the senate Cumque alios audiam
mussitare indignanter, et dicere opportere statui per Senatum, aboleantur ut
haec scripta, quibus Christiana Religio comprobetur, et vetustatis opprimatur
auctoritas. Arnobius adversus Gentes, l. iii. p. 103, 104. He adds very
properly, Erroris convincite Ciceronem... nam intercipere scripta, et
publicatam velle submergere lectionem, non est Deum defendere sed veritatis
testificationem timere.
. The prevailing sect of the new Platonicians judged it prudent to connect
themselves with the priests, whom perhaps they despised, against the
Christians, whom they had reason to fear. These fashionable philosophers
prosecuted the design of extracting allegorical wisdom from the fictions of the
Greek poets; instituted mysterious rites of devotion for the use of their
chosen disciples; recommended the worship of the ancient gods as the emblems or
ministers of the Supreme Deity, and composed against the faith of the gospel
many elaborate treatises Lactantius (Divin. Institut. l. v. c. 2, 3.) gives a
very clear and spirited account of two of these philosophic adversaries of the
faith. The large treatise of Porphyry against the Christians consisted of
thirty books, and was composed in Sicily about the year 270.
, which have since been committed to the flames by the prudence of orthodox
emperors See Socrates, Hist. Ecclesiast. l. i. c. 9. and Codex Justinian, l. i.
tit. i. l. 3.
.

Although the policy of Diocletian and the Maximian and Galerius punish a few
Christian soldiers.
humanity of Constantius inclined them to preserve inviolate the maxims of
toleration, it was soon discovered that their two associates, Maximian and
Galerius, entertained the most implacable aversion for the name and religion of
the Christians. The minds of those princes had never been enlightened by
science; education had never softened their temper. They owed their greatness
to their swords, and in their most elevated fortune they still retained their
superstitious prejudices of soldiers and peasants. In the general
administration of the provinces they obeyed the laws which their benefactor had
established; but they frequently found occasions of exercising within their
camp and palaces a secret persecution Eusebius, l. viii. c. 4. c. 17. He limits
the number of military martyrs, by a remarkable expression (...), of which
neither his Latin nor French translator have rendered the energy.
Notwithstanding the authority of Eusebius, and the silence of Lactantius,
Ambrose, Sulpicius, Orosius, etc. it has been long believed, that the Thebaean
legion, consisting of 6000 Christians, suffered martyrdom, by the order of
Maximian, in the valley of the Penine Alps. The story was first published about
the middle of the vth century, by Eucherius, bishop of Lions, who received it
from certain persons, who received it from Isaac bishop of Geneva, who is said
to have received it from Theodore bishop of Octodurum. The Abbey of St. Maurice
still subsists, a rich monument of the credulity of Sigismond, king of
Burgundy. See an excellent Dissertation in the xxxvith volume of the
Bibliotheque Raisonnee, p. 427-454.
, for which the imprudent zeal of the Christians sometimes offered the most
specious pretenses. A sentence of death was executed upon Maximilianus, an
African youth, who had been produced by his own father before the magistrate as
a sufficient and legal recruit, but who obstinately persisted in declaring,
that his conscience would not permit him to embrace the profession of a soldier
See the Acta Sincera, p. 299. The accounts of his martyrdom, and of that of
Marcellus, bear every mark of truth and authenticity.
. It could scarcely be expected that any government should suffer the action of
Marcellus the Centurion to pass with impunity. On the day of a public festival,
that officer threw away his belt, his arms, and the ensigns of his office, and
exclaimed with a loud voice, that he would obey none but Jesus Christ the
eternal King, and that he renounced for ever the use of carnal weapons, and the
service of an idolatrous master. The soldiers, as soon as they recovered from
their astonishment, secured the person of Marcellus. He was examined in the
city of Tingi by the president of that part of Mauritania; and as he was
convicted by his own confession, he was condemned and beheaded for the crime of
desertion Acta Sincera, p. 302.
. Examples of such a nature savor much less of religious persecution than of
martial or even civil law: but they served to alienate the mind of the
emperors, to justify the severity of Galerius, who dismissed a great number of
Christian officers from their employments; and to authorize the opinion, that a
sect of enthusiasts, which avowed principles so repugnant to the public safety,
must either remain useless, or would soon become dangerous, subjects of the
empire.

After the success of the Persian war had raised Galerius prevails on
Diocletian to begin a general persecution.
the hopes and the reputation of Galerius, he passed a winter with Diocletian
in the place of Nicomedia; and the fate of Christianity became the object of
their secret consultations De M. P. c. 11. Lactantius (or whoever was the
author of this little treatise) was, at that time, an inhabitant of Nicomedia;
but it seems difficult to conceive how he could acquire so accurate a knowledge
of what passed in the Imperial cabinet.
. The experienced emperor was still inclined to pursue measures of lenity; and
though he readily consented to exclude the Christians from holding any
employments in the household or the army, he urged in the strongest terms the
danger as well as cruelty of shedding the blood of those deluded fanatics.
Galerius at length extorted from him the permission of summoning a council,
composed of a few persons the most distinguished in the civil and military
departments of the state. The important question was agitated in their
presence, and those ambitious courtiers easily discerned, that it was incumbent
on them to second, by their eloquence, the importunate violence of the Caesar.
It may be presumed, that they insisted on every topic which might interest the
pride, the piety, or the fears, of their sovereign in the destruction of
Christianity. Perhaps they represented, that the glorious work of the
deliverance of the empire was left imperfect, as long as an independent people
was permitted to subsist and multiply in the heart of the provinces. The
Christians (it might speciously be alleged), renouncing the gods and the
institutions of Rome, had constituted a distinct republic, which might yet be
suppressed before it had acquired any military force: but which was already
governed by its own laws and magistrates, was possessed of a public treasure,
and was intimately connected in all its parts, by the frequent assemblies of
the bishops, to whose decrees their numerous and opulent congregations yielded
an implicit obedience. Arguments like these, may seem to have determined the
reluctant mind of Diocletian to embrace a new system of persecution: but though
we may suspect, it is not in our power to relate, the secret intrigues of the
palace, the private views and resentments, the jealousy of women or eunuchs,
and all those trifling but decisive causes which so often influence the fate of
empires, and the counsels of the wisest monarchs The only circumstance which we
can discover, is the devotion and jealousy of the mother of Galerius. She is
described by Lactantius, as Deorum montium cultrix; mulier admodum
superstitiosa. She had a great influence over her son, and was offended by the
disregard of some of her Christian servants.
.

The pleasure of the emperors was at length signified to the Christians, who,
during the course of this melancholy winter, had expected, with Demolition of
the church of Nicomedia. A. D. 303. 23d Feb.
anxiety, the result of so many secret consultations. The twenty-third of
February, which coincided with the Roman festival of the Terminalia The worship
and festival of the God Terminus are elegantly illustrated by M. de Boze, Mem.
de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. i. p. 50.
, was appointed (whether from accident or design) to set bounds to the progress
of Christianity. At the earliest dawn of day, the Praetorian prefect In our
only MS. of Lactantius, we read profectus; but reason, and the authority of all
the critics, allow us, instead of that word, which destroys the sense of the
passage, to substitute praefectus.
, accompanied by several generals, tribunes, and officers of the revenue,
repaired to the principal church of Nicomedia, which was situated on an
eminence in the most populous and beautiful part of the city. The doors were
instantly broke open; they rushed into the sanctuary; and as they searched in
vain for some visible object of worship, they were obliged to content
themselves with committing to the flames the volumes of holy scripture. The
ministers of Diocletian were followed by a numerous body of guards and
pioneers, who marched in order of battle, and were provided with all the
instruments used in the destruction of fortified cities. By their incessant
labor, a sacred edifice, which towered above the Imperial palace, and had long
excited the indignation and envy of the Gentiles, was in a few hours levelled
with the ground Lactantius de M. P. c. 12, gives a very lively picture of the
destruction of the church.
.

The next day the general edict of persecution was published Mosheim (p. 922 --
926.), from many scattered passages of Lactantius and Eusebius, has collected a
very just and accurate notion of this edict; though he sometimes deviates into
conjecture and refinement.
; and though Diocletian, still The first edict against the Christians. 24th of
February.
averse to the effusion of blood, had moderated the fury of Galerius, who
proposed, that every one refusing to offer sacrifice, should immediately be
burnt alive, the penalties inflicted on the obstinacy of the Christians might
be deemed sufficiently rigorous and effectual. It was enacted, that their
churches, in all the provinces of the empire, should be demolished to their
foundations; and the punishment of death was denounced against all who should
presume to hold any secret assemblies for the purpose of religious worship. The
philosophers, who now assumed the unworthy office of directing the blind zeal
of persecution, had diligently studied the nature and genius of the Christian
religion; and as they were not ignorant that the speculative doctrines of the
faith were supposed to be contained in the writings of the prophets, of the
evangelists, and of the apostles, they most probably suggested the order, that
the bishops and presbyters should deliver all their sacred books into the hands
of the magistrates; who were commanded, under the severest penalties, to burn
them in a public and solemn manner. By the same edict, the property of the
church was at once confiscated; and the several parts of which it might
consist, were either sold to the highest bidder, united to the Imperial domain,
bestowed on the cities and corporations, or granted to the solicitations of
rapacious courtiers. After taking such effectual measures to abolish the
worship, and to dissolve the government, of the Christians, it was thought
necessary to subject to the most intolerable hardships the condition of those
perverse individuals who should still reject the religion of Nature, of Rome,
and of their ancestors. Persons of a liberal birth were declared incapable of
holding any honors or employments; slaves were for ever deprived of the hopes
of freedom, and the whole body of the people were put out of the protection of
the law. The judges were authorized to hear and to determine every action that
was brought against a Christian. But the Christians were not permitted to
complain of any injury which they themselves had suffered; and thus those
unfortunate sectaries were exposed to the severity, while they were excluded
from the benefits, of public justice. This new species of martyrdom, so painful
and lingering, so obscure and ignominious, was, perhaps, the most proper to
weary the constancy of the faithful: nor can it be doubted that the passions
and interest of mankind were disposed on this occasion to second the designs of
the emperors. But the policy of a well-ordered government must sometimes have
interposed in behalf of the oppressed Christians; nor was it possible for the
Roman princes entirely to remove the apprehension of punishment, or to connive
at every act of fraud and violence, without exposing their own authority and
the rest of their subjects to the most alarming dangers Many ages afterward,
Edward I. practiced, with great success, the same mode of persecution against
the clergy of England. See Hume's History of England, vol. ii. p. 300, last 4
to edition.
.

This edict was scarcely exhibited to the public Zeal and (...) a Christian.
view, in the most conspicuous place of Nicomedia, before it was torn down by
the hands of a Christian, who expressed, at the same time, by the bitterest
invectives, his contempt as well as abhorrence for such impious and tyrannical
governors. His offense, according to the mildest laws, amounted to treason, and
deserved death. And if it be true that he was a person of rank and education,
those circumstances could serve only to aggravate his guilt. He was burnt, or
rather roasted, by a slow fire; and his executioners, zealous to revenge the
personal insult which had been offered to the emperors, exhausted every
refinement of cruelty, without being able to subdue his patience, or to alter
the steady and insulting smile which in his dying agonies he still preserved in
his countenance. The Christians, though they confessed that his conduct had not
been strictly conformable to the laws of prudence, admired the divine fervor
of his zeal; and the excessive commendations which they lavished on the memory
of their hero and martyr, contributed to fix a deep impression of terror and
hatred in the mind of Diocletian Lactantius only calls him quidam, etsi non
recte, magno tamen animo, etc. c. 12. Eusebius (l. viii. c. 5.) adorns him with
secular honors. Neither have condescended to mention his name; but the Greeks
celebrate his memory under that of John. See Tillemont, Memoires
Ecclesiastiques, tom. v. part ii. p. 320.
.

His fears were soon alarmed by the view of a Fire of the palace of Nicomedia
imputed to the Christians.
danger from which he very narrowly escaped. Within fifteen days the palace of
Nicomedia, and even the bedchamber of Diocletian, were twice in flames; and
though both times they were extinguished without any material damage, the
singular repetition of the fire was justly considered as an evident proof that
it had not been the effect of chance or negligence. The suspicion naturally
fell on the Christians; and it was suggested, with some degree of probability,
that those desperate fanatics, provoked by their present sufferings, and
apprehensive of impending calamities, had entered into a conspiracy with their
faithful brethren, the eunuchs of the palace, against the lives of two
emperors, whom they detested as the irreconcilable enemies of the church of
God. Jealousy and resentment prevailed in every breast, but especially in that
of Diocletian. A great number of persons, distinguished either by the offices
which they had filled, or by the favor which they had enjoyed, were thrown
into prison. Every mode of torture was put in practice, and the court, as well
as city, was polluted with many bloody executions Lactantius de M. P. c. 13,
14. Potentissimi quondam Eunuchi necati, per quos Palatium et ipse constabat.
Eusebius (l. viii. c. 6.) mentions the cruel extortions of the eunuchs,
Gorgonius and Dorotheus, and of Anthimius, bishop of Nicomedia; and both those
writers describe, in a vague but tragical manner, the horrid scenes which were
acted even in the Imperial presence.
. But as it was found impossible to extort any discovery of this mysterious
transaction, it seems incumbent on us either to presume the innocence, or to
admire the resolution, of the sufferers. A few days afterward Galerius hastily
withdrew himself from Nicomedia, declaring, that if he delayed his departure
from that devoted palace, he should fall a sacrifice to the rage of the
Christians. The ecclesiastical historians, from whom alone we derive a partial
and imperfect knowledge of this persecution, are at a loss how to account for
the fears and dangers of the emperors. Two of these writers, a Prince and a
Rhetorician, were eyewitnesses of the fire of Nicomedia. The one ascribes it
to lightning, and the divine wrath; the other affirms, that it was kindled by
the malice of Galerius himself See Lactantius, Eusebius, and Constantine, ad
Coetum Sanctorum, c. 25. Eusebius confesses his ignorance of the cause of the
fire.
.

As the edict against the Christians was designed Execution of the first edict.
for a general law of the whole empire, and as Diocletian and Galerius, though
they might not wait for the consent, were assured of the concurrence, of the
western princes, it would appear more consonant to our ideas of policy, that
the governors of all the provinces should have received secret instructions to
publish, on one and the same day, this declaration of war within their
respective departments. It was at least to be expected, that the convenience of
the public highways and established posts would have enabled the emperors to
transmit their orders with the utmost dispatch from the palace of Nicomedia to
the extremities of the Roman world; and that they would not have suffered fifty
days to elapse, before the edict was published in Syria, and near four months
before it was signified to the cities of Africa Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiast.
tom. v. part i. p. 43.
. This delay may perhaps be imputed to the cautious temper of Diocletian, who
had yielded a reluctant consent to the measures of persecution, and who was
desirous of trying the experiment under his more immediate eye, before he gave
way to the disorders and discontent which it must inevitably occasion in the
distant provinces. At first, indeed, the magistrates were restrained from the
effusion of blood; but the use of every other severity was permitted and even
recommended to their zeal; nor could the Christians, though they cheerfully
resigned the ornaments of their churches, resolve to interrupt their religious
assemblies, or to deliver their sacred books to the flames. The pious obstinacy
of Felix, an African bishop, appears to have embarrassed the subordinate
ministers of the government. The curator of his city sent him in chains to the
proconsul. The proconsul transmitted him to the Praetorian prefect of Italy;
and Felix, who disdained even to give an evasive answer, was at length beheaded
at Venusia, in Lucania, a place on which the birth of Horace has conferred fame
See the Acta Sincera of Ruinart, p. 353; those of Foelix of Thibara, or Tibiur,
appear much less corrupted than in the other editions, which afford a lively
specimen of legendary license.
. This precedent, and perhaps some Imperial rescript, which was issued in
consequence of it, appeared to authorize the governors of provinces, in
punishing with death the refusal of the Christians to deliver up their sacred
books. There were undoubtedly many persons who embraced this opportunity of
obtaining the crown of martyrdom; but there were likewise too many who
purchased an ignominious life, by discovering and betraying the holy scripture
into the hands of infidels. A great number even of bishops and presbyters
acquired, by this criminal compliance, the opprobrious epithet of Traditors;
and their offense was productive of much present scandal, and of much future
discord, in the African Church See the first book of Optatus of Milevis against
the Donatists at Paris, 1700. Edit. Dupin. He lived under the reign of Valens.
.

The copies, as well as the versions of scripture, Demolition of the churches.
were already so multiplied in the empire, that the most severe inquisition
could no longer be attended with any fatal consequences; and even the sacrifice
of those volumes, which, in every congregation, were preserved for public use,
required the consent of some treacherous and unworthy Christians. But the ruin
of the churches was easily effected by the authority of the government, and by
the labor of the Pagans. In some provinces, however, the magistrates contented
themselves with shutting up the places of religious worship. In others, they
more literally complied with the terms of the edict; and after taking away the
doors, the benches, and the pulpit, which they burnt, as it were in a funeral
pile, they completely demolished the remainder of the edifice The ancient
monuments, published at the end of Optatus, p. 261, etc. describe, in a very
circumstantial manner, the proceedings of the governors in the destruction of
churches. They made a minute inventory of the plate, etc. which they found in
them. That of the church of Cirta, in Numidia, is still extant. It consisted of
two chalices of gold, and six of silver; six urns, one kettle, seven lamps, all
likewise of silver; besides a large quantity of brass utensils, and wearing
apparel.
. It is perhaps to this melancholy occasion, that we should apply a very
remarkable story, which is related with so many circumstances of variety and
improbability, that it serves rather to excite than to satisfy our curiosity.
In a small town in Phrygia, of whose name as well as situation we are left
ignorant, it should seem, that the magistrates and the body of the people had
embraced the Christian says; and as some resistance might be apprehended to
the execution of the edict, the governor of the province was supported by a
numerous detachment of legionaries. On their approach the citizens threw
themselves into the church, with the resolution either of defending by arms
that sacred edifice, or of perishing in its ruins. They indignantly rejected
the notice and permission which was given them, to retire, till the soldiers,
provoked by their obstinate refusal, set fire to the building on all sides, and
consumed, by this extraordinary kind of martyrdom, a great number of Phrygians,
with their wives and children Lactantius (Institut. Divin. v. 11.) confines the
calamity to the conventiculum, with its congregation. Eusebius (viii. 11.)
extends it to a whole city, and introduces something very like a regular siege.
His ancient Latin translator, Rufinus, adds the important circumstance of the
permission given to the inhabitants of retiring from thence. As Phrygia reached
to the confines of Isauria, it is possible that the restless temper of those
independent Barbarians may have contributed to this misfortune.
.

Some slight disturbances, though they were suppressed almost as soon as
excited, in Syria Subsequent edicts.
and the frontiers of Armenia, afforded the enemies of the church a very
plausible occasion to insinuate, that those troubles had been secretly fomented
by the intrigues of the bishops, who had already forgotten their ostentatious
professions of passive and unlimited obedience Eusebius, l. viii. c. 6. M. de
Valois (with some probability) thinks that he has discovered the Syrian
rebellion in an oration of Libanius; and that it was a rash attempt of the
tribune Eugenius, who with only five hundred men seized Antioch, and might
perhaps allure the Christians by the promise of religious toleration. From
Eusebius (l. ix. c. 8.) as well as from Moses of Chorene (Hist. Armen. l. ii.
c. 77, etc.) it may be inferred, that Christianity was already introduced into
Armenia.
. The resentment, or the fears, of Diocletian, at length transported him beyond
the bounds of moderation, which he had hitherto preserved, and he declared, in
a series of cruel edicts, his intention of abolishing the Christian name. By
the first of these edicts, the governors of the provinces were directed to
apprehend all persons of the ecclesiastical order; and the prisons, destined
for the vilest criminals, were soon filled with a multitude of bishops,
presbyters, deacons, readers, and exorcists. By a second edict, the magistrates
were commanded to employ every method of severity, which might reclaim them
from their odious superstition, and oblige them to return to the established
worship of the gods. This rigorous order was extended, by a subsequent edict,
to the whole body of Christians, who were exposed to a violent and general
persecution See Mosheim, p. 938; the text of Eusebius very plainly shows, that
the governors, whose powers were enlarged, not restrained, by the new laws,
could punish with death the most obstinate Christians, as an example to their
brethren.
. Instead of those salutary restraints, which had required the direct and
solemn testimony of an accuser, it became the duty as well as the interest of
the Imperial officers, to discover, to pursue, and to torment, the most
obnoxious among the faithful. Heavy penalties were denounced against all who
should presume to save a proscribed sectary from the just indignation of the
gods, and of the emperors. Yet, notwithstanding the severity of this law, the
virtuous courage of many of the Pagans, in concealing their friends or
relations, affords an honorable proof, that the rage of superstition had not
extinguished in their minds the sentiments of nature and humanity Athanasius,
p. 833. ap. Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom. v. part i. p. 90.
.

Diocletian had no sooner published his edicts General idea of the persecution,
against the Christians, than, as if he had been desirous of committing to
other hands the work of persecution, he divested himself of the Imperial
purple. The character and situation of his colleagues and successors sometimes
urged them to enforce, and sometimes inclined them to suspend, the execution of
these rigorous laws; nor can we acquire a just and distinct idea of this
important period of ecclesiastical history, unless we separately consider the
state of Christianity, in the different parts of the empire, during the space
of ten years, which elapsed between the first edicts of Diocletian, and the
final peace of the church.

The mild and humane temper of Constantius In the western provinces under
Constantius and Constantine;
was averse to the oppression of any part of his subjects. The principal
offices of his palace were exercised by Christians. He loved their persons,
esteemed their fidelity, and entertained not any dislike to their religious
principles. But as long as Constantius remained in the subordinate station of
Caesar, it was not in his power openly to reject the edicts of Diocletian, or
to disobey the commands of Maximian. His authority contributed, however, to
alleviate the sufferings which he pitied and abhorred. He consented, with
reluctance, to the ruin of the churches; but he ventured to protect the
Christians themselves from the fury of the populace, and from the rigor of the
laws. The provinces of Gaul (under which we may probably include those of
Britain) were indebted for the singular tranquillity which they enjoyed, to the
gentle interposition of their sovereign Eusebius, l. viii. c. 13. Lactantius de
M. P. c. 15. Dodwell (Dissertat. Cyprian. xi. 75.) represents them as
inconsistent with each other. But the former evidently speaks of Constantius in
the station of Caesar, and the latter of the same prince in the rank of
Augustus.
. But Datianus, the president or governor of Spain, actuated either by zeal or
policy, chose rather to execute the public edicts of the emperors, than to
understand the secret intentions of Constantius; and it can scarcely be
doubted, that his provincial administration was stained with the blood of a few
martyrs Datianus is mentioned in Gruter's Inscriptions, as having determined
the limits between the territories of Pax Julia, and those of Ebora, both
cities in the southern part of Lusitania. If we recollect the neighborhood of
those places to Cape St. Vincent, we may suspect that the celebrated deacon and
martyr of that name has been inaccurately assigned by Prudentius, etc. to
Saragossa, or Valentia. See the pompous history of his sufferings, in the
Memoires de Tillemont, tom. v. part ii. p. 58 -- 85. Some critics are of
opinion, that the department of Constantius, as Caesar, did not include Spain,
which still continued under the immediate jurisdiction of Maximian.
. The elevation of Constantius to the supreme and independent dignity of
Augustus, gave a free scope to the exercise of his virtues, and the shortness
of his reign did not prevent him from establishing a system of toleration, of
which he left the precept and the example to his son Constantine. His fortunate
son, from the first moment of his accession, declaring himself the protector of
the church, at length deserved the appellation of the first emperor, who
publicly professed and established the Christian religion. The motives of his
conversion, as they may variously be deduced from benevolence, from policy,
from conviction, or from remorse; and the progress of the revolution, which,
under his powerful influence, and that of his sons, rendered Christianity the
reigning religion of the Roman empire, will form a very interesting and
important chapter in the third volume of this history. At present it may be
sufficient to observe, that every victory of Constantine was productive of some
relief or benefit to the church.

The provinces of Italy and Africa experienced in Italy and Africa, under
Maximian and Severus;
a short but violent persecution. The rigorous edicts of Diocletian were
strictly and cheerfully executed by his associate Maximian, who had long hated
the Christians, and who delighted in acts of blood and violence. In the autumn
of the first year of the persecution, the two emperors met at Rome to celebrate
their triumph; several oppressive laws appear to have issued from their secret
consultations, and the diligence of the magistrates was animated by the
presence of their sovereigns. After Diocletian had divested himself of the
purple, Italy and Africa were administered under the name of Severus, and were
exposed, without defense, to the implacable resentment of his master Galerius.
Among the martyrs of Rome, Adauctus deserves the notice of posterity. He was of
a noble family in Italy, and had raised himself, through the successive honors
of the palace, to the important office of treasurer of the private demesnes.
Adauctus is the more remarkable for being the only person of rank and
distinction who appears to have suffered death, during the whole course of this
general persecution Eusebius, l. viii. c. 11. Gruter, Inscript. p. 1171. No.
18. Rufinus has mistaken the office of Adauctus, as well as the place of his
martyrdom.
.

The revolt of Maxentius immediately restored peace to the churches of Italy
and Africa; and the same tyrant who oppressed every other class under Maxentius;
of his subjects, showed himself just, humane, and even partial, toward the
afflicted Christians. He depended on their gratitude and affection, and very
naturally presumed, that the injuries which they had suffered, and the dangers
which they still apprehended from his most inveterate enemy, would secure the
fidelity of a party already considerable by their numbers and opulence
Eusebius, l. viii. c. 14. But as Maxentius was vanquished by Constantine, it
suited the purpose of Lactantius to place his death among those of the
persecutors.
. Even the conduct of Maxentius toward the bishops of Rome and Carthage, may
be considered as the proof of his toleration, since it is probable that the
most orthodox princes would adopt the same measures with regard to their
established clergy. Marcellus, the former of those prelates, had thrown the
capital into confusion, by the severe penance which he imposed on a great
number of Christians, who, during the late persecution, had renounced or
dissembled their religion. The rage of faction broke out in frequent and
violent seditions; the blood of the faithful was shed by each other's hands,
and the exile of Marcellus, whose prudence seems to have been less eminent than
his zeal, was found to be the only measure capable of restoring peace to the
distracted church of Rome The epitaph of Marcellus is to be found in Gruter,
Inscript. p. 1172. No. 3. and it contains all that we know of his history.
Marcellinus and Marcellus, whose names follow in the list of popes, are
supposed by many critics to be different persons; but the learned Abbe de
Longuerre was convinced that they were one and the same. Veridicus rector
lapsis quia crimina flere
Praedixit miseris, fuit omnibus hostis amarus.
Hinc furor, hinc odium; sequitur discordia, lites,
Seditio, caedes; solvuntur foedera pacis.
Crimen ob alterius, Christum qui in pace negavit
Finibus expulsus patriae est feritate Tyranni.
Haec breviter Damasus voluit comperta refer:
Marcelli populus meritum cognoscere posset.
We may observe that Damasus was made bishop of Rome, A. D. 366.


. The behavior of Mensurius, bishop of Carthage, appears to have been still
more reprehensible. A deacon of that city had published a libel against the
emperor. The offender took refuge in the episcopal palace; and though it was
somewhat early to advance any claims of ecclesiastical immunities, the bishop
refused to deliver him up to the officers of justice. For this treasonable
resistance, Mensurius was summoned to court, and instead of receiving a legal
sentence of death or banishment, he was permitted, after a short examination,
to return to his diocese Optatus contr. Donatist. l. i. c. 17, 18.
. Such was the happy condition of the Christian subjects of Maxentius, that
whenever they were desirous of procuring for their own use any bodies of
martyrs, they were obliged to purchase them from the most distant provinces of
the East. A story is related of Aglae, a Roman lady, descended from a consular
family, and possessed of so ample an estate, that it required the management of
seventy-three stewards. Among these, Boniface was the favorite of his
mistress; and as Aglae mixed love with devotion, it is reported that he was
admitted to share her bed. Her fortune enabled her to gratify the pious desire
of obtaining some sacred relics from the East. She entrusted Boniface with a
considerable sum of gold, and a large quantity of aromatics; and her lover,
attended by twelve horsemen and three covered chariots, undertook a remote
pilgrimage, as far as Tarsus in Cilicia The Acts of the Passion of St.
Boniface, which abound in miracles and declamation, are published by Ruinart
(p. 283-291.), both in Greek and Latin, from the authority of very ancient
manuscripts.
.

The sanguinary temper of Galerius, the first in Illyricum and the East, under
Galerius and Maximian.
and principal author of the persecution, was formidable to those Christians,
whom their misfortunes had placed within the limits of his dominions; and it
may fairly be presumed, that many persons of a middle rank, who were not
confined by the chains either of wealth or of poverty, very frequently deserted
their native country, and sought a refuge in the milder climate of the West. As
long as he commanded only the armies and provinces of Illyricum, he could with
difficulty either find or make a considerable number of martyrs, in a warlike
country, which had entertained the missionaries of the gospel with more
coldness and reluctance than any other part of the empire During the four first
centuries, there exist few traces of either bishops or bishoprics in the
western Illyricum. It has been thought probable that the primate of Milan
extended his jurisdiction over Sirmium, the capital of that great province. See
the Geographia Sacra of Charles de St. Paul, p. 68-76. with the observations of
Lucas Holstenius.
. But when Galerius had obtained the supreme power and the government of the
East, he indulged in their fullest extent his zeal and cruelty, not only in the
provinces of Thrace, and Asia, which acknowledged his immediate jurisdiction;
but in those of Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, where Maximin gratified his own
inclination, by yielding a rigorous obedience to the stern commands of his
benefactor The viiith book of Eusebius, as well as the supplement concerning
the martyrs of Palestine, principally relate to the persecution of Galerius and
Maximin. The general lamentations with which Lactantius opens the vth book of
his Divine Institutions, allude to their cruelty.
. The frequent disappointments of his ambitious views, the experience of six
years of persecution, and the salutary reflections which a lingering and
painful distemper suggested to the mind of Galerius, at length convinced him
that the most violent efforts of despotism are insufficient to extirpate a
whole people, or to subdue their religious prejudices. Desirous of repairing
the mischief that he had occasioned, he published in his own name, and in those
of Licinius and Constantine, a general edict, which, after a pompous recital of
the Imperial titles, proceeded in the following manner:

Among the important cares which have occupied Galerius publishes an edict of
toleration.
our mind for the utility and preservation of the empire, it was our intention
to correct and re-establish all things according to the ancient laws and public
discipline of the Romans. We were particularly desirous of reclaiming, into the
way of reason and nature, the deluded Christians, who had renounced the
religion and ceremonies instituted by their fathers; and presumptuously
despising the practice of antiquity, had invented extravagant laws and opinions
according to the dictates of their fancy, and had collected a various society
from the different provinces of our empire. The edicts which we have published
to enforce the worship of the gods, having exposed many of the Christians to
danger and distress, many having suffered death, and many more, who still
persist in their impious folly, being left destitute of any public exercise of
religion, we are disposed to extend to those unhappy men the effects of our
wonted clemency. We permit them therefore freely to profess their private
opinions, and to assemble in their conventicles without fear or molestation,
provided always that they preserve a due respect to the established laws and
government. By another rescript we shall signify our intentions to the judges
and magistrates; and we hope that our indulgence will engage the Christians to
offer up their prayers to the deity whom they adore, for our safety and
prosperity, for their own, and for that of the republic Eusebius (l. viii. c.
17.) has given us a Greek version, and Lactantius (de M. P. c. 34.), the Latin
original, of this memorable edict. Neither of these writers seems to recollect
how directly it contradicts whatever they have just affirmed of the remorse and
repentance of Galerius.
. It is not usually in the language of edicts and manifestos, that we should
search for the real character or the secret motives of princes; but as these
were the words of a dying emperor, his situation, perhaps, may be admitted as a
pledge of his sincerity.

When Galerius subscribed this edict of toleration, Peace of the church.
he was well assured that Licinius would readily comply with the inclinations
of his friend and benefactor, and that any measures in favor of the
Christians, would obtain the approbation of Constantine. But the emperor would
not venture to insert in the preamble the name of Maximin, whose consent was of
the greatest importance, and who succeeded a few days afterward to the
provinces of Asia. In the first six months, however, of his new reign, Maximin
affected to adopt the prudent counsels of his predecessor; and though he never
condescended to secure the tranquillity of the church by a public edict,
Sabinus, his Praetorian prefect, addressed a circular letter to all the
governors and magistrates of the provinces, expatiating on the Imperial
clemency, acknowledging the invincible obstinacy of the Christians, and
directing the officers of justice to cease their ineffectual prosecutions, and
to connive at the secret assemblies of those enthusiasts. In consequence of
these orders, great numbers of Christians were released from prison, or
delivered from the mines. The confessors, singing hymns of triumph, returned
into their own countries; and those who had yielded to the violence of the
tempest, solicited with tears of repentance their readmission into the bosom
of the church Eusebius, l. ix. c. 1. He inserts the epistle of the prefect.
.

But this treacherous calm was of short duration, Maximin prepares to renew the
persecution.
nor could the Christians of the East place any confidence in the character of
their sovereign. Cruelty and superstition were the ruling passions of the soul
of Maximin. The former suggested the means, the latter pointed out the objects,
of persecution. The emperor was devoted to the worship of the gods, to the
study of magic, and to the belief of oracles. The prophets or philosophers,
whom he revered as the favorites of heaven, were frequently raised to the
government of provinces, and admitted into his most secret councils. They
easily convinced him, that the Christians had been indebted for their victories
to their regular discipline, and that the weakness of polytheism had
principally flowed from a want of union and subordination among the ministers
of religion. A system of government was therefore instituted, which was
evidently copied from the policy of the church. In all the great cities of the
empire, the temples were repaired and beautified by the order of Maximin; and
the officiating priests of the various deities were subjected to the authority
of a superior pontiff, destined to oppose the bishop, and to promote the cause
of paganism. These pontiffs acknowledged, in their turn, the supreme
jurisdiction of the metropolitans or highpriests of the province, who acted as
the immediate vicegerents of the emperor himself. A white robe was the ensign
of their dignity; and these new prelates were carefully selected from the most
noble and opulent families. By the influence of the magistrates, and of the
sacerdotal order, a great number of dutiful addresses were obtained,
particularly from the cities of Nicomedia, Antioch, and Tire, which artfully
represented the well-known intentions of the court as the general sense of the
people; solicited the emperor to consult the laws of justice rather than the
dictates of his clemency; expressed their abhorrence of the Christians, and
humbly prayed that those impious sectaries might at least be excluded from the
limits of their respective territories. The answer of Maximin to the address
which he obtained from the citizens of Tire is still extant. He praises their
zeal and devotion in terms of the highest satisfaction, descants on the
obstinate impiety of the Christians, and betrays, by the readiness with which
he consents to their banishment, that he considered himself as receiving,
rather than as conferring, an obligation. The priests as well as the
magistrates were empowered to enforce the execution of his edicts, which were
engraved on tables of brass; and though it was recommended to them to avoid the
effusion of blood, the most cruel and ignominious punishments were inflicted on
the refractory Christians See Eusebius, l. viii. c. 14. l. ix. c. 2 -- 8.
Lactantius de M. P. c. 36. These writers agree in representing the arts of
Maximin: but the former relates the execution of several martyrs, while the
latter expressly affirms, occidi servos Dei vetuit.
.

The Asiatic Christians had every thing to dread from the severity of a bigoted
monarch, who prepared his measures of violence with such End of the
persecutions.
deliberate policy. But a few months had scarcely elapsed, before the edicts
published by the two western emperors obliged Maximin to suspend the
prosecution of his designs: the civil war which he so rashly undertook against
Licinius employed all his attention; and the defeat and death of Maximin soon
delivered the church from the last and most implacable of her enemies A few
days before his death, he published a very ample edict of toleration, in which
he imputes all the severities which the Christians suffered to the judges and
governors, who had misunderstood his intentions. See the Edict in Eusebius, l.
ix. c. 10.
.

In this general view of the persecution, which Probable account of the
sufferings of the martyrs and confessors.
was first authorized by the edicts of Diocletian, I have purposely refrained
from describing the particular sufferings and deaths of the Christian martyrs.
It would have been an easy task, from the history of Eusebius, from the
declamations of Lactantius, and from the most ancient acts, to collect a long
series of horrid and disgustful pictures, and to fill many pages with racks and
scourges, with iron hooks, and red hot beds, and with all the variety of
tortures which fire and steel, savage beasts and more savage executioners,
could inflict on the human body. These melancholy scenes might be enlivened by
a crowd of visions and miracles destined either to delay the death, to
celebrate the triumph, or to discover the relics, of those canonized saints who
suffered for the name of Christ. But I cannot determine what I ought to
transcribe, till I am satisfied how much I ought to believe. The gravest of the
ecclesiastical historians, Eusebius himself, indirectly confesses, that he has
related whatever might redound to the glory, and that he has suppressed all
that could tend to the disgrace, of religion Such is the fair deduction from
two remarkable passages in Eusebius, l. viii. c. 2. and de Martyr. Palestin. c.
12. The prudence of the historian has exposed his own character to censure and
suspicion. It was well known that he himself had been thrown into prison; and
it was suggested that he had purchased his deliverance by some dishonorable
compliance. The reproach was urged in his lifetime, and even in his presence,
at the council of Tire. See Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. viii.
part i. p. 67.
. Such an acknowledgment will naturally excite a suspicion that a writer who
has so openly violated one of the fundamental laws of history, has not paid a
very strict regard to the observance of the other: and the suspicion will
derive additional credit from the character of Eusebius, which was less
tinctured with credulity, and more practiced in the arts of courts, than that
of almost any of his contemporaries. On some particular occasions, when the
magistrates were exasperated by some personal motives of interest or
resentment, when the zeal of the martyrs urged them to forget the rules of
prudence, and perhaps of decency, to overturn the altars, to pour out
imprecations against the emperors, or to strike the judge as he sat on his
tribunal, it may be presumed that every mode of torture, which cruelty could
invent or constancy could endure, was exhausted on those devoted victims The
ancient, and perhaps authentic, account of the sufferings of Tarachus, and his
companions (Acta Sincera Ruinart, p. 419 -- 448), is filled with strong
expressions of resentment and contempt, which could not fail of irritating the
magistrate. The behavior of Aedesius to Hierocles, prefect of Egypt, was
still more extraordinary, (...). Eusebius. de Martyr. Palestin. c. 5.
. Two circumstances, however, have been unwarily mentioned, which insinuate
that the general treatment of the Christians, who had been apprehended by the
officers of justice, was less intolerable than it is usually imagined to have
been. 1. The confessors who were condemned to work in the mines, were
permitted, by the humanity or the negligence of their keepers, to build
chapels, and freely to profess their religion in the midst of those dreary
habitations Eusebius. de Martyr. Palestin. c. 13.
. 2. The bishops were obliged to check and to censure the forward zeal of the
Christians, who voluntarily threw themselves into the hands of the magistrates.
Some of these were persons oppressed by poverty and debts, who blindly sought
to terminate a miserable existence by a glorious death. Others were allured by
the hope, that a short confinement would expiate the sins of a whole life; and
others again were actuated by the less honorable motive of deriving a
plentiful subsistence, and perhaps a considerable profit, from the alms which
the charity of the faithful bestowed on the prisoners Augustine. Collat.
Carthagin. Dei, iii. c. 13. ap. Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. v.
part i. p. 46. The controversy with the Donatists has reflected some, though
perhaps a partial, light on the history of the African church.
. After the church had triumphed over all her enemies, the interest as well as
vanity of the captives prompted them to magnify the merit of their respective
suffering. A convenient distance of time or place gave an ample scope to the
progress of fiction; and the frequent instances which might be alleged of holy
martyrs, whose wounds had been instantly healed, whose strength had been
renewed, and whose lost members had miraculously been restored, were extremely
convenient for the purpose of removing every difficulty, and of silencing every
objection. The most extravagant legends, as they conduced to the honor of the
church, were applauded by the credulous multitude, countenanced by the power of
the clergy, and attested by the suspicious evidence of ecclesiastical history.

The vague descriptions of exile and imprisonment, Number of martyrs.
of pain and torture, are so easily exaggerated or softened by the pencil of an
artful orator, that we are naturally induced to inquire into a fact of a more
distinct and stubborn kind; the number of persons who suffered death in
consequence of the edicts published by Diocletian, his associates, and his
successors. The recent legendaries record whole armies and cities, which were
at once swept away by the undistinguishing rage of persecution. The more
ancient writers content themselves with pouring out a liberal effusion of loose
and tragical invectives, without conderscending to ascertain the precise number
of those persons who were permitted to seal with their blood their belief of
the gospel. From the history of Eusebius, it may however be collected, that
only nine bishops were punished with death; and we are assured, by his
particular enumeration of the martyrs of Palestine, that no more than
ninety-two Christians were entitled to that honorable appellation Eusebius de
Martyr. Palestin. c. 13. He closes his narration, by assuring us, that these
were the martyrdoms inflicted in Palestine, during the whole course of the
persecution. The vth chapter of his viiith book, which relates to the province
of Thebais in Egypt, may seem to contradict our moderate computation; but it
will only lead us to admire the artful management of the historian. Choosing for
the scene of the most exquisite cruelty, the most remote and sequestered
country of the Roman empire, he relates, that in Thebais, from ten to one
hundred persons had frequently suffered martyrdom in the same day. But when he
proceeds to mention his own journey into Egypt, his language insensibly becomes
more cautious and moderate. Instead of a large, but definite number, he speaks
of many Christians ((...)); and most artfully selects two ambiguous words
((...), and (...)), which may signify either what he had seen, or what he had
heard; either the expectation, or the execution, of the punishment. Having thus
provided a secure evasion, he commits the equivocal passage to his readers and
translators; justly conceiving that their piety would induce them to prefer the
most favorable sense. There was perhaps some malice in the remark of Theodorus
Metochita, that all who, like Eusebius, had been conversant with the Egyptians,
delighted in an obscure and intricate style. (See Valesius ad loc.)
. As we are unacquainted with the degree of episcopal zeal and courage which
prevailed at that time, it is not in our power to draw any useful inferences
from the former of these facts: but the latter may serve to justify a very
important and probable conclusion. According to the distribution of Roman
provinces, Palestine may be considered as the sixteenth part of the Eastern
empire When Palestine was divided into three, the praefecture of the East
contained forty-eight provinces. As the ancient distinctions ofnations were
long since abolished, the Romans distributed the provinces, according to a
general proportion of their extent and opulence.
; and since there were some governors, who from a real or affected clemency had
preserved their hands unstained with the blood of the faithful Ut gloriari
possint nullum se innocentium peremisse, nam et ipse audivi aliquos gloriantes,
quia administratio sua, in hac part, fuerit incruenta. Lactant. Institut.
Divin. v. 11.
, it is reasonable to believe, that the country which had given birth to
Christianity produced at least the sixteenth part of the martyrs who suffered
death within the dominions of Galerius and Maximin; the whole might
consequently amount to about fifteen hundred, a number which, if it is equally
divided between the ten years of the persecution, will allow an annual
consumption of one hundred and fifty martyrs. Allotting the same proportion to
the provinces of Italy, Africa, and perhaps Spain, where, at the end of two or
three years, the rigor of the penal laws was either suspended or abolished,
the multitude of Christians in the Roman empire, on whom a capital punishment
was inflicted by a judicial sentence, will be reduced to somewhat less than two
thousand persons. Since it cannot be doubted that the Christians were more
numerous, and their enemies more exasperated, in the time of Diocletian than
they had ever been in any former persecution, this probable and moderate
computation may teach us to estimate the number of primitive saints and martyrs
who sacrificed their lives for the important purpose of introducing
Christianity into the world.

We shall conclude this chapter by a melancholy truth, which obtrudes itself on
the reluctant mind; that even admitting, without hesitation Conclusion.
or enquiry, all that history has recorded, or devotion has feigned, on the
subject of martyrdoms, it must still be acknowledged, that the Christians, in
the course of their intestine dissentions, have inflicted far greater
severities on each other, than they had experienced from the zeal of infidels.
During the ages of ignorance which followed the subversion of the Roman empire
in the West, the bishops of the Imperial city extended their dominion over the
laity as well as clergy of the Latin church. The fabric of superstition which
they had erected, and which might long have defied the feeble efforts of
reason, was at length assaulted by a crowd of daring fanatics, who, from the
twelfth to the sixteenth century, assumed the popular character of reformers.
The church of Rome defended by violence the empire which she had acquired by
fraud; a system of peace and benevolence was soon disgraced by proscriptions,
wars, massacres, and the institution of the holy office. And as the reformers
were animated by the love of civil, as well as of religious freedom, the
Catholic princes connected their own interest with that of the clergy, and
enforced by fire and the sword the terrors of spiritual censures. In the
Netherlands alone, more than one hundred thousand of the subjects of Charles
the Fifth are said to have suffered by the hand of the executioner; and this
extraordinary number is attested by Grotius Grot. Annal. de Rebus Belgicis, l.
i. p. 12. Edit. fol.
, a man of genius and learning, who preserved his moderation amidst the fury of
contending sects, and who composed the annals of his own age and country, at a
time when the invention of printing had facilitated the means of intelligence,
and increased the danger of detection. If we are obliged to submit our belief
to the authority of Grotius, it must be allowed, that the number of
Protestants, who were executed in a single province and a single reign, far
exceeded that of the primitive martyrs in the space of three centuries, and of
the Roman empire. But if the improbability of the fact itself should prevail
over the weight of evidence; if Grotius should be convicted of exaggerating the
merit and sufferings of the Reformers Fra-Paolo (Istoria del Concilio
Tridentino, l. iii.) reduces the number of Belgic martyrs to 50,000. In
learning and moderation, Fra-Paolo was not inferior to Grotius. The priority of
time gives some advantage to the evidence of the former, which he loses on the
other hand by the distance of Venice from the Netherlands.
; we shall be naturally led to inquire, what confidence can be placed in the
doubtful and imperfect monuments of ancient credulity; what degree of credit
can be assigned to a courtly bishop, and a passionate declaimer, who, under the
protection of Constantine, enjoyed the exclusive privilege of recording the
persecutions inflicted on the Christians by the vanquished rivals or
disregarded predecessors of their gracious sovereign.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

