AN ESSAY ON REGIMEN. TOGETHER WITH FIVE DISCOURSES, Medical, Moral, and
Philosophical: Serving to illustrate the PRINCIPLES and THEORY OF Philosophical
Medicin, And point out Some of its MORAL CONSEQUENCES.

By GEO. CHEYNE, M.D. C.R.Ed.S. and F.R.S.

Felix, qui potuit rerum congnoscere causas. VIRG. Inque domus Superum scandere
cura fuit. OVID. 1 Cor. xiii. 12. (...) LONDON: Printed for C. RIVINGTON, in
St. Paul's Churchyard; And J. LEAKE, Bookseller in Bath. M.DCC.XL.

TO THE Right HONORABLE THE Earl of HUNTINGDON, etc.
My LORD,
HAD I the Honor to be known to a Person of more Probity, Steadiness, Love to
his Country, and Benevolence to the whole. Race of Mankind: Had I known a truer
Friend to Christianity in General, or to the Church in Particular; your
Lordship had not been troubled with this Address, nor with the Protection of
this Work; which is designed for the Cure, Relief, or Entertainment, of the
Valetudinary, Weak and Diseased in Body or Mind. Your Lordship's natural and
acquired Endowments enable You to judge solidly, how well it may be fitted for
that End. Good Lady HUNTINGDON, I believe, has benefited by some of the Rules
for Health laid down in this Treatise; as have some others of the Branches of
your Noble Family. Lady Betty's eminent Christian Virtues are not only
universally admired, but felt. These Considerations make this Work your
Lordship's peculiar Property; and I am greatly pleased with an Opportunity,
publicly to declare the Honor and Esteem I have for the Family of the
HASTEINGS, and, in particular, how deeply I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most faithful humble Servant, GEO. CHEYNE.
Bath, Aug. 15. 1739.
THE PREFACE
1. THE following Essay was written to instruct all sober and serious Persons,
how to preserve, or regain their Health; but chiefly to direct and relieve my
Fellow Sufferers, the Scorbutic, Gouty, Consumptive, or Nervous
Valetudinarian-low-livers; to make them pass their Lives the most comfortably,
the Degree of their Distempers, the Time of Life, the Nature of Things, and the
secret Orders of Providence, will permit. And since they must be deprived, in
some Degree, of the grosser sensual Pleasures; since all sentient and
intelligent Beings are made for Happiness, will by mere Instinct, seek it
some-how, and some-where; since their necessary Low-living will naturally (in
time at least) make them high-spirited, and their intellectual Organs more
acute, penetrating, and delicate; I have endeavored, by the following
Discourses, to supply them with some suitable Entertainments and Amusements,
such as I have often agreeably diverted my leisure Hours with.

2. True Philosophy is the Science of living the most happily, through the
whole Period of our Existence, the Nature of things will permit; Physic is but
one Branch of this Philosophy, and regards but one part of our Composition, and
but for a small Period of our Duration. True Philosophy takes in the whole
Extent of our Being, from its most distant Beginning, to its most advanced
Stages, possible or conceiveable. True Physic is that only which directs how
the Body may be preserved the most healthful, the intellectual Organs depending
on the Body the most acute, the Senses the most perfect, and the Limbs the most
active; not for a while only, and by Fits and Starts, but uniformly, as long as
they were made to last, and as the original Frame and Texture will permit: Any
thing less than this, is but as a Part to the Whole; an imperfect and
unfinished Sketch of such a Philosophy, and such a Physic, their Theory and
Principles, was intended by the following Essay and Discourses.

3. They were composed at different Times, and on different Occasions; but one
general Scheme, and one manner of free philosophizing, and easy Conjecturing,
runs through them all; one, to wit, where the fundamental Truth, or Proposition
in general, is supposed either allowed, revealed, or already demonstrated. But
the Why? the final Causes, the moral Consequences, and the particular Detail,
is only here conjectured about, from probable or philosophic Principles. This
necessarily makes them more loose, unguarded, and immethodical, and the same
things to be often repeated. But I had neither Leisure, Relish, nor Strength of
Application, to remedy these Faults; it would have cost me more Trouble than
the first Composure. All I could obtain of myself, was to make a short, more
distinct Abstract of the whole, and join a few Explications, to prevent Cavil,
and all Mistakes not wilful and disingenuous, if possible.

4. I am very sensible, by this Work, I shall make myself obnoxious to two very
different kinds of Men, the Stiff, Rigid, and Precise; and the Licentious,
Unguarded, Spurious, Free-Thinkers. The first, very probably, will censure my
Conjectures and Sentiments, as dangerous, and presumptuous, and myself, as
being wise above what is written, and arrogantly prying into the Secrets of
infinite Wisdom. It is very possible I may have been faulty, in this particular.
I am sensible, that some even undoubted Truths, that may hurt the Weak, ought
to be concealed, or enjoyed only in secret; the same Degrees of Light not being
equally luminous and perceptive to all Eyes. But since old Men, and
Valetudinarians especially, become, as it were, Children a second time, and, in
their second Childhood, those must have their Rattles as well as these; I
thought it safer, as I am sure it is much more entertaining, to play with
Ideas, philosophic Conjectures, and such Amusements, how weakly soever founded,
as tend to make Virtue and its Source amiable, justify the Conduct of
Providence, and mend and rejoice the Heart without hurting the Head, than to
dwell on the dark Side of Things, that lead to Pyrrhonism, Fatalism,
Infidelity, and Despair. If I thought I had advanced any thing derogatory from
the Amiableness of infinite Perfection, contrary to the Doctrine of the earliest
and purest Times of Christianity, contradictory to the Analogy of Faith, and
the Form of sound Words, I had committed these Sheets to the Flames, with the
Hand of their Author, before I had published them. But, on the contrary, I
hoped they might agreeably entertain my Valetudinarian, who being placed by his
low Health, in the middle State, between both Worlds, the old and the new, must
unavoidably, at some times, figure to himself some sort of a Map of the next
World. I was therefore willing to try to illuminat it, the best I could, and to
trace some of the Out-lines of the Passages from this to that Mansion; by
endeavoring to illustrat, from not so common a Set of Principles and
Philosophy, some great and fundamental Truths, established on more popular
Proofs, viz. that there is no Possibility of Happiness here or hereafter,
without Purity of Heart and Life; and that the true Reason of the present
Darkness, both in Providence and Revelation, is the Difficulty of recovering
this Purity of Heart and Life, to its utmost Perfection, in free lapsed
Intelligences, consistent with their Liberty, and the Harmony of the Divine
Attributes, which infinite Power and Wisdom will not, I might say, cannot,
counter act.

5. I apprehend less Quarter from the opposite Set of Men, who may honor me
with Enthusiasm, Romanceing, and Castle-building, without any solid Foundation.
All I have to say is, that perhaps my Manner of explaining some great and
fundamental Truths, and a few of the Consequences I draw by my Method, may be
defective: And perhaps, from some of the Links being dropped, and from Faults in
the wording, the Chain of the Reasoning may not be always clear and strong; but
I am sure the Foundation is solid and just, and allowed to be such by all true
Philosophers; and without it, all general and abstracted Reasoning (on these
imperceptible Subjects) must be vain; I mean, without admitting Analogy: For
without supposing the Evidence and Probability of it, (it being in Things only,
what Proportion is in Numbers, and its Progressions being only like the higher
and subsequent Terms of a Series in Algebra, from some of the first and
simplest Terms being given) no general Laws, nor universal Propositions, can be
found out, in Mathematics, Philosophy, or Morality. For Induction, either in
Experiment, Observation, or Calculation, must be always particular and limited.
Perhaps the Method, when managed by a clearer Head, and a more solid Judgment,
may become a noble Source of divine Knowledge, and a sublime Philosophy.
Mathematicians well know, that there are several different Methods of
investigating the same Propositions in Algebra and Geometry; and there is
scarce a Geometer, but has his own Method of Investigation. The same
Conclusions, drawn from different demonstrated Truths, give a sensible
Pleasure, and a stronger Conviction, to an honest Heart, and a Lover of Truth;
and I could not but be delighted with the Universality, Simplicity, and
Luminousness of the Method of Analogy, and the other Principles I have laid
down in the following Discourses, not having met with an Objection, Difficulty,
or even a Puzzle almost, in Nature, Providence, or Revelation, which had not an
easy, consequential or probable Solution from them, which is, at least, a
Prejudice in their Favor. I had nothing to do, but to try the Difficulty, in
its most simple and obvious Cases, (as I used to do in Algebra, to find out
universal Canons) and attentively to observe the Conditions of the Progression,
till the higher Terms involved the Complication.

6. There are some Persons made so by Nature, that they are slow, dark, gloomy,
joyless, puzzling, and perplexing, and they pass for the wise, prudent, guarded
Men of the World: They may attack Error, but seldom find out Truth by
themselves; like the Scuttle-fish, they spout out their own black Liquor on the
pellucid Element. If they are honest and sincere, they are much to be pitied,
and are to be treated with Humanity and Charity, being in the State of those
born poor and blind, and so destitute of the Necessaries and Conveniences of
Life. They must do the best they can, and be charitably supplied, and with
Docility be willing to be led by others; and thus, though their Trial might be
hard and severe, yet their Victory would be meritorious and glorious. But, on
the contrary, it often happens, that Licentiousness, Self-sufficiency, and a
supercilious Contempt of others, are the true Causes of their Darkness and
Indigence, and that they have themselves, by wrong or no Culture, stunted the
Organs of their Faculties, and by a perpetual Mal-regimen have distorted them.

7. I take common Happiness, in our natural State at present, to lie in the
Pursuit of the general Measures of Thinking, Acting and Living, followed by the
greatest part of the middling Rank of our Species (as it is in their Order in
other Animals); and common Sense (as it is distinguished from cultivated and
refined Sense) to lie in assenting and conforming to the Truths and Manners,
agreed upon explicitly or implicitly, in the Community where Providence has
placed us, without some irresistible, that is, miraculous Evidence, or a
peaceable, silent, and not intermeddling Self-conviction to the contrary. And
he who pretends to be happy, as to his outward Circumstances, out of common
Life, or wise as to intellectual Endowments, out of common Sense, in Things on
a Level with his Occupation and Education; I take him always to labor under
some undiscovered chronical nervous Distemper, be the other Appearances what
they will, and have been seldom mistaken in a particular Case. For though a sound
Mind be not the only sure Evidence of a sound Body, yet it will always show,
that none of the great Organs of Life is entirely spoilt, or greatly damaged,
however tender and delicate they may be. It is more difficult, than perhaps
most Men are aware of, to determine, with any Degree of Exactness, the Limits
that separat Wisdom from Folly, Wrong-headedness from intellectual Sanity; the
most perfect Man here has a Mixture of both: Optimus ille, qui minimis urgetur.
Certain it is, that true Wisdom, and a sound Mind, consists in first pondering,
and then doing, every thing as near as we can, with Order, Number, Weight and
Measure: But since Precision is incompatible with Finitude, if we endeavor to
be constantly progressive toward Perfection, though by gentle Steps, neither
stopping nor turning aside, but doing the best we can without Scrupulosity, and
generously hopeing and believeing, that infinite Wisdom and Goodness has, or
will supply the rest, in his own Time and Manner, we cannot fail.

8. Were I to choose for myself, considering the many certain Miseries and
Temptations of this State of Probation, the few uncertain Antidotes, and much
fewer sincere, durable, and real Pleasures; I had much rather have the weaker,
than the stronger System of Nerves, within the Extremes. I had rather choose to
be contented with the slight and slender, than covet the strong and pungent
Pleasures. I had rather be happy in a Dream, than miserable awake. In a word, I
had rather choose to be an innocent, benevolent, though weaker and more credulous
Person, than a malicious, critical, spurious Free-thinker, even with regard to
this Life only. They most certainly are, comparatively, unhappy and joyless in
themseves, and are unharmoniously framed, in Body as well as Mind, who can
delight, and employ their Talents, on throwing Darkness and Doubts even on the
imaginary Happiness (suppose it such) of their Fellow Creatures: Nothing but
Rancour, and acrid Juices, could be pleased with tearing and destroying
Childrens Play-things; and the wisest Man here is comparatively but a Child.

9. As to myself, I can honestly affirm, I have had but one uniform manner of
thinking in Philosophy, Physic, and Divinity, in the main, ever since my
Thoughts were fixed, and my Principles established: They may have had
Alternatives of greater Light and Darkness, occasionally and transiently,
according to the State of my Spirits, Knowledge, and Experience; but in the
Heart of my Soul (so to speak) I have been uniform, and under the same
Convictions, as to the Fundamentals of these Sciences; and always thought
spurious Free-Thinkers, active Latitudinarians, and Apostolic Infidels, (it
being a Contradiction they can be certain in their Negative Opinions, or by
them when propagated, should do any Good to their Fellow Creatures, but an
infinite deal of Hurt) under some obstinat bodily Distemper, and much more
proper Subjects for Medicin than Argument; and that a low Diet, long and
obstinatly persisted in, would at last cure both their Body and their Mind, so
far as it depends on the Body, especially where Vice and Infidelity have not
become habitual, as they certainly have in old Sinners: As I firmly believe,
and am as much convinced as I am of any natural Effect, that Water-drinking
only will preserve all the Opulent healthy from every mortal Distemper, bateing
Accidents, hereditary and epidemical Diseases; and that a Diet of Milk and
Seeds, with Water-drinking only, duly continued, and prudently managed, with
proper Evacuation, Air and Exercise, is the most infallible Antidote for all
the obstinat Diseases of the Body, and Distemperature of the Mind, so far as it
depends on the Body, the present State of Things will permit; and that it will
cure every Disorder in the Body, cureable, and render the Distemperature of the
Mind more tractable; and that, in all Events, it will make both more tolerable,
than they can possibly be otherwise. This Regimen I have for these twenty
Years, first and last, pursued, and shall, with the Divine Aid, persist in it
to my last Moments; hitherto, I thank GOD, with as much Vivacity, Health and
Activity, as can be expected at my time of Life, under such a gouty, scorbutic
and nervous Habit. The State of my Intellectuals will be best known by the
following Discourses, which were designed to illustrate the Principles, Theory,
and moral Uses of philosophical Medicin. The practical Inferences, and the
Conclusions drawn from them in particular Cases and Diseases, confirmed by
forty Years Experience and Observation, will follow in due Time, in a Treatise
entitled, The natural Method of Cure in the Diseases of the Body, and
Distempers of the Mind thereon depending; if GOD shall see fit, by the
Preservation of my Health and Faculties.

THE General CONTENTS.
A Philosophical and Practical Essay on the general Method and Medicines, but
particularly on the Regimen and Diet, its Quantity, Quality, Order and Choice,
fittest to preserve Health, prolong Life, and produce equal good Spirits, in
Persons of all Ages and Constitutions. DISCOURSE I. Philosophical Conjectures
about the Nature and Qualities of the original animal Body, and of its
progressive State, in its several Stages of Existence. DISCOURSE II.
Philosophical Conjectures about the preference of vegetable to animal Food, and
of the End and Design of Providence, in appointing the First, and, on Trial,
permitting the Latter. DISCOURSE III. A Philosophical Theory, founded on
Experiments, of the Nature and Laws of minute inanimat Bodies, and their
Systems in general. DISCOURSE IV. Philosophical Conjectures on spiritual
Nature, the human Spirit, in particular. DISCOURSE V. Philosophical Conjectures
on Natural Analogy, its Laws, and some of their Consequences. An Abstract, or a
brief, but distinct, Representation of the Doctrines and Sentiments contained
in the precedeing Discourses. N. B. This Abstract is designed as an Index of
the Contents of each particular Paragraph, with the Page where it is to be
readily found.


A Philosophical and Practical ESSAY ON THE GENERAL Method and Medicines, But
particularly on the REGIMEN of DIET, ITS Quantity, Quality, Order and Choice,
fittest to preserve HEALTH, prolong LIFE, and produce equal good SPIRITS, in
persons of all Ages and Constitutions.
Vivere Naturoe, si convenienter, oportet. HOR.
A Philosophical and Practical ESSAY ON THE General METHOD and MEDICINES;
But particularly on The REGIMEN of DIET, its Quantity, Quality, Order and
Choice, fittest to preserve HEALTH, prolong LIFE, and produce equal good
SPIRITS, in Persons of all Ages and Constitutions.
. 1. THERE is not a more pernicious Error in Physic, or one more opposite to the
Expectation of Patients, ( viz. the Preservation or Recovery of their Health)
than that very common and universally received Opinion, That there are Bodies
in Nature, or in the Materia Medica, or such as may be found out by Art, by
dividing, compounding, or altering them by the Tortures of the Fire, which will
suddenly, or in any great Degree, change or destroy the Malignity of the morbid
Humors of animal Bodies; or will entirely alter the Nature, Qualities, Figure,
Size and Laws of Cohesion of the Particles that compose their Fluids and
Solids; from an unsound and unhealthy State, to one of a kindly and benign
Nature (a wild Notion, at first introduced and propagated by enthusiastical
Chemists, Quacks and Symptom-Doctors). An animal Body is nothing but a Compages
or Contexture of Pipes, an hydraulic Machin, filled with a Liquor of such a
Nature as was transfused into it by its Parents, or is changed into by the
Nature of the Food it is nourished with, and is ever afterward good, bad, or
indifferent, as these two Sources have sent it forth. The Primae Viae, or the
alimentary Tube, is, as it were, a Common Sewer, may be foul'd or cleaned in
various Manners, and with great Facility; it is wide, open, and reasonably
strong, in most Animals: But from the Intestines into the Habit, (which only
ought to be reckoned the Body, or the Vehicle of the Soul) and into the
sanguiferous Tubes, into the Glands and Bowels, the Passages from thence are so
straight and narrow, that they are but infinitesimal Pores, rather than
Orifices, Strainers and Searches, rather than Mouths of Tubes, and are scarce
ever visible or perceptible in a healthy State; and the Supply and Nutriture of
the Fluids and Solids must pass under the Form of a Steam or Vapor through
them, and not in the Form of a Liquor, either for Food or Physic, either to
increase the Quantity, or alter the Quality of the Blood and Juices; and the
Solids (which concentred, consolidated and condensed into their real or first
Formation Size, would not equal a Grain of Sand) are permanent and dureable,
and continue pretty much in that State of Elasticity and Firmness, they were
first created with; and they are strong or weak, small or coarse, firm or lax,
loose or elastic, blunt or sharp, as they were first made by the supreme
Artificer, or are altered somewhat by the original Dyscrasy or Distempers of
the Parents, (the Mother can only mend or spoil their Juices, which might be
easily perfected by long Continuance in a sweetening Diet, during their younger
Days; which if they survive, they generally grow stronger as they grow older,
become the Genii, and the Governors of the World, because the Solids, thus
purified, come from the Father alone) and continue much the same all the Time
of their Duration on this Globe, except so far as the small temporary and
fugitive Alteration that Diet, Exercise, or Evacuation, or mild ponderous
Medicines long continued, may make on them; so small a Matter it really is,
that Physic, or the Materia Medica, can perform on the Habit, on the Solids at
least; and yet it is only in and by them, that Health, long Life and Serenity
are to be had: The most that Physic or Physicians can do, is in and by the
Primae Viae, or alimentary Tube, through these fine lacteal Searches into the
Habit.

. 2. WHAT is it then, will it be said, that Art, Physic or a philosophic
Physician, can truly do, to relieve the Miseries, Pains and Diseases of their
Fellow Creatures? A great deal, if judiciously and honestly directed, and
obstinatly and exactly pursued, viz. by mending the Juices in the Manner
Nature, the Distemper, the Age, and the Habitudes of the Patient point out.
These (the Juices) are the only things in an animal Body, in the Power and
under the Dominion of a Physician. If the principal Intentions of the Physician
be to mend the Blood and Juices, they will in time, and by the wise Mechanism
of Nature, rectify and confirm the Solids into their proper Situation and Tone;
for it is out of, and by the Juices, that the Solids are nourished, figured and
clothed. Air and Exercise will give them the proper Firmness and Degree of
Elasticity, and then the animal Functions will be performed with Facility and
Pleasure, and thereby the Person will enjoy Health and Serenity. Art can do
nothing but remove Impediments, resolve Obstructions, cut off and tear away
Excrescences and Superfluities, and reduce Nature to its primitive Order; and
this only can be done by a proper and specific Regimen in Quantity and Quality,
by Air and Exercise, and by welljudg'd and timeous Evacuation, and prepareing
the morbid Juices for easier Elimination, by Means which, I fear, lie in a
narrow Compass, and depend mostly on the mild mineral Medicines (which were
never originally designed by Nature to be introduced into an animal Body, and
always rend, tear and wear them out faster, like Spirits and chemical Medicines,
but in bad Cases are at first at least necessary) judiciously managed with
proper Dilution.

. 3. PHLEBOTOMY will directly let out a Part of the bad and vicious Juices, to
be immediately supplied with good ones, from proper Regimen, by making the
Vessels more roomy, and thereby enabling the Circulation to make her fuller
Rounds; for when the Blood Vessels are too turgid and full, or the Juices too
thick, gross, and sizy, to tumify them, the natural Secretions and Discharges
will be too small to admit into them new, fresh, sweet Juices, from Food or
Physic, which well-tim'd, partial and frequent Phlebotomy, will much assist.
Vomits drive forcibly out of the upper Part of the chyliferous Tube, not only
its noxious Contents, but strongly squeeze all the Glands (which are infinite)
of the Abdomen, dissolve and fuse by its Convulsions, and internal Compressure,
their Contents, (and that of the universal Mass of the Fluids) and promote
their Expulsion; and, frequently repeated, are of more Use and Efficacy than
all the other Evacuations joined together; for they not only truly reach the
Habit, supply the Place of Exercise, cleanse the internal Viscera and Glands,
(which can by no other means be reached) but compress, squecze and drive out
the most distant Obstructions, by setting the whole System, and the most remote
Fiber, in violent Action and Play; and where the Solids and natural Strength
will admit, are, I think, the most universal Remedy known to Art, if obstinatly
and long persisted in, in chronical and obstinat Cases especially; for most
infallibly they bring out all the latent most remote Morbosities in the Habit,
dissolve and fuse them, and mix them with the universal Mass of Fluids, in the
Trunks of the great Vessels, to be more readily and easily thrown out of the
Habit: but they are a hard Work, and few can bear them. Purges clean and empty
the lower Part of the chyliferous Tubes, leave the Glands situated there, more
Freedom to part with their Obstructions by subsequent Repetitions: but this
Evacuation, though much easier, yet is a great way about, and of slow and small
Efficacy in great Diseases, unless the Malady be situated in the lowermost
Regions of the Body; and even then Vomits do it sooner and more effectually:
and in weak Habits, and nervous Distempers, Purges ruffle extremely.
Diaphoretics, I think, do little in these our Northern Climats, unless they be
very gentle, and are useful only in acute Cases, where Nature tends toward a
Crise; in chronical Cases, they heat and inflame, and only spend the thinnest
and most aqueous Parts of the Fluids, which are generally most innocent.
Diuretics scour and clean the urinary Passages, and carry off scorbutic and
nephritic Salts: but to be innocent or efficacious, they ought to consist of
the thinnest, softest and coolest of all Liquors, that is, the purest Water,
just softened and acuated by the Meal or Salt of some proper Vegetable.
Blisters are mostly Topical, they melt, fuse, and draw forth the viscid Serum
from the capillary Vessels, and leave Room for a freer Circulation; and when
promoted and effected by Cantharides, have a sensible Effect on the most
distant Fluids and Solids; and in acute Cases, they are indeed the greatest and
most effectual Remedy. These are most and chiefest of the Evacuations used in
the Practice of Physic, and, judiciously and properly pursued, are of the
greatest Consequence to lay a solid Foundation for a Cure.

. 4. MERCURY and Antimony alone, with their milder Preparations, judiciously
managed, and united with the specific Juice of Vegetables that Experience has
determined proper for the Distemper, upon all the Reasoning and Experience I
have ever had, bids fairest for attenuating the Juices, and opening the
Obstructions in the small Vessels and Glands, and so fitting the morbid
Particles for Elimination; but they are a two-edged Sword, and destroy weak
Persons in unskilful Hands; but I have Occasion to speak more explicitly of
their Nature and Effects in another Place. Nitre and its Preparations,
especially the animal Preparation of it, in Wood-lice, has been thought by all
Antiquity, the most innocent and yet most effectual of all the saline Tribe of
Medicines, to cool, deterge, and open Obstructions; and its sensible Effect in
dividing the Blood-Globules in the Lungs, and giving it thereby its Scarlet
Color, and its Efficacy in propagating and quickening Fire and Light, (in both
which Effects it has undoubtedly a great Power, if not the greatest) show its
Energy; and in febrile Exacerbations, especially of the Symptomatic kind from
malignant Ulcers, and an inflammatory State of the Blood, when plentifully
diluted with pure Water, and long continued, I think, and have found it the
best, if not the only Remedy, sufficient to justify the great Encomium on the
Natron of the Ancients. When the Blood is sufficiently fus'd, and the Glands
made sufficiently open and pervious, by Evacuation and Diet, then Steel, Bark
and Bitters, judiciously prepared, and fitted to the original Strength of the
Solids of the Patients, will be found the most effectual, to wind up the
Springs of Life, and to give a Tension, due Tone, and proper Degree of
Elasticity to the Solids, the Fibers and Nerves, but especially the Membranes,
which, I think, are the true and only Seats of Spring and Elasticity, and the
proper immediate Instruments of Motion and the Functions in an animal Machin:
Long and great Evacuation, and a thin cool Diet, while they are pursued to
fuse, thin, and attenuat the Juices, must of Necessity relax and let down the
Spring of all the Solids; when the Juices are sufficiently thin'd and
attenuated, (which Blood-letting will always discover) then, to give Strength,
Vigor and Activity to the Patient, that all the Secretions may be duly made;
the sole Intention to perfect the Cure, I say, is to wind up the Solids again,
as far as Art can, which, I fear, is not far; at least, I have never found it
much, nor very dureable; for all Astringents are of the Nature, act by the same
Laws, and have the Effect that Wine and spirituous Liquors have, and are not
unlike the buckling upon Pipes and boiling soft broken Hair; they will give
them a new Tension and proper Figure for a short time, but their Efficacy and
Relief is only fugitive and transient, and never dureable; and they effect at
the same time a thickening, incrassating and sizeing on the Blood and Juices,
while they are winding up, braceing and contracting the Solids; for the Effects
of the Qualities and Powers of all Bodies, both Liquids and Solids, of Food and
Physic, are always in a duplicat Proportion of the Distance from the Center of
their component Particles. There is indeed this Difference between Bark,
Bitters and Steel, and that of strong Liquors, that the Sides of the Vessels,
especially their fine close membranous Coats, imbibe, attract and preserve the
astringent Virtue and Qualities of Bark, Bitters and Steel, and such
Astringents and Bracers, longer, by reason of their innate attractive Virtue on
the Particles of such Bodies, their greater Solidity, and closer Texture, than
the Blood Globules and the circulating Fluids do, which are in a perpetual
Flux; and spirituous Liquors mixing more immediately, fully, and by closer and
larger Contacts with the circulating Juices, spend their Efficacy on them, and
thicken them faster. For these Causes and Reasons, I say, strong Liquors must
have a more immediate and stronger Effect on the Blood and Juices, for
condensing and thickening them, than Steel, Bitters and Bark, and suchlike
Astringents can have; and so spirituous Liquors much indulged, must necessarily
have a much quicker, and more deleterious Effect on animal Fluids, than Steel
and Astringents can: but still they both act in one Tenor, and by one general
Law; and Steel, Bitters and Astringents, improperly and intemperatly used, and
over-dos'd, will have the same kind of bad Effects, and produce the same
Symptoms and Diseases that Intemperance in strong Liquors will; only they are
sooner felt, are less grateful and bewitching, are much less or not at all
craved, and consequently are sooner given over.

. 5. IT is Diet alone, proper and specific Diet, in Quantity, Quality and
Order, continued in till the Juices are sufficiently thinn'd, to make the
Functions regular and easy, which is the sole universal Remedy, and the only
Mean known to Art, or that an animal Machin, without being otherwise made than
it is, can use with certain Benefit and Success, which can give Health, long
Life and Serenity. There is an innate Degree of Strength and Elasticity in the
Solids, to circulat the Liquors, and promote the Secretions, and carry on the
vital Functions, with which one comes into the World, which they derive from
their Birth and Parents, which is ever after but little altered even either by
Art or Diet: Growth, Enlargement of the Body, and crusting over the original
Solids, and Maturation, only fills the linear and infinitesimal original Tubes
and Vessels with a proper Liquor, to stretch, extend, and plump them, as a Sack
is filled with Grain, or a Bladder with Air or Water; from that Liquor, their
Coats, the fleshy and nervous Fibers of the Muscles, Tendons and Membrans, and
other Solids of the Body, is thickened, crusted over, and condensed; the
Spring, Elasticity, and motive Power, lies solely and entirely in the original,
primary, divinely organis'd linear Fibrils, and the Membrans made of them. The
Incrustration and Incrassation from the Fluids, in the Tubes superinduced on
them, but weakens their original Spring and Elasticity, both by its Weight and
incommensurat Vibrations, as we find by the Elasticity of Twigs, the sharp
Notes of fine small Hairs, and the Agility of young Animals. The Elasticity
consists mainly in the original Degree of Attraction in the component
elementary Particles of the linear Fibrils, primarily fashioned by the Author
of Nature; and it is in this Elasticity alone, the Force, Power and Pleasure of
Life, and of the animal Functions, consists. If the Elasticity of these Solids
be such, as easily, readily and pleasantly to overcome and slide over all the
Rubs, Impediments and Letts in the Functions, (whatever State the Fluids be in)
then the Animal is healthy, active and gay; otherwise, if they are performed
with Labor and Struggle, and from too great Efforts of the self-motive
Principle on the primarily divinely organis'd Vehicles, and its Load of Crust
which is laid on it, to defend it from the Injuries of this Element, and
ruinous Planet we are now confined to: For as a Surgeon lays a Plaster on a
Sore, to defend it from the Air, and the Touch of hard rough Bodies; if this
Plaster itself should be hard, rough, corrosive, or stimulating, it would
become a Pain and Incommodity, instead of a Pleasure or Defense. It is out of
the Juices that circulat in the Tubes, that this plaistering is made on the
primitive sensible elastic Fibrils; and it is therefore of the last
Consequence, and indeed the One thing necessary, that these Juices be the
sweetest, lightest and most lenient possible; and this we can only bring about
by Diet, soft, sweet, cool, mild Diet.

. 6. SOME Persons have industriously and designedly spread it about, that I was
of Opinion, that a sole strict Vegetable; or Milk and Seed Diet, was the best
and fittest for all Persons, Climats, and Ages, without Exception or
Limitation, and the only one proper, approved by the Author of Nature, and
specific to cure all animal Distempers; advised my Patients no other, or
pretended to cure them no other way, be their Distemper what it will. My
Opinions are of little Consequence to the World, and I hope I have too little
Value or Regard for them, as they are mine, to be any Degree sanguin or
concerned for their Reception. I have, and I hope have always expressed, so
great a Regard for the Wisdom, Fitness, and Propriety of Things, as discovered
by Revelation, (from whence the Patent for animal Food is derived) not to set
up my Opinions or Ideas in Opposition to those of holy Writ, and the Divine
Spirit speaking in it. The Wisdom of Man, even that of the highest Cherubim, is
but Foolishness, when compared with the Omniscience of God, and his wise
Providence. He that made us and sent us here, knows best what is fittest for
us, to answer and bring about his own Designs of Love and Mercy. But I am
thoroughly convinced, from Reason, Experience, Philosophy and Revelation, that
in our present State, in this our probatory transitory Situation, on this
ruinous Globe, (sensibly and evidently spoiled a second time by the Deluge) on
which we are now situated, that animal Food, their Juices, and integral
Particles, are the fittest and most proper, to produce most quickly and more
immediately, the firmest hardest human Flesh, and warmest strongest Blood. There
is a Similarity and Homogeneity between the muscular Flesh of tender sweet
Animals, and that of the human Body; the integral Particles of the Solids of
the first, and the component Globules of their Juices, are ready formed,
figured and adjusted to build up the Flesh, and cloth the Solids, and furnish
out the Juices of the latter: they are at hand, adjusted by Square and Compass,
directly to be laid together, to rear the Solids; and their Juices are inured
and familiaris'd to perform the Meanders of the Circulation, and with Facility
to perform all the animal Functions, with the least Labor or Struggle, less
than those of Vegetables in general; as a Mason will sooner and more strongly
build the Walls of a House, who has hewn plain rectangular Stones at hand, than
one who has rough Stones only, Sand and Mortar, all which must be first figured
or prepared for a solid dureable Building. All this, I think, is true, just and
philosophical; and while Youth and tolerable Health continues, none ought to
alter the common temperat Diet of the middling Rank of those among whom he
lives, for a particular or artificial one, without a particular Call, and the
best Advice: Nay, I think such a Change unnatural, out of the Order of
Providence, and in some Degree immoral. When a Person is tolerably well, and
not far advanced into Life, to change an animal for a vegetable Diet, to avoid
mere Possibilities and future Contingencies, is arrogantly prying into the
divine Decrees, and insolently criticizing the Conduct of his Providence. If
God's Design is to purify us by Pains and Penalties here, ours ought not to be
only the mere enjoying the Kingdoms of this World, and the Glories thereof. If
his be to shorten the Time of our Sufferings, by rendering them more intense;
ours ought to be to bear them as long as by his Assistance we possibly can, in
the common Course of Nature and Providence; for if we cowardly fly from them on
one Side, He has Power and Skill enough to double them in another; in this
Particular, whatever is, is best: But if we should find our Pains and
Sufferings so intense, that they are no longer tolerable, but hinder, instead
of promoting, what is our Duty and Vocation, and what we are convinced is best
for us, then he has advised us, when persecuted in one City, to flee to
another: Then, and only then, when animal Food will no longer do, we are to try
what Milk and Seeds can do to ease our Pain. It is only the Cross of God's
Appointment, and which he declares his, by natural Causes, and in the Course of
his Providence, unforeseen and unavoidable, which we are to take up daily, and
with all the Joy, Alacrity and Resignation, that the Meaning of a Cross can
imply, that is, the best we can, with the Aid of his Grace. And if Suffering,
Punishment, Pains and Penalties, and shortening the Duration of our
Imprisonment here, be the very best for us in our present Situation and State;
and if animal Food, and fermented Liquors, naturally, necessarily, and
mechanically produce these Effects more readily than Vegetables, Milk and Seed
Foods, and aqueous Liquors, then was it with infinite Wisdom, Kindness and
Fitness, that the Holy Spirit permitted animal Food, and enlarged the Materials
of our Aliment, even though his first Intention for Man had been Vegetables only
(which could only be in a paradisaical State, or on a better unspoil'd Planet).
But the real Truth is, Nature, our Globe, the various unkindly Climats, the
different Ages, States, Conditions and Circumstances under which Man is at
present, render it utterly impossible and impracticable, that Man should be
advised, ordered or commanded, by infinite Wisdom, to live only on Vegetables.
It is not, and it cannot be, by Bread alone that Man can live at present; it
cannot answer the Ends, Uses and Occasions Men are now necessitated to pursue.
Great and sudden Efforts of Prowess and Strength cannot be answered or executed
by Vegetables and Water only; they are too thin, weak and poor. Youth-hood,
Vigor, Robustness, and great Action, would be tortured, and languish under
Bread and Water in ever so great Plenty: Milk, Fruits, Seeds and Vegetables, in
any Perfection, are of much greater Expense and Labor to procure, than that
the Poor and Necessitous now can afford them, especially in Northern Climats;
they have lost their Vigor, Energy and Balsam, since the Deluge. Milk is
appropriated for Children, and not grown Men, to answer the Ends of Providence.
But to explain my Thoughts on this Matter as a Physician only, as clearly and
precisely as I can, as they flow from natural Philosophy, the animal Economy,
and my own Experience, I say, 1. That after a Fever, or any acute Distemper is
over, and had its perfect Crise, and the Person is not past the Meridian of
Life, the Blood and Juices, by the strong and violent Labor of the Solids,
being sufficiently ground, effete and languid, a Milk, Seed, or vegetable Diet,
is by no means long and obstinatly to be continued in; it would continue the
Party too languid, the Juices too thin and vapid, and the Spirits too low; and
therefore he ought absolutely to be directed to an animal Diet, and temperatly
strong Liquors of the lightest, most nourishing and balsamic Nature, to be
gradually and cautiously entered upon; especially as he begins to be capable of
Air and Exercise. 2. If upon taking away a few Ounces of Blood only out of a
large Orifice, the Curd is found too thin, tender, watery, and too readily
fusible, or dissolvible in warm Water, and the Serum too clear, whiteish, or in
too great a Quantity; a Milk, Seed and vegetable Diet, is by no means to be
longer continued in, but is to be altered gradually into light, sweet and young
animal Food, and temperat fermented Liquors. 3. If after two, three, four or
five Years, the Disorders for which a low cool Diet was advised and entered
upon, with sufficient Strictness and Precision, is not cured, or greatly
relieved, the Party may conclude, that a low cool Diet will not make a perfect
Cure, and must with Patience, and a general Regularity, enter on common Life,
and not be longer scrupulous, or anxious about Regimen, in the Quality, but in
the Quantity, and submit to the Order of Providence, and use the Means that
Experience or the best Advice suggests to alleviat the Symptoms, and do the
best he can taliter qualiter, if he is under Fifty. 4. To such as have an
original hereditary weakly scorbutical or scrophulous Habit, and are far
advanced in Life; who have mesenteric glandular Obstructions, with feeble
Solids, and little Strength and Vigor, a Milk, Seed and vegetable Diet, with
aqueous Liquors, is by no means to be advised; for as the Case is absolutely
incureable, it were in vain to torment and restrain them, more cruelly than
their Distemper itself does; they must not be forbid, but rather indulged the
common Comforts and Gratifications of Life. It is to such that St. Paul's
Advice to Timothy is just, as well as kind, to drink a little Wine for their
Stomachs sake, and their often Infirmities: A general Moderation, and an
Observation of the Juvantia and Laedentia, is only to be advised, and the Use
of these Means known to Art, to alleviat Symptoms. 5. In all eruptive Cases, in
all acute and periodical cutaneous Cases, in the actual Fits of the Gout, in
the second Fever of the Smallpox, in Fevers verging toward a Crise, to drive
out from the Center to the Circumference any changeable Disorder, and
universally in all Cases where the vital Indications languish and labor, and
Nature is in a Struggle to throw outward Morbosity; she is most certainly to be
assisted by generous cordial and warmer Medicines, and higher Diet, to further
the End Nature points at. These are some of the Cases where too low and cool a
Regimen is by no means to be advised or pursued. 6. And lastly, Whenever the
End of a low Diet is obtained, viz. the sweetning and thinning the Juices, and
the Symptoms are abated or cured, the Diet is to be heightened, and gradually
and cautiously raised, at least if the Party be under Fifty. I will now suggest
as plainly, in what Cases I think it is to be advised and tried. As to the
Healthy and Well, I have nothing here to say: Sufficient for the Day is the
Evil thereof.

. 7. IT is only to those whose Stomach and Digestion is so weak and relaxed,
that they cannot concoct without extreme Suffering, any such Proportion even of
tender animal Food and fermented Liquors, as may be sufficient to nourish and
support them: To those whose Blood and Juices are evidently so thick, gross and
viscid, that it fills and obstructs the Vessels so tumidly, that they cannot
receive a sufficient Quantity of either Medicin or Food, to cure or preserve
them, the Circulation and Perspiration being entirely at a stand: To those who
are subject to perpetual Haemorrhages, Inflammations, or constant small acute
Fevers: To those who are after the great Meal toward Midnight, hectical or
consumptive: To those laboring under a scorbutico-nervose Atrophy and wasting:
To those laboring under hereditary, early, knotted, disabling and painful
Gouts or Stone: To those who are highly, hereditarily and early scrophulous or
scorbutical: To those who are leprous and universally crusted over with
cutaneous Blotches and Scabs: To those who are epileptical early in Life, with
a thin cacochymic Habit: To those who are constantly hysterical or
hypocondriacal, with frequent Fits and Convulsions, under a weak thin Habit,
which threaten a Consumption; for I have always observed these obstinat violent
hysteric and hypocondriac Fits in young slender Persons, to be the first Stage
of a real Phthisis Pulmonum, or at least of a nervous Atrophy; and if it was
not cured or prevented in this its first Stage, by the same Means and Regimen
commonly the Refuge of the subsequent Stages, they were not to be ever after
remedied, they being sure Presages of Tubercles in the Lungs: To those that are
plainly cancerous; in short, to those chiefly who after they have long and
strictly followed the best Advice, and the most effectual Remedies, still
labor under some atrocious, painful and dangerous Distemper; to such, and such
only, have I ever advised a total rigid Milk and vegetable Diet, with aqueous
Liquors; but no longer to be continued, than till the Symptoms were extremely
mitigated, or entirely overcome; and then, if it was after the Meridian of
Life, to be persisted in obstinatly; if long before it, to be gradually and
cautiously altered into common Life with great Temperance; and I know all
honest and experienced Physicians, ancient and modern, are and must be of the
same Mind.

. 8. THE great and essential Difference between animal and vegetable Food, is
much the same as between Chemical and Galenical Medicines. Chemical Medicines are
the supposed (at least their most active) Virtues and Qualities of Plants,
Metals and Minerals, contracted and concentred into a small Volume, by the
Tortures of the Fire; their useless or destructive Parts separated and thrown
away, and their useful and sanative Qualities compacted and united into an
immediate Contact and condensed. They would be of admirable Use and Convenience,
if these supposed Facts, and such mentioned Virtues, were just, solid and true,
or if an animal Body could bear them without greater or more fatal future
Injuries, than their present Benefit (how great soever) or Convenience can
compensat. But it is most certain, that such Medicines, Drugs or Bodies, are the
most destructive to animal Bodies, if long and in great Quantities thrown in,
that Malice can invent, beyond Gunpowder itself and even spirituous Liquors;
for not only Nature has provided none such, but as Poisons in venomous
Creatures to kill their Enemies, or cook them for their Food: but that the
Particles of Fire, the most destructive of any, are so closely impacted and
transubstantiated in, as never to be afterward separated from them, and that
their component Particles are so minutely divided by the Tortures of the Fire,
as to acquire such a Force of Attraction toward the Particles of animal
Bodies; such a Polarity, (as Dr. Lister observed, in all Calcinations, both of
Vegetables and Minerals, so constantly to answer the Magnet) that they become
Iron, Bristles, Nails and Lancets, darting directly and perpendicularly into
the Solids, so as quickly to tear, rend and destroy, or fix them, and so can
never be proper for Food or Physic; whereas Galenical Medicines, consisting of
the integral Particles of Vegetables, Metals or Minerals, dissolved only by
gentle Heat and Moisture, in a watery Menstruum, have none of these deleterious
Qualities on animal Bodies, but become their Food as well as Physic, and
naturally take the Places of the morbid Particles of animal Habits, which Time
and the natural Functions mechanically throw off. Just so animal Food, and
fermented Liquors, are the smallest, most elementary and attractive Particles,
united and concentered like the Rays of the Sun in the Focus of a
Burning-glass. Their delicious Flavor and Savor consists in their greater
abundance of Oil and Salts, which are the most active, and consequently the
most destructive to animal Bodies. If they are sufficiently diluted, and their
Volume and Quantity increased, by the more innocent and unactive Particles of
fine Earth and Water, they may be safely used, approaching thereby very near to
Vegetables. Juices and fermented Liquors, much diluted with Water, become the
nearest Approximation to pure Water, the only Beverage designed and fitted by
Nature for long Life, Health and Serenity; and the whole Study of the Patient,
and Intention of the Physician, ought to be to find out this just Mediocrity of
animal and vegetable Food, when combined, for Aliment, and of fermented and
aqueous Liquors mixed for Beverage, which is the most proper for preserving his
Health, or curcing his Disorders; for there is very little in the Specification
of the Diet, whether it be all Vegetable, or partly Animal, partly Vegetable,
some Vegetables being more deleterious to animal Constitutions than some animal
Substances; and there is but a very little Difference between pure warm Water,
and cold Water warmed with a very little Wine; the just Mixture and Proportion
suited to the Constitution and Distempers of the Patient, is by far the
greatest Affair; though in the Distempers by me just now specified, that are
painful and dangerous, too great Exactness, both in Quantity and Quality, is
never to be slighted; for in a true statical Balance, such as the Constitutions
under the mentioned Diseases are, a few Grains or Spoonfuls thrown in, will
destroy the Equilibrium of Health and Ease.

. 9. THE Benefits a Person who desires nothing but a clear Head and strong
intellectual Faculties, would reap by religiously drinking nothing but Water,
(tepid or cold, as the Season is) while he is yet young, and tolerably healthy,
well educated, and of a sober honest Disposition, are innumerable: As, 1. That
he would live probably till toward an hundred Years of Age, that being the
Term of Life appointed by the Design of the Creator, even after the Deluge, and
after that eating of animal Food was permitted, before (as it is believed)
fermented Liquors were invented; at least, if we have any regard for Moses's
History, which yet cannot be denied to be one of the justest Accounts of these
early Times. 2. That he would thereby constantly enjoy a clear Head, calm, at
least governable Passions, a Facility in intellectual Applications, and in the
Acquisition of Virtue; and so having a longer Duration secured to him, and all
Impediments removed, he might make surprising and wonderful Advances in both.
3. He would thereby be secured against all the great atrocious and frightful
Distempers, such as Melancholy, Lowness of Spirits, Wrong-headedness, Lunacy
and Madness (the Bane of the finest, best and most penetrating Spirits in Great
Britain). For I defy any Man to give an Instance of any furious Madness, or
great and obstinat Lunacy or Melancholy, in any one who soon after Twenty,
entered on Water drinking only, let him eat what he can; for it is fermented
Liquors only that inflame the Membrans and membranous Tubuli (the Nerves),
which are the bodily Organs of intellectual Operations. It is the Fire, Sulphur
and volatile Tartar of fermented Liquors, that inflame, corrugat and stimulat
these Membranes, and their linear Threads, into violent Succussions, that break
and tear them, which are the immediate Cause of these frightful and overwhelming
Distempers, as they are of the painful tortureing ones, Gout, Stone, Cancer and
Consumption: For though Gluttony will thicken the Curd of the Blood, and thereby
cause Obstructions in the Glands and Capillaries, from whence many and various
Distempers may arise, yet will they be of the obtuse, slow, lingering Kind, and
in which Nature will always give a timeous and early Warning, by Inappetency,
Nausea, Vomiting, Purging, Sweating, Spitting or Rheums, which will opportunely
stop the Progress; and while Water is plentifully then craved and given, it
will carry on, distance in the Circulation, and dilute this too viscid Curd, to
prevent an entire Obstruction of the animal Functions, or destroy Life, and
hinder the Generation of Gout, Stone, Cancer and Consumption, which are solely
produced by the hard salin Concretions of fermented Liquors. But, 4. The most
signal Benefit a Man will reap from early Water-drinking solely, while as yet
in tolerable Health, is being preserved from the acute, sudden and mortal
Distempers, as Apoplexies, Suffocations, Fevers of all kinds, Pestilences and
Pleurisies. It is to fermented, strong, or spirituous Liquors solely, that
these quick and destructive Distempers owe their true Cause, which give no
Warning, and admit of no Cure: At least, Water-drinking solely, is the only
Preservative, I am certain, known or knowable to Art. Accidents, epidemical
Causes, a constant Neglect, or a total Inability to guard against the Dangers
of the other Non-naturals, absolutely necessary toward perfect Health and Life,
may produce some Degrees of these mentioned grand Distempers; but then, under
sole Water-drinking, they will neither be so painful nor dangerous: For it is
certain, Water-drinking, Dilution, and thin Diet, is the only Mean known to Art
and Experience, to cure them, when Persons are already seized with these
Distempers, joined with strong and proper Evacuations; and whatever will cure,
will prevent; as Water poured on will extinguish Fire, so it will prevent its
being kindled or beginning. If these frightful, painful and mortal Distempers
happen sometimes in Eastern or Southern Climats, where fermented Liquors are
not much in Use, it is because they wallow and indulge in some things almost
equally as pernicious and inflammatory as these strong Liquors, as high in
Aromaticks, eastern Gums and Juices; Opiats, the volatile cepacious Roots,
Fruits and Seeds, of the poisonous, soporiferous or stimulating kind, with
which those Climats abound, which is the sole Cause of all their inflammatory
Distempers, and unnatural and dissolveing Lust; for these are all but dry
Drams, of a more dureable and adhesive Nature than some of the liquid ones; for
Fire is still Fire, whether Solar or Culinary, Natural or Chemical; whether it
is transubstantiated into liquid or solider Matter; and Water is its only
Extinguisher.

. 10. I HAVE said, that the Quantity of Aliment (Meats and Drinks) is of much
greater Consequence in general, than the Quality, for the Preservation of Life,
Health and Serenity. If a Man study the least, light or heavy will not so much
incommode him. The great End and Use of a low Diet, or one of Milk, Seeds and
Vegetables, is to mend the Juices, to cool, attenuat and sweeten the
circulating Fluids; whatever Diet does this, must mechanically relax, unbend,
and let down the Spring of the Solids. It is true, the Superiority of the Force
or Spring of the Solids, must be always greater than the Resistance of the
Fluids; else the Animal could not live at all; that is, the animal Functions
could not be performed; and this Superiority must be continued in some
Proportion, whatever Regimen the Animal uses, so long as it lives. But it is
certain, a cool, thin, sweetning Diet, attenuats the Fluids in a greater
Proportion than it relaxes and unbends the Solids; because, 1. All the
Secretions are from the Fluids, and not from the Solids; and they spending and
wasting faster, must be sooner supplied and altered by the proper Food. 2.
Because the immediate Action of Food and Physic is upon the Fluids, and they
absorb and consume most of their Virtue and Efficacy; and the Solids are never
acted upon by them, till the Fluids are fully saturated and transubstantiated
into their Substance. And, 3. Because all Fluids by their Nature are sooner and
more readily acted upon, and altered into foreign Qualities, than any Solids
possibly can; and hence it comes to pass, that a Person on the immediate Change,
and for some considerable Time after, in passing from a high to a low Diet,
will find his Health wonderfully mended for the better, because the Resistance
of the Fluids is immediately lessened; which will again, even under the same
Diet in Quantity and Quality, wonderfully, and, as it were, unaccountably
totter, and alter for the worse; which happens on the Despumation of the
Glands, Capillaries and Solids, while they are spewing out and disgorgeing
their morbid Contents on the Primae Viae; but which, by proper and specific
Evacuations, Exercise and Astringents afterward, will generally be set to
rights again, if the Person be at a proper Time of Life, that is, under Fifty;
for after that, there is little Encouragement from any Mean, but gentle
Evacuation, and a Perseverance in the regulated Regimen: Nay, even he must
proceed, lessening it in Quantity at least, if not in Quality, by proper
Degrees, and at proper Periods, descending out of Life, as one ascends into it,
viz. by Milk-Porridge, Water Gruel, Panada, and the like. But the great Benefit
and Advantage a Man reaps from a low, cool, thinning, sweetning Regimen, of
Milk, Seeds and Vegetables, above what he can have under any Diet of animal
Food and fermented Liquors, is, that he can keep the stretched and extended
Bowels, and Blood Vessels, always fuller and plumper, and in their natural
Tension and Situations; and consequently will make the Secretions more
plentifully, and all the Functions will be more natural, and easier, than under
a spare, cautious and anxiously guarded starving Regimen of so little animal
Food as is absolutely necessary; as a weak Person will walk more easily in Stays
than loose, some lame Persons in a Boot than a Stocking; and a defensive
Plaster will keep a Sore easier, than when it is bare; and Excesses are
neither so painful nor dangerous under the first as under the second Regimen;
and the same Person may safely venture on at least four times as much
Vegetable, Seed and Milk Food, as he dare of animal Food of any kind, at least
of dense, hard, or full-grown animal Food.

. 11. I THINK the natural Order and Progression in Regimen, for those who are
ordained to, or for those whose Vocation and Occupation is sedentary and
studious, who by the Order of Providence, and Situation of Life, have been
signatur'd to intellectual Professions, and for all those who would cultivat
and maintain clear Heads and quick Senses to the last, is from their Birth till
Fifteen, to persevere in a gradually increasing temperat Diet, without
fermented Liquors; from Fifteen to Fifty, to be only temperat in animal Foods
and fermented Liquors; after Fifty to give up animal Food Suppers, and
fermented Liquors; after Sixty to give up all animal Food; and then every ten
Years after to lessen about a quarter of the Quantity of their vegetable Food;
and thus gradually descend out of Life as they ascended into it. And that all
Persons subject to inflammatory Distempers, Gouts, Erisipelas's, hot Scurvies,
Leprosies, Asthma's, Jaundices, Colicks, nervous Lownesses, violent Headaches,
Haemorrhages and Haemorrhoids, Anasarca's, Ruptures, or white Swellings, though
otherwise strong, hearty, hale, and of a seeming sound Constitution, ought to
give up Meat Suppers, and all fermented Liquors; and that the Children of all
Fathers (for Mothers are not here to be minded) who have died before
Thirty-five, of any natural Distemper whatever, and all the Children begot of
Fathers after Sixty, ought to live without Meat Suppers, or fermented Liquors;
and that all Persons whatever, whatever Age they be of, or of whatever Nature
their Complaints and Disorder may be, if, upon repeated small Phlebotomies, and
without transient Accidents, (as Colds, Damps, Blasts, and Bruises) they
constantly observe their Blood sizy, viscous and glutinous, ought directly to
be put on a low Diet, either of Milk, Seeds and Vegetables only, or at least of
one, without Meat Suppers, and fermented Liquors; and this Regimen, with proper
attenuant, alterative and sweetning Medicines, (which, in the Nature of things,
ought to be of the mild ponderous and mineral Tribe) to be continued till at
least this Size and Glue be broken and dissolved; else they can never expect
uniform and continued Health; for such a Regimen, and such Medicines, must do
this in Time; else nothing in Nature possibly can.

. 12. UNPHILOSOPHICAL and unexperienced Persons, though they know and observe the
great critical Alteration that happens in the Sex, in or about Fifty, and that
without a special Care, both in the Regimen, proper Evacuation, and alterative
Medicines, they are in great Danger, either of their Lives, or of some chronical
and obstinat Distempers, that make their Lives ever after miserable and
uncomfortable, after that Period; yet think this Misfortune peculiar to
Females, and that the Males have a Privilege and Security to be luxurious and
sensual to the last; which is the true Reason why so few die natural Deaths,
and that most pass as really and truly out of Life, in a violent untimely
Manner, as a Felon, who suffers under public Justice. The Matter of Fact and
Order of Nature is this: Fifty was designed as the Meridian of Life, in this
our lapsed; State and Duration, on this ruinous Planet; from this solstitial
Point it is a Descent out of Life. From the Birth upwards to this Point, the
Solids were developeing, expanding, crusting over, and hardening to their
utmost Extension, Firmness and Density; and thereby their Elasticity beginning
then at Fifty to weaken and unbend, and they to ossify, the Digestions become
grosser and more imperfect, the Secretions lessen, and all the animal Functions
labor; and then, if due Care is not taken to obviat these Effects, the
chronical Distempers naturally arising out of these Causes, and that lurked in
the original Constitution, begin to emerge and sprout out, the Viscera to
tumify and obstruct, the Glands then swell and press on the circulating
Blood Vessels, the Capillaries to coalesce, become full and dense, and the
Nerves and Membranes are interrupted in their Play and Vibrations, and all the
animal Machin labors, and the Functions are performed heavily, with Pain and
Struggle. This is the true Time and Season of Life, for Attention,
Consideration and Care of a wise Man and a Philosopher. The Hyperbolic Curve of
Life is at the Point of its Return downwards again; and if then proper Care be
taken, by some few Evacuations, Alteratives, and a Regimen; to put a Drag on
the Wheels of Life, that they may go down gently, calmly and serenely, these
become more useful to themselves and others, than in the first ascending part
of Life; and this happens equally to both the Sexes: for it is not from this
Season being the common Period of the Fertility of the Female Sex, that these
Appearances happen; but is a general Law of Nature to both Sexes from the
Causes assigned; for all the Difference of the Sexes lies in the different
Configuration of the superinduced Crust or Shell laid over the primitive
ethereal Body, which in both is probably pretty near of the same Figure, Size
and Materials, originally.

. 13. IT is not an unpleasant Speculation, to contemplat the Order of Nature in
its Progression toward reducing this our Tabernacle of Clay, into its original
Dust, from its Cradle to its Coffin, especially in those who live the whole
Duration of the natural Life. The Diseases of Infancy are generally Scabs,
Blotches and Blains over the Face, Head, Eyes and Ears; sometimes Fits and
Convulsions, and such Cephalic and Head Distempers; and these are certainly
constitutional and parental Disorders communicated by the morbid Juices of the
Parents; the Colicks, Vomitings and Diarrhoea's succeeding, come from the
improper Nourishment in Quantity or Quality of the Mothers or Nurses; the
Measles and Smallpox are also original and parental Impurities conveyed to the
Blood and Juices in the Birth, from too high and too much animal Food, and are
most of them the Diseases of the upper Region of the Body. When Nature has
struggled by these to purify the Juices by such Despumations, then come the
Distempers of the Breast and Lungs, in Coughs, Catarrhs, Consumptions,
Asthma's, Pleurisies or Peripneumonies; after these come Pains in the Stomach,
Heart-burnings, Colicks, bilious Vomitings, Jaundice and Diarrhoea's; then
succeed Gouts, Stone and Gravel, Palsies, Rheumatisms and fixing of the Joints;
and very often Ruptures, Piles, or Mortifications in the Bowels, Feet, or Toes,
the Diseases of the lower Regions. All I would insinuat by this Reflection, is,
that Nature seems to aim, and would certainly, if not interrupted by Accidents,
obtain and pursue a kind of a regular and uniform Progression, in her Course of
dissolving and mouldering into Dust, this Adamical Crust of Clay, by
Distempers, topical and local, from the Head, through the Viscera, to the Feet
and Joints, till, like a dying Vegetable, she has fixed it in the Earth, from
whence it sprung. This is certainly her general Law, if not interrupted by
original, parental Diseases or Accidents hurting some of the Organs before it
was born, or by Accidents proper and peculiar to the Party itself; or a general
bad Regimen, which may quicken this Progress, or throw it out of its natural
Progression on a weakened Part, that may discompose the general Law of Nature.

. 14. FOR Perspicuity and Brevity, I distinguish four Orders and Degrees of
Regimen of Diet, that is, of Meat and Drink; viz. 1. The common Diet of a
reasonable Proportion of animal Food and fermented Liquors, common to the
middling Rank of the Healthy, Temperat and Sober in every Climat or Country. 2.
A Diet of plain fresh animal Food once a Day, without any fermented Liquor,
only plain Water, or Toast and tepid Water for Beverage; or one of one Day Meat
without Wine, and another Day a little Wine without Meat, which I would call
the trimming Diet. 3. A Diet without any animal Food, but one of Milk, Seeds,
Fruits and Vegetables, any thing where the Life of no Animal is wanted to
compose or dress such (as Eggs, Gravey, and the like). 4. A total strict Milk
and Seed Diet only, without any other Materials. Of these I intend to say
something in general, and in this Order, both as to their Times and Cookery.
But first as to the Order, or Time of changeing any one of these different
kinds of Regimen one for another.

. 15. WHEN a Person is tolerably well, and is subject to no painful or
dangerous Distemper, I think it his Duty, and the Order of God and Providence,
to let Well alone; and with general Temperance, without Solicitude, Anxiety or
Scrupulosity, to persevere in the common Regimen of the middling healthy
temperat Order of Men, in the Country and Climat where he was born, or long
habituated: To follow St. Paul's Advice in another Case, to ask no Questions
about what he should eat for Health's sake; or rather our Savior's Counsel,
not to be solicitous, or take anxious Care, about what he should eat, or what
he should drink, or wherewithal he should be clothed; but without Curiosity or
Nicety, take a Share of whatever is presented: For to live at such a Time, and
in such a Circumstance, medically, is truly to live miserably, and propter
vitam vivendi perdere causas. It is enough, for a wise Man, and a Christian
Philosopher, to stop, and attend to Diet and Regimen, when, by the Order of
Providence, his natural and providential Course of common Regimen is barred up,
by some Disorder or Distemper; and then wise Nature will give him timeous
Warning, by Inappetency, a Nausea, Reaching, Vomiting, a Flatulence, Fullness or
Pain in the Stomach; for all Distempers begin first at the Stomach or Bowels,
and then ascend to the Head, which is the Language of the God of Nature, saying
to the Person, Man, take Care; and then, and only then, ought a Christian
Philosopher mind his Regimen, and by Evacuation, moderat Fasting or Exercise,
endeavor to relieve or remove the Grief, or apply to some honest experienced
Physician for Advice.

. 16. IF the Case is acute, the Party is not generally, at least for any Time,
in a Condition to observe or direct for himself: But seldom any notable Errors
are committed in Regimen then; for on the slightest Attempts to any great
Excess, either in Quantity or Quality, Nature immediately revolts, and the Party
suffers to such an Extremity, by the Exacerbations of his Symptoms, that any
notable Progress in such an unnatural Regimen cannot possibly be received or
persisted in; and yet I have seen and felt, by the Indiscretion of Friends, or
the officious Sedulity of Nurses, the poor Patient suffer to mortal Agonies,
and sometimes to Death, in acute Cases, by improper Loads of high Foods, or
liquid or solid Drams and Cordials; and many have suffered more from high and
hot Drugs, than ever they could from the Distemper. In acute Cases, seldom any
thing that is given either for Food or Physic, passes the Primae Viae, unless
it be extremely light and liquid. In such, the wiser Ancients scarce ever
administered (besides proper Evacuation) any thing but tepid Water, simple
Oxymel, or Water softened, or sharpened by the Flour or Meal of some proper or
specific Vegetable. Long obstinat Fasting, continued even ad Deliquium, with
plentiful Dilution, and the Evacuation indicated by the Nature of the
Distemper, was their most universal Remedy. But it is not of Regimen in acute
Cases that I here intend to speak; my sole Business is with chronical Cases.

. 17. BUT since chronical Cases are only acute Cases diluted, and drawn out
into a longer Time, with weaker Paroxysins, and a more protracted Crise; since
Nature has a general Law and Type, by which she governs and signatures such
acute Distempers, especially in those who follow her Laws and Simplicity, and
not disturbed by spurious Art or Accidents; since Fasting, proper Evacuation,
and Dilution, are the great Remedies indicated in acute Cases; it is natural
and highly probable to suppose, that proper Evacuation, Abstinence, and thin
cool soft Regimen longer persisted in, will be the single Intention pointed
out, and the great and cardinal Remedies in chronical Cases; and therefore,
when a Person, under common Life, is seized with a chronical Distemper, which
by prudent Abstinence, and lessening the Quantity of this common Diet, is not
removed, he ought to apply to the proper Directors of Health, and follow their
Advice religiously, in the Use of Medicines and Regimen they order; and if in
three Months time, in chronical Cases, by rigorously pursuing the ordered
Medicines and Regimen, their Symptoms are not totally removed, or greatly
relieved and mitigated, he may, I think, fairly conclude the Regimen was not
low, cool and thin enough, for the End proposed; and therefore ought to resolve
to sink his Regimen, both in Quantity and Quality, and enter upon what I call
the trimming Diet.

. 18. BUT before any Person resolves to sink or alter his Regimen of Diet, or
any prudent Physician ought to advise such an Alteration, he ought always to
premise a gentle partial Phlebotomy out at the largest Vein, and from the
largest Orifice commonly opened; for a small Trunk of a Vein will only send out
such Blood as is much different from the Crase of the whole Mass; the
Circulation being slower in the small Branches, the Viscidity is generally
impacted into the smallest in a greater Proportion, and the serous Part by the
Slowness is perspired or run off, by the Lymphatics, and lateral Branches; and
a small Orifice either compresses and breaks the Texture of the Curd of the
Blood, disunites and separates the Globules, so that the Observation cannot be
fairly or with any Degree of Accuracy made; but by comparing the Blood so let
out, with other sound healthy Blood, (for Example, that of a healthy Person, or
of a Bullock or Sheep) if the Difference in Taste, Color, Cohesion of the
Globules, and Curd, and the Proportion thereof to the Serum, be in all or most
of these Distinctions, greatly different from those of the sound Blood, it may
fairly be concluded that the Regimen of Diet, both in Quantity and Quality, is
to be sunk and lessened, and that proper and specific alterative Medicines, to
thin and sweeten the Blood, are indicated, (especially those of the mild
ponderous Nature at first, with the Galenical Vegetables, which universal
Experience has assigned as specific in a Distemper of such a Denomination) and
the Evacuations of the Primae Viae by gentle Vomits and domestic Cathartics, as
the Symptoms exasperat; for though a Person may still suffer, even when the Blood
thus let out for Experiment's sake, mostly appears, on such gross Experiments,
tolerably good, and not differing greatly from sound Blood in the Size, the bad
Juices being confined to the Capillaries, Glands and great Viscera; yet these
will never be opened and rendered pervious, till the Blood in the great Trunks
of the Vessels be first attenuated, thin'd and sweetened: And he will never be
long or uniformly well, who has bad Juices circulating, in these greater
Vessels; it is a certain Symptom, that it must be much worse and more sizy in
the small lateral Branches, the Capillaries, and the Glands of the Viscera; and
it is Diet alone, and it chiefly, joined with mild ponderous Remedies at first,
Evacuation, Air and Exercise, that can at last alter or antidote these morbific
Symptoms. And if after three Months Use of the Medicines advised in chronical
Cases, by an honest experienced Physician, the Blood on such a Trial continues
bad, that is, sizy, liverish, with either too little Serum though clear, or too
much but muddy, then, I think, the trimming Diet ought to be tried, viz. one of
white Meat in a moderat Quantity once a Day, with Milk, Seeds and Vegetables,
for the other Meals, and aqueous Beverage; or one Day a little plain Meat of
any kind once a Day, with aqueous Beverage that Day, and the next Day only
Milk, Seeds and Vegetables, with about a Gill of some sound old Wine, with or
without Water; and this Regimen, with a due Care of the other Non-naturals,
proper Evacuation, and due Exercise, I think, ought to be continued for one
whole Year or two, in obstinat hereditary chronical Cases; for, I think,
acquired ones will scarce require so long Time, or such Severity of Regimen, to
be cured, or at least greatly alleviated, unless their Excesses have been
violent, or that they are far advanced in Life.

. 19. BUT since such Cases do daily happen, both in hereditary Distempers, and
those acquired by an obstinat Mal-regimen long continued in; that after a full
Twelvemonth or more of a trimming Regimen of Diet, with proper Evacuation, and
specific Alteratives, the Blood, on making the Trial, as above described,
continues still bad and sizy, then, I think, all Medicin (except domestic
Evacuations or Alteratives) may be fairly cashiered and laid aside, as of
little or no Use, and the whole Stress and Hope laid on Diet and Regimen only,
by sinking it in Quantity as well as Quality, and confineing one's self to
Milk, Seeds, Fruits and Vegetables, well dressed, or much dissolved by culinary
Fire, to evaporat the Wind; and drinking only tepid Water, or some specific
mineral Water, as the Case requires, and Wine only as other Persons use
Spirits, on dangerous Symptoms, as a Cordial, and on Extremities; and this
Method and Regimen ought to be continued for two Years more at least. And, I
think, in Persons of a tolerable Constitution, and where some of the great
Viscera are not entirely spoiled and irremediably consumed, this Method and
Diet cannot fail of having salutary Effects of a perfect Cure, or a very
considerable Relief; and then if the Party is not past the Meridian of Life,
the Person may without Fear or Danger, gradually and by slow Degrees, rise
again to the trimming Diet, and from it return back again by the same Steps he
descended into common Life; and only on Exacerbations, and stated Seasons, sink
into his lower Regimen, for a Preservative.

. 20. BUT after all this Care and Perseverance in a milk, seed and vegetable
Diet, with aqueous Beverage, if on a Trial after the manner mentioned, the
Blood be still sizy, as it often is in bad Constitutions, and obstinat Cases,
and the Symptoms, still severe and depressing; the only thing remaining for
such a Person with any Reason or Expectation of Success of a total Cure, or any
notable Alleviation of his Symptoms, is, for the Person to enter on a total
rigid strict milk and seed Diet only, without Butter, Eggs, or any other
Vegetables, but Wheat, Barley, Rice, Oats, Sago, and the like seed Meats; and
even to make his Milk the thinnest possible, skim'd Milk, sweet Buttermilk,
sweet Whey, or the Whey made with a Mixture of sour Milk, or Orange-Whey, or
Whey made with the Juice of some specific Vegetable, (especially in scorbutic,
gouty, pulmonic and icteric Cases, which is the Base of most of the chronical
Distempers in England) and Bread or Seeds dressed made with Milk only; for
Seeds are young Vegetables, and are neither so hard of Digestion, so windy, nor
abound with the essential Salts of Plants, Roots and Fruits. And even the
Quantity of the Regimen is to be minded; little at a time, but oftener, never
either to load the Stomach, nor compress the Nerves, Membranes and Fibers;
Fullness and Compression, even by such Foods, like Stops in musical Chords, will
interrupt their easy, regular and harmonious Vibrations and Play, and so will
sink the Spirits, and make the Functions labor. This Regimen ought at last to
be tried, all other Methods not succeeding. One would not buy Gold too dear;
but Health and free Spirits are more precious than Gold, and a wise Man would
give up every thing else for them. This Regimen will infallibly have one of
these two Effects; it will either totally cure him, if the great Viscera are
not quite consumed; or make him lie down more easily, and will infallibly give
him longer Time and better Spirits to settle his temporal Affairs, and give all
the Attention to his future State, the Nature of Things will then admit.

. 21. MOST People that enter on a low Diet for Health and Spirits, entirely
counter act and defeat its beneficial Effects. I have known some Men of
Quality, and Gentlemen of Fortune, who have been advised a low Diet, have their
Vegetables of the highest and rankest Flavor, dressed high with burnt Butter,
hot Spices, Aromatics, Onions, Eggs and Salt; so that they were infinitely more
deleterious and hurtful, than a moderat Quantity of plain animal Food once a
Day could possibly be. The meager fasting and Lent Times among the Catholics,
in French, Italian and Spanish Cookery, with their high Fish Sauces, will much
sooner inflame the Blood, produce Gout, Stone and Fevers, than a Bit of
Chicken, Veal, Lamb, or any white Meat plainly dressed possibly can. All the
beneficial and salutary Effects of a low and vegetable Diet, I have ever
observed, have been owing in atrocious, obstinat and painful Distempers, to
Milk and Seeds only, and even these the thinnest and the least the Person could
be tolerably easy under from the Pain of Hunger: And it is not easily to be
credited what wonderful Effects, even in the most desperate and universally
condemned to Death Distempers, I have seen performed by such a Regimen duly and
obstinatly persisted in, especially in Persons under Fifty; Epilepsies totally
cured, hereditary Gouts almost eradicated, universal Lepers made clean, Stones
in the Bladder and Kidneys laid quiet, Cancers healed or palliated, ulcerated
Lungs made sound, and schirrous Livers made pervious. But all this has been
constantly brought about by a total, obstinat and continued milk and seed Diet
only; but in all such incurable Cases, the Diet is to be persisted in to the
last Day of Life; for I have always observed, when such returned to a high or
common Diet only, their Distempers always returned with greater Violence, as in
Reason and true Philosophy must have been expected: For the Solids being
brought down and relaxed to a Level and Equilibrium with such a Diet, become
infinitely sensible, delicat and tender; and such strong Aliment becomes an
universal Stop and Obstacle to their Play and Vibrations, (like sticking down a
musical Chord all along with Pins) and interrupts, marrs and confounds the
whole animal Functions and Economy, and brings on all the old Symptoms enraged.

. 22. IT is true, to live thus poorly, anxiously and attentively, is a most
miserable kind of Life, to which the Brave, the Bold, and the Unbeliever will
brag he should prefer Death itself: But I, who give little Credit to such
Bounces, know Self-preservation to be the great Law in Nature, never met one
but the true practical and habitual Christian among my many Patients, and even
scarce these, who was truly willing and pleased to strip and lie down; and only
him who was always resigned to the Order of Providence either in Life or Death;
and even not Him at all Times, and in the dark Moments of Trial, or any but the
extremely miserable in Life. But here the Case is not mere dying, but living a
dying Life, perhaps for many Years: Here it is in two Evils, ( violent Pain, or
extreme Lowness and Languishing, or tolerable good Spirits, and sufferable
Pain, at the Tax and Charge of a transient momentary sensual Gratification)
choosing the least; on the other side, it is a voluntary and a resolute
withdrawing from the Orders and future unknown Designs of Providence over us,
when a very certain Mean (at least in due Time) of escaping, or at least
greatly diminishing these Miseries is offered. In short, not to take up with a
low Regimen here, is a plain Rebellion against the Orders and Designs of
Providence manifested by Nature, the Relations of Things, Philosophy and
Experience, for the mere Gratification of vicious morbid Appetites: In a word,
it is deliberat Suicide, the greatest of all Rebellion and Sin.

. 23. IN Lowness of Spirits, want of natural Rest, great Anxiety, involuntary
dark and terrifying Thoughts, Ideas and Imaginations, there are but these three
infallible immediate Reliefs or Remedies: 1. A Vomit, that can work briskly,
quickly and safely, and Experience and Use can only determine what that one
shall be; for it is not the Evacuation or Quantity of the Discharge, that is to
be so much minded, as the internal Action, the strong Convulsion, the internal
Exercise, and the cleaning, squeezeing and compressing the knotted and tumified
Glands of the Primae Viae, warm Water, Chamomile, or Carduus Tea; and without
drinking any thing, I have often effected a present perfect Relief, by mere
urging and tickling the Throat and Glands with the Finger or a Feather, by
bringing the Muscles of the Abdomen into repeated Efforts and Kecks; and so
have frequently discharged Loads of Phlegm and thin Rheum, which always greatly
relieved; and this Method frequently, nay sometimes daily repeated, and with
greater Safety and less Trouble pursued, will answer the Ends, in tender and
delicat Constitutions, under a Regimen, of formal and artificial Vomits; and I
earnestly recommend the Trial and frequent Practice of it, to all tender
low-living Valetudinarians, as what they will find infinite Benefit from, and
much easier and safer than artificial Apothecary Vomits, when they have made
the Practice of it easy and familiar: The Strong and Robust, whose Fibers are
firm and callous, will require stronger for a present Relief, and they must be
repeated whenever the Symptoms exasperat. 2. Great, frequent and continued
Exercise, especially a Horseback, because this Exercise, by the frequent
Succussions, opens all the Glands of the Abdomen, of the Mesentery and Liver,
where the Evil generally lies. Walking, because of the universal Action of all
the Solids, and its forceing the Perspiration, is the best Exercise to preserve
Health and good Spirits; but Riding is best to recover them; to this the
Flesh-brush for half an Hour, Morning and Night, ought to be joined, to uncork
the Plugs, and concreted Recrements that stop the Mouths of the perspiratory
Glands; and then washing with tepid Water in Winter, and cold Water in Summer,
the whole Skin, to scour off these Impurities; and drying well after: and
having always a large broad soft Girdle of Leather, quilted with Cotton, to
wear about the Loins, like a Stay or Swaith, to keep the Viscera in their
natural Situations, the Lacteals and Intestines in their natural Curvatures,
and the Bowels from being too pendulous, especially in thin and wasteing
Persons. 3. Religiously to study and practice the lightest and the least of
Food, they can be tolerably easy under: The least unnecessary Burden,
compressive Constriction or Ligature on the tender delicat Fibers, Nerves or
Membranes, hinders their easy, pleasant and natural Play and Vibrations, which
is the immediate Cause of Lowness and Anxiety; it is like nailing or sticking
down with Pins or Stops, the Play of a musical Chord, whence Discord must
necessarily ensue. In short, to preserve or obtain good Spirits, in very low
Cases, a Man must be in a constant Course of Self-denial as to Aliment, and
make, as it were, Hunger his greatest and only Pain; but nothing but Experience
and constant Observation of the Juvantia and Laedentia, is sufficient to
determine, to each Individual respectively, how far this is to be carried.
Prudence is the first of all Natural as well as Christian Virtues; Gold may be
bought too dear, but wise Nature always tells us how far this Method ought to
be carried, by the Intenseness of our Cravings, when gone too far; and then a
Person under no unnatural or vicious Passion or Lunacy, will obey her Calls, by
giving her what she craves, so as to make her tolerably easy. But these are the
most general certain Antidotes against extreme Lowness and Anxiety known to me;
the Reliefs of Art and Medicin are not my Design at present here.

. 24 SOME Persons have found great Relief on Lowness, a bad Constitution, and
nervous Distempers, on Change to a Southern and warmer Climat, from a Northern
and colder. But I never observed that Benefit dureable, or in any Degree
perfect, unless the Party continued all the rest of his Days in that Climat and
Country; and though proper Air and Warmth be a most comfortable and cherishing
thing to animal Bodies, yet it is observing the Diet, liveing in the manner of
the Country, that contributes most to the Cure or Relief; for it is well known,
that in warm Countries, and southern Climats, the Diet there is not only
exceeding spare and light, but almost altogether Vegetables: The Heat and
Rarefaction of the Air, and constant Perspiration, make a full high rank Diet
certain Pain or Death: And even the Materials of their Food there, the Animals
and Vegetables, are lighter and less rank and destructive in their Nature, and
more stimulating; the Natives scarce ever taste fermented or strong Liquors,
and indulging in them is the sole notorious Cause of the sudden Deaths of all
our Soldiers, Seamen and Traders. It is true, eastern and southern Nations use
many and the highest Aromatics, with their Vegetables, and they are but dry
Drams of as pernicious a Nature almost as our liquid ones; and this is the sole
Cause of their unnatural Lust and Leachery, of their acute Distempers, and
short Lives. But when a valetudinary Person goes to a southern Country for his
Health, and lives as he used in his northern Country, he rather grows worse for
the Climat; and if recovered by the Air and Traveling, and observing the
Regimen peculiar to the Healthy in that Climat, if he returns, and does not
continue the Regimen of Diet by which he was recovered, he falls back again,
and the second Error is worse than the first; and, in Truth, to travel through,
or live even a few Months or Years in, a southern Climat, and afterward be
obliged to pass his Life at Home in a northern Climat, is but only roasting at
the Fire, or going strait out of a very hot Room into the cold Air, to freeze
and chill the faster, and more intensely; for Reaction is always equal to
Action.

. 25. As to the Quantity of Foods of any kind, strong, middling or weak,
fittest to prolong Life, and prevent or cure Diseases; the most proper for each
Individual, there is no possible way to determine it to any Precision; it must
be different, according to the Size, Strength, Age, Constitution, Habitude,
acquired or hereditary Distempers of each Particular, which are as various as
their Faces. Wise Nature had so contrived us, had we followed her Simplicity
and Order in our Diet, that our Appetites and Craveings should be a sufficient
Rule; but having by long Habitudes and Example, spoiled, corrupted and
disordered her Laws, Sensations and Order, she is not now, in all Cases,
sufficient to determine this Affair. The best Rules, I think, a wise Man can
folfollow, are, 1. To use the plainest, most tender, least poignant and savoury
Meats, fully dressed, he can find, and to abate in Quantity what he is forced
to increase in the Quality of his Food. 2. To take the least possible he can be
tolerably easy under from the Pain of Hunger. 3. To observe for some Time, and
with some Care, what Foods, in Quantity and Quality, he is easiest under, and
the natural Rest, the natural Secretions, and the animal Functions labor
least, and are most pleasantly performed under. 4. To observe the Quantity
after the great Meal, he can apply his Head, his Attention, and his Body, to
their proper Offices, with the greatest Facility and Pleasure under. 5. To
follow the Quantity and Quality of those Foods that give him regularly one
figured Stool a Day only. 6. For one Month to try double the Quantity, or at
least one third, or less, more than he used of the same kinds of Food, and
observe what Difference this makes in his Functions, Intellectual or Animal;
and by some repeated Trials of this kind, summing up the whole, and taking the
half of this Quantity, divided by the Number of Days, as the Medium between the
least or greatest Quantity. 7. To try, by a Sanctorian Chair, the Quantity and
Quality of those Foods that perspire the most and soonest, and reduce the Body
to pretty near always the same Weight: Or, 8. Lastly, Without Care, Anxiety or
Perplexity, to study and pursue the lightest and least of Food he can possibly
be easy under; for, without all doubt, Nature will (to a Man of a sober Mind,
and in his right Senses) by acute and intolerable Pains from Hunger, apprize
him at least in some time, if he has underdos'd her. So far may suffice to an
honest prudent Person, as to the Quantity of Food, or the Materials of the Curd
of the Blood: As to the Liquids, or the Materials of the Serum, I am perfectly
convinced, Nature never intended any thing but pure Water; Water being
signatur'd, by its greatest Fluidity and Insipidity, for carrying alimentary
Particles readily and pleasantly through all the strait Meanders of animal
Life; and having designed fermented Liquors, and the Juices of Fruits and
Vegetables, for Physic only, and they are, when used with Intemperance, or as
common Beverage, the sole universal and adequat natural Cause of most acquired
Distempers; and Water-drinking only, the proper and adequat Antidote for such.
But if a Man will drink vinous and fermented Liquors, then the best are those
that are of a middling Strength, the lightest, oldest and ripest, which have
spent or dropped their saline, tartarous and grossest Particles by Age and
Maturity; on which Account the old Rhenish or Hock, ripe Claret or Burgundy,
neat old Port and Madera, will be preferable; and the rich, fat, fiery, oily
and gross Wines are only to be used as Cordials and Drams, on Necessity and
Extremity. But always the least is the very best of all fermented Liquors
whatsoever.

. 26. WHOEVER can resolve in bad Spirits, a bad Constitution, and in advanced
Life, to go into a Regimen, may, I think, fairly be manumitted from Drugs, that
is, from any kind of Alteratives, even the Preparations of Mercury, Steel,
Antimony, Sulphur, and all those of the ponderous and mineral Kind, they will
only tear and rend his tender Bowels and Vessels; and even from every sort of
the violent and active kind; and trust simply to Nature and domestic
Evacuation, as the Symptoms exasperat, viz. little Bleedings, gentle and weak
Emetics, Stomach Purges, mineral Waters of a proper kind, gentle Air and
Exercise, and a Regimen of the lightest and least, no regular Meals, but a
little at a time and oftener; for as Nature will not, now on its Decline, bear
the violent and active Remedies, without being torn to pieces, so there is not
sufficient Time in Life remaining for strong Health; and they must consider
what Nature can bear and do, and follow her by their Feelings rigidly, and
treat themselves as Children the second time, by giving her barely the lightest
and the least she can be tolerably easy under, and always endeavoring to
lessen the Quantity and Quality of the Diet, as her active and digestive Powers
weaken and decrease; for one Day tolerably easy by the Strength of Nature only,
will be better than two such by the Help of Art, for her Recovery, and
prolonging her Life.

. 27. IN a low Regimen, even when upon Necessity, and under prudent Counsel and
Advice, when a Person has entered upon it, and has continued in it for a long
time, they may have many Plunges, Discouragements and Exacerbations; especially
as the peccant Matter becomes collected from the Mass of Blood by the greater
Glands, and is now soliciting to be pumped off, or driven out by the
Commonsewer; besides Accidents, the Inclemency and Alterations of the Seasons,
especially Spring and Autumn, when animal as well as vegetable Nature undergoes
some notable Alterations; none ought to be so scrupulously nice, as not, at
such a Time, to lay aside their low Milk and Seed or vegetable Diet, and take
to a little white Meat, and fermented Liquors, upon Nausea, Inappetency, and
transiently to brace the Solids, to get Strength to throw off the still
remaining Load of Morbosity and Viscosity; this is but like standing to take a
little Breath in ascending a steep Mountain: But then they ought, as soon as
this periodical Paroxysm is removed, by proper Evacuation, and this temporary
braceing Regimen, to return to their cooling, soft, sweetning and thinning
Diet, in order to purify the Juices totally. This Interruption will only retard
the Cure a short time, and will give Strength to perfect it at last, as far as
the Nature of Things will permit: For it is to be believed as a certain Truth,
without which no Patient will be encouraged to proceed, that it is to a low,
cool, thin Diet alone, with proper and indicated Evacuation, that the Blood is
to be at last mended, and the highest Health the Constitution will permit is to
be obtained.

. 28. To conclude this tedious Detail, of the two, animal Food or fermented
Liquors, either of any kind, that is in Use, if my Opinion were to be asked,
Which of the two is most pernicious to animal Bodies, or, in which of the two,
Mistakes or Excesses are most pernicious, fatal, and most productive of the
severe Distempers? I would not hesitate a Moment, to ascribe to fermented or
distilled Liquors of any kind, the whole Blame of all or most of the painful
and excruciating Distempers that afflict Mankind: It is to it alone all our
Gouts, Stones, Cancers, Fevers, high Hysterics, Lunacy and Madness, are
principally owing: It is the true Pandora's Box. And he who would timeously
give up, while he is tolerably well, fermented Liquors, and drink nothing but
pure tepid Water, need never seek nor want any other Cure or Medicin, but
gentle and proper Evacuation occasionally, be his Distemper what it will: He
may then freely give up any Concern about what he should eat; let him, without
Fear, follow Nature and his Appetite, in whatever plain Meat is presented, he
can be in no Danger from any fatal or dangerous Distemper. Water-drinking to
those that are already tolerably well, begun early, at least under Thirty-five,
or after, when no chronical, hereditary, mortal Distemper is rooted, is the
true and universal Panacea, and the Philosopher's Stone. God has not only
permitted, but by a wife Appointment of his Providence, has, in many Cases,
made animal Food absolutely necessary and indispensable; and for great high
Health and Spirits, warm and strong Blood, bodily Prowess and great Labor, it
is the only proper Food; but for fermented Liquors, I know no Command, Counsel,
or Example. Certainly wise Nature, who has provided liberally Supplies for all
our Wants, has furnished us none of it; it is the Invention of spurious and
luxurious Art, and it is present Death to many, and the natural Aversion of all
Animals who follow pure Nature: It certainly shortens the Duration of Life to
all that use it even with Moderation, and is the alone adequat Cause of all the
mortal, painful and atrocious Distempers. As a Medicin, present Relief, and as
a bitter Chalybeat Potion, on Occasions and Extremities, it might be a
tolerable Medicin; but as common Beverage, it is a slow but certain Poison.

FOR a Conclusion, I will, from the whole, set down a few Aphorisms, that may
perhaps instruct and ease the Memory of the Valetudinarian.

Aphorism 1. A CONSTANT Endeavor after the lightest and the least of Meat and
Drink a Man can be tolerably easy under, is the shortest and most infallible
Mean to preserve Life, Health and Serenity.

Aph. 2. HE that would preserve a clear Head, and equal Spirits, must keep his
Stomach clean, his Bowels moderatly empty and uncomprest.

Aph. 3. ON bad Nights, Lowness, Flatulence and Oppression of Spirits, of any
Continuance, the only certain Reliefs are, a small Phlebotomy, a gentle Vomit,
a domestic Purge, rideing a Horseback, and a Regimen of the lightest and the
least persisted in.

Aph. 4. SMALL frequent Phlebotomies are the quickest and most effectual Mean
to mend the Blood, and to cure Cacochymy, if a Regimen of the lightest and
least be joined.

Aph. 5. GENTLE and repeated Evacuation upwards and downwards, (especially, and
perhaps only, Vomits) by the Medicines most familiar and experienced, (the
Action and Exercise of Vomiting is its chief Use) are the surest, quickest, and
most effectual Mean to prevent or remedy the ill Effects of Gluttony,
Over-loading and Repletion, (that is, almost all chronical Distempers) provided
the lightest and the least be joined afterward.

Aph. 6. DISEASES are always to be cured by their Contraries, the high Diet by
the low, the hot by the cool, the sapid by the insipid, the thick and gross by
the thin and poor, Repletion by Fasting, Inactivity by Exercise. Health
acquired and possessed lies in the middle Regimen, between these two Extremes.

Aph. 7. PERFECT Health and good Spirits depend chiefly, if not only, on the
easy and pleasant Play or Performance of the Animal Functions, viz. the
Digestion, Circulation, Respiration, Perspiration, muscular Motion, and the
Secretions.

Aph. 8. HE that would be soon well, must be long sick, that is, treat himself
as a Valetudinarian in most things.

Aph. 9. EXERCISE and gentle Evacuation will supply the Place of Abstinence,
and Abstinence will supply the Place of Evacuation; but the first two are still
preferable, because they damage the Solids least.

Aph. 10. QUANTITY in Food will supply Quality, and Quality will supply the
Place of Quantity; but in very bad Cases it is most secure to join both.

Aph. 11. THERE is but little in a specific Regimen of Diet to remedy or
antidot a specific Distemper; Abstinence in general, or a constant Endeavor
after the lightest and the least, will constantly supply the Place of any
specific particular Regimen of Diet: But in very bad Cases, a particular Choice
of the most specific Regimen that Art, Experience and Philosophy show to be
most proper, is not to be neglected.

Aph. 12. THE Regimen of Diet by which one is cured of a particular Distemper,
ought to be coninued, at least in some Degree, especially if the Person is not
much under Fifty, else the Distemper will return with more severe and worse
Symptoms than at first, as Experience has constantly showed.

Aph. 13. Every wise Man, after Fifty, ought to begin to lessen at least the
Quantity of his Aliment; and if he would continue free of great and dangerous
Distempers, and preserve his Senses and Faculties clear to the last, he ought
every seven Years go on, abateing gradually and sensibly, and at last descend
out of Life as he ascended into it, even into the Child's Diet.

Aph. 14. He that is old when he is young, that is, treats himself as a wise
old Man does, or ought to do, by great Temperance, Air and Exercise, if he
lives past Thirty-five, will be young when he grows old in Years.

Aph. 15. No Person of any Fortune ever died, or suffered acute Pains, or
mortal Distempers, by the too cool, too little, or too insipid in Diet; all by
the too hot, high and savoury: But Virtue and Health lie in the golden Mean, so
difficult to be found, and only to be secured by the lightest and the least a
Man can be tolerably easy under.

Aph. 16. THE eternal Law of Nature, by intense Pain in Craveing and Hunger,
will never suffer a Person in his right Senses to go on long obstinatly, and to
his Hurt, in the too little.

Aph. 17. WATER pure, clear and insipid, is the sole Beverage that can procure
or continue Health, and a clear Head, being the sole Fluid that will pass
through the smallest animal Tubes without Resistance; next to it are aqueous,
or weak fermented Liquors.

Aph. 18. WATER tepid or cold, or impregnated with the specific Vegetables, or
Minerals, that Experience has found proper to antidot a given Distemper, is the
true Panacea in both acute and chronical Distempers: Nature has prepared no
other Medicin for us, but Water impregnated with Vegetables in their Juices, or
natural Mineral Waters on the Surface of the Earth.

Aph. 19. MILK is the only Food prepared by Nature for young, that is, weak and
tender animal Bodies; and there is no real Difference between a young, tender,
animal Body, and a diseased grown Animal, but that, of the two, the last is the
worst; but it will cost Labor and Patience to make Milk agree in bilious Cases.

Aph. 20. MILK and sweet sound Blood differ in nothing but in Color: Milk is
Blood, which almost directly comes from the Chyle into the Teats of the Animal;
and Blood is Milk which has gone many Rounds in the Circulation, and is ground
a little in the Lungs, where being mixed with the Nitre of the Air, it receives
its Scarlet Color; it is a Medium between animal and vegetable Food.

Aph. 21. WHEY sweet, or medicated with the Juice of any specific Plant, Sage,
Balm, or Orange, or antiscorbutic, vulnerary, or pulmonic Plants, will supply
the Place, and are preferable to most Decoctions, of Plants, Infusions, Apozems
and Diet-Drinks whatsoever, except those of the strong Detergents, as
Horseradish, Mustard Seed, and the like, where necessary.

Aph. 22. GOATS Whey being a natural Infusion from gentle Heat, and gentle
Triture, of the fine aromatic and nitrous Vegetables on which Goats feed only,
is one of the very best Diluents, Detergents, Cleansers and Sweetners of
scorbutic and salin Cacochymies.

Aph. 23. FRICTION Morning and Night, and in Winter Washing with warm, and
Drying before a Fire, and in Summer with cold Water, is an excellent Mean to
facilitat and promote the Perspiration; to clean the Cuticle, and cure
cutaneous Uncleanness and Defedations, cold Batheing is excellent, and
preferable to every Washing in Cases where the Blood is sweet and thin, the
Solids too lax only.

Aph. 24. CINCTURE with a broad quilted Belt about the Loins, to keep the
Bowels in their natural Situations, and the chylous Vessels in their best
Locality, and in flabby Constitutions, weak Bowels and Atrophies, is of great
Benefit.

Aph. 25. RIDEING is the best of all Exercises to get Health, and to promote
the Digestions, especially in nervous Distempers, where the Abdomen and the
Meseraic Glands are principally affected: But Walking is best to preserve
Health already got, because it is the most natural and the most universal
Promoter of all the Excretions.

Aph. 26. IN Nature or Art there is no such immediate Cure for low Spirits,
Anxiety, and Want of Sleep, as rideing a Horseback, long Journies with
Fasting, or rather a very soft light Feeding with warm thin Liquors at
Resting-Places, but that the least possible that actual Fainting will permit.

Aph. 27. NEXT to Rideing, is either a Vomit, or Fasting almost to Faintness,
and then only a little spiced Wine and Water warm, and a Mouthful or two of dry
Biscuit every 5th or 6th Hour, with continued Friction, with a coarse Cloth,
warm Flannel, or a Flesh-Brush, especially on the Spine, in Faintings and
extreme Lowness.

Aph. 28. TO procure natural Rest, nothing is like four or five middling Pills
of true Assafoetida, with four or five Grains of pure succatrine Aloe, taken
going to Bed.

Aph. 29. THE only Way to secure tolerable Spirits in very low Cases, is a
constant Endeavor to make Hunger the greatest Pain, and to cheat the Appetite
and Craveing with little, warm, light Liquors at large Intervals.

Aph. 30. GOOD Hours will be always a most beneficial Mean to preserve Health
and Spirits, to go to Bed by Ten, and rise by Six.

Aph. 31. WHOSOEVER would preserve his Health and Spirits to the last, even
when he is in Possession of it, ought to pass through the great Operations of
Physic in the Spring, viz. To bleed, vomit and purge, whether he have apparent
Necessity or not; for Seurvy, or scorbutic Juices, is the great chronical and
fundamental Distemper of Britain; all the rest are but Sprouts and Branches of
it. And therefore,

Aph. 32. VOMITS often repeated, at least as often as the Symptom of any Ail
aggravats, increases or exasperats, are the sole universal Antidot and Panacea
of Britain: an ailing Person cannot repeat them too often, they will always
prove beneficial and salutary.

Aph. 33. IN cold Feet nothing like batheing them in tepid Water a little
before going to Bed.

Aph. 34. A low Diet seldom extirpats, or totally eradicats, any hereditary
chronical Distemper, unless it be in the young, the middling-aged, or the
strong and healthy, who have otherwise tolerable Stamina; in the very puny,
delicat and slender, in the old, and far advanced in Life, even after Fifty, in
the strongest, it only abates the Violence of their Symptoms, makes them less
severe, and the Returns seldomer, and only prolongs the Duration of their Lives.

Aph. 35. THE natural Diseases of the Poor and Necessitous are generally owing
to a bad, unwholesome, unsound Diet, and the Want of due Care of the other
Non-naturals, Cleanness and Shelter; and are generally cured by their
Contraries, viz. a good, wholesome, plain Diet, and a due Cleanness, Shelter
from the Inclemency of Seasons, and an easy Mind.

Aph. 36. IF it happen that the Poor, and those having no Property of their
own, by Stealth, Robbery, or unlawful Means, enter on and pursue the Luxury of
the Rich and Opulent, not having the other Necessaries and Conveniences of
Life, neglecting, or not being able to afford, or being inured to want the
necessary Care of the other Non-naturals, their Diseases are then the most
atrocious, painful and miserable of any; which is the Reason that the acute and
contagious Distempers begin first, spread faster, and are more mortal among
them, than those of the better Sort.

Aph. 37. DIET; a proper well regulated and parsimonious, cool Diet, is the far
greatest Article of long Life and Health; but the other Non-naturals are to be
carefully attended to, and guarded against, else it will not avail alone, which
is the Case in Monasteries, Deserts, and long Sea Voyages.

DISCOURSE I. Philosophical CONJECTURES ABOUT THE NATURE and QUALITIES OF THE
Original Animal Body, AND OF ITS PROGRESSIVE STATE IN ITS Several Stages of
EXISTENCE.
1 Cor. xv. 44. There is a natural Body, and there is a spiritual Body.
DISCOURSE I.
Philosophical CONJECTURES ABOUT THE NATURE and QUALITIES OF THE Original
Animal Body, AND OF ITS PROGRESSIVE STATE IN ITS Several Stages of EXISTENCE.
. 1. THERE are Animalcules, which being endued with Life and Motion, must
consequently perform Animal Functions, that are less than any Object
perceptible by our Senses.

THIS is beyond all Doubt from Microscopical Discoveries in Pepper Water,
Spring Water, Vinegar, Sperm, the Urine and fluid Juices of almost all morbid
Animals; and Mr. Lewenhoeck has shown, that there are Animals, many Thousands
of which would not equal a visible Grain of Sand; and that there are Tubes in
Animals, of which several Hundreds would not equal a common Hair; and the
smallest Animals, to carry on Life, must necessarily have all the chief
Organical Parts of the greatest Animals, at least analogically.

. 2. An organized Animal Body could not possibly at first have been formed, nor
can its Functions be now accounted for, or explained, by mere Mechanism, or the
Laws of Motion which now obtain, without the Sagacity and Agency of a primary
self-existent Cause; nor can the Functions be continued without the
Superintendance and Influence of a self-moving, self-acting secondary Agent,
informing and acting on it continually.

THIS is not only demonstrable from the Inertia and Passivity of Matter, from
the obvious Contradiction of a perpetual circular Motion, which is the Case of
all Animals (the Motion of the Heart, and the Muscular Force of the
Blood Vessels, being the Cause of the Circulation, and the Circulation being
the Cause (efficient or occasional) of the Motion of the Heart, and of the
Muscular Fibers;) But that mere Mechanism acts only according to the Surfaces
of Bodies; and yet it is probable, that animated Bodies act according to their
Solidities, and that every Atom of an animated Body is constantly in Action,
for the Preservation and Well-being of the whole Machin, and also for exerting
that particular Animal Function, which its Figure, Situation and Use in the
Animal requires. Besides, natural and simple Mechanism can act only from One
Center of Motion or Impulse, in One single Direction only; whereas Curvature
requires different Direction every Moment, and consequently various Centres of
Motion or Impulse. Now, if we consider the Varieties of Motions and Directions
in the Joints and Muscles of Animals, but especially the infinite Variety of
Curvatures in the Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, and particularly in the Glands,
we will readily perceive it to be utterly impossible, and a Contradiction, that
an Animal Body could have been at first formed without a Supra-mechanical
Organisation; or that it should continue to live, and perform Animal Functions,
without the continual Agency and Superintendance of a secondary self-active,
and selfmotive Principle.

. 3. It is highly probable, that the first Elements of Bodies, or the least and
last Particles of Matter, are solid, hard, and indivisible, by any finite
Power, or Force whatever; because by Friction, Collision, and Use, they are not
worn out, and lose not their Original Figure and Size; since they are still fit
for the Ends and Purposes of their first Institution.

. 4. GOD and Nature do nothing in vain; and since Body must necessarily be
always endued with some Figure, being neither infinitely small, nor infinitely
great (where Figure may possibly be thought to evanish) the three most simple
Figures of all solid Bodies, viz. Spheres, Cubes, and equilateral triangular
Prisms, might possibly at first have made all the Diversities of the primitive
original Particles of specific Bodies. These Figures, with the particular Laws
of Attraction and Union thence arising, together with different Diameters, and
various Combinations, may have made all the Differences of Bodies.

. 5. THE several Elements, or the several Aggregats or Masses of the different
original Particles, now commonly called Elements, as Water, Air, Light, Salt,
and Earth, have each some specific Qualities, which distinguish them from each
other, and which they never entirely lose in any State whatsoever; but which
may be swallowed up, and rendered unactive, when blended and combined with
other Particles, as they are in the integral Particles of natural Bodies, as
these are constituted in this our System.

WATER has its Incompressibility, the Rotundity, or at least the Spheroidity of
its constituent Particles; its Transparency, or refractive Power, its Admission
of Salts into its Substance without greatly increasing its Dimensions, at least
in a certain Quantity and Proportion, nay sometimes lessening them.

AIR has its Elasticity, its repulsive Force, its acid and nitrous Spirit, and
its vivifying Quality to Fire, and Animal Life.

LIGHT has its Activity, Velocity, Tenuity of its Particles, and its Fitts of
easy Transmission and Reflection, and probably a greater Gravity or Byas, on
one Side, than the other of its Particles.

SALT has its Solubility in Water only, its penetrating Virtue on Bodies, and
its stimulating Quality on animal Fibers; A greater Degree, and particular Law
of the attractive Force of its Particles on one another, whereby its Clusters
are generally of regular, and nearly similar Figures terminated by plain
Surfaces.

EARTH has its greater Gravity, loose Connection, and less Attraction of its
Particles; its Friability, and irregular Figure, being probably the Ramenta or
Abrasions of the other Elements.

PERHAPS the primitive Animal Body might consist of the First pure specific and
sublimed Elements, harmoniously combined, and elegantly ranged in their
Original Natures, of which our present patched gross Bodies, are only the
confused dense Kind; as our present Globe of Earth, its Water, Salt, Air,
Light, and Earth, are but probably the putrified Carcass of the primitive
Planet; but both may continue to have some remote Analogy to one another, as a
Carcass has to a living Beauty, or an Egyptian Mummy to a living Cleopatra.

ACCORDING to this Analogy then, may not the Matter and Substance of the
original first-created Vehicle or Animal Body, be of such Elements of the
original Kind? of a celestial and spiritual Nature (so to speak) infinitely
more subtle and refined than the Matter of Light, more elastick than the
finest Ether; and whose Particles might have had, as it were, an infinite
Power of Attraction even at finite Distances, and consequently might pervade
all gross Bodies of our System without Resistance or Pain.

. 6. On such an analogous Supposition or Conjecture, the Fineness, Elasticity
and Law of Attraction in the Particles of such a spiritual Animal Matter, might
admit of Degrees (as all Finites must necessarily do) and the Degree might be
in Proportion to the natural and moral Powers of the Spirit conjunctly.

IT seems highly probable, that all finite created Spirits have, and must have
material Vehicles, of Purity and Fineness in Proportion to their natural and
moral Powers conjunctly, not only to limit and direct their Energy and
Efficiency, but to commerciate with other Animals, and inanimat created
Natures; none but the Supreme Spirit, the Father of Spirits, being absolutely
and entirely an infinitely pure immaterial Spirit, acting by his Power and
Energy with equal Facility at all possible Distances. And the Vehicles, or
original Bodies of all created Spirits might possibly be of some such Nature,
as this described Matter, which may be called spiritual Matter, or Element.

. 7. This spiritual animal Body, at first divinely organized, may be rolled up,
folded together and contracted in this present State of its Duration, into an
infinitely small Punctum Saliens, into a Miniature of a Miniature in infinitum,
lodged in the Loins of the Male of all Animals, (for it is highly probable the
Female was but a secondary Intention, or a Buttress to a falling Edifice) and
proceeding in a diverging Series, and progressive Gradation, that in due Time
it may be fit to be nourished, and increased by the Juices of the proper
Female, and thereby enabled to bear the Coarseness and Injuries of this ruinous
Globe, and gross Element, to which it is to be condemned for a certain Period.

. 8. IT would seem that this spiritual Body, of this refined subtle Matter
divinely organized, by an infinite Degree of Attraction to its particular
informing Spirit, and by an individual Fitness and Congruity to the specific
immaterial Inhabitant, is so intimately united with it in its original
Creation, that they are never after to be separated, whatever future State they
may go into, by any finite Power whatsoever; no more than the Firmness and
Solidity of the primitive original Atoms of of Matter can be broken or divided
by any natural Power. So that in whatever Afterstates it may exist, or whatever
Plaster or Vehicle of a denser and coarser Element may be superinduced, the
spiritual Inhabitant and the primitive Creation-Body go inseparably together.
And as this refined spiritual Body might have been the Creation primitive Body,
so it may, purified, develop'd and mundify'd, become the last Resurrection and
glorified Body.

. 9. It seems highly probable, analogous to the other Appearances of Nature,
and congruous to rational Agency (if we suppose the first Being rational,
intelligent and wise, acting with Designs and Purposes) that the confining of
intelligent or sentient Beings, for so long a Time, to so dark and strait a
Prison, in the Origin, Seeds and Eggs of Animals, on this ruinous Globe, must
have been for some wise and good End and Purpose, in God's moral Government of
his int ligent and sentient Creatures; perhaps for Punishment, Correction,
progressive Purification, and painful Sensation ( A Body have thou given me,
was said of our Savior, to make him passive); Feeling and Experience being the
most effectual Mean to admonish and teach finite, wandering and heedless
Beings; at least this seems one Part of the Design.

. 10. THAT in our present Scene of Existence, our natural Powers are tied down,
sopited, and fettered by the Manner of our Origination, and coming into
rational Life, is self-evident: The wisest and best Man on the Earth, as to
rational and intelligent Living, was first like a mere Vegetable or Plant,
afterward a mere Animal or Brute, and but at last, very late, and only for a
short Time, the rational and complete Man; and this Truth might be further
illustrated, and even demonstrated, from the Qualities of Matter, which are
contrary to and destructive of the Qualities of Spirit. Now this Progression
must have some End and Purpose in the Intention of a wise and good Cause; and
may suppose, that by the Abuse of Liberty, and idolatrising the Creatures, the
moral Powers ( Justice, Goodness, and Truth) being erased and cancelled in the
Spirit, the most effectual Mean and Expedient to restore them, was to tie down,
contract and sopite the natural Powers of the Soul ( Living, Perceiving, and
Willing) to a Level and Equality with these defaced moral Powers, that by the
Use of the proper Means, they might (without Letts or Obstacles from these
natural Powers) gradually improve and grow up together, in the same Degree and
Order; at least this may be One not improbable End and Design of Providence, in
this progressive Growth of the natural Powers of the human Spirit; since it is
evident in Fact, that where the natural and moral Powers of the Soul rise to
any Degree, this Progression is observed.

. 11. The Works of God are without Repentance, the true unbodied Spiritual
Substance in intelligent and sentient Natures, being an Emanation, Efflux, Ray,
or Spark, or (if I durst use such figurative Language) an infinitesimal
Miniature of his Substance, (and of his living, perceiving and willing, or
whole Nature) who is Self-existent; After flowing from him, can no more perish,
or cease to live, perceive and will, than necessary Self-existence can cease to
be; so that Living, Perceiving and Willing, (i. e. Cogitation) can never be
totally extinct in any intelligent and sentient Being: Never in the Root,
Faculty or Power, though they may be, and often are, in the Acts; like Fire in
Ashes. Annihilation is contradictory to, and destructive of infinite Wisdom and
Power, and unworthy of infinite Perfection, requiring the same Omnipotence that
Creation does; Reaction being always equal to Action. And Self-activity being
an infinitesimal Miniature of necessary Existence and Omnipotence. The first
Being might as justly be supposed capable of destroying Himself, as his
Miniature Images: Besides, it were neither wise nor good even in a Man, to
suffer the Heir Apparent of a great Kingdom to destroy or annihilate himself,
if it were possible by Correction, Restraints, Time, and due Culture, to fit
him for the Possession; and sure every Thing that is wise and good is possible
to the best of Beings. These Natural Powers may be sopited, contracted and
hindered from issuing into Action, (as we see they are in sound Sleep, in some
Diseases, Syncope's, and many other Cases) by Obstacles of, and Resistances
from gross Matter, by Bonds, Fetters and Chains made of these our Elements; and
the coarser and straiter these Fetters and Chains are, the straiter and closer
the Prison may be, and the weaker and fewer may be the Acts of the natural
Powers, till this Prison become almost dead Matter, and a Dungeon, or a mere
Point. Now infinite Wisdom and Power, being, as it were, necessitated by the
infinite Benevolence of his Nature, to lay out all the Energy of his
Omnipotence and Omniscience, to recover and restore his Miniature Images,
consistent with the Harmony of his own Attributes, and with the Usage of their
natural Powers, (neither of which he could force, or offer Violence to,) seems
to have contrived this wonderful Expedient, viz. to tie down, sopite and
restrain the Acts and Exertion of the natural Powers, of lapsed, sentient and
intelligent Beings, for a determined Space of Time, by Chains and Fetters made
of the Elements of this ruinous Globe, in order to punish and purify them, and
so to vindicate his Sovereignty, to repair the Indignity done to his Purity, to
warn and deter the other Orders of his standing Hierarchies, and at the same
Time, by lessening the Strength and Activity of the natural Powers in their
full Vigor, to allow Freedom and Uninterruption from them, for the Restoration
and Advancement of the moral Powers.

. 12. WERE the natural Powers of a free, lapsed and intelligent Being, greatly
and eminently higher than the moral Powers in the present State, they must
necessarily clash with, interrupt and greatly hinder the Acquisition of the
moral Powers. For Example, unerring Evidence, irrefragable Demonstration,
absolute Certainty, must necessarily interfere with Humility, Dependence,
Resignation, Faith and Trust, and consequently with all Merit, Gratitude, and
Love. What Faith? What Resignation? What Merit is there in believing the
Propositions of Euclid? In this we are as much passive in our immaterial
Principle, as in our Material. We trust our Lives and Fortunes to a Seaman, or
Coachman, not on Demonstration and absolute Certainty, but because we believe
them to be honest able Persons in their several Vocations. Faith and Hope must
eternally exclude Mathematical Certainty. Perfect Demonstration and absolute
Certainty, would exclude Choice, Election and Preference, in finite dependent
Creatures. It is Probability alone, Verisimilitude, Analogy, and final Causes,
or Revelation, that can be the proper Evidence to produce Faith, and to give
Merit, Choice, Election and Preference to the Actions of finite, lapsed and
dependent Creatures; and this whole present Scene of Providence, and the
Darkness, Obscurity and seeming Deformity on the Face of Nature, and the Works
of an All-wise, All-good Being, seem only contrived and calculated, to preserve
the natural Powers of lapsed finite Intelligences inviolate, and at the same
Time to harmonise with the Divine Attributes. For had the natural Powers
continued in their Perfection and full Extent, while the moral Powers were
cancelled and extinguished, they could never have been restored consistent with
the Harmony of the Divine Attributes, and the natural, unperishable and
inviolable Powers of free Intelligences. Liberty to do Good or Evil,
Pre-Existence abused, universal Restoration, and final Confirmation, consistent
with the Harmony of the Divine Attributes, and the natural Powers of lapsed
Intelligences, well explained, will remove all the possible Difficulties and
Obscurity, in Nature, Providence, and Revelation.

. 13. To comprehend, ascertain and demin with Precision, and Mathematical or
Metaphysical Certainty, the real Nature, or Substance of any thing, small or
great, is incompatible with Finitude, and the sole incommunicable Attribute of
the Deity; and if lapsed finite Creatures, such as we of the human Race are
supposed to be, could attain to it, it would destroy our Liberty to act, (whose
very Essence consists in doing any thing or its contrary) and determine us
infallibly to one Tenor of Action, as certainly as one Impulse, or one Center
of Motion in a Body, would determine it to one Direction, or in a Right Line,
and consequently would counteract our Recovery and Restoration, and render it
impossible. And the most perfect Cherubim in Heaven, to perpetuate and eternise
its Happiness, must necessarily have made a surrendry and sacrifice of its Will
to infinite Goodness, and its Understanding to infinite Wisdom; and though all
that are admitted to the Beatific Vision, see God Face to Face, or see as they
are seen, yet it can be only pro Modulo suo; and though the Faith and Trust
necessary to us here in our uncertain lapsed probatory State, when we come to
Glory shall be done away, yet naked Faith, or a Faith founded solely on the
Ipse Dixit of infinite Perfection, as well as pure Love, or love of Infinite
Perfection for itself, or for its own Amiability, is indispensibly necessary
even in Heaven, to perpetuate and eternise the Felicity of the most perfect
Seraphim. As our bodily Eyes are utterly incapable of perceiving the real and
positive Magnitude, Dimensions and Distance of material Objects, nothing but
their relative ones; so is the most sublime and perfect created Understanding
for ever incapable to discover, and comprehend the precise Nature, Essence or
Qualities of the First Being, or of any of his lowest Works. Objects are
perceived or comprehended not according to their own absolute precise and
positive Nature, by created Understandings of any Order and Degree, but
respectively and relatively, according to the Degree and Extent of their
Faculties; and yet a Miniature may be truly a Picture, and as just an one in
small, as one at length, and between the First Being, and the absolute Nature
of his Works, as conceived and comprehended by creaturely Faculties, there will
be allways the Proportion of Infinite to Finite. And when Jesus Christ said he
was the Truth, the absolute Truth, he as really affirmed his Divinity, as when
he said he that has seen me, has seen the Father, or I and the Father are
one; for the absolute precise Metaphysical Truth of real positive Things is
inseparable from the Divine Nature; and he could not be honest and sincere even
as a Creature, if in such a momentuous and and fundamental Point, he could lead
Creatures into a Mistake; an honest Person would have trembled to come so near
plain Blasphemy, and yet he says his Words are Spirit and Truth. But I beg
Pardon for this Digression out of the Sphere of Philosophy.

. 14. THE subjecting material Bodies, the outward Creation, and, perhaps,
spiritual Natures, to general and invariable Laws, (the continuing these under
the Lapse, which were and must have been established in the State of Innocence,
I say, the Continuance of these) seems to be another Expedient of infinite
Wisdom to preserve Liberty in the Recovery of the moral Powers of lapsed
Intelligences, and to conciliate the Harmony of the Divine Attributes. Without
these general Laws, (discoverable only to any Degree, by just Observation, calm
Attention, accurate Experiment, extensive Induction and Calculation) there
could be no Room for Correction, Amending, for Choice and Election, or for
moral Good and Evil; but Things would happen in the intellectual and moral
System, as they are supposed to happen in the natural System on the Epicurean
Scheme, by Chance, Casualty, Fits and Starts, or fatal Necessity; which is
absolutely to deny the first Being to be a rational, intelligent and free
Agent; for infinite Wisdom can do nothing, but for wise Ends and Purposes; and
must contrive Means, which have a natural and necessary Tendency and Fitness
for these Ends. If these Means be not seen by us, or being in some measure
seen, may seem not to attain their Ends, it is because, being finite lapsed
Creatures, our narrow Capacities cannot reach them, or because all the
Conditions requisite to make them effectual, were not present in a particular
Case; for infinite Wisdom must act uniformly, with Order, Number, Weight and
Measure; all which, nothing but general Laws and Canons can effect, as is well
known to Geometers, and plainly exemplified in the universal Canons of Algebra.
If these general Laws be duly investigated, cautiously guarded, and all the
necessary Conditions be taken in, they can never fail of obtaining their End
and Effect; unless infinite Wisdom and Power suspend them for a limited Time,
to manifest his Power, or for moral Ends and Purposes; or unless they are kept
from attaining their natural Ends directly, by the voluntary and free Agency of
imperfect human Intelligences.

. 14. THE only Thing worthy of a true Philosopher is, with Attention, to draw
up and collect as many as he possibly can, of these general Laws of the Divine
Agency in the natural, moral, and intellectual World, for his own Use, or that
of his Fellow-Intelligences. For without all Doubt they must be some few of the
most obvious of the Laws of infinite Wisdom, laid down as the Plan, by which
all his Works of Wonder were at first formed, and are still governed: And though
in Him all this great Affair was but one single Act of Wisdom and Power, yet in
regard to us his infinitesimal Miniatures, now in a lapsed State, they must be
considered by Parts, in different Acts, and divided Sections, and viewed
separately, in Proportion to our weak and limited Faculties: For certainly
general Laws, and universal Rules, are the Method of Divine Agency, and of his
wise Providence.

. 15. THE general Laws of Motion, the Laws of simple Mechanism, the Laws of
Refraction and Reflection, and many more such general Laws, both in natural
Philosophy, civil Society, and human Policy, are pretty well known and
adjusted, in all the polished Nations of the World; and it is not improbable
such general Laws may obtain in other Systems, at least analogically: and they
actually do so, as far as our Observation reaches. And it is very probable that
similar and analogous general Laws, have place in the moral, spiritual and
intellectual World. For God is the same Yesterday, Today, and for Ever; his
Nature, Attributes, and Agency, uniform: And since he acts by general Laws in
material Agency, it is highly probable, and conformable to his infinite Wisdom,
to act in the same uniform Manner in all his Operations, ad extra; and, as far
as just Observations have been made, and well-grounded Conclusions drawn by
Analogy, we shall find it so in all the Systems, Moral, Spiritual or Divine;
though these last have been but little studied, and timorously applied to, by
Persons of a proper Spirit and Genius, out of Dread of the odious Designation
of Enthusiasm or Superstition: but future Ages may perhaps get over this
Terror; for the Method has a solid Foundation in the Nature of Things.

. 16. THESE general Laws of the Divine Economy in Creation and Providence, or
the Rules of consummate Wisdom and Fitness, which the Supreme Being has chalked
out and laid down, are, without all Doubt, inexhaustible and incomprehensible
to such an Order of Beings as we are in our present State, and undiscoverable
to any Degree of Perfection; for who can search out the Almighty to Perfection?
Perhaps the Discovery of them may be a Part of the Happiness and Perfection of
another State of Existence, and some small Portion of the Employment of happy
contemplative Spirits in other Regions; and there, The Works of the Lord will
appear wonderful to them that delight therein. For if the First Being be
rational, intelligent, wise and good, as doubtless he is infinitely so, there
must of Necessity be in all his Works, Conduct and Actions ad extra, one
perpetual Analogy, and one continued Harmony through the Whole, and in every
single Part; each individual Organ and Law must be fitted to this great End,
viz. the Perfection of the Whole, and of each Part; and he who considers the
Economy of Nature, Providence, and Restoration, with greatest Attention and
Humility, will most clearly discern this Wisdom, Fitness, and Divine Order in
them.

. 17. SUPPOSE an infinitely wise, powerful and good Being, did intend to
produce something new, that he had no Pattern or Model of before Him, (as the
first intelligent Cause could not possibly have in Creation) as an Artificer;
for Example, (to descend the lowest in a Similitude) he could only express, in
sensible Images, the Genius, Nature, and Ideas of his own Mind, and fit the
Parts and Organs of such a Machine to the End and Use for which it was
designed, with Number, Weight and Measure; and so (to compare great Things with
small) Supreme Wisdom, having nothing but Himself, his own beneficent Nature
and Attributes before Creation, to copy forth and represent, could, in all his
Works of Wonder, delineate nothing but his own Substance, Nature, Wisdom,
Goodness, Justice and Truth. So that all Nature, all Creation, all the Worlds,
the Material, Moral and Spiritual, can possibly be nothing else, but the
supreme, immense and infinitely perfect Being, displayed, portrayed, and made
sensible and perceptible. Mundus universus nihil aliud est, quam Deus
explicitus, said a learned Man. To think otherwise, is a sort of Blasphemy, and
degrading of infinite Wisdom and Perfection below finite lapsed human
Intelligences. For there is no possible Work of any Man, but which in some
Degree is a Picture of himself, of his own Idea, or of the Constitution and
Complexion of his Mind at that Time.

. 18. IF then there be a perpetual Analogy running through all the Works of
God, Natural, Moral and Spiritual; if all his Workings ad Extra, be
Representations, Pictures and Hieroglyphics, stronger or weaker, more general
or more particular, of his own Nature, Complexion and Attributes; if the
material inanimated System of outward Things, being contrived with infinite
Fitness, Justness, Propriety and Delicacy, do represent his infinite Wisdom and
Power, in a more sensible, yet in a darker and weaker Manner: and if the
Economy of his universal and particular Providence, and the amazing Economy
of the Restoration of every individual lapsed Being, be stronger and more
irresistible Evidences and Representations of his infinite Penetration, (so to
speak) Benevolence and Power; then it must be acknowledged; that, through all
his Works, there runs one perpetual Progression, one continual Analogy, and
uninterrupted Harmony, of his own Nature, Wisdom and Power; and that as
Proportion is the Medium, and true Logic of material Natures and Beings, so
Analogy is the true Key and Analysis of spiritual Natures and Qualities; and as
the Data of the first is in Sensation, or the Notices from our Senses, or
accurate Experiment: so the Data of the last is in Attention and Reflection upon
our own spiritual Natures, and their Operations, and Experience of the
Qualities, Sentiments and Passions of our own Hearts and Souls; and carrying
these to as great a Height as possible. For I can conceive no clearer or more
distinct Manner to give a Child or an ignorant Person an Idea (though low and
imperfect) of the first Being, than to tell him He is like the Soul or living
Nature, of the best and most amiable Person he ever knew, infinitely exalted,
without his Imperfections; but who has Life and Being from Himself only:
whereas all his Creatures are Emanations from Him, and the Works of his Power:
And what is this, but a true Analogy? Just such a one, as when we give an
Infant or ignorant Person an Idea of the Sea, by showing him the nearest great
Lake, and telling him that the Sea is of the same Nature, but vastly bigger.

. 19. IT is plain from the natural, civil, and sacred History of the whole
human Race, from the visible and perceptible State of our Globe, its
surrounding Atmosphere, kindred Planets, and their Influences upon ours; that
Pain, Suffering and Misery, is as natural and necessary to us here in this
present State, as Existence is. It is utterly unavoidable but in Degree; none
ever lived, but felt it it some Kind or Degree or other. The Extreme Tenderness
and Delicacy of our lumbaginous and spermatic State, subject us to the
Distempers and Sufferings arising from the Indiscretions and bodily Diseases of
our Parents: The Weakness and Helplessness of Childhood and Infancy, expose us
to innumerable Accidents and Distempers. The imprudent and improper Nourishment
in Quantity or Quality, given us by our Mothers or Nurses, bring naturally on
us Suffering and Misery: The Grossness, Coarseness, and Inclemency of the
Element we live and breathe in, mechanically infects us with its noxious and
deleterious Qualities: Ignorance, bad Example, contagious Custom, and popular
Errors and Prejudices continue the Hazards and Dangers of Childhood. Strong
Passions and Appetites, a wrong Turn of Head or Heart, a corrupt and degenerate
Age, strengthen and confirm our Miseries and Misfortunes in Youthhood:
Disappointments, Misfortunes, Cares, Want of, or the bad Usage of the
Necessaries and Conveniences of Life, Luxury or Intemperance, Famine or
Scarcity, Epidemical Diseases, or unforeseen Accidents, one or other, or
perhaps all together, make the Complexion of Manhood: And old Age (the Cardinal
Disease of human Life) finishes the dark Scene of human Misery with perpetual
Aches, Sores and Infirmities of Body and Mind; a more sensible Dotage and
Childhood, a Taedium Vitae, with a Desire of Dissolution, which is yet
accompanied with a terrible Dread of it; all these conclude this Climax and
Progression of Misery; through which the very best and wisest, that lasts out
the natural Duration of Life, must pass, for his Punishment, Expiation, and
Purification; not to mention the Remorse and internal Crucifixion of those who
feel a Law in their Members warring against the Law of their Minds in a
perpetual Strife and Conflict. It is only in and through the Economy of the
Restoration, by the Knowledge of the Gospel, that these natural, necessary and
unavoidable Pains, Punishments and Miseries, can be turned, may be reckoned,
and are really Mercies, Blessings, fatherly Corrections, lose their Stings, and
become Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

. 20. PAIN, Punishment, and Suffering then would seem to be a natural,
necessary and (as it were) a mechanical Mean of Expiation, Purification and
Perfection, to all sentient and intelligent Beings, in this present State of
Existence: which Virtue, Attention and Care can only lessen, but which none can
totally, but only in a small Degree, avoid, if not by and through the Means
just now mentioned. As rubbing hard Bodies against one another, is the only
Method to polish and finish them; and the harder and longer the Friction, the
finer the Polish, and the more perfect the Figure; so Pain, in sentient and
intelligent Beings, arises from Resistance to Action, or from Re-action, which
in spiritual as well as material Agency, is always equal and contrary to
Action. Sentient Beings naturally, necessarily, and, as it were, mechanically,
recede from, and exert a Principle of Resistance and Re-action to the Cause of
Pain; intelligent Beings, caeteris paribus, necessarily fly from it with
greater Velocity, from the united Force of Sensation and Reflection. Sensation
and Perception begin the Aversion and Reluctance to the Cause or Occasion of
Pain, and Reflection turns it into an Abhorrence and Detestation.

. 21. CONSCIOUSNESS of the Reasons and Effects, seems in no wise absolutely
necessary toward Purification in general, at least toward the first Degrees
of it, as we see in Brutes, Children and Idiots. Pain and Punishment in such a
Degree, and often repeated, will naturally bring them to abstain from that, for
which they suffer. Consciousness of the End and Design of it seems only
necessary to accelerate, perfect and turn into a Habit, the Aversion and
Abhorrence of what has caused Pain, and to strengthen that Habit into a second
Nature; as Wood is made straight, first by softening it by Fire, and then
keeping it by Cords and Weights in a Situation contrary to its Curvature. Pain
and Punishment soften and melt down the Subject, Consciousness fixes and
hardens it, and gives it an habitual contrary Nature. Consciousness attends
single Acts only, and not Habits; when the Habit is perfected, Consciousness
vanishes and dies away (as a perfect Musician, while playing on an Instrument,
reflects not on single Strokes distinctly) so that Consciousness seems
necessary as a Check or Bar, to prevent Relapses; and seldom takes place till
the End and Design of Punishment is in some Degree obtained.

. 22. FROM what has been said, it is evident that this our Planet and its
Appendages, is really and literally a Prison or Gaol, a Place of Banishment, of
Pains and Punishment for a certain Period of Time, to lapsed sentient and
intelligent Beings: like Siberia among the Ruffians, the Bastille or the Pierre
incise with the French, or the Plantations or Newgate among us. And the
Inhabitants of both Kinds, sentient and intelligent, are, without a Figure:
Prisoners, Slaves, and Felons, under a State of Expiation and Purification. Our
whole Creation, our entire System, in regard to our defaced and spoilt Planet,
labors like Slaves at the Oar, is in Travail, in a perpetual Fermentation and
Effervescence, as in a malignant Fever, working for a Crise and Delivery. Some
Individuals may be delivered sooner, some later, according as their Expiation
and Purification is perfected; and at last the whole System, and all its
Inhabitants, must naturally and necessarily, but harmoniously or analogically,
and according to general Laws, undergo some great and violent Crise, and an
universal Jail-deliver will be brought about; but when and how this will be
accomplished, is beyond Conjecture; a Thousand Years are but as a Day here, and
the Ways of the Almighty are past finding out. It would seem as if the only
Problem, or Difficulty, (to speak so in regard to Omnipotence, where no real
Difficulty can happen) worthy of infinite Wisdom to solve, were to recover,
perfect and establish in perpetual and unrelapsing Order and Purity, free and
lapsed intelligent Beings, consistent with the Harmony of his own Attributes,
and the natural Powers with which he has endued them. How infinite Wisdom and
Power will bring this about, we can only conjecture in a few general Hints,
from such of his general Laws as are obvious, from final Causes, which are
plain, and must include some Part of the Ends in rational Agency; and from dark
Sketches of the Analogy of Things: not impossibly thus.

. 23. AN infinitely wise, good and powerful Being having created this System,
we cannot suppose, but it must have been as perfect and blissful, as its Nature
could admit, and his sentient, intelligent Creatures as happy, as their Natures
and Order could allow; and that he must have furnished them with Means and
Power to perpetuate, if not increase, this Perfection and Happiness. But from
the very Nature and Essence of Liberty; whoever has a Power to continue or
increase in a State, must also have a Power to fall back or decrease; whatever
is finite, must necessarily be fallible. Now suppose such finite fallible
Beings actually lapsed: the same wise and good Being must have ordered Things
so, not only that they should recover and rise again, but that their Fall and
Lapse should at last be a Mean, not only to strengthen, confirm and fix them in
Happiness ever after, (and this seems the only Mean, by which fallible free
lapsed Creatures, once actually fallen, could be brought to an illapsing State
of Stability) but even to increase the Degree of their Happiness and
Perfection; and this, I think, would not only be the full and plenary Solution
of this infinitely difficult Problem, but one worthy of its all-wise and
all-powerful Author only; and this he has effected, I think, by these three
Expedients or Means. 1. By continuing general Laws of Agency in material, moral
and spiritual Actions, plainly intimating, that the Concurrence of the same
Causes and Conditions will always produce the same Effects; and so leaving Room
for Consideration, Amendment, Improvement, Choice, and the Discernment of moral
Good and Evil, and thus securing Liberty and the other natural Powers of lapsed
Intelligences. 2. By tying down, sopiting and suspending the natural Powers of
the Soul for so long a Time, as is its Duration from the first original Male,
till the Bonds and Chains, by which their Exertion is restrained, be broken and
untyed by Death. That during this Time, the Benefit acquired by the progressive
Parentage (if they happen to return to Order and Habits of Virtue, or have
their moral Powers recovered) may operate on these infinitesimal Miniatures; by
mending their Natures, that they themselves may have time given to recover into
Order; and that the Interruption from the natural Powers arrived at their
Perfection, might not prevent the Acquisition and Recovery of the Moral Powers.
And, 3. By the Economy of Redemption by a Savior, which doubtless was
projected before the Creation of the World, or this System, and when the proper
Disposition to receive it, and to reap the Benefit of it, is acquired; and
which may in some Time or Place, explicitly or implicitly, be revealed, to
finish the Work of Restoration. But that not being my Province in a
Philosophical Disquisition, I proceed.

. 24. IT is the grossest Absurdity and Contradiction to suppose, that an
infinitely wise and beneficent Being would make either sentient or intelligent
Beings suffer, merely for Suffering's Sake. He must have had just, good and
kind Reasons for this his strange Work. And since it is certain, that both
sentient and intelligent Beings do and must unavoidably suffer, and are in a
State of Punishment, Misery and Banishment here; it necessarily follows, that
they are in a State of Expiation, Purification and progressive Perfection, in
their respective Orders; and will at last be set free, made happy, and
perfected, and confirmed in that State for ever. Omnipotence surely can, and
infinite Goodness, I hope, will do all this.

. 25. IF all is not Deceit and Illusion, it must be evident to a Demonstration,
that nothing imperfect or unhappy in its Order can come out of the Hands of
infinite Perfection; and yet it is Fact, that all sentient and intelligent
Beings here, are universally more or less, miserable and imperfect; and that
there never was any human Creature, in his right Senses, which in a whole
Duration of human Life, felt not, and thought not himself unhappy, miserable
and imperfect, at least, for some time, if not for the most of his rational
Life: and wished not himself earnestly, better, wiser, more perfect, and happy.
It is impossible, that infinite Wisdom and Goodness, can punish sentient and
intelligent Creatures, or make them miserable, but for some wise and beneficent
End and Purpose; from whence it will be evident to a rational Person, that of
necessity there must have been a State of Existence prior to this present:
wherein all those sentient and intelligent Beings, while in a collective Mass,
which have been, or shall be on this Globe, had misbehaved, rebelled, and run
into Disorder, probably, by idolatrising Creatures and Self, and preferring
them to the Creator. And the Account of this Rebellion and Lapse in Revelation,
may refer only to the last Scene or Act in the Tragedy, or the new modelling
this secondary State or partially lapsed System, when the slightest Trial of
Faith and Obedience was made; for certainly Nemo repent fit turpissimus;
finite Creatures can naturally acquire Habits of Virtue and Vice, or indeed of
any kind, only by Degrees, or single Acts repeated. Certain Consciousness, or
clear distinct Knowledge of this pre-existent State, would only feed idle
Curiosity; and might hinder and counter-act that implicit Trust, Dependence and
absolute Resignation in every Thing, so absolutely necessary to relative
Perfection and Happiness. For the Point in View of infinite Perfection, is to
bring all the finite sentient and intelligent Creatures to an absolute
voluntary Surrendry, and Trust of themselves, and every Thing relating to them
in Time and Eternity, to his Will and Pleasure implicitly; nothing less being
sufficient to establish and perpetuate the Divine Sovereignty, harmonise his
Attributes, and eternise the Peace, Happiness and relative Perfection of
universal Nature; which different Willing would eternally confound and perplex
anew, and bring on a second, or perpetuate the present Lapse.

. 26. IT is not impossible, that there are other States, Mansions, and
probatory Celestial Regions, proper and peculiar to the several imperfect
Degrees of the moral Faculties of spiritual Intelligences, with their
Creation-Bodies or Vehicles, according to the several remaining Degrees of
Imperfection, even almost in infinitum, in an ascending or descending
Progression. Infinite Wisdom and Goodness may have appointed, in general, a
certain limited Period, beyond which the Incrustation of their Creation-Bodies
cannot last, things being in such a State: But the actual Approach may be
quicker or slower, according to certain Terms and Conditions: which we know to
be the Case of our present mortal Tabernacles; and according to the bad or good
Usage of our Liberties in the Use of the Means afforded us for acquiring the
moral Virtues, and affixing the moral Powers in confirmed Habits; we may ascend
into more pure, more happy, and more perfect Regions, or descend into more
gross, miserable and dark Dungeons, almost in infinitum. But it would also
seem, that sentient and intelligent Creatures could suffer Pain and Misery only
to a certain finite and limited Degree, (though the Time may be eternal, all
Spirits being immortal by Nature) all the Activities and Passivities of such
Beings being necessarily finite and limited; and when they come to that Point,
they must necessarily return, wish for Deliverance, cry for Mercy, Pity and
Freedom, and endeavor it with the whole natural Powers of their Spirits; and
to this Point only, it would seem, an infinitely wise, beneficent and powerful
Being can intend to bring his lapsed, wandering miniature Creatures now under
the Gospel; and that he should be ready to receive them into Mercy, and allow
them the Means for restoring and recovering their lapsed moral Powers. But how
long Time it may require to bring them to this absolutely necessary Point, no
Reason or Philosophy (whether an Indefinite, that is, a creaturely or
relatively infinite Time) can determine; and Revelation has not made it plain
and explicit, but on the contrary has left it not only dubious, but seems to
point otherwise; to be sure not before all are brought to this indispensable
Point of Returning. The Economy, Satisfaction and Sufferings of the God-Man
Jesus Christ, could be only sufficient to render that Expiation, and
Restoration of the moral Power in a finite Time, which, in its own Nature, and
the Nature of God and of his Purity, must have been Infinite and Eternal. The
repairing the Indignity and Affront done to his Sovereignty and Purity, and the
deterring his other standing Creatures from Lapse and Rebellion, is not perhaps
left in their Power to prevent; that may be done by the necessary and
unavoidable Pains and Sufferings they must undergo, from the painful and
leprous Incrustation of the several Elements they must pass through; their
returning into Order, their Acquisition of the moral Powers of the Soul, and
fixing them in these, and consequently in permanent Happiness, entirely depends
on themselves, and the Use of the Means afforded.

. 27. IT is no easy Matter to form any precise limited Idea or Notion of
Substance either Material or Spiritual; all we certainly know of either, is,
that they exist, are Realities, and are the Base or Subject of real Qualities.
But we can no more penetrat into the Substratum or Support of these Qualities,
by the natural Activity of our Spirits, than our Eyes can see Objects at a
certain Distance; such is the Nature, Frame and Limitation of our Order and
Rank of natural Powers. We certainly know that material Substance is the
Substratum of Extension, Impenetrability, Passivity and Figure; and spiritual
Substance, of living, perceiving and willing, that is, of Cogitation or
Thinking, and also of beginning Motion in Bodies, and giving them a particular
Direction. The Aggregate, or Sum of all these respective Qualities (most of
which are contrary to the others) may be bound together or united by some Bond
of Union, which we shall never have any direct or immediate Conception of, till
we throw off this material Incrustation, that intangles and fetters the full
Exercise and Penetration of our natural Powers. And therefore, if we dropped both
Substances, as unknown and unknowable Things at present, or rather, if we
supposed both only mere Capacities, Recipients, Canals or passive Subjects of
contrary Qualities, as they flow, or are derived from the primary Source and
self-existent Cause of all Activity, Qualities and Realities, whose whole End
and Use (of these Capacities) was to receive and contain these Qualities,
limiting, contrary, and destructive of each other respectively; or, lastly, if,
as Geometers use the Method, we make the one Positive, the other Negative; this
way of considering this dark Subject might, perhaps, throw some Light on it:
And then imagined that Matter or Body was analogous to (but yet no-wise the
same with, but quite contrary, though not contradictory) to Spirit infinitely
condensed, concentred or incrassated: And that spiritual Substance was
analogous to Matter infinitely rarefied, refined or sublimed: Then, in the
Geometrical Manner of considering such respective Qualities and their Subject,
Body infinitely rarefied, refined and sublimed, would at last terminat in
limited Space or Expansion; and limited Space or Expansion infinitely
condensed, contracted and inspissated, would end in solid indivisible Points or
Monads, the common Idea of the component Particles of Body. And yet that Body
should be rarefied into Space, or Space condensed into Body, is an absolute
Contradiction and Impossibility; only this Manner in which Geometers consider
infinitely little, or infinitely great Quantities, is here suggested, as an
Illustration of material and spiritual Substance, so difficult to be explained.
But we not being able to conceive or comprehend Infinitude, or infinite Agency,
its Effects and Consequences, it may, perhaps, be said, that this is only
explaining one Obscurity by a greater. It may be so: All then we are absolutely
certain of is, that these essential Qualities of Matter and Spirit
respectively, viz. in Matter, Extension, Impenetrability, Divisibility,
Mobility, Passivity and Figure; and in Spirit, Living, Perceiving, Willing,
Self-activity, Self-mobility, and the Power of beginning Motion, and giving
Direction to Bodies; must necessarily be uniform, and always the same in
Degree, whatever State or Circumstances they may be in. These respective
Substances are always in their own Nature and Essence so contrary and
destructive of one another in their Qualities, that they become a perpetual
Bar, Obstruction and Obstacle to the Exertion of these their essential
Qualities. They are not indeed contradictory or destructive of one another's
Qualities in every Degree; they are not incompatible and unallyable (as we know
by Fact); but they are contrary; and one Degree of the Qualities of the one,
destroys a relative, equal or proportional Degree of the Qualities of the
other; and the Sum total of these Qualities in the one, destroys the Sum total
of the Qualities of the other, equally or proportionally, like Light and
Darkness; and an infinite Degree of the one may sopite or totally obstruct the
sensible Actions of the other, though not annihilat or absolutely destroy the
other in its Root or Nature. But Infinitude being above our Capacities, we can
only speak of the Effects of their Contrariety and Opposition in their finite
Degrees, and pronounce nothing of the Effects of infinite Operations; only we
are certain, that no less than an infinite Power and Operation in the one, can
totally extinguish and annihilat the Nature and Operations of the other;
Reaction being always contrary and equal to Action. We may have a fine
Illustration and analogous Resemblance of this infinite contrarv Action, from
the Nature of an infinite converging Series; in which from the next immediate
Step in the Progression, by passing through infinitely little of that Order,
the Terms from positive become negative; and likewise, from some Particles of
Matter, which after having got without their Sphere, from attractive become
repulsive, in respect to a particular Center; these Hints are far from an
affirming, or any Endeavor to prove, that Matter is only infinitely condensed
Spirit, and Spirit only infinitely refined Matter, as to their several
Substances: For the Fact I think false, impossible and contradictory; for
Matter, however refined and sublimed, is still Matter, and has the opposite
Qualities to Spirit, and have their essential Qualities in direct Contrariety;
and were it otherwise, in this Manner of illustrating the Subject, the Proof
were absolutely impossible; because the Effects of infinite Power and Agency
are known and knowable by Him only, whose Attributes are infinite Power and
Might. If the Proposition and Effect was true and real, no finite Agency could
effect it, nor finite Understanding evince it: But these Instances are adduc'd
only as an Illustration, to remove the seeming shocking Absurdity and Terror,
in most good Persons Minds, from affirming any Resemblance or Analogy between
material and spiritual Substances; for these evidently show, that similar and
analogous Effects are Realities in the Nature of Things, though their Manner and
Process be inconceiveable to us finite Beings; and also, as much as in me lies,
to take off any Mistakes and Misapprehension, as if I advanced any thing in the
Philosophic Explication of these Mysteries of Nature, inconsistent with
Revelation or Religion, as the Reverend Dr. Brown Bishop of Cork has done in
his Divine Analogy; not fully having understood my Manner of explaining the
Subject, or perhaps I had not made my Meaning sufficiently clear and plain; as
the Subject is in itself almost inexplicable, and ought to be guarded with all
possible Precision, if at all handled.

. 28. IN my poor Way of conceiving and conjecturing, from the obvious
Appearances in Nature subjected to Sense; from the final Causes the Supreme
Rational Being may possibly have in such external Operations; from the Analogy
carried from the Things that are seen, to those that are invisible, and only
intelligible; the most probable and satisfactory Account that can be found of
the Economy and Plan of the Restoration of finite lapsed Intelligences, seems
to be this, at least these may possibly be some of the prominent Lines of this
Plan: Some finite free Intelligences of the several Orders in the living
Hierarchies having by the Abuse of their Liberty, and committing Idolatry, by
too inordinate Commerce with the Creatures, and habitually turning away from
their Source the Creator, destroyed and cancelled the moral Powers of their
spiritual Natures: Infinite Wisdom and Power, by the Necessity of his
beneficent Nature, employing the whole Force of his Omnipotence and
Omniscience, to restore and recover them, without committing Violence on their
natural Powers, or on the Harmony of his own Attributes; first ties down and
contracts their natural Powers with Chains of gross Matter, from a (purposely,
or mechanically) ruined and defaced Elementary Globe, such as our present
Habitation is; Chains, which the natural Powers of the Spirit are necessarily
obliged to endeavor to be unloosing all the Time, from the original Creation
of this gross Body; during which Time, Means, Opportunity and Leisure is
allowed, for the Acquisition and Restoration of the moral Powers: As Felons and
Robbers are tamed and mended by working in the Mines, and tugging at the Oar.
By the Toil, Labor and Suffering, from this working off, and melting down the
gross and leprous Plaster, superinduced on the primitive Creation-Body, by
fileing, purifying and breaking these Chains which fetter the Activity and free
Agency of the natural Powers of the Soul, on this Creation-Body. First,
Reparation, and an Amend honorable is made to infinite Purity and Sovereignty;
and the bad Example to other Intelligences, removed: And in the mean time,
outward and inward Means may be offered and bestowed, by external Providence,
suprahumane and imperceptible Aid and Grace, and the Light and internal
Operation of the Divine Word and Reason, the Messiah, for recovering the
defaced moral Powers of the Soul. Some are under this Operation a shorter, some
a longer Time, according to the Wisdom and Designs of the Sovereign Reason, and
the Mansion they are to fill in the new Jerusalem, even till the last Scene,
which in the Nature of gross corruptible Matter can last but a finite Time,
either in the Nature of the Elementary Planet itself, with its Appendages, or
in the Incrustation on the primitive Creation-Bodies made of this elementary
Matter; which must crumble and dissolve into Dust within certain Limits of
Time, by the established Law of Nature; the first, possibly, from the Expense
and Fixation of Water, as Sir Isaac Newton insinuates, and the other necessary
Fluids; the others for want of Nutrition and Chylification, and both by Natural
and general Laws, but still within certain Limits less than real infinite. But
both must at last be perfectly purified; the Earth and its Appendages,
possibly, by an universal Conflagration; the particular gross Plaistering, by
being dissolved into its original Dust, that the primitive Creation Body may be
disincumber'd, and made supple and pliable to obey the Dictates of the
informing immaterial Spirit; and the Spirit, by the Acquisition and habitual
fixing of the Moral Powers. For there cannot be a more certain and indubitable
Truth, than that nothing imperfect in its Order could come out of the Hands of
infinite Perfection; and that nothing impure or imperfect in its Order, can
return to live and commerciate with, or be united to God perfectly, finally and
immutably.

. 29. This Infinitesimal Particle of Celestial Matter, this Miniature of a
Miniature in infinitum, decreasing in a continued analogical Progress, and
stored up in the Seeds of all Animals and Vegetables, from the first to the
last Animal and Vegetable; this divinely organis'd Vehicle or Corpuscle, in
which the immaterial Principle was inspired in its Creation, and to which it is
so intimately united by a particular Law of Union, and an individual Fitness
and Congruity, is inseparable from it in all its future States and
Circumstances of Duration, at least by any Degree of Force less than infinite.
The immaterial Spirit, the Spiritual Inhabitant of this Celestial Vehicle, is
in its own Nature immortal and imperishable, being an infinitesimal Miniature
of the Divine Nature and Substance, which is Self-existent. I say then, the
Spirit, the immaterial Substance, that informs this ethereal Creation Body, is
of its own Nature immortal and imperishable; but the material Vehicle, though of
a refined and ethereal Substance, is only eternal by the Divine Order and
Appointment, and comparatively in respect of other grosser and more dense
Compounds, of which Time and Use may alter the Form, though not destroy the
Substance; and perhaps their Perpetuity may be continued by a divine primary,
or secondary spiritual Influence, from both these immortal Principles. I am
sensible, these strong Figures may be exposed to Ridicule, and interpreted
profanely, by light Persons; but when they understand, and can explain with
Precision, what the Force of Infinitude (small or great) is, their Raillery and
Levity may be tolerable; such, of Necessity, must be the Language, when we
attempt to express perceptible only, and spiritual Things. I hope I have a due
Sense of the Purity and Perfection of the Divine Nature and Spiritual Things,
not to expose them maliciously and designedly to Contempt and Ridicule. My
whole Design is to help honest and sincere Persons to some Ideal Knowledge,
(which at best is but a poor Affair) that may possibly comfort and mend the
Heart, without hurting the Head.

. 30. IF there is any Verisimilitude or Consistency in this Sketch, it will
follow from it, that the lighter and thinner (while sweet and healthy) the
Crust and Plaster from this elementary System, that is laid over this Creation
Body, the more the natural Powers of the Spirit will be at Liberty to exert
their Functions, and acquire the moral ones; the Sufferings and Miseries of the
present State of our Existence will be fewer and less intense, and the total
Disengagement of the Spiritual Inhabitant from its Prison and Load, will be
more easy and perfect; and we shall shake off our Chains and Fetters, as we do
our Clothes to go to Bed. The universal Law of Nature, for every sentient and
intelligent Being, that is brought on this elementary Planet, is, first, to
have its spiritual and its celestial Body tied down, and concentred by Chains
and Fetters of this Element, into a Miniature of a Miniature, then into a
Punctum Saliens, and at last into a sensible elementary Body: During all this
Time, the spiritual Nature is working, like a Slave in the Mines, or at the
Oar, to extend this celestial Body to its original analogous Figure and
Dimensions, by breaking all its elementary Fetters; while yet at the same time
it is crusting over more densely the primitive celestial Body by Nutrition, and
the animal Functions with a gross leprous Plaster; when the Creation Body is
entirely develop'd, by giving a Facility to its Organs of all kinds, by Culture
and Use in their several Ways, its intellectual Faculties get Power and Liberty
to exert themselves; during which Time the Acquisition of the moral Powers may
and ought to take Place, and by Degrees, and in a nearly determinable Period,
this Plaster dries, hardens, and at last crumbles into Dust; and then the
Spirit with the celestial Body, if but partially purified, passes into other
States, Elements, and Mansions, as its Degree of moral Virtue, or Acquisition
of moral Powers require.

. 31. FROM this Representation of the State and Progress of sentient and
intelligent Beings in Spirit and Body, during their Banishment to this ruinous
Planet; it follows, that the Root, Faculty and Capacity of the Spirit, or its
natural Powers, continue potentially and radically the same; or that living,
perceiving, and willing, as to their Essence, Power and Capacity, are in all
States radically and invariably the same; though their Exercise, Acts and
Exertion be restrained and sopited by gross Matter. Whoever considers the
invariable Nature of spirit, must be convinced, that its giving Motions, with
their several Modifications, must always radically and potentially be the same,
and uniform, however their Acts may be suspended, sopited, or destroyed by
gross Matter, and the Im-mechanism of Bodies; and that all the Functions of the
Body, all its voluntary and involuntary Motions, all its living and vital
Actions, all its internal and external Operations, all its Sensations, Passions
and Willings, that depend on the Body, are all but Cogitation, or Thinking, in
some Degree or other, and its several Modifications, as really, as intense,
fullgrown Thinking, with Reflection, or Meditation, is; in a Word, that the
Soul, Spirit, or living Principle, is really the true and only intelligent
Being, and the Body only is its Organ, Instrument or Tool, and but a passive
Adjunct of the living Intelligence; and consequently, that, 1. our acquired
Knowledge is but Remembrance; 2. that a moral Sense and Faculty; 3. that innate
Ideas of God and Virtue, of moral Good and Evil; That, 4. spiritual Sensation
and spiritual Senses; and that, 5. the Soul uses material Organs (though not of
gross Matter only) in all its Operations, all these are as much Philosophical
Realities (however ridiculed and exposed by ignorant Persons) as the same
Things are, when sensibly and outwardly transacted on our finished and perfect
external Senses; and that, 6. All our Culture, Study and Labor, to acquire
Sciences and Knowledge, or to perfect our natural Powers, terminat only in
fileing off, melting away, and scraping down, those Chains, and Crust
superinduced upon them; and are only removing Superfluities, reducing
Excrescences, and rendering the gross Patchwork superinduced on our spiritual
Body, pliant, supple and correspondent, with the least Resistance to it; that
the Creation Body may be at Liberty to extend and disincumber itself: And,
Lastly, That the shortest and readiest Way to true and solid Knowledge, is to
endeavor with the utmost Vigor, and strongest Effects of our spiritual
Nature, to recover and acquire the moral Powers of the Soul defaced and
cancelled by the Lapse, viz. Justice, Goodness and Truth; or, in the Revelation
Language, Faith, Hope, and Charity; to which these will be found, when justly
explained, entirely analogous and consonant; for it could only be to allow Time
and Uninterruption from the natural Powers, had they been always in their full
Extent and Force, that they have been thus tied down, and sopited; so that now
they can only rise and extend in Proportion, as the moral Powers are acquired.

. 32. THE Activity, Sensibility and Penetration, the voluntary and involuntary
Motions of this our Elementary Body, the animal Functions, the more material
Acts of Thinking and Cogitation, such as Sensation, Memory, Imagination,
Attention, etc. are all radically and primarily performed, by the Self-action
and Self-motion of the immaterial Spirit, on this Creation-aethereal Body
principally; as Sulphurous Inflammations raise Mountains, and as Springs, and
Weights move Clock-works; with this notable Difference, that the first has an
internal, immortal Spring of Self-action, the other only a temporary and
transitory one. Perhaps, for Example, toward voluntary and involuntary Motion,
or toward the Exertion of the animal Functions; I say, perhaps, there may not
be wanted any foreign, independent and perplexed subtle Fluid, of whatever
Nature; if the animal Appearances and Functions can be more simply, as clearly
and fully explained, by the Action of a self-active and self-motive spiritual
Substance, informing and influencing a fitly and divinely organized ethereal
Body, and thereby immediately impressing its Action and Energy on the gross
earthly Plaster laid over it. A true spiritual Substance, of the very lowest
Order, must necessarily have in itself a Spring of Self-action, a Principle and
Faculty of Self-motion, from its own internal Nature and Essence. I can have no
Notion of a spiritual Substance, that has not a Power of beginning and
impressing Motion on Matter or Body fitly disposed; there seems no Distinction
so essential between Spirit and Body, as Activity and Passivity; it is true this
Activity in created spiritual Substances is finite and limited, and may be
further restrained by gross Matter to any Degree; but it will be always
sufficient to begin and impress Motion on Body, so long as the Inertia of Body
is not greater, than the Self-activity of such an Order of spiritual
Substances, else it could not in any Sense be called self-active. And to
produce muscular Motion, and the animal Functions and Appearances, there may be
nothing more necessary, than Self-activity, and Self-mobility, in a greater or
lesser Degree; and divine Organisation, Fitness, and not insuperable
Resistance, or rather a ready Facility, in the primitive ethereal Vehicle,
which may overcome the Load of Plaster and Rust laid over it: I say, perhaps,
this may be sufficient to account fully for all the animal Appearances; a
foreign subtle Fluid may be necessary to explain the Appearances of inanimated
Matter; but seems here superfluous, and looks perplexed and operose, and unlike
the Operations of the God of Nature, which are always from easy and simple
Causes, and by one such Cause produce various and beautiful Effects. And I
think there is scarce accounting for the infinitely different Degrees of
Sensibility, the Degrees of Stature and Growth, and the Degrees of Penetration,
and of quick and slow Thinking, Memory and Solidity, both in sentient and
intelligent Animals, without allowing the Plaistering and Soder, on the
Creation ethereal Body to sit lighter, thinner and less incumbring on some
than on others, and the ethereal Organs to be more at Liberty in the vastly
sensible and quick Thinkers and Feelers, than in the slow.

. 33. IT would seem in this progressive State of Purification of lapsed
sentient and intelligent Beings, that when one Crust or Plaster from the
Element to which they are confined, is worn off, another may grow on, of the
Nature of the Celestial or Terrestrial Mansion, which they inhabit, fitted to
the Degree of the acquired moral Powers; and this in a continual Ascent or
Descent, till the moral Powers are perfected and confirmed into Habits, and the
ethereal or spiritual Body is purified and refined from all the Dross and Rust
it had contracted; and then will be accomplished their last permanent and
eternal State, suited to their Order.

. 34. THE specific Law of Attraction, Fitness and Similarity of the Element or
Planet, to the Degree of the moral Purity or Impurity in sentient and
intelligent Beings, may as naturally and necessarily determine and attract them
to this their specific Region or Mansion, as the Eggs of Insects, and Seeds of
Plants scattered and blown by the Wind, are directed, drawn and adhere, by
Electricity, to the Leaves of those Plants and Trees only, which are fittest
and have the most proper Juices for their Adhesion, Incubation and
Vivification, and for crusting them over, to defend their Delicacy and
Sensibility while young and tender, from such Injuries as would put an End to
Life. For a Law of Attraction, Fitness and Similarity will be found to hold
good, either simply or in some kind of Proportion, or analogically, through all
Creation, as well in Spirits, as in Bodies, in the natural, moral and celestial
Worlds, till the first and supreme Being become locally and finally All in all,
and that All be in him with Perfection and analogous Similarity in their
several Natures, as the Fish, or Rivers are in the Sea, and that he acts and
influences, and gives Perfection and Happiness to all Things He has made.

CONCLUSION.
THIS rude and unfinished Sketch may possibly be thought by some, an imaginary
and enthusiastical Romance, and so perhaps it may be. It is innocent, if a
Fable; and if thought otherwise, by proper and competent Judges, I should
renouce and disclaim it. But on the most intense, anxious and mature
Observations and Reflections on universal Nature, on allowing the Supreme Being
to be a wise, good, powerful and rational Agent, admitting final Causes when
they are obvious, and Analogy when plain and simple; the Outlines, and
Groundwork of this System may be just and solid, however faulty the Detail and
Execution may be. I can be answerable for nothing, but the Honesty of my
Intention in it.

END of the FIRST DISCOURSE.
DISCOURSE II. Philisophical CONJECTURES ABOUT THE Preference of VEGETABLE TO
ANIMAL FOOD: AND OF THE End and Design of PROVIDENCE, IN Appointing the FIRST,
AND, ON TRIAL, Permitting the LATTER.
Genesis i. 29. And God said, Behold, I have given you every Herb bearing Seed,
which is upon the Face of all the Earth, and every Tree, in which is the Fruit
of the Tree yielding Seed, to you it shall be given for Meat. Genesis ix. 3. Every
living thing that moves, shall be Meat for you; even as the green Herb have I
given you all things. Ver. 4. But Flesh with the Life thereof, which is the
Blood thereof, you shall not eat.
DISCOURSE II.
Philosophical CONJECTURES ABOUT THE Preference of VEGETABLE TO ANIMAL FOOD:
AND OF THE End and Design of PROVIDENCE, in Appointing the First, and, on
Trial, Permitting the Latter.
. 1. IT is certain that by our Make, by the Frame of our Organs, we are now
fitted as for Vegetable, so for Animal Food. The Form of some of our Teeth, the
Liver, the Pancreas, and many other of our internal Bowels and conglomerate
Glands, seem primarily and chiefly designed and fitted to antidote the
Mischiefs arising from animal Food, and fermented Liquors, at least for some
Time, and in the Days of our Youth and Vigor: For certainly, a Part of the
Designs of any intelligent Agent may be known by Analogy justly drawn, and by
final Causes, and is the best Evidence finite and lapsed Creatures seem capable
of receiving, in the Designs and Contrivances of the Creator, till they come to
converse with him Face to Face. They may be mistaken in them, as well as in
every other kind of Evidence, being finite, lapsed, and consequently fallible
Creatures: But this seems to be the only Evidence they are capable of at
present in such Matters; and may show evidently the Design of the Author of
Nature, as a unequal Screw of any Number of Spires, shows, that it was designed
to fit some concave one of the same Number of Spires and Diameter. Chance is
only a technical Word, to denote our Ignorance of the true and physical Cause
of Order and Design; and yet admitting the Existence of Chance, that through
the whole human Race there should have been, in the infinite Number of their
Organs, a perfect Similarity by Chance only, and not Design, may, by a fair
Calculation, be shown to be as infinite to finite, that is mathematically
impossible. But the Question I design to treat of here, is, Whether Animal or
Vegetable Food was, in the original Design of the Creator, intended for the
Food of Animals, and particularly of the human Race? And I am almost convinced
it never was intended, but only permitted, as a Curse or Punishment, and a Cure
for a Malady, or (as the French term it) a pis-alle, and because infinite
Wisdom and Power could make no more of his corrupted rebellious free Creatures
in their present State; and for this infinitely wise and paternal End, He seems
to have permitted it; 1. To let them feel and experience the natural and
necessary Effects of their own Lusts and Concupiscence, by painful and cruel
Distempers: Feeling and Experience being the surest Means by which a finite
lapsed Creature can know and learn. 2. To shorten the Duration of their natural
Lives, that Sin, Misery, and Rebellion, might not increase infinitely. 3. To
produce naturally, and in a Manner consistent with Liberty, and the other
natural Powers of the Soul, (which being derived from Him, and being his
Miniature Images, He neither could nor would force or destroy) those Sufferings
and Miseries, and Dislike of inordinate Lusts and Enjoyments, that might make
them think, ponder, and return to Order, Love of Virtue, and its source and
Original. And, 4. To sink and contract the natural Powers of the Soul, (viz.
Living, Understanding, and Will), by means of such frail Bodies, into a Level
with the decayed and lapsed moral Ones, ( viz. Justice, Goodness, and Truth)
which by this Rebellion were greatly corrupted and degraded. The Reasons that
incline me to think in this Manner, are these following:

. 2. 1. WHATEVER be the true, primogenial, and last Principle of Bodies, beyond
which it is impossible to analyze or divide them, these are incontestably found
in all animal and vegetable Bodies, as has been before observed: 1. Sulphur,
Oil or material Heat, from whence Spirit and Activity. 2. Salt, or hard angular
Particles highly attractive, and dissolvable in Water. 3. Air, or small elastic
Particles. 4. Water or Phlegm, from whence alone Fluidity: And, lastly, Earth,
the Base and Substratum of these others. In the due and proportional Union of
these, do the Variety and Difference of animal Substances consist. Now it is
past all Doubt in Philosophy, and in philosophical Chemy, that animal
Substances of most kinds, possess in a much greater Proportion the two first of
these Principles, viz. Salts and Oils, than Vegetables, which partake more of
the last, viz. Air, Water, and Earth. But from many undeniable Experiments, the
two first Principles are known to be the most active, energic, and deleterious,
and tend more, by their Activity, to the Division, Dissolution and Destruction
of the Subject, than those others, when they enter in any great Proportion. 2.
The Jelly, the Juice or Chyle of animal Substances, is infinitely more
tenacious and glewy Vide Memoirs of the Academy Royal for 1729 and 1730.
, and its last Particles more closely united, and separated with greater
Difficulty, than those of vegetable Substances. This is evident from the
Experiments made with them in joining of Wood, and is known to all Artificers,
and may be made manifest to the Senses in the Difference between the Tenacity
of Camp-jelly, or Fish-glew, and that of Paste made of Flower or Barley; or
from the Strength of Ropes or Cords made of Cat-gut or Leather, and those made
of Tow or Hemp, of the same Diameter: And therefore animal Food must much
sooner, more strongly, and irremediably make Viscidities in animal Fluids, and
more schirrously obstruct the Capillaries and Glands, than vegetable
Substances. 3. But the far more pernicious and destructive Part, is the Salts,
and Oil, abounding more in most animal than in vegetable Substances; of which
there are so many and convincing Demonstrations, that none can have any Doubt
of it, that has the least Acquaintance with natural Philosophy: For our Blood
and Juices being nourished and supplied by such Substances, as abound most with
these active elementary Principles, must necessarily be stored and saturated
with Salts and Sulphurs; and these, being always in a State of Action, are the
true, original, and the most adequate Causes of the most excruciating
Distempers. 4. When to these, strong, fermented and spirituous Liquors are
added as a Vehicle, or diluting Mixture, and join to the Salts and Sulphurs of
animal Substances, not only their inflammable Spirits and tartarous Salts, but
their condensing and hardening Quality on the Food in the Stomach, the
Digestion is by that means hindered and stopped, and the Food not being
sufficiently divided and comminuted, but broken only into gross Particles, does
more quickly and obstinately thicken the Juices, and obstruct the Glands and
Capillaries, than vegetable Substances. 5. Animal Juices and Substances, before
they were turned into Flesh, must have been strained through infinitely smaller
and more numerous Tubes, such as the last and extreme Capillaries are (some of
which are not bigger than the six hundredth part of an Hair); by which Means
their Particles must be rendered extremely smaller and finer, and consequently
have a much greater Degree of Attraction, than those of Vegetables, which pass
through fewer Strainers, and have no other motive Powers but the Heat of the
Sun; whereas those of animal Substances have, besides the Sun, the Force of
muscular Digestion, and of the Motion of the Heart; the Flesh of Animals, I
say, must, upon this Account, necessarily consist of smaller Particles, and so
be united with a greater Force, and endowed with a greater Degree of
Attraction, and consequently must, with far greater Difficulty, be digested and
separated, than vegetable Substances possibly can. And hence it is that
carnivorous Animals are much more deleterious Food, being endowed with much
finer and more pungent Salts and Sulphurs, than those Animals that live on
Vegetables only, as both the higher Savor and deleterious Effects of the first
abundantly show. From all which it is plain to a Demonstration, that animal
Substances must naturally and necessarily incrassate the Juices, and produce
Obstructions in the Glands and Capillaries, and consequently create Pains and
Diseases, much more readily than vegetable Substances. 6. It is plain by
Weight, that the Substance of most animal Food is specifically heavier than
that of most Vegetables commonly used for Food, sometimes in the Proportion of
three to two. The Fibers and Juices of animal Bodies are not only more compact
and closely united, and have fewer Vacuities than those of Vegetables, whereby
the digestive Powers have less Difficulty in concocting and grinding equal
Quantities of Vegetable than animal Food; but by the less Flavor and Savor of
vegetable than animal Food, the Appetite is sooner satisfied, and is under less
Temptation to Excess in the first than in the latter; and it is consequently
better and sooner digested, circulated and secreted, especially by tender and
delicate digestive Powers, and so cannot so readily cause Viscidities and
Obstructions. Lastly, Infinite Experiment, and the best natural Philosophy,
confirm to a Demonstration, that those Substances, which have least of Salt and
Sulphur, of Spirit, Oil, and hard pungent Particles, and most of soft Earth,
Water and Air, are the fittest to circulate, and be secreted through animal
Tubes, create least Resistance to the motive Powers, tear, rend, and wear out
the Tubes themselves least, and form less obstinate and powerful Obstructions,
in the smaller Vessels; and consequently, that vegetable Substances, which
consist of a less Proportion of Salts and Sulphurs, i. e. of pungent and fiery
Particles, and of a greater Proportion of Earth, Water and Air, i. e. of less
active and cooler Particles, will be less ready to create Diseases, and shorten
Life, than an equal Quantity of animal Substances, which have all these in an
inverted Proportion. In a Word, vegetable Substances are more rare, less
compact, less coherent, more easily dissolvable and digestible, turn into a
lighter Chyle, have less Salt, Oil, and Spirit, and consequently are less
heating and inflaming, than animal Substances, and so obstruct and tear animal
Tubes less.

. 3. IF this Account be just and philosophical, and if it be lawful at all to
enquire into final Causes, (which, if the first Being be rational and
intelligent, and acts with Design, and for some End, is not only lawful, but
laudable, when done with Modesty and Humility) then certainly one Part of his
Design in permitting animal Food, must of Necessity have been to shorten the
Duration of human Life, to create, or at least to permit us by it, to multiply
and enrage Diseases, Misery and Sufferings; since it is evident to a
Demonstration, that it must always produce this Effect, and will always have it
preferable to vegetable Food; and whatever is, naturally and necessarily is,
and is permitted by the first Being, we may with the utmost Certainty conclude,
was at least one Part of his Design; and if Suffering, Pain and Misery here be
necessary for our Purification and Recovery out of this degenerate State, then
very probably that might be his Design in this Permission. This Phenomenon in
Providence, (the Permission and Use of animal Food) and Fact in Revelation, is
not accountable any otherwise, than that Pain, Suffering and Diseases, being a
natural and necessary Mean of Expiation and Purification, in the Economy of
Restoration, Infinite Wisdom permitted it, though unwillingly, as his strange
Work, against the Grain, as it were, for that End solely; as a kind Father
suffers his unnatural and perverse Son to be carried to Gaol, to suffer Hunger,
Cold, Pain and Confinement there, as the only Mean to make him sober,
considerate, wiser and better. For that animal Food and fermented Liquors will
more readily, certainly, and cruelly, create and exasperate Diseases, Pains,
and Sufferings, and sooner cut off Life than vegetable Food will, there can be
no more Doubt than in any Proposition of Euclid, if Reason, Philosophy, the
Natures of Things, or Experience, have Evidence, or Force in them; and it is
very observable, that this Indulgence for animal Food was not granted, till the
Era of Longaevity was expired, or at least they took place together; and not
till the spiritual Corruptions of Pride, Tyranny, Malice, Revenge, Murder, and
brutal Commerce, so universally raged, that infinite Wisdom, to begin a new
World, was forced to destroy, by a Deluge, the whole Race of Mankind, except a
few of the most innocent and least depraved Individuals, such as they were, far
from perfect, but the least bad of the Race: this seems so, if any Credit be
given to the Jewish History of Nature.

. 4. IT will be no Difficulty to one acquainted with Revelation, to find the
like Permissions in the divine Economy: Nothing is more plain and demonstrable
from Nature, and its eternal Laws, and from Justice and Equity, than that in
the original Intention, one Woman was designed for one Man, and no more; for
there being no Difference between the Sexes but in their outward Frame, and the
Configuration of the Shell or Tabernacle; (their essential Nature and spiritual
permanent Form being of the same Degree, constant and invariable; different
Culture and Form making all the real Difference); infinite Wisdom might then,
with the same Wisdom and Propriety, have given the Male, more Eyes, Stomachs or
Heads, as more Wives; and yet, for the Hardness of their Hearts, God permitted
Plurality of Women to the Jews. This same People, though they had not only God's
general and imperceptible Providence, as we now have, for their Government and
Direction, but his miraculous, sensible and visible Presence, to instruct and
guide them, yet they wanted a King, as the other Nations had, and he gave them
one in his Wrath. Infinite Goodness, intending always, by the whole Power of
his Omnipotence and Omniscience, to restore his lapsed and rebellious
Creatures, consistent with their Liberty, and the natural Powers he had given
them, and the Harmony of his own Attributes, descends below his first
Intention, and drops the primary and original Perfection of his Commands to
them, for a Time, to condescend to their Weakness and Infirmity, in order
afterward to bring them up to it again. As a kind Father, who to wean his rash
and giddy Child from the Fire, holds his Finger near a Candle, till he begets a
sensible Fear and Dread in him of being too familiar with that dangerous
Element.

. 5. UPON the Foot of natural Religion only, and from the strict Rules of
natural Justice and Equity, how any one can justify the taking away the Life of
a Fellow Creature, out of Wantonness, Luxury and Riot, and not from Necessity
and Self-defence, so long as there may be found sufficient Store of vegetable
Food to carry on the Expenses of Living, and the more agreeable Performance of
the animal Functions; to give a living Creature the greatest Pain it can
possibly receive, and take from it the only Happiness it is capable of, viz.
its Life, (which none can restore or recompense) merely to scratch callous
Organs more sensibly; how, I say, to account for this barbarous and savage
Wantonness on the foot of mere natural Religion and natural Equity only,
without Revelation, I can by no means conceive. That the infinitely wise Author
and Lawgiver of Nature, who sees through the whole System of Intelligences at
once, and perfectly knows for what Ends and Purposes he has made them, and sent
them here, and is the sole Proprietor of Life and Happiness, may dispose of
them how he pleases, knows when they have finished their probatory and
expiatory Course, and is able to recompense the Loss of a lower Life, by the
Gift of a higher; for it is not impossible, the Animals may have been a lower
Order of rational Intelligences, who, lapsing less, are sooner, and with less
Suffering, recovered; and since they suffer with us, they may be restored with
us; the Apostle says, the whole Creation travelleth together; that is,
probably, the whole System of Saturn, the Goal of God's Creation: For Him, I
say, to give up the Lives of a lower Rank of Beings, for the Expiation,
Instruction, or Admonition, or other Benefit of a higher, may be an Act of
great Justice, Wisdom and Goodness. And, if it might be allowed us to
conjecture, one wise End and Purpose in this Permission of animal Food, might
be to punish, admonish and correct us, by bodily Distempers, so as to bring us
to reflect, repent and amend; or even, to shorten the Time of our Sufferings
here, and by the Violence of our Diseases, and a nearer Prospect of Death, and
a future Reckoning, to reclaim us sooner and more effectually; and at the same
Time to advance these Victims to a higher State of Being and Happiness.
Probably for these mentioned (but to be sure for wise and good) Ends and
Purposes, has God by Revelation given us a Permission, or Patent, for the Use
of animal Food: But for fermented Liquors, He has given us none, that I know
of; neither are they natural, or proper; nor were they ever approved or
recommended for common Use, or as proper and ordinary Drink; but only as
Physic, or a Cordial, on Festivals, or at Sacrifices, on Sickness, or in
Extremities. In the early and innocent Ages of golden Simplicity, no Hint
supposes them commonly known or tried. And if fermented and spirituous Liquors
were used only as bitter Draughts, Cordials and chalybeat Medicines, to brace
and wind up the Stomach, and alimentary Tubes and Solids transiently, for a
short Time; on Sickness, Lowness, Fainting, Fatigue, and inclement Seasons, as
they seem to be intended by the Author of Nature; they might be Blessings, and
great temporary and transient Reliefs; but as they are now used constantly at
Meals, as common Beverage to dilute solid Food, and to make Persons easy under
a Load of high rich animal Food, they become the efficient Causes of most
Diseases; and upon the most serious Enquiry, I could never find an adequate
natural Cause, for the Frequency of nervous and atrocious chronical Distempers
now, from what they were formerly, nor of the Stuntedness, Punyness and
Feebleness, so conspicuous among the better Sort, from what they were before
the Conquest, and in our Gallic Wars; but the free and frequent Use of strong
and spirituous Liquors, and rich and high Foods, with foreign Cookery, at that
Time introduced first; and living in great Towns, and using only Coaches and
Chairs, and sedentary Employments and Diversions. And drinking Water only, and
living low, is the only adequate Antidote and Remedy for these Distempers thus
produced; for no Axiom is so certain in Physic, as that Diseases must be cured
by their Contraries.

. 6. THE Hurt and Damage all fermented Liquors do an animal Body, is evident
from many Considerations; as, 1. That it hardens, constricts and binds up the
Fibers, and strongly unites the Particles of animal Substances, so that they
are with much greater Difficulty separated and divided, i. e. digested. A Piece
of Meat will continue sweet and sound, for many Years in Wine or strong Beer,
or in any strong fermented Liquor; the Liquor cementing and pinning together
the Parts of the Meat; and the same happens when they are mixed in the Stomach;
by which the Digestibility and easy Dissolution of it, is obstructed; so that
in such a Mixture Mutton is turned into Beef, and Beef into Shoe-Leather. 2.
There is in strong Liquors a crisping, corrugating, or caustic Quality workt on
the Fibers, which burns and dries them up, and destroys their elastic and
ductile Virtue, and consequently renders them unfit to be broken and divided in
the Stomach. This is evident from the Use commonly made of strong Beer, as the
best Plaster for Sprains, Relaxations and Strains; and that Brandy will really
stop Haemorrhages and Ruptures in the Blood Vessels, by burning and wrinkling
the tender Fibers and Capillaries, and so by this crisping Quality must keep
Food from being readily and perfectly digested. 3. The Fire and Heat in strong
Liquors, by stimulating and twitching the Fibers and Coats of the Blood Vessels
and Nerves, and consequently bringing them into quick and frequent Vibrations,
and elastic Efforts, will break and tear the Fibers of the alimentary Tubes,
and separate their Union and Continuity, so as at last to wear out these
Organs, at least, much sooner, and with greater Pain and Suffering, than Water
or aqueous Liquors possibly can. Lastly, It is a common and well-known
Experiment, that to stunt the Growth of young Animals, as Dogs and Cats, they
need only be frequently rubbed over with Brandy, Rum, or any Spirit. This stops
the Ductility and Extension of the young animal Fibers, that they cannot be
dilated and develop'd by the Force of the Circulation, and so stunts their
Growth. From all which it is plain, that strong, but especially spirituous
Liquors, are really Poison to an animal Constitution; and their ill Effects,
not only in shortening the Lives, but in stunting the Growth and Stature of the
lower Rank of People, from the late frequent Use of Gin, Punch, and other
spirituous Liquors, have become so flagrant, as to call aloud for the just
Indignation of the Legislature; and it is to be wished, that an effectual
Remedy may be found out for so destructive an Evil. And I am fully convinced,
that the primary and original Design of the Author of Nature for the solid Food
of Animals, was nothing but earthy Particles mixed with Water and Air, finely
divided and cemented only, with the least Oil and Salt possible, as they are
found in Seeds, Fruits, young Vegetables, and farinaceous or pulpous Roots,
with Water only for Drink; which alone would make the Animal last the longest,
and with the fewest Pains and Diseases. But this Diet must be only tried and
begun with the Young, while their Fibers are tender and sweet.

. 7. THAT all sensitive, as well as intelligent Creatures, are in an expiatory,
purifying and progressive State here, and going on to a greater Degree of
Perfection, and a nobler State of Being in their several Orders, is
demonstrable from the utter Contradiction and Impossibility there must be, that
an infinitely wise and good Being could create sentient and intelligent Beings
to suffer, for no other Reason but for the sake of Suffering; or that he should
make Creatures to suffer for any other End or Purpose, but for Expiation,
Purification and progressive Perfection of Being, and to establish and confirm
them in their acquired State of Perfection: Neque enim, sub justo Deo, miser
esse quisquam, nisi mereatur, possit, says St. Augustine most divinely. Most of
the Animals are Martyrs for the human Species in Food or Sacrifice: Some of
them are Food for one another; all of them are subject to epidemical Diseases
and casual Misfortunes; a few of them pass their Time much more comfortably
than others; all of them but unhappily at best, and go through Death at last.
All this must be for some wise Purpose, and none can be nobler, than that of
Expiation, Purification and progressive Perfection of Being; and silent
Admonition, and teaching us, their superior Order of Beings. Consciousness of
this End, either to them or us, might retard this Effect. Childhood, Idiotism,
and many cephalic and nervous Distempers, can bring no Consciousness of the
divine End and Design of this Economy along with them, even to intelligent
Beings; it is sufficient, that Consciousness come when the End is accomplished,
or the designed Perfection attained. At what Time animal Food came first in
Use, is not certainly known. He was a bold Man who made the first Experiment;
Illi robur et aes triplex circa pectus erat. To see the Convulsions, Agonies
and Tortures of a poor Fellow Creature, whom they cannot restore nor
recompense, dying to gratify Luxury, and scratch callous and rank Organs, must
require a rocky Heart, and a great Degree of Cruelty and Ferocity. I cannot
find any great Difference on the Foot of natural Reason and Equity only,
between feeding on human Flesh, and feeding on brute animal Flesh, except
Custom and Example. I believe some rational Creatures would suffer less in
being fairly butchered, than a strong Ox, or red Deer; and in natural Morality
and Justice, the Degrees of Pain here, make the essential Difference; for as to
other Differences, they are relative only, and can be of no Weight with an
infinitely perfect Being. Did not Use and Example weaken this Terror, and make
the Difference, Reason alone could never do it. Perhaps it may be conjectured,
that since Sacrifices were certainly an original, revealed or traditional
Institution, and that no Nation under the Sun, hitherto known, was without
them, they being, it would seem, a chief Part in the grand Economy of the
Restoration; Sacrifice, I say, might have been originally instituted, 1. To
admonish and inform the Sinner silently, and without committing Violence on his
Liberty, what he deserves; and implicitly to tell him, that he deserves the
same Death he makes the poor Brute undergo. For the Liberty of Mankind seems so
precious, being the Root of Intelligence, that it is wonderful in how many
Shapes infinite Wisdom and Goodness, has put Himself, in the Conduct of
Providence and Nature, to preserve it inviolate; and at the same time to
instruct and admonish his free lapsed Intelligences. I believe a good natural
Philosopher might show with great Reason and Probability, that there is scarce
Beast, Bird, Reptile nor Insect, that does not, in each particular Climat,
instruct, and admonish Mankind of some necessary Truth, for their Happiness
either in Body or Mind. And, 2. To continue the Expectation of all Ages, of
some more noble and meritorious Sacrifice, some time or other to be celebrated.
And it is not impossible, that the rude and untaught Mob, who were employed in
the lower servile Offices about Sacrifices, might have been the first who
ventured on animal Food, (if it was not instituted before as a Sacrament with
the same Intention as the Eucharist was afterward) their Station habituating
them to bear with less Pain, the Sufferings of their Fellow Creatures while
sacrificed; and they finding it palatable and luscious, might recommend the Use
of it to Others. Perhaps, I say, this might have been the Original Institution
of animal Food among all Nations. However, as this is only a remote Conjecture
to account for the early Commencement of animal Food, so contrary to the
original Nature of Man, and the Design of the Creator, and has no Regard to
those concerned in our unbloody Sacrifice; I proceed now to observe how
cautiously, and with what an evident Forbid, the Jewish Law directs this Permit
of animal Food, viz. absolutely and positively not to eat the Blood of the
Animal (in which not only its Life, but its most delicious Savor and most
deleterious Qualities chiefly consist, and because Blood Globules, by their
Rotundity, Volubility, and Elasticity, resist Trituration, that is, Digestion).
Now this in Reality, and by Insinuation and Moral, is to say, That since for
the Hardness of your Hearts, and your present unconquerable Lustings, you
cannot be brought to abstain altogether from animal Food; yet because in the
Blood is the Life thereof, and all its deleterious, morbific and noxious
Qualities, you are to drain it as much as possible of all its Moisture and
Juice, (for the Serum as well as the Grume, mostly consists of globular
Particles), and eat it plain, roasted or boiled, to drain it still more: By
this Method, animal Food will be much less pernicious, and will approach very
near to Vegetables. There is no understanding this Permission any other Way,
nor is it otherwise to be reconciled to common Sense, or rational Conception,
however both Jews and Christians have at present dwindled and diluted its true
Import, out of Luxury.

. 8. THIS Doctrine is further confirmed by this surprising Circumstance in the
Permission, that there is a very particular and otherwise unintelligible
Distinction made between clean and unclean Beasts, either to be sacrificed, or
eaten for Food; and a distinguishing Mark assigned how to know the last. And
since it comes from the same Source with the Permission of animal Food, these
two must have some material Difference in the Nature of Things; and that can be
none other but that the Flesh of these last cannot be so readily digested and
squeezed from their Blood, but that it will have sufficient remaining, of a
more deleterious Nature, to inflame and mortify the Juices of those who use it
freely, and to enrage and madden their Passions; and he who is deeply
acquainted with natural Philosophy, and the History of the unclean Animals,
will be sensible of the Justness of this Prohibition and Observation. From
whence it is natural to conclude, that though for the Hardness and Perverseness
of Men's Hearts, animal Food was permitted and indulged, yet it was with such
various Clogs and Exceptions, as might make it as little pernicious as
possible. For the same Reason likewise was the Fat of the Sacrifice forbid to
be eaten: And all this to show that it was with great Reluctance, and in mere
Condescension, and contrary to the original Intention, it was thus permitted.
And though under the new Dispensation, St. Peter was informed by a miraculous
Vision, that nothing was now common or unclean, yet it was not till Selfdenial,
Poverty of Spirit and Mortification, or abstaining from the Lusts of the Flesh,
were established as the fundamental Doctrines of this new System; which when
sincerely believed and strictly followed, would leave no room for Difference of
Food, or ceremonial Distinctions, which served only as a Schoolmaster, to bring
them to these purer and more universal Doctrines of Christ. It is certain, at
the Creation there could be no such Thing as an Indulgence for animal Food, if
only Pairs of each Animal were created at first.

. 9. I MUST however own, that I think some vegetable Food, of much Salt, Oil,
or luscious Juice and Poignancy, as much or more deleterious, inflaming, and
incrassating, than some mild animal Substances: For Example, Onions, Shallot,
Mustard, Horseradish, all the Nut-kinds, Eastern Gums, Balsams, Raisins,
Pickles, Spices, Aromatics, strong fermented Sours, rich and fat late Fruits,
as dry yet plump Grapes, much Sugar, and the like; these are in some delicate
Constitutions more poisonous and hurtful to an human Body, than a Bit of the
muscular and lean Flesh of Chicken, Veal, Lamb, Rabbit, Partridge, Turkey, and
the like white and young animal Foods; whose Whiteness and Tenderness shows
there is little or no red Blood Globules in them, and are consequently more
easily digestible, and less deleterious. These Vegetables may be allowed in
small Quantities, as a Sauce or Relish to otherwise insipid and unpalatable
vegetable Food, to sickly Appetites; but in great Quantities, and without
Caution, they will hurt, heat and thicken the Blood and Juices of tender
Constitutions; which is the sole Cause of the acute Distempers of all the
Eastern and Southern Nations, who do not deal, or but very sparingly, in strong
fermented Liquors. Without doubt, plain Milk (the genuine Soup prepared by the
Author of Nature, and of a middle Nature between animal and vegetable
Substances) boiled or raw, or prepared with Seeds, as Rice, Sago, Barley,
Wheat, Millet, and the like, is the best and safest of all Foods for such
tender Constitutions, as being in itself Blood, that has not as yet often
passed through the Lungs, to give it its scarlet Color, and deleterious
Qualities, but is drawn almost directly from the Stomach and Lacteals, from an
Emulsion made there, and Cookery of Nature, of Grass and Vegetables with pure
Water, and designed by the Author of Nature, for the Cure and Nourishment of
the Young, Tender and Delicate: And I can see no Difference between a young or
tender and delicate Animal by Nature, and one made so by a Disease; but that
such a Diet is still more necessary for the last than for the first. The mealy
Roots and early Fruits are next to these; such as Potatoes, Turnips, Carrots,
Skirrets, and the like, Strawberries, Cherries, Currants, etc. and only in the
last Place and Degree is the Saladin, Colworts, and latter and richer
Fruitkinds, and Winter Vegetables, as containing too much Air or Wind. And the
Author of Nature has with such a Profusion of Kindness secured against Want or
Famine, that in inclement Seasons, and bad Years, if the Earth cannot produce
Plenty above Ground, it secures it under Ground in bulbous, knotted, or mealy
Roots, even in Snow or Frost.

. 10. AGAINST this Doctrine, that animal Food was permitted for a Punishment,
and that fermented Liquors are not an Institution of Nature and its Author;
those who have Regard for Revelation, whence the Patent for animal Food is
drawn, may object, that our blessed Savior, who was without Sin, eat and drank
of what was set before him; that his first Miracle was supernaturally producing
Wine, to celebrate the Marriage of Cana in Galilee; that he was accounted a
Wine-biber; that he eat and drank with Publicans and Sinners; that he wrought
other Miracles to produce animal Food to a Multitude; that St. Peter had a
miraculous Vision to instruct him, that no sort of Food was unclean; that the
Eucharist is celebrated in Wine; and that St. Paul advises Timothy to drink
Wine for his Infirmities. To all which I answer, 1. That the Question is not
what is, now, best and fittest in the present Ends of Providence, in order to
restore and recover Man from his lapsed and fallen State; but what was probably
the first Design of our Creator, in our primitive unlapsed State, before we and
our Habitation (the Earth with its Atmosphere and Appendages) were thus spoilt
and disordered. 2. One sort of Repair, Props, or Support, may be proper or
necessary for a Habitation in one Degree of Ruin and Decay, that would by no
Means be necessary or proper in another or lower Degree. 3. There is neither
Virtue nor Vice in abstaining from one sort of Food more than another, but as
it is commanded by lawful Superiors; all that is here considered, is, which of
the two, vegetable or animal Food, in the Nature of Things, by the animal
Economy, and as human Creatures and their Food are now constituted, is
physically and experimentally fittest to carry on and prolong Life, with the
least Pain, fewest Diseases, and for the longest Time. Virtue and Vice are of
quite another Consideration, and depend on the internal Principle and
Disposition; the Quantity, Manner and Order in which these necessary Supports
are taken, not on the Things themselves. But if it be asked, Which of the two
Diets is most conducive to Virtue or Vice? Which of the two is most likely to
facilitate the Acquisition of Virtue? What is abovesaid, plainly determines it
in Favor of a low Diet; for by it the bodily Passions being made cooler and
weaker, the Blood and Juices being sweetened, the intellectual Organs thereby
rendered cleaner, more agile and penetrating, Reason and the spiritual Nature
of Man has more Liberty to act, and meets with less Difficulty and Resistance
in its Operations. 4. As to our blessed Savior, he having come to seek and to
save what was lost, was obliged to take the World as he found it, in order to
raise it from that Degree of Perdition in which it was then plunged. He took
upon him the Form of a Servant; he took not the Nature of Angels, but the
Nature of the Seed of Abraham; he was in all things like unto us, Sin only
excepted. Those to whom he came, and among whom he dwelt and conversed, could
at first neither receive nor understand his sublime Doctrines; he had many
Things to say even to his Disciples, which they could not then bear; and yet
this Doctrine of the Preference and greater Advantages of vegetable than of
animal Food, is virtually and implicitly contained in the general Doctrine of
Self-denial and Poverty of Spirit, (in the Sense of the Evangelic Counsels,
that carry quickest into Perfection, where Celibacy is preferred to Marriage;
for in the Kingdom of Glory, they are neither married nor given in Marriage,
but are as the Angels of God) so strongly and pre-eminently inculcated in the
Gospel, as any who reads and considers it, must plainly see. 5. I readily
grant, and have given the Reasons and Philosophy of these Things, that in our
present lapsed State, in the present Infertility, and insufficiently nutritive
Qualities of the Vegetables, in the present Curse on the Earth, and the
Necessity of Labor, Handicrafts, mechanical Force, and martial Prowess, while
Wickedness is so powerful, and the Wicked so numerous, there is a Necessity for
high animal Food, and fermented Liquors, in some Cases, and to some Persons, to
secure against and remedy these Evils. But the sole Question here is, Whether
this Diet will prevent Diseases, or lengthen Life so effectually as the other?
Or whether Providence has not designed and appointed vegetable Food for the
Cure and Antidote of the Pains and Diseases naturally and necessarily arising
from animal Food, and fermented Liquors? Perhaps God, in his moral Government
of the World, has designed animal Food, more readily to punish those who will
not be drawn by Love and Beauty; i.e. to purify some sorts of Men by Pains and
Sufferings. 6. I willingly allow, that fermented and sometimes spirituous
Liquors, are excellent Remedies, temporary Filips, Whips or Spurs, in
Faintness, Sickness, Labor, or festival Occasions for Joy, and promoting of
Friendship, and on Necessities and in Extremities: But I contend, then, and
then only, they ought to be used; and that there is neither Precept, Example,
nor Encouragement from Reason, Experience, or Revelation, to use them
otherwise, or as they are now used for common Food, and daily Beverage; whence
they become one Cause of all the great Diseases of the present Age. From these
general Considerations, all the mentioned Difficulties have an easy Solution to
the Candid and Ingenuous: I am not fighting Prizes, nor making Articles of a
Creed. That infinite Wisdom foresaw, and laid in Provision and the necessary
Precaution and Antidote, for the most deleterious Effects of animal Food and
fermented Liquors, for a short time, seems to me evident for these Reasons, 1.
In that He provided the Liver, (the Pancreas, and other internal Glands) in
Animals, these vastly strong, complicated and elabour'd Organs, to draw out the
most poisonous Parts of strong Meats and Drinks: the stronger the Liver, and
the larger that Organ grows, the more Bile it throws out on the Common-shoar,
the Intestines, to deprive the Chyle of its churlish Salts, and acrid Sulphurs,
and thus makes the Liver an useful Medicine to promote the animal Functions,
Digestion, Chylification, and the peristaltic Motion, and then throw its
useless Parts out of the Habit. 2. By the createing mineral and ponderous
Medicines, ( Mercury chiefly) to open Obstructions, break saline Concretions,
and dissolve the Tenacity of the Globules and Serum. And, 3. In providing
mineral Waters of so various and complicated Natures, for the same Ends and
Purposes, which they will, well-chosen, effect at last, as certainly as those
formerly mentioned. Now it is plain to a Demonstration, that under a vegetable
Diet, all those have little or no Use in Medicine; nay, any one who is
acquainted with the Delicacy, Tenderness and Sensibility of the internal and
infinitely minute Parts of an animal Machine, must know that they are not only
in a great Degree useless, but hurtful, and tend to tear, dissolve and destroy
the infinitely minute Fibrils, of which the Solids of an animal Machin are
formed: So that their final End and Design in Providence must have been to
antidote the ill Effects of animal Food and strong fermented Liquors, to a
certain Degree, and for a certain Time, probably till some time after the
Meridian of Life, while the Organs had attained their utmost Extension and
Firmness; for it is not improbable, that none of the Mineral Waters existed
under the Form and in the Manner they now appear, till after the Deluge, the
Era of animal Food, fermented Liquors, and the shortness of Life.

. 11. To the Appearance of the present State of Nature, that seems to clash
with this Doctrine, viz. the vast, nay infinite Mass of Life, or living
Creatures, generated by Heat and Moisture, the many Millions of organized Seeds
of Plants and Animals destroyed every Season, the Impossibility of having any
Sort of Food, or even pure Water, without destroying and devouring Millions of
Animaculs; that here almost each Animal devours and lives upon another; and
that both in the sentient and intelligent Creation, there seems to be a natural
and unconquerable Appetite and craveing Desire of animal Food, and an
insatiable Thirst of Blood: To these and suchlike Prejudices, (I cannot call
them Objections) it may be answered, I. First, That these Facts are not denied,
but are of no Weight against the Propositions here chiefly asserted, viz. 1.
That it is Philosophically certain, that animal Food is in its own Nature more
ready to produce Distempers than vegetable Food. 2. That it is therefore highly
probable, that an infinitely good and wise Being would not appoint in his first
Intention, animal but vegetable Food, at least to his intelligent and rational
Creation, and which accordingly is confirmed from Revelation: And, 3. The chief
Assertion here made, is, That in Consequence of these two Propositions it
follows, that vegetable Food, Seeds especially, must be the proper Antidote,
and Cure of the Diseases brought on by animal Food. But, II. It may be
considered, as St. Paul asserts, that this whole Creation, the whole System,
but chiefly this our Globe, with all its Inhabitants, labors, and is under a
mortal Distemper, and in Travail, like a parturient Woman, to throw off this
present Load of Corruption, Deteriority, and Lapse, that it may regain its
original Spirituality, Purity, and Liberty; it is at present in a State of
Expiation, Purification, and progressive Perfection; every Thing is out of its
natural Order, the System is, as it were, in a Fever, and every Part and
Particle is in Action, (like the Body of a Man in a febrile Fermentation), to
throw off its peccant Humors, and to bring the whole Compound into Order,
Regularity, and perfect Health. But, III. These very Appearances on which the
Objection is founded, confirm to a Demonstration, what I assert, viz. That all
animal Life here is in an expiatory, purifying, and progressive State, toward
its original Perfection; for it would be the grossest Contradiction, to suppose
that an infinitely good and wise Being, should give Pain to any of his
Creatures, for any other End, but to reclaim and perfect them; that He alone
knows when his Justice, Purity, and the Amend Honorable, and the Infection of
Impurity, are perfectly answered and cancelled, in their present State of
Melioration, and so knows when and how it is fittest to put an End to it by
Death, that is, by the Rupture and Dissolution of their gross and earthy
Prison, formed out of this our ruinous planetary System, now spoiled and
defaced; to set the indwelling spiritual Inhabitant free into some more pure
and refined System; and that animal Life of all Kinds and Degrees, does and
must necessarily suffer here, by bodily Wants and Infirmities, by the Injuries
and Inclemencies of Seasons, by the Rapacity and Ferocity of their
Fellow Creatures, besides a thousand other Accidents, and at last most
intensely by their Death, and the Rupture of their outward Shell or Tabernacle;
From all this is a plain Demonstration, that they are in a State of Suffering,
Expiation, and progressive Purification, and that at last they will all be set
at Liberty, and become the Sons and Children of God in some Degree or Order or
other, according to his original Intention, and the Plan of this his universal
Monarchy and Kingdom, laid before the Foundation of the World; and all this
Darkness, Sufferings, and unintelligible Play, is only to save human Liberty,
and produce at last pure Love and naked Faith. IV. No body ever denied, that
Animals of all Kinds might be destroyed, even intelligent as well as sentient,
when it is done for some wise or useful Purpose, as in Self-defence, or even
for moral Purposes, implicitly to admonish and teach others their Duty, what
they deserve, or what they are to believe and hope; these Purposes, with all
their particular Circumstances, are under the moral Government of an infinitely
wise Being. The only Question here is, Whether they may reasonably and justly
be put to Pain unnecessarily and wantonly, or for no wise End or Purpose, but
only to scratch callous Pallates, when other Means of Health may be had more
effectual, and no less pleasant. V. It is not altogether Fact, that Animals
devour one another from any other Reason, but for Want of sufficient Plenty of
proper vegetable Food, as Seeds, tender Plants, mealy Roots, and the like,
which even the most carnivorous Animals will brouze on, when they can meet with
it in Plenty, as is well known in natural History; and even the Fish, which of
all Animals are the most voracious, will readily feed on Balls of Meal and
Milk, without offering to devour one another; as the ingenious Mr. Andrews of
Norfolk has found by Experiment; for having put several Sorts of small and
great Fishes together into a large whitened Pond of clear Water, where they
might all be easily seen and numbered, and feeding them with Balls made of Milk
and Flower, (which were put into pervious Troughs) he found, at least thought,
that they did not offer the least Violence to one another. VI. Allowing Animals
to be actuated by a spiritual or immaterial Principle, of the same Nature with
intelligent Creatures, yet they are not of the same Degree and Order with them;
they may be intelligent Creatures of an inferior Order, beginning lower, and
verging more slowly toward their intended Perfection; they may be under
different Conditions of Purification, and may pass the whole of their Duration
here, in the State of Infants, who dye before they are born, or before they
arrive at the Use of Reason, and yet in other States of Being may grow and
advance to a much higher Perfection of Sensation and Intelligence than we can
readily imagine. For to me it seems utterly incredible, that any Creature,
whether sentient or intelligent, should come into this State of Being and
Suffering, for no other Purpose than we see them attain here; and it is equally
incredible, that any Creature should spontaneously exert animal and muscular
Function, i.e. should live and feel, without some Degree of an immaterial,
immortal, and selfactive Spirit. Matter and its Laws, can never account for
such Appearances. There must be some infinitely beautiful, wise and good Scene
remaining for all sentient and intelligent Beings, the Discovery of which will
ravish and astonish us one Day. Moderately wise Ends, Purposes, and Means, are
unworthy of infinite Perfection; whatever God does must be every way worthy of
Himself: His Working may serve many wise and good Ends and Purposes here, but
the last and great End of all must be of Dignity and Majesty worthy of Him,
though we cannot yet a great while comprehend it.

. 12. To conclude: 1. It is plain from Revelation, that animal Food was
permitted, and fermented Liquors not forbidden; and consequently, that there is
neither Virtue nor Vice in the Use of them absolutely, but in the Order, Time,
Quantity, and other Circumstances of their Usage. 2. That in our present
Situation, and under our present Circumstances, for some Persons, and in Order
for some Purposes, a reasonable Quantity of animal Food, and fermented Liquors,
may be absolutely necessary. 3. It is plain from Reason, Philosophy, and
Experience, that Excesses in high animal Food, and strong fermented Liquors,
are the true efficient and most general Cause of most atrocious and dangerous
Distempers; and consequently, that vegetable Food, and unfermented Liquors, are
the true and natural Antidote of such Distempers. 4. That animal Food, and
fermented Liquors, will more probably, and more naturally cause Distempers, and
shorten Life, than vegetable Food, and unfermented Liquors. 5. That a moderate
and small Quantity of animal Food, and generous fermented Liquors, will
naturally tighten, harden, and strengthen, give Firmness and Force to animal
Solids and Fibers, and enrich, warm, and invigorate the Blood and Juices; and
consequently, is safest to all subject to eruptive Distempers, as Gout,
Erisipelas, etc. in the Fits. But at the same time that it hardens and tightens
the Solids, it condenses and thickens the Juices, and renders the Animal of a
shorter Duration of Life, and more subject to Diseases. 6. Lastly, That for
bodily Strength, animal Food, and fermented Liquors, seem fittest; but for
intellectual Exercises, vegetable Food, and unfermented Liquors, seem
appropriated; and that consequently, the best Way to secure the golden
Mediocrity, between bodily Strength and spiritual Force, (the State fittest for
the Generality of Mankind) is for the healthy to confine themselves to about a
Pound, at least half a Pound, of animal Food, and a Pint, at least half a Pint
of fermented Liquors, daily: But for the unhealthy, valetudinary, and studious,
to sink below this Medium in both these, till, by Experience and Observation,
they find that Quantity of either, they are easiest under, and to stick to
that, should it even be to descend totally into Vegetables, Milk and Seeds,
with unfermented Liquors.

END of the SECOND DISCOURSE.
DISCOURSE III. A Philosophical THEORY FOUNDED ON EXPERIMENTS OF THE NATURE and
LAWS OF Minute Inanimat Bodies, AND THEIR SYSTEMS, in general.
Romans viii. 22. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth, and travaileth in
Pain till now.
DISCOURSE III.
A Philosophical THEORY Founded on EXPERIMENTS, OF THE NATURE and LAWS of
Minute INANIMAT BODIES, and their Systems, in general.
PREFACE.
THAT the Curious and Philosophical Reader (who possibly may be entertained
with such Speculations) may have in one general View, what has been or will be
incidentally hinted in my preceding and succeeding Works, concerning the Nature
of Minute Bodies, their Systems and Laws, I have collected into a few
Propositions, what I have found scattered in the Works of Philosophers and
Mathematicians of most Note, on that Subject; particularly those of Sir Isaac
Newton. These I have connected the best I could, and in some Particulars have
adventured to supply with Conjectures by Analogy, from their general Nature;
leaving every one to judge for himself, according to his Taste and Liking,
there being nothing of what is here laid down very material to the practical
Part of these Discourses.

PROPOSITION I.
THE Elements, or least and last Particles of Matter, are of various Sizes,
Densities and Figures. Those of the first Order, or the very least, are almost
infinitely small, hard and elastic, pervading all Bodies but pervious to none;
such as are probably the Particles of the Etherial or Newtonian Fluid. The
Particles of the second Order are composed of these, and consequently are of a
greater Size, but less dense and elastic, being pervious to the Particles of
the first Order, and themselves pervading all others: Of this kind are probably
the Particles of Light. The Particles of the third and last Order, are composed
of those of the second Order, bearing such Proportion to them in Size, Density
and Elasticity, as they do to those of the first Order.

SCHOLIUM.
IT is beyond all Doubt, that the Quantity of solid Matter in this material
System is very small, in respect of the interspersed Vacuities. It is
demonstrably certain, that a solid Cube or Sphere of a Mile or Furlong, or even
a Yard in Diameter, being divided sufficiently small, and its Parts ranged in a
proper Order, would furnish Solidity enough to answer all Appearances. Suppose
the Particles all Cubes, and to be so united by the Contact of their Angles as
to make cubical Interstices, then the Vacuity would be equal to the Solidity;
and since Matter is divisible in infinitum, this Vacuity may be increased to
any Proportion of Majority. We actually find that Water and Mercury will pass
through the Pores of Gold; and Sir Isaac Newton has demonstrated, that Gold
must have many times more Pores than solid Parts, and yet it is the heaviest of
all Bodies. Light passes through the most opake Bodies, when shreded
sufficiently thin, it scarce meets with any Resistance in its Passage through
clear Glass; and Ether pervades all Bodies with very little or no Resistance:
From all which it manifestly appears, how small a Proportion there is between
the Solidity and Vacuities in our System.

PROP. II.
THE Elements of Bodies, or the least and last Particles of whatever Order, are
solid, hard and indivisible, at least by natural and created Powers, else it
would be in the Power of Natural Means and created Agents to alter the present
Constitution and Nature of Things: For a World made up of Particles broken and
worn out, would be quite different from what it now is, and altogether
insufficient to answer the Ends and Purposes of Nature.

PROP. III.
Analogous to, of the same Nature, and probably from the same Cause, with
Gravity in the great Bodies of Universe, (the Sun, Planets and Fixed Stars)
which acts as the Squares of the Distance reciprocally, there is in the least
and elementary Particles of Matter, a Principle of Attraction and Repulsion,
whereby they attract and repel one another, according to some constant and
invariable Law, whatever that may be.

SCHOL. I.
WHAT this Law is, by which the Particles of Matter attract and repel each
other, no Observations or Experiments hitherto made have been sufficient to
determine; only thus much is certain, that in receding from the Point of
Contact, it decreases in a greater Proportion than that of the duplicate Ratio
of the Distance reciprocally; for by that Law, the Force of Attraction at any
small assignable Distance, would be nearly the same; whereas it is manifest
from Observation and Experience, that it is exerted only at or near the Point
of Contact. Sir Isaac Newton has calculated from the Inflection of the Rays of
Light, that the attracting Force in the Point of Contact is
10000,0000,0000,0000 times greater than the Force of Gravity; and the ingenious
Mr. Hales has shown by a great Variety of Experiments, that the repulsive, or
elastic Force, (which probably arise from one and the same Cause) in some sorts
of Particles, are likewise immensly great.

SCHOL. II.
IF Particles mutually attract each other as the Cubes of their Distances
reciprocally, the Force of Attraction in the Point of Contact will be
infinitely greater than at any assignable Distance. According to this Law,
(which seems to obtain, at least very nearly in the smallest Particles of
Matter) if the Force of Attraction in the Point of Contact, be not infinitely
greater than the Force of Gravity, it will be infinitely less than that Force
of Gravity at any assignable Distance. But though the Force of Attraction in the
Point of Contact is very great, yet it is not infinitely greater than the Force
of Gravity, seeing the Parts of any Body may be separated by a finite
assignable Force, and therefore at a given Distance it must vanish, or become
infinitely small.

SCHOL. III.
REPULSION begins, and goes on, where Attraction ends, and o constitutes the
middle Point in the Progression between them, or o, i. e. infinitely small of
the same Order, is the last Term and Limit of Attraction, and the first of
Repulsion; and they probably go on according to the same Law and Progression,
though with contrary Directions: For, as Sir Isaac Newton observes, those
Particles which recede from one another with the greatest repulsive Force, and
are with the greatest Difficulty brought together, cohere most strongly when
brought into Contact.

PROP. IV.
THE Cohesion of the small Particles of Matter, is in the compound Proportion
of the Quantity of their cohering Surfaces, and the Quantity of their
attractive Powers; and their attractive Powers are, caeteris paribus, as their
Densities, or the Quantities of Matter they contain.

COROL.
HENCE it follows, that the less the cohering Surfaces are, caeteris paribus,
the less will be the Degree of Cohesion, and that the least Degree of Cohesion,
is when the Surfaces touch in a Point only, or are Spheres or Spheroides.

PROP. V.
THE Power or Force of Attraction, in small Particles of Matter, increases as
the Size of the Particles is diminished. For, as this Force acts only in or
near the Point of Contact, it will be proportional to that Contact, or in the
compound Ratio of the Density of the Particles and the Largeness of their
Surfaces; but the Surfaces decrease as the Squares of the Diameters, while the
Solidities decrease as their Cubes; and therefore, the smallest Particles of
Matter, having the largest Surfaces in Proportion to their Solidities, and more
of their Points coming into Contact, will have the greatest attractive Force in
Proportion to their Bulk.

PROP. VI.
THE Gravities of Particles decrease as the Cubes of their Diameters; for their
Gravities are as their Quantities of Matter, which, in homogeneous Bodies, are
as the Cubes of the Diameters.

COROL.
HENCE it is, that Mercury, from the Smallness and Divisibility of its Parts is
so easily raised; and that Bodies may be suspended in Fluids specifically
lighter than themselves.

PROP. VII.
IF the Parts of a Body, immersed in a Fluid, are more strongly attracted by
the Fluid, than they are by one another, they will mutually recede from each
other, with a Force equal to the Excess of the one Attraction above the other,
and will be equally diffused through the Fluid: And hence the Nature of
Solution, Separation and Diffusion.

PROP. VIII.
IF Particles, suspended in a Fluid and attracting each other, are elastic,
after their Collision they will resile from one another, and meeting with other
Particles, they will be reflected, till by such Actions and Re-actions, a
Fermentation, Effervescence and Ebullition is produced.

PROP. IX.
IF Particles, suspended in a Fluid and attracting each other, are not elastic,
they will not be reflected from one another, but coalesce into Masses, till
their Gravity exceeding that of the Fluid, they will sink, and be precipitated.
The same thing will be produced by increasing or diminishing the Gravity of the
Menstruum in which the Particles are suspended.

PROP. X.
THE Figures of the Elements of all pure unelastic and incompressible Fluids
must necessarily be spherical, or at least approaching thereto; for were they
of any other Figure, their Surfaces would touch in more Points than one, and
consequently they would cohere. And the Elements of solid Bodies probably may
be of the Figure of some one or other of the regular Solids, as Cubes,
Triangles, Prisms, etc. so that, their Surfaces coming into Contact, they may
attract each other with the greater Force.

SCHOL.
WHAT may be the Figure of the Elements of elastic Fluids, as the Air, and the
Newtonian Ethereal Fluid, is not material to enquire, since their Fluidity
does not arise from the Figure, but the repulsive Force of their Particles.

PROP. XI.
THE Elasticity of solid Bodies is the Effect of the attracting Force of their
Particles; for when the small contiguous and cohering Particles of a Body are,
by a Stroke, or any external Violence, separated from each other to extremely
small Distances, if this Force is taken off, the separated Particles will, by
the Force of Attraction, rush back into their Contacts with an accelerated
Velocity, and the Body will recover its pristin Figure. But if the Particles
are so far separated as to be without their Spheres of Attraction, they will
remain in that Disjunction, and the Body will be incapable of recovering its
former State.

PROP. XII.
THAT Bodies, under a Rotation, fly off in the Tangent, is only a Consequence
of that general Law, by which they persevere in the same State of Rest, or
moving uniformly in a straight Line, unless they are made to change that State
by some external Force impressed; for the Direction of a Body moving in the
Circumference of a Circle, is in the Tangent, and it is made to describe the
Circle only by the central Attraction, which ceasing to act, the Body will
proceed in its proper Direction, or will fly off in the Tangent.

PROP. XIII.
THE Figures of Bodies, and their Actions on one another, arising from the
Principles of Attraction and Repulsion, together with the Motions impressed on
them by living and intelligent Agents, will probably account for most of the
Appearances of the material World, if mechanically adjusted, and treated
according to these mentioned Laws.

PROP. XIV.
AIR is a System of Particles endued with a repulsive Force, which being fixed
in all animal, vegetable and mineral Substances, are by Fire, Fermentation,
Putrefaction, Dissolution, or any other intestine Action or Reaction, set at
Liberty, and thrown off into an elastic State, and carrying along with them
Ramenta or Abrasions of the Bodies they were fixed in, they compose our
Atmosphere; which is a Chaos of such Particles of various Solidities, Gravities
and attractive and repulsive Powers, acting by the established Laws of minute
Bodies; and hence its Compression, Weight, Elasticity and various Degrees of
Density.

SCHOL.
THE Density of the Air is proportionate to its Compression, and therefore the
centrifugal, or expansive Force by which its Particles endeavor to recede from
one another, must be in the reciprocal Proportion of their Distances, or in the
direct subtriplicate Ratio of their Densities.

PROP. XV.
EARTH is only a loose Collection of the different elementary Particles of
Matter, of all the three Orders, thrown together without any regular
Combination or Cohesion; as Whiteness is a Blending and Mixture of all the
differently-colour'd Rays of Light.

PROP. XVI.
WATER is a Collection of the Solutions of tasteless and insipid Salts,
originally fixed, crystalis'd and dispersed quite through the Globe; but kept in
Fluidity by Heat, like melted Lead. And different Salts are Water united with a
little Air and some Earths, acid or sulphurous, in a crystalis'd State; as Ice
is Water congealed, and Water is Ice dissolved. But this is not intended as a
Definition, but only as an Illustration. All Salts are soluble by Water, and
all Water evaporated; drops a saline Substance mixed with Earths.

PROP. XVII.
ACIDS seem to be composed of such elementary Particles as are endued with a
very great attractive Power; whence, by insinuating themselves into the Pores
of Bodies, and attracting their Particles more strongly than these Particles
attract one another, they thereby separate and divide them.

SCHOL.
POSSIBLY the Figures of Acids, may be triangular Prisms, or such like, to
facilitate their Entry into Bodies, and to separate their Particles like
Wedges; for all Matter must have some Figure.

PROP. XVIII.
HEAT, as it is a Property of Bodies, is only the brisk vibrating Action and
Reaction of the elastic repelling Nitre of the Air, and the ethereal Fluid,
with the strongly attracting acid Sulphur; which Sulphur, by its Analysis, is
found to contain an inflammable Oil, an acid Salt, a very fixed Earth, and a
little Metal.

COROL.
HENCE the Affinity between Light and sulphurous Bodies, and the true Nature
of Oils and inflammable Spirits, which are nothing but a great deal of Sulphur,
a fine or light acid Salt, a very little Water and Earth.

SCHOL.
SINCE it has been found, that a Thermometer in an exhausted Receiver, will
rise and fall as much, and almost as soon, as another Thermometer placed by it
in the open Air, it seems to follow, that Heat is conveyed and propagated from
one Body to another, by some subtle elastic Fluid, pervading all Bodies; and it
is not improbable, that the Vibrations of this Medium in hot Bodies, contribute
to the Intenseness and Duration of their Heat. And since smooth polished
Bodies, with plain Surfaces, cling together as strongly in an exhausted
Receiver as in the open Air, it is not improbable, that their Cohesion may be
caused by this same Medium. Both Experiments go a great way to ascertain the
Existence and Necessity of some such ethereal Fluid.

PROP. XIX.
LIGHT seems to be the vibrating Particles of a hot Body, driven off by the
repelling Force, with an immense Velocity, which is continued and augmented by
the ethereal Fluid, and the Attraction of the Bodies it meets with in its
Progress.

SCHOL. I.
SINCE, as Sir Isaac Newton has observed, Light is convertible into Bodies, and
Bodies into Light; and that it is probable, that Light is only the Particles of
a hot Body, thrown off with an immense Velocity, it would seem, that these
Particles which constitute Light are the elementary Particles of the second
Order, with which sulphurous and oily Bodies, from the great Activity,
Attraction and Elasticity of their Parts, appear to be saturated and abound;
for these being smaller and more elastic, than the Particles of the third
Order, will be thrown off with a very great Velocity, which we know to be an
essential Property of the Rays of Light; and they will likewise pervade all
Bodies, which is also a Property belonging to the Rays of Light; there being no
Body, however dense or close in its Texture, which, by being shreded thin, does
not become transparent.

SCHOL. II.
THE Rays of Light seem to consist of Particles of different Sizes, (that being
necessary to produce the various Colors and different Degrees of
Refrangibility) the least of which make Violet, the weakest and darkest of the
Colors, and are most easily diverted from the right Course, by refracting
Surfaces; and the rest, as they are bigger, make the stronger and more lucid
Colors, as Blue, Green, Yellow, Red, and are with more and more Difficulty
diverted.

SCHOL. III.
THE Sun and fixed Stars, are immense Globes of Matter, saturated with these
Particles of the second Order, and so being heated red hot, are kept in Heat by
their intestine Motion, and the Action and Re-action of their Parts with the
ethereal Fluid; their dense Atmospheres, by their Compression, keeping their
Parts from flying off, or consuming too fast.

SCHOL. IV.
IT is not impossible, that our Earth, with its Satellit the Moon, the other
Planets in this our System, with their Satellites, but especially the Comets,
should be all of them Bettering-houses, (according to the Dutch manner of
speaking) Prisons, Dungeons, and Places of Punishment, for Trial, Expiation, or
progressive Purification of the several Sorts, Orders and Degrees of lapsed,
sentient and intelligent Beings. That they are not, and cannot be permanent or
eternal, in their present State, Philosophy and Astronomy furnish innumerable
Arguments, to convince any thinking Person. Most of their Orbits are
elliptical, which certainly is not so simple or perfect a Figure as a Circle.
The Planes of their Orbits cut one another at irregular various and vastly
different Angles, which, at least, in our present way of thinking, is not so
harmonious. Besides the unaccountable Oddnesses in most of their diurnal and
annual Revolutions, the Nutations of their Axes, their Rings, Spots and
Girdles, which, at least, savor not of that Simplicity, Perfection and Beauty
conspicuous in most of the other Works of the Author of Nature. Moreover, as to
our Planet in particular, it has so many untoward Marks, and oblique Symptoms
of a designed Deteriority, that it would require a Volume to enumerate those
daily observed by Astronomers and natural Philosophers, besides those now
mentioned, which are common to most of them. Our Earth has, in particular,
barren and unfruitful Climates, unhospitable and uninhabited Regions, unhealthy
and mortal Seasons, Tempests, Thunder and Lightning, Vulcanos, Plagues and
epidemical or infectious Atmospheres: All which could never proceed from an
infinitely good and wise Being, if his Design was not to punish and correct.
But all these seeming Deformities are kind and fatherly Designs of Wisdom, and
have infinitely beautiful final Causes and Motives; and are strong and amazing
Instances of his Being, Love and Wisdom, if they are reckoned only Correction
and Bettering Mansions, of no durable or permanent Stability, but verging and
growing into some progressive, beautiful and final State, by general Laws,
which State, in due Time, will appear and emerge, and then He may, as He did at
first, say of all his Works, they were good and perfect in their Order. And
then the Son shall give up the Dominion to his Father, in a much happier and
more perfect Condition than it was at first made, as He said of Himself, that
He came, that all God's Creatures ( Sentient and Intelligent, and consequently
their Habitations and Mansions) should have Life, (that is, have Perfection and
Happiness) and have it more abundantly.

PROP. XX.
FLAME is the sulphurous or oily Smoke of a hot Body, agitated to such a
Degree as to be ignited.

PROP. XXI.
THOSE Bodies are transparent, whose Pores are sufficiently small to attract
the Rays of Light, and rectilinear to transmit them: Thus Paper is made more
transparent, by having its Pores filled or lessened with Water or Oil.

THE following Propositions are manifest from Experiment Vide Boil; the
Philosophical Transactions, and the Memoirs of the Academy Royal.
.

1. MERCURY consists of smaller Particles than any known Fluid, for it will
pass where no other Fluid can. 2. THE Particles of Mercury, in all their
Divisions, preserve a spherical Figure, from the strong Attraction of their
Parts; as is evident by fine Glasses: And the smaller the Particles, the more
perfect the Spheres; as the same Glasses demonstrate. 3. MERCURY is the
heaviest of all natural Fluids, being 14 times heavier than Water. 4. THE
Particles of Mercury attract some Bodies the most of any, as Gold; and fly from
others the most, as Oil of Vitriol, and all Acids.
COROLLARIES.
1. THEREFORE the Particles of Mercury are the most easily raised by Heat,
being divisible into the smallest Parts; which, though not sensible, yet are
known by their Effects in Silver Water, Mercurial Steams and Exhalations, and
their ready passing through all animal Substances. 2. THEREFORE the Particles
of Mercury have the greatest Momentum and Force, being the heaviest of all
natural Fluids. 3. THEREFORE the Particles of Mercury, by their Smallness,
Sphericity and Weight, being actuated and raised by Heat, readily pervade all
animal fleshy Substances, which are but Spunges with communicating Cells; as is
evident from the Effects of Fumigations, and the Palsies of those who silver
Glass, or dig in the Mines of that Mineral.
MEDICAL COROLLARIES.
1. THEREFORE the Particles of Mercury are the fittest to break the Cohesion of
all Viscosity, and divide its Substance by its Weight, in Animal Tubes; from
which Viscosity all the cold chronical Diseases most probably proceed. 2.
THEREFORE the Particles of Mercury are fittest to open all Obstructions in the
small Capillary or Lymphatic Vessels, from their Smallness, Weight and
Sphericity. 3. THEREFORE the Particles of Mercury, from their Smallness, Weight
and Sphericity, are fittest to make the Circulation whole and entire quite
around. 4. THEREFORE Mercury is the only proper Antidote for such Palsies,
whose Cause is the Tenacity of the Juices in the small Blood Vessels, pressing
upon the Nerves and Fibers, and so interrupting their Vibrations and Actions.
5. THEREFORE Mercury is the best Antidote for the Scurvy, in the first
Intention, by its Smallness, its Weight and Sphericity, breaking the Salts and
larger Concretions obstructing the Lymphatics. 6. THEREFORE Mercury is also the
best Antidote for the Gout, in the first Intention, readily opening those small
Vessels which are the most difficult to be dilated by reason of their
Compression betwixt bony Articulations, even though their Smallness should be
such, that 200 of them can make up but the Thickness or Bulk of one Hair. But a
thin cool Diet must continue them pervious, when Mercury has made them so. 7.
THEREFORE Mercury, duly prepared, and judiciously managed, is the only proper
Antidote for the Diseases produced by Excesses of any kind, especially of
animal Food and fermented Liquors. 8. MERCURY, by its Weight and Sphericity,
will infallibly burst those Vessels whose Obstructions cannot be dissolved or
opened, driving the Substance of these Obstructions through the Sides of the
slender Lymphatic Vessels; and will infallibly tear the small Vessels, whose
Sides are very rare and slender, or whose Pores are made very large by
Putrefaction. 9. THEREFORE Mercury is a divine Antidote or real Poison,
according to the Person prescribing, or the Case it is prescribed in. 10. THE
best Preparation of Mercury is that wherein its Particles are most minutely
divided, and kept at the greatest Distance from one another. 11. THAT
Preparation of Mercury is the best, where, after a due Division into its
smallest Parts, the Mixture is made with that Body which has the most specific
Virtue against the Disease. Thus the Aethiops cum Sulph. is best for
Inflammations, Piles, the Gout, the Erysipelas, etc. and that with Antimony,
against cutaneous Distempers; that with Volatiles and Foetids, in Nervous
Cases; that with Bark and Bitters, in Intermittents; and so in others. 12.
THEREFORE the Aqua Mercurialis is the very safest general Deobstruent in very
weak Persons, did it not require too long time to produce any salutary Effect.
Mercury alcalisated, or killed with any calcined Body, given often and in small
Doses, is the next; Cinnabar next to that, and then Aethiops, etc. 13. ALL
Mineral Medicines ought to be infinitely divided, before they are sent into an
Animal Body; they never having been intended by the Author of Nature to enter
there, but in their minutest Particles and Divisions; as we may see by Nature's
preparing, in this Manner, Mineral Waters of all kinds, fitted for the Cure of
almost all chronical Diseases, if joined with a proper Regimen; except,
perhaps, some few of those begot by unnatural cramming with Mixtures of Salts,
Spices, Oils, and inflammable Spirits; or those begot by contagious venereal
Diseases. 14. MERCURY, with the Salts, such as Calomel, the Turbith, Sublimat,
red, white and green Precipitate, are, of all Preparations, the most
prejudicial and injurious to animal Habits; these saline Mixtures tearing the
small Vessels, where Diseases are mostly generated, and in whose Integrity, all
the Delicacy of Life consists: But they are thereby of the quickest Effect in
Cases that depend on Expedition, as the Hydrophobia, inflammatory Rheumatism,
and the like.
GENERAL MEDICAL COROLLARIES.
1. As Water alone, Blood-warm, is the best Diluent, so Mercury is the best
Deobstruent; but as Water alone may be too sluggish, so Mercury alone may be
too active and ponderous, for tender and delicate Animal Solids, especially in
its fluid State, or mixed with Salts, or too active Bodies; and therefore the
absolutely best Preparation of Mercury, is when, being divided by the utmost
possible Art, it is joined with the most specific vegetable Medicines against
the Distemper, that it can conveniently be united with, and fixed in. 2. As the
Fineness or Smallness of Particles, together with the Largeness of their
Surfaces, make Hardness, or the greatest Cohesion in Bodies, as has been shown
by Proposition IV. and V. and may be seen in finewoven Cloth, Gold, Marble,
Crystal, Shells, Salts and Diamonds; and as Earths, Water, Milk, watery Fluids,
and vegetable Substances, consist mostly of Water and rare loose fine Earths,
with a little grosser Salts and Sulphurs of small or no Cohesion, it is
evident, that such Substances are fittest for weak, tender and valetudinary
Persons, as affording all the Materials of Nutrition, and being more easily
resolvible into their integral Particles; and are most proper Food for
intellectual Purposes, which depend on the easy Performance of the animal
Functions, as nervous Distempers arise chiefly from their labored Performance,
compressing, by their Weight and Hardness, the too tender and delicate
membranous Tubuli of the Nerves, and so stopping or retarding their Vibrations
and Oscillations, though they are not so proper for mechanical Strength and
Force.
GENERAL SCHOLIUM.
IN these few Propositions are contained the Principles of all the natural
Philosophy hinted at in my medical Treatises. If it is just, or approaches the
Truth, as I hope it does, then it must necessarily follow, 1. That soft, mild
and cool Foods, are fittest to carry on the animal Functions the most readily,
freely, naturally and lastingly. 2. That Spirits, Salts, chemical Oils, (which
are but Spirits condensed) and every thing that has passed the Tortures of the
Fire, abounding with Particles small, hard, caustic, (for calcined Antimony
will be increased one fifth in its Weight) and highly attractive, are most
pernicious to animal Habits; not only burning and tearing the delicate Fibers
and Vessels, like Caustics and Lancets, but by their attractive Powers,
violently corrugating and contracting the Fibers; so that in habitual Drinkers,
Drammers, and high Feeders, their Tone and Elasticity is entirely destroyed, by
their sudden and alternate Contractions and Relaxations Vide Hales's
Haemostaticks.
, while at the same time the Juices are thickened and coagulated by the
spirituous Mixture, and so disposed to form Obstructions and Concretions in the
smaller Vessels: And therefore they ought never to be used, but as Spurs and
Whips, to push on and stimulat the sluggish Organs for a time, and make them
carry off the Over-load with a short Vigor; and so are only proper in
Extremities, as a present Filip. 3. That animal Foods, whose Parts have been
first divided by animal Organs, and afterward attenuated and refined by those
of other Animals, and mixed with great Quantities of animal Salts and Oils,
when again taken into animal Habits for Food, where they undergo a third
Subtilization or Milling; or the Flesh of Animals that live on animal Food, are
so minutely divided, as (by Proposition IV.) to acquire the greatest Degree of
Attraction; and therefore, when introduced into the small Tubes and capillary
Vessels, in great Quantities, they must form Obstructions of the strongest
Cohesion and Tenacity. 4. That Mercury, in some Shape or other, is the only
proper Deobstruent and Dissolvent, in all chronical Cases, and in those acute
ones that come nearest to them; especially in those who have fed much and long
on animal Foods, and fermented or distilled Liquors. 5. That Milk and
Vegetables are not only the sole rational and proper Food of tender or diseased
Animals, but, from the Grossness of their Parts, and their small Degree of
Attraction and Cohesion consequent thereupon, being dissolved by a less Force
than animal Food, are fittest to carry on, the most pleasantly, all the
Functions in which Health, Serenity and free Spirits consist. 6. That therefore
Milk, Seeds, Fruits, and mealy Vegetables, with Water-drinking, are undoubtedly
the most infallible Means to preserve the Faculties clear and acute, and to
acquire Activity and long Life, whatever mechanical Force and Strength may
require for sudden strong Efforts. 7. On the whole, as Water, with a little
fine vegetable Earth, Salt and Sulphur, seems to me, to be the proper Food
intended by Nature for Animals; and as it is Water alone which conciliats that
Fluidity absolutely necessary to Juices circulating in Tubes; the more it
partakes of this Element, the fitter it is for the animal Functions. Mercury
seems to be the only other Fluid that has the Qualities fitted for circulating
and destroying Viscosity; so that, in fine, the two proper Antidotes intended
by Nature for chronical animal Diseases, especially those of the worst Kind,
seem to be Mercury, some-how prepared, and Water, naturally or artificially
impregnated, the one for animal, and the other for vegetable Feeders.

DISCOURSE IV. Philosophical CONJECTURES ON SPIRITUAL NATURE, THE HUMAN SPIRIT
in Particular.
Genesis i. 26. And God said, Let us make Man in our Image, after our Likeness. --
Ver. 27. So God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created He
him.
DISCOURSE IV.
Philosophical CONJECTURES ON SPIRITUAL NATURE, THE HUMAN SPIRIT in Particular.
. 1. THE natural Faculties, Properties or Attributes of all rational Spirits,
and human Intelligences, (and indeed of all Intelligences of whatsoever Order
or Degree) are incontestably these three: 1. Perception or Understanding. 2.
Willing, Choosing or Freedom. 3. Memory, Reflection or Attention. Out of these
three all the Operations of a human Spirit may be deduced; and suppose living
or actuating some Vehicle as their Base: and though they may be (and are
justly) considered separately, yet, in wellexercised and duly cultivated
Spirits, they are sometimes so instantaneous, as to seem one and the same Act
of the Mind, and are called by the general Name of Thinking or Cogitation, when
either in separate Acts, or instantaneous, and all Spirits differ chiefly in
the Degrees of these natural Powers.

. 2. HOWEVER uncommon the Expression may seem, yet to those who admit a Deity,
or supreme Spirit, of infinite Perfection, the Author and first Cause of all
Things, finite Spirits of all possible Orders can be conceived philosophically,
no otherwise than as Miniatures, Effluxes, Emanations, Infinitesimals, or
infinitely small Sparkles, of this infinite Source of Living, Intelligence,
Action, Perfection and Happiness, voluntarily emitted, lighted up or created,
by this infinitely perfect Being, and endowed with his radical and essential
Qualities and Attributes of Life, Activity and Intelligence; so that all
Spirits are, in their own Natures, diminutive or infinitely small Deities, and
necessarily (now they are created, and have a derivative Existence from Him)
must partake of his Immortality, Intelligence and Freedom, or his Divine Nature
and Image; and consequently can never be annihilated, forced, or deprived of
the Powers of Perception, Intelligence and Willing, no more He can.

. 3. THESE Faculties and Powers of all Spirits are not only to be felt, but
distinguished in every human Mind, duly exercised and cultivated, by
attentively considering its Nature and Operations; but necessarily follow by
Analogy, from the Nature of the first Cause, that Being of infinite Perfection,
the Deity; who being of infinite Wisdom and Power, could find nothing without
Himself, before Creation, to be a Model or Pattern for his intelligent
Creatures; and therefore stamped them with his own most glorious Image,
creating them little Divinities, resembling Himself in his radical and
essential Attributes, so as at last to become similar to Him in Perfection and
Happiness, in their several Orders, Gradations and Ranks. For infinite
Perfection wanting nothing, and to whom no Happiness nor Perfection could be
added, could have no other End or View, in producing rational Intelligences
into Being, but to make them happy, by partaking of his essential Happiness, in
their several Orders and Ranks; that is, in becoming similar to him in his
natural as well as moral Attributes; his natural ones (as has been said) being
Life, Intelligence and Activity; his moral ones, Justice, Goodness and Truth;
in which two united consists the Perfection and Happiness of all intelligent
Creatures.

. 4. IN a mere Philosophical Disquisition, though no Argument is to be taken
from Revelation; yet to express my Meaning so as to leave no room to be
mistaken by such to whom Revelation is familiar, I shall represent it in the
Words of the Scriptures. It is said in Genesis, on the Design of the Creation
of the human Soul, Let us make Man after our own Image; and again, in the Image
of God created he him; and elsewhere, You are God's Images: And to show the
human Rank, David says, He was created a little lower than the Angels; and our
Savior, speaking of Marriage, says, that in Heaven they are neither married,
nor given in Marriage, but are like the Angels; and the same Manner of
describing the human Spirit frequently occurs in the Scriptures, both of the
old and new Testament.

. 5. IT is a frequent and common Opinion of all Pagan and Christian Antiquity,
that all created Intelligences have Bodies or Vehicles of one kind or another,
fitted to their Order, Rank, Degree of Purity, Habitation and Situation. It is
highly probable and philosophical, to think there is no perfectly pure and
immaterial Spirit, but the Supreme Spirit, the Father and Creator of all
Spirits; and that all created Spirits, how high and sublime soever, have proper
and peculiar Bodies, and organized Cases, not only to circumscribe and limit
their Powers, and their Extension and Expansion, but to enable them to
communicate, and commerciat with, to contemplat and admire the Contrivance of
the material World; to converse with the lower Ranks of Intelligences, that we
certainly know, have material Vehicles, such as we of the human Race are; but
also to execute the Orders of the Divine Economy and Providence, over the
whole System of Intelligences, and material World. And accordingly we find
Mention made in holy Writ, of a natural Body and a spiritual Body; and of the
Sun and Planets having a particular Glory, in their Bodies, peculiar to
themselves; and of the glorious Appearance and Radiation of our Savior's Body
on the Mount. And it is very absurd, and almost blasphemous, to think these
Myriads of Stars and Luminaries, that appear in a Winter Night, in the Heavens,
and its milky Way, to be nothing but twinkling Tapers, uninhabited, and
designed only to be stupidly and ignorantly gazed on by us.

. 6. WHAT a spiritual Substance, or of what Nature the Substratum of these
Faculties of Understanding and Will, or of Thinking, is, we shall never
perfectly know, till we arrive at the World of Spirits, and drop this coarse
earthly Tabernacle. Indeed, we know nothing of the internal Substance of any
Being; all we know or can know, is their sensible Qualities and the Effects of
them on us; and something in general we learn of inanimated Bodies, and their
Laws, from the Uniformity of these Effects: And we may be certain, that
spiritual Substance is in most, if not all its Qualities, contradictory, at
least contrary, to Body or material Substance, and vice versa. For Example, we
know that Matter is absolutely passive, and equally susceptible of Motion or
Rest; and that Spirit, or spiritual Substances, are self-active and
self-motive, and the immediate productive Cause of all Motion in Body, and
consequently is endowed with Freedom or Liberty. We know that Matter is
impenetrable, and that two Bodies cannot possess the same Space at the same
time; but Spirits may and can pervade and penetrat one another, at least by
their spiritual Virtue and Energy; as is evident from Persuasion, Conviction,
Reasoning and Compassion, and suchlike spiritual Actions. It is true, the
Sphere of their Activities is limited and circumscribed; but we also know, that
the Spirit acts in every Point of that Circumscription: as we find by our
Bodies, every Part of which is more or less sensible, by the membranous Mouths
of the nervous Tubuli being spread over all the solid Parts of an animal Body;
and we know no Body, or mere Matter, that is so. Matter is certainly divisible
in infinitum, and may be actually divided into very small Parts; but Spirit,
having no sensible Parts, is neither divisible nor discerptible. Persons of
light Understandings, and gross Conceptions, may dispute or ridicule these
Truths; but they must be poor Philosophers, who can think them not highly
probable; and have a mean Notion of the Extent of Nature, and its Author. Four
of the greatest Philosophers of this or any other Age, to wit, Sir Isaac
Newton, Mr. Leibneitz, Mr. Hugens, and Mr. Fatio, when they describe the
Matter, which they suppose to be the Cause of Gravity, consider it as
infinitely small in its Particles, infinitely rare, infinitely elastic, and
moved with an infinite Velocity. And the first of these, by a very strong
Figure, calls it Spiritus quidam Subtilissimus. What these four Infinitudes may
effect on Matter, to destroy at least these gross, palpable and sensible
Qualities we observe in it, such as sensible Extension, Impenetrability and
Passivity, I will not take upon me to determine: But all the Notion we can now
form of Spirit, is to divide, refine, sublime and exalt Body and Matter ad
infinitum, so that we be sure it can have very little of the sensible
Qualities; and this, I fear, is as far as Philosophy can go, while we have only
gross and palpable Vehicles of Clay. For by Analogy to infinitely divided,
subtiliz'd, sublimed and refined material substance, we form the only Idea,
Notion or Perception, we can now frame of spiritual Substances, and that is but
a gross one, and neither just nor true.

. 7. LIVING, Sensation or Actuation of Matter, is not easy to define or
describe. Existence or Being belongs to Matter as well as Spirit; but Life,
Sensation or Perception, and their Consequences, belong only to some one Rank
of Spirit or Mind; and I may defy all the Philosophers and Mathematicians, that
ever have been, to explain consistently, from Matter and Mechanism alone, as it
now obtains, the Life, Growth and Fecundity of the lowest Plant or Vegetable,
at least its Seed or Seeding, much less of the least Insect or Animal, and
least of all of a rational, sentient and percipient Being: So that wherever
there is any Degree of Life, Vegetative, Sensitive or Rational, there is
probably some Degree of a Soul or Spirit, immaterial, immortal and progressive;
so that Life or Animation, in all Creatures in general, is indeed Matter
organized and actuated by a Spirit, or Soul, of some one Rank or Degree or
other: I mean only created Life, or Life derivative, as it is in Creatures; for
in the Creator, Life is without Matter, without Body or Vehicle, and without
Limits, or Possibility of Nonexistence or not Living. The best Notion, Idea,
or Perception, we can frame of created Life, is that of a nice, delicate,
finely contrived Machine, of a vast Variety of Organs set in Motion by the
first Cause, and continued by an internal self-motive Spring, which Spring is
this spiritual Substance.

. 8. As we have some Notion of what Extent the best-form'd and most cultivated
human Spirit is, there may be Myriads of a lower Rank of the same Species; and
that as under the human Species, there is an almost infinite Variety of the
brutal and irrational Species, and under these, a like or greater Variety, of
the vegetable Kind, from the Moss on the Wall and the coralline Sea-plant, up
to the highest Divine, Philosopher or Mathematician of the human Race; and that
all the several Species, from the highest to the lowest, sink so gradually into
one another, that it is impossible to determine where one Degree ends, or the
next begins: So it is also highly probable, that above the human Species there
are Orders, Ranks and Hierarchies, rising gradually and insensibly, without
Limits and without End. This the Dignity, Power, Wisdom and Goodness of the
first infinitely perfect Being, and the Analogy of Things, seem to oblige us to
conjecture or hope; and the infinite Variety of Systems, Fixed Stars, (which we
known to be Suns, and very probably have primary and secondary Planets,
analogous to ours) and the infinite Expansion of Space, makes it probable and
philosophical. And as an Angel is only of a little higher and more noble Order
than the human Race, and all created Intelligences have Vehicles or Bodies of
an Order and Purity analogous to their Rank and Degree in the Scale of
Intelligences; we may fairly and philosophically define a pure original, not
lapsed, Angel, of the lowest Order, a spiritual Substance of the next immediate
Order above the Human, actuating a divinely organized Body, of a Purity and
Sublimity analogous to their Order, and the Perfection of his informing Spirit.

. 9. WE have a pretty clear Perception of what the human Race is at present,
both in their Body and Spirit. He that has a just, though not an adequate Idea
of infinite Perfection, that is, of infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, can
find no possible Reason or Motive, why such a Being should create
Intelligences, imperfect in their Order, unhappy and perishing, when the same
Power, Wisdom and Goodness, could either have totally abstained from creating
them at all, or have made them to be at last happy in their Order and Rank,
consistent with their Natures and his own; Malice and Difficulty having no
Place in such a Being. But any one who considers this ruinous disordered Globe,
and the Miseries, Darkness and Wretchedness of the whole System of
Intelligences that inhabit it, cannot but conclude one of these two, either
that their Author had not Power to make them otherwise, or that they have
wilfully forfeited their Rank, and his Favor and Protection, by transgressing
the Terms and Conditions on which they were entitled to it; and so being left
to reap the Fruits of their own Labor, sunk into a lapsed disorderly Condition.

. 10. INFINITE Power, Wisdom and Goodness, could, primarily and originally,
bring no Intelligence into Being, with rational and intelligent Spirits,
actuating divinely organized Bodies or Vehicles, but under these two
Conditions: 1. That the organized Body should be supple, pliable, and joyfully
obedient to all the Dictates and Commands of the free intelligent Spirit: And,
2. That the Spirit should be supple, pliable, and obedient to the Dictates and
Influences of the Eternal and infinitely perfect Spirit, its Author and
Creator: And in these two, its original Innocence, Happiness and Perfection,
must necessarily have consisted. And this was and must have been the true
original and paradisaical State of both Body and Soul of the human Race; and
must be the Constitution and Complexion of the unfallen angelical State, and of
all the Hierarchies of unlapsed Spirits. Which two Conditions, I think,
necessarily infer a preexistent State to our present one, since we do not find
them in ourselves now.

. 11. ALL created Intelligences being free and finite, must of Consequence be
fallible, and liable to run into Disorder, as well as capable of obeying Order:
For they could not be free, unless they had the Power of choosing either Side;
Self-activity being of the Essence and Root of Intelligence, and perhaps the
Source from which it springs; so that all created finite free Intelligences
were naturally capable of Falling, of Rebellion and Disorder. An infinitely
wise and intelligent Being, of sufficient Power, could not make another
intelligent Being with Desires, Impressions and Pantings after a State which
was according to Order, to his Nature, and the Nature of Things, unless at the
same time He had appointed Means and proper Objects to satisfy these just and
natural Desires; no beneficent and good Being could act so. Now that we (at
least many of us of the human Race) have yet a Notion and Idea of a better
State of Being and Acting, than we find ourselves in, and wish and pant after
it, is most certain and undeniable; every honest and thinking Person must find
a Law in his Members, that wars against the Law of his Mind, and wishes and
desires to be freed from the one, that he may conform to the other. Now this is
what is called the Lapse or Fall; and if this State of Imperfection last for
ever, so must the Fall; and till this Desire or Panting be satisfied, the
intelligent Creature cannot be completely happy; and for this End was the
Economy of Jesus intended.

. 12. How and by what Steps the Lapse was brought on, is of no Consequence for
us precisely to know. The Design and Point in View of all the Economy of
Providence, and of Jesus, is to restore us, with the Consent, Concurrence and
Integrity of our three radical Attributes, of Living, Activity or Freedom, and
Intelligence, which He cannot do Violence to, they being immediately derived
from Himself, whose Images and Miniatures all Intelligences are: And the Means
that alone can effect this, without intrenching upon these essential and
radical Qualities, are pure Love, naked Faith, and universal Resignation; which
Means we could not perfectly use, if precise Truths, particular and specific
Steps, and the naked Nature of Things, were always pointed out to us: This (at
first at least) would infallibly weaken our Faith and Trust, counteract our
Resignation, and destroy our Liberty; and therefore all that is revealed
concerning this, and the other Truths of past, future and invisible States, is
general, undetermined, and indefinite; and the Precision is promised only on
our Advancement and Progress. He that does the Will of my Father, shall know of
the Doctrine: Our first Lesson is just what is absolutely necessary to begin
our Return; the Knowledge of more Truths and greater Precision, is to reward
our Progress. The next immediate Step, or what is to be done daily and hourly,
we are never ignorant of in our Duty; and that is all that is necessary; the
rest are all wisely put out of our Reach, and do not belong to us now, till we
advance that Step; and when we come into the proper Disposition of Body and
Mind, to benefit by the just and precise Knowledge of these mentioned and
suchlike Divine Truths, (though absolute Precision be inconsistent with
Finitude) we shall admire and adore the Wisdom of our Teacher, for having
concealed from us what would then have hurt us, as much as for these general
Truths, which serve sufficiently to animate and encourage us in our now
traveling and probatory State; for both are directed with equal Wisdom. If we
are ignorant, it is because we are not come into the proper Disposition to
benefit by Knowledge, or that more precise Knowledge would hurt us, and draw us
out of our Orbit, or shortest Road.

. 13. IF we may be allowed to conjecture with Humility and Modesty, about such
unreveal'd and indefinite Truths and States, we may reasonably think, that this
Lapse was not brought about all at once, but Step by Step, by many
Machinations, Plots and Contrivances of the superior lapsed Intelligences on
the Inferior. Nemo repent fit optimus aut turpissimus. Finite Intelligences
must form and acquire all their Habits by repeated Acts, and Step by Step: So
that in all Probability, the Fall might have been a long time in bringing
about; and innumerable Numbers of all the several Ranks and Orders, and some of
all the different Hierarchies, might have been brought into this general
Rebellion, and have gradually departed from that pure Love, naked Faith and
universal Resignation, which alone made the Essence of their Perfection and
Happiness; though in the brief contracted Account we have of it in Revelation,
it is comprised in a few general Words, which is all we in our present State,
it seems, could bear, without Violence being committed on our Liberties, our
universal Resignation obstructed, and the Merit of pure Love and a generous
Trust and Confidence in infinite Perfection destroyed; more explicit and
detail'd Accounts, might have nourished Pride, Presumption and
Self-sufficiency, and so sunk us deeper.

. 14. OUR Senses were given us to commerciat with material Objects, and to
perceive and enjoy the Beauties of the inanimate Creation, as well as to limit
the Extension and Expansion of our Powers and Faculties; and by them all our
Sensations, Ideas and Pictures of Bodies and inanimate Creatures, are conveyed
to the sentient and intelligent Principle. The Key and Mean of all our natural
Knowledge of them, is Experiment or Observation, performed by our Senses
simply, or improved by Art, and the Logic of all human and natural Knowledge
about them, is Proportion justly applied: For Syllogism and formal Argument, is
but Proportion expressed in abstracted Terms, or the Ideas meant by these
Terms; and this is the true and only Mean of natural Knowledge about Bodies and
their natural Qualities and Laws. In spiritual Truths, imperceptible and
immaterial Beings, ( viz.) about their Nature, Qualities and Ranks, can know
nothing naturally and humanly, (unless it be infused and impressed by some
other Spirit) but by Analogy, Similitude, Allegory, Trope, Metaphor, or Figure,
referring them to, and comparing them with, our own intelligent and sentient
Spirit, and its Manner of Operation; and then clothing them with such Terms,
or referring them to such Knowledge, as we have received from Sensation, or
from Proportion; and this is the only Mean and Instrument of human Knowledge we
can possibly have, in the Nature, Qualities and moral Relations of Spirits,
spiritual and moral Actions and Duties. The sentient and intelligent Principle,
or Soul, is the Spring or Source of both Keys or Kinds of Logic, without which
both would be equally useless. Culture and Experience is in spiritual
Knowledge, what Experiment and Observation is in sensitive Knowledge; Analogy
is to the first, what Proportion is to the second; Similitude, Allegory, Trope,
Metaphor and Figure, (all the Appendages of Analogy, or a more distant or near
Approximation to it) are what a more or less accurate, a general or more
particular Experiment and Observation, or juster and clearer Proportion applied
to material Objects, is in sensitive Knowledge; and a close, simple, full and
cogent Analogy, is as just and coercive a Demonstration in spiritual Knowledge,
as a Mathematical or Geometrical one is in sensitive Knowledge. Scripture,
Revelation, and our own inward Feelings of the Operations of our Soul, give the
Data, ( viz. the general Propositions, the accurate Observations on them)
analogous to Mr. Flamstead's or Dr. Halley's Observations of the Appulses of
the Moon to the Fixed Stars, from sufficient Numbers of which, the great Orbit
of the Lunar Revolution is determined, by comparing them with the general Law
of Attraction. Here Revelation gives us the Observations; the Knowledge we have
of the Nature of the Operations of our own Spirits, gives us the general Law;
and Analogy may answer to Algebra and Calculation in Astronomy and mixed
Mathematics; and we may err and blunder in the first for want of Care and
Attention, as we may in the last, being ever finite, and consequently fallible.

. 15. THE Account we have in Revelation of the Lapse, may have a literal,
natural and material Meaning (as all the Words and Works of God have a natural
or literal, spiritual and divine Meaning and Use, else he were not God, that
is, a Being of infinite Perfection); and these Meanings may only develope and
unfold themselves, and appear to different Persons, according to their
different Degrees of Purity and Perfection; the literal and cortical Meaning
and Use, may be fitted to elementary and initiating Persons, and be just and
true in its Degree; and the others proper only for the more advanced; and this
with infinite Variety, Justness and Property. Now in Moses's Account of the
Lapse, the Tree of Life, of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, the Serpent,
Paradise, and all the Scene and Group of this mysterious Affair, was certainly
literal, material and real, as there represented and described; but perhaps
happened not till the last Act of this Tragedy. Paradise was certainly a most
delicious and enchanting Place of material and bodily Delights; the Tree of
Life and its Fruit was designed to perpetuat the Life and Health of the then
new-modell'd, though not perhaps Ethereal Vehicle; the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil, certainly communicated by its Fruit, Pain, Diseases and Death to
this partially incrusted Body: The Serpent, no Doubt, was a lapsed Spirit,
embodied in this then more beautiful Animal. Now as all this Scene, may have
also spiritual Meaning as well as a literal and elementary one, of more
Consequence to our Happiness and Perfection to be known and believed, as the
Spirit is of more Value than the Body; why may not Paradise mean in this Sense,
the three original and fundamental Powers of the Soul, Living, Activity or
Liberty, and Intelligence, or its original and immutable Nature and
Constitution, entrusted with us finite Intelligences, to cultivate, improve and
exalt? The Tree of Life be Him, from whom all Life and Being proceeds, the
Father of us all? The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, the primary Image of
the Deity, the Son of God, by whose Economy Evil known and felt, could only be
done away and eraz'd, or his divine Nature, Justice, Goodness and Truth, which
Image was in the human Nature defaced, by trusting it to his own Spirit and
Liberty? The Serpent, the grand Deceiver, or lapsed spiritual Nature in
General, or one of the highest Order of the lapsed Hierarchy? And so the whole
Scene of the Lapse may be more properly and feelingly allegoriz'd, or explained
in plain Terms to an honest and ingenuous Heart, ( viz.) thus: All created
finite Intelligences being free, and consequently fallible, innumerable Numbers
of them, through Pride, Self-sufficiency, and Desire of Independence, trusting
to, and conducting themselves by their own natural Lights, as being made little
Deities, and deriveing with their Being from their Author, a Ray, Efflux, or
infinitesimal Emanation of his Self-existence, infinite Activity or Power, and
infinite Wisdom, that is, of his Nature and essential Attributes; deriving, I
say, dependent and derivative Living, Freedom and Intelligence, but affecting
Independency, and departing from pure Love, naked Faith and universal
Resignation to infinite Perfection, they gradually sunk into Selfishness,
Propriety and inordinate Love of the Creatures; and instead of being governed
absolutely in all things by the Providence, Influences, Impulses and
Suggestions of the Eternal Spirit, they affected to be governed by their own
natural Spirits, and selfish and narrow Views and Prejudices, and became, as it
were, independent, unguarded, and unrestrained Thinkers and Actors, prying into
and determining in all Matters whatsoever; and instead of being resigned to the
universal Reason and sovereign Will and Order of Divine Providence, found Fault
with, criticis'd, grumbled at, and blasphemed the Conduct and Economy of
infinite Wisdom, and gradually departed from pure Love, naked Faith, and Trust,
and universal Resignation, the sole Means to preserve them in the Perfection of
their dependent State, and in Similarity to his moral Attributes; and so fell
from the perfect Happiness of their Rank and derivative Being; Self, spurious
Self, became transubstantiated into their thus depraved Natures.

. 16. WHEN human Nature had thus lapsed, by affecting Independence, and
desireing to govern itself by its own natural Spirit solely, and wallowing in
the Objects of Sense, and swallowed in Creature-pleasures, it being an eternal
Law, established in Nature, (for many wise and great Ends) and, by Analogy, (as
we find it) extending from material to spiritual Things, viz. that Like draws
and is equally drawn to Like; or that Bodies and Spirits attract and unite with
similar Bodies and Spirits, from the universal Principle of Attraction and
Union; the human Body did hence necessarily and mechanically (as it were)
contract a Rust, Grossness, Stupor and Inactivity, and became restive and
disobedient to the Commands of the natural Spirit, gradually degenerating into
an earthly, gross, material Prison or Dungeon; and the Spirit was hereby more
contracted, restrained and limited in its original and immutable Attributes of
Liveing, Activity and Intelligence, as to their Extention, Purity, the
Quickness and Exertion of their Acts, (for all Spirits are limited and tied
down to the Nature, Order and Purity of their Vehicles, while their Union
lasts, though their natural Powers in their Fund and Essence be immutable, and
constantly the same) so that their natural Spirits now being assisted by the
supernatural Grace and Influence of the Eternal Spirit, procured by the
Mediation of Jesus, must work out their Recovery and Restoration by gradually
returning to their original Order.

. 17. PERHAPS, as all animated Beings, Sentient or Intelligent, must
necessarily be clothed with some Vehicle, purer or grosser, ethereal or
planetary, fitted to the Mansion they are confined to, and to their Degree of
Purity in their moral Powers, and their Extention or Rank of natural Powers; so
all created free Intelligences, of whatever Order or Degree, must necessarily
pass through some State of Probation, Apprenticeship and Trials, of their Love,
Faith and Patience, before they can arrive at their final, immutable, and for
ever permanent State, and the Mansion they are eternally to inhabit afterward.
That something like this was the general Sense of Mankind, seems to be hinted
in all Pagan Antiquity that we have any Accounts of, Egyptian, Syrian, Grecian
and Roman, by their Initiations into the Mysteries of their Gods; and this,
chiefly, in order to produce an habitual Firmness, Force and Stability, on
finite, free, labile Intelligences, in the different Institutions. It would
seem, as none but God is a pure Spirit in his Nature and Substance, none but
God can be infallible and impeccable: And that all Creatures being finite and
free, must necessarily, by their Nature, be labile, fallible and peccable; and
that even infinite Wisdom and Power could not make a Creature (for God cannot
work Contradictions) that was of its own Nature, illabile, infallible and
impeccable; but that before that secondary Nature of eternal Infallibility,
Illability and Impeccability could be brought about, on the most perfect of
created Intelligences, it must necessarily be, by confirmed Habits, produced by
repeated Acts, and perfected into pure Love and naked Faith, or into an
absolute Surrendry of their natural and moral Powers, to infinite Perfection,
which alone can produce derivative Infallibility and Illability on them, and so
eternize Perfection and Happiness, and which only can be produced by various
Trials, Essays and Temptations to the contrary: He who never was tempted, what
knows he? Thus the Son of God, as Man, was made perfect by Suffering: As a
Potter gives Firmness and Impenetrability to his Earthen Ware, by keeping it in
the Fire till it vitrifies. Had Lucretia lived to all Eternity, her Chastity
would never have been doubted; whereas Cleopatra must not only first have made
an Amend Honorable, but have passed through several severe new Trials, before
here is could have been believed. We plainly find by Revelation, that many of all
the several Hierarchies fell on their Trial; for tried they must have been,
else they could not have fallen; for Reaction always supposes Action. As it is
the Nature of Pride and Malice, to be spiteful, infectious and tempting, (in
Hopes that Numbers may make them overlooked, or too powerful, and so secure) we
find they, or their Leader, (suppose his Name Lucifer) had a great hand in the
human Lapse, as it is glanced at under the Serpent that tempted Eve. And from
this Fall of the Angels, the natural and plain Account of Daemonology, and the
early impious Heresy of the Manichaeans, ( Lucifer and his Angels) is to be
derived. What the Trials of these fallen Angels were, and in what manner those
of the Angels in the several Hierarchies who stood, combated, kept firm and
unshaken, and thereby were for ever confirmed, established and eternized, and
perhaps increased and enlarged in Purity, Luster and Glory, by their Victory;
is not revealed, nor to be discovered but by Analogy or Conjecture. The History
of the human Lapse is so brief and obscure in Moses, (perhaps partly
allegorical, partly literal) with a plain Design to damp idle or hurtful
Curiosity, and so prevent our being hurt thereby, by withdrawing us from the
one thing necessary, that it amounts almost to a total Forbidding, and a
Warning from prying with too much Eagerness into this mysterious Affair; and to
leave things secret (the Secreta Imperii Divini) to God. All that is certain
is, that we are lapsed at present, or in a State of Trial and Probation, (we of
the human Race on this ruinous Planet) and cannot possibly now be as we came
out of the Hands of our infinitely wise, good and powerful Creator.
Pre-existence, the Manner of our Lapse, the Duration of our Banishment, and the
last Term and Limits of our Restoration, are, with infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, in their Detail concealed from us, because they would infallibly hurt
us; if more precise, they might obstruct the Merit of Faith, or draw us out of
the shortest Way. Either of these two Manners of explaining the Lapse, may
suffice an honest modest Philosopher, (who is sensible of his own limited
Faculties) to make the Affair neither improbable nor impossible; especially
when he finds himself both imperfect, unhappy, and unfit to be finally united
with a Being infinitely perfect and happy, as He now is. I choose the first, as
more conformable to Revelation, and the Form of sound Words; and every modest
Christian Philosopher will be cautious not to be wise, above what is written.

. 18. WHETHER this Globe of Earth, as we now inhabit it, was the original and
primitive Seat of innocent and unlapsed human Spirits, and by the Energy and
Force of the Lapse, was gradually and necessarily, and, according to the
present Laws of Bodies, turned into the ruinous, dark, dismal State it is now
in, and such elementary and clayey Prisons made of it, as our present Vehicles,
and the human Race, with all the Spirits concerned in the Rebellion, thrust
down and confined upon it, is not material to be known, nor perhaps
philosophically to be determined: It seems most probable, and conformable to
the Analogy of Things, and the common Laws of Nature, that it gradually and
naturally changed from its original Beauty and superior Place among the Stars,
into its present ruinous and decayed State, from the natural Malignity, and
deleterious Energy of the Rebellion in its primitive Inhabitants, which perhaps
was gradual. What is certain is, that such a Place as Paradise is described, is
now nowhere to be found on it; and that balancing the Inconveniences with the
Advantages, of want of Light and Sun, and of cold, uncertain and various
Seasons, of Barrenness, and Mountains covered with Ice and Snow, of the one
Part, with the Hurricanes, Tempests, Volcano's, Earthquakes, Thunder and
Lightning, poisonous Insects, and ravenous and savage Beasts, scorching Heats,
and pestilential Winds, Blasts or Damps, of the other, the whole Globe is
pretty near equal in Conveniences; and no particular Place without its
Comforts and Inconveniences. So that either Paradise was on some other Planet,
or (which is most natural to suppose) Crime, Rebellion and Disorder have had a
physical and necessary Influence, on the Matter or Vehicle belonging to each
human Spirit; and thus the whole Mass of rebellious Intelligences, with the
Globe they inhabited, was naturally and physically changed and disordered. I
say, it is most natural and philosophical, and perhaps a necessary Consequence
of physical Efficiency and Energy, to conclude that the Spirit, according to
its Degree of Purity or Depravity, should purify and sublime, or corrupt and
disorder the elementary Vehicle, with which it is clothed: as Fire turns
Bodies into its own Nature, and Cold deadens and incrassats them, according to
the Degree of their Intenseness. We see Luxury, inordinat Leachery, Riot and
Laziness, first incrassat, then inflame, and at last mortify and putrify human
and animal Bodies; and Abstinence, a low and cool Regimen, Exercise and Air,
lighten, enliven and volatilize them. And it is not impossible, that a whole
Race, and all the Inhabitant Mass of such corrupted and putrified Bodies, and
depraved and degenerated Spirits, may have had such an insensible and gradual
Influence on a whole Globe, its Atmosphere and different Regions, as quite to
alter its original Nature; as we see Heaps of putrefying Fish, Insects, and the
Carcasses of Men, by the Fermentation and Volatilization of the animal Salts,
(from intense Heat) produce an universal Plague and Pestilence, as was that of
Athens, and many others. Thus far the Change of our Planet might have been a
natural and necessary Consequence at least, the Elements, or Beginning of such
a Depravation of the Bodies of its Inhabitants, and their Habitation: which, no
doubt, infinite Wisdom and Power, (who directs the natural and necessary
Effects of his inanimat Creation, for the moral Purposes of his intelligent
Creatures, supernaturally) and out of the general Law established for material
Bodies and spiritual Substances, may have heightened, exasperated, or even
quickened, according to his Pleasure, for the wise Ends and Purposes of his
Providence; and thus might have destroyed that Paradise, which by Rebellion and
Disorder had been abused, viz. supernaturally and contrary to the general Laws
of the Celestial Motions, might have changed the Orbit, the Center of Rotation,
the Distance of the Earth from the Sun, and the Angle of the Ecliptic with the
Equator; to reverse the Elements, destroy its Figure and Structure, and thus to
weaken the Fertility, and produce the rest of the Appearances we now observe on
our Planet, and throughout the whole Solar System, which have many evident
Marks of Ruin and Desolation; and this for a Punishment and expiatory
Purification of the lapsed Inhabitants: And thus also the Deluge might have
been brought on, after the Destruction of a paradisaical Globe, by altering
only its Center of Gravity; and after the same Manner other Changes might have
been produced.

. 19. AN animal Body is nothing but a System or Aggregat of mere mechanical
Powers, viz. of Ropes, Pullies, Levers, Tubes, Glands, Strainers, and the like;
viz. One great Pipe with infinite Branches, (infinite in Number, Fitness and
Delicacy;) secreting proper and specific Liquors, to keep them (these Solids)
in Repair, and preserve them in their due Tone, and a proper Degree of
Elasticity, thereby to serve the Intentions, and answer the Ends of the
intelligent Spirit, while confined to this Planet. And as I have often used the
Similitude, I still find it the most proper, viz. that the Body, this earthly
Vehicle and Machin, is, as it were, a curious finely contrived Organ, or
musical Instrument, whose Keys, Stops and Pipes were all originally, elegantly
adjusted and duly tuned, for the Use of the Musician, or indwelling Spirit. In
this Fitness and Propriety to answer the Purposes of the Creator, does the
Union consist; if that is partly disordered, this Union is partially dissolved;
while the great and necessary Parts are tolerably sound, the Union will still
subsist, though imperfectly; but if these essential Organs are quite spoiled, the
Union will be totally dissolved, and the Inhabitants, by the eternal Laws of
Spirits, must necessarily find out, and pass into some other astral Vehicle, or
musical Organ, proper for its then Degree of Purity or Corruption; as an Insect
is, by the great Law of Instinct, directed to deposit her Eggs on those Leaves
or Trees that are fittest to preserve and vivify them; or a Bird seeks by
Instinct, the Situation and Materials for her Nest, that is most proper to
shelter and accommodate her Young; and this perhaps in a continual Progression,
from astral Vehicle to Vehicle, perpetually refining, as the rational free
Intelligence purifies in its moral Capacity or Attributes.

. 20. MATTER, or Body, is essentially incapable of any thing but Division,
Figure, Motion and Situation. It is naturally passive, and to make it active,
or capable of Self-motion, is an absolute Contradiction and Impossibility; for
two opposite and contrary Principles can never subsist in the same Subject: and
therefore it must be entirely inert and passive, and for ever continue in the
State it is put in, unless it be changed by some external Force; and that can
never be effected but by a Spirit, or spiritual Substance: which, on the
contrary, is essentially self-active and self-motive, and by its Agency
determines the Motion and Rest, and different Directions and Actions of Bodies.
It is true, this Agency is under certain Restrictions, being limited and
subjected to the general Laws of the Nature of Bodies; but the Beginning, End
and Degree of the Force and Motion, and all other Changes produced in Bodies,
are from the Energy and Action of spiritual Substances, either primary or
secondary, original or created; so that where Matter, Mechanism and its Powers
and Laws end, there spiritual Agency and Energy begin. And therefore I fear,
that Sir Isaac Newton's Spiritus quidam subtilissimus, Descartes's and
Leibnitz's Vortices, Hugens's and Fatio's infinitely rare, rapid, subtle
Matter, with the Qualities they must endow them, to solve Appearances, (I mean
only in animated Bodies, for in Inanimat it may be required, nay some such
Fluid seems necessary, I think) is, I fear, imaginary and without Foundation,
from sufficient Experiment, or the Anology of Nature; unless by their infinitely
subtle Matter, they mean real spiritual Substance, or else the first Elements
of Bodies; for Matter must be extended, divisible, inert, and gravitat, else it
can be no longer Matter; and when such immaterial, and, as it were, self-moving
Matter is granted, it will separate us, but one Step further from spiritual
Substance and Agency; or the perpetual Influence of the First Cause, in whom
all things live, move and have their Being. And, I fear, the whole of the
Supposition, how mechanical and adequat soever, to answer Appearances in all
animated Beings, and in all Accounts of it given by these great Men, has not
that Simplicity and Beauty conspicuous in, and essential and necessary to, all
the Works of God, i. e. to infinite Wisdom and Power. Of the same kind are
animal Spirits, in the Account of muscular Motion; and, on the whole, I can
conceive Matter no otherwise, but as divided, extended, moved and figured, and
actuated and directed by Spirit, which only can act on it, by its own
self-motive Energy, though that too is limited and circumscribed by Matter, in
all created Spirits. If Experiment or repeated Observations should ascertain
the Existence of such an infinitely rare and elastic Matter necessarily, (which
I fear it will hardly do) then we must submit to receive it; but, I think,
since Resistance will always necessarily accompany Matter in Motion, how small,
rare or elastic soever, it will of consequence at last alter the Figure and
Direction, and abate the Force and Figure of the Particles, so as to render
them unfit to produce the Effect, and answer present Appearances; and perhaps
this System may be so ordained at first thus to end. But still, as we must stop
somewhere at last, and admit of spiritual Agency to impress the first Motion,
nothing but repeated and undeniable Experiment and Observation should induce us
to multiply Causes, and allow any such Fluid intervening between animated
Matter and the first or secondary Movers. This will be better understood by an
Example: It is well known what Pains have been taken, and how many Hypotheses
have been framed, not only by Physicians, but Geometers of the first Rank, to
explain muscular Motion, and all, I think, hitherto in vain. This subtle Matter
under the Name of animal Spirits, (or at least in propagating them) and even
Sir Isaac's Spiritus subtilissimus, has been employed for this Purpose, though
with little Satisfaction to most attentive and qualified Judges. How much more
natural, philosophical and simple is it, to suppose the Nerves to be infinitely
delicat and mechanically adjusted membranous Tubes, Twists or Ropes, whose
Elasticity and Mechanism is preserved by an internal milky soft Pith, which
Membranes receive their first Impression and Impulse from the self-motive
Principle within us, (for the self-moveing Principle must communicate the first
Impulse either on this supposed intermediat Fluid, or on these Membranes, and
either of them is equally unintelligible and explicable; but the last is the
shortest way, and therefore likeliest to be the Method of the Author of Nature,
who always works the shortest Way, and after the simplest Manner, as may be
mathematically demonstrated in all his real and natural Workings) and
communicate and propagat it by proper and harmonious Oscillations to the
Muscles, by whose mechanical Structure those harmonious Motions are excited
into Action, by that admirable Mechanism so fully and justly explained, by the
learned and ingenious Dr. Alexander Stewart! How much more simple and natural
is it to conceive, that the Surfaces of Bodies, their Effluvia or repelling
Steams, communicate certain justly proportioned and commensurable Undulations,
Vibrations and Tremors to such membranous Pipes, which the natural Sagacity of
the intelligent Principle knows by its own innate Powers, to indicat the
Presence of such and such Bodies; in the same Manner as the Governor of a
besieged Town, or the several Ships of a Fleet, understand what such a Number
of Guns, or such a Flag, import and signify! Thus Things are easy, intelligible
and simple. We daily see and hear, what fine Pieces of Music a skilful Musician
can fling off a well-tuned Instrument, from the various Motions of his Fingers
or Voice: But this I propose as a mere Illustration. If Experiment should show
the Necessity of the mentioned ethereal Fluid, even then, I think, it will take
Place only in unanimated Nature. And if there is any Regard to be had to such
an Hypothesis, before it be absolutely decided by Experiment, it must be,
because Nature and its Author never act by Starts, Fits, and Intervals, but by
slow, uniform and imperceptible Degrees, though the Progression is often not to
be determined by finite Experiments, or finite Capacities. But even though the
Organs of Sense may and do want Media, the animal Functions are too intimat and
necessary to Life to need such.

. 21. LIFE, Activity and Intelligence, are natural and necessary in some Degree
to all spiritual Beings, as all the Consequences and Combinations of them are;
as being Miniatures, Sparkles or Infinitesimals of the Deity. All of the same
Order, Rank or Hierarchy, have these nearly in the same Degree; and these
Hierarchies and Ranks, differ only in their Degrees of these primary
Attributes. What may make the most apparent Difference in this State of things,
in the Individuals of the same Rank or Species, is, perhaps, the more coarse or
elegant Texture; or the Fitness or Unfitness of their ethereal Vehicles in
their first Formation, as they primarily came out of the Hands of their Maker.
All the radical Differences conspicuous in the human Race now, are owing to the
different Frame, Texture and Culture of their bodily Machin, and its spiritual
Organs; so that originally there must have been no Difference of Sexes, because
at last, in their restored and recovered State there will be none; they will,
in that respect, be like the Angels, as Revelation expressly asserts. Something
analogous to Creative Fecundity, possibly, may be even in Angels, and primarily
may have been too in the human Race, because of their Similarity and
Resemblance to those Angels, and to their grand Original the Deity; I say, some
miniature Resemblance of his Creative Power might have been in them. Beneficent
Nature must be necessarily communicative, and earnestly desirous, there may be
infinitely more Beings to contemplat, worship and adore the infinitely perfect
Being, and admire the Operations of his Hands, to imitat Him, and partake of
his Felicity. But how this Creative Power, or earnest Desire of more
Intelligences, operated then, I will not take upon me to conjecture: But
certain it is, that the Division of the Sexes was after the Lapse was begun,
and, perhaps, when it was far advanced; possibly to put a Drag on it, and
prevent the final Degeneracy into Self-love, or an idolatrous and unnatural
Commerce with the brute Creation.

. 22. IT is both philosophical and highly probable to suppose, that the Bodies
as well as the Spirits of all the human Race were created at one and the same
time; at least were sent into these Adamical Dungeons they now inhabit, at one
and the same time. The Spirit endowed with the three radical Qualities of Life,
Activity and Intelligence, in the Perfection that belonged to its Order and
Species; and the Body, in the Perfection of their then Estate, at least in the
original and first Stock, in whose Loins were included in Miniatures and
Infinitesimals, in a perpetual Progression descending, all the Race and Mass
that should ever exist, of that Species. This will be no Difficulty to those
who know and understand, the infinite Divisibility of Matter, and the Doctrine
of first, second, third and consequent Fluxions or Differences, as they are now
demonstrated and explained. These infinitesimal Bodies have probably been
animated, and growing in their own Manner, and according to their Laws, from
their first Formation, and from the Time of the primary general Creation, till
they arrived at their full Maturity. No doubt both these miniature and mature
Bodies, were vastly different from what we find our lapsed earthly Tabernacles
now are. As the Spirit was perfect in its Kind, so was the Body: As the Spirit
was pliant, supple, and cheerfully obedient to the Influences of the Eternal
Spirit, (which was breathed into it by the Spirit of God, viz. pure
disinterested Love) so was the Body pliant and obedient to the Commands of the
human Spirit: All was Order, Peace, Love and Harmony; and probably the Frame
and Figure of the Body might be in many Particulars different from what we now
find it, as we have observed of the Difference of the Sexes in the former
Section; and these Differences may be necessary in one State of the
Progression, and may naturally drop off, and decay, in another, when of no
further Use: Instances of which we may see in the different Shapes of seminal
Animalculs, Eggs, Nymphae and young Insects, from what they have when arrived
at Maturity; of a Chick in the Egg, from what it is when perfectly grown; in
the several Stages of the Silkworm, and most other animated Beings, Vegetables
as well as Animals. And this is a just and wise Contrivance, and evidently
demonstrates Design in the Maker, to fit the living Creature for its several
Situations. But what is most material, is, that even this now Adamical and
gross Tabernacle of ours, must necessarily contain under it, the Principles,
Elements, Springs and linear Root of that ethereal or paradisaical Body it was
created in, and of that perhaps glorious Body it will be restored to at last in
the final Recovery (which perhaps are both the same). But this can be no
Difficulty to those who know that the Rays of the Sun are but Matter and Body,
which may be contained in a Dungeon of Putrefaction, and in a Dunghill as well
as in the azure Sky; and that the Particles of Matter attract and repel each
other in different Circumstances, and purify and sublime as well as incraffat
and condense, by the mere Force and Energy of the present Laws of Nature: And
this Law, by which the whole Stock of such an Order and Rank of Intelligences
advances in a certain Progression toward Happiness and Perfection, (the
Confirmation and Stability of which is only to be found in the last and most
perfect State of Purity and Happiness, as being free, but finite, and
consequently fallible Creatures) must absolutely depend on and be brought about
by Experience, confirmed Habits, many appropriated Trials, and much gradual
Labor; for nothing is more certain than the Axiom, Nemo repent fit
turpissimus aut optimus. This Law, I say, of deriving the whole Race from such
a radical Stock in an increasing Progression, was a noble Design, and of
infinite Love and Wisdom, for rendering the succeeding and posterior
Generations Partakers of all the Acquisitions of Wisdom, Knowledge, and other
Improvements of their Predecessors: But as Corruption optimi est pessima, by the
Lapse all the contrary has happened, and

Aet as parentum pejor avis tulit So that what infinite Love and Goodness could
not effect, that is, render finite fallible Intelligences fixed, and eternally
stable in Order and Purity: Punishment, Experience and Trial may at last
effect, though in an unnatural and retrograde Manner: But for this Misfortune,
infinite Wisdom is no more to be blamed, than a kind Father that leaves a
comfortable Subsistence to a prodigal Son, is to be charged with the Miseries
and Diseases he has contracted in squandering it.

. 23. THERE may possibly be original Difference in the Complexion and Frame of
the Spirits of the same Rank and Order of Intelligences: some have one or more
of their natural and radical Attributes in a greater Degree of Perfection than
others, which certainly are heightened by the different Degrees of Perfection
and Improvement of their moral Qualities; it being sufficient to constitute
their Degree or Rank, that the Sum total of their Qualities, one to compensat
the other, be originally pretty near equal. But I should think the greatest
Difference consists in the Culture: The righteous Man is more excellent than
his Neighbor, says the Royal Prophet; which is only from his cultivating into
higher Habits his moral Qualities; and it is the same with both Parts of the
Compound, the Qualities of which, in all finite free Intelligences, must ever
depend, to a certain Degree, on Culture and Improvement, in the Docility or
Facility of the Spirit, and Pliancy of the Body. He that by Study, entering
into his own Heart, thinking, reflecting, remembering, and acting, cultivats
his Spirit, will continually acquire a Facility, Quickness and Penetration in
intellectual Opperations; and he that by Air, Exercise, a low Diet, and proper
and well-tim'd Remedies, improves and heightens his Health, and perfects his
animal Functions, will be fitter and more capable to improve his intellectual
Faculties. The bodily Machine, disordered or spoiled, will sink, debase, blunt
and confound the Operations of the Spirit; and the Spirit violently agitated,
or too closely confined, will disturb the Economy of the bodily Functions: and
the perfect State of Health, and the last Perfection of all intelligent
Creatures, consisting of an intelligent Spirit and a material Machine, depends
on the perfect Sanity and Harmony of both united, in their respective Order and
Rank. A superior Degree of Perfection in either, will consist with an inferior
Degree in the other; but when either the Spirit is quite uncultivated, or in an
infinitesimal Degree only, the radical Qualities of Living, Activity and
Intelligence, may be dwindled into that one of mere Living, as in Children and
Idiots, perhaps Brutes; and when the Body is much in Disorder, the spiritual
Faculties, however cultivated, either wander at random, or act irregularly. But
the Fund of the Spirit, or the radical Qualities, may be eternally the same,
invariable and unalterable in their Order and Rank, whatever happens to the
bodily Machine; only the sensible and elicited Acts will vary and alter; or,
which is the same thing, the radical Qualities of Living, Activity and
Intelligence, may be invariable in the Rank and Degree proper to such a Species
of spiritual Nature, whatever Machine or bodily Organ it be clothed with; only
it cannot exert its elicit or exterior Acts without a proper Machine: As a
Musician is still in his Nature and Fund a good Musician, whether he has an
Organ or musical Instrument to play on or not, or whatever sort of musical
Instrument he has; but he never can perform an harmonious pleasant Piece of
Music, without having a perfect and proper musical Instrument. An Angel is
still an Angel in his Nature, whatever Vehicle he appear in; but cannot perform
his Office to the human Species, unless he appear in some Shape or Vehicle
familiar and proper to his Commission. So that as to the human Species, the
present Body and Vehicle was designed, and is necessary only to commerciat and
communicate with the System of Bodies or Beings clothed with material and
sensible Appearances and Qualities, as they now are in their ruinous State: For
as to invisible, imperceptible, and spiritual Objects and Beings, the first
Elements of any Knowledge about them, must entirely and solely be derived from
Analogy, to the Ideas and Resemblances of Things, conveyed to the sentient
Principle through the Senses; and when these elementary Steps are gone through,
and become familiar and easy, spiritual Agency and Operation (if such be
allowed) may then begin its Influence and Effects: For when the Mind has been
duly cultivated and habituated to a Faculty of Thinking, to abstracted
Sentiments, Reflections and Ideas, then rational, spiritual and closer
Thinking, becomes familiar and easy: But the Rudiments, and initial Procedure,
must be derived through the Senses, in Perceptions and Ideas excited by Matter
and its Qualities, but improved by Analogy and its Appendages, Trope, Metaphor,
Similitude and Hieroglyphic.

. 24. THE natural Progression and final Cause or Reason of this Economy, as
far as philosophical Reasoning may go in such Matters, may be this: The
original and radical Qualities of all spiritual Natures being (as has been
often said) Liveing, Activity and Intelligence, and these being unalterable and
eternally the same, in the specific Order and Rank, a vast Number (perhaps of
all the several Orders of the Hierarchies) lapsed and fell, and ran into
Rebellion and Disorder, (being finite and free) and so defaced and lost their
moral Qualities of Justice, Goodness and Truth. Infinite Wisdom and Love then,
always intending to recover and restore his lapsed Creatures, must, by the
eternal unalterable Laws of his Nature, bring it about in a Manner consistent
with their original and radical Qualities; that is, by preserving their Life or
Liveing, their Activity or Liberty, and their Intelligence or Understanding. In
loseing their moral Attributes, they perhaps lost or spoiled, their
paradisaical or glorious Body with which they were originally clothed, and
were new-cloath'd over it, with a crass, unactive Tabernacle or Prison, such as
we find our present Adamical one now is; by which means our radical Qualities
were greatly confined, and more narrowly circumscribed, and we were reduced to
a State of Annihilation and Extinction as to them (as it were) for a long Tract
of Time: Our radical Qualities of Liveing, Activity and Intelligence being thus
reduced to the single one of Liveing; as the whole human Race actually once
were in the Loins of their first Parent Adam, or whoever was the first of the
human Race. From that time they have been developeing, extending and
unfettering their Adamical Tabernacles (every one in his Order) thus spread
over the internal ethereal Vehicle, till they came to a certain Degree of
Maturity, and had formed the several new-cloath'd Organs, Pipes and Springs of
this second Adamical Machin, fit to perform the probatory and expiatory
Harmony, in this Period of Duration, in order to acquire and regain their moral
Attributes of Justice, Goodness and Truth, and to return into Order, and,
consequential, Happiness: Finite Beings, are absolutely incapable to regain
these moral Attributes consistent with their natural and necessary ones, but by
a gradual Progress, ( viz.) by Labor, Patience, Experience and Trial, by which
they may be gradually confirmed into permanent Habits, and advanced to the
Degree of their Order and Rank, or perhaps higher; and thus their natural
Attributes being depressed and sunk into an Equality with their moral Ones, by
being thus clothed and circumscribed with gross Vehicles, their natural Powers
are preserved from Violence, and only sopited for a time, till the moral
Qualities begin to rise; and then both may go on in the same Pace, which, it
would seem, could, by no other possible or imaginable Means, be so consistently
brought about. For the natural Attributes of Liveing, Activity and
Intelligence, preserved at their utmost original Extent, must necessarily have
counteracted and clashed with the Acquisition of the moral Attributes to any
Degree of Perfection. For Example; innate, precise Knowledge, and a penetrating
Understanding, in any thing, in this our lapsed Estate, would necessarily have
counteracted Dependence, Meekness, Poverty of Spirit, Humility, pure Love, and
universal Charity; and unbounded Liberty must have clash'd with Restraints,
Submission and Resignation, now (at least) so absolutely necessary to the
Acquisition of the moral Powers to any Degree, and so of the rest of the moral
Attributes. But by thus depressing the natural Attributes to the Level of the
moral ones, both may, without Violence, be in time restored to their appointed
Order and Degree; that is, they gradually and Step by Step, may be turned into
permanent Habits, by the Divine Grace, and the Economy of Jesus.

. 25. HENCE, the moral Attributes being defaced by the Lapse, and the natural
ones brought down to a Level with them, by confining them to gross Vehicles or
Prisons, the whole of the intellectual Operations must, in some measure, depend
on the bodily Machin, as well, as the Degree and Perfection of the moral
Attributes, in this present lapsed State, at least in its first Steps and
Initiation. The intellectual Operations can never be so regularly and perfectly
exerted, while the Body is in Disorder; a sick and diseased Person seldom
perceives truly, nor reasons justly; and a vicious Person never judges solidly,
that is, by Number, Weight and Measure, nor acts perfectly. But that this may
be more clearly understood, it may want a little further Detail. I say nothing
here of a possible passive State in advanced Christianity, that being above
Philosophy or Conjecture, and perhaps the last Scene of the Drama of
Restoration.

. 26. WHAT Men call a Genius, or a Man of fine natural Parts, a Hero, or a
Philosopher, (before the Fund, the whole created spiritual Substance, or the
moral as well as the natural Attributes, be acquired and cultivated into a
Habit) is much owing to the Perfection of the Machin or Vehicle, and its
spiritual or ethereal (now clothed over with Clay) Organs. The intellectual
Faculties require proper Organs, Springs, Ropes and Pipes, to perform their
Operations by, as well as the Senses; and these probably are the Arteriolae,
Fibrils and membranous Tubuli prolonged, of the cortical and glandular Parts of
the Brain, which are diversified and delicatly modified ad infinitum; the
Detail and Mechanism of which never was, nor perhaps ever will be,
philosophically explained: But that the Perfection of the intellectual
Operations in our present State, depends, in some measure, on the Soundness and
Integrity of the Body, and these particular Organs, there are many undeniable
Evidences to prove, as shall be afterward shown. What I would here insinuat
is, that the Delicacy, Fineness and Perfection of one Set of these intellectual
Organs, beyond that of another Set, is that which makes the Genius, Hero or
Philosopher. Thus the Health of the Body being good and sound, if a Man has
warm, but sharp Blood, with very elastic and strong pungent Nerves, but the
particular Organs of Thinking, Attention and Reflection, indifferently agile
only, he may make a Hero. If his Blood be cool, soft, mild and sweet, and his
intellectual Organs very elastic or agile, he may make a Philosopher or
Lawgiver: And so of the other Differences of natural Spirits, among the human
Race, in all of whom the Fund, or natural Attributes, may be pretty near equal.
But whatever Equality there may be in the natural Qualities of such Spirits,
the Difference in the moral ones, makes the human Species to differ at last
widely, even in the Exercise of natural ones. For the true Criterion of a right
and sound Understanding, and perfect Judgment, is to examine things by Number,
Weight and Measure, according to their Nature and Relations, and then to
estimat and prefer them, according to their intrinsic Worth and Importance thus
determined; and in this Sense it is true only, that the righteous Man is more
excellent than his Neighbor: that is, wiser as well as better. And that the
Acquisition and Culture of the moral Qualities, not only show the Justness and
Strength of the natural ones, but also enlarge, augment and perfect them, both
as they necessarily mend and improve the bodily Health, by Temperance and
Abstinence, and consequently rectify and tune the Organs of the intellectual
Faculties, but likewise as they cultivat and extend all the Powers of the
Spirit, by Study, close Thinking, by Actions, and Abstraction, and other
intellectual Operations, employed in the Acquisition and Exercise of these
moral Qualities.

. 27. THAT the Perfection, and full, free and just Use of the intellectual
Faculties, depends, in a great measure, on the Soundness and Health of the
bodily Machin, more particularly of the Organs of these intellectual Faculties,
is evident from many Considerations: 1st, The Body was designed to concentre
and circumscribe the spiritual Powers, to confine and imprison them for a time,
and fit them only grossly to commerciat with other Bodies on this present
ruinous Planet, and must purify and refine, according to the Degree of the
Acquisition and Perfection of the moral Attributes, as has been explained; and
every Step in this Acquisition necessarily tends to develop and enlarge the
natural and radical Attributes, as has likewise been hinted; from whence their
mutual Dependence on each other becomes evident. In this our lapsed State, our
gross and earthly Prisons were designed by infinite Wisdom, to curb, concentre
and restrain the exalted Functions of the radical and intellectual Faculties,
in Proportion to the Defacement and Decay of the moral ones, that being both on
a Level, they might rise, advance and perfect by equal Degrees, without
Clashing or Contradiction; without which our Ruin must have been eternal, our
Lapse perpetual, and our Recovery impossible; the natural and radical
Qualities, in their utmost Extent, being evidently contradictory to, and
destructive of, the Acquisition and Improvement of the moral ones; and the
whole Restoration must be brought about by the Culture of the moral Qualities,
which perfect and develop the natural ones, and thereby purify and sublime the
Vehicle, extend and form the intellectual Organs: So that in the first Steps at
least of this Progressive Purification, the Perfection of the Acts of the
intellectual Faculties depend on and are in proportion to the Perfection of
their natural and bodily Organs. 2dly, We experimentally find, the intellectual
Faculties and Operations depend on the Body, in all acute and chronical
(especially those called nervous) Distempers; the Raveings, Incoherences and
Distractions in the first, and the unaccountable Terrors, Panics,
Inconstancies, Dispondence and Cowardice of the last, are sufficient Proofs of
this; and demonstrat the Necessity of a proper Crase in the Juices, and the
Soundness and proper Elasticity of the Solids and Organs, in all the
intellectual Functions and Operations, but eminently so in the first Steps of
our Renovation. 3dly, We actually find, and are ocularly sensible, in an
Embryo, in Infancy, in seminal Miniatures, that the whole of the natural Powers
are concentred and imprisoned; and that it is in their Growth only, and in the
developing of their Organs, and in the Enlargement of the Doors, Windows and
Aperture of the Senses, that their intellectual Faculties ever enlarge
themselves to any Degree. 4thly, We find that Luxury, Leachery, Intemperance,
Laziness, strong and violent Passions, inclement and pestilential Air, Bruises
and Accidents, that injure the arterial, and nervous System, always hurt, and
sometimes destroy the free Exercise of these Faculties, and the Acquisition of
Virtue (at least of some Virtues) as well as Science; and that proper Remedies,
and due Management, recover and restore them again. 5thly, Abstracting from the
Probability and analogical Evidence, that the Bodies of the whole Race were
actually formed, lived, grew and extended in the Loins of the first original
Pair, we see plainly, (as I have hinted) that every Individual begins with, as
it were, a mere vegetable Life, while in Embryo, in seminal Miniature, and in
the Mother's Womb; that when it is born, it has scarce more than an animal
Life, in which it continues much longer than any other Animal we know; and that
it rises by slow and imperceptible Degrees into a rational Life: From which it
is evident, that the Powers of the Soul are sunk, concentred, imprisoned and
contracted by its unformed Tabernacle or organical Vehicle, and cannot exert
its intellectual Functions, but gradually and insensibly, and as the bodily and
intellectual Organs are formed; and that for this wise and gracious End, That
the moral Powers and Virtues of the Soul may have Time, Liberty and Leisure, by
repeated Acts, to turn into Habits, and so all three may equally develop and
extend together, ( viz.) the natural and radical Powers, (which in their
Capacity, and original Energy, are invariable) and the moral Attributes of the
Soul, and their mechanical and material Organs. 5thly, But what is in this Case
a Demonstration, is, that all the vital Functions and Sensations, are all
performed by the Spirit, by the Intermediation only of Motions, Vibrations and
Tremors, properly modified and impressed by Bodies, or their Effluvia, on
rightly disposed membranous Tubuli, elastic Threads or Filaments; which Motions
or Vibrations, the Soul naturally, and by its own innate and radical Powers and
Sagacity, knows to denote the Presence of such and such Bodies, and their
Actions. Thus Seeing is performed by the Impressions of the Rays of Light,
emitted or reflected by the Surfaces of Bodies, which by the Size of their
component Particles, and other Circumstances, exciteing particular Vibrations
and Undulations on the elastic optic Nerves, point out to the sagacious Spirit
(innately and naturally endowed with such a Capacity of Perceiving and Judging)
the Presence of such and such Bodies: And in a Manner analogous to this, is
Hearing, Feeling, and all the other Senses performed, and muscular Motion may
be performed much in the same way. 6thly, To confirm all this, and that
Observations and Fact may justify and demonstrat Speculation, it is certain,
and almost infallible, that ponderous Medicines, duly and properly prepared and
adjusted, and a low, cool, thin Diet, persisted in, a due Time, and joined with
Air and Exercise, will generally restore the free and perfect Use of the
intellectual Faculties, not only to those who have destroyed or hurt them by
Luxury and Laziness, but even to such as have derived them with their Birth, or
from Accidents or Parents, if the Organs themselves be not entirely confounded
or spoiled; at least in some Degree, sufficient to demonstrat the Proposition;
and every one knows that this Method, and these Medicines, only mend the
Juices, and open Obstructions. Of this I could give some such Instances, having
treated several such Cases, that I could venture my Reputation on some Degree
of Success of the Method, when applied early and in due Time, before the noble
Organs be quite spoiled. And if Philosophy have any thing certain or true, it
is this, that quo posito ponitur, and quo sublato tollitur, in eo consistit
ejus rei Essentia. A great deal more I could urge, but this must suffice to the
honest Inquirer, and fair Philosopher; else, nothing will.

. 28. FROM all which it is evident, that it is to Experience, Culture and
Probation, removing Obstacles and Impediments, that we must apply both for the
Extention and Improvement of the natural and moral Powers of the Soul, and for
the Perfection of the intellectual Organs of the Body. All three, since the
Lapse, have been contracted, imprisoned or concentred, as it were, to a Punctum
Saliens, (as the Naturalists speak of the beginning Incubation of a Chick from
an Egg) to be extended and dilated to a given State of Maturity and Perfection,
altogether proper for its Order and Rank, and alone and only to be brought
about at first by the Culture of others (its Parents, Nurses and Masters) while
under Age, and afterward by its own Industry, Attention and Diligence, in a
proper Method, when come to Maturity. So that the whole Perfection of Body,
Soul and Spirit, (by Soul and Spirit I always mean the natural and moral
Powers) depend on proper Culture, Experience and Trials; and our whole lapsed
State is probatory, experimental and progressive, and from our vegetable,
through our brutal and rational, up to our restored first paradisaical and last
divine, fixed and immovable State; the whole Progress is in a great measure
our own Work, though under general Laws, both for Spirits and Bodies, but with
supernatural (or if you please, miraculous) Aids and Assistances from time to
time, to be the Rewards and Motives of our Diligence and Zeal, though perhaps
they are never to be felt or distinguished, till the whole Progression is at an
End; which Progression might or may be much after this Manner, as far as can be
conjectured from things as they now appear. The human Race was originally made
in the Scale of Intelligences, and in that Cone of Creation (if I may be
allowed the Similitude without offending weak Minds, and low Philosophers)
which seems to ascend, from inert and passive Matter through the human Species,
to the Angels, and beyond the Cherubims and Seraphins, up to the utmost Extent
that created finite free Intelligence reaches: (all which, in their natural
Powers, are Infinitesimals respectively and unalterably of their great
Original, the Deity, but at an infinitely infinite Distance from Him, as they
ought and must be, but in a verging Progression of Similarity to him, in their
natural as well as moral Powers) I say, the human Species, being made a little
lower only than the Angels, with Bodies or earthly Machins, supple and pliant
to their in dwelling spiritual Intelligences, and with Spirits supple and
pliant to the Influences, Impulses and Commands of the Father of Spirits (in
which their Innocence and Felicity consisted); and being free, and consequently
capable of a progressive Procedure, from this original State of their Creation,
either forward to Perfection and Happiness to a certain Degree, which probably
might fix them in the Extention of their original Powers, (though not in the
greatest Perfection of their moral ones) and consequently in their greatest
Happiness; or a Departure backward into Disorder, Rebellion, spurious
Self-love, inordinat Love of the Creatures, Propriety, and consequently Misery;
their Creator eternally designing to restore them to their first or perhaps a
higher Rank, placed them first upon this Ball of Clay, (which had been either
naturally and physically ruined and spoiled, by their own immoral Taint and
Corruption, or was by his own omnipotent Agency) and confined them to Prisons
and Dungeons made of this Planet, though with infinite Wisdom and Elegancy, and
with a sublime Delicacy adjusted to the Nature of their Lapse, or the Ends of
their Probation and Purification; whereby their natural Powers being cramped
and concentred to the Degree of the Decay of their moral Powers, they may by
their own Labor and Culture (but supernaturally assisted) advance
proportionally in both, to the Stature and Degree appointed them in their
original Formation, and perhaps higher; and in the mean time, perhaps dropping
through many different Vehicles, and material Bodies, grosser, or more sublime,
either Dungeons, or partially glorious Bodies, as they have advanced or gone
backward in the Acquisition of the moral Attributes, Justice, Goodness and
Truth, or (which is the same in the Christian Language) of the Cardinal
Virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity; which, justly explained, are of the same
Import.

. 29. THE human Soul, or intelligent Principle, has its radical Qualities and
Faculties, that it was endowed with in its first Creation, essentially inherent
and innate in its Nature, and in their full Extent and Perfection, even now in
this lapsed State, perhaps beyond the Vigor they can ever arrive at in this
mortal Life, only cramped and sopited by this gross and earthly Prison (like a
Felon in a Dungeon or condemned Hole); and as it has the Power or Root of the
Senses of Seeing, Hearing and Feeling, almost the same as when at entire
Liberty, in its ethereal Vehicle, though now confined to Darkness, Silence and
Unactivity, and can only see and hear as through a Grate or narrow Chink; yet
it has its natural Powers, and their bodily Organs, as vigorous and lively, as
when it was at large, though it be not in a Capacity to exert them in the same
Degree, by reason of its heavy clay Coverlet: And this gross earthly Tabernacle
actually contains under it, the organical Lines and Stamina of that glorious
paradisaical and first created Body it was endowed with before the Lapse, or of
the more glorious one it will be solely clothed with in its final Perfection
and Restoration, though both (for they are one and the same) now covered over and
encrusted with gross mouldering Clay; and both Soul and Body, as they are now
in this lapsed State, will gradually drop and put off this Adamical Tabernacle,
and slide into another, and perhaps a third, according to the general Laws of
Purification, and in Proportion as the spiritual Inhabitant advances in
Perfection, till at last it arrive at that fixed and permanent State, and the
Place and Mansion it was designed for in the universal System of Intelligences.

. 30. FROM this Account, if agreeable with the universal Analogy of Things, and
the general Laws of Providence relating to the Lapse and Purification of
Intelligences; it will follow, that intellectual Acts and Exercises are but
Remembrance, and removeing Impediments, or but the Spirit's returning to its
original and primitive State: That Culture, Study and Reflection, and all the
Operations of the Mind, are really (and not figuratively) but lopping, pruning,
dressing and removeing Obstacles and Encumbrances, and forming the bodily
Organs to a proper Suppleness and Facility, for the Performance of spiritual
Exercises, and to produce Habits: That the Study of Arts and Sciences, and all
other Knowledge, is but Remembrance and Recollection, opening Passages and
Apertures, to admit more Light into the Prison and Dungeon; which can only
effectually be done by the Acquisition of the moral Powers of Justice, Goodness
and Truth, or of Faith, Hope and Charity; and this not figuratively, but in
Reality, and by fixed Habits. In a word, the Soul has essentially and radically
in its Fund and Nature, innate and permanent, all the natural Powers in their
full Extent and Degree that ever it can possibly arrive at here, but they
covered over, sopited and concentred by the gross Adamical Prison; and is only
deprived of its moral Powers in its present lapsed State, which moral Powers it
is sent here to recover.

. 31. THE Exercise of the natural Powers of the Soul, ( viz.) of Liveing,
Activity and Intelligence, is the general State and Complexion of all spiritual
Natures: Liveing means, supposes and implies the actuating, informing,
directing and superintending the several Motions and Functions of a divinely
organized Material, either Ethereal or Planetary, grosser or more refined
Vehicle, according to the Economy of Providence in its Restoration, and in
giving Motions and Directions to Bodies or Matter to a certain Degree. Memory
is but an Affection or Modification of the Understanding, fixing it to a
particular Object; as seeking any thing absent or lost, is but a particular
Attention and Observation or Detention of the Eye on the different Objects
presented; and that the Understanding has proper Organs for the different Uses
and Purposes of Perceiving, Considering, and fixing its Attention, as the Eye
has various Muscles, Tendons, Humors and Glands, for directing, fixing and
perfecting its Sight; and Memory is just such a Modification of the
Understanding, as Searching or Seeking is of the Eye; and all is performed
through the mechanical Powers and Organs of the Body, by the innate Sagacity of
the Mind: and hence it comes to pass, that when these mechanical Powers and
Organs of the Body are quick and agile, to present Variety of Images, Pictures
and Ideas with Readiness, the Person is ingegious, fanciful, poetical, or of a
quick and lively Imagination. If the Organs of the Imagination, the nervous
Fibrillae, the membranous Tubuli, be strong and firm, the Impressions or Ideas
being dureable, the Memory becomes strong. The Understanding is merely passive,
it is like the Vis Inertiae of Matter, or Reflection and Refraction in it, of
which it is the analogous Quality in the Soul; and this Vis Inertiae is one of
the last Steps of the descending Miniature of the divine Original in his
inanimat Creation. Truth is to the Understanding, what Light is in animal Life
to the Eye; it must be received absolutely, and only according to the then
State of the Mind. It is the Will that is the ruling and directing Faculty of
spiritual Nature, and its analogous Quality in inanimated Matter, is Attraction
and Repulsion: all depend on it; it rules absolutely, and without Control,
even sometimes over the Understanding, and every Faculty of the Soul. It is the
self-active and self-motive Principle, acting above and beyond Matter, at a
Distance, without the Intervention of a material Medium, by its own Energy, and
after its specific manner of Operation; as is evident from Instinct, Impulse,
Sympathy and Antipathy, Conscience, natural Affection, and the like
immechanical Affections of the Soul. Matter only limits and modifies its
Operations, and renders it capable to commerciat and communicate with Bodies, by
acting upon them, and being reacted upon by them. The Will may and can act
without and contrary to the Judgment, Conviction and Approbation of the
Understanding (Self-activity and Self-mobility necessarily secluding all
foreign Aid); and from it the first Springs, Direction and Perfection of the
Understanding, often take their Rise; but generally they advance by the same
Steps in their Purification; only the probatory and purifying Process in the
lapsed State, both in the Acquisition of the moral Attributes, and in the
Culture and Development of the bodily Organs, of the Faculties, gradually and
by uniform Acceleration (like the Velocity of descending Bodies) receives its
constant Impulse from the Will.

. 32. SOME have thought, that the Wills of all Intelligences were so ordered by
the divine Decree and Appointment, that they should be so absolutely free, as
to become even independent of his Influence and Prescience, and that their
Liberty should be in a natural Equilibrium to do whatever their original Powers
could possibly effect, and be determined by their own Strength only, and
affirmed that so much a self-motive Power does necessarily imply; and that
accordingly, God was not actually certified of the Lapse, till it happened, in
the Angelical Hierarchy. That the divine Nature may actually have arbitrary
Ideas, they think, necessarily follows, from his natural infinite Liberty, which
they suppose a Consequence of the absolute Infinitude of all his Attributes,
and the Base and Root of his infinite Intelligence or Omniscience. For no
Creature is free, but must be at the same time intelligent, and all intelligent
Creatures are naturally Images of Him; and since intelligent Creatures, such as
we are, have arbitrary Ideas, (as is evident from our being able to act
contrary to our Judgment, and contrary to our present and future greater Good,
were it but to show the Nature of our Liberty, in any one Instance, for
Example, to suffer present or future certain Pain, as in Suicide) therefore
there must, by Analogy, be concluded a correspondent Power of infinitely more
Force and Perfection in the divine Nature. It is true, Omniscience could
certainly foreknow whatever Omnipotence could effect; but both Omniscience and
Omnipotence being in the divine Nature infinitely free, they think it a higher
Instance of Perfection and Power, for a free Omniscience voluntarily to design
not to know what his Omnipotence might effect on his free intelligent Creation;
and that it implies not want of Perfection and Power, but, on the contrary, is
a much higher Instance of Perfection and Power, for an infinitely perfect Being
to create Intelligences, that should be naturally in such a Degree of Freedom,
that even He Himself should not foreknow what they were to do; but should, as
it were, voluntarily and arbitrarily suspend ( Jesus Christ, say the Fathers,
suspended the Influence of his Divinity on his Humanity; He made Himself of no
Report, He took upon Himself the Form of a Servant, the greatest Instance of
his Divinity possible) the Influence and Penetration of his Omniscience, to
magnify and manifest his Omnipotence. He might, no doubt, have foreknown every
thing that should ever be effected, or brought to pass, by the self-motive
Powers of his created miniature Images; but He might also designedly and
arbitrarily not foresee or foreknow all this, to enoble his intelligent
Creatures thereby, that so they might be free even from his Espial and
Observation, for a Trial of their Faith and Patience, (as a tender Mother tries
her Fondlings Strength and Gait, by letting go the Leading-string) and thus
leave them a Possession and Property, (that they might be fitter Objects of his
Commerce and Glory) and that they might have something in Dominion and
Heritage, that in Gratitude they might render back to Him, which even He (now
He had created them) could not force from them. Perhaps such a Creature might
become a nobler Instance of infinite Wisdom and Power, than one, all whose
future Thoughts and Actions were certainly foreknown even by Omniscience: as a
skilful Watch-maker might make a Watch or Clock, whose Time of Going or
Striking he might not foreknow, or could not foretell, that absolutely depending
on the Length of the Chain tied to the Spring or Weight, which he had in his
Power not to have measured. This bold and profane Supposition, of God's
designed and arbitrary Non-foreknowledge of his finite free Intelligences
future Actions, would indeed entirely take off all the Difficulties and
Objections against the Lapse, about Liberty, Prescience, and Predestination;
and justify the Darkness and Distresses in Providence, Revelation, and the
whole Economy of the Restoration: but whether it is perfectly consistent with
the Harmony and Simplicity, and absolute Infinitude and Dignity of the divine
Nature and Attributes, I dare not take upon me to determine. And since infinite
Sagacity and Penetration (like that of a wise and good Minister of State) will
account for Prescience, without influencing or intrenching on Liberty, I am
much rather inclined to subscribe to it. Infinite Perfection can provide for the
Perfection and Happiness of his Creature, without any Prejudice to Himself.

. 33. ALL intelligent Creatures being (as I have often said) Effluxes,
Emanations, and analogous Infinitesimals of the Deity, must necessarily be
impressed with his Image; for though they be finite, dependent, and created,
yet being free, so far they are little analogical Divinities; and though they
flowed from Him as their Source, yet by this their Liberty, they are able to
hold, as it were, in Property, an infinitesimal Portion of his spiritual Nature
and Qualities, and thereby have something of their own to give Him back, and
thus to commerciat with Him, and at last to return to Him as their last End:
just as the last and least Particles of Water (being probably spherical or
spheroidical) may retain their own Figure when received into the universal
Volume of all Fluids of the Ocean, and are actuated by its Motions; or like the
Fish, which though in the Sea, yet all of them preserve their own Forms; or
rather like the Iron in the Oven, which being turned into liquified Fire, yet
retains its own Shape. Just so, all created Intelligences may preserve their
own Principles of Individuation, when they are restored to the Rock out of
which they were hewn. But these lame and unanimated Allusions I adduce only as
Illustrations of this incomprehensible Subject; for Creation, though a
necessary Article to be believed in all the Systems of Natural Religion, is as
incomprehensible and inexplicable as any Mystery in Revealed, unless it be by
Analogy; and it is no hard Matter then to conceive any thing is, that actually
exists, especially where infinite Power is supposed the Cause, and when it does
not involve an absolute Contradiction, as these analogical Allusions show this
does not. However this Explication be received, I think it self-evident, that
in their Creation, or Emanation from the first Cause, all Intelligences have
been impressed with God's Image, and are really thereby infinitesimal Deities:
And that the natural Powers, Attributes and Faculties we feel in our own Souls,
may fairly be carried up to absolute Infinitude by Analogy, and in some
imperfect and gross manner, be so raised as to give a shadowy Glance, or faint
Idea, of the supreme Being the Deity: And that our Liberty may not be violated,
and our Restoration may be secured, I fear this is as precise as we can reach
in this our lapsed Estate, while we dwell in earthly Prisons, I mean by
Philosophy or mere Reasoning only, without Revelation or divine Faith. And
therefore, whatever natural Powers, Qualities or Faculties we find in our own
Souls, (at least in the best and most perfect of our Race) we may safely
conclude, there are Powers, Qualities and Faculties, eminently correspondent
and analogous to them, in the divine Nature, with the Difference that absolute
Infinitude has to the lowest Finite: and on the other hand, that there are
miniature Resemblances in all finite Intelligences, correspondent and analogous
to the essential and fundamental Attributes in the divine Nature; and
consequently that we may fairly reason and philosophize (with the Modesty and
Humility that become the lowest of Intelligences) from our own spiritual
Nature, up to the Divine spiritual Nature, keeping within the Bounds and
Proportion mentioned. For Example; we find and certainly know, that in our own
spiritual Nature there are Liveing, Understanding and Will, and that all our
intellectual Operations are but Modifications of these: These then must be the
natural Image of the divine Being originally impressed on our Souls. We learn
from Revelation, that in the divine Nature, there is a Trinity of Persons, in
Unity of Substance. We may then fairly conclude, that, in some Manner or other,
the three radical Powers of Liveing, Understanding and Will, are the natural
miniature Image and Representation of this Trinity in Unity. In the divine
Nature, the three analogous and correspondent Attributes are, Self-existence,
Omniscience and Omnipotence; in other Words, Necessity of Being, infinite
Wisdom, and infinite Activity. In all created Intelligences, there are a derived
Being or Liveing, finite Understanding, and limited Will or Freedom. This
Analogy or Correspondence, I say, between the divine Nature, and the spiritual
Nature of all finite Intelligences, may give us at least some general Notion of
the Trinity in Unity (for Precision is incompatible with Finitude, and all I
pretend to here, is to remove Contradiction and Impossibility, from an
uncomprehensible and inexplicable Mystery). Self-existence, or Necessity of
Being, is the proper Characteristic of the Father in Revelation. I am that I
am, or I am the sole Being, that is necessary Existence. The Word, the Wisdom,
the Understanding of the Father, the express Image of his intelligent Nature,
the sovereign Reason, is the Characteristic of the Son in Scripture. The Holy
Ghost, or the Spirit of the Father and the Son, ( viz.) their infinite Activity,
Energy and Power, is represented there as a liveing, enlightening, actuating,
comforting and instructing intelligent Substance, and shadowed out to us by the
most penetrating energic Things known, to wit, Wind, Light and Fire; and so may
be explained by our self-motive Power, our Liberty, the Spring of pure Love,
naked Faith, and universal Resignation. All these three (and I think the
natural Attributes of the Deity are but Three) natural Powers and Faculties are
comprehended in one spiritual Nature, in all created Intelligences: in them
they are Modalities only, Powers or Faculties; but in the divine Nature, they
are Realities, and active distinguished Subsistences, because of its infinite
Activity. For nothing is more certain in Philosophy, than the metaphysical and
scholastic Axiom, that every thing in God, is God. I might, with a good deal of
philosophical Propriety, run this Analogy up to all the Qualities and
Attributes ascribed in Scripture to the Persons of the holy Trinity; but I give
it only as a philosophical Emblem, Allusion or Similitude, to reconcile that
inexplicable Mystery to modest, sober and guarded Thinkers; for it is still
much better to adore and obey, and wish or pray, to believe as the Holy Spirit
in Revelation intended, the best we can, in the holy Trinity, than to
philosophize about it. The two capital Errors in the Doctrine of the Trinity,
(especially of the Incarnation) and divine Nature of the Persons, (which is the
Hinge of the Doctrine of the Trinity) is the Arian and Sabellian Heresies; both
which are of great Detriment to Christian Perfection, and the Practice of its
cardinal Virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity, or the Acquisition of the moral
Powers of the Soul; but with a very notable Difference, the Arian being of
infinitely more Detriment to sublime practical Christianity, than the Sabellian
Heresy. The first dwindling and sinking the Merit, Dignity and Love, his
Sufferings and Satisfaction, and consequently dishonouring and debasing the
divine Nature, Purity, and the Merit of the common Savior of the lapsed
Mortals; and thereby the Motives and Necessity of pure Love, naked Faith and
universal Resignation, the sole Means of our Recovery and Immobility: And
perhaps among all the Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors, and universally
acknowledged Saints, there will not be found one who notably leaned to this
Heresy. The Sabellian, on the contrary, though certainly Heretical, too
arrogantly departing from the Form of sound Words, yet has preserved the
Dignity and Purity of all these Motives, the Greatness of the Love of God, the
Sanctity of his Nature, and Heinousness of Sin, and is only too philosophically
nice, out of a Dread of intrenching on the Unity of the divine Nature. I was
the more willing to retouch this Speculation, because what I have advanced
about it in my Philosophical Principles of Revealed Religion has been
misunderstood; else I had not meddled with it here, as being out of my present
Province, for which I ought to beg the Reader's Pardon. This Mystery was not
revealed to puzzle our Reason, but for a Trial of our Faith, and a Motive to
our Resignation; and because its Truth was necessary to the Conception of the
general Plan of the Restoration, and the understanding, practiseing and
perfecting the Christian Virtues and Morality.

. 34. THE Soul and Body at first sopited in a State of mere vegetable Life, (in
the seminal Animalcul, and in Embryo) is there developing, vegetats, and lives,
(perhaps for many Ages) according to their own general Laws, and the secret
Designs of Providence; in Time, the Compound comes into the Light, and is born
into the World; and then, from the Velocity of its Growth, and the Development
of the Organs of its Faculties, (the nervous membranous Tubuli, and the
glandular Machinulae, perhaps increasing first) becomes sensitive, and enjoys
animal Life: The Nature of gross Matter, the Miseries of this ruinous Globe,
and the present dark State of Things, inclement or deleterious Air, Negligence
and Ignorance, and many other Accidents, (all under the Direction of an
infinitely wise Being, for kind and gracious Purposes) make the slender
Individual now become sensitive, and feel Pain, Misery and Distress, even
before it is conscious or capable to know the Cause. Instinct, (a plain but
innate Effect) Pains and Sufferings, make it mechanically (as it were) avoid
the Approach of the Causes possible or probable, by which these Pains are
produced. Hence natural Aversion, Reluctance, and some Endeavors to retire
from Excess of Colds and Heats, improper or too much Nutriment, and all noxious
Bodies and Animals. These Sensations and Feelings lodged in the Memory, with
the innate Instincts, Sympathies and Antipathies, grow stronger, till they are
gradually confirmed into Habits; and on these infant Habits and Ideas begin the
Dawnings of Reason, Reflection, Memory and Will, and all the Play of the
intellectual Faculties on their now developing Organs. If the Body is strong,
its Appetites and Passions are proportionally so, which inordinatly gratified,
naturally and necessarily beget strong and new Pains and Punishments; these, on
Reflection and Remembrance, awaken Conscience, arising from an innate Instinct
radically implanted in spiritual Nature, to excite and encourage a Love of
Order, and punish Disorder; and Conscience actuated and enlivened by still
further Reflection on the necessary and natural Connection between Disorder,
Crime and Punishment; on the first Dawnings and Awakening into rational and
conscious Life, if Children were duly and strenuously nurtured and cultivated
by frequent Acts, as Occasions offer, and supported by due Temperance, Air and
Exercise, in the bodily and organical Powers, and by bringing the Appetites and
Passions in Subjection to the Spirit, and thereby laboring to acquire a
Facility and Readiness in the Exercise of the moral Powers, as the natural ones
advance; they would, in due Time, raise the Adamical Compound to all the
Perfection and consequent Happiness this present State would admit, in the full
and free Exercise of the natural Powers, and the Acquisition of the moral ones;
though not to the greatest, yet to a competent Degree, and to the most perfect
and orderly Condition this present probatory and expiatory State will admit.
But the Nature of Things in and about us is such, and the Miseries and
Sufferings are so constant, unavoidable and pungent, as will naturally and
necessarily excite in a Mind cultivated after the Manner has been described, an
anxious Desire to inquire and examine if there be any possible Means to be freed
from them at last; and if there can be any rational and probable Way to secure,
at least after this State is past, and this Adamical clay Tabernacle is laid
down, some State of Being, at least no worse, and as much better as may be, on
our going into another Mansion: And this is the precise Condition of Mind
infinite Love and Wisdom intends to bring his rational lapsed Intelligences
into, by this wise Economy; for under such a Disposition, sooner or later,
they will be fitted to hearken to, to examine and seriously to inquire into the
Truth of Revelation, and heartily to say, Lord! what shall I do to be saved?

END of the FOURTH DISCOURSE.
DISCOURSE V. Philosophical CONJECTURES ON NATURAL ANALOGY, ITS LAWS, AND SOME
OF ITS CONSEQUENCES.
1 Cor. xiii. 12. For now we see through a Glass darkley -- 2 Cor. iv. 18.
While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen: for the things which are seen, are Temporal; but the things which are not
seen, are Eternal.
DISCOURSE V.
Philosophical CONJECTURES ON NATURAL ANALOGY, its LAWS, and some of their
CONSEQUENCES.
THINGS may differ in the Degrees of the same Qualities, as well as in Kind; as
in a Cube of Gold and one of Lead, in spiritual and material Substances, and
the like.

DEFINITION I.
DIFFERENCE in Degrees only, is where things having their essential Qualities
common, admit in these Qualities, a More and a Less, or a Difference in their
Degrees. For Example; A Miniature and a Picture to the Life; a Cube and a
Parallelopipedon of the same Substance, and on the same Base; a Man and a Child.

DEFINIT. II.
DIFFERENCE in Kind, is only where some essential Qualities in the things
compared are common, some are different; as a Vegetable and an Animal, Matter
and Spirit, a Cube of Gold and one of Lead.

DEFINIT. III.
BY Ratio, is here meant the Relation or Reference of any two things compared
to one another, whose essential Qualities admit of Degrees, or of a More and a
Less; as between a Brute and a Man, a Man and an Angel, and between different
Bodies of the same Substance.

DEFINIT. IV.
SIMILARITY, is where there is an Equality or Sameness of Ratio's in the
Substance, and essential Qualities of things, differing only by a More and a
Less. For Distinction's sake, in abstracted or simple Ideas, or in Qualities, I
should call this Sameness or Equality of Ratio's, a Similitude or Likeness; as
in Problems of Arithmetic and Geometry, in Heat and Cold, in Light and
Darkness, and the like. In Things, Substances or Aggregats of Qualities, I
should call it Similarity; as in all the Individuals of the human Species, in
Animals and Vegetables of the same Tribe, and their Progress from the Embrio or
Seed, to Maturity, I should pronounce them, I say, in a Similarity of Ratio's.

DEFINIT. V.
THINGS, Substances, and Qualities, are meant to be progressive, or in a
Progression, which are constantly increasing or decreasing similarly: For
Example; The concave Surfaces that make a Globe, (as the Coats of an Onion, the
Membrans of the Cornea of the Eye) the Puncta Salientia, that become Animals;
the Mathematical Point, whose Fluxion describes a Line; the Mathematical Line,
whose Fluxion makes a Surface; and the Mathematical Surface, whose Fluxion
makes a Solid.

SCHOLIUM.
SPACE and Time, Motion and its Velocity, seem to be no Realities, at least no
external Realities, but the mere Modifications, and different Circumstances and
Situations of Bodies or Matter, and so nothing but mere abstracted Ideas, or an
easier and clearer Manner for our finite Conceptions, which cannot comprehend
any complicated Thing at once. A particular Space, or the Locality of a Body,
seems to be a mere Mathematical abstracted Solid, (so to speak) or the last
Limit or Term of a Mathematical Solid, or of Body evanishing; such an one as a
Point is of a Mathematical Line, a Line of a Mathematical Surface, and a
Surface of a Mathematical Solid; only here the whole Content of the
Mathematical Solid, or evanishing Body, is comprehended in the Idea. The same
way of Reasoning may be applied to Time, Motion, and Velocity, which are but
the Limits, Modifications, and particular Circumstances of Body or Matter, and
have no external Realities; but like the Shadow, that depends on the Light,
shineing on the Body: they all admit of Degrees, or a More and a Less, as
belonging to, and connected with, Matter and Bodies. A particular Space is to a
particular Body, what o, or the relative Infinitesimal is to a particular given
Progression; and an Infinite Body, like infinite Space, is a mere imaginary Idea,
the last Term or Limit of an ascending Progression, as o is of a descending
one. Suppose, for Example, a Progression of the Powers of Natural Numbers, or
their Cossic Characters, descending, etc. + x4 + x3 + x2 + x + ^ - x - x2 - x3
- x4, etc. the middle Term, o or x/ will represent a Mathematical Point, and +
x will represent an infinite Body, and - x infinite Space, + x a particular Body,
and - x a particular Space; and substituteing for + x, x + x + x + x + x, etc.
and for - x, - x - x - x - x, etc. (or what Number of unknown Quantities, or
howsoever compounded, with their variable or constant Powers) and treating them
according to the Nature of their Composition in a given Expression, by the
common Rules of Cossic or Arabic Characters, and rejecting all the finite
Terms, or those of a lower Order of such abstracted Infinits, and reserving
only the highest Terms of the Expression; and you will readily and intelligibly
have all the Mysteries, and solve all the Problems discovered by Fluxions,
Differentials, and Series's, in Numbers, Space, Time, Motion, Velocity, and
Bodies, and see that all this mysterious and admired Play of the Understanding,
is wholly about abstracted Ideas, and the Modifications of Body and Matter,
which our narrow, limited and finite Faculties not being able to apprehend and
conceive distinctly in the Complex, are forced to parcel out and divide thus
into single intelligible Parts, merely for their own Convenience; and so is a
mere Technical Art of the Understanding and Imagination to assist the Memory.

DEFINIT. VI.
RELATIVE Infinite, or Infinitude in Creatures, (whose Nature consists in being
more or less respectively than any assignable Quantity whatever) is such as
increases or decreases perpetually; yet by no finite Power can be actually
brought to nothing, and no finite Faculty can actually assign its limiting
Terms, viz. the greatest and the least. In this Sense it is, that we suppose
the least Particles of Bodies to be hard and indivisible; that Body or Matter
cannot be infinite; that Matter is divisible in Infinitum; that Attraction at a
certain finite Distance becomes Repulsion; that positive Quantities become
negative in convergent Progressions, or from negative become positive in
divergent Progressions; which Progressions may be infinitely varied, even to a
created or relative Infinitude, as Mathematicians know.

DEFINIT. VII.
ABSOLUTE Infinitude is the sole Property or Attribute of the Deity, who is
infinitely Infinite in all Excellencies and Realities, which, though infinitely
various, are at the same time infinitely simple and one. This is evident from
the Simplicity and Unity of his Nature, as a true Philosopher must see.

DEFINIT. VIII.
THINGS are contradictory only, which absolutley and totally destroy one
another, and mutually annihilat their Substance, Subsistence, and Qualities
Thus it is in things created, (if absolute Contradiction can subsist in them)
Heat and Cold in the same Degree, Light and Darkness in the same Degree,
negative and positive Terms of the same Progression, finite and infinite of the
same Kind. But nothing seems to be so absolute a Contradiction as necessary
Existence and Nonentity, absolute Nothing and absolute Infinitude.

SCHOLIUM.
IT is doubtful, whether or not there can be any real and complete
Contradiction between created Substances, Things and Qualities, since they must
all necessarily be Pictures, Emblems or Miniatures of the Deity, and the divine
Attributes, Substance or Nature. There seems to be necessary, an Energy, Action
and Reaction in the contradictory or totally annihilating Substances, Things or
Qualities; as that between the good and evil Principle in the Manichean System;
between absolute Nothing and absolute Infinitude, in the true Philosophical
System; between Creation and Annihilation: For in all created Things,
Substances and Qualities, there is Subsistence and Reality, ( Spiritual,
Intellectual or Material) which cannot be annihilated or rendered totally
contradictory, but by the same absolute Infinitude by which they were created
or ordained; and infinite Perfection can at no future Time be contrary to
itself; the Works of God are without Repentance; and Reaction always supposes
Action. In created Substances, Things and Qualities, there seems only to be a
Contrariety, that is, a Contradiction or Annihilation of some of the Qualities,
and their respective Degrees. Thus material and spiritual Substances may be
contrary to one another, but not contradictory; being actually united, and
some-how allied, in all intelligent Beings; and having some Qualities common,
as actual Existence, and a Power of intending and remitting their Energy, or of
Expansion and Contraction in their Substances and Powers, analogous to
Elasticity in Bodies. They must indeed have Limits and Bounds of their Activity
and Self-mobility, beyond which they can do nothing, which Powers Matter seems
designed to terminat and counteract (as Shadows die away in thick Darkness).
Matter may suspend, contract and destroy the Action and Exertion of these
spiritual Powers, but cannot annihilat their Substratum, nor destroy their Root
or Fund; for after their Concentration by Matter or Body, they will still
subsist in the Substratum, either in Root or Act, in a finite Magnitude, or
infinitesimal Miniature.

DEFINIT. IX.
ANALOGY is a Similarity in Substances and essential Qualities, differing only
by a More or a Less, or in Degrees.

SCHOLIUM.
ANALOGY is of two kinds, simple and complex; that is, perfect and complete, or
imperfect and incomplete.

DEFINIT. X.
SIMPLE Analogy, is where there is a perfect and total Similarity of
Substances, and essential Qualities, differing only in Degrees. As that between
a lumbaginous Animalcul, a seminal Embryo, a Child and a Man; that between a
Seed and a Plant. Of this Nature are all the particular Answers to indetermin'd
Problems in Algebra, and all the particular Curves that answer the same
Conditions in Geometry, of which there is an infinite Variety.

SCHOLIUM.
THERE are (I think) Substances, Things and Qualities of a middle Nature,
between the Extremes, or the greatest and least of their Terms, in every
created Reality; as between any two finite given Terms in Quantities, there is
an Infinity of mean Proportionals, actual and assignable; as between x and y
there is the Mean ^, and between x and ^ there is ^; and in a Circle of an
infinite Diameter, between any finite Part of the Diameter and the other infinite
Segment, there is the Perpendicular, (a mean Proportional) which is neither
infinitely Small nor infinitely Great, (I speak only of relative Infinitude) and
which I should call Indefinit; so in Substances or Substrata of Qualities,
whether Material or Spiritual, (the two Terms or Limits) some may approach or
verge toward gross indiscerptible or imporose Matter, or pure Spirit, in all
the Degrees of relative Infinitude, which never can by any Power less than
absolutely infinite, arrive at either of the Extremes. This in Algebra and
Geometry is demonstrated; and the absolute Infinitude, Purity and Simplicity of
the Divine Nature makes this Distinction necessary here.

COROLLARY I.
HENCE it will be reasonable to suppose, that as Matter, by its infinite
possible Division, Minuteness and Rarity, by its Elasticity and Velocity, may
be sublimed and refined into relative Infinitude, so as to become, as it were,
Sir Isaac Newton's Spiritus quidam Subtilissimus, and meet only with an
infinitely small Resistance in passing through gross and porous Bodies, such as
our Planet is; so spiritual Substance may be analogically supposed to be
capable of all the relative Degrees of Purity and Sublimity, or Grossness and
Density, till it terminat in the lowest or highest spiritual Substance, which
yet will ever be contrary, though not contradictory, to material Substance.

COROLLARY II.
HENCE it will follow, that this infinitely refined material Fluid, of indefinit
Rarity and Elasticity, will meet with no sensible Resistance in passing through
gross planetary Bodies; yet its Parts being still Material, and subject to the
Laws of all material Bodies, must at least meet with some infinitesimal
Resistance, and have some Reaction; as the Rays of the Sun, being Oceans of
material Particles, constantly emitted from his Body, must necessarily lessen
it, though insensibly and infinitely little, yet really; so that neither of them
can be designed to last to an actual Eternity in their present State; they may
be so altered on proper Occasions, by the Power and Influence of Him who first
created them, as to answer the Ends of his wise Providence, but cannot continue
as they now are during all his Eternity.

DEFINIT. XI.
COMPLEX or imperfect Analogy, is where there is only a Similarity between a
certain Number of essential Qualities, that differ in Degrees, and are
diversified in other Qualities less essential; as that between a Man and an
Angel, that between a Man and a Brute, or that between a Plant and a Brute; and
the several Ranks and Orders of Being emerge as these Qualities increase and
multiply.

PROPOSITION.
ALL Creation, the whole System of the Universe, with all the particular
Systems in Nature, all Beings animated and inanimat, all Substances, Qualities
and Realities whatever, and every individual Circumstance in Nature, is
nothing, and necessarily can be nothing, but the Supreme Being, his Nature and
Attributes, transubstantiated into Being and Preceptibility, portrayed and
shadowed out and drawn forth ad extra. Mundus universus nihil est nisi Deus
explicitus. But the Workman will eternally be different in Kind from his Work,
the Cause from the Effect.

DEMONSTRATION.
BEFORE Creation, Omnipotence itself could find no Pattern or Model for his
Operations ad extra, but Himself, and his own Attributes, or the Ideas of his
own Mind; which being infinitely perfect, must necessarily have been the best
and most eligible to imitat and copy out in his Productions; and Perfection
being simple and one, by the Necessity of his own perfect Nature, He could act
outwardly no other way than by this Analysis; and this is a Demonstration a
priori from the Cause to the Effect, if any thing can possibly be such; and in
fact, it holds equally strong a posteriori, so far as the wisest and
best-cultivated human Spirits can reach or investigat, taking in the necessary
Conditions and Circumstances, as far as Experiment and Observation can
discover; which I intend to show and illustrat in a few Instances.

. 1. THE vegetable World, in its Variety, Elegance and final Causes, is a most
astonishing Proof of God's geometrical Knowledge and Skill, (so to speak) and
fully shows what Matter, the grossest and most unactive Substance, can do, when
contrived and directed by his Wisdom and Power. In Plants and Vegetables, there
seems to be no spiritual or self-motive Power; but only a material Spirit, or
such an one perhaps as Sir Isaac Newton's Spiritus quidam subtilissimus: Here,
and in material Agency, that Fluid seems necessary; and the few Observations he
has offered to infer its Necessity, (which the present Experiments and
Discoveries about the Cause and Laws of Electricity and Magnetism wonderfully
confirm) are supported by its Implication here in vegetable Nature, in order to
explain the Actuation, Growth and Increase of Plants and Minerals; all which
vegetat and increase according to general Laws, which no less Power than that
of the Author of Nature could so wonderfully have contrived and perpetuated.
For though by Heat, Moisture and Attraction, from a supramechanical original
Formation and Arrangement of the indivisible Particles of Matter, or original
Elements, their future Progression, Development and Multiplication may be now,
in the gross, understood and explained; yet the Cause of Attraction and
Elasticity, the first Impulse, and motive Energy, and the Continuance of these
Powers and Activity, can so probably be accounted for from no other Principle,
as this relatively infinitely rare and elastic Fluid, the Size, Figure and Laws
of which could come only from this infinitely powerful and wise Geometer.

. 2. THE totally inanimat Creation (consisting either in the Fragments of the
animated Parts, or in the now aggregated or compounded Moleculae of the primary
Elements) show and speak the Wisdom and Skill of their Artificer; but more
especially the Systems and Collections of these elementary original Particles,
viz. Air, Water, Light, Salts, and Mercury; how proper their Size, Figure and
Laws, for the Uses and Ends proposed? This Speculation would rapturously employ
the Eternity of a sagacious natural Philosopher. Sir Isaac Newton has, with
great Penetration, discovered many hitherto unknown Mysteries and Miracles of
Wisdom, in the Theory of Light and Colors. I will only suggest on the Head of
this and the former Proposition, that had it not been for the first Contrivance
in the Systems of minute Particles now mentioned, there could not possibly have
been any proper Materials for the Food, Growth and Increase of the Vegetables,
Minerals and Metals; and had it not been for the Combination and Arrangement of
the Elements, into such middling integral Particles, as are these of the
Vegetables, there could have been no proper and peculiar Food for the Animals;
the whole System being so disposed in a perpetual Climax, that all its Parts
mutually depend upon and are subservient to one another; the Tubes of
Vegetables being mechanically fitted and harmoniously adjusted to mould the
Form, the Size, and combine these Elements into the middling nourishing
integral Particles, for the Food of Animals, by the Solar Heat, and the Laws of
Attraction in minute Bodies.

. 3. IN sentient and intelligent Beings, from the brute Creation, through Men
and Angels, up to the Seraphims and Cherubins, as far as Creation reaches, the
Analogy is plain, simple and necessary. The three natural Powers of Liveing,
Intelligence and Liberty, in their spiritual self-active Principles, clothed
and circumscribed by ethereal Vehicles, seem to be there in a perpetual
Climax, and differ only in Degrees. The essential Difference between this and
the vegetable and mineral Creation, (which are both of the same Order and
Tribe, and by the same vegetative Laws, diversified under different
Circumstances, (like the initial Terms of an algebraic Canon converging into
the higher and more advanced Terms) equally grow and increase) seems to consist
in the self-motive and self-active Powers of the former, of which the latter is
entirely destitute. The vegetable Creation seems only to be actuated by the
Powers of Matter, and is consequently inert and passive, and continue for ever
in their Place and Situation, unless forced from it by some external Impulse;
whereas the brute and animated Creation have a self-motive Power; so that
Vegetation entirely depends upon the Powers of Matter; and Animation, in all
its Degrees, requires a spiritual Substance of some Rank or other: And here the
essential Difference between vegetable and animal Nature lies, viz. in the
locomotive Power of the latter, of which the former is destitute entirely, and
is merely passive. But since the brute Creation, in some Degree, plainly
manifests all the Passions and Affections of Mind, that we of the human Race
are capable of; since they live, or are actuated by a self-motive, self-active
Principle; since they feel Pleasure and Pain, and may be (at least most of them
that fall under our Observation) made to learn and understand some things
(which is a Proof that they are endowed even with Intelligence in a lower
Degree); and since all of them, from the minutest microscopical Animalcul up to
the Elephant and Whale, suffer, and must necessarily suffer, a Million of
different ways here, at last most intensely by their Death and Dissolution, it
is highly probable that they are in a lapsed, expiatory and progressive State
of Being, and may advance to higher Degrees of Perfection and Happiness, like
the initial Terms of a diverging Progression: This the Analogy, perspicuous and
necessary in all the Works of infinite Wisdom, and the various and manifold
Operations of God's Power, makes highly probable, rational, and philosophical.
Infinite Benevolence admits of no Stop or Bounds in its Communication of Being,
Happiness and Perfection, but what arises from the Difference of the Order of
Nature, or of Things.

. 4. As to us of the human Race, our original Powers, the Order, Rank and
present State of our spiritual Nature, and self-motive Substance, with its
original ethereal Vehicle, at present covered over with a Crust of the
Substance of the gross ruinous Planet we inhabit, so much has been already said
in the former Discourses, that to avoid Tautology, (which I have perhaps run
too much into), I shall not come over the same Subject here.

. 5. THE angelic Hierarchy must, in its own Nature, and from our present lapsed
State and Condition, be absolutely unknown to us, but in so far as Revelation,
or philosophical Analogy, give us some dark Hints; but such Hints they do give
us, as imply no Contradiction, but on the contrary have a great Degree of
Probability and Verisimilitude, and naturally flow from the infinitely various
Wisdom of the great Author and Cause of Creation: We may err in the Detail, but
not in the general Idea about them. We see what a Variety (an infinite Variety)
of Vegetables and Animals, in their several Tribes and Species, He has
produced; and if we could possibly observe and class them, taking in those we
cannot discover but by the Help of microscopical Art, we should find this
Variety increase infinitely more in the animated, than in the vegetable
Creation, rising in a certain harmonious Progression and Variety, and which, no
Doubt, is multiplied in the same Proportion in the angelical World. For, as
things combined multiply or increase in the Number of their Qualities or their
Degrees, so do the Combinations possible and actual, as is well known to
Mathematicians. The Fixed Stars, with their analogous planetary ethereal pure
and sublime Systems and Apparatus, seem most probably to be the Seats of the
unlapsed angelical Hierarchies; and he that knows, or has a dark Notion only,
of the Number of those already discovered, the Number of those hid in the Milky
Way, as it is called, and the infinite Extension and Expansion of Space, which,
in order to preserve the Situation, Distance and Equilibrium of these Orbs,
must be filled with analogous Luminaries or Systems, may have some Idea of the
infinite Number and Variety of these Hierarchies. They must all have some
generical Nature, as well as specific Differences: This generical Nature may
probably be no other, than the fundamental and essential Attributes of the
Deity, viz. Liveing, Understanding and Will, or Father, Son and Holy Spirit, as
has been analogically illustrated, and which, in gross solid Matter, are
shadowed out in the trine Dimensions of Bodies. Their specific Differences no
finite Capacity can possibly assign or comprehend, but there are two very
eminent, essential and luminous ones, suggested to us from Revelation, and
confirmed by philosophical Analogy, viz. those of the distinguishing
Characteristic of the Son and Holy Spirit. St. John says, God is Light, and in
Him is no Darkness at all; and in another Place he says, God is Love, and he
that dwells in God, dwells in Love: That is, the Divine Nature and
Substance is Light and Love; and accordingly, the highest Orders of the
celestial Hierarchies are eminently Light and Love, or they are infinitely
Luminous, or infinitely Ardent; which two Qualities make the Characteristic of
the Cherubims and Seraphims, as their Names import; and these two Attributes of
the Divine Nature seem to pass variously, and in different Degrees and
Gradations, through all Creation down to inanimat Nature; and in each
Individual, they are both radically and actually existent, but in different
Degrees, according to their several Orders. Existence, or Liveing, is common to
all created Beings, which is an analogous Participation, Picture or Image of
the Father and Creator, by whom are all things. Some Bodies are nothing but
light, luminous and transparent, as Fire, sulphurous Bodies, and all minute
Bodies, violently agitated, or put into brisk vibrating Motions; and every Body
shredded sufficiently thin, becomes diaphanous; and all Bodies whatever,
reflect or refract Light. Some Bodies, again, are more or less attractive, as
Salts, Oils and Sulphurs; and some at certain Distances less than infinite, are
repulsive (which is a flagrant Picture of Lapse, Corruption and Rebellion in
spiritual Nature). All these Qualities have their analogous and correspondent
Powers in spiritual Nature, which to a Philosopher of any Penetration were
superfluous to detail. For in spiritual Beings and intelligent Natures, these
two Qualities and their higher Degrees, in some more than in others, are so
conspicuous, that they cannot be over-looked. In all Founders of Republics, and
Civil Societies, in all Lawgivers and Philosophers, in all Apostolical Men, in
the Inventers of Arts and Sciences, even in the Broachers of Heresies, this
Quality of Light, however coarse, turbid, and confined, seems to have been
their Passion, their Fort, their Characteristic and overruling Bias; and in
all the Hermetical Tribe, the Solitaries, the true contemplative Philosophers,
the Founders of Orders, Monasteries and Collegiat Life, in true and zealous
Patriots and Lovers of their Country and Species; in short, in all the
contemplative and abstracted Persons, Love seems to be the predominant
Affection; and this Division runs through all, even corrupt and lapsed Nature,
and makes the great Distinction of Mankind, into the Governed and Governing;
those who defend Truth, and those who attack Error; those who thrust, and hit
the Mark best, i.e. the Lawgivers, or their Makers; and those who parry best,
i.e. Politicians and honest Statesmen; those fitted by Nature to command, and
those that are made only to be commanded and obedient; that is, all the active
and social, or the Children of Men; and the Sons of God, or the Thinking and
Contemplative. But this Difference is with infinite Variety, great
Imperfections, foreign Mixtures, and diabolical Influences in corrupt Nature;
but never the one in any eminent Degree, without some Degree of the other, as
they are both united to Infinitude, in their divine Original and Cause; and
these Differences make up the Specification and Individuation of the several
Particulars of lapsed, free and intelligent Nature, and the Difference of the
Conduct of Divine Wisdom, in their Purification and Restoration, who with
infinite Wisdom and Propriety, conducts all and each, without Violence on their
Freedom and specific Qualities, or Dissonance to the Harmony of his own
Attributes, to their great and final End of Being; which is the wonderful
Economy of the general and particular Restoration; and this Difference and
Distinction of the original Qualities and Affections of the Soul, viz. Light
and Love, and the different Maneuver and Conduct of Providence in this State
toward them, is founded on the different Parts they might have acted in the
general Lapse of Mankind, and the different Offices, Seats and Mansions they
are to be prepared for in the universal Monarchy of the Restoration; and may
make the otherwise unaccountable Difference of the Bodies, Spirits, Tempers,
Capacities, and outward and inward Success in this State, of two Children of
the same Birth, as Twins, or two immediately succeeding one another of the same
Parents, under the same Education and Beginnings in the World, and on the same
Bottom; which every one must have observed to be as various, different and
distant as the Poles, and in a manner diametrically opposite, even otherwise
unaccountable and odd.

. 6. THAT the fixed Stars, and their analogous planetary satellitious sublimer
ethereal Systems, may possibly be the Seats and Mansions of the unlapsed,
tried and purified angelical Hierarchies, and of restored, purified and
glorified sentient and intelligent mortal Beings, seems not only probable,
philosophical, and according to the general Analogy of Things; but is strongly
and frequently hinted in Revelation, as every one who is familiarly acquainted
with it must know. God's Throne, his Shechinah, the Heaven of Heavens, his
Dewlling Place, is always represented above: Elijah went upwards, Christ
ascended, and the Seats of the blessed are always represented as among these
celestial Orbits. And though Analogy may not apodeictically demonstrate a Fact
or Truth, especially as to its precise and specific Nature and secondary
Qualities, in the Detail, about imperceptible and spiritual Beings (precise
Truth in these Matters being not only incompatible with Finitude, but
counteracting Faith, Trust and Resignation, the sole Means of our Recovery and
progressive Purification, being absolutely destructive of Liberty, and clashing
with the Divine Attributes of infinite Justice and Purity, and his absolut
Dominion over the Creation); yet when Analogy and Revelation concur in the same
general Conclusion, it is so high a Presumption and Probability as comes
nearest a Demonstration; at least to those who have any Regard for Revelation;
for to such it will be self-evident, that infinite Wisdom, and absolut
Infallibility, will never make the most distinct Approach to any Allusion or
Similitude, that borders on things in no Degree of Alliance, Approximation or
Neighborhood, or where the Contact is not as near as Circumstances will admit,
or that is not as the first Terms of a convergeing Progression, or one that
will lead his low, wandering, blundering Creatures into gross Mistakes; that
Bodies or Vehicles of spiritual Substances must have an Ubi, a local permanent
Situation at last, is certain; that these numberless glorious Luminaries were
lighted up with such a Profusion of Luster, only for us stupidly to gaze at, is
ridiculous. That they must be infinite in their Number, (I mean always
creaturely relative Infinitude) follows from the infinite Expansion of Space,
and the Equilibrium necessarily to be preserved, in order to perpetuat the
Situation, Distance and Relations of these glorious Luminaries. That they may
be of an infinitely purer, more refined and sublimed Matter than even that of
our Sun, (who was designed grossly only to picture out the Divine Nature to us
lapsed Mortals, and to enlighten and cherish us a little, and our dark Prison,
during our Probation and Recovery, and not made for Perpetuity; and which is
covered over and compressed with a gross dense Atmosphere, with Maculae and
Spots, that possibly may hinder its too quick and violent Consumption) is
highly probable. These fixed and permanent Luminaries, with their analogical
planetary Apparatus, may be the Seats of the Blessed, whose glorious Vehicles
may be of the same Matter and Substance with their respective Mansions. These
ethereal Planets and fixed Stars, may be so situated, and so harmoniously
placed in regard to one another, that the Rays, and, as it were, spiritual or
ethereal Matter, which they perpetually pour forth and emit through the whole
Expansion of Space, may by a perpetual Flux and Reflux, and melodious
Vibrations, be returned back again upon one another, and so perpetuat and
eternise their Luster and Glory. The Rays of our Sun have Fits of easy
Transmission, Refraction and Reflection; according to Sir Isaac Newton, its
Particles have a greater Bias on the one Side than on the other; they attract
one another in an infinitely greater Proportion than their Power of Gravity in
general. Bodies may be turned into Light, and Light into Bodies. Some Diamonds
and precious Stones are luminous, emit Light, and shine in the Dark. Several
Phosphors (liquid and solid) emit Light at all Times, both in Air and Water;
and the Asbestos and purest Gold bear all Degrees of Heat and Fire without much
Alteration; and the purest Glass in the Focus of the strongest Specula, only
continues liquid without any other Change. These Facts I suggest only to show
that Light, as well as other Bodies, may be various, of different Purity and
Sublimity, differing in Degree, though not in Kind; and much more might be
suggested here, to show the various Nature and different Qualities of Light and
luminous Bodies one from another, if necessary, to illustrat this perhaps
imaginary Speculation, at least save it free from Contradiction or
Impossibility; but I propose in this mere Conjecture.

. 7. THAT infinite Wisdom, Power and Love, could produce no sentient or
intelligent Being ad extra, without impressing in the Fund and Essence of its
Nature, an infinite Love to Him, an insatiable and unextinguishable Desire,
Thirst and Ardour to be reunited at last with Him, as its supreme Felicity, is
as absurd, and, I think, blasphemous to doubt, as to doubt of his Being and
Existence. To think otherwise, is to question his infinite Perfection; for
infinite Perfection must be single and one; and sentient and intelligent Beings,
without this radical and innate Ardor for Happiness, that is, to be at last
united and to commerciat with infinite Perfection, seeing, by the Sensibility
and Intelligence of their Nature, they are capable of it, in their Order, would
be an Effect without a Cause, or an Action without an End or Purpose, at least
without intending the self-evident best End, which is a Contradiction the most
absolut to infinite Perfection. No sentient and intelligent Being ever was
without an Ardor or Bent toward Happiness; it is a radical Principle in their
Nature, and never counteracted, though its Nature and true Cause is often
mistaken, may be unknown or forgot, yet it can finally consist only in this
Reunion. But Sensibility and Intelligence, being by their Nature and Essence
free, must be labile, and by their Lability may actually lapse, degenerat, and
by Habit acquire a second Nature, opposite and contrary to this implanted Brass
and Tendency toward a Reunion and permanent Commerce with their original and
first Cause; and by Selfishness, inordinat Love and Idolatry of their
Fellow Creatures, sopit and extinguish this central Bias, at least as to
elicit Acts, though not in the Root and Fund: And in this Contrariety,
Distraction and tearing asunder of these moral Powers in spiritual Nature, the
Essence of Misery and Hell itself chiefly consists. So long as this contrary,
habitual and foreign Bias lasts, so long must the Unhappiness and Tortures of
such sentient and intelligent Creatures continue; like the Chill and Cold in
the Comets, while in the Parts of their Orbit most distant from the Sun; or
like the small Particles of Matter, which out of the Sphere of their Attraction
become repulsive, and by the Law of their Passivity continuing ever in the
State into which they are put, must for ever proceed in this their repulsive
Course. But this contrary Bias to Reunion with their infinitely perfect and
happy Original, being adventitious only, and by Habit only confirmed into a
second artificial Nature, the infinite Love, Wisdom and Economy of the Son of
God was contrived and designed to melt down, annihilat and destroy, that the
original innate Bias might operate and take Place; and without this infinitely
wise Economy, to me it seems, the permanent Order, Peace and Harmony, and
consequent Felicity of universal sentient and intelligent Nature, could no
other possible way have been or be established at last.

. 8. IT is not impossible, but extremely probable, and according to the
universal Analogy of Nature, that our Planets and their Satellites, should be
the more tolerable Jails, Prisons and Dungeons of the several Orders and
Degrees of lapsed, probationary, sentient and intelligent Beings. That some of
them are straiter, less comfortable, more dark, dismal and unhappy than others,
there is no doubt can be made. That they are not, nor cannot be designed for an
eternal Duration, in their present Condition, is highly probable. We see on
this our Planet, that the Bodies, Tempers and Habitudes of sentient and
intelligent Beings, that continue long in such particular Climats, and under
such Influences of the Celestial Bodies, alter, and take a Turn, according to
the general Laws and Temperature of that Climat. The Planets and their
Satellites have an infinite Propriety and Fitness for being more tolerable
Bettering and Correction-Houses and Prisons, for lapsed, sentient and
intelligent Beings: They are no ways, nor cannot become, in their present
Situation, Pleasure-Houses, Paradises, and happy Mansions, nor permanent
Dwelling-Places for perfect and glorified Intelligences. The natural Language
of the Deity to us in our present Condition, can be no other but by Types,
Similitudes, Allusions, Parables, Allegories, Analogy, and final Causes,
without Violence on our Liberty, our Acquisition of Faith, Hope and Charity, or
debasing his own infinite Purity and Perfection; at least about invisible and
imperceptible Beings and States under our present Lapse; and therefore I
conjecture, that our Planets, and their Satellites, are designed by infinite
Wisdom for the temporary Jails and Correction-Houses of lapsed, probationary,
sentient and intelligent Beings; and that their superinduced Vehicles, or other
penal and penitential Habits, are of the same Substance and Materials with the
respective Prisons they are confined to.

. 9. THAT the Comets cannot be the Seats of blessed Spirits, I think, is
self-evident: That they are not made only to supply our Planet the Earth, or
even all the other Planets with Moisture and Humidity, only, is as evident. The
Number of them (perhaps half a dozen in a Century) that have been observed and
seen, and of which we have some Records, with their sensible Effects,
Appearances and Periods, are abundantly too many for that far-fetched and
precarious Purpose only. Our Water most certainly decreases, and must
necessarily be exhausted in time; as do the Heat and Rays of the Sun; but not
so sensibly as to lay a Foundation for Experience and Observation by our Senses
or Art: But rather to increase our sensible Punishment, and natural
Purification, at the last Stage. And it is highly reasonable and philosophical
to suppose, that our whole System was designed by our Creator to last in its
present Situation, only so long as was required for the Probation, Purification
and Expiation of lapsed sentient and intelligent Beings, which both Revelation
and Philosophy show cannot be an infinite Duration; but that the whole planetary
System, within the Orbit of Saturn, is progressively and by general Laws
verging toward some grand Catastrophe and Jail-Deliverance. The Elect seems to
imply, the Officers and Governors of this new Jerusalem, this political future
State, this universal Restoration Monarchy of the Father of all; and the Period
of the Duration of this present probatory State of the System of Saturn, seems
confined and limited in Revelation, to the Number of the Elect's being
accomplished, that is, to the Time when all the necessary Officers, Governors
or Magistrates of this new universal Government is formed, finished and
accompleated, and then will be the End, Crisis and Period of this probatory
State. I say then, the Comets cannot be the Seats of the Blessed, if
Alterations of Heat and Cold, Summer and Winter, in some more temperat and
moderat Degree, be necessary for tolerable liveing, in Bodies crusted over with
the Substance of which the Habitation is made, (as it is philosophical to think
of the Inhabitants of the Comets) seeing their Orbits are so excentric to the
Sun, the Foci of their Ellipses so vastly distant, that they must pass for Ages
through both Extremes of Heat and Cold, and be perpetually involved either in
Fire or Darkness, and so in extreme Misery, as to their incrusted Machins; and
consequently they probably are the Prisons, Condemn'd-Holes and Dungeons of
God's Kingdom, and universal Monarchy.

. 10. IT is both rational and philosophical, and according to the natural
Analogy of Things, to suppose, that the next World, or its several Steps of
Progression, and its initial Steps or first Terms, and the invisible
impreceptible State of Things, in the other Life, has a great and near
Similitude and Resemblance to this present State; and that they differ chiefly
in Degrees, the other World being of an infinitely greater Purity, Sublimity and
Perfection only, without the Errors, Darkness or Miseries of this Life. God is
the same Yesterday, Today, and for Ever, immutable and invariable in his
Nature and Attributes; and, as has been often hinted, all his Works ad extra,
and the Operations of his Wisdom and Power, have a perpetual ascending Analogy
and Progression toward Him, his Nature and Felicity. It is true, Revelation
informs, that Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, nor has it entered into
the Heart of Man to conceive the Glory and Happiness that God has reserved in
another Life for them that love Him. But as that refers chiefly to the inward
Joy and Happiness, Ecstasies and Transports, that the consummatly Blessed feel
in their Commerce and final Union with Him, their infinitely perfect Source and
Original; so it does not affect their outward State, their Polity, external
Order and Mansions, of which only I am here speaking; and of which the
Description and Account by Revelation, intimats plainly a great Affinity with
the most perfect and happy Condition of our now World; and it is highly
probable, they differ more in Degrees of Perfection than in Kind. The new
Jerusalem is liken'd to a City, a State and Republic; it has its People,
Subjects and Officers; it has Temples, paradisaical Gardens, Rivers of
Pleasure, a perpetual Spring, and all our best and most beatifying Delights and
material Comforts here. I know all this Language and Description is but
Allusion, Figure and Allegory, and must be understood chiefly of our Creation
or glorified Bodies; but as every created Being, sentient and intelligent, has
a Body or Vehicle as well as Spirit, an ethereal, planetary, or a glorified
Vehicle, the last inseparable and immortal, as well as a spiritual self-motive
Substance, the Body or glorified Vehicle may have analogical Food, some Fruit
of the Tree of Life, which in Paradise itself perpetuated the Immortality of,
and would have eternis'd the Creation Vehicle; it must have an Ubi, a Mansion
and Dewlling Place; it must have analogous Pleasures of an innocent, spiritual
and sublimer Nature, proper to its Order and Rank, and proportioned to the
Purity of its then Body and Soul; there must be different Orders, Ranks and
Distinctions; superior Officers and Subalterns, a Government and Polity in the
new as well as in the old Jerusalem: In short, they will probably differ not in
Kind, or absolute and total Contradiction, from the best and most perfect State
of Things here, that can be imagined or described, at least in the first Steps
or Terms in the progressive Perfection and Happiness; but in Degrees, and in
Negation of all that is imperfect, dissonant and disorderly in this present
State; but this in an infinite, that is, a relative or creaturely infinite
superior Degree; and into the final, consummat and perfectest State, we must
mount only by Degrees, and Steps, through many Mansions and progressive Order;
and by acquireing an habitual Stability, by repeated Acts and Trials, be
confirmed in eternal Purity and Felicity at last; and one Stage of Being will
be perhaps but an Apprenticeship and probatory Initiation for a higher and
better, and this without Bounds and without Limits (I mean only as to the
bodily Restoration Vehicle, its Mansion, Food, created Pleasures and
Enjoyments, which can only flow from the Fund, the spiritual Inhabitant's being
restored and perfectly united with, and transformed into the Divine Nature and
Qualities). This System, modestly explained and cautiously guarded, in the
Proportion of Perfect to Imperfect, Infinite to Finite, Innocent to Lapsed,
would, I think, take off many Difficulties in Revelation, in the Economy of
Jesus and the Restoration, the different Methods of Providence, and its present
Appearances, and our Mistakes of the Sentiments and Writings of inspired
Authors. For it is impossible the Spirit of God should insinuat any
Resemblance, Alliance, or analogical Similitude between things that differ
generically, were disparata and incompatible; but between such as were verging
by Progression, and in an Approximation to the real Perfection of their
Natures. Lapsed Beings are infinitely distant at present from such a final Union
and relative Identity with their Source, and his Throne and Shechinah: But must
be like the Assymptots of Hyperbola's and their Curves, eternally approaching
to, but never able totally to coincide.

. 11. ANALOGY, it is true, can never demonstrat the actual Existence and real
Being of any thing to us: Sensation only and Experience can do that. It is only
capable of explaining and illustrating the Nature, Substance and Qualities of
Things already made and created. It is, as Quintilian very elegantly describes
Analogy, Ejus haec vis est, ut id quod dubium est, ad aliquod simile, de quo
non quaeritur, referat, ut incerta certis probet. But then it takes off any
Contradiction and Impossibility from its Existence; makes it possible, probable
and rational; and renders it a fit Subject for the supreme Reason and Power to
work upon, if He pleases, and similar to his other Operations; it clears all
possible Objections, and Difficulties, and makes it natural and intelligible;
and that is precisely what our present Condition and Situation requires, or
will admit, for the Acquisition of the moral Powers, Faith, Hope and Charity,
to secure our Liberty from Violence, and the Divine Attributes from Dissonance.
And if the fundamental Proposition be admitted, viz. that all the Works of
infinite Wisdom and Power ad extra, are and can be nothing but Pictures,
Resemblances and Signatures of God's Nature, Substance and Attributes, in
Miniature, impressed or prominent: In a word, if it be true, as has been said,
that Mundus universus nihil est nisi Deus explicitus; and, I think, nothing can
be more self-evident; then most of the Consequences I have drawn from this
great Truth are necessary, natural and obvious; especially when Revelation
suggests the same Truths and Conclusions, at least in general. We may very
readily err in the Detail, and in the Eliciting and Application of a particular
Case; but not so readily in the general Law, as is common with Algebraists,
they often blunder in the Application, who were in the Right in the Canon.

. 12. WE may blunder and be mistaken in our particular Conclusions and
Deductions from this universal Analogy, I say, as well as in Geometry and
Algebra, being weak, fallible, and imperfect Creatures: But our Errors and
Blunders in the first, will sometimes proceed from a different Cause from our
Mistakes in the latter. A wrong Head, want of Culture, and Precipitation, are
generally the Cause of our Mistakes in Geometry and Algebra; but in Analogy,
especially that Analogy which concerns the moral Attributes of the Divine
Nature, the human Soul, the holy Scriptures, and invisible States, it is owing
often to a wrong Heart, Pride, and Self-sufficiency. We are afraid such pure
and sublime Theorems should be true; they hint the Necessity of a greater
Purity in us than we are willing to cultivat at present. If we ascribed all
Perfection, every good Gift and perfect Donation, to the supreme Cause; and
were at the same time humbled and contented even with our own Ignorance, Errors
and Blunders of Love and Resignation only; if our Sentiments and Ratiocination
were intended for his Glory and Magnificence solely, and our own Humiliation,
satisfied with this single Truth alone, that God is God, that is infinitely
perfect, they could neither hurt us nor others. But if our Heads must needs be
at work (as mine has here); if, like Children, we must play with Ideas, and
philosophise about the Kingdom of Invisibles and Imperceptibles, and the Arcana
Imperii divini; if we cannot at first, at least and in our Years of Probation
or elementary State, arrive per saltum at pure Love, naked Faith, and universal
Resignation (the only solid Means of Infallibility and Stability); then the
best and surest Method is to deal in Analogy, as the Mathematicians do in
Algebra and Geometry, to acquire a Facility in solving difficult Problems with
Readiness and Accuracy; viz. by laying up in our Memory, or having ready at
hand a Penus Analogica, as they have a Penus Analytica; in beginning with the
most simple and least complicated Analogies; in attentively observing the
Ratio's, Relations and References of Things, Substances, their Qualities and
probable final Causes, and finding out their Degrees and Progression. The
Astronomers had with Exactness and Accuracy discovered and settled the Orbit,
Period, Distance, and Laws of the Sun and Earth, before they attempted with any
Success that of the Moon; and Sir Isaac Newton had settled and adjusted the
Laws, Motions and Appearances of the Solar System, before he attempted the Moon
and Planets; and had for seven Years studied experimental Chemistry, before he
set about to investigat the Nature and Laws of minute Bodies and their Systems;
he had cultivated and made many and various Experiments, by separating,
combining and analyzing the Rays of Light, through many diaphanous Mediums,
before he attempted to discover the Nature, Figure, and Laws of their component
Particles. Analogy and its Appendages, Type, Allusion, Similitude, Parable,
Hieroglyphic and Allegory (all more remote or nearer Approaches to Analogy) is
the only natural Language the Deity can speak to us at present, under our
Degeneracy and Lapse, consistent with his Dignity and Purity, and the
Preservation of our Liberty. He may speak to us mediatly by his Angels; He may
speak to the Wills by his Holy Spirit, and to our Understandings by his Word
his only begotten Son, and in the holy Scriptures by his Prophets, Apostles,
and Saints; but his sole, natural, articulat, indelible and universal Language,
can possibly be no other but his Works of Wonder ad extra. The Heavens declare
the Glory of God: By the Characters and Hieroglyphics intimatly impressed on
them; and they can only be read or understood by Analogy to Him, to us, and to
one another. If then we began with this inanimat World, in (which only true
natural Philosophy from final Causes can instruct us) thence proceeded to the
vegetable World, then advanced to the brute Creation, (where natural History
and Chemistry will be of great Service) and at last ascended to intelligent
Beings, through the angelic Hierarchy, till by Analogy we arrived at the
Supreme Cause; this Method would be the most natural and secure, in a natural
Progression by Analogy: And if with Humility, Modesty, and begging the
Direction of the uncreated Wisdom, we persever'd with Patience: this divine
Philosophy might, in time, (cultivated by different Hands) be of Service to the
contemplative Christian Philosopher himself, as well as to others. But my
Meaning will be better understood by a short Recapitalation of what has been
said, and an Illustration by an Example.

1. WHEN God intended to bring Creatures into Being, He could not choose but
make them after the most perfect Pattern: He therefore stamped his own Image
upon all his Works. Hence the Creatures, being all Miniatures of the Deity,
must bear a mutual Resemblance to Him and to one another. This Resemblance is
what we call Analogy, and runs through the whole Scale of Beings; every Being,
besides its peculiar and distinguishing Quality, whereby it is determined to
this or that particular Order, and has the Pre-eminence of all below it; being
also possessed of all those Qualities that are to be found in any of the
inferior Orders. As a Curve of any of the Orders has all the Properties of the
inferior Orders of Curves, besides those that belong to its own Class or
Species.

2. THESE different Orders or Ranks of Beings, being distinguished by their
respective Qualities, the first Term of this infinite Scale will be simple
Existence; the Addition of one Quality will constitute the second Term or
Order; of two, the third; and so of the rest; whence the Number of Qualities
with which any Being is endowed, will determine its Place in this Scale, and
show its Distance from the first Term. Besides this Difference in the several
Orders of Beings, there is also a Diversity among those of the same Order,
which proceeds from their possessing some of the common Qualities in a more or
less eminent Degree.

3. As God can have but one Model in all his Productions, every System of
Beings will resemble all the other Systems, and each will be a Copy of the
whole Creation. The material World will be a Transcript of the spiritual; and
the Laws and Economy of the one will be analogous to and correspond with those
of the other. Besides this general Analogy, there will be a more immediate and
flagrant Relation between each material System, and the Intelligences to which
it belongs; the Structure of the Bodies and other material Organs of these
Intelligences, together with the whole Frame and Contexture of the material
System, being such as will best suit the Nature, Rank and Order of these
Intelligences. And this Relation probably will subsist and attend them in all
the Changes and Periods through which they pass; so that should the intelligent
System lapse from its Purity and Perfection, the material System would fall
into Disorder likewise, and undergo some similar and analogous Change.

4. OF this general Analogy between the spiritual and material Systems, there
are many Traces plainly to be discerned by an acute and contemplative
Philosopher. To instance only in the Similitude which our solar System, as now
disordered, bears to the lapsed Intelligences that inhabit it. In the Center of
this System is placed the Sun, a bright and lively Image of the Deity, his
material inanimat Miniature; the Planets and other celestial Orbs revolving
about him at their respective Distances, and performing their Revolutions in
different Periods of Time, will represent the several Orders of lapsed
Intelligences, the different Degrees of their Lapse, and the Duration and
Continuance of their probatory State. This glorious Body, the Sun, infinitely
surpasses all the other Orbs in Magnitude and Luster; they are no more,
compared to him, than Points in the Circumference of a Circle. They have no
Brightness of their own; it is all derived by Reflection, and is more or less,
according to their Distance from him.

5. THE chief Properties of the Sun are Attraction, Light and Heat. The Sun's
Attraction extends to the remotest Parts of the System, acting at all
Distances, with a Force increasing in a certain Proportion as these Distances
decrease. It Is by this Attraction that the Planets are retained in their
Orbits, and kept from flying off in the Tangent, to which their projectile
Force gives them a constant Tendency. Should the Sun's Attraction cease but a
Moment, the whole System would fall into the utmost Disorder, and be
irrecoverably ruined. How like is this Attraction to the Love of God,
continually operating upon all created Intelligences, and powerfully
soliciting them to a nearer Approach and Resemblance to Himself! Its Influence
is constant and invariable; were it possible it should have the least
Intermission, the whole Creation would fall into utter Ruin and Destruction.

6. THE Light of the Sun is diffused throughout the whole System; no Celestial
Body is endowed with this Quality but himself. This is an Image of that Light
which enlightens every Man that comes into the World; an Emblem of Him who came
forth from the Father of Lights; the Light and Sun of the new Jerusalem, and of
spiritual Nature.

7. THE Sun's Light is always accompanied with Heat, the Principle of Life and
Vegetation. In the other celestial Bodies there is some small Degree of this
Quality, but it is originally derived from or produced in them by the solar
Heat; without which they would be barren and inhospitable Deserts. This
represents the Influences of the Holy Spirit, which are inseparable from the
Light of the Gospel; and are the Principle of our spiritual Life, animating and
cherishing every intelligent Being, and making it productive of all the Fruits
of Righteousness.

8. LET us next consider the Properties of the Planets, and other Bodies that
revolve about the Sun. Their various Magnitudes and Distances from the Sun,
with the periodical Times of their Revolution, will express the several Orders
of lapsed Intelligences, the different Degrees of their Lapse, and the
particular Periods of Time allotted for their Trial and Probation. Some of
these Bodies, as the Comets, move in Orbits that are very Ellyptical, going off
to immense Distances from the Sun, where the Influence of his Heat and Light is
almost insensible; but by the Force of his Attraction they are again drawn
back, and brought even to a nearer Approach than other Bodies that move in
narrower Orbits.

9. THE Planets are constantly acted upon by two different Forces, viz. Gravity
or Attraction, and the projectile Force. These are contrary to one another, and
always act in opposite Directions; the projectile Force giveing the Planet a
constant Tendency to recede from the Sun, and to fly off in the Tangent; while
the Force of Attraction, by drawing it the contrary way, prevents that Effect:
So that by the joint Action of both, the Planet is kept in its Orbit. The
attractive Force, though continually influencing the Planet, is not a Quality
of it, but proceeds from the Sun; the only Quality belonging to the Planet is
that of the projectile Force. This will shadow out the Lapse, the Action of
Selfishness, and the inordinate Love of the Creature, with their Opposition to
the divine Love.

PHILOSOPHERS tell us, that the present State of our System cannot be of long
Continuance; but that the solar Attraction must necessarily prevail over the
projectile Force of the celestial Bodies; and all the Comets and Planets, with
their Satellites, be at last absorbed and swallowed up in the Sun.

FINIS.
AN ABSTRACT; Or, A Brief, but Distinct REPRESENTATION OF THE Doctrines and
Sentiments Contained in the preceding DISCOURSES.
AN ABSTRACT OF DISCOURSE I.
PHILOSOPHICAL CONJECTURES about the Nature and Qualities of the Original
Animal Body, and of its Progressive State, in its several Stages of Existence.
THAT there may be Animals, (and consequently animal Organs) performing
analogically, at least, the animal Functions, less than our Senses can
discover, assisted by our best Art, possibly less, than our Imagination can
frame an Idea of Page 1 Several Demonstrations, showing the utter
Impossibility, that an animal Body could be first formed, or can be now
continued, by mere Mechanism, or the Laws of Nature now obtaining; but must be
the immediate Work, continued and supported by the constant Influence of an
omnipotent and omniscient First Cause 3 That the least and last Particles of
Matter can be divided by no finite Power whatever 4 That their Figures were
probably at first only Spheres, Cubes, and equilateral triangular Prisms ibid.
That our now porous and confused Elements, Salts, Water, Light, Air, and Earth,
still have inherent Qualities, which distinguish them from each other, which
they never totally lose, though these may be swallowed up, when combined
unharmoniously, as they now are 5 That the original Creation, and the
Resurrection Body, might have been, and may be, of this first kind of simple
Elements, harmoniously combined; but are now crusted over, and discordantly
blended with the gross secondary Elements of this ruinous Planet we inhabit 6
That the Fineness of the original ethereal animal Body, may have been in
Proportion to its Order, and the Perfection of the natural and moral Powers of
the Soul conjunctly 7 That this analogically, spiritual (so to speak) animal
Body, might have been rolled up, and concentred, into a Miniature of a
Miniature in Infinitum, in the Loins of the first Adamical Parent, till by its
being sufficiently plastered over with the Matter of this ruinous Planet, it
became able to bear its now Inclemency, and be born into this World 8 That this
primitive, ethereal, divinely organized Body, by an individual Fitness and
Congruity to the informing spiritual Substance, might have been thereby so
intimatly and commensuratly united with it, that they could never after be
separated by any finite Power, no more than the original Particles of Matter
could be divided by such a Power ibid. That the confineing this original
spiritual Body and Soul so long a Time to so dark a Prison, as the Seeds and
Eggs of Animals are now, might have been for progressive Purification,
Correction and Punishment 9 That it is Fact, that the wisest and best Men, have
been at first mere Vegetables, afterward mere Brutes, and but at last rational
intelligent Beings 10 That sentient and intelligent Beings are by their
derivative Nature immortal and unannihilable, and because God can never be
contrary to Himself; but are in a progressive State toward Perfection and
Happiness in their Order, like the several Orders of Hyperboloids 12 That the
natural Powers being uniformly constant and invariable, and the moral Powers
being cancelled by the Lapse, had not the natural Powers in their full Vigor
been suspended and fettered, they must have counteracted the Acquisition of the
moral Powers 13 That precise Knowledge, and mathematical Certainty, in the real
Nature, and of the intimat Substance of any complex Thing, is incompatible with
Finitude; and that the Degree of Certainty in Things, is only in Proportion to
the Amplitude of the Faculty 16 That subjecting all Creation to general Laws,
was one infinitely wise and effectual Mean to secure Liberty inviolate, and to
harmonize the Divine Attributes, in the great Work of Restoration 17 That the
only thing worthy of a Philosopher, is, by Experiment, Attention and Induction,
to collect as many of these general Laws, as he possibly can 18 That God being
Simple, One, and always the same, must necessarily act by general Laws in all
Creation; but that good and wise Men have been deterred from studying them, in
spiritual Nature, out of Dread of the odious Appellation of Enthusiasts 19 That
the Study of these general Laws of infinite Wisdom and Sagacity may be a Part of
the Employment of happy contemplative Spirits hereafter 20 That an infinitely
rational and perfect Being could possibly have no other Pattern or Model for
his Works of Creation at first, but himself, his own Substance, Nature and
Attributes 21 That therefore there must be one perpetual Analogy and
progressive Perfection running through all the Works of an infinitely rational
Being; and that as Proportion is the Key of the material, Analogy is the Logic
of the spiritual World 22 That Suffering is a mechanical and necessary
Consequence of our present Situation on this ruinous Globe, and that none ever
could avoid it absolutely, but in Degree, and that through the Merits and Economy
of Jesus only. Sufferings become Blessings because Means of Restoration 24 That
this Suffering is a natural and mechanical Purification and Perfection of the
Subject 25 That Consciousness of the End or Occasion of this Suffering is no
way necessary toward the beneficial Effects of it: That Consciousness would be
prejudicial in the first Steps of this Purification; and only when its End is
obtained, can it be beneficial to clench its Effects 26 That the great Problem
and Difficulty with the Best of Beings (so to speak), and in the Economy of
his Providence, and the Reason of the present Darkness in it, is to restore
lapsed Creatures, in Consistence with their Liberties, and the Harmony of his
Divine Attributes 27 That the general Methods of Providence in restoreing
lapsed Intelligences, are plainly, 1. The continuing general Laws. 2. The
suspending the elicit Acts of the natural Powers for a Time, by Ligatures of
this ruinous Planet: And, 3. By the admireable and adoreable Economy of Jesus
30 That it is a Contradiction to suppose a beneficent Being would create
sentient or intelligent Beings, for Suffering, merely for Suffering's Sake
ibid. That the Sufferings of the sentient and intelligent Creatures, in this
present State, necessarily supposes a State of Pre-existence and a future
Lapse, or a Course of Trial and Probation 32 That there may be other States and
Mansions, in infinitum, of progressive Purification and Perfection; and that
Suffering, which in the Divine Purity, and the Nature of Disorder, must have
been eternal, is made temporary only, by the Merit and Suffering of Jesus 34
That spiritual Substance may be conceived analogous to, and not contradictory
to Matter sublimed and refined by the Power of Omnipotence; but even this Idea
is imperfect, and not satisfactory, their Substances being naturally
destructive of each other, and their Qualities in all their Modifications
equidistant. 37 That the spiritual Body, and immaterial Spirit crusted over
with Clay, may for its Purification progressively be an infinite time in
developeing these natural Powers, and in acquireing the moral Powers defaced by
the Lapse; but that now under the Economy of Jesus, this will be perfected in
a finit Time, and even the whole System of Saturn is by general Laws vergeing
to some great Catastrophe or Change 42 That the Spirit, as being a Ray of the
Divine Substance, or a Power emitted from his necessarily existent Nature, is
immortal in its own Nature; but that the spiritual or ethereal Vehicle is only
immortal by the Divine Order, and comparatively, as the first Particles of
Matter are indivisible 43 That the thinner and lighter the Crust on this
ethereal Vehicle is, the natural Powers will be elicited more readily and
freely, and the moral Powers acquired more easily and fully, and the necessary
Sufferings thereby lessened 44 That since the natural Powers of the Spirit are
constant and always the same in their Root and Fund, it will follow, 1. That
our acquired Knowledge is but Remembrance. 2. That there is in our spiritual
Nature inherent and innate a moral Sense, and a natural Sagacity, as well as
natural Sensations. 3. That there are innate Ideas of God and Virtue, and of
moral Good and Evil in the Soul, though sopited and unelicited, as well as a
natural Power to perform the animal Functions. 4. That spiritual Sensation and
Senses (justly explained) are Realities, and not Figures. 5. That the Soul, in
her Operations now, can only use and employ the material Organs of the
ethereal Vehicle crusted over as they are with planetary Clay, which she must
endeavor to extend, develope and mundify. 6. That Culture, Study and Labor in
extending and perfecting the natural Powers, is but removeing Superfluities,
cutting off Excrescences, and rendering the ethereal Vehicles and their Organs
pliant and supple, and for the which we are now condemned to labor for our
Punishment and Purification. 7. That the shortest Way to perfect the natural
Powers, is to labor at the recovering the moral Powers 46 That the Activity,
Sensibility and Penetration, the animal Functions, the Passions, Sentiments,
Memory, Imagination, and the other more material and less abstracted Operations
of the Soul, and even the involuntary Functions, the voluntary Motions of the
Body, are more immediately performed by the self-moveing, immaterial, naturally
sagacious Spirit, on the primitive ethereal Vehicle divinely organized, but
now crusted over with Clay, as Springs and Weights move Clock-works, the first
though having an innate Principle of Self-action, the other only an extraneous
and adventitious one 48 That in this progressive endless Purification and
Perfection of an Animal in Body and Spirit, there may be many Steps, Stations
and Mansions, and, one finished, another may begin, till the final Completion
50 That in this endless progressive Purification toward consummat Perfection
and Happiness, there may be a particular Law of Attraction, Fitness and
Similarity, proportioned to the Acquisition of the moral Powers, and Extension
of the natural Powers, that may draw and determine them to their several
Stations and Mansions, as the Eggs of Insects and Seeds of Plants are by
Electricity drawn to their proper Nidus's and Leaves, till like the Asymptots
of Hyperbola's they come at last to meet in their Curve ibid. That this Sketch
of a System is innocent, though it should be deemed a Romance, which is all I am
answerable for 51
AN ABSTRACT OF DISCOURSE II.
PHILOSOPHICAL CONJECTURES about the Preference of Vegetable to Animal Food;
and of the End and Design of Providence in Appointing the first, and, on Trial,
Permitting the latter.
THAT by our present Frame, we are fitted as for Vegetable, so for Animal Food,
at least in the Days of our Vigor; but that Animal Food, on Trial, and
consequent Miscarriage, under the first intended and appointed Vegetable Food,
was permitted by the Author of Nature, as a pis all, 1. To let us feel the
natural and necessary Effects of our own Lusts and Concupiscence. 2. To produce
naturally and mechanically those Pains, Miseries and Distempers, that might
create a Horror of inordinat Lusts and Appetites, and afford Time and
Opportunities to ponder and think, and thereby to return to Order, Love of
Virtue, and its Source. 3. To shorten the Duration of our natural Lives, that
Sin and Misery might not increase, or last eternally. 4. To concentre our
natural Powers to a Level with our defaced moral Powers, that, without
clashing, they might rise, and be restored, in the same Progression. And, 5.
Perhaps to connive at what, without committing Violence on Liberty, could not
at that Time be prevented. 55 That our present earthly Bodies being composed of
the now secondary Sulphur, Salt, Air, Water and fine Earth, only, and it being
certain, from chemical Experiments, that Sulphur and Salt are the two most
active and destructive Elements, and that the three last, Air, Water and fine
Earth, are more innocent, the less active and deleterious, and Animal Food
abounding most in the two first, and Vegetable in the three last; consequently
Animal Food must be more destructive to Animal Bodies than Vegetable in the
same Proportion. 2. Because by Experiment the Juice and nourishing Extract of
Animal Food is more tenacious and glewy than that of Vegetable Food. 3. Because
Animal Food abounding more with Salts and Sulphurs, and they by their Nature
being always in perpetual Motion and Action, must mechanically tear Animal
Substances faster than Vegetables, which abound most with the more passive and
innocent Elements; especially, 4. When fermented Liquors are joined to them, as
Dilution, which harden the solid Meat, and obstruct its Solution and
Digestibility. And lastly, since, 5. the Particles of Animal Food being
strained through the finer Tubes, and stronger Organs, of Animal Digestion,
must be more minutely divided than the Particles of Vegetables can, by their
fewer and grosser Tubes of Preparation, and being destitute of Animal Heat and
Force, and having only the Solar Heat and universal Law of Attraction common
and equal in both; on these Accounts, the Particles of Animal must be much
finer than the Particles of Vegetable Food, and consequently have a
proportional much greater Degree of Attraction; must therefore be united with
greater Force, and form stronger Obstructions, and being more delicious, betray
the Feeder more readily into Excesses. On all which Accounts, (I say) Animal
Food must mechanically and necessarily create Diseases, and shorten Life more
readily than Vegetable 59 That since what is, and necessarily is, must be a
Part of the Intention of the Creator, and since Animal Food necessarily begets
Diseases and Pains more readily than Vegetable Food can, there is no accounting
for the Permission of Animal Food, but by supposing Pain and Suffering here a
necessary Mean of Expiation and Purification, which GOD, on Trial, finding
nothing else could reclaim his rebellious Creatures, unwillingly, as it were,
permitted it, as a Father sends his Son to the Correctionhouse: And that, as
when by Pride, Tyranny, Malice, Murder and Brutal Commerce, by the more
luxuriant and delicious Vegetable Food, the Deluge came to its Pitch, he was
forced to destroy both the People and their Food by this Deluge 62 That to
those to whom Revelation is familiar, the like Means of Correction will be
evident from the Permission of Plurality of Wives to the Jews; and that under
his immediate and miraculous Government, he, on their Murmurs, indulged them in
a Monarchical Government, as a kind Father admonishes his froward giddy Child
to beware of too familiar Approaches to Fire, by burning his Fingers 64 That
there is no accounting for the Permission of Animal Food, on the Foot of
Natural Religion, the wanton Murder of Animals for Food, when more salutary
Vegetable Food can be readily had, showing a Cruelty and Ferocity inconsistent
with beneficent Natures; but that the universal Proprietor of Life and
Happiness might, with great Wisdom, Justice and Kindness, knowing when the Term
of Expiation of a lower Class of probationary, progressive or lapsed Animals is
accomplished, give Leave, in the Course of his Providence, to put an End to
their present Manner of Living, and advance them thereby sooner to a higher
State of Being and Felicity, and at the same time secretly, and in Consistence
with their Liberty, to admonish a higher Rank of Intelligences what they
merited; for these (to be sure for wise and beneficent) Ends, perhaps
unknowable by us, GOD might have permitted the killing Animals for our Food, as
he certainly did for Sacrifice; for this we have a Patent in Revelation, but
none for fermented Liquors, but as Physic, Cordials and Stomachicks or Bitters,
on Extremities, Sickness, inclement Seasons, Fatigue or in Festivals 64 That
fermented Liquors of any Kind can never, in their Nature, be proper, or the
best, for Animal Health and Life; for they are the spurious Invention of Art,
and the further Deviation from the Simplicity of Nature, which has given us no
Intimation of any such Kind of Beverage in the Preparations of pure Nature, and
which the Animals who follow the Laws of Nature, will not touch; they are
properly Physic, bitter Draughts, and unnatural Cordials on Extremities, in
Sickness and inclement Seasons, and only designed for a temporary Relief, and
occasionally. Fermentation concentres, condenses and contracts, as it were, to
a Point, at least to a much smaller Volum, (like a Burning-glass, which
condenses the solar Rays, to make them more fierce) all the deleterious
Particles of the Vegetables, that is, their Salts and Oils; and is the true and
sole Cause of all our great and atrocious Distempers, especially of all the
Train of the frightful nervous Diseases which now rage universally in England,
like a Plague; and have been increaseing since the Conquest, and since Wine has
been familiar to all Ranks; and Water-drinking only, timeously begun in Life,
is the only sufficient Antidote for these most wretched lunatic Distempers 46
That there are many Evidences of the Hurt fermented, but especially spirituous
Liquors, do an animal Body; as, 1. That they harden and destroy the
Digestibility of animal Food, and indeed of all kinds of Food in the Stomach.
2. Because they corrugat and contract the Fibers, and pin together the
Particles of the Food, so that they cannot be so readily separated and divided
into their integral nourishing Parts. 3. Because by their Heat and Activity,
they bring the Fibers and Membrans of the digestive Organs, and all the other
Solids, into too violent and frequent Vibrations and Succussions, and thereby
break the Tone, and destroy the Elasticity, of these Organs, dissolve their
Continuity, and so wear them out much sooner. And, 4. Because they stunt the
Ductility and Growth of the animal Organs themselves, and thereby hinder their
Developement, Extension, Elasticity and natural Strength, by continuing their
linear or superficial Amplitude folded or rolled up 68 That all sentient and
intelligent Creatures are in an expiatory, perfectioning and progressive State,
is evident, because here they must necessarily suffer; and infinite Beneficence
could not possibly create any sentient or intelligent Being, merely to suffer;
but chiefly, perhaps only, for Expiation, and consequent progressive Perfection
and Happiness. That probably the early and universal Precept of Sacrifice,
might first introduce animal Food; which Sacrificeing might have been intended,
1. Silently and kindly to admonish the Sinner to consider what he deserves: In
this silent manner possibly, for the preserving Liberty inviolate, all the
Animals might, partly, be designed to read us Lectures of Instruction in
Morality, or of the Conveniences of Life, in the same manner. 2. By a
Prolepsis to perpetuat the Expectation and Hope of some more noble Sacrifice,
with such a View as the Eucharist was instituted after that Sacrifice had been
accomplished. But yet this Permission seems to have been against the Grain, as
may be gathered from the Caution not to eat the Animal's Blood, in which its
Life and deleterious Qualities alone consisted 73 This Aversion in infinite
Wisdom and Goodness, to permit the Use of animal Food, which He condescended
to, merely for the Hardness of the Hearts of his lapsed Creatures, kindly to
give them a forced Permission to do what He found they would presumptuously do,
is further shown by the Distinction between clean and unclean Animals, which
were not to be eaten; which in their Nature are more apt to madden the
Passions, enrage Distempers, and produce an Aversion to Virtue. And though St.
Peter had a miraculous Vision, to tell him nothing was unclean under the
Gospel, yet that was not till the Doctrine of Self-denial and Mortification was
established, as the Fundamental of Christianity 74 That some Vegetables, as
Eastern Gums, Spices, Aromaticks, pungent Foetids, and Onion Tribes, are more
destructive to Animals, than young white animal Food 76 To the Difficulties,
that our blessed Savior eat and drank with Publicans and Sinners: That he
wrought his first Miracle to produce Wine: That he fed a Multitude by
miraculous Animal Food: That St. Peter had a Vision to instruct him, that all
Food was equal: It is answered, 1. That the Question only is, Which of the two
Foods, Animal or Vegetable, was probably first intended by the Author of the
Universe before the Lapse, and the Ruin of the Planet we now inhabit? 2. That
different Repairs are necessary to different Degrees of Ruin, even in material
Habitations. 3. That there is neither Virtue nor Vice in either kinds of Food,
but in their Quantity, or as they are commanded by lawful Superiors. But that a
low or vegetable Diet is naturally and mechanically more productive of Health
and long Life, and consequently of Knowledge and Virtue, than a high animal
Diet. 4. That our Savior came to seek, to save those who were lost, and so was
under a Necessity of converseing with the Voluptuous and Sinners: But that the
Preference he gave to a low Diet, was implicitly included in his grand Doctrine
of Selfdenial, and taking up the Cross. 5. I grant, that in our present
Situation on this ruinous Globe, it is impracticable and impossible, for
Persons of all Ranks, Conditions and Occupations, to live entirely on
Vegetables: Their Use now, is only to cure, alleviat and lessen the Distempers
generated necessarily by animal Food, and fermented Liquors: And, 6. Even
these, and spirituous Liquors, are sometimes necessary on Extremities, in some
Diseases, as Filips and Cordials for temporary Reliefs; and infinite Wisdom
foresaw this Mischief of these high Meats and Drinks, and provided an Antidote
for them, at least for a Time, 1. By making the great Bowel, the Liver, to
draw off their Poison, and turn it into a salutary Medicin. 2. By forming
mineral Waters of all kinds, with such Profusion and Variety, everywhere on
the Surface of the Globe: And, 3. By creating the Minerals themselves, Mercury
especially, mechanically adjusted for that Purpose, among many other Uses and
Utilities, of ponderous and mineral Medicines, which probably were not in the
same Form, or so readily at Hand, before the Flood 81 That to the Appearances
in the present State of Nature, that seem to clash with this Doctrine (which
consists only in these three Propositions, 1. That animal Food, in its own
Nature, is more ready to produce Distempers than vegetable Food. 2. That
therefore infinite Wisdom must have had wise and beneficent Ends in instituteing
the first, and but probably permitting only the latter: And, 3. That therefore
the latter must be the proper Antidote for Disorders produced by the former);
it is to be observed further, that at present our whole System is in Disorder,
in a purifying, and, as it were, in a febrile State, laboring in a
perfectionating Progression by general Laws, under natural Liberty, and the
Harmony of the Divine Attributes, which must at last terminate in relative
Order, Perfection, and universal Happiness. That now there is no such thing as
avoiding the destroying of animal Life absolutely; but that it should not be
done out of mere Luxury, Wantonness and Ferocity, which even the rapacious
Animals do not, but from want of any proper Food 86 That on the whole, it is
plain from Revelation, that, 1. Animal Food was permitted, and fermented
Liquors not absolutely, but their Excesses, forbidden. 2. That in many
Circumstances and Situations, a reasonable Quantity of animal Food and
fermented Liquors is absolutely necessary for a Time. 3. That it is plain from
Philosophy and Experience, that Excesses in high animal Food, and strong
fermented Liquors, are the true and adequat Cause of the great and atrocious
Distempers. 4. That animal Food, and fermented Liquors, will necessarily
shorten Life (perhaps one half) more readily than vegetable Food, and
unfermented Liquors, and in the same Proportion cause Distempers. 5. That though
a moderat Quantity of animal Food and fermented Liquors will naturally warm and
strengthen the Blood, and tighten the Solids for a Time, and consequently is
necessary in all eruptive Distempers, yet they will shorten Life, and produce
Distempers, much more readily than vegetable Food, and unfermented Liquors. 6.
That for bodily and mechanical Strength dureing a Time, and for a transient
Occasion, though animal Food, and fermented Liquors, be the most effectual; yet
for intellectual Purposes, vegetable Food, and unfermented Liquors, are
certainly fittest. But to secure the golden Mediocrity between bodily Strength
and clear penetrating Heads, about a half Pound of animal Food, and a half Pint
of fermented Liquors, in the entirely Healthy and Young, or rather less, seems
to bid fairest in Quantity for that Purpose: The Valentudinary must gradually
sink below this healthy Standard, till, by Experience, they find their own
proper Dose 88
AN ABSTRACT OF DISCOURSE III.
A PHILOSOPHICAL THEORY, founded on Experiments of the Nature and Laws of
minute inanimat Bodies, and their Systems in general.
PROPOSITION I. THE least Particles of Matter are of various Sizes, Densities
and Figures; the very least are almost infinitely small, hard and elastic,
making the first Order; the second Order are composed of those; and these
combined make the third Order 92 SCHOLIUM. The Quantity of solid Matter in the
material System of the Universe, may be very small; and yet, if duly divided
and arranged, might answer all the Appearances of material Worlds 93 PROP. II.
The least Particles of Bodies are indivisible by any finite or created Powers
94 Analogous to Gravity in the great Bodies of the Universe, there is in the
least Particles of Matter, a Principle of Attraction and Repulsion ibid. SCHOL.
I. What the general Law of Attraction and Repulsion in the least Particles of
Matter precisely is, has not yet been determined; only in receding from the
Contact, it is demonstrable that it is greater than the reciprocal Duplicat. 95
SCHOL. II. If Particles attracted each other in the reciprocal Triplicat in
their Point of Contact, the Force of their Attraction would be infinitely
greater, than at any assignable Distance; yet it would not be infinitely greater
than the Force of Gravity, since any Body may be separated by an assignable
Force 96 SCHOL. III. Repulsion begins and goes on, where Attraction ends; and
they probably go on according to the same Law and Progression, but with
contrary Directions ibid. PROP. IV. The Force of Cohesion in the small
Particles of Matter, is in a compound Proportion, of the Quantity of their
cohering Surfaces, and the Quantity of their attractive Powers ibid. COROL.
Therefore the less the cohering Surfaces are, the less will be the Degree of
Cohesion, and the least of all will be in Spheres or Spheriods 97 PROP. V. The
Force of Attraction in small Particles increases, as the Size of the Particles
is diminished ibid. PROP. VI. The Gravities of Particles decrease as the Cubes
of their Diameters ibid. COROL. Hence, from the Smallness and Divisibility of
its Parts, Mercury is so easily raised; and Bodies may be suspended in Fluids
specifically lighter than themselves ibid. PROP. VII. If a Fluid attracts the
Parts of an immersed Body more strongly than they do one another, they will be
equally diffused through it 98 PROP. VIII. Elastic Particles suspended in a
Fluid after their Collision, will resile, and by their Actions and Reactions,
cause Fermentation and Effervescence ibid. PROP. IX. Unelastic Particles
suspended in a Fluid attracting each other, will sink and be precipitated; the
same will be produced by diminishing the Gravity of the Menstruum 98 PROP. X.
The Figures of the Particles of all unelastic Fluids must necessarily be
Spherical; and the Elements of all Solids must be of some of the regular
Solids, as Cubes, Triangles, Prisms, etc. 99 SCHOL. The Figure of the Particles
of elastic Fluids is of no Consideration, since their Elasticity depends only
on their repulsive Force ibid. PROP. XI. The Elasticity of solid Bodies is the
Effect of the attracting Force of their Particles ibid. PROP. XII. That Bodies
under a Rotation fly off in the Tangent, is the Effect of the general Law, by
which they continue in their State, whatever that be 100 PROP. XIII. The
Figures of the Particles, and their Actions on one another, arising from the
Principles of Attraction and Repulsion, together with the Motions impressed on
them by living and intelligent Agents, will probably account for the
Appearances of the material World, if adjusted according to their Laws ibid.
PROP. XIV. Air is a System of Particles endowed with a repulsive Force, which
being fixed in all animal, vegetable and mineral Substances, are by Fire,
Fermentation, Putrefaction, Dissolution, or any other intestine Action and
Reaction, set at Liberty, and compose our Atmosphere; and hence its
Compression, Weight, Elasticity and Density ibid. SCHOL. The Density of the Air
is proportionat to its Compression, and therefore its expansive Force must be
in the direct subtriplicat Ratio thereof 101 PROP. XV. Earth is a loose
Collection of the different elementary Particles of Matter, of all the three
Orders, thrown together without any regular Combination ibid. PROP. XVI. Water
is a Collection of the Solution of tasteless Salts, originally crystalliz'd,
but kept in Fusion by Heat; and different Salts are different Combinations of
these with the other Elements 102 PROP. XVII. Acids seem to be very attractive
Particles of plain Surfaces, and angular Points ibid. SCHOL. Possibly the
Figures of Acids may be triangular Prisms; for all Matter must be figured ibid.
PROP. XVIII. Heat is the brisk vibrating Action and Reaction of the repelling
Nitre of the Air, and the ethereal Fluid with an attractive acid Sulphur;
which Sulphur yields an inflammable Oil, an acid Salt, a fixed Earth, and a
little Metal 163 COROL. Hence the Affinity between Light and sulphurous
Bodies, and the true Nature of inflammable Spirits ibid. SCHOL. Since a
Thermometer in an exhausted Receiver will rise and fall in the same manner as
in the open Air, and since polished Bodies in the same, cling together as
strongly as in the Air; it seems to follow, that there is some subtle elastic
Fluid pervadeing all Bodies, to produce these Appearances 104 PROP. XIX. Light
seems to be the vibrating Particles of hot Bodies, driven out by the repelling
Force, with an immense Velocity; which is increased by the ethereal Fluid, and
the Attraction of Bodies ibid. SCHOL. I. Since Light is convertible into
Bodies, and Bodies into Light; it would seem, that Light is only the Particles
of a hot Body thrown off with an immense Velocity ibid. SCHOL. II. The Rays of
Light seem to consist of Particles of different Sizes, and different Degrees of
Refrangibility ibid. SCHOL. III. The Sun and fixed Stars are immense Globes of
Matter, saturated with the Particles of the second Order, or of Light ibid.
SCHOL. IV. It is not impossible this Earth, with all the Planets and Comets,
should be intended as temporary Prisons, and Places of Correction, for the
Trial, Expiation, or progressive Purification of the several Orders of lapsed,
sentient and intelligent Beings 106 PROP. XX. Flame is the sulphurous Smoke of
a hot Body 107 PROP. XXI. Bodies are Transparent, whose Pores are sufficiently
small and rectilinear ibid.
EXPERIMENTS.
PROP. I. Mercury consists of smaller Particles than any known Fluid. 2. The
Particles of Mercury, the smaller they are, the more perfect Spheres they are.
3. Mercury is the heaviest of all natural Fluids. 4. Mercurial Particles
attract some Bodies most, and fly from others the most 108 Philosophical
Corollaries. 1. Therefore the Particles of Mercury are most easily raised by
Heat. 2. Therefore they have the greatest Momentum. 3. Therefore they will
readily pass through all animal Substances, which are lax and porous 109
Medical Corollaries. 1. Therefore the Particles of Mercury are fittest to break
Viscosity. 2. Therefore they are the fittest Medicin to open the Obstructions
of the small Vessels. 3. Therefore they are fittest to cure Palsies. 4.
Therefore they are fittest to antidot the Scurvy. 5. Therefore they are the
best Antidot for the Gout. 6. Therefore they are the best Remedy for chronical
Distempers caused by Excesses. 7. Therefore the Particles of Mercury duly
prepared, are the most probable Mean to make the Circulation quite round and
entire through the whole System of the animal Tubes; that is, to thin the
Juices 110 Medical Cautions. Mercury, however prepared, will infallibly burst
those Vessels, whose Obstructions cannot be dissolved, and break those whose
Sides are very slender, or which are putrified; and therefore Mercury is a
divine Antidot, or real Poison, according as it is managed; neither it nor any
mineral Medicin being ever designed by the Creator to enter an animal Body, no
more than animal Food, in his first Intention, at least before the Lapse, and
perhaps not before the Deluge, the Minerals being probably then intended for
other Uses, and not being perhaps in the Form they are now, nor on the
mountainous Surfaces of the Earth, nor dissolved in Water, as we now find them
111 The Choice of mineral Medicines. The best Preparation of Mercury is that
wherein its Particles are most minutely divided and separated, and thereby
fitted to pervade the smallest Tubes ibid. That Preparation of Mercury is best,
where its Particles being minutely divided, the Mixture is made with that Body
of the most acknowledged specific Virtue against the Disease 112 Therefore the
Aqua Mercurialis is the best and most universal of all Deobstruents in very
weak Persons; the Mercurius Alcalisatus next; then the Cinnabar, Aethiops,
Quicksilver, purified with specific Extracts, etc. ibid. All mineral Medicines
ought to be infinitely divided before they are sent into an animal Body ibid.
Mercury, and the active Salts, are the very worst and most prejudicial
Preparations to animal Bodies, and are not to be used but in small Doses, and
in Cases that require Expedition 113 General medical Corollaries. As Water,
Blood-warm, is the best Diluent, so purified Quicksilver is the best
Deobstruent. But as Water alone may be too sluggish, so Mercury alone may be
too active and ponderous in delicat Constitutions; therefore the very best
Preparation is where Mercury, infinitely divided, is mixed with the specific
Vegetable or Mineral against a given Distemper ibid. Therefore a thin cool low
Diet of vegetable, or very tender and loose animal Substances, is the very best
Food for delicat and wasted Constitutions 114 A general medical Scholium. From
this System, or Philosophical Explication, of the Nature and Laws of the minute
Particles of Matter, it will follow, 1. That soft, mild, thin and cool Foods,
are fittest to carry on and continue animal Life and Functions. 2. That
Spirits, Salts, chemical Oils, and Medicines that have passed through the
Tortures of the Fire, are most pernicious to animal Bodies. 3. That Food of
Animals which live on Animals, are the worst kind of animal Food for human
Bodies. 4. That Mercury, duly prepared and combined with a specific
Alterative, is the best Deobstruent and Dissolvent. 5. That Milk and Vegetables
are the proper Food for young and diseased Animals, and tender Constitutions.
6. That Water Beverage is best for preserving the Faculties clear, the Spirits
free, and prolonging Life. 7. That, on the whole, Mercury, some-how prepared,
and Water, naturally or artificially impregnated, are the two Antidots provided
by Nature for animal Distempers in chronical Cases 116
AN ABSTRACT OF DISCOURSE IV.
PHILOSOPHICAL CONJECTURES on Spiritual Nature, the Human Spirit in particular.
THAT the natural Powers of all Spirits are these two, Understanding and
Willing, which suppose a third, viz. Living, as their Base 119 That all created
Spirits naturally and philosophically can be conceived only as infinitesimal
Miniatures, Sparkles, Emanations, or, if I durst use the Words, diminutive
analogous Particles of that infinitely perfect spiritual Being, who is so
entirely One, that He cannot have Parts; yet have these Miniatures of Him an
infinitesimal Portion of his spiritual Substance, endowed with a proportional
Share of his natural Attributes of Living, Understanding and Willing; and so
are therefore necessarily immortal, and cannot be annihilated 120 That these
Faculties or Powers are felt sensibly and perceptibly by duly cultivated
Spirits of all Orders, and follow by Analogy as to the Substance of the Soul,
and these Faculties, from the necessary Nature and Attributes of the Deity 121
That this Meaning is evident in Revelation, which says, Men are God's Images,
and they are there called Gods; that is, they were at first made infinitesimal
Divinities, endowed with his natural and moral Attributes, in their Order 122
That all Pagan and Christian Antiquity believed, that all created Spirits were
clothed with some material Vehicle, and that God alone was pure, immaterial,
infinite Spirit; and Revelation speaks of a spiritual, that is, of an infinitely
refined and sublimed Body 123 That neither material nor spiritual Substances
are knowable by us at present, but by their sensible Effects and Acting: But
that Matter and Spirit are contrary, though not contradictory, in their most
essential and distinguishing Qualities; Matter being divisible in infinitum,
and Spirit indivisible: But what infinite Divisibility, Rarity, Elasticity and
Velocity in the Particles of Matter, might at last effect on its Substance and
Qualities, to give Matter a Nature different from gross porous inert Bodies,
none but the Author of Matter and Spirit can tell or comprehend: But they will
eternally be even thus, like the Hyperbolic Curve and its Asymptot, probably
like parallel Right Lines 125 Living is probably actuating, governing and
moveing a divinely organized Vehicle, primitive, ethereal or planetary; and
wherever there is any Degree of Life, vegetative (or divinely organized Matter
only) sensative or rational, there of Neceslity must be a spiritual (so to
speak) Body, or an immaterial, immortal and progressive spiritual Substance,
actuating, governing and moveing a divinely organized Body of some Order or
Nature or another, or both united 126 That there may possibly be Orders, Ranks
and Species of animated Beings, with divinely organized Vehicles of all
Degrees, gradually rising, from the Coralline to the highest Seraphim; and an
Angel is only a spiritual Substance actuating a divinely organized Body, of an
Order and Purity a little higher than that of an unlapsed perfect human Being
127 That we plainly perceive how imperfect and unhappy Beings we are at
present, we of the human Race; yet cannot possibly think that we came thus out
of the Hands of our Creator; but must conclude we have lost our primitive
Creation State by some wilful Mismanagement of our own 128 That our primitive
State must necessarily have been, 1. That our organis'd Vehicle was entirely
supple and pliable to our Spirit; and, 2. That our Spirit was entirely pliable
to the Divine Spirit 129 That all created Spirits being naturally free, must be
necessarily fallible: That, on this Globe, there was never a thinking Being,
come to any Degree of Maturity, who found not himself, at one time or another,
miserable, and wished not to be otherwise; this State is called the Lapse 130
How this Lapse was brought about, is not explicitly revealed, and is not
knowable by mere Reason or Philosophy; we feel that it is, and that is all we
at first know certainly. GOD'S Design being to restore us, with the Consent of
our own Liberty, and the Harmony of his Attributes, discourages vain Curiosity
in Particulars; all that is revealed to us is general and indefinit; we feel
that we are imperfect and unhappy, and that is sufficient to begin the first
Steps of our Recovery into Order in Body and Soul; we are always certain in the
Knowledge of our Recovery, of the second Step when we have made the first, of
the third when we have made the second, and soon in infinitum; more previous
Knowledge would but perplex and confound us, and draw us out of the shortest
Road of Restoration 132 That it is not improbable, that the Lapse was brought
about by Steps and Degrees, that Way of Lapseing being most natural to finite
Creatures, and many of the several Orders of Beings might have been concerned
in it 133 That our Senses were given us to commerciat with material Objects,
these of our present System especially, or others we may pass into; in which
the Key and Logic of our Knowledge is Proportion. All we can possibly know of
spiritual Natures must be from Analogy, without Violence on our Liberty, which
make us mere Vegetables, and from comparing them with the Faculties and
Operations of our own Spirits; and Analogy, duly cultivated and cautiously
guarded in spiritual Nature, is answerable to Algebra, or Analyticks in
Mathematics 135 That since God is, spiritual Nature and material Nature is and
exists: All GOD's Words and Works must therefore necessarily have a literal or
material, spiritual and divine Meaning and Sense; the literal for Beginners,
the spiritual for the Advanced, and the divine for the Perfect. Perhaps it may
be thus in the Account of the Lapse, and all the Group of this Affair certainly
were literal, Paradise a Place of material Delight, the Tree of Life a Food to
perpetuat the then material Vehicle in Health and Liveliness; the Tree of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil, quite the contrary; the Serpent, the highest fallen
Angel. The spiritual Meaning may refer to the moral Powers of the Soul, as the
literal did to the bodily; the Tree of Life may refer to the Source of the
Divinity, the Father; the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, to the
God-Man Jesus Christ; the Serpent, the grand Deceiver; Paradise, the natural
Powers of the Soul, which were contracted and sopited by gross Matter, upon the
Lapse, after the moral Powers were defaced by Rebellion, Disorder, Selfishness,
and inordinat Love of the Creature 137 That by this Lapse, from the Principle
of Attraction established universally in the spiritual as well as material
World, the primitive ethereal Vehicle was gradually turned to a planetary one,
such as we now live in; and thereby the Activity, Energy, and Extension of the
natural Powers of the Soul were greatly confined and stunted, as to their
elicited Acts, though they could not be so as to their Fund, and potential
Nature; and now they must rise to Perfection in proportion only to the acquired
moral Powers, and by Labor and Culture, under the Economy of Jesus, and by
the Aid of supranatural Grace, be develop'd, extended and purified 139 That
perhaps all sentient and intelligent Beings, of all Ranks, must necessarily
pass through a State of Trial, Probation and Apprenticeship, before they can
be, even by Omnipotence, confirmed and eternized in Illability and
Impeccability, as a Potter vitrifies his Ware by Fire; or a Smith steels his
Iron. All that is necessary or proper for us to know, or be certain of, in our
present State, is, that we are lapsed Probationers, and progressive toward
Perfection and Happiness; more precise Knowledge of our pre-existent or future
State might only retard our Progress 143 Whether the ruinous Planet we now
inhabit, was the primitive Seat of unlapsed human Spirits, and by their gradual
Lapse was insensibly turned into its present Condition, is impossible for us
now to determine. Paradise, as described by Moses, is now nowhere to be found;
and most Climats, on a Balance of Incommodities with Conveniences, are pretty
much upon an Equality to the Natives. We find Luxury destroys our planetary
Vehicles, and Pestilences infect the Atmosphere and the Earth, as well as its
Inbitants: But it is probable, the Divine Power might suspend or accelerat the
general Laws of Nature, to turn this Globe from its Paradisiacal to its present
State 145 An animal Body being a System only of mechanical Powers, composed of
fine elastic infinitesimal Lines, or Threads formed into various Webs or
Membranes, and they into Tubes or solid Bundles, are, by proper Liquors, kept
for a time in due Elasticity, having under them the primitive ethereal
Vehicle, which is the proper Covering of the Soul, and its immediate Instrument
between it and the planetary Plaistering, which, when broken, drops, and
perhaps they (Soul and ethereal Vehicle) pass into others, till its
progressive Purification be finished into Illability and Impeccability 147
Matter is capable only of Division, Figure, Motion and Situation, and is
passive and inert. Spirit is self-motive and selfactive, and must be the
Principle of Motion in Bodies, without which they would continue for ever
inert, but so far as their Principle of Attraction or Repulsion, produced
probably by some subtle universal Fluid, sets them into Action: But this Fluid
seems confined chiefly to inanimat Matter; and does nothing in particular or
eminently in proper animal Functions, but as the general Laws of Nature operate
and concur with all material Operations; and the Whole of animated Functions
seem to be directly and eminently transacted by the actuating immaterial
Principle on the divinely organized ethereal Vehicle, which communicats its
Energy to the planetary Plaistering. So that the material Spirit of Sir Isaac,
Hugens and Leibnitz's rapid Fluid, and even our common animal Spirits, seem to
be without any Use, but in inanimat Motions and Appearances: And perhaps animal
Motions and Functions may be better understood and explained, by supposing what
is Fact, that our Solids, the Nerves especially, (which are the more immediate
Instruments of animal Motions, and their Functions) are membraneous cellular
Tubuli, preserved in their proper Elasticity and Tone, by a milky Oil contained
in them; and are mechanically adjusted at first by the immediate Hand of the
Almighty, and fitted to convey, from the immaterial Spirit, a Beginning of
proper harmonious Vibrations and Oscillations (which may perhaps be promoted
and forwarded by the correspondent Undulations of an infinitely rare elastic
Fluid, disseminated through universal Space); which being sent, in a proper
Direction, by the appropriated Nerves, to the peculiar Muscles, and divinely
organized Instruments, conveys proper Action, Energy and Motion to them; and
Bodies, and their Effluvia, (so and so vibrating) may to the same membranous
Tubuli, communicate peculiar Vibrations, fitted to impress a Sensation of their
Presence, and of Bodies, and their Qualities, to the intelligent naturally
sagacious Spirit; so that the whole Work may be directly transacted between the
Spirit and outward Bodies, by the divine Mechanism of proper bodily Organs; and
the ethereal Fluid may be to animated Bodies, in their Motions and Functions,
not essential, but accidental or commodious, for a more convenient Propagation;
as Air is to Animals, or Water to the Fish 151 That Living, Activity or
Liberty, and Intelligence, in some Degree, and all their Modes, are necessary
to all animated Beings, of all Orders; and the Difference in the Individuals of
the same Order, depends on the Frame and Texture of their Vehicles in a great
measure; so that probably at first there might have been no Difference of
Sexes, that depending on a designed different Configuration of this planetary
Crusting. That some Power analogous to the original creative Attributes in the
Deity, arising from his infinite Self-activity, might be communicated to all
sentient and intelligent Beings, is not improbable. But how this infinitesimal
creative Power operated before the Lapse, is not known: Perhaps by an intense
Willing under the Influence of the Divine Spirit 153 It is highly probable,
from the Necessity of Suffering, in the present State, that all the sentient
and intelligent Beings, that shall ever live or appear on this Globe, were all
created at the same Instant, miscarried in their Probation, and were all at the
same time confined into infinitesimal Prisons of this ruinous Planet, in the
Miniature, Seeds, Ova, and Animalculs of the primitive Pairs, or Stock, to be
progressively propell'd into sensible Living on this Planet, all by general
analogous Laws, in their Order; and this progressive Propagation was kindly
designed, as a Mean of recovering their moral Powers, by the Benefits arising
from the Acquisition of Virtue and Wisdom in the Parents, though the contrary has
fallen out 156 There may be original Differences in the Spirits of the
Individuals of the same Order of Intelligences, some having one of the
essential and natural Attributes of the Spirit in a higher Extent than the
other, it may be sufficient to constitute the same Order, that their Aggregats
be equal: But the Perfection of the ethereal Vehicle, Culture, and the
Acquisition of the moral Attributes, makes the most signal Difference in this
State; as Air, Exercise and Diet improve the Health, so does Culture in the
Acquisition of the moral Powers of the Mind. The natural Powers are constant
and invariable, as to their Fund and Capacity; but are impeded from elicit Acts
by the Clumsiness and Want of due Culture of the animal and intellectual
material Organs 159 The Mainoeuvre of Providence in the Restoration seems to be
thus: The radical natural Powers being constant and invariable in their Fund
and Capacity, but the moral Powers being defaced by the Lapse; infinite
Goodness, ever acting by his own beneficent Nature, designing to recover these
moral Powers, tied down the Energy and Elicitation of the natural Powers, by
Ligatures of this ruinous Planet, at first into that of mere Living; and
included the whole Mass of lapsed human Intelligences, in the Loins of One, or
a Pair, who were to be the universal Parents, designing the self-active and
self-motive Principle in each should, under certain general Laws, break and
work off these Ligatures, in their several Orders; while they, by other general
Laws, relating to spiritual Nature, ( Prophecy, to wit, Miracles, Apostolic
Lawgivers, supernatural Influences and Graces, and at last by the overwhelming
Light and Love of the Messiah, his only begotten Son) should recover in them
the defaced moral Virtues 162 Hence it is evident, the first and initial Steps
of this Restoration must, in a great measure, depend on the Sanity of the
Adamical Machin; because, when our earthly Tabernacle is greatly disordered,
these elementary Steps in the Developement of the natural, and the Acquisition
of the moral Powers, cannot be so readily brought about, which depends greatly
on the Parentage; for the whole Aggregat of all that is connected with the
Parents, their Bodies, Humors, and material or spiritual Qualities, are
transfused and transubstantiated through the whole, and descend to Posterity
just as they possess them, and so the Children must fare accordingly 163 It may
happen, by Accident, by Disease, by universal Causes, that one Set of nervous
Glands in the Brain, one Set of membranous Tubuli (the material Organs of
Cogitation) may be more spoiled, broken, and worn out in some than the others,
both in Parents and Children; which will make a great Difference in the elicit
Acts of the natural Powers, and which will make the Difference between a
Lawgiver, a Philosopher, a Hero, and an Artisan. But this whole Affair is more
immediately under God's special and particular moral Government of his World;
though perhaps by general Laws, only occasionally, and on great and worthy
Motives, suspended 165 That at present, the Perfection of intellectual
Faculties depends, in a great measure, on the Sanity of the bodily Machin,
seems evident, because, 1. The Adamical Machin was intended only to suspend the
elicit Acts of the natural Powers in their most eminent Degree, to give us
Fredom, by developeing and throwing off their Incrustation, to acquire the
moral Powers. 2. By Experience we find, that in Disorders and Distempers of the
Body, the intellectual Operations are either inconstantly, weakly, or
unsteadily performed. 3. It is Fact, that in seminal Miniatures, in Embryo, and
Childhood, and for a long time, the Soul does nothing but perform the living
and animal Functions. 4. We find, that Luxury, Leachery, Laziness, strong
Passions, inclement Air, Bruises and Accidents, that injure the Body, hurt and
destroy the free and easy Exercise of these Faculties, in the Acquisition of
Science and Virtue. 5. We actually see, that as the Body inlarges, and the
Organs of the Senses strengthen, the intellectual Faculties and their elicit
Acts grow stronger. 6. All intellectual as well as vital Operations, are
performed by the Intermediation of modulated and harmonious Vibrations on
membranous Tubuli, (the Nerves) and they absolutely depend on the State of the
Body. 7. As Luxury, Leachery, and Laziness, will spoil these intellectual
Operations; so, on the other hand, a low cool Diet, Air and Exercise, proper
Evacuation, and the mild ponderous Medicines, will cure and mend them, and bring
them often to the same, sometimes to a better State than they were before 169
From hence it is evident, that the whole Work of our Restoration, in some
measure, depends on ourselves, in Cooperation with the Divine Assistance,
under his Providence, and the Economy of Jesus; the whole Creation, from inert
Matter, up to the highest Cherubim, being, as it were, an inverted Cone rising
from a Point, and made of infinitesimal Surfaces, as it were, contitinually
enlarging, (which makes their Order) being all Pictures, less or greater, of
the radical or natural Attributes of their Creator; but Men having defaced
their moral Attributes, are imprisoned in Gaols of this ruinous Planet, that by
a progressive Expiation, Purification, and Labor, they may recover these, and
so become again similar to their Original, in their moral as well as natural
Powers, and so become again infinitesimal Divinities, in their Order, and
perpetually happy 173 The human Soul has innate, constantly and invariably in
it, all the natural Powers it was first created with, even now in its lapsed
State, at least in its Fund, Capacity, and Essence; only they are suspended,
chained down, and concentred, as to its elicit Acts, by the Adamical
Tabernacle, like a Felon in a Dungeon, and will drop at last; and so perhaps
passing through various planetary Gaols, will progressively recover the Use of
their natural Powers, as they acquire the moral ones 175 From whence it will
follow, that the Culture of the natural Powers, the Acquisition of Sciences,
and all intellectual Exercises, are but Remembrance, cutting off Obstacles, and
removeing Impediments, opening Passages, and widening Apertures, through this
Adamical Prison, which is the most readily and effectually brought about by
endeavoring to acquire the moral Powers 176 That Memory is but an Affection of
the Understanding and Will, fixing the Attention and Reflection, like seeing in
the Eye by the Effort of the Will. The Understanding is passive and inert, as
every material Organ is. It is the Will that is the ruling and commanding
Faculty, and Sovereign in the Soul. The Will is infinite and unlimited, and may
act in Contradiction and Contrariety to the Understanding; is so absolutely
unlimited, infinite and unconfined, that it extends to all Distances, without
the Intermediation of Body. Being a self-motive and self-active Principle, it
is no less real in its Operations, though it do not always effect its Volitions.
In it lies the true and essential natural miniature Image of the Deity 178 Some
have thought, the Will of all free Agents so infinitely free in its own Nature,
as it was derived from the creative Source of Liberty and Power the Deity, that
He left it free, hid and imperceptible directly from his own Penetration,
Espial and Influence; for so much they think a selfmotive Power necessarily
implies, though but an infinitesimal one; and that even Omniscience knew not that
the Angels had lapsed, till the Rebellion actually happened; but had, from all
Eternity, provided for the Possibility of such an Event: That to ennoble his
Creatures, and make them fit to commerciat with Himself, He might suspend his
Omniscience to magnify his Omnipotence; and might designedly and arbitrarily
not foresee (though He certainly always might) the contingent and natural Actions
of his intelligent Creatures, to make them more worthy of Him. But this bold
and unwarranted Supposition, though it might solve some Difficulties about the
Lapse, about Prescience and Predestination, and in the Economy of Revelation
and the Restoration, is perhaps inconsistent with the Perfection of the Divine
Nature; and since infinite Penetration and Sagacity will equally answer the same
Difficulties, and is less derogatory from infinite Perfection, the former
Supposition is untenable, I think 182 As the trine Dimensions of Matter and
Space, and their necessarily being neither fewer nor more, give us, in
unanimated Nature, a lively Picture of the Trinity in Unity, in the Divine
Nature; so the three fundamental natural and essential Powers of all
intelligent Creatures, carry up the analogical Picture higher; which perhaps
passes through all the celestial Hierarchy, and all intelligent Nature, up to
their Source the Creator, who is the last and highest Term of this Climax; as
He is, so we are, in our spiritual Nature, with the uncomprehensible Difference
there is between the lowest Finite and absolute Infinitude. As in our Nature
there is Living, Understanding and Willing; so in his there is Self-existence,
Omniscience and Omnipotence; or, analogous to, in the Revelation Language,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. But as Living, Understanding and Willing, in us
and all Creatures, are but, as it were, Modalities, Qualities, Faculties and
Powers; in the Divine Nature, on the contrary, they must be Realities,
Subsistences and Beings; because every essential and radical Attribute in God
must be actually God, because of his infinite Simplicity and Perfection. But
this Representation of the Divine Nature is here only alleged as an Allusion
and analogous Picture, to take off the Difficulties in this inexplicable
Mystery; and, in some Degree, to reconcile it to modest guarded Philosophers,
of honest Hearts, who are conscious of their own low Rank in the Scale of
Intelligence. The Arian and Sabellian Heresies being the two Extremes, are yet
widely different in their Influence on Christian Perfection: The first
dwindling the Merit, Dignity, Example and Satisfaction of the Savior of Men,
into a mean low human Transaction; the second being only too philosophically
nice and punctilous about the Unity of the Divine Nature; which though, I think,
this emblematical miniature Representation of it, actually existent in all
intellectual Nature, fairly reconciles, and makes as clear as our present State
will admit 184 The immaterial Soul and ethereal Vehicle, sopited in a State of
mere vegetable Life, for perhaps many Ages, in the seminal Animalcul, by this
planetary Incrustation; in time appears on this Globe, becomes sensitive, feels
Pain and Misery; then begins Instinct and Remembrance from precedent Suffering,
and stores the Mind with Ideas or Pictures of absent Actions and Things, and on
these the Understanding operats to produce a Facility and Habit of Reasoning;
as the material Organs and Instruments of these Operations develope and
strengthen, Reflection and Remembrance of present or past Suffering awakens
Conscience (an innate Faculty of the Soul); this Faculty, as the Ideas
multiply, Sensations become more intense, Reflection more strong and frequent,
and the intellectual Organs are disposed, becomes more anxious and vehement;
and providential disposing Accidents, or natural Occurrences, incline us to
provide for a durable future Happiness, at least when this Adamical Tabernacle
shall crumble into Dust; and then perhaps we come to a State to say in earnest,
Lord, what shall I do to be saved? which seems to be the precise Condition
infinite Love and Goodness intends by this wonderful Economy to bring us into
190
AN ABSTRACT OF DISCOURSE V.
On NATURAL ANALOGY, its Laws, and some of its Consequences.
THINGS may differ in Degree as well as in Kind 193 DEF. 1. Difference in
Degrees is where things having their essential Qualities the same, admit in
these Qualities a More and a Less ibid. DEF. 2. Difference in Kind, is where
some of the essential Qualities of things compared are common, some are
different ibid. DEF. 3. By Ratio, or Relation, is meant the Reference or
Connection any two things compared have with one another, whose essential
Qualities common, admit of a More or Less ibid. DEF. 4. Similarity is where
there is an Equality or Sameness of Relations: In the Substance and essential
Qualities of things compared, differing only by a More or a Less: In abstracted
and simple Ideas, this Sameness is commonly called Similitude of Ratio's: In
Things, Substances, or Aggregats of Qualities, it may be called Similarity of
Relations 194 DEF. 5. Things, Substances, and Qualities, are meant to be
progressive, which are constantly increasing or decreasing similarly 195 SCHOL.
Space, Time, Motion, and Velocity, seem to be no Realities, or external Things,
but mere Modifications, different Situations and Circumstances of Bodies or
Matter; and are only our Manner of conceiveing or considering these. A
particular Space, or the Locality of a particular Body, seems to be the
Mathematical Term, or the Limits of the Three Dimensions of a Body, (as a Point
is of a Line) or a Body in the Instant of its Evanishing or Generating. And
universal Space is just such an Idea as infinite Number, or an infinitely great
Body, or a mere Ens Rationis. And to show that they are all but abstracted
Ideas, and our partial Manner of conceiveing Things, from our limited Capacity;
if we perform actually the Arithmetical Operations, as the Expression points
them out, on proper infinite Series's, and throw away all the lesser Quantities,
we shall come to all the Mysteries in Fluxions and Differentials, Ratio's, and
Series, commonly known, which are acknowledged to be only abstracted Ideas, and
technical Arts, to supply the Defects of our Faculties, which are not
intuitive, but progressive; they admit of Degrees, or a More and Less, only as
belonging to and being connected with Body; viz. Space, Time, Motion, and
Velocity, are Relations or Modifications only of Body or Matter 196 DEF. 6.
Relative Infinite, is such as is supposed to increase or decrease perpetually,
yet by no finite Power can be brought to, and no finite Capacity can assign or
conceive its limiting Terms, viz. the Greatest or the Least 197 DEF. 7.
Absolute Infinitude is the sole Attribute of the Deity, who is infinitely
infinite in all Perfections and Realities ibid. DEF. 8. Things only are
contradictory, which totally destroy one another, destroy their Subsistence,
Substance, and Qualities ibid. SCHOL. It is very doubtful, nay, I think,
impossible, there can subsist a full Contradiction among created Things,
Substances, or Qualities, since they must all be Effluxes of the Deity, in whom
there can subsist no Contradiction. For in created Things, to become totally
contradictory, there must be an equal Action and Reaction, to have produced it;
but in all Creatures there seems to be a Subsistence and Reality, which cannot
be totally destroyed by one another, but by a Power and Energy equal to that by
which they were created, and infinite Perfection cannot be contrary to itself.
There may therefore be a Contrariety among created Substances and Qualities,
but not a full Contradiction, or total Annihilation of their Subsistence,
Substance, and all their Qualities. For even between material and spiritual
Substances, there will remain still, Substance, Subsistence, a Relation, an
Alliance, a Power of Expansion and Remission, both of their Substance and
Qualities, which will make them alliable, and, as the Chemists speak, will make
them capable of an Amalgama, (like Quicksilver with Lead) though they will
eternally act by Contrariety on one another's Substances and Qualities, and
ever counteract one another 200 DEF. 9. Analogy, is a Similarity in Substances
and essential Qualities, differing only by a More or a Less ibid. SCHOL.
Analogy is of two kinds, perfect and complete, and imperfect and incomplete
ibid. DEF. 10. Perfect Analogy is where there is a total Similarity of
Substances, and essential Qualities, differing only in Degrees ibid. SCHOL.
There are, I think, Substances, as well as Things and Qualities, of a middle
Nature, between the Extremes, in every created Reality; and this seems to be
necessary, from the Infinitude of the Divine Nature, as well as from the Nature
of Finitude and Creature, which must be various and gradual. And as between any
two given Terms, there are an Infinity of mean Proportionals assignable; and
between an infinitely small, and an infinitely great part of the Diameter of an
infinite Circle, there is the Perpendicular neither infinitely small nor great;
so there must be material and spiritual Substances, of all Degrees of
Sublimity, Purity, and Perfection, which, though similar, may differ in Degrees
201 COROL. Hence it may be possible, there may exist material Substances,
continually approaching to the Nature and Qualities of spiritual Substances,
which yet they can never arrive at, like the Asymptots of an Hyperbola 202
COROL. 2. Hence, there may possibly be material Fluids, so infinitely rare,
spiritual, and elastic, that they may permit gross, porous, planetary Bodies,
with only an infinitely little Resistance, though that Resistance may be still
somewhat, and but as the Sun diminishes only infinitely little continually, in
the Emission of her Light; neither the spiritual Fluid, nor the Sun, can be
designed to last, in their present Condition, a Duration equal to GOD's
Eternity 203 DEF. 1. Complex Analogy is where there is only a Similarity
between a certain Number of essential Qualities, common to the Things compared,
which differ in Degrees; but are diversified in other Qualities less essential
ibid.
PROPOSITION.
All Creation, the whole System of the Universe, with all the particular
Systems in Nature, are or can be nothing, but the supreme Being and his
Attributes, transubstantiated into Being and Perceptibility; but the Cause will
be always different from the Effect, the Artificer from the Work. This may be
demonstrated a priori, from the Nature and Attributes of the first Cause; but
to illustrate it a posteriori, some Instances may be proper 204. 1. In the
vegetable World, to explain their Growth and Multiplication, the infinitely rare
elastic material Fluid mentioned, judiciously applied, will be sufficient, as
also in the Vegetation and Growth of Minerals 205. 2. The totally inanimat
Creation, especially our now secondary Elements of Air, Water, Light, Salts,
and Mercury, in the peculiar Fitness of the Size, Figure, Law of Attraction and
Gravity, show the infinite Wisdom of their Contriver; for had they not been
figured, so as they are now in Nature, to fit the Tubes of Vegetables, and to
combine them into their now integral Parts, they could not have been proper
Materials for the Accretion of these Vegetables; and if they had not been so
combined and molded in the Vegetables, there had been no proper Food for
Animals 206 The Difference between Vegetables and Animals lies in this, that
for the Actuation, Growth and Multiplication of the first, there neither is,
nor is wanted any other Power or Energy than what an infinitely rare and elastic
material Fluid produces on a divinely organis'd material Machin; but in the
latter, there is a self-motive and self-active spiritual Substance actuating
and governing all their Functions, of some Order or Degree, even in the lowest
Brute and Insect 208. 4. The human Powers, their Degree, Order, and the Nature
of their primitive ethereal Vehicle, with its now Plaistering, have been
sufficiently explained 209. 5. The Angelic Hierarchies must be infinite in their
Number, rising in a harmonious Progression and Variety, whose Seats may
possibly be the Fixed Stars, and their analogous planetary ethereal Systems and
Apparatus; and these must be infinite in Number likewise, to preserve the
Equilibrium in universal Space, and their original Distances from each other;
they must have one generical Nature, which must be that of the radical
Attributes of the Deity, Living, Understanding and Willing; their specific
Differences may consist in Light and Love, that some are more eminently
luminous, others more ardently loving; and this Difference seems to take Place
even on this ruinous Planet, in the different Complexions and Talents of Mind
in the different Orders of Men, which can only account for the odd Diversity in
the Children of the same Parents, under the same Education and Example 213 The
Fixed Stars, which must be infinite in Number, seem to be the material Mansions
of unlapsed, tried and purified angelical Hierarchies, and of restored,
sentient and intelligent lapsed Creatures. God's Throne, his Shechina, is
represented as above: Elijah went upwards, and Christ ascended. Bodies of all
Orders, or different Purity, must have an ubi, a local Situation, and a
parmanent Mansion, at last: These Fixed Stars, and their planetary Apparatus,
may be the Seats of the Unlapsed and Restored, and their ethereal Vehicles may
be of the same Matter with their Mansions; and the Matter of these luminous and
glorious Seats, and the Vehicles made of them, may be eternis'd by harmonious
Vibrations, and a perpetual Flux and Reflux of their Rays 216 GOD being the
Creator of all sentient and intelligent Beings, the efficient Cause, and Object
of perfect Felicity, it is a manifest Contradiction he should creat any such
without impressing in the very Essence of their Nature an ardent and insatiable
Tendency and Ardor after Reunion with him; and accordingly the Desire of
Happiness in all sentient and intelligent Beings is invariable and
unextinguishable, as we see, however they may mistake the End or Means, by
being labile, and placeing it in spurious Selfishness, and inordinat Love of
the Creatures; and in the Distinction and Contrariety between this innate Bias
and that adventitious one, does the Essence of Misery and Hell, in all future
States, consist; but this last Bias being acquired only, and not innate and
essential, the Love, Merits and Satisfaction of the Son of God, were contrived
from all Eternity, to melt down and efface 219 Is it not highly probable that
the System of Saturn, the Planets and their Satellits, may be the local Prisons
and Dungeons, or Correction-houses, of the several Orders of lapsed
probationary and progressive sentient and intelligent Beings? They differ
vastly in their Accommodations; they seem to be under some penitential
Discipline from many obvious Imperfections and Oddities not easily otherwise
accountable, or reconcilable to the Simplicity, Beauty, Harmony and regular
Order of all the Works of an infinitely perfect and powerful Being; but, with
infinite Propriety and Wisdom, seem fitted for the Design of Penitence,
Correction, and initial Purity and Perfection 220 The Comets cannot possibly be
the Seats of the Blessed; they are too many to supply only our Decrease of
Water; their Alternations of extreme Heat and Cold, Light and Darkness, are too
violent for any animated Vehicle in a State of Happiness: They seem more
probably to be the Habitations of animated Beings under the Expectation of the
last Sentence, or to be the Condemned Holds of GOD's Kingdom 222 The next
immediate Mansions to this, or the several Stations and Mansions designed for
the respective Purification of Soul and Body of lapsed, sentient and
intelligent Beings, and all the several Steps, Stations or Mansions, in all
Probability have a gradual Resemblance or Analogy to one another and to this
State here, and this Planet we now inhabit as the first or initial Term upwards
or downwards respectively; in those upwards all the Beauties, Comforts and pure
Delights here increasing similarly in Degree, without their Deformity, Miseries
or Pains; in those downwards all the contrary: This Climax seems naturally to
flow from the Simplicity and Immutability of the Divine Nature by Analogy, and
is conform to Revelation. All Bodies or Vehicles, planetary and ethereal, must
have an ubi, and a fixed Mansion at least for a Time; and all sentient and
intelligent Beings must have a Polity, Order and Laws, be under a Government
and Subordination; else it would not be a happy State, but consummat Misery.
GOD is a God of Order, and all his Works are performed with Order, Number,
Weight and Measure, and must have all a mutual Analogy, or as near a
Resemblance to one another, as the Nature of Things will admit 125 Analogy does
not (at least always directly and infallibly) demonstrat the real Existence and
necessary Production of Things ad extra; but it strongly illustrats, explains,
and makes them consistent with and consonant to the Things that we know
already, see and feel to exist; it makes them different Links only of the same
Chain, of Effects, and similar Terms of the same Progression, removes
Difficulties, and makes Things rational and fit Objects for a rational supreme
Cause to work by; and this is the solid Foundation of all true Philosophy,
which can only gather Causes and general Laws by Induction from repeated single
Experiments, and is as high an Evidence as the Nature of Finitude and our Rank
of Intelligence will admit in imperceptible Things; and when confirmed by
Revelation, rises to the Evidence of a Demonstration in the strictest Sense 127
We may err and blunder in it, as we may in Algebra and Geometry; but often our
Errors in the last come but from Want of Culture, Precipitation, or a wrong
Head only; but in the Analogy that leads us to the Knowledge of the Divine
Purity and Nature, and the Necessity of our own Purification and Perfection for
invisible States, and the Nature of Spirits, our Blunders are often owing to a
wrong Heart, Licentiousness, Selfishness, and Independency. If we went on in
natural Analogy as we do in natural Philosophy and Geometry, by the simplest,
plainest and most obvious Cases, first collected by Induction, laid them up as
a Store to proceed on to the higher Terms of the analogical Progression, and
with Attention and Humility went on, from inanimated Matter, and its Law^ to
Vegetation, Animation, Spiritual Being, up to the supreme Cause; perhaps great
Proficience might be made in time by such a Method. Analogy is the only Mean of
Knowledge, that can secure Liberty in lapsed Intelligences. I will illustrate
my Meaning by an Example in the System of Saturn 229 1. GOD bringing Creatures
into Existence, must have made them after the most perfect Pattern, and
therefore stamped them with his own Image, and so they must bear a Resemblance
to him, and to one another, which is Analogy. 2. The Number of Qualities added
to Existence, together with the Degrees of these Qualities, determine their
Order. 3. The material World is a Transcript of the spiritual, and there is a
more immediate Relation between each material System, and the Intelligences to
which it belongs; and should they lapse and fall into Disorder, their Mansion
would make a similar Change. 4. There are many Evidences of this Analogy
between the material and spiritual Systems: The Sun is placed in the Center of
our System, the material Image of the Deity; the Planets revolve about him, in
different Times and Periods, to represent the several Orders of lapsed
Intelligences; these Planets have no Light in themselves, it is all derived by
Reflection from him. 5. Heat, Light, and their Consequence Attraction, are his
chief Properties, and by this Attraction the Planets are kept in their Orbits,
which strongly pictures out the Love of God, continually soliciting all
Intelligences to a nearer Approach to him. 6. The Light of the Sun is diffused
through the whole System, representing that Light which enlightens every Man
that comes into the World, an Emblem of him who came forth from the Father of
Lights God-Man. 7. The Sun's Light is always accompanied with Heat, which
represents the Holy Spirit the Principle of spiritual Life. 8. The various
Magnitudes, their Distances from the Sun, with the periodical Times of the
Revolutions of the Planets, will express the different Degrees of the Lapse,
and the Times allotted for their first Trials and Probation. The Comets by
their long elliptical Orbits are thrown off to the greatest Distance, and again
drawn back to the nearest Approach to the Sun, to represent the Extremes of
Love and Punishment to the same Intelligences, in order to purify them. 9. The
Planets are acted upon by two different Forces, Attraction and the projectile
Force, which are contrary to one another. The projectile Force makes the Planet
recede perpetually from the Sun, while the Force of Attraction prevents this
Effect; the projectile Force belongs to the Planet, the attractive to the Sun.
How wonderfully does all this Economy proclaim and speak in a Language truly
natural, and proper to the Majesty and Wisdom of the Deity, the Nature of the
Lapse, the Action of Selfishness, and inordinat Love of Creatures, and the
Force of the Divine Love in the Economy of Jesus! For it is supposed by the
best Phi^losophers, that the solar Attraction will at last prevail over the
projectile Force, and thereby both Planets and Comets will be swallowed up and
transformed into the Substance of the Sun.
FINIS.
MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS ON, AND EXPLICATIONS OF, THE Preceding DISCOURSES.
. 1. THERE seems to be something solid, in one Observation Leibnitz makes, viz.
the Mark or Criterion, between the Works and Operations of Nature, or the GOD
of Nature; and the Works of Art, or of finite Power and Wisdom, viz. That GOD,
or Nature, works always by Organs infinite in Number, or in a perpetual
convergent Progression of Organs or Means toward some one or many wise Ends,
or Art, by Organs finite in Number, or numerable (by Organs; Creature, Man is
always meant a separable distinct Part of a Machin). For Example; we may be
able to reckon the Wheels, Springs, Pullies, Chains, etc. of any Watch or
Clock, or any Machin, how complicated soever, made by Art: But who can reckon
the Fibers, Tubes, Membranes, Valves, Inosculations, Ligatures, Degrees of
Curvature, in the Tubes, etc. of a Pile of Grass, or of a Feather of a Bird?
The further we go by our Senses, assisted even by the most perfect Art, their
Number multiplies on us; but then, if we could descend into the Figure, Number,
and Law of Cohesion of their component Particles, we should be entirely lost,
and all our Art or Management would leave us in thick Darkness, and utter
Confusion. In the Works of the GOD of Nature, there is no Maximum or Minimum
assignable, or conceiveable by us. Sir Isaac Newton has demonstrated the
infinite Tenuity of the Particles of Light; and the progressive Analogy of
Nature shows it is possible, that there may be Fluids as much more rare, and of
as much lesser Particles, as those of Sand are bigger than those of Light.
Leuvenhoeck's Discoveries of the Minuteness of some Animalculs, and of some
Tubes of Animals, are scarce credible by any one who has not seen some of them,
as I have. The ingenious Dr. Porterfeild has demonstrated the extreme Tenuity
of even an organized and compounded nervous Fiber; and there is no Reason from
the Nature of Matter, from the Laws of Mechanism, or from the Divine
Attributes, to stop there; we may descend still lower, or higher in infinitum,
and be warranted by Reason and Geometry. One great Fault in natural
Philosophers has been, that they have rejected every Account, as incredible,
imaginary, and fictitious, which supposed Fluids extremely or infinitely rare,
rapid, and elastic, as is that of Huygens's, Leibnitz, and Sir Isaac Newton's;
and yet some such there must infallibly exist in Nature, as the Phenomenon
show: For if the natural Motions on our Earth, in Bodies, are performed by Air,
Water, and Heat, since we know sensibly, these are Fluids of a finite and
pretty near determinable Size, Figure, and Degree of Gravity in their
Particles, the Analogy of Nature will make it as evident, that the other less
known, secret, subtle, and unaccountable Appearances may be performed by some
other properly conditioned Fluid, (I mean only in the Appearances of the
material World) I say, as certainly, as if the first Terms of a Series x + x2 +
x3 + x4, etc. were given, I should certainly conclude the 10th, 11th and 12th
Terms of such a Series were x10 + x11 + x12.

. 2. THE Threads, (the last and the least) Fibers, or linear Filaments of all
vegetable and animal Substances, are certainly infinitely small, elastic and
ductile; in separateing and anatomiseing them, we can never come to an End; and
fine Microscopes will show, that even the very least our Senses can perceive,
or our Art divide, are still Twists or Tubuli, and compounded of an infinite
Number of lesser and lesser Threads. They are infinitely elastic, for we find no
Limits in their Elasticity; the smaller and finer they are, we find them
growing still more elastic in the same Proportion; and here also the
Progression is without Stop or Limit. Elasticity depending on the Degree of
Attraction, in the component Particles, the Elasticity can never be stopped, till
we arrive at Particles infinitely hard, indivisible, and imporose, which no
finite Power can produce, and no finite Intelligence conceive; and even in
such, there would be an infinitely small Renisus, or Reaction of their Particles
when compressed; so that all Fluids of whatever Nature, and of whatever Degree
of Rarity, must have some Degree of Elasticity or Reaction. Of such Threads,
the Membranes, and of these Membranes the Tubes, and Vessels of all vegetable
and animal Substances, seem composed. I say, not mechanically, and according to
the Laws of Nature, that we see now they are governed by, and accounted from,
but supra-mechanically composed, and by the immediate Hand and Power, or
Influence, of an infinitely wise and powerful First Cause. Of these again, I
say, are the Tubuli, the Coats of the Pipes, and all the other vascular
Apparatus, in fewer or more Pipes, according to their Use and Necessity,
composed. The Fluids are only designed to keep them in a proper Degree of
Moisture and Glibness, to continue their necessary Tone, and due Degree of
Elasticity. All the pleasant, easy, and healthful Sensations of Life, depend
chiefly on these Fluids. Little can be effected by Art or Medicin, on the
Solids, and their linear Fibers: A temporary Constriction only, a transient
winding up, a Fit of tolerable Health, and Flow of Spirits, may be gained by
astringent cordial Medicines; but it is Regimen alone, by rendering the Fluids
sweet, soft, cool and balsamic, that enable the Solids to play, according to
their innate Powers, that can give dureable and uniform good Health, and keep
these Solids as they were at first formed, in a proper Tone, Glibness, and
Elasticity.

. 3. WE are not to conceive, as if the Author of Nature created Things in the
Order, and in the Manner we can only now apprehend or explain them: They were,
in Him, but one single Act of his Omnipotence and Omniscience; for us, to
understand them in any tolerable manner, if at all we can, we must divide them
into different Parts and Parcels, and form an Idea of them by different Acts of
our Imagination. For Example: Suppose Matter divided into solid, imporose,
infinitely little Cubes, triangular equilateral Prisms and Spheres, harmoniously
ranged and united at first, by some Law of Attraction, and framed by a Divine
Mechanism, into organical Bodies, some-how analogous and similar to those,
which sentient and intelligent Beings are now clothed with (with this only
Difference, that besides their being now cased over with the gross porous
Matter, of this ruinous Planet, several additional temporary Organs, to fit
them for their changeing Situations, may be added, which in other Situations
may drop off, and dry away; as we see in the Placenta and umbilical Vessels of
the Foetus, and the different temporary Apparatus of the Silkworm, and other
Insects); into which the First Cause inspired an infinitesimal Sparkle, and
Miniature of his own Substance, and natural and moral Attributes, to actuate
and govern this Microcosm, in the same analogous, but in an infinitely lower
manner, as He presides over and actuates the Universe. This ethereal Body,
being then supple and pliable to the actuating spiritual Substance, as it was
to the Divine Influence; but being free and fallible, innumerable Multitudes of
them, by spurious Self-love, and inordinat Love of the Creatures, and created
Pleasures, actually lapsed, fell into Rebellion and Disorder, and so brought on
the Necessity of this present State, and the gross penitential Appearances of
this ruinous Planet we now inhabit.

4. BODY and Spirit, or material and spiritual Substances, will eternally be
disparata, if not contradictory, yet entirely dissimilar and contrary, and at
an infinite Distance, in their Natures and Substances. Body will be eternally
passive and inert, Spirit eternally self-active and self-moveing, or endowed
with an internal Principle of acting on, or moveing Matter; all their Relation
or Reference one toward another, can only be known by Analogy; and yet not
being contradictory, they might possibly be conceived of the Nature of
Hyperbola's, with their Assymptots: For though the Passivity of Body be in
Proportion to its Density, yet since Body cannot be actually infinite in its
Quantity or Extent, its Passivity or Inertia cannot be infinite, but lessens as
its Density does; but still, if its Density was supposed even infinitely small,
that will not make it self-active; it must actually become Spirit, and pass
through that Term Not-matter in its Progression, before it can arrive at
Self-activity, and then acquire the contrary Qualities, as the Series + 4 + 3 +
2 + 1 + 0 - 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 does; and nothing less than infinite Power can reduce
it to that State; that is, it must be actually brought to be Not-matter, or an
immaterial Substance, before it can become active or spiritual Substance; and
so is, as it were, in the State of parallel Lines, and not of an Hyperbola with
its Assymptot. But still there is an Analogy between their Substances, such an
one tho's as is between finite and relative infinite, or between the least and
greatest Term of an infinite convergent Series.

5. THE Persians, of all the Ancients, seem to have had the least intolerable
Notion, Idea, or analogical Picture on their Imaginations of spiritual Nature,
in conceiving it like Light or Fire. If we suppose an indivisible, infinitely
rare Substance, and endow it with infinite Elasticity and Energy, with an
internal Principle of Self-activity, or of Self-mobility, we have the essential
Attribute of spiritual Substance; all its other Qualities will be as
Modifications, flowing from that Root; for then Understanding or Conception
will become only analogous to an intimat Union, Contact and Presence to every
individual Atom or component Particle as it were, of the Object conceived or
understood. Reasoning will be a progressive Performance of this intellectual
Operation, and compareing the analogous Parts or component Particles to one
another: Love or Desire will be a continued Union or Contact with the Object;
and so of the other Modifications of this internal Principle of Self-action in
an infinitely rare and indivisible sentient or intelligent Substance: Fire or
Light will then be the most luminous Resemblance or analogical Picture of
spiritual Substance and Qualities; especially if we take it as it is, in its
uncreated Source, the Divine Nature, for an infinitely pure, perfect, simple and
active, living and intelligent Substance, then it will become the best
analogical Resemblance of the Divine Substance (however faulty and deficient)
we can frame, now as at present we are: And small Lamps, Globes, or Sparkles of
Light or Fire, kindled up, voluntarily emitted, or flowing, from this infinite
Globe of Light and Love, will best represent particular spiritual Natures,
whose Rays, though emitted with a relatively infinite Velocity, will weaken, and
terminat in thicker and thicker Darkness, Shade, or Want of Fire and Light,
which will best represent to us, and furnish out the Idea of Body, but still an
imperfect one, Darkness being only a Negation of Light: But as the Rays of
Millions of different Flambeaux may pass really, though material, through the Eye
of a Needle, without Resistance or Interfereing; so spiritual Substances, by a
proper Penetration, may conceive and comprehend, according to their Capacity
and Power, their proper Objects; and in this analogical Sense it may be
understood, that universal Nature, or the created Universe, may represent GOD's
Body, or his Sensorium, and he may be called the Soul of the Universe, as the
Planets in our System may be termed the Body, the Tabernacle and organical
Machin of the Sun; in all which though there will be eternal Impropriety and
Disparity: For the one is the Cause, the other the Effect only; the One is the
Artificer, the other the Work; the one is a living, spiritual Substance, the
other dead Matter; the one is self-originated, and necessarily existent, the
other is created, derived and dependent; the one is the first and least Term,
the other, as it were, the greatest, and last Term, of an infinite divergeing
Series, but at an infinitely infinite Distance. This is as far, it would seem, as
our active Powers can go, in their present State, by themselves, unless it be
communicated and impressed by the Source from above, by direct Sensation and
Feeling on the Spirit.

6. As the self-motive, self-active Power in spiritual Substance is the Source
of Intelligence, by its intimat Penetration, Union, and Presence with the whole
internal Substance of its comprehended Object; so it is the sole Principle of
Liberty, and the true miniature Image of the Deity; in short, it is the very
Essence of spiritual Nature, and the Root of all its Qualities and Operations:
It may be limited in its Extent, in its elicit Acts, and circumscribed in its
Energy; but in its Root, Faculty, and essential Nature, in its self-active
Base, it is infinite and unbounded. A Farthing Candle is as truly Light and Heat
as the Body of the Sun; and we may have vehement Willings, Longings, Volitions
and Velleities, and have an innate, inherent Power to intend or remit our Wills
in infinitum, which no other Power can deprive us of, but that which can
annihilat us, or turn us into another Nature. It would seem to me, that created
spiritual Substance of all Orders and Degrees, were analogous to the infinitely
pure and perfect Divine spiritual Substance, infinitely diluted or rarefied, as
it were, like the Light and Heat of the Sun reflected from the Moon; and this
in an infinite similar Progression, becomeing rarer and more diluted, till it
terminated in Darkness or Shade, thicker and grosser till it becomes like
Matter, which is analogous to Shade or Darkness, and which too goes on in
infinitum, thickning and incrassating, to become quite inert and passive; so
that laying aside created Substance, both material and spiritual, as quite
unknown and unknowable, and of which we can have no Idea a priori, nor be
certain of its Existence but a posteriori, and from its Effects, or the divine
Veracity, if we conceive spiritual Substance analogous to Fire or Light,
infinitely pure, rare, self-active, and self-motive, and material Substance
analogous to Shade or Darkness, infinitely dense, compact and concentred, we
shall have all that I think can be made of either, in this our present State;
and as Darkness contracts and limits Light, extinguishes or imbibes its elicit
Rays; so Body or Matter limits and stops the Selfactivity of spiritual Nature,
and they are an eternal Bar and Obstacle on one another; as Matter of a proper
Figure and Contexture of Parts, condenses and heightens the Action of Fire and
Light; so divinely organis'd and harmoniously figured Vehicles may promote the
elicit Acts of spiritual Natures; and the Analogy to Fire, Light and Darkness,
will hold good then through all the Degrees of compareing. It may be said, that
all this is but Figure; but I think all true Figure is but remote Analogy, and
all true Analogy is a distant progressive Approximation to Reality; and both
are as real the one as the other, and differ only as the first and last Terms
of a Series.

7. THE Purification of the Soul is perfectly analogous to the Cure of the
cacochymical and cadaverous State of the Body; and the Method of Cure of
spiritual Nature, taking in the different Subjects, Matter and Spirit, is
perfectly similar to the Methodus metasyncriticus of the Ancients in the Cure
of a Cachexy in the Body. The Analogy is here perfect and complete; they differ
only, as the first and subsequent Terms of a geometrical divergent Progression.
Sin, Disorder and Rebellion, is to the spiritual Nature of an intelligent
Being, precisely and really (as much as they are both Realities) what a
cancerous and malignant Ulcer is to an animal Body: The Cure of the last is by
a low, sweetning and thinning Diet at first, to enable the Patient to bear the
last Operation, which must be by Excision and Extirpation, and raiseing new
sound Flesh in its Place; Penitence, Selfdenial, calm Passions, a meek Spirit,
and a constant patient Attendance to, and Dependence on, the Directions of the
Physician of Souls, will answer the first Part; and I am of Opinion, he (the
Divine Physician of Souls) by his omnipotent Power, and his being GOD, he, I
say, must perform supernaturally and instanteously, as it were, (for a
sweetning Cure of such inveterat Humors alone, would require infinite Time)
some grand Operation, (in which the Creature is entirely passive) analogous to
Excision and Extirpation, to divide between the Joints and Marrow, to cut out
the Adamical Core in lapsed spiritual Nature, and to raise up, ingraft and
implant his own Nature and Substance in its stead, to perpetuat and eternise
its Soundness and Integrity, not in a Figure or Metaphor, as is commonly, though
I think barbarously, philosophised; but at last, and in the dernier Resort, and
before the hyperboloid Curve (to speak so) can meet with its Assymptot, as
really and truly as Matter and Spirit are Realities, though of different Natures.
In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die: In the Sense that Death
came by Adam, Death spiritual was completed by one Action of the of the
Parentage of Mankind, so by some one miraculous Operation eternal Life comes by
Jesus Christ. I can never apprehend, that the Economy, the Operation, the
Efficiency of Jesus, terminats either in Example, Repair of the Indignity,
confirming the standing Hierarchies, cooperating with us in destroying bad
Humors and Habits gradually, or making a sufficient, free and full Atonement
only; but that he must supernaturally and really cut out, burn away, and fill
up, and supply, as it were, with his own spiritual Substance, the Adamical
cadaverous Core out of lapsed spiritual Nature, to sanctify and eternise its
Purity, Perfection and Happiness; and this as really, though not materially, but
spiritually, I say, as really as Spirit is real, contradistinguish'd from
Matter. I choose to speak in the Mathematical and Medical Language, because the
Analogy, the Similarity, and the Precision, is here so just, so close, and so
luminous, that I think it must penetrat those who can perfectly understand it,
and may by a Dictionary be made plain to others, if they think it worth the
while to deal in such abstracted Conjectures.

8. THE human Spirit is literally, and not in a mere Figure, a Tabula rasa, a
Sheet of white Paper, as it comes into the World at present, under its
planetary Plaistering; and it would seem, for this very End the Plaistering
itself was designed, and the gross porous secondary Elements, of this ruinous
Planet, were by infinite Wisdom contrived; not but that spiritual Nature, in its
Order, and in its natural and essential Powers, of living, understanding and
willing, and all their Modifications of Sagacity, Penetration and Conduct, and
a Capacity of perceiveing outward Things, and of gathering the Materials on
which they work, of external Objects, Ideas, and Knowledge of Things, are not
in their Fund, in the Faculty and Power, unalterably the same, and as it were
engraved in their Substance according to their Order; for spiritual Nature
cannot increase or diminish in its essential Powers and Capacity; but their
elicit Acts, their Appearances ad extra, may be intercepted and restrained from
issuing forth by the gross planetary Plaistering; like Characters and
Inscriptions engraved in the Substance of Brass or Marble, and filled up with
Wax, Clay or Dirt: or like the imperceptible Ink, which leaves no Trace on the
white Paper, but shows itself when rubbed over with Juice of Lemon. Thus the
immaterial thinking Substance is laid asleep, becomes thoughtless, and as it
were stupefied, a bare polisht Plain, and a Sheet of clean Paper, (its three
natural Powers of living, understanding and willing are sunk in one of living
only) a mere Recipient or Continent, and as it were (without Ridicule) a dark
Lanthorn, in the Loins of the Parent; and as it comes first into the World; but
still the self-active and self-motive Flame is alive within in its Seed, and
its Punctum saliens. External Objects, Pain, natural Instincts and Necessities,
rub off some of the improper Plaistering, and break some of the Ligatures;
these repeated and increased, unloose more; and thus the Organs of Sensation,
the Apertures of the Senses, and the sentient and instructive Powers, are
gradually set free, and the Dirt picked out of the spiritual Substance; then
Memory and Attention awakens, and Ideas are formed and retained by Time and
Degrees. By the Animal Functions, which flow from living, more and more of the
membranous Tubuli, and medullar and cortical Glands of the Brain, are
develop'd; and the self-motive Powers, by repeated Efforts, Strains, and
Pushes, (like a Spring in the Box of a Watch) set free more and more of
ethereal Organs of Thinking, according to the Degree of Culture, Exercise, and
Useage, they pass under, and this by a quicker or slower Progression and
Velocity, as they are cultivated, used and exercised, till they come to the
highest State they generally arrive at; and thus by Labor and Exercise of the
Organs of the intellectual Faculties, they work off the Dirt, that filled up
the ingrav'd Characters on their spiritual Substances, and make the
imperceptible Writeing appearing legible merely by fileing off and scrapeing
away the Plaistering on the primitive ethereal Vehicle, whereby the spiritual
Substance is set free directly to enjoy and use all its inbred Powers, and has
Capacity to perceive all Things ad extra, know, understand and possess them;
not as a blind Man restored to his Sight, or a deaf Man to his Hearing, or a
dumb Man to his Speech, who were born so; but as a Man, for a short time shut
up in a Dungeon, and separated from all things without, and again set at
Liberty, knows and enjoys all again, as before. And the final Cause of this
reduceing the spiritual Substance to a Tabula rasa, by a gross Plaistering, and
a temporary Imprisonment, in the dark, dismal, cadaverous Dungeon of this Body,
seems to be not only for Expiation and Punishment, but that the moral Powers of
the Soul, Justice, Goodness and Truth, or Faith, Hope and Charity, might feel
no Interruption from the Activity, Extent and Contrariety of these natural
Powers; but that they might amicably, gradually, and, by mutual Assistance and
Support, rise and grow together in similar Steps, and a regulated Progression,
till they were confirmed into a Habit; like sweetning the whole Mass of the
Fluids, by a milk or vegetable Diet; to fit the Subject for the last passive
grand Operation in the Economy of Jesus, which may be to cut out, as it were,
of our spiritual Substances, that Core, schirrous or cancerous Gland, generated
by the Lapse, and from the Adamical Principle, and to heal and fill it up with
his own immaculat Substance, perhaps really and truly (as the Liturgy of the
Church of England expresses it) communicated to us in the worthy receiveing of
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus, or some-how we cannot explain. --
This Effect will neither appear absurd nor unphilosophical to those who believe
Jesus to be the Son of God, of the same Substance and equal Powers with the
Father; the Manner how, is the proper Subject of Faith, unconceiveable to us,
at least as we are at present; but the Fact, in general, or something of that
kind, highly probable from Analogy, and evident from Revelation: For, I think,
no truly humble Christian, let him be in what State of Perfection he may, can
think himself fit to be united and commerciat eternally with infinite Purity and
Perfection, till some great Work be done in his Soul, more than he feels in
himself then.

. 9. MOST, Christians, at least, are agreed, that the Economy of the
Restoration, as contrived and executed by Jesus Christ, ( God-Man, the eternal
Son of GOD) as far as it was possible on his Part, and as far as it was
consistent with Liberty, and the Harmony of the Divine Attributes; I say, all
Christians are agreed, that this was a Work of surprizeing Wisdom, Beauty,
Goodness, and worthy of a GOD; having in it, to the greatest Perfection, every
thing that could most effectually answer the End proposed: But I know not if
many have endeavored to show it to be the (...), and the only one, that could
possibly answer that End, taking in the whole Conditions; and yet I cannot
help thinking, that this may be strictly demonstrated. A Sovereign may pardon,
on his Repentance and Amendment, a rebellious Subject, and receive him into
Grace and Favor; but it will be eternally true, he has been a Rebel, and that
there remains the Cicatrice of that Sore in his Heart and Soul, which first
produced his Rebellion. Now it is as certain, as that GOD is, that nothing
impure and imperfect in its Order, can finally, invariably and eternally be
united and commerciat with Him; that is, be permanently and eternally happy;
because of his infinite Purity, Dignity, and Sovereignty; and the receiveing an
imperfect, intelligent Being into his Favor, Service, and designed Post again
permanently, (or one less similar to Him in its Order) would not only sully his
Purity, but make Him cheaper, and less intensely the sovereign Felicity of the
standing Hierarchies, and make his Wrath less dreaded, and so not a sufficient
Bar on their Lapse. Now every Truth, and every Fact, is in its own Nature as
eternal, as it is real. It will be eternally true, I have been a Rebel, if I
have been one; and GOD alone, who has the Power of Creation, has the Power of
Annihilation; and this Fact, as far as a Fact can be, at least as to its Root,
must be annihilated and done away some-how, before it can be creaturely and
relatively true, that I was not a Rebel, or at least that my Rebellion is
really now, both as to Him and me, as it never had been; which can only be
done, as far as I conceive, by annihilating, burning out, consumeing, the
rebellious Core of my spiritual Substance, and filling it up with something
analogous to his pure immaculat Divine Nature and Substance, or new createing;
and nothing less than a GOD can do this: So that on Repentance and Amendment,
Men might be in the Condition only of Rebels, whose Lives conquering Monarchs
have saved, yet instead of continuing them Citizens, had translated them into
some remote Corner of an uncultivated Country, as a conquered Province, and
made them a lower Order of Creatures. But as infinite Perfection is without any
possible Change, in its first most perfect Intention, as to its Nature, but not
as to its Degree; and can only bring it about less immediately, and after a
longer Time, (by reason of the Free-wills of his intelligent Creatures, on
which He neither can nor will commit Violence) yet still will effect it, with a
Perfection at last, beyond even, as it were, the first Intention; accordingly
Jesus Christ came, to bring Life, and to bring it more abundantly; and by his
infinite Power and Love, being GOD, to annihilat, melt down, and burn away, the
Adamical Lapse, Core, and Cicatrice, of Sin and Rebellion, in spiritual Nature,
and new create, and replace, his own Divine Substance and Nature in its stead;
so that it may then be said, with philosophic Propriety, that a truly
regenerat and sanctified Person has the Divine Nature and Substance of Jesus,
GOD-Man, actuating and moving him, that is, living in him, as really and
substantially as ever before his Adamical lapsed Spirit lived in him. This may
sound odd and particular to little Philosophers, nay, even to many perhaps
virtuous and good Persons; but as I think it is the Language of St. Paul, and
of Jesus Christ himself, I think also, that if there is not some Reality, and
philosophic Propriety in it, as real as is the Distinction between material and
spiritual Substance, and that it is not entirely all Figure, there is no
forming any Idea, either of the (...) or (...) of it (and even Figure in
philosophic Propriety, is but the first Term of an infinite Series); nor why it
should have been revealed or mentioned: Nor will there be much Difficulty
insuperable in it, or unexplicable in Philosophy, to those who admit Jesus to
be GOD, and his Words to be Spirit and Truth, and GOD to be infinite in Power
and Goodness; the End and Means of all whose Actings must be equally perfect in
their Order, and who suppose that Matter and Spirit must be equal Realities.
This last State I resemble to the Hyperbolic Curve's meeting with its Asymptot
(I hope I shall be forgiven the Particularity of the Expression, because of its
Justness and Propriety); and it may be the finishing Operation, to eternize the
Infallibility and Impeccability of all lapsed, sentient and intelligent Beings,
to which few arrive in this Life, and all must perhaps pass through many
Mansions, and various planetary Vehicles, before they can attain to it in its
last Perfection, and to which some pass with a quicker Velocity, and a faster
convergeing Progression, like the several Orders of the Hyperloids, some of
which meet the Asymptot infinitely sooner and faster than others Vide
Philosophical Principles of Revealed Religion.
, but through which all must pass sooner or later; for GOD's Ways must be
equal, uniform and general, to all his Creatures of the same Order, with only
the Difference their general or particular Wants or Distempers require; and as
He treated the Manhood of Jesus Christ, who was made perfect by Sufferings, and
as He has treated all his Disciples, so all lapsed intelligent Beings must pass
through Jesus Christ, receive his Revelation, and go through his States, sooner
or later, or in some Mansion or another, before they arrive at perfect
Infallibility and Illability; that is, they must first or last all be Jesus
Christ-like, before they can become permanently GOD-like, or similar to Him in
Perfection and Happiness. This Progression and final Perfection, the Free-wills
of intelligent Beings may retard a finite Time; and they might have retarded it
from Eternity to Eternity, that is, for ever, both in the eternal Nature of
Sin, and the infinite Purity of the Divine Nature, without this sole and
individual Mean, viz. the Merits, Power and Efficacy of the Economy of Jesus
the GOD-Man; who uniteing human Nature to Himself, has actually, really, but
spiritually, cut out the Core and Cicatrice of the Lapse, and filled up the
discontinuous Void with his own spiritual Substance and Nature, in all those
who shall be finally restored; for He is the Way, the Truth, and the LIFE.

. 10. REASON and Faith, in their true philosophic Natures, in their Source and
Foundation, are so far from being contrary, much less contradictory, that they
are entirely similar and analogous, and differ only as the higher and lowest
Terms of a divergeing Series. Reason, in its Principle and Faculty, in the
lowest Intelligence, is like a Progression, the first Term of which is the
Root, or miniature Base, of all the higher subsequent Terms, which are all
similar and analogous to one another, how compounded and elevated soever they
may be, and where the superior Terms virtually include the inferior, and bring
them down to the Simplicity and Plainness of the lowest Term; but not without
Labor, Attention, and Reduction of the Conditions to their proper Limits. GOD
is the Sovereign and Supreme Reason, involved in Clouds and Darkness, by reason
of his infinite Splendour, and the infinite Disproportion of our Faculties; and
perhaps out of Designs of Love and Goodness, as we are at present in so unfit a
State: Our Reason and Conception, though infinitely disproportioned to such an
Object, yet is of a similar Nature with his Light, and natural Attributes: Our
Reason, and intelligent Powers, are analogous to the lowest and first Term of
such a Progression; his Light and Splendour, to the highest and last great Term;
which Term, in a Series, though comparatively infinite, yet is but a finite,
compared with his absolute Infinitude. The other Terms of such a Series may be
analogous to the natural Powers of the several different Orders of
Intelligences, that may exist in external Nature; and all the several Orders of
Intelligences, with their respective Powers, from the lowest to the relative
highest, may be continually approaching one another, yet never can reach the
other Terms, much less the last Term relative infinite, and least of all to
absolute Infinitude; for in absolute Infinitude there is such Variety of
Objects, Mansions, Pleasures, and Happiness, as are boundless and without
Number or Limits. GOD is the sovereign and supreme Reason, I say, always
consistent, uniform, and invariable: He is pure, unsullied, and unchangeable.
Creatures, even the most sublime and perfect, can only know Him by a
progressive nearer Approach to Him in Similarity, which will be gradual, but
endless. The Faculties, Powers, and Qualities, both Natural and Moral, of
Creatures, are, as it were, but analogous (to speak still more plainly) to a
Series, such as 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5, etc. We of the human Race, at least our
Fellow Animals, of the only sentient Race, may be as 1, or 2; the higher Orders
may be as 10, 100, 1000, etc. to us. At what Term we began, or any Order
begins, we cannot know, nor, did we know, could we alter it; that depends
entirely on the good Pleasure and Wisdom of Him that made us: In this Point we
cannot add a Cubit to our Stature, but we may all press forward to higher Terms
and Degrees, and be continually progressive, though perhaps mostly in our moral
Powers, and consequently in Perfection and Happiness; which can be done by
Faith only, that is, by trusting to, believing in, and acting according to the
Direction given by one, whose natural and moral Powers are of a much higher
Order, or in Proportion to a much higher Term than ours are: As if one, whose
natural and moral Powers are as 1000, should reveal to one whose natural and
moral Powers are as 1 only, that in order to raise his natural and moral Powers
to 2, he must trust or believe, that is, take his Word for it, so and so, and
do so and so in Consequence, and that this will lead him on gradually to the
Term 2, and so in all the other Terms of the Progression. This really seems to
be somewhat like the Case of all sentient and intelligent Beings, in order to
advance in this eternal Progression of Perfection; the only Method possible for
them, is to trust and act in Consequence of this Trust, and depend on the
Veracity and Ability of the Informer; for this trusting is in order to the
acting. In building, or working or sailing a Ship to a certain Port, the Seaman
must trust and work, according to his Directions: In raising an Arch, or
measuring a Distance, very few Operators understand the abstract Geometry, on
which the Directions are founded. In short, in this our present expiatory and
probatory State, in all we do to advance toward higher Terms of our
progressive Perfection and Happiness, we must absolutely trust and work, else
we shall never advance in divine Faith, and in the progressive Perfection of
our natural and moral Powers; and here we have not only infinite Power and
Wisdom for our Director, but infinite Goodness for our Assistant, who yet from
the Purity and Perfection of his own Nature, cannot direct or assist us but in
Consistence with the Harmony of his own Attributes, and our own Free-wills, i.
e. imperceptibly. Our intellectual Powers are analogous to our material Organs,
our Senses. One with a Telescope, or with very strong Eyes, might see a City,
or a Dwelling, which another without it, or with weaker Eyes, could not
perceive. If the weak-sighted Person must needs go to this City or Dwelling, he
could only take the Directions of the stronger-sighted, on what Point of the
Compass to direct his Course, what Hills, Dales, and Rivers to cross, to walk
on Trust and Hope. Our trusting is in order to our traveling. Faith, or Trust,
that does not terminat in Action or Traveling, is mere Painting and dead Work.
Revelation discovers the Being, Purity, and Perfection of the First Cause, his
internal Nature, and the Splendour He dwells in, what is his Society, and what
their Occupation; that to be happy completely and permanently, we must get
thither. We, while our Powers, natural and moral, are but as 1 or 2, cannot see
or perceive the Beauty, Perfection of his Nature, and the Place He inhabits,
nor the Propriety of the Directions and Advices He gives us, in order to get
thither. The Nature of things will not admit of any other Evidence, but Faith
and Trust, and consequent working, till our natural and moral Powers are
thereby raised higher; and then we shall perfectly comprehend the Beauty,
Propriety and Utility of these Directions, and advance gradually, by following
the same Method, to higher Terms of Powers and Faculties, and higher Degrees of
Glory and Felicity, in this infinite endless Progression. From all which it is
evident, that Reason and Faith are so far from being contrary, much less
contradictory, that Reason is the first Term given in this Progression, of
created Light or Powers: Faith or Trust is, as it were, the Ratio of the
several Terms, which goes through them all, that is, the Ground or Bottom of
the subsequent Operation and Working. By the Directions given, and Working, we
infallibly pass to the second, third, and higher Terms: Or, to express it yet
more strongly and clearly, if possible, Faith or Trust is proceeding as we do
in Algebra, supposing the second or higher Term, though unknown, yet as known;
and then working according to the Conditions of the Question, the Term unknown
becomes thereby infallibly known. I cannot enlighten these Figures, and this
Language here, they are so pertinent and cogent to those who understand them.

11. PURE and disinterested Love is Love of infinite Perfection for itself only,
and for its own Amiableness, without any other Consideration; but this, as
every thing else, admits of infinite Degrees. The great Mistake here, lies in
Persons pretending to get to the Top of the Ladder, without ascending by all
the Steps; and that some define the last Step as it were the first. All things
belonging to Creatures must be progressive, and confirmed Habits must be
acquired by repeated persevereing Acts. Naked, free and generous Faith, is
trusting, confideing, and believeing in Infallibility, and infinite Veracity,
upon its own Word, its Nature only; and on the most slender Intimation of its
Orders, the generous Believer is determined to venture his Whole on that
Bottom: And from these two, flow absolute Resignation; and this also admits of
Degrees: Both these are subject to Error, Mistake and Delusion, in feeble
lapsed Mortals, such as we are; and this cannot be prevented, from the very
Nature of Things, as they are now, in our probatory and penitential State,
constituted; but surely there is less Danger in the Excess, than the Defect: No
good Master ever rejected or punished his poor good-natured, weak Servant, for
loveing and trusting him too much, or obeying him too precisely or literally. I
readily grant, Prudence, Order, Measure, Decency and Regularity, are the first
of all the Moral and Christian Virtues, and frightful Consequences have ensued
upon the Neglect of them; and both Enthusiasm and Infidelity, I think, equally
imply a wrong Head, some nervous Disorder, and Want of common Sense; but both
Excesses and Defects strongly evidence, that there is a just Medium wherein
true Virtue and sole Right consist: And still of the two Evils, Infidelity and
Tepidity is infinitely the worst, not only in regard of the Infidels and Tepid
themselves, as it defeats the sole Means Providence has, or, I think, can
contrive, for their Recovery and Restoration; but as it destroys Numbers of
weak Souls by its Influence and Example, and as Infidelity saps the Foundations
of all Morality, and consequently of all civil Society; whereas Enthusiasm can
but hurt chiefly the Bodies, or outward Fortunes of their Fellow Creatures, by
diabolic and tyrannical Persecution, unless Hypocrisy can be joined to
Enthusiasm, and then it becomes consummat Infidelity. To me it would seem, the
whole Conduct and Design of Providence, in this present probationary State, is
to produce in the Hearts of his lapsed Creatures, pure Love and naked Faith
only, and that this is the sole Key of all the Enclosures of his Providence;
and that this State of Mind must be that which alone is of any Value in the
Sight of GOD, as being the only Means possible of begetting perfect Felicity,
and eternizeing it; even so much, as that He in his Providence seems to
neglect, or overlook and undervalue, as it were, any thing less than these, at
least any thing that might retard or interfere with these. An Instance or two
will make this plain: We see that we, of the lowest Rank of Intelligences, are
endowed with a Capacity and Power of communicating our Thoughts, Conceptions,
Dispositions, and Sentiments to one another, directly, plainly and
intelligibly, by Language or Writeing, and by many other Signs, Symbols and
Figures: Infinite Wisdom and Power, without all Doubt, had he so pleased, might
have contrived us so at present, that he might have been able some-how to
communicate himself directly, plainly, instantaneously and intelligibly, to all
his intelligent Creatures, his Children, the Work of his own Hands, whom he
cannot help loveing as a tender Father does his Children. But since this Method
not only would have done us no Good, but on the contrary, a great deal of Hurt,
by hindering and interfereing with our implicit Trust, our Reliance, our
Resignation, our Faith, and absolute Dependence on him, so necessary to the
Production, and eternizeing of perfect Happiness; we see he hides himself in
Clouds and Darkness, and is literally a Deus absconditus as to us, and does
only approach to, or commerciat with us, in pure Love, naked Faith, and total
Abnegation and Resignation, so hard to be acquired. Again, how necessary, how
indispensable, would seem the precise, the limited, the unmistakeable Nature of
natural and moral Good and Evil to us, in our present probatory State? and yet
we are left for the Knowledge of them, to Feeling, to Observation, to
Experience, to Culture, to Pain and Suffering. The wisest of mere Men said,
That no Man knows Good or Evil by all that is before him: We naturally reckon
Health, Wealth, Honor and Success, the real, the only Goods of this Life; and
yet, if Christianity is not all a Farce, their Contraries are often, nay
almost, always the most real, and the most perfect Goods, since they are the
shortest Road to absolute Resignation, the greatest of all Goods, and the sole
Mean of perfect Happiness. Once more; infinite Wisdom and Power has, as it were,
done nothing to gratify our Curiosity, to polish our Natures, to advance the
Comforts and Gratifications, the Conveniences, and the honest Improvements of
Living: How many Nations, and Millions of our own Species, of the same Order
and Rank of Intelligences, are left all their Lives in the utmost Brutality,
Ignorance and Savageness, not only as to the Endowments of their Minds, but
almost as to the absolute, at least decent Necessaries of Life! in which
Cimmerian Darkness, and execrable bodily Impurity, or Filth, they wallow, live
and die, even vastly below many of the Brute Species. The most useful, pleasant
and instructive Discoveries in Life, have, even among the most polisht Nations,
been discovered late, by Chance, and with great Imperfections at first, I mean,
Writeing, Printing, the Compass, and Glasses, and even Philosophical Physic
itself: All this cannot happen by Chance, Fatality, from Impotence, or without
some infinitely wise and gracious Design, under the Economy and Providence of
an infinitely good, wise and powerful Governor, who alone knows best, how long,
and what Kind of Trial and Probation is fittest for his lapsed intelligent
Creatures, of such Tribes, Nations and Climats; to what Degree they have
lapsed, what is their most proper Trial, how far Simplicity (and even actual
Humiliation of this intelligent Creature, made a little lower than the Angels
in his natural unalterable Powers, and as it were, to drench him in Dirt and
Nastiness, even below the lowest Brute, as Compost fructifies Vegetables) is
the Via brevissima, and Suffering, even unconscious Suffering, is sufficient;
and knows best what Mansion they are designed to inhabit hereafter; and has
fitted outward Circumstances accordingly: And as to what is commonly reckoned
polishing, and having the decent Necessaries and Conveniences of Life, he
leaves Men to their natural Liberty and Industry, to employ their natural
Activity innocently and laudably thereby, which otherwise might run riot in
Turpitude and Vice; and to general Laws, which, followed with Simplicity,
Attention and Sincerity, would naturally bring them perhaps the shortest Way to
disinterested Love, implicit Trust and Resignation; and this he does even with
a seeming Neglect of those other Things, as accounting them of no Value, when
compared with this pure Love, and implicit Trust, that Disposition of Mind
which alone can beget and eternize Happiness. Further; of what great
Consequence to the Quickness of our Purification, and consequently of our
eternal Happiness, it would appear to us, would be, the certain Knowledge of
the precise Time of our Dissolution and Death? Then, like true penitent and
serious Felons, we should employ all our last Moments entirely in cleansing our
Vessels, and trimming our Lamps; and yet all that is known in this weighty
Affair is general, and that we once must all die: The Time, the Manner, and
other Circumstances, are all absolutely unknown to us; and why this? but only
because infinite Purity and Perfection values nothing about us, but absolute
Trust, Dependence, and Resignation, even to venturing our very Lives; and, as
our Savior expresses it, if we do not hate, that is, undervalue, our own Life,
in respect of him, or love it but in Subordination to our Love of Him, we
cannot be his Disciples. Again; the Providence of GOD seems to act here solely
by second Causes, and by general Laws only, and in such a manner, that we but
seldom perceptibly discern the Hand that disposes of Events; though doubtless, as
GOD is an infinitely free Agent, He governs by a particular, as well as a
general Providence; on proper and particular Occasions He dispenses with his
own general Laws for a time, by a particular Interposition, both in material
and spiritual Appearances: But in these particular Interpositions, we can have
no physical, but only a moral Certainty, in order to raise and confirm our
Trust and Resignation; for Faith, Trust, and Resignation, always suppose
Uncertainty and Doubt; and some time or other, we shall admire and adore that
Wisdom and Goodness, who could in so delicat and kindly a manner conceal from
us, and hide that Hand, which directs every Atom of the Universe, and disposes
of every Hair of our Heads, in order to render our Trust, Faith, and
Resignation, stronger and more firm: As the Darkness and Cool of the Autumn
Nights are what harden and consolidat the now refined and purified Juices,
which the stronger Sun, and longer Daylight, had raised and sublimed into the
Seeds and Fruits; for the same Reason, the Operations and Influences of the
Divine Spirit, or Grace and spiritual Aid and Assistance, are secret and
imperceptible; and are always to be suspected, when they are impetuous,
sensible, and acting only by Fits and Starts, as the gross Machin is in or out
of Tune, and as the animal Functions play easily or labor, especially in young
unexperienced Persons, who have not been tried and purified in the School of
the Cross: For these uncommon and extraordinary, or even perceptible Operations
of the Divine Spirit, seldom happen pure, sincere, and unmixt; but to the long
and severely Tried and Purified, and when the Passions, Appetites, and
spiritual Humors are moderated, calmed, and subdued, on the Decline of a Life
spent in due Retirement, and proper Silence; not in the Storm or Tempest, but
in the still calm Voice, does the Divine Spirit speak; and a truly humble, and
enlightened Person, ought to suspect himself, get above, and pass over every
Impulse, Sweetning, or Glance of Light that comes not thus accompanied.
Children, Beginners, and Noviciats in the spiritual Life, are often gratified
with such Sugarings for their Encouragement; but Bread is for grown Persons,
which is got by the Sweat of the Brow, and bearing the Cross; and a prudent
staid Person will have too great a Regard for the Purity and Dignity of the
Divine Spirit, to bring him down, to account for all the mechanical and animal
Operations of his volatile and various Imagination. Nec Deus intersit, nisi sit
Deo dignus vindice nodus, and aquila non captat muscas. But I beg Pardon for
this Digression out of my Sphere, Capacity and Experience, to treat justly. But
all the Difficulties and Darkness in Providence, and in natural and revealed
Religion, seem to be intended by infinite Wisdom with surprizeing Justness,
Propriety, and Delicacy, only as the most effectual Means to bring us to pure
Love, and naked Faith, Trust, and Resignation; and are so far from being
Objections against the Christian Religion, or to weaken its Credibility,
Dignity and Authority, that were there no such Difficulties, Doubts,
Uncertainties and Mysteries in Revelation, it would be a strong Presumption,
and an undeniable Argument, that it came not from GOD, who being infinitely
infinite in all Perfection, Wisdom, Knowledge and Goodness, must be
incomprehensible to us in our present State, and so they could not be worthy,
adequat and proper for such a Being, who is equally above Perception, Feeling
and Sentiment, as above Comprehension. These may be good, useful and real, and
his mediat, but seldom his immediate Operation. This pure Love and naked Faith
seems to be the only Point in View, of the great and wise Governor of the
Universe, even to such a Contempt of what we commonly think fine Endowments and
Polishing, that in a great many Instances, in Nations, Tribes, and for Ages, he
would seem, in the Conduct of his Providence, to prefer their Contraries, as
the shortest Way to this End; though still there is a Choice, Perfection, and
Meliority, in the Honestum, Utile, and the Decorum; but he only can know when,
where, and in what outward Circumstances, lies the (...), quoad hos aut hunc.

12. I TAKE it, in the first original Creation there was but one universal
Salt, or one Kind of saline Particles, and that they were hard, imporose,
triangular, equilateral Prisms. When Nature came to be confounded, jumbled, and
unharmoniously combined, the other Elements of Air, Water, Sulphur and Earth,
in forming secondary Elements, were incommensuratly and discordantly mixed with
these; but still each preserved some Degree of its primitive Nature, as the
compounded Elements retained more or less of their primitive Particles in the
Composition; hence our purest Elements that Art can elicit, are still
compounded, and inseparable from the rest; the purest, most simple, and most
necessary of them all, seems to be our pure Nitre, or the universal Salt of the
Air, the Mother of all Salts, so necessary to animal Life, Sanguification, the
Stimulation of the animal Fibers, the Propagation and Action of Heat and Fire,
the Production of Cold and Freezeing, to animal Foecundity and Vegetation, and
many other of the Appearances of Nature, to which it seems absolutely
necessary, and enters into their Substance and Composition. The other Salts,
Acids and Alcalis, the essential, or lixivial Salts of Vegetables, Plants and
Minerals, are only this primitive nitrous Salt combined with these other
Elements, and as they predomine and exist in these particular Subjects: These
mentioned Salts in Animals, are Nitre mixed with animal Oils, Air, Water and
Earth, such as their Substances are compounded of; and it is in the same Manner
in the Plants and Minerals. The greatest specific Difference among the Salts
seems to arise from the Distinction of Acids and Alcalis; the first, both from
Philosophy and Experiment, seem to be of acute-angled, greatly attractive
Particles; and the Degree of their Acidity seems to depend on the proportional
Degree of the Sharpness of their Points, which now may be various, and their
Degree of Attraction also: Alcalis seem to be porous calcarious fine Earths;
the testaceous Powders are among the most simple and perfect of them, and the
Model of all the rest. and plainly show the Nature of the whole Tribe. They
are, as is evident from the Microscope, nothing but Earths of an exceeding fine
Grain, and of very small Particles, full of large Pores and Cells, wherein an
acid Water or Spirit has been contained, probably that of Nitre. Heat, solar or
culinary, and Calcination, throws off some Part of this acid Water, and leaves
the Cells partially empty. These empty Cells, upon being immerged in any acid
Spirit or Water, suck it in again with Violence and Velocity, the remaining
Part of the Acid in the Cells attracting the new Acid with additional Force;
and hence Fermentation and Effervescence. All the Alcalis partake of this one
general Nature, and differ only as they are more or less combined with the
other Elements. Volatility arises from a light Oil united with either Kinds of
Salts; and this seems to be the true philosophic Nature of all Salts. Salts and
Air seem absolutely necessary to carry on animal Life and Functions; Air to
rarefy the Juices, separat the Globules, which might otherwise be too closely
united and compressed; for the Introduction of which into the Blood and Fluids,
the Lungs of Animals seem chiefly designed: Salts stimulat the Solids into
Actions, Vibrations, and excite their clumsy elastic Force, in order to carry
on the animal Functions, so absolutely necessary to living. The just and proper
Regulation of these two, Air and Salts, the so necessary Instruments of
pleasant and easy living, is as fit a Subject to be adjusted by a wise and
philosophic Physician, (others are but Empyrics at the best) as Diet and
Exercise. The Air we choose to live in ought to be rather dry and thin in the
Medium; but even this must be proportioned to the Nature of the Distemper, and
the State of the Juices, if possible; and they who have acquired their
Disorders by high Meats and Drinks, which abound in volatile Salts, must by
insipid Foods, and aqueous Liquors, lessen the Abundance of such Salts, which
is the Case of all the Rich and Wealthy. They, on the contrary, who have
acquired their Distempers by too poor and low a Manner of living, on vegetable,
insipid and instimulating Food only, which is the Case of most of the Poor or
Indigent, must be cured by more generous Living, and more stimulating and sapid
Meats and Drinks, which excite their Solids into Action, and on which account
all low Livers, who are driven into this Way of Living, by the Nature of their
Distempers, require double the Exercise, of those who can bear generous and
active Foods; and without it Nature will stagnat and sink; which is the Case of
many of the Female Sex, and of Persons in Gaols and Monasteries: In a Word,
wherever a low or vegetable Diet is necessary, there Air and Exercise are in
a much higher Degree necessary, than they are in a more generous Diet, to make
a low Diet effectual. But then the high Feeders pay in the Shortness of their
Lives, and the Sharpness of their Diseases, for their present Pleasure, and
idle, indolent, healthy Life.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13, Line 27, dele with. p. 13, l. 2, for gene, read general. p. 33, for
affixing, r. of fixing. p. 65, from ( higher, to -- for Him) in a Parenthesis.
p. 81, l. 16, for Liver, r. Bile. p. 84, l. 30, dele from. p. 95, l. 16, for
are, r. is. p. 172, l. 20, for vergeing, r. divergeing. p. 176, l. 7, dele
they. p. 177, for ingegious, r. ingenious. p. 196, l. 19, read the Series thus,
x4 + x3 + x2 + x + ^ - x - x2, etc. for o, r. i, and for x/ r. x/ x. p. 241, l.
28. dele and. p. 294. l. 23. for permit, r. pervade. l. 28, for her, r. its. p.
lxvi. ( the rest are) is transposed, and should follow in the next Line after
the Word Britain.


