LECTURES ON THE CATECHISM OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

LECTURES ON THE CATECHISM OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

BY WILLIAM GILPIN, M. A. VICAR OF BOLDRE, NEAR LYMINGTON.

VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR R. BLAMIRE IN THE STRAND; SOLD BY R. FAULDER, NEW
BOND-STREET, AND B. LAW, AVE MARY-LANE.

MDCCLXXIX.

LECTURE XIV.
Duties owing to particular persons -- duty of children to parents -- respect
and obedience -- in what the former consists -- in what the latter --
succouring a parent -- brotherly affection -- obedience to law -- founded on
the advantages of society.

FROM the two grand principles of "loving our neighbor as ourselves; and of
doing to others, as we would have them do to us," which regulate our social
intercourse in general, we proceed to those more confined duties, which arise
from particular relations, connections, and stations in life.

Among these, we are first taught, as indeed the order of nature directs, to
consider the great duty of children to parents.

The two points to be insisted on, are respect and obedience. Both these should
naturally spring from love; to which parents have the highest claim. And indeed
parents, in general, behave to their children, in a manner both to deserve and
to obtain their love.

But if the kindness of the parent be not such as to work upon the affections
of the child, yet still the parent has a title to respect and obedience, on the
principle of duty; a principle, which the voice of nature dictates; which
reason inculcates; which human laws, and human customs all join to enforce; and
which the word of God strictly commands.

The child will show respect to his parent, by treating him, at all times with
deference. He will consult his parent's inclination; and show a readiness in a
thousand nameless trifles, to conform himself to it. He will never peevishly
contradict his parent; and when he offers a contrary opinion, he will offer it
modestly. Respect will teach him also, not only to put the best coloring upon
the infirmities of his parent; but even if those infirmities be great, it will
soften and screen them, as much as possible, from the public eye.

Obedience goes a step further, and supposes a positive command. In things
unlawful indeed, the parental authority cannot bind: but this is a case that
rarely happens. The great danger is on the other side, that children, through
obstinacy, or sulleness, should refuse their parents lawful commands; to the
observance of all which, however inconvenient to themselves, they are tied by
various motives; and above all, by the command of God; who in his sacred
denunciations against sin, ranks disobedience to parents among the worst. Romans
i. 30.


They are farther bound, not only to obey the commands of their parents; but to
obey them cheerfully. He does but half his duty, who does it not from his heart.

There remains still a third part of filial duty, which peculiarly belongs to
children, when grown up. This the catechism calls succouring, or administering
to the necessities of the parent; either in the way of managing his affairs,
when he is less able to manage them himself; or in supplying his wants, should
he need assistance in that way. And this the child should do, on the united
principles of love, duty, and gratitude. The hypocritical jew would sometimes
evade this duty, by dedicating to sacred uses, what should have been expended
in assisting his parent. Our Savior sharply rebukes this perversion of duty;
and gives him to understand, that no pretense of serving God, can cover the
neglect of assisting a parent. And if no pretense of serving God can do it,
surely every other pretense must still be more unnatural.

Under this head also we may consider that attention, and love, which are due
to other relations, especially that mutual affection, which should subsist
between brothers. The name of brother expresses the highest degree of
tenderness; and is generally used in scripture, as a term of peculiar
endearment, to call men to the practice of social virtue. It reminds them of
every kindness, which man can show to man. If then, we ought to treat all
mankind with the affection of brothers, in what light must they appear, who
being really such, are ever at variance with each other; continually doing
spiteful actions, and showing upon every occasion, not only a want of brotherly
kindness; but even of common regard?

The next part of our duty, is "to honor and obey the king, and all that are
put in authority under him."

By the "king, and all that are put in authority under him," is meant the
various parts of the government we live under, of which the king is the head:
and the meaning of the precept is, that we ought to live in dutiful submission
to legal authority.

Government and society are united. We cannot have one without the other; and
we submit to the inconveniences, for the sake of the advantages.

The end of society is mutual safety and convenience. Without it, even safety
could in no degree be obtained: the good would become a prey to the bad: nay
the very human species to the beasts of the field.

Still less could we obtain the conveniences of life; which cannot be had
without the labor of many. If every man depended upon himself for what he
enjoyed, how destitute would be the situation of human affairs!

But even safety and convenience are not the only fruits of society. Man,
living merely by himself, would be an ignorant, unpolished savage. It is the
intercourse of society, which cultivates the human mind. One man's knowledge,
and experience is built upon another's; and so the great edifice of science,
and polished life, is reared.

To enjoy these advantages, therefore, men joined in society; and hence it
became necessary, that government should be established. Magistrates were
created; laws made; taxes submitted to; and every one, instead of righting
himself (except in mere self-defence) is injoined to appeal to the laws he
lives under, as the best security of his life and property.

LECTURE XV.
Duty to our teachers, and instructors -- arising from the great importance of
knowledge, and religion -- and the great necessity of gaining habits of
attention, and of virtue in our youth -- analogy of youth and manhood to this
world and the next.

WE are next injoined "to submit ourselves to all our governors, teachers,
spiritual pastors, and masters." Here another species of government is pointed
out. The laws of society are meant to govern our riper years: the instructions
of our teachers, spiritual pastors, and masters are meant to guide our youth,

By our "teachers, spiritual pastors, and masters," are meant all those, who
have the care of our education, and of our instruction in religion; whom we are
to obey, and listen to with humility, and attention, as the means of our
advancement in knowledge, and religion. The instructions we receive from them,
are unquestionably subject to our own judgment in future life; for by his own
judgment every man must stand, or fall. But, during our youth, it is highly
proper for us to pay a dutiful submission to their instructions, as we cannot
yet be supposed to have formed any judgment of our own. At that early age, it
should be our endeavor to acquire knowledge; and afterward unprejudiced to
form our opinions.

The duty which young people owe to their instructors, cannot be shown better,
than in the effect, which the instructions they receive, have upon them. They
would do well, therefore, to consider the advantages of an early attention to
these two things, both of great importance, knowledge and religion.

The great use of knowledge in all its various branches (to which the learned
languages are generally considered as an introduction) is to free the mind from
the prejudices of ignorance; and to give it juster, and more enlarged
conceptions, than are the mere growth of rude nature. By reading, you add the
experience of others to your own. It is the improvement of the mind chiefly,
that makes the difference between man and man; and gives one man, a real
superiority over another.

Besides, the mind must be employed. The lower orders of men have their
attention much engrossed by those employments, in which the necessities of life
engage them: and it is happy that they have. Labor stands in the room of
education; and fills up those vacancies of mind, which in a state of idleness
would be engrossed by vice. And if they, who have more leisure, do not
substitute something in the room of this, their minds also will become the prey
of vice; and the more so, as they have the means to indulge it more in their
power. A vacant mind is exactly that house mentioned in the gospel, which the
devil found empty. In he entered; and taking with him seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, they took possession. It is an undoubted truth, that one
vice indulged, introduces others; and that each succeeding vice becomes more
depraved. -- If then the mind must be employed, what can fill up its vacuities
more rationally than the acquisition of knowledge? Let us therefore thank God
for the opportunities he has afforded us; and not turn into a curse those
means of leisure, which might become so great a blessing.

But however necessary to us knowledge may be, religion, we know, is infinitely
more so. The one adorns a man, and gives him, it is true, superiority, and rank
in life: but the other is absolutely essential to his happiness.

In the midst of youth, health, and abundance, the world is apt to appear a
very gay, and pleasing scene; it engages our desires; and in a degree satisfies
them also. But it is wisdom to consider, that a time will come, when youth,
health, and fortune will all fail us; and if disappointment, and vexation do
not sour our taste for pleasure, at least sickness and infirmities will destroy
it. In these gloomy seasons, and above all, at the approach of death, what will
become of us without religion? When this world fails, where shall we fly, if we
expect no refuge in another? Without holy hope in God, and resignation to his
will, and trust in him for deliverance, what is there that can secure us
against the evils of life?

The great utility therefore of knowledge and religion being thus apparent, it
is highly incumbent upon us to pay a studious attention to them in our youth.
If we do not, it is more than probable, that we shall never do it; that we
shall grow old in ignorance, by neglecting the one; and old in vice, by
neglecting the other.

For improvement in knowledge, youth is certainly the fittest season. The mind
is then ready to receive any impression. It is free from all that care, and
attention, which, in riper age, the affairs of life bring with them. The memory
too is then stronger; and better able to acquire the rudiments of knowledge;
and as the mind is then void of ideas, it is more suited to those parts of
learning, which are conversant in words. Besides, there is sometimes in youth a
modesty, and ductility, which in advanced years, if those years especially have
been left a prey to ignorance, become self-sufficiency, and prejudice; and
these effectually bar up all the inlets to knowledge. -- But, above all, unless
habits of attention, and application are early gained, we shall scarce acquire
them afterward. -- The inconsiderate youth seldom reflects upon this; nor
knows his loss, till he knows also, that it cannot be retrieved.

Nor is youth more the season to acquire knowledge, than to form religious
habits. It is a great point to get habit on the side of virtue. It will make
every thing smooth, and easy. The earliest principles are generally the most
lasting; and those of a religious cast are seldom wholly lost. Though the
temptations of the world may, now and then, draw the well-principled youth
aside; yet his principles being continually at war with his practice, there is
hope, that in the end the better part may overcome the worse, and bring on a
reformation. Whereas he, who has suffered habits of vice to get possession of
his youth, has little chance of being brought back to a sense of religion. In a
common course of things it can rarely happen. Some calamity must rouse him. He
must be awakened by a storm, or sleep for ever. -- How much better is it then
to make that easy to us, which we know is best? And to form those habits now,
which hereafter we shall wish we had formed?

There are, who would restrain youth from imbibing any religious principles,
till they can judge for themselves; lest they should imbibe prejudice for
truth. But why should not the same caution be used in science also; and the
minds of youth left void of all impressions? The experiment, I fear, in both
cases would be dangerous. If the mind were left uncultivated during so long a
period, though nothing else should find entrance, vice certainly would: and it
would make the larger shoots, as the soil would be vacant. A boy had better
receive knowledge and religion mixed with error, than none at all. For when the
mind is set a thinking, it may deposit its prejudices by degrees, and get right
at last: but in a state of stagnation it will infallibly become foul.

To conclude, our youth bears the same proportion to our more advanced life, as
this world does to the next. In this life we must form, and cultivate those
habits of virtue, which must qualify us for a better state. If we neglect them
here, and contract habits of an opposite kind, instead of gaining that exalted
state, which is promised to our improvement, we shall of course sink into that
state, which is adapted to the habits we have formed.

Exactly thus is youth introductory to manhood; to which it is properly
speaking a state of preparation. During this season we must qualify ourselves
for the parts we are to act hereafter. In manhood we bear the fruit, which has
in youth been planted. If we have sauntered away our youth, we must expect to
be ignorant men. If indolence and inattention have taken an early possession of
us, they will probably increase, as we advance in life; and make us a burden to
ourselves, and useless to society. If again, we suffer ourselves to be misled
by vicious inclinations, they will daily get new strength, and end in dissolute
lives. But if we cultivate our minds in our youth, attain habits of attention
and industry, of virtue, and sobriety, we shall find ourselves well prepared to
act our future parts in life; and, what above all things ought to be our care,
by gaining this command over ourselves, we shall be more able, as we get
forward in the world, to resist every new temptation, as it arises.

LECTURE XVI.
Behavior to superiors -- the word betters explained -- probable reasons for
God's appointing various distinctions among men -- happiness and misery not
connected with station.

WE are next injoined "to order ourselves lowly and reverently, to all our
betters."

By our betters are meant they who are in a superior station of life to our
own; and by "ordering ourselves lowly and reverently toward them," is meant
paying them that respect, which is due to their station.

The word betters indeed includes two kinds of persons, to whom our respect is
due -- those, who have a natural claim to it; and those who have an acquired
one; that is, a claim arising from some particular situation in life.

Among the first, are all our superior relations; not only parents; but all
other relations, who are in a line above us. All these have a natural claim to
our respect. -- There is a respect also due from youth to age; which is always
becoming; and tends to keep youth within the bounds of modesty.

To others, respect is due from those particular stations, which arise from
society and government. Fear God, says the text; and it adds, "honor the king."

It is due also from many other situations in life. Employments, honors, and
even wealth will exact it; and all may justly exact it, in a proper degree.

But it may here perhaps be inquired, why God should permit this latter
distinction among men? That some should have more authority than others, we can
easily see, is absolutely necessary in government; but among men, who are all
born equal, why should the goods of life be distributed in so unequal a
proportion?

To this inquiry, it may be answered, that, in the first place, we see nothing
in this, but what is common in all the works of God. A gradation is every where
observable. Beauty, strength; swiftness, and other qualities, are varied
through the creation in numberless degrees. In the same manner likewise are
varied the gifts of fortune, as they are called. Why therefore should one man's
being richer than another, surprise us more than his being stronger than
another, or more prudent?

Though we can but very inadequately trace the wisdom of God in his works, yet
very wise reasons appear for this variety in the gifts of fortune. It seems
necessary both in a civil, and in a moral light.

In a civil light, it is the necessary accompaniment of various employments; on
which depend all the advantages of society. Like the stones of a regular
building, some must range higher, and some lower; some must support, and others
be supported; some will form the strength of the building, and others its
ornament; but all unite in producing one regular, and proportioned whole. If
then different employments are necessary, of course different degrees of
wealth, honor, and consequence must follow; a variety of distinctions, and
obligations; in short, different ranks, and a subordination must take place.

Again in a moral light, the disproportion of wealth, and other worldly
adjuncts gives a range to the more extensive exercise of virtue. Some virtues
could but faintly exist upon the plan of an equality. If some did not abound,
there were little room for temperance: if some did not suffer need, there were
as little for patience. Other virtues again could hardly exist at all. Who
could practice generosity, where there was no object of it? Who, humility,
where all ambitious desires were excluded?

Since then providence, in scattering these various gifts, proposes ultimately
the good of man, it is our duty to acquiesce in this order, and "to behave
ourselves lowly, and reverently" (not with servility, but with a decent
respect) "to all our superiors."

Before I conclude this subject, it may be proper to observe, in vindication of
the ways of providence, that we are not to suppose happiness and misery
necessarily connected with riches and poverty. Each condition has its
particular sources both of pleasure and pain, unknown to the other. Those in
elevated stations have a thousand latent pangs, of which their inferiors have
no idea: while their inferiors again have as many pleasures, which the others
cannot taste. I speak only of such modes of happiness or misery as arise
immediately from different stations. Of misery, indeed, from a variety of other
causes, all men of every station are equal heirs; either when God lays his hand
upon us in sickness, or misfortune; or when, by our own follies and vices, we
become the ministers of our own distress.

Who then would build his happiness upon an elevated station? Or who would envy
the possession of such happiness in another? We know not with what various
distresses that station, which is the object of our envy, may be attended. --
Besides, as we are accountable for all we possess, it may be happy for us, that
we possess so little. The means of happiness, as far as station can procure
them, are commonly in our own power, if we are not wanting to ourselves.

Let each of us then do his duty in that station which providence has assigned
him; ever remembering, that the next world will soon destroy all earthly
distinctions. -- One distinction only will remain among the sons of men at that
time -- the distinction between good and bad; and this distinction it is worth
all our pains and all our ambition to acquire.

LECTURE XVII.
The injury of words -- evil-speaking -- lying -- an equivocation -- breach of
promise -- slandering.

WE are next instructed "to hurt nobody by word, or deed -- to be true and just
in all our dealings -- to bear no malice nor hatred in our hearts -- to keep
our hands from picking and stealing -- our tongues from evil-speaking, lying,
and slandering."

The duties comprehended in these words are a little transposed. What should
class under one head is brought under another. "To hurt nobody by word, or
deed," is the general proposition. The under parts should follow: First, "to
keep the tongue from evil-speaking, lying, and slandering;" which is, "to hurt
nobody by word." Secondly, "to be true and just in all our dealings;" and "to
keep our hands from picking and stealing;" which is, "to hurt nobody by deed."
As to the injunction, "to bear no malice nor hatred in our hearts," it belongs
properly to neither of these heads; but is a distinct one by itself. The duties
being thus separated, I shall proceed to explain them.

And, first, of injuring our neighbor by our "words." This may be done, we
find, in three ways; by "evil-speaking, by lying, and by slandering."

By "evil-speaking" is meant speaking ill of our neighbor; but upon a
supposition, that this ill is the truth. In some circumstances it is certainly
right to speak ill of our neighbor; as when we are called upon in a court of
justice to give our evidence; or, when we can set any one right in his opinion
of a person, in whom he is about to put an improper confidence. Nor can there
be any harm in speaking of a bad action, which has been determined in a court
of justice, or is otherwise become notorious.

But, on the other hand, it is highly disallowable to speak wantonly of the
characters of others from common fame; because, in a thousand instances, we
find that stories, which have no better foundation, are misrepresented. They
are perhaps only half-told -- they have been heard through the medium of
malice, or envy -- some favorable circumstance has been omitted -- some
foreign circumstance has been added -- some trifling circumstance has been
exaggerated -- the motive, the provocation, or perhaps the reparation, has
been concealed -- in short, the representation of the fact is, some way or
other, totally different from the fact itself.

But even, when we have the best evidence of a bad action, with all its
circumstances before us, we surely indulge a very ill-natured pleasure in
spreading the shame of an offending brother. We can do no good; and we may do
harm: we may weaken his good resolutions by exposing him: we may harden him
against the world. Perhaps it may be his first bad action. Perhaps nobody is
privy to it but ourselves, Let us give him at least one trial. Let us not cast
the first stone. Which of our lives could stand so strict a scrutiny? He only
who is without sin himself can have any excuse for treating his brother with
severity.

Let us next consider "lying;" which is an intention to deceive by falsehood in
our words. -- To warn us against lying, we should do well to consider the
folly, the meanness, and the wickedness of it.

The folly of lying consists in its defeating its own purpose. A habit of lying
is generally in the end detected; and, after a detection, the liar, instead of
deceiving, will not even be believed, when he happens to speak the truth. Nay,
every single lie is attended with such a variety of circumstances, which lead
to a detection, that it is often discovered. The use generally made of a lie is
to cover a fault; but as the end is seldom answered, we only aggravate what we
wish to conceal. In point even of prudence, an honest confession would serve us
better.

The meanness of lying arises from the cowardice which it implies. We dare not
boldly and nobly speak the truth; but have recourse to low subterfuges, which
always argue a sordid, and disingenuous mind. Hence it is, that in the
fashionable world, the word liar is always considered as a term of peculiar
reproach.

The wickedness of lying consists in its perverting one of the greatest
blessings of God, the use of speech, in making that a mischief to mankind,
which was intended for a benefit. Truth is the great bond of society. Falsehood,
of course, tends to its dissolution. If one man may lie, why not another? And
if there is no mutual trust among men, there is an end of all intercourse and
dealing.

An equivocation is nearly related to a lie. It is an intention to deceive
under words of a double meaning; or words, which, literally speaking, are true,
and is equally criminal with the most downright breach of truth. When St. Peter
asked Sapphira (in the 5th chapter of the Acts) "whether her husband had sold
the land for so much?" She answered, he had: and literally she spoke the truth:
for he had sold it for that sum, included in a larger. But having an intention
to deceive, we we find the apostle considered the equivocation as a lie.

In short, it is the intention to deceive, which is criminal: the mode of
deception, like the vehicle in which poison is conveyed, is of no consequence.
A nod, or sign, may convey a lie as effectually, as the most deceitful language.

Under the head of lying may be mentioned a breach of promise. While a
resolution remains in our own breasts, it is subject to our own review: but
when we make another person a party with us, an engagement is made; and every
engagement, though only of the lightest kind, should be punctually observed. If
we have added to this engagement a solemn promise, the obligation is so much
the stronger; and he who does not think himself bound by such an obligation,
has no pretensions to the character of an honest man. A breach of promise is
still worse than a lie. A lie is, simply a breach of truth: but a breach of
promise, is a breach both of truth and trust.

Forgetfulness is a weak excuse. It only shows how little we are affected by so
solemn an engagement. Should we forget to call for a sum of money, of which we
were in want, at an appointed time? Or do we think a solemn promise of less
value, than a sum of money?

Having considered evil-speaking and lying, let us next consider slandering. By
slandering we mean, injuring our neighbor's character by falsehood. Here we
still rise higher in the scale of injurious words. Slandering our neighbor is
the greatest injury, which words can do him; and is, therefore, worse than
either evil-speaking, or lying. The mischief of this sin depends on the value
of our characters. All men, unless they be past feeling, desire naturally to be
thought well of by their fellow creatures; a good character is one of the
principal means of being serviceable either to ourselves, or others; and among
numbers, the very bread they eat, depends upon it. What aggravated injury,
therefore, do we bring upon every man, whose name we slander? And, what is
still worse, the injury is irreparable. If you defraud a man; restore what you
took, and the injury is repaired. But, if you slander him, it is not in your
power to shut up all the ears, and all the mouths, to which your tale may have
access. The evil spreads, like the winged seeds of some noxious plants, which
scatter mischief on a breath of air, and disperse it on every side, and beyond
prevention.

Before we conclude this subject, it may just be mentioned, that a slander may
be spread, as a lie may be told, in various ways. We may do it by an
insinuation, as well as in a direct manner; we may spread it in a secret; or
propagate it under the color of friendship.

I may add also, that it is a species of slander, and often a very malignant
one, to lessen the merits, or exaggerate the failings of others; as it is
likewise to omit defending a misrepresented character; or to let others bear
the blame of our offenses.

LECTURE XVIII.
Injurious actions -- law and justice different things -- illustrated by
several instances -- malice and hatred arising from the resentment of injuries
-- arising from envy.

HAVING thus considered injurious words, let us next consider injurious
actions. On this head we are injoined "to keep our hands from picking and
stealing, and to be true and just in all our dealings."

As to theft, it is a crime of so odious, and vile a nature, that one would
imagine no person, who has had the least tincture of a virtuous education,
even though driven to necessity, could be led into it. -- I shall not,
therefore, enter into a dissuasive from this crime; but go on with the
explanation of the other part of the injunction, and see what it is to be true
and just in all our dealings.

Justice is even still more, if possible, the support of society, than truth:
inasmuch as a man may be more injurious by his actions, than by his words. It
is for this reason, that the whole force of human law is bent to restrain
injustice; and the happiness of every society will increase, in proportion to
this restraint.

We very much err, however, if we suppose, that every thing within the bounds
of law is justice. The law was intended only for bad men; and it is impossible
to make the meshes of it so strait, but that many very great enormities will
escape. The well meaning man, therefore, knowing, that the law was not made for
him, consults a better guide -- his own conscience, informed by religion. And,
indeed, the great difference between the good and the bad man consists in this:
the good man will do nothing, but what his conscience will allow: the bad man
will do any thing, which the law cannot reach.

It would, indeed, be endless to describe the various ways, in which a man may
be dishonest within the limits of law. They are as various, as our intercourse
with mankind. Some of the most obvious of them I shall cursorily mention.

In matters of commerce the knave has many opportunities. The different
qualities of the same commodity -- the different modes of adulteration -- the
specious arts of vending -- the frequent ignorance in purchasing; and a variety
of other circumstances, open an endless field to the ingenuity of fraud. The
honest fair-dealer, in the mean time, has only one rule, which is, that all
arts, however common in business, which are intended to deceive, are utterly
unlawful. It may be added, upon this head, that if any one, conscious of having
been a transgressor, is desirous of repairing his fault, restitution is by all
means necessary: till that be done, he continues in a course of injustice.

Again, in matters of contract, a man has many opportunities of being dishonest
within the bounds of law. He may be strict in observing the letter of an
agreement, when the equitable meaning requires a laxer interpretation: or, he
can take the laxer interpretation, when it serves his purpose; and at the
loophole of some ambiguous expression, exclude the literal meaning, though it
be undoubtedly the true one.

The same iniquity appears in withholding from another his just right; or in
putting him to expense, in recovering it. The movements of the law are slow;
and in many cases cannot be otherwise: but he who takes the advantage of this
to injure his neighbor, proves himself an undoubted knave.

It is a species of the same kind of injustice to withhold a debt, when we have
ability to pay; or to run into debt, when we have not that ability. The former
can proceed only from a bad disposition: the latter, from suffering our desires
to exceed our station. Some are excused, on this head, as men of generous
principles, which they cannot confine. But what is their generosity? They
assist one man by injuring another. And what good arises to society from hence?
Such persons cannot act on principle; and we need not hesitate to rank them
with those, who run into debt to gratify their own selfish inclinations. One
man desires the elegancies of life; another desires what he thinks an equal
good, the reputation of generosity.

Oppression is another species of injustice; by which, in a thousand ways,
under the cover of law, we may take the advantage of the superiority of our
power, either to crush an inferior, or humble him to our designs.

Ingratitude is another. A loan, we know, claims a legal return. And is the
obligation less, if, instead of a loan, you receive a kindness? The law,
indeed, says nothing on this point of immorality; but an honest conscience will
be very loud in the condemnation of it.

We may be unjust also in our resentment; by carrying it beyond what reason and
religion prescribe.

But it would be endless to describe the various ways, in which injustice
discovers itself. In truth, almost every omission of duty may be resolved into
injustice.

The next precept is, "to bear no malice, nor hatred in our hearts."

The malice and hatred of our hearts arise, in the first place, from injurious
treatment; and surely no man, when he is injured, can at first help feeling
that he is so. But Christianity requires, that we should subdue these feelings,
as soon as possible; "and not suffer the sun to go down upon our wrath."Various
are the passages of scripture, which inculcate the forgiveness of injuries.
Indeed, no point is more labored than this; and with reason, because no temper
is more productive of evil, both to ourselves and others, than a malicious one.
The sensations of a mind burning with revenge, are beyond description: and as
we are at these seasons very unable to judge coolly; and of course, liable to
carry our resentment too far, the consequence is, that, in our rage, we may do
a thousand things, which can never be atoned for; and of which we may repent as
long as we live.

Besides, one act draws on another; and retaliation keeps the quarrel alive.
The gospel, therefore, ever gracious, and kind to man, in all its precepts,
injoins us to check all these violent emotions; and to leave our cause in the
hands of God. "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord:" and he, who,
in opposition to this precept, takes vengeance into his own hands, and
cherishes the malice and hatred of his heart, may assure himself, that he has
not yet learned to be a Christian. These precepts, perhaps, may not entirely
agree with modern principles of honor: but let the man of honor see to that.
The maxims of the world cannot change the truth of the gospel.

Nay, even in recovering our just right, or in pursuing a criminal to justice,
we should take care, that it be not done in the spirit of retaliation and
revenge. If these be our motives, though we make the law our instrument, we are
equally guilty.

But besides injurious treatment, the malice and hatred of our hearts have
often another source, and that is envy: and thus in the litany, "envy, malice,
and hatred," are all joined together with great propriety. The emotions of envy
are generally cooler, and less violent, than those which arise from the
resentment of injury; so that envy is seldom so mischievous in its effects as
revenge: but with regard to ourselves, it is altogether as bad, and full as
destructive of the spirit of christianity. What is the religion of that man,
who instead of thanking heaven for the blessings he receives, is fretting
himself continually with a disagreeable comparison between himself and some
other? He cannot enjoy what he has, because another has more wealth, a fairer
fame, or perhaps more merit, than himself. He is miserable, because others are
happy.

But to omit the wickedness of envy, how absurd and foolish is it, in a world
where we must necessarily expect much real misery, to be perniciously inventive
in producing it?

Besides, what ignorance! We see only the glaring outside of things. Under all
that envied glare, many unseen distresses may lurk, from which our station may
be free: for our merciful creator seems to have bestowed happiness, as far as
station is concerned, with great equality among all his creatures.

In conclusion, therefore, let it be the great object of our attention, and the
subject of our prayers, to rid our minds of all this cursed intrusion of evil
thoughts -- whether they proceed from malice, or from an envious temper. Let
all our malicious thoughts soften into charity and benevolence; and let us
"forgive one another, as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven us." As for our
envious thoughts, as far as they relate to externals, let them subside in
humility, acquiescence, and submission to the will of God. And when we are
tempted to envy the good qualities of others, let us spurn so base a
conception, and change it into a generous emulation -- into an endeavor to
raise ourselves to an equality with our rival, not to depress him to a level
with us.

LECTURE XIX.
Duties owing to ourselves -- temperance -- sobriety -- chastity -- rules for
preserving the purity of our thoughts, words, and actions.

THUS far the duties we have considered, come most properly under the head of
those which we owe to our neighbor; what follows, relates rather to ourselves.
On this head, we are instructed "to keep our bodies in temperance, soberness,
and chastity."

Though our souls should be our great concern, yet, as they are nearly
connected with our bodies, and as the impurity of the one contaminates the
other, a great degree of moral attention is, of course, due to our bodies also.

As our first station is in this world, to which our bodies particularly
belong, they are formed with such appetites, as are requisite to our commodious
living in it; and the rule given us is, "to use the world so as not to abuse
it." St. Paul, by a beautiful allusion, calls our bodies the "temples of the
Holy Ghost:" by which he means to impress us with a strong idea of their
dignity; and to deter us from debasing by low pleasures, what should be the
seat of so much purity. To youth these cautions are above measure necessary,
because their passions and appetites are strong; their reason and judgment
weak. They are prone to pleasure, and void of reflection. How, therefore, these
young adventurers in life may best steer their course, and use this sinful
world so as not to abuse it, is a consideration well worth their attention. Let
us then see under what regulations their appetites should be restrained.

By keeping our bodies in temperance is meant avoiding excess in eating, with
regard both to the quantity and quality of our food. We should neither eat more
than our stomachs can well bear; nor be nice and delicate in our eating.

To preserve the body in health is the end of eating; and they who regulate
themselves merely by this end, who eat without choice or distinction, paying no
regard to the pleasure of eating, observe perhaps the best rule of temperance.
They go rather indeed beyond temperance, and may be called abstemious. A man
may be temperate, and yet allow himself a little more indulgence. Great care,
however, is here necessary; and the more, as perhaps no precise rule can be
affixed, after we have passed the first great limit, and let the palate loose
among variety. -- Nam variae res,
Ut noceant homini, credas memor illius escae,
Quae simplex olim tibi sederit. At simul assis
Miscueris elixa, simul conchylia turdis
Dulcia se in bilem vertent, stomachoq. tumultum
Lenta feret pituita. --
Hor.
Our own discretion must be our guide, which should be constantly kept awake by
considering the many bad consequences, which attend a breach of temperance. --
Young men, in the full vigor of health, do not consider these things; but as
age comes on, and different maladies begin to appear, they may perhaps repent,
they did not, a little earlier, practice the rules of temperance.

In a moral and religious light, the consequences of intemperance are still
worse. To enjoy a comfortable meal, when it comes before us, is allowable: but
he who suffers his mind to dwell upon the pleasures of eating, and makes them
the employment of his thoughts, has at least opened one source of mental
corruption. -- Corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis, animum quoq. praegravat una,
Atq. affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.
Hor. Sat.


After all, he who would most perfectly enjoy the pleasures of the table, such
as they are, must look for them within the rules of temperance. The palate
accustomed to satiety has lost its tone; and the greatest sensualists have
been brought to confess, that the coarsest fare, with an appetite kept in order
by temperance, affords a more delicious repast, than the most luxurious meal
without it.

As temperance relates chiefly to eating, soberness or sobriety relates
properly to drinking. And here the same observations recur. The strictest, and
perhaps the best rule, is merely to satisfy the end of drinking. But if a
little more indulgence be taken, it ought to be taken with the greatest
circumspection.

With regard to youth indeed, I should be inclined to great strictness on this
head. In eating, if they eat of proper and simple food, they cannot easily err.
Their growing limbs, and strong exercise, require larger supplies than
full-grown bodies, which must be kept in order by a more rigid temperance. But
if more indulgence be allowed them in eating, less, surely, should in drinking.
With strong liquors of every kind they have nothing to do; and if they should
totally abstain on this head, it were so much the better. The languor which
attends age, -- Ubive
Accedant anni, et tractari mollius aetas
Imbecilla volet. --
Hor. Sat.
requires perhaps, now and then, some aids; but the spirits of youth want no
recruits: a little rest is sufficient.

As to the bad consequences derived from excessive drinking, besides filling
the blood with bloated and vicious humors, and debauching the purity of the
mind, as in the case of intemperate eating, it is attended with this peculiar
evil, the loss of our senses. Hence follow frequent inconveniences and
mortifications. We expose our follies -- we betray our secrets -- we are often
imposed upon -- we quarrel with our friends -- we lay ourselves open to our
enemies; and, in short, make ourselves the objects of contempt, and the topics
of ridicule to all our acquaintance. -- Nor is it only the act of intoxication
which deprives us of our reason during the prevalence of it; the habit of
drunkenness soon besots and impairs the understanding, and renders us at all
times less fit for the offices of life.

We are next injoined "to keep our bodies in chastity." "Flee youthful lusts,"
says the apostle, "which war against the soul." And there is surely nothing
which carries on a war against the soul more successfully. Wherever we have a
catalogue in scripture (and we have many such catalogues) of those sins, which
in a peculiar manner debauch the mind, these youthful lusts have always, under
some denomination, a place among them. -- To keep ourselves free from all
contagion of this kind, let us endeavor to preserve a purity in our thoughts
-- our words -- and our actions.

First, let us preserve a purity in our thoughts. These dark recesses, which
the eye of the world cannot reach, are the receptacles of these youthful lusts.
Here they find their first encouragement. The entrance of such impure ideas
perhaps we cannot always prevent. We may always however prevent cherishing
them: we may always prevent their making an impression upon us: the devil may
be cast out, as soon as discovered.

Let us always keep in mind, that even into these dark abodes the eye of heaven
can penetrate: that every thought of our hearts is open to that God, before
whom we must one day stand; and that however secretly we may indulge these
impure ideas, at the great day of account, they will certainly appear in an
awful detail against us.

Let us remember again, that if our bodies be the temples of the Holy Ghost,
our minds are the very sanctuaries of those temples: and if there be any weight
in the apostle's argument against polluting our bodies, it urges with double
force against polluting our minds.

But above all other considerations, it behooves us most to keep our thoughts
pure, because they are the fountains from which our words and actions flow.
"Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks." Obscene words and
actions are only bad thoughts matured; and spring as naturally from them, as
the plant from its seed. It is the same vicious depravity carried a step
farther; and only shows a more confirmed, and a more mischievous degree of
guilt. While we keep our impurities in our thoughts, they debauch only
ourselves: bad enough, it is true. But when we proceed to words and actions, we
let our impurities loose: we spread the contagion, and become the corrupters of
others.

Let it be our first care, therefore, to keep our thoughts pure. If we do this,
our words and actions will be pure of course. And that we may be the better
enabled to do it, let us use such helps as reason and religion prescribe. Let
us avoid all company, and all books, that have a tendency to corrupt our minds;
and every thing that can inflame our passions. He who allows himself in these
things, holds a parley with vice; which will infallibly debauch him in the end,
if he do not take the alarm in time, and break off such dalliance.

One thing ought to be our particular care, and that is, never to be
unemployed. Ingenious amusements are of great use in filling up the vacuities
of our time. Idle we should never be. A vacant mind is an invitation to vice.

LECTURE XX.
Covetousness the source of wickedness and misery -- a desiring frame of mind
-- covetousness consistent with prodigality -- particularly to be restrained in
youth -- duties of each station -- an active, useful life recommended -- the
proper motive to such a life.

WE are forbidden, next, "to covet, or desire other men's goods."

There are two great paths of vice, into which bad men commonly strike; that of
unlawful pleasure, and that of unlawful gain. -- The path of unlawful pleasure
we have just examined; and have seen the danger of obeying the headstrong
impulse of our appetites. -- We have considered also an immoderate love of
gain, and have seen dishonesty and fraud in a variety of shapes. But we have
yet viewed them only as they relate to society. We have viewed only the outward
action. The rule before us, "We must not covet, nor desire other men's goods,"
comes a step nearer home, and considers the motive which governs the action.

Covetousness, or the love of money, is called in scripture "the root of all
evil:" and it is called so for two reasons; because it makes us wicked, and
because it makes us miserable.

First, it makes us wicked. When it once gets possession of the heart, it will
let no good principle flourish near it. Most vices have their fits; and when
the violence of the passion is spent, there is some interval of calm. The
vicious appetite cannot always run riot. It is fatigued at least by its own
impetuosity: and it is possible, that in this moment of tranquillity, a whisper
from virtue may be heard. But in avarice, there is rarely intermission. It
hangs, like a dead weight upon the soul, always pulling it to earth. We might
as well expect to see a plant grow upon a flint, as a virtue in the heart of a
miser.

It makes us miserable as well as wicked. The cares and the fears of avarice
are proverbial; and it must needs be that he, who depends for happiness on what
is liable to a thousand accidents, must of course feel as many distresses, and
almost as many disappointments. The good man depends for happiness on something
more permanent; and if his worldly affairs go ill, his great dependence is
still left. Saeviat, atq. novos moveat fortuna tumultus;
Quantum hinc imminuet? --
Hor. Sat.
But as wealth is the only god which the covetous man worships, (for
"covetousness," we are told, "is idolatry,") a disappointment here, is a
disappointment indeed. Be he ever so prosperous, his wealth cannot secure him
against the evils of mortality; against that time, when he must give up all he
values; when his bargains of advantage will be over, and nothing left but tears
and despair.

But even a desiring frame of mind, tho it be not carried to such a length, is
always productive of misery. It cannot be otherwise. While we suffer ourselves
to be continually in quest of what we have not, it is impossible that we should
be happy with what we have. In a word, to abridge our wants as much as
possible, not to increase them, is the truest happiness.

We are much mistaken, however, if we think the man who hoards up his money, is
the only covetous man. The prodigal, though he differ in his end, may be as
avaritious in his means. Alieni appetens, sui profusus.
Sal. de Catil.
The former denies himself every comfort; the latter grasps at every pleasure.
Both characters are equally bad in different extremes. The miser is more
detestable in the eyes of the world, because he enters into none of its joys;
but it is a question, which is more wretched in himself, or more pernicious to
society.

As covetousness is esteemed the vice of age, every appearance of it among
young persons ought particularly to be discouraged; because, if it gets ground
at this early period, nobody can tell how far it may not afterward proceed.
And yet, on the other side, there may be great danger of encouraging the
opposite extreme. As it is certainly right, under proper restrictions, both to
save our money, and to spend it, it would be highly useful to fix the due
bounds on each side. But nothing is more difficult than to raise these nice
limits between extremes. Every man's case, in a thousand circumstances, differs
from his neighbor's: and as no rule can be fixed for all; every man, of
course, in these disquisitions, must be left to his own conscience. We are all
indeed very ready to give our opinions how others ought to act. We can adjust
with great nicety, what is proper for them to do; and point out their mistakes
with much precision: while nothing is necessary to us, but to act as properly
as as we can ourselves; observing as just a mean as possible between
prodigality and avarice; and applying, in all our difficulties, to the word of
God, where these great landmarks of morality are the most accurately fixed.

We have now taken a view of what is prohibited in our commerce with mankind:
let us next see what is injoined. (We are still proceeding with those duties,
which we owe to ourselves.) Instead of spending our fortune therefore in
unlawful pleasure, or increasing it by unlawful gain; we are required "to
learn, and labor truly (that is honestly) to get our own living, and to do our
duty in that state of life, unto which it shall please God to call us." --
These words will be sufficiently explained by considering, first, that we all
have some station in life -- some particular duties to discharge; and secondly,
in what manner we ought to discharge them.

First, that man was not born to be idle, may be inferred from the active
spirit, that appears in every part of nature. Every thing is alive; every thing
contributes to the general good: even the very inanimate parts of the creation,
plants, stones, metals, cannot be called totally inactive; but bear their part
likewise in the general usefulness. If then every part, even of inanimate
nature, be thus employed, surely we cannot suppose it was the intention of the
almighty father, that man, who is the most capable of employing himself
properly, should be the only creature without employment.

Again, that man was born for active life, is plain from the necessity of
labor. If it had not been necessary, God would not originally have imposed it.
But without it, the body would become enervated, and the mind corrupted.
Idleness therefore is justly esteemed the origin, both of disease and vice. So
that if labor, and employment, either of body, or mind, had no use, but what
respected ourselves, they would be highly proper: but they have farther use.

The necessity of them is plain, from the want that all men have of the
assistance of others. If so, this assistance should be mutual; every man should
contribute his part. We have already seen, that it is proper, there should be
different stations in the world, -- that some should be placed high in life,
and others low. The lowest, we know, cannot be exempt from labor; and the
highest ought not: though their labor, according to their station, will be of
a different kind. Some, we see, "must labor (as the catechism phrases it) to
get their own living; and others should do their duty in that state of life,
whatever that state is, unto which it has pleased God to call them." All are
assisted: all should assist. God distributes, we read, various talents among
men; to some he gives five talents, to others two, and to others one: but it is
expected, we find, that notwithstanding this inequality, each should employ the
talent that is given, to the best advantage: and he, who received five talents,
was under the same obligation of improving them, as he who had received only
one; and would, if he had hid his talents in the earth, have been punished, in
proportion to the abuse. Every man, even in the highest station, may find a
proper employment, both for his time and fortune, if he please: and he may
assure himself, that God, by placing him in that station, never meant to exempt
him from the common obligations of society, and give him a license to spend his
life in ease and pleasure. God meant assuredly, that he should bear his part in
the general commerce of life, -- that he should consider himself not as an
individual, but as a member of the community; the interests of which he is
under an obligation to support, with all his power; -- and that his elevated
station gives him no other pre-eminence, than that of being the more
extensively useful.

Having thus seen, that we have all some station in life to support -- some
particular duties to discharge; let us now see in what manner we ought to
discharge them.

We have an easy rule given us in scripture, on this head; that all our duties
in life should be performed "as to the Lord, and not unto man:" that is, we
should consider our stations in life, as trusts reposed in us by our maker; and
as such should discharge the duties of them. What, though no worldly trust be
reposed? What, though we are accountable to nobody upon earth? Can we therefore
suppose ourselves in reality less accountable? Can we suppose, that God, for no
reason that we can divine, has singled us out, and given us a large proportion
of the things of this world, (while others around us are in need), for no other
purpose than to squander it away upon ourselves? To God undoubtedly we are
accountable for every blessing we enjoy. What mean, in scripture, the talents
given, and the use assigned; but the conscientious discharge of the duties of
life, according to the advantages, with which they are attended?

It matters not whether these advantages be an inheritance, or an acquisition:
still they are the gift of God. Agreeably to their rank in life, it is true,
all men should live: human distinctions require it; and in doing this properly,
every one around will be benefited. Utility should be considered in all our
expenses. Even the very amusements of a man of fortune should be founded in it.

In short, it is the constant injunction of scripture, in whatever station we
are placed, to consider ourselves as God's servants; and as acting immediately
under his eye; not expecting our reward among men; but from our great master
who is in heaven. This sanctifies, in a manner, all our actions: it places the
little difficulties of our station in the light of God's appointments; and
turns the most common duties of life into acts of religion.

LECTURE XXI.
Bad company -- meaning of the phrase -- different classes of bad company --
ill-chosen company -- what is meant by keeping bad company -- the danger of it
from our aptness to imitate and catch the manners of others -- from the great
power and force of custom -- from our own bad inclinations.

WE have now gone through our duty to God, our neighbor, and ourselves; and
should proceed, in the order pointed out in the catechism, to consider the
lord's prayer: but it will not, perhaps, be amiss to step a little aside, and
but a little, for the sake of one lesson on a subject, which to youth is very
important; and without the observance of which, every station will be attended
with its peculiar danger: the lesson I mean respects the danger of keeping bad
company.

"Evil communication, says the text, corrupts good manners." The assertion is
general: and no doubt all people suffer from such communication; but above all,
the minds of youth will suffer; which are yet unformed, unprincipled,
unfurnished; and ready to receive any impression.

But before we consider the danger of keeping bad company, let us first see the
meaning of the phrase.

In the phrase of the world, good company means fashionable people. Their
stations in life, not their morals are considered: and he, who associates with
such, though they set him the example of breaking every commandment of the
decalogue, is still said to keep good company. -- I should wish you to fix
another meaning to the expression; and to consider vice in the same detestable
light, in whatever company it is found; nay, to consider all company in which
it is found, be their station what it will, as bad company.

The three following classes will perhaps include the greatest part of those,
who deserve this appellation.

In the first, I should rank all who endeavor to destroy the principles of
christianity -- who jest upon scripture -- talk blasphemy -- and treat
revelation with contempt.

A second class of bad company are those, who have a tendency to destroy in us
the principles of common honesty and integrity. Under this head, we may rank
gamesters of every denomination; and the low, and infamous characters of every
profession.

A third class of bad company, and such as are commonly most dangerous to
youth, includes the long catalogue of men of pleasure. In whatever way they
follow the call of appetite, they have equally a tendency to corrupt the purity
of the mind.

Besides these three classes, whom we may call bad company, there are others
who come under the denomination of ill-chosen company: trifling, insipid
characters of every kind; who follow no business -- are led by no ideas of
improvement -- but spend their time in dissipation and folly -- whose highest
praise it is, that they are only not vicious. -- With none of these, a serious
man would wish his son to keep company.

It may be asked what is meant by keeping bad company? The world abounds with
characters of this kind: they meet us in every place; and if we keep company at
all, it is impossible to avoid keeping company with such persons.

It is true, if we were determined never to have any commerce with bad men, we
must, as the apostle remarks, "altogether go out of the world." By keeping bad
company, therefore is not meant a casual intercourse with them, on occasion of
business; or as they accidentally fall in our way; but having an inclination to
consort with them -- complying with that inclination -- seeking their company,
when we might avoid it -- entering into their parties -- and making them the
companions of our choice. Mixing with them occasionally, cannot be avoided.

The danger of keeping bad company, arises principally from our aptness to
imitate and catch the manners and sentiments of others -- from the power of
custom -- from our own bad inclinations -- and from the pains taken by the bad
to corrupt us. See this subject treated more at large in an anonymous pamphlet,
on the employment of time.


In our earliest youth, the contagion of manners is observable. In the boy, yet
incapable of having any thing instilled into him, we easily discover from his
first actions, and rude attempts at language, the kind of persons, with whom he
has been brought up: we see the early spring of a civilized education; or the
first wild shoots of rusticity.

As he enters farther into life, his behavior, manners, and conversation, all
take their cast from the company he keeps. Observe the peasant, and the man of
education; the difference is striking. And yet God has bestowed equal talents
on each. The only difference is, they have been thrown into different scenes of
life; and have had commerce with persons of different stations.

Nor are manners and behavior more easily caught; than opinions, and
principles. In childhood and youth, we naturally adopt the sentiments of those
about us. And as we advance in life, how few of us think for ourselves? How
many of us are satisfied with taking our opinions at second hand?

The great power, and force of custom forms another argument against keeping
bad company. However seriously disposed we may be; and however shocked at the
first approaches of vice; this shocking appearance goes off, upon an intimacy
with it. Custom will soon render the most disgustful thing familiar. And this
is indeed a kind provision of nature, to render labor, and toil, and danger,
which are the lot of man, more easy to him. The raw soldier, who trembles at
the first encounter, becomes a hardy veteran in a few campaigns. Habit renders
danger familiar, and of course indifferent to him.

But habit, which is intended for our good, may, like other kind appointments
of nature, be converted into a mischief. The well-disposed youth, entering
first into bad company, is shocked at what he hears, and what he sees. The good
principles, which he had imbibed, ring in his ears an alarming lesson against
the wickedness of his companions. But, alas! this sensibility is but of a day's
continuance. The next jovial meeting makes the horrid picture of yesterday more
easily endured. Virtue is soon thought a severe rule; the gospel, an
inconvenient restraint: a few pangs of conscience now and then interrupt his
pleasures; and whisper to him, that he once had better thoughts: but even these
by degrees die away; and he who at first was shocked even at the appearance of
vice, is formed by custom, into a profligate leader of vicious pleasures --
perhaps into an abandoned tempter to vice. -- So carefully should we oppose the
first approaches of sin! so vigilant should we be against so insidious an enemy!

Our own bad inclinations form another argument against bad company. We have so
many passions and appetites to govern; so many bad propensities of different
kinds to watch, that, amidst such a variety of enemies within, we ought at
least to be on our guard against those without. The breast even of a good man
is represented in scripture, and experienced in fact, to be in a state of
warfare. His vicious inclinations are continually drawing him one way; while
his virtue is making efforts another. And if the scriptures represent this as
the case even of a good man, whose passions, it may be imagined, are become in
some degree cool, and temperate, and who has made some progress in a virtuous
course; what may we suppose to be the danger of a raw unexperienced youth,
whose passions and appetites are violent and seducing, and whose mind is in a
still less confirmed state? It is his part surely to keep out of the way of
temptation; and to give his bad inclinations as little room as possible, to
acquire new strength.

LECTURE XXII.
Ridicule one of the chief arts of corruption -- bad company injures our
characters, as well as manners -- presumption the forerunner of ruin -- the
advantages of good company equal to the disadvantages of bad -- cautions in
forming intimacies.

THESE arguments against keeping bad company, will still receive additional
strength; if we consider farther, the great pains taken by the bad to corrupt
others. It is a very true, but lamentable fact, in the history of human nature,
that bad men take more pains to corrupt their own species, than virtuous men do
to reform them. Hence those specious arts, that show of friendship, that
appearance of disinterestness, with which the profligate seducer endeavors to
lure the unwary youth; and at the same time, yielding to his inclinations,
seems to follow rather than to lead him. Many are the arts of these corrupters;
but their principal art is ridicule. By this they endeavor to laugh out of
countenance all the better principles of their wavering proselyte; and make him
think contemptibly of those, whom he formerly respected: by this they stifle
the ingenuous blush; and finally destroy all sense of shame. Their cause is
below argument. They aim not therefore at reasoning. Raillery is the weapon
they employ; and who is there, that has the steadiness to hear persons and
things, whatever reverence he may have had for them, the subject of continual
ridicule, without losing that reverence by degrees?

Having thus considered what principally makes bad company dangerous, I shall
just add, that even were your morals in no danger from such intercourse, your
characters would infallibly suffer. The world will always judge of you by your
companions: and nobody will suppose, that a youth of virtuous principles
himself, can possibly form a connection with a profligate.

In reply to the danger supposed to arise from bad company, perhaps the youth
may say, he is so firm in his own opinions, so steady in his principles, that
he thinks himself secure; and need not restrain himself from the most
unreserved conversation.

Alas! this security is the very brink of the precipice: nor has vice in her
whole train a more dangerous enemy to you, than presumption. Caution, ever
awake to danger, is a guard against it. But security lays every guard asleep.
"Let him who thinks, he stands," says the apostle, "take heed, lest he
fall." Even an apostle himself did fall, by thinking, that he stood secure.
"Though I should die with thee," said St. Peter to his master, "yet will I not
deny thee." That very night, notwithstanding this boasted security, he repeated
the crime three several times. And can we suppose, that presumption, which
occasioned an apostle's fall, shall not ruin an unexperienced youth? The story
is recorded for our instruction; and should be a standing lesson against
presuming upon our own strength.

In conclusion, such as the dangers are, which arise from bad company, such are
the advantages, which accrue from good. We imitate, and catch the manners, and
sentiments of good men, as we do of bad. Custom, which renders vice less a
deformity, renders virtue more lovely. Good examples have a force beyond
instruction, and warm us into emulation beyond precept: while the countenance
and conversation of virtuous men encourage, and draw out into action every
kindred disposition of our hearts.

Besides, as a sense of shame often prevents our doing a right thing in bad
company; it operates in the same way in preventing our doing a wrong one in
good. Our character becomes a pledge; and we cannot, without a kind of
dishonor, draw back.

It is not possible, indeed, for a youth, yet unfurnished with knowledge,
(which fits him for good company) to choose his companions as he pleases. A
youth must have something peculiarly attractive, to qualify him for the
acquaintance of men of established reputation. What he has to do, is, at all
events, to avoid bad company; and to endeavor, by improving his mind and
morals, to qualify himself for the best.

Happy is that youth, who, upon his entrance into the world, can choose his
company with discretion. There is often in vice, a gayety, an unreserve, a
freedom of manners, which are apt at sight to engage the unwary: while virtue,
on the other hand, is often modest, reserved, diffident, backward, and easily
disconcerted. That freedom of manners, however engaging, may cover a very
corrupt heart: and this awkwardness, however unpleasing, may veil a thousand
virtues. Suffer not your mind therefore, to be easily either engaged, or
disgusted at first sight. Form your intimacies with reserve: and if drawn
unawares into an acquaintance you disapprove, immediately retreat. Open not
your hearts to every profession of friendship. They, whose friendship is worth
accepting, are, as you ought to be, reserved in offering it. Choose your
companions, not merely for the sake of a few outward accomplishments -- for the
idle pleasure of spending an agreeable hour; but mark their disposition to
virtue or vice; and, as much as possible, choose those for your companions, whom
you see others respect: always remembering, that upon the choice of your
company depends in a great measure, the success of all you have learned; the
hopes of your friends; your future characters in life; and, what you ought
above all other things to value, the purity of your hearts.

LECTURE XXIII.
Of prayer in general -- its first object is praise -- a second, to solicit the
pardon of sin -- a third, to beg a supply of our wants -- one of the advantages
of prayer, to preserve in our minds a sense of God, and of our dependence upon
him -- together with a sense of our duty; to which it contributes not only in a
natural, but in a spiritual way -- the qualifications of prayer considered --
faith -- humility -- sincerity -- resolutions of amendment -- charity -- to be
offered through the merits of Christ -- ejaculations of praise -- petition --
objections -- praise, an absurd homage -- absurd to inform God of our wants --
absurd to attempt by our prayers, to alter a stated course of things.

BEFORE we enter upon the lord's prayer, which falls next under our
examination, it may be proper to consider prayer in general -- the object, the
advantages, and the qualifications of it; together with some of the most
popular objections, which are made to it.

When we consider the infinite distance between God and man -- between that
being, whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain; and man, with all the
weaknesses of mortality about him; it may at first appear matter of
astonishment, that we are allowed any communication with so great a being. The
distinctions, which worldly policy, and worldly pride, make among mankind, --
among creatures of the same rank, cannot but raise our ideas still higher of
the goodness of God! When we see man treating his fellow creatures with
petulance, and disdain, upon the vile distinctions of station, family, and
fortune; what a lesson to us is the goodness of God! Merciful, mild, and
condescending to our weaknesses, he listens to, and grants, the petitions of
his meanest creatures.

The first great object of prayer is the praise of God. The works of creation
naturally raise it: and the goodness of God, in continuing to us that being,
which we cannot ourselves preserve; and the comforts which we cannot ourselves
procure; brings it home to our feelings. It is a duty, which every rational
creature owes to his creator. It is also one of the best sources of our
happiness. Simple praise, which consists merely in extolling excellence, is a
pleasing theme. But when it is excited by gratitude, it flows with still
greater pleasure. Gratitude has a tendency to improve that happy disposition of
mind, which feels every enjoyment that it possesses.

A second object of prayer is, to solicit the pardon of our sins. God not only
permits, but even injoins us to to do it: and he has appointed penitent prayer,
as one of the means of obtaining pardon. It must ever be accompanied by
confession; as confessing a fault is one of the first steps toward amending
it. In this humiliating employment, we have not only to deplore our own
sinfulness; but the lost condition of human nature. Without being truly
sensible of this, we can neither acknowledge the means, which God has used to
obviate it; nor be grateful for them.

After thanking God for his past goodness, and endeavoring to make ourselves
as worthy as we can of future favors; it is the next object of prayer, to
petition a supply of our wants. Among them the principal is, that of the
assistance of God's holy spirit. It is the constant doctrine of scripture,
that, however necessary our own endeavors are, to make us virtuous; they are
not sufficient alone to do it. Our own feelings and imperfections, in a
thousand instances, must convince us that this is the case. To counteract the
depravity of nature, God has promised us the divine assistance of his holy
spirit: and earnest prayer is the means he has appointed for the attainment of
that end. We are permitted also to pray for our temporal wants. This is indeed
the nicest and most delicate part of prayer. Too thankful for past mercies we
cannot be: too earnest in soliciting the pardon of our sins, and God's
spiritual assistance, we cannot be: but so short sighted are we, that in
begging a supply of our temporal wants, we may easily err. But on these heads,
I shall be more full, in the explanation of the Lord's prayer.

Besides praising God for his mercies; asking pardon for our sins; and beging a
supply of our wants, which are the primary objects of prayer; there are other
great advantages, which are closely connected with it.

Of these the first, is to preserve in our minds a sense of God, and of our
dependence upon him. When we praise God, we are naturally impressed with an
idea of his perfections; and when we beg the forgiveness of our sins, and a
supply of our wants; we are as naturally reminded, that we are weak and sinful
creatures: that we are continually under the eye of an all-powerful Being; and
are in hourly need of his protection, and favor. And if our prayers be
constant, uniform, and fervent; these great truths will be impressed upon our
minds, and become the leading principles of our lives.

Prayer is calculated also to impress us with a sense of our duty; and to keep
us steady in the practice of it. A virtuous wish is a step toward virtue. A
fervent prayer is still a nearer advance. To pray ardently for an increase of
virtue, even in a natural way, must increase it: and to pray frequently, must
tend to preserve it. Indeed, in the whole circle of christian duties, perhaps
there is not one, which has a greater effect in forming the heart, than
rational devotion.

After the advantages of prayer, let us consider the qualifications of it: or,
what concomitant circumstances are necessary to make it an acceptable service
to God. It should be founded in faith; and accompanied with humility,
sincerity, resolutions of amendment, and charity. It should also be offered up
in the name, and through the merits of Christ.

It should first be founded in faith. It is obvious to common sense, that "he
who comes to God, must believe that he is; and that he is a rewarder of them,
who diligently seek him:" otherwise, why should we come to him at all? We ought
therefore to trust his promises, and put up our prayers in the full assurance
of being heard. Even men, when their word is plighted, expect this confidence.
And shall we approach God with less confidence, than we do man?

Secondly, our prayers must be accompanied with humility. Humility is expected,
even when we ask a favor of our fellow creatures. What humiliation then is due
to God, from whom we have every thing to ask; and before whom we have not the
smallest merits to plead? An humble heart is in itself a pleasing sacrifice to
God. The humility of the publican was half his prayer.

They should be accompanied also with sincerity. Mere lip-service can never
please God. It is a mockery of him. Indeed, if our minds are thoroughly
impressed with a sense of God's power and goodness; and of our own weakness and
dependence; our prayers will of course be sincere: we shall find it less
difficult to check the idle wanderings of our thoughts: we shall confess our
sins with an heartfelt contrition; and praise God with unfeigned thankfulness.
I shall just add, that as we should guard, on one hand, against an unanimate
coldness, and insensibility; so ought we, on the other, to avoid all irrational
fervor, in our devotions. The effusions of a heated imagination, cannot be a
pleasing sacrifice to an all-wise God.

But sincere prayer is of little value in the sight of God, if it be not
accompanied with steady resolutions of amendment. If the heart be not improved,
devotion is dead. Its fruit is lost. To implore pardon for our sins, and not
endeavor to avoid them; is showing ourselves to be just so much in earnest, as
to own we are in the wrong; without attempting to get right.

One thing more is necessary to make our devotions acceptable to God; they
should be offered up in the spirit of charity. He who begs forgiveness at God's
hands, in an unforgiving temper, may as well omit his prayers. He had better
omit them. To his uncharitable temper, he only adds a new offense -- that of an
unworthy prayer. It is the constant language of scripture, that "with the same
measure with which we mete, it shall be measured to us again. Give, and it
shall be given unto you. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven."

But no human qualifications alone can carry up our prayers to the throne of
grace. We must have other merits, besides our own, to make them acceptable in
the sight of God -- the all-sufficient merits of our blessed Redeemer. He is
the great mediator between God and man. A holy life makes his merits, ours. All
our prayers therefore should be offered up in his name, and through his most
powerful mediation.

But in the Lord's prayer, no mention is made of the merits of Christ.

It is true; nor could there. When that prayer was composed, the great
atonement was not made. How could it then be pleaded? But we are told, it ought
to be pleaded, as soon as it was made. "Hitherto," said our Savior to his
disciples, a little before his passion, "have ye asked nothing in my name: but
whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you."

When all these qualifications are united; when our prayers are founded in
faith -- when they are accompanied with humility, sincerity, resolutions of
amendment, and charity -- and lastly, when they are offered up in the name, and
through the merits of Christ; we may assure ourselves, that they will be
acceptable in the sight of God.

I shall just add, on this subject, that besides formal prayers, either public
or private, a devout mind will find many opportunities of exercising itself, in
the midst even of business and pleasure. An ejaculation of praise, a single
petition, raised from the heart, in one devout thought, unaccompanied by any
external act, will unquestionably find its way to heaven. This is literally
having God in all our thoughts; and making our lives a continual prayer.

As reasonable a duty, however, as prayer is, objections have been made to it.

Praise, it has been said, is an absurd homage: as if the Almighty Father
could be pleased with the empty praises of a poor insignificant race of
creatures. We are to do all, it seems, to the glory of God. What glory can God
receive from our doings? Does his name in any respect depend upon the breath of
man?

To this objection we answer, that if the real exaltation of God's glory, or if
any addition to his happiness, be supposed to be the intention of praise; the
idea indeed were very absurd. But certainly with regard to man; no employment
can be more adapted to his nature, or in itself more rational, than to praise
his creator. It reminds him of all those great attributes, which, as he praises
them, he learns to imitate. It reminds him of that infinite wisdom and power,
on which he ought always to depend. It reminds him of that tenderness, and
indulgence, which he has so often experienced, and which he ought ever to
praise.

When we are ordered therefore to do every thing for the glory of God, the
expression is merely adapted to common acceptance; and alludes to the glory of
earthly princes, which good subjects advance by obeying the laws. The highest
glory therefore, according to our ideas, which God can receive from his
creatures, arises from their obedience to his commands.

But it is absurd, replies the objector, to inform God of our wants: nay such
information amounts almost to a denial of his omniscience.

Undoubtedly, if it were the intention of the petitioner to inform God; but
this never enters into the idea of a prayer. God has injoined us to pray for a
supply of our wants, as a mean of receiving it. In what manner prayer is
efficacious to this purpose, it is not for us to inquire. One thing is very
obvious, that dependant creatures ought always to be reminded of their
dependent state; and of that Being, from whose bounty they receive every thing
they enjoy. And nothing surely can be better calculated than prayer, to promote
this wise end.

But is not prayer an absurd attempt to alter the stated course of things? And
is it not high presumption to imagine, that God will alter it for the sake of
our petitions?

The objection is founded in ignorance. Do we know what is the stated course of
things? Do we know whether there even exists what the objector calls a stated
course? Or whether God may not reserve all events, as far as free agents are
concerned, in a mutable condition, dependant on circumstances.

In whatever way our prayers are efficacious, it is not our part to inquire. We
have the Almighty's express command for this intercourse with him; and
therefore we ought with thankfulness to comply. He who gave the command, knows
best how to make the compliance with it effectual.

LECTURE XXIV.
Occasion on which the Lord's prayer was composed -- general idea of it --
division into five parts -- the first contains an address of praise --
explanation of the word Father, when applied to God -- of the word heaven --
The second part contains a petition for the general good of mankind -- meaning
of hallowing God's name -- thy kingdom come -- thy will be done.

HAVING thus considered prayer in general, let us now consider the Lord's
prayer.

This prayer was composed by our Savior, upon a request which his disciples
made him; to "teach them to pray, as John taught his disciples." Much of the
substance of it is supposed to have been taken from the Jewish forms, then in
use; from which our Savior, as it appears, selecting proper parts, adapted
them to his own purpose. This mode of composing a prayer was agreeable to his
usual practice; which was to give as little offense as possible to the
prejudices of men. In forming a prayer, therefore, he chose rather to take in
part what he found already established, than to compose one entirely anew.

This prayer was not only intended as a form of prayer in itself, but also as a
model to show us how to fashion our prayers. We have the great lines of
rational devotion marked out; to which we may adapt our own exigencies. This
seems implied in the introduction; "After this manner pray ye." As if our
Savior had said, The precise form of words here given you, needs not always be
adhered to: but let it be your general direction.

The Lord's prayer seems to admit an easy division into five parts.

The first contains an invocation of praise: "Our Father, which art in heaven."

The second contains a petition for the general good of mankind; "Hallowed be
thy name; thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven."

The third part contains a petition for temporal blessings: "Give us this day
our daily bread."

The fourth, for spiritual: "And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from
evil."

The fifth concludes with a profession of our faith. "For thine is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory, for ever and ever."

PART I.
The first part contains an invocation of praise. "Our father which art in
heaven."

The Jews, as far as appears, were not allowed the use of this address to God.
At least they had no idea of it in a christian sense. They were taught rather
to address him by some such awful title, as the "lord Jehovah -- the lord of
hosts -- or the lord who takes vengeance." His power, rather than his
goodness, was the leading character under which they acknowledged him. But the
christian dispensation allows us to address the deity under the tender name of
father. "We have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry abba, father.
The spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ."
Under the gracious appellation of father, we not only acknowledge God as the
creator, and preserver of the world; but hope from him, as a child expects from
his parent, the supply of our wants, assistance in our difficulties, indulgence
to our failings, and pardon for our faults: and these kindnesses in a greater
degree, proportioned to his greater goodness, and power.

By the word heaven, the Jewish language frequently understands pre-eminence. A
city exalted to heaven, means only a city raised to an extraordinary height of
power. When we address God therefore in heaven, we are not taught to conceive
him as stationed in any particular place of abode: God is present, we know, on
earth, as well as in heaven; every where, as well as any where. When we address
ourselves therefore to God in heaven, we mean only to address ourselves to that
God, who is omnipotent, and supreme.

PART II.
After the invocation, the prayer begins, in the spirit of christian
benevolence, with a petition for the general good of mankind: "Hallowed be thy
name -- thy kingdom come -- thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven."

God's name is hallowed, or religiously honored, when his creatures have just
sentiments of him. When we pray therefore, that God's name may be hallowed; we
pray, that mankind may have their minds impressed with just ideas of his
wisdom, power, justice, and other attributes. In a word, we pray, that all
mankind may love, and fear him, as their great benefactor, and judge, -- and
that, in the scripture language, "they may sanctify the Lord God in their
hearts."

We farther pray, that mankind may not only have just sentiments of the deity;
but may be partakers also with us in the purity of religion. "Thy kingdom come."

By kingdom, in the new testament, or the "kingdom of heaven," is generally
meant the christian religion. When John the baptist preached, saying, "the
kingdom of heaven is at hand;" he meant the gospel, or the christian religion,
is about to be established. When we pray, therefore, that "God's kingdom may
come;" we pray, that the christian religion, in its full purity and perfection,
may be established throughout the world; as what must be most conducive to the
happiness of it. This is yet, we see, far from being the case. Great part of
the world never heard of christianity. Great part of it, though they have heard
of Christ, yet acknowledge him not. A large portion even of the christian world
debase christianity almost into heathenism: and great numbers, even where we
suppose christianity purely professed, deny the power of it, by leading wicked
lives. Great reason therefore have we to pray, that God's "kingdom may come."
-- We have ground to hope, from many parts of the prophetic writings, that at
length "the fullness of the gentiles shall come in." And for this event we
devoutly pray; "when the day star shall arise to all the world; and the people,
which sit in darkness, shall see a great light:" when the whole race of mankind
shall join in the psalmist's triumphant song, "the Lord reigns, let the earth
rejoice: yea the multitude of the isles shall be glad thereof."

In consequence of men's having just notions of God, and a true religion to
direct them; we pray, that their lives may be answerable to such advantages;
and that God may be obeyed by mankind on earth, as far as human frailty will
permit, as he is by the angels in heaven: "Thy will be done on earth, as it is
in heaven." -- Angelic obedience we conceive to be perfect: human obedience, we
know, is very defective. Lifeless, and inanimate in our devotions -- negligent
at best in our practice -- our most plausible actions springing often from
unworthy motives; great reason have we to pray, that we, and all mankind may
give the best proof of our religious principles, by emulating the prompt
obedience of angels; and "doing God's will on earth, as it is done in heaven.

LECTURE XXV.
The third part contains a prayer for the supply of our wants -- first of a
temporal kind -- the necessaries of life, all we are allowed to pray for -- the
fourth part contains a prayer for the supply of our spiritual wants -- the
forgiveness of our sins -- and the assistance of God's holy spirit -- the
phrase "lead us not into temptation," considered -- the fifth part contains an
acknowlegement of God's power, and our gratitude -- a paraphrase of the whole.

PART III.
AFTER praying for the general good of mankind; we are instructed to pray for
the supply of our own wants. These are of two kinds, temporal and spiritual.

And first, we are allowed to pray for temporal things. "Give us this day our
daily bread," is all we are allowed: and it cannot possibly, by any mode of
interpretation, extend to more, than the necessaries of life. It is a common
analogy in language, to make some principal thing stand for many of the same
kind. Thus the word faith often stands for the whole of religion; tho it is
only a part. And thus the word bread, in the passage before us, stands for all
the necessaries of life; of which it is the principal. For the necessaries of
life then we are allowed to pray; but not for the superfluities of it. We must
pray in general terms; but must not particularize. For spiritual things, we are
at full liberty; because here we cannot err: but with regard to temporal, so
circumscribed is all our knowledge, that if we go farther, we may run into
error; and in a thousand instances, ask for things, which may prove our ruin.
The apostle warns us against those, "who ask amiss, that they may consume it
upon their lusts."

There is something singular in the repetition of the words, this day, and
daily; as if human nature, so apt to err on this subject, were doubly cautioned
not to be solicitous to lay up a great store for the future: but, to be
satisfied with a moderate provision; and that we should not seem to form in our
hearts, that wicked wish of placing ourselves in a state independent of God.
"Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee;" is a dreadful
sentence upon record against such folly.

PART IV.
Being permitted, with these restrictons, to pray for temporal things; we are
allowed a larger scope with regard to spiritual. On this head, we have two
things to pray for -- that God would pardon our past sins; and assist us in
avoiding sin for the future. Both these requests are contained in the following
words: "Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us;
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil."

First then, we are to beg of God forgiveness of our past sins; and a christian
knows, upon what conditions only they will be forgiven. Without a thorough
repentance of them -- such a repentance, as ends in a reformed life, we know,
it is in vain to expect forgiveness.

Something more also is required. We are instructed to approach the throne of
God in a forgiving temper toward others; when we petition forgiveness for
ourselves: agreeably to those passages of scripture, in which we are told,
"that unless we forgive others, our heavenly father will not forgive us;" and
that, "when we come to the altar, and there remember that we are at enmity with
our neighbor; we must first be reconciled to him, before we presume to offer
our gift: that is, before we make our supplication to God. The forgiveness of
others, therefore, we see, tho not the absolute condition of our own
forgiveness, is however a necessary qualification. Tho alone, it cannot obtain
our pardon; yet, at the same time, our pardon cannot be obtained without it.
Nay, whoever uses the Lord's prayer in an unforgiving temper; instead of
begging a blessing, begs a curse. He begs that God "will forgive him, as he
forgives others;" that is, he proposes his own uncharitable temper as the only
rule, by which he wishes himself to be judged.

Having thus prayed, that God would forgive our past sins; we next beg his
assistance in avoiding sin for the future. It has already been observed, that
in this prayer, no mention is made of the merits of Christ; as the great
atonement was not then offered. We may observe also, that no mention is made of
the Holy Spirit of God; which was not then promised. And yet even then, we see,
men were ordered to pray for the assistance of God; to lead them out of
temptation, and deliver them from evil. In what way God assisted his faithful
servants under the old dispensation; or how that mode of divine assistance
differed from the assistance now afforded us under the dispensation of grace;
is a question of very little importance. Certain it is, that God always did
assist his servants; and never left himself without a witness of his goodness
in the moral, as well as in the natural world. But though this prayer was
composed before the spirit of truth was promised; and when man, of course,
could not use the petition for God's assistance in that sense, in which it was
afterward used by christians; yet the christian sense ought certainly to be
the sense in which it should now be used. When we pray therefore for God's
assistance to "deliver us from evil;" we pray for it in that way, in which God
has graciously promised it in the gospel; that is, through his Holy Spirit.

The mode of expression is rather singular in the phrase, "Lead us not into
temptation." It immediately occurs, how can God lead us into temptation? God,
St. James tells us, "tempts no man."

But the phrase, according to the jewish idiom, means no more, than that God
would lead us out of temptation: that he would not suffer us, in the
scripture language, to be "tempted above our strength; but that he would, with
the temptation, make a way to escape." The purport of the petition therefore
is, that he would graciously conduct us through all the moral difficulties of
this life; and that finally, having passed our pilgrimage here upon earth, he
would take us to himself, safe from all our dangers; and grant us peace in a
happy immortality.

Surrounded by dangers, and difficulties of every kind, great reason have we
for these petitions. Every object around us -- every period of age -- every
station of life -- every temper of mind -- our passions -- our appetites -- our
imagination -- our very reason -- all conspire in furnishing abundant matter
either to mislead or to seduce us. The poor are tempted to dishonesty, and to
repine at God: the rich are tempted by wantonness to forget him. The life of
business, and the life of leisure, abound equally with temptations. The man of
commerce with the world, finds them in company: nor can the recluse avoid them
in solitude. Thus surrounded by temptations, human power is insufficient to
carry us safely through them. To heaven therefore we must pray for assistance.
"With God all things are possible." His power cooperating with our endeavors,
will enable us to meet our adversary on superior ground. "It can lead us out of
temptation; and deliver us from evil."

PART V.
Having thus put up our petitions to God, we conclude with an assurance of our
firmest confidence in him. Faith, we know, is one of the greatest requisites of
prayer. If we do not believe that God is able to grant our petitions, it is
idle to make them. We pray therefore to God -- because, "his is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory, for ever, and ever." He is the supreme disposer of
all events: and his power, like his goodness, is above conception. We have the
firmest confidence therefore, that he is both able and willing to grant all our
reasonable petitions.

The whole prayer then, according to this explanation, may be thus paraphrased:

O thou beneficent Being, our creator, preserver, and father, have mercy upon
the whole race of mankind. May we all have just sentiments of thee. May thy
true religion be established throughout the world; and may men feel its
influence; live suitably to its precepts; and emulate, in their obedience, the
blessed spirits of heaven. -- Grant us such a share of this world's good, as
thou see most proper for us. We ask not for wealth, or power. Grant us the
necessaries of life -- the rest we submit to thee: and may we never, through
the influence of the world, forget our dependence upon thee -- Grant, O Lord,
that we may make ourselves proper objects of thy mercy and forgiveness. May we
have a thorough sense of our own unworthiness; and may that lead us to
contrition, penitence, and steady resolutions of amendment. And may we never
presume to ask thy forgiveness in an unforgiving temper. -- Amidst all the
temptations and difficulties of this world, be thou present with us. Let us not
be tempted above our strength; but let thy gracious spirit always conduct us.
May we exert our own best endeavors in resisting the temptations which arise
from the various deluding objects of the world; and may thy gracious aid render
those endeavors successful. So that finally having finished our course, we
may, after this state of trial upon earth, be received into the eternal
mansions of thy heavenly kingdom. Hear our petitions, O Lord, which are put up
in the fullest confidence and faith in thee. We acknowledge thy power, and
trust in thy goodness, for a proper supply of all our wants.

LECTURE XXVII.
Nature of positive duties -- definition of a sacrament -- its original meaning
-- the several parts of the definition explained -- sacrament of baptism --
significancy of water as a sign -- baptism of infants.

WE have now considered the great duties of faith and obedience; in which
consists the sum of religion. These we commonly call morally right, or right in
their own nature.

Besides these, there is another species of duties, which are called positive.
In their own nature they are indifferent; but are rendered binding, only as
they are appointed by divine authority.

The Jews were burdened with a heavy load of these positive duties. One may
almost say, the spirit of the Mosaic law consisted in them. In ceremonies also
consisted entirely the religion of the heathens. All they knew indeed of
religion was a burdensome ritual, made up of external acts, which had no
reference to life, and manners.

Never was any system of religion so free from the burden of ceremonies as
christianity; never was any religion so purely addressed to the heart. The two
sacraments, of baptism, and the Lord's supper, are the only ceremonies ordained
by Christ; both certainly very apposite -- baptism, as an outward testimony of
our entrance into the christian religion; and the Lord's supper, as an outward
testimony of our continuance in it. The former, of course, is administered only
once; the latter, frequently.

The short account of the sacraments, contained in the catechism, considers
three points; the nature of a sacrament in general -- the nature of the
sacrament of baptism -- and the nature of the Lord's supper.

With regard to the nature of a sacrament in general, it is first asked, how
many sacraments Christ has ordained?

The answer is, Two only, as generally necessary to salvation; viz. baptism,
and the supper of the Lord.

This question points chiefly at the papists, who hold seven sacraments --
baptism, the Lord's supper, confirmation, matrimony, penance, orders, and
extreme unction. Now as the word sacrament is no where defined in scripture; we
have no objection to a dozen sacraments, instead of seven, if the papists choose
it: all we contend for, is, that none of them should be placed upon an equal
footing with baptism and the Lord's supper; which, according to our definition
of a sacrament, are the only two that are ordained by Christ.

The word sacrament originally implied the oath which soldiers took to their
leader; and under this idea it was first adopted into the language of religion.
But its meaning, in the earlier ages, was very indefinite: and we find it used
among the writers of the first centuries, to express any thing mysterious in
religion. By degrees, it obtained a closer acceptance; and among protestants
was, at length, confined merely to baptism, and the Lord's supper. However,
still unfortunately, the old idea of a mystery in some degree cleaves to it;
and has been of prejudice to one of these rites especially; which in itself
seems to be as simple, as it is significant.

We define a sacrament to be an outward, and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace; ordained by Christ himself as a means, whereby we receive the
same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.

In a sacrament, there must first be an outward, visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace; that is, a sensible representation of some benefit received.

A sacrament must, secondly, be distinguished from other ceremonies, by being
ordained by Christ. Common ceremonies the church may decree, and abrogate at
pleasure. They are useful merely for the sake of order; and under different
circumstances, different ceremonies may take place. But a sacrament, as
ordained by Christ, is of perpetual obligation.

Lastly, a sacrament is a means whereby we receive the grace of God, and a
pledge to assure us thereof. -- The gospel, we know, is a gracious covenant
between God and man. On our part, the conditions are faith, and obedience. On
God's part, the forgiveness of our sins, and eternal life. Now the sacraments
of baptism, and the Lord's supper, are the appointed means, whereby we receive,
or declare our acceptance of these conditions; and our resolution of observing
them. And on God's part, they are a kind of pledge, and security, that these
gracious conditions shall be performed. Seals, and signatures, are visible
signs, which have in all ages been thought necessary in the execution of a
covenant: they are necessary to reduce into a formal act, what would otherwise
be only an intention of the mind. In conformity to human ideas, God thought fit
to appoint circumcision, as a ratification of the Jewish covenant. St. Paul
mentions it under the idea of a Romans iv. 11.
seal, by which that covenant was confirmed. -- Under the same idea, the two
sacraments were appointed; and may be considered, on God's part, as his seals
to the covenant of grace: or, (as it is here phrased) pledges to assure us
thereof.

A sacrament, in general, being thus defined, the sacrament of baptism is next
considered; in which, if we consider the inward grace, we shall see how aptly
the sign represents it. -- The inward grace, or thing signified, we are told,
is "a death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness:" by which is meant
that great renovation of nature, that purity of heart, which the christian
religion is intended to produce. And surely there cannot be a more significant
sign of this than water, on account of its cleansing nature. As water refreshes
the body, and purifies it from all contracted filth; it aptly represents that
renovation of nature, which cleanses the soul from the impurities of sin. Water
indeed, among the ancients, was more adapted to the thing signified, than it is
at present among us. They used immersion in baptising: so that the child being
dipped into the water, and raised out again; baptism with them was more
significant of a new birth unto righteousness. But though we, in these colder
climates, think immersion an unsafe practice; yet the original meaning is still
supposed.

It is next asked, What is required of those who are baptized? To this we
answer, "Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and faith, whereby they
steadfastly believe the promises of God, made to them in that sacrament."

The primitive church was extremely strict on this head. In those times, before
christianity was established, when adults offered themselves to baptism, no one
was admitted, till he had given a very satisfactory evidence of his repentance;
and till, on good grounds, he could profess his faith in Christ: and it was
afterward expected from him, that he should prove his faith, and repentance,
by a regular obedience, during the future part of his life.

If faith, and repentance, are expected at baptism; it is a very natural
question, Why then are infants baptized, when, by reason of their tender age,
they can give no evidence of either?

Whether infants should be admitted to baptism, or whether that sacrament
should be deferred till years of discretion; is a question in the christian
church, which has been agitated with some animosity. Our church by no means
looks upon baptism as necessary to the infant's salvation. The catechism
asserts the sacraments to be only generally necessary to salvation, excepting
particular cases. Where the use of them is intentionally rejected, it is
certainly criminal. -- The Quakers indeed reject them on principle: but though
we may wonder both at their logic, and divinity; we should be sorry to include
them in an anathema.
No man acquainted with the spirit of christianity, can conceive, that God will
leave the salvation of so many innocent souls in the hands of others. But the
practice is considered as founded upon the usage of the earliest times: and the
church observing, that circumcision was the introductory rite to the jewish
covenant; and that baptism was intended to succeed circumcision; it naturally
supposes, that baptism should be administered to infants, as circumcision was.
The church, however, in this case, has provided sponsors; who make a
profession of obedience in the child's name. But the nature and office of this
proxy has been already examined, under the head of our baptismal vow.

LECTURE XXVIII.
Sacrament of the Lord's supper -- its end -- significancy of its symbols --
the words "verily and indeed taken" explained -- frame of mind requisite on
receiving it -- other ends in the sacrament, besides those proposed.

HAVING thus considered the sacrament of baptism, the catechism proceeds lastly
to the sacrament of the Lord's supper.

The first question is an inquiry into the original of the institution: "Why
was the sacrament of the Lord's supper ordained?"

It was ordained, we are informed, -- "for the continual remembrance of the
sacrifice of the death of Christ; and of the benefits which we receive thereby."

In examining a sacrament in general, we have already seen, that both baptism,
and the Lord's supper, were originally instituted as the "means of receiving
the grace of God; and as pledges to assure us thereof."

But besides these primary ends, they have each a secondary one; in
representing the two most important truths of religion; which gives them more
force, and influence. Baptism, we have seen, represents that renovation of our
sinful nature, which the gospel was intended to introduce: and the peculiar
end, which the Lord's supper had in view, was the sacrifice of the death of
Christ; with all the benefits which arise from it -- the remission of our sins
-- and the reconciliation of the world to God. "This do," said our Savior,
(alluding to the passover, which the Lord's supper was designed to supersede)
not as hitherto, in memory of your deliverance from Egypt; but in memory of
that greater deliverance, of which the other was only a type: "Do it in
remembrance of me."

The outward part, or sign of the Lord's supper, is "bread and wine" -- the
things signified are the "body and blood of Christ." -- In examining the
sacrament of baptism, I endeavored to show, how very apt a symbol water is in
that ceremony. Bread and wine also are symbols equally apt in representing the
body and blood of Christ: and in the use of these particular symbols, it is
reasonable to suppose, that our Savior had an eye to the Jewish passover; in
which it was a custom to drink wine, and to eat bread. He might have instituted
any other apt symbols for the same purpose; but it was his usual practice,
through the whole system of his institution, to make it, in every part, as
familiar as possible: and for this reason he seems to have chosen such symbols
as were then in use; that he might give as little offense, as possible, in a
matter of indifference.

As our Savior, in the institution of his supper, ordered both the bread and
the wine to be received; it is certainly a great error in papists, to deny the
cup to the laity. They say indeed, that, as both flesh and blood are united in
the substance of the human body; so are they in the sacramental bread; which,
according to them, is changed, or, as they phrase it, transubstantiated into
the real body of Christ. If they have no other reason, why do they administer
wine to the clergy? The clergy might participate equally of both in the bread.
-- But the plain truth is, they are desirous, by this invention, to add an air
of mystery to the sacrament, and a superstitious reverence to the priest; as if
he, being endowed with some peculiar holiness, might be allowed the use of both.

There is a difficulty in this part of the catechism, which should not be
passed over. We are told, that "the body and blood of Christ are verily, and
indeed taken, and received by the faithful in the Lord's supper." This
expression sounds very like the popish doctrine, just mentioned, of
transubstantiation. The true sense of the words undoubtedly is, that the
faithful believer only, verily and indeed receives the benefit of the
sacrament: but the expression must be allowed to be inaccurate, as it is
capable of an interpretation so entirely opposite to that which the church of
England has always professed. -- I would not willingly suppose, as some have
done, that the compilers of the catechism meant to manage the affair of
transubstantiation with the papists. It is one thing to show a liberality of
sentiment in matters of indifference; and another to speak timidly, and
ambiguously, where essentials are concerned.

It is next asked, What benefits we receive from the Lord's supper? To which it
is answered, "The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and
blood of Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine." As our bodies are
strengthened and refreshed, in a natural way, by bread and wine; so should our
souls be, in a spiritual way, by a devout commemoration of the passion of
Christ. By gratefully remembering what he suffered for us, we should be excited
to a greater abhorrence of sin, which was the cause of his sufferings. Every
time we partake of this sacrament, like faithful soldiers, we take a fresh oath
to our leader; and should be animated anew, by his example, to persevere in the
spiritual conflict, in which, under him, we are engaged.

It is lastly asked, "What is required of them, who come to the Lord's supper?"
To which we answer, "That we should examine ourselves, whether we repent us
truly of our former sins -- steadfastly purposing to lead a new life -- have a
lively faith in God's mercy through Christ -- with a thankful remembrance of
his death; and to be in charity with all men."

That pious frame of mind is here, in very few words, pointed out; which a
Christian ought to cherish, and cultivate in himself at all times; but
especially, upon the performance of any solemn act of religion. Very little
indeed is said in scripture, of any particular frame of mind, which should
accompany the performance of this duty; but it may easily be inferred from the
nature of the duty itself.

In the first place, "we should repent us truly of our former sins; steadfastly
purposing to lead a new life." He who performs a religious exercise, without
being earnest in this point; adds only a pharisaical hypocricy to his other
sins. Unless he seriously resolve to lead a good life, he had better be all of
a piece; and not pretend, by receiving the sacrament, to a piety which he does
not feel.

These "steadfast purposes of leading a new life," form a very becoming exercise
to christians. The lives even of the best of men afford only a mortifying
retrospect. Though they may have conquered some of their worst propensities;
yet the triumphs of sin over them, at the various periods of their lives, will
always be remembered with sorrow; and may always be remembered with advantage;
keeping them on their guard for the future, and strengthening them more and
more in all their good resolutions of obedience. -- And when can these
meditions arise more properly, than when we are performing a rite, instituted
on purpose to commemorate the great atonement for sin?

To our repentance, and resolutions of obedience, we are required to add "a
lively faith in God's mercy through Christ; with a thankful remembrance of his
death." We should impress ourselves with the deepest sense of humility --
totally rejecting every idea of our own merit -- hoping for God's favor only
through the merits of our great Redeemer -- and with hearts full of gratitude,
trusting only to his all-sufficient sacrifice.

Lastly, we are required, at the celebration of this great rite, to be "in
charity with all men." It commemorates the greatest instance of love that can
be conceived; and should therefore raise in us correspondent affections. It
should excite in us that constant flow of benevolence, in which the spirit of
religion consists; and without which indeed we can have no religion at all.
Love is the very distinguishing badge of christianity: "By this," said our
great Master, "shall all men know that ye are my disciples."

One species of charity should, at this time, never be forgotten; and that is,
the forgiveness of others. No acceptable gift can be offered at this altar, but
in the spirit of reconciliation. -- Hence it was, that the ancient christians
instituted, at the celebration of the Lord's supper, what they called
love feasts. They thought, they could not give a better instance of their being
in perfect charity with each other; than by joining, all ranks together, in one
common meal. -- By degrees, indeed, this well-meant custom degenerated; and it
may not be amiss to observe here, that the passages See 1 Cor. xi.
in which these enormities are rebuked, have been variously misconstrued; and
have frightened many well-meaning persons from the sacrament. Whereas what the
apostle here says, has no other relation to this rite, than as it was attended
by a particular abuse in receiving it: and as this is a mode of abuse, which
does not now exist; the apostle's reproof seems not to affect the christians of
this age.

What the P. 305.
primary, and what the P. 311
secondary ends in the two sacraments were, I have endeavored to explain. But
there might be others.

God might intend them as trials of our faith. The divine truths of the gospel
speak for themselves: but the performance of a positive duty rests only on
faith.

These institutions are also strong arguments for the truth of christianity. We
trace the observance of them into the very earliest times of the gospel. We can
trace no other origin, than what the scriptures give us. These rites therefore
greatly tend to corroborate the scriptures.

God also, who knows what is in man, might condescend so far to his weakness,
as to give him these external badges of religion, to keep the spirit of it more
alive. And it is indeed probable, that nothing has contributed more than these
ceremonies to preserve a sense of religion among mankind. It is a melancholy
proof of this, that no contentions in the christian church have been more
violent, nor carried on with more acrimony, and unchristian zeal, than the
contentions about baptism and the Lord's supper; as if the very essence of
religion consisted in this or that mode of observing these rites. -- But this
is the abuse of them.

Let us be better taught: let us receive these sacraments, for the gracious
purposes for which our Lord injoined them, with gratitude, and with reverence.
But let us not lay a greater stress upon them than our Lord intended. Heaven,
we doubt not, may be gained, when there have been the means of receiving
neither the one sacrament nor the other. But unless our affections are right,
and our lives answerable to them; we can never please God, though we perform
the externals of religion with ever so much exactness. We may err in our
notions about the sacraments: the world has long been divided on these
subjects; and a gracious God, it may be hoped, will pardon our errors. But in
matters of practice, we have no apology for error. The great lines of our duty
are drawn so strong, that a deviation here, is not error, but guilt.

Let us then, to conclude from the whole, make it our principal care to purify
our hearts in the sight of God. Let us beseech him to increase the influence of
his Holy Spirit within us, that our faith may be of that kind, "which works
by love;" that all our affections, and from them our actions may flow in a
steady course of obedience; that each day may correct the last by a sincere
repentance of our mistakes in life; and that we may continue gradually to
approach nearer the idea of christian perfection. Let us do this, disclaiming,
after all, any merits of our own; and not trusting in outward observances; but
trusting in the merits of Christ to make up our deficiencies; and we need not
fear our acceptance with God.

A CATECHISM; THAT IS TO SAY, AN INSTUCTION TO BE LEARNED OF EVERY PERSON,
BEFORE HE BE BROUGHT TO BE CONFIRMED BY THE BISHOP.
CATECHISM, etc.
Question. WHAT is your Name?

Answ. N. or M.

Quest. Who gave you this Name?

Answ. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism; wherein I was made a member
of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven.

Quest. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

Answ. They did promise and vow three things in my name: First, that I should
renounce the devil, and all his works, the pomps and vanity of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh Secondly, that I should believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And thirdly, that I should keep God's
holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life.

Quest. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do, as they
have promised for thee?

Answ. Yes verily; and by God's help so I will. And I heartily thank our
heavenly Father, that he has called me to this state of salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my life's end.

Catechist. Rehearse the articles of thy belief?

Answer.

I BELIEVE in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth:

And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the virgin Mary* suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried, he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the
dead; he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy catholic church; the communion of
saints; the forgiveness of sins; the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen.

Quest. What do thou chiefly learn in these articles of thy belief?

Anws. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all
the world;

Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind;

Thirdly, in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God.

Quest. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that
you should keep God's Commandments: Tell me how many there be?

Answ. Ten.

Answ. Which be they?

Answer.

THE same which God spoke in the twentieth chapter of Exodus, saying, I am the
Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage.

I. Thou shall have none other gods but me.

II. Thou shall not make to thyself any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord,
thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord, thy God, in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

IV. Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord, thy God, gives thee.

VI. Thou shall do no murder.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbor's wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Quest. What do thou chiefly learn by these commandments?

Answ. I learn two things; my duty toward God, and my duty toward my
neighbor.

Quest. What is thy duty toward God?

Answ. My duty toward God is, to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him
with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my
strength: to worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to
call upon him, to honor his holy name and his word, and to serve him truly all
the days of my life.

Quest. What is thy duty toward thy neighbor?

Answ. My duty toward my neighbor is, to love him as myself, and to do to all
men, as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor, and succor my father
and mother. To honor and obey the king, and all that are put in authority
under him. To submit myself to all my governors, teachers, spiritual pastors,
and masters. To order myself lowly and reverently to all my betters. To hurt
nobody by word or deed. To be true and just in all my dealings. To bear no
malice or hatred in my heart. To keep my hands from picking and stealing; and
my tongue from evil speaking, lying, and slandering. To keep my body in
temperance, soberness, and chastity. Not to covet, nor desire other men's
goods; but to learn and labor truly to get my own living; and to do my duty in
that state of life, unto which it shall please God to call me.

Catechist. My good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things
of thyself, nor to walk in the commandments of God, and to serve him, without
his special grace; which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
prayer. Let me hear therefore, if thou can say the Lord's prayer?

Answer.

OUR Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come: thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: give us this day our daily bread:
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: and
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Quest. What desire thou of God in this prayer?

Answ. I desire my Lord God, our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all
goodness, to send his grace unto me, and to all people; that we may worship
him, serve him, and obey him, as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he
will send us all things that be needful both for our souls and bodies; and that
he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins; and that it will please
him to save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily; and that he will
keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from
everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,
through our Lord Jesus Christ: and therefore I say, Amen. So be it.

Question.

How many sacraments has Christ ordained in his church?

Answ. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation; that is to say, Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord.

Quest. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

Answ. I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace
given unto us; ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the
same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.

Quest. How many parts are there in a sacrament?

Answ. Two: the outward visible sign; and the inward spiritual grace.

Quest. What is the outward visible sign, or form in baptism?

Answ. Water: wherein the person is baptized, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Quest. What is the inward and spiritual grace?

Answ. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness: for being by
nature born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children
of grace.

Quest. What is required of persons to be baptized?

Answ. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God, made to them in that sacrament.

Quest. Why then are infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform them?

Answ. Because they promise them both by their sureties: which promise, when
they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Quest. Why was the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ordained?

Answ. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ;
and of the benefits which we receive thereby.

Quest. What is the outward part, or sign of the Lord's Supper?

Answ. Bread and wine; which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Quest. What is the inward part, or thing signified?

Answ. The body and blood of Christ; which are verily and indeed taken, and
received by the faithful in the Lord's supper.

Quest. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?

Answ. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ; as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Quest. What is required of them who come to the Lord's supper?

Answ. To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former
sins; steadfastly purposing to lead a new life; have a lively faith in God's
mercy through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death; and be in
charity with all men.

INDEX.
A
VOL. I.
ATHANASIAN Creed, Pages. 20 Apostles Creed, Pages. 28 Ascension of Christ
examined, Pages. 113
VOL. II.
Authority legal, submission to it, Pages. 8 Active Life recommended, Pages. 86
B
VOL. I.
Body, the Resurrection of, Pages. 156
VOL. II.
Brotherly Affection, Pages. 7 Betters, our Duty to, ib. Baptism, Sacrament of,
Pages. 169
C
VOL. I.
Catechism, Pages. 193 Catechism, History of, Pages. 3 Cranmer, Archbishop,
employed in composing the Catechism, Pages. 4 Creeds, History of, Pages. 19
Christ, Grounds of our Belief in him, Pages. 51 Corruption of the Church, an
Object of Prophecy, Pages. 66 Christian Religion, the combined Force of its
Evidence, Pages. 76 Confucius, a remarkable Passage from him quoted, Pages. 83
Communion of Saints, Pages. 132 Commandments, Ten, Pages. 167
VOL. II.
Children to Parents, Duty of, Pages. 3 Commerce, Knaveries practiced in it,
Pages. 53 Contracts, Knaveries practiced in them, Pages. 54 Chastity, Pages. 72
Covetousness, its Mischief, Pages. 80 Company, bad, Pages. 95 Character,
affected by bad Company, Pages. 108
D
VOL. I.
Damned, State of; Heathen Ideas of it, Pages. 163
VOL. II.
Debts, just, witholding them, iniquitous, Pages. 55 Duties of Life, by what
Rule performed, Pages. 90 Daily Bread explained, Pages. 149
E
VOL. I.
Eternity of a future Sat, Pages. 158
VOL. II.
Evil-speaking explained, Pages. 38 Equivocation, its Wickedness, Pages. 42
Envy, Pages. 59 Ejaculation, what Pages. 128
F
VOL. I.
Fear of God explained, Pages. 174
VOL. II.
Father, Appellation ^f God in Prayer, Pages. 140 Forgiving Temper, required in
Prayer, Pages. 152
G
VOL. I.
God, Being of, proved, Pages. 35 Gentiles, their Call an Object of Prophecy,
Pages. 61
VOL. II.
Government, its End, Pages. 10 Generosity, false, described, Pages. 55
H
VOL. I.
Hell, Descent into, explained, Pages. 93 Holy Ghost, Belief in, explained,
Pages. 121 Holy Catholic Church, its Meaning, Pages. 131 Honor due to God's
Name, Pages. 193 Honor due to God's Word, Pages. 207
VOL. II.
Habit, its Force, Pages. 101 Heaven, explained, Pages. 141 Hallowing God's
Name, Pages. 142
I
VOL. I.
Jews, Dispersion of, an Object of Prophecy, Pages. 62 Judgment, last,
scriptural Account of it examined, Pages. 115 Inspiration explained, Pages.
124.
VOL. II.
Ingratitude, Pages. 56 Inclinations, bad, Pages. 103
K
VOL. II.
Knowledge, its great End, Pages. 14 Kingdom of Heaven, Pages. 143
L
VOL. I.
Love of God explained, Pages. 176 Love of our Neighbor, Pages. 222
VOL. II.
Labor, its moral Use, Pages. ^5 Lying examined, Pages. 40 Law and Justice,
distinct Ideas, Pages. 52 Lord's Prayer, Pages. 137 Lord's Supper, Pages. 177
M
VOL. I.
Miracles, those of the Gospel examined, Pages. 56 Mahomet, Idea of his
Religion, Pages. 64 Miracles, Distinctions between true and false, Pages. 71
VOL. II.
Malice, Pages. 57 Manners easily caught in Youth, Pages. 100
N
VOL. I.
Nowel, Dr. employed in composing the Catechism, Pages. 6 Name given in
Baptism, Pages. 9 New Testament, its Authenticity proved, Pages. 22
O
VOL. I.
Objections to the Authenticity of Scripture, Pages. 28 Objections of Atheism,
Pages. 41 Objections to Miracles, and Prophecies, Pages. 71 Objections to the
Resurrection of Christ, Pages. 102 Oaths, Pages. 194
VOL. II.
Obedience of Children to Parents, Pages. 5 Oppression, Pages. 56 Opinions,
easily caught in Youth, Pages. 101 Objections to Prayer, Pages. 129
P
VOL. I.
Paul's (St.) Doctrine of Faith, Pages. 13 Pliny, his Testimony concerning
Christ, Pages. 52 Prophecy, the Evidence of, considered, Pages. 58 Prophecies,
Distinction between true and false, Pages. 74 Plato, remarkable Passages from
him, with regard to a Divine Instructor, Pages. 80 Pontius Pilate, why
mentioned in the Creed, Pages. 92 Pontius Pilate, Acts of, no Reason to call
them in Question, Pages. 101
VOL. II.
Promise, Breach of, Pages. 43 Presumption, its Danger, Pages. 109 Prayer, its
Object, Pages. 118 Prayer, its Advantages, Pages. 121 Prayer, its
Qualifications, Pages. 123 Prayer, Lord's, Pages. 137 Prayer, Lord's,
paraphrased, Pages. 158 Positive Duties, Pages. 163
R
VOL. I.
Renouncing the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, Pages. 10 Resurrection of
Christ examined, Pages. 95 Right Hand of God explained. Pages. 114
VOL. II.
Respect of Children to Parents. Pages. 4 Religion, an early Attention to it
recommended, Pages. 16 Rights, just, withholding them iniquitous, Pages. 54
Ridicule, its Power, Pages. 107
S
VOL. I.
Sponsors, Use of, Pages. 8 Suetonius's Testimony of Christ, Pages. 51 Shiloh,
its Signification, Pages. 63 Suetonius, remarkable Passages from him, with
regard to the Messiah, Pages. 80 Sallust, his Account of Lentulus's Conspiracy,
Pages. 81 Satisfaction of Christ explained, Pages. 136 Sin, its different
kinds, Pages. 148 Soul, its Immortality, Pages. 155 Sabbath, Grounds of its
Observance, Pages. 186 Swearing, common, its pernicious Tendency, Pages. 196
Serving God truly all the Days of our Life explained, Pages. 215
VOL. II.
Succouring Parents, Duty of, Pages. 6 Society, Ends of, Pages. 8 Stations,
different, accounted for, Pages. 28 Slandering, its Malignity, Pages. 45
Sobriety, Pages. 69 Sacrament, Nature of, in general, Pages. 165
T
VOL. I.
Tacitus, his Testimony concerning Christ, Pages. 52 Tacitus, a remarkable
Passage from him, with regard to the Messiah, Pages. 81 Trust in God, Pages.
191
VOL. II.
Temperance explained, Pages. 66 Trespasses, Forgiveness of, Pages. 151
Temptation, lead us not into, explained, Pages. 155
V
VOL. I.
Vow, baptismal, Pages. 8 Virgil, remarkable Passages in his Pollio, Pages. 82
W
VOL. I.
Wake, Archb. his Commentary on the Catechism, Pages. 5
VOL. II.
Words, how injurious, Pages. 38
Y
VOL. II.
Youth, the fittest Season for our Improvement, both in Knowledge and Religion,
Pages. 18
FINIS.

