ARISTOTLE's MASTERPIECE: OR THE Secrets of Generation Displayed in all the
Parts thereof; CONTAINING 1. The Signs of Barrenness. 2. The way of getting a
Boy or Girl. 3. Of the likeness of Children to Parents. 4, Of the Infusion of
the Soul into the Infant. 5. Of monstrous Births and the Reasons thereof. 6. Of
the benefit of Marriage to both Sexes. 7, The Prejudice of unequal Matches. 8.
The discovery of Insufficiency. 9. The cause and cure of the Green Sickness. 10
A Discourse of Virginity. 11. How a Midwife ought to be qualified. 12.
Directions and Cautions to Midwives. 13. Of the Organs of Generation in Women.
14. The Fabric of the Womb, 15 The use and action of the Genitals. 16. Signs
of Conception, and whether of a Male or Female, 17. To discover false
Conception. 18, Instructions for Women with Child. 19. For preventing
Miscarriage 20. For Women in Childbed, 21. Of ordering newborn Infants; and
many other very useful Particulars, To which is added, A word of Advice to both
Sexes in the Act of Copulation, and the Pictures of several Monstreus Births.

Very necessary for all Midwives, Nurses and Young-Married-Women.

London, Printed for W. B. and to be sold by most Booksellers in London and
Westminster. 1704.

The Introduction.
IT plainly appears in holy Writ, that this glorious Universe bespangled with
gaudy Fires, and every where adorned with wonderful Objects proclaiming the
wisdom and Omnipotence of the Great Workmaster, who in Six Days erected all
things or his Pleasure, was at first drawn out of Nothing, or at most a
Formless Chaos of ^onfusion, a disordered and confounded heap (...) jarring
Elements, tossed and jumbled to^ether under the dismal Shades of dying Night,
Eldest of Things; no Fruit or Plea^^re no Creature that had Breath, had being
(...) the place this lower world possesses, till ^od out of the Abundance of
his Goodness ^nt forth his Holy Spirit, who, Dove like, with mighty out-spread
VVings, s^t brood^^g on the vast Abyss, and made it pregnant: ^hen Light put
Darkness soon to Flight, and (...) the glorious Lamp^ of Heaven appear, all
^reatures soon had Being, and every Plant, ^ree, Herb, or Flower of fragant
Smell, ^^ung from the verdant Earth, raised by ^ommand above the Waters; every
thing (...) use having Seed in it self, that no second ^^eation needed. But
still that Lordly ^reature, who should rule other Creatures, being wanting, he
was framed more glorious than all the Creatures, as not made without mature
Counsel and Deliberation and stamped in the Divine Similitude, inspired with
the infused Breath of Life, beyond what any other Creature durst to boast: The
Contemplation of which, long since made the Royal Psalmist break out into this
Rapture; What is Man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou
visitest him? Thou made him a little lower than the Angels, and have crowned
him with Glory and Honor. Thou make him to have Dominion over the wo^k^ of
thy Hands, and have put all things under his Feet. Psalm. 8.4, 4, 6.

Thus, I say, when God had created the world and furnished it with whatsoever
seemed good i^ his Sight, and that there was nothing wantin^ for necessary use,
Commodity and Pleasure, i^ seemed good to him then, to make one that might use
them to his Glory, and take delight in re^joicing in them. Wherefore when
Natures Or^naments were all complete, he brought Man in^to the World, as into
his own possession; an^ that he might not be disconsolate, nor solitary gave
him a Woman for a Helper and Comp^^nion, infusing into them a Fource of Love,
an^ Desire toward each other, and of procreating their Likeness; having
prepared for that purpose, a swelling Humor or Spirit, and organical Parts;
and that the one through fear of neglect, should not be induced to decline the
Society of the other, he added Allurements and Desire of mutual Embracings,
that so they might in Procreation be sweetly affected and delighted by wondrous
Ways: For unless this was natural to all kind of Creatures, they would be
regardless of Posterity, and Proc^eation would cease, whereby Mankind would
quickly be lost; and the Affairs of Mortals of no continuance. But that this
passionate Desire might strongly operate, as well in sensual Felicity, as on
the Imagination, God has firmly impressed it on all Creatures subject thereto,
both Male and Female, but more especially on Man. And lest it should prove
unruly in him, and not easily subdued; he has thought it convenient to
prescribe him Bounds, and confine him to the Use of the Matrimonial Bed; that
so they might not defile themselves with wandering Lust, who want the Gift of
Continency. Wherefore so soon as Copulation is finished, and the Woman happens
to prove with Child, great is Nature's Cunning in furnishing the Embryo with
convenient Nutriment, that at the set time, when Nine Months are run over, Man,
that Ruler and Ornament of the Sublunary World, may come forth; in relation to
which Mystery of Generation Holy Job, in the Tenth Chapter of his Book, thus
expresses himself; Have thou not poured me out as Milk, and curdled me like
Cheese? Thou have clothed me with Skin and Flesh, and have senced me with
Bones and Sinews. Thou bast granted me Life and Favor, and thy Visitation has
preserved my Spirit.

But not to be too tedious upon this Subject, I shall proceed to unravel the
Mystery of Generation, and diverse other Mysteries: which I hope will be to the
Satisfaction of the Learned and Ingenious of the Age, whose Discretion, I need
not doubt, will keep them from wresting it to any other end than what it was
designed for, viz. The Benefit and Advantage of the m^dest of either Sex, not
desiring that this Book should fall into the Hands of any Obscene and Wanton
Person. whose Folly or Malice may turn that into Ridicule, that loudly
proclaims the Infinite Wisdom of an Omnipotent Creator, who by his mighty
working is able to subdue all things to himself.

Gloria Deo in Excelsis.
Aristotle's Masterpiece: OR, The Secrets of Generation Displayed, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Marriage, and at what Age Virgins and Youths are capable of the
Marriage Bed, and the Reasons that prompts them to desire it, with the Signs of
Barrenness, and how long a Man or Woman are capable of having Children.
THAT Marriage is an Honorable State, ordained by God in Paradise, and since
confirmed by our Blessed Savior, who wrought his first Miracle at a Wedding, I
hope no Body will deny. Therefore it is convenient that PARENTS will take care
of their Daughters Chastity; and when they find them inclinable to Marriage,
not violently to restrain their Affections, but rather to provide for them, if
possible, such Husbands as may be for their Advantage, and with whom they may
live comfortably in that blessed State, lest being crossed in their Purposes,
and delayed, they part with their Honor dishonorable ways.

The propension and inclination of Maids to Marriage, is to be discovered by
many Symptoms; For when they arrive to Maturity (which is usually about the
14th or 15th Year of their Age, according to their respective Habits or
Constitutions) then their Menses, or Natural Purgations begin to flow: and the
Blood, which is no longer taken to augment their Bodies, abounding, incites
their Minds and Imaginations to Venery. External Causes also may promote and
excite them to it; for the Spirits being brisk, and in a manner inflamed* when
they arrive at this Age, if they eat salt, sharp Things, Spices, etc. whereby
the Body becomes still more and more heated, then the Inclination and Proneness
to Venerial Embraces is very great: nay, sometimes almost inseparable. And a
due use of these Enjoyments being denied to Virgins, very often produces very
dismal Effects, as green and Weasel-Colour, short Breathings, Tremblings of the
(...), etc. But if they happen to be married to their own Content, those
Afflictions vanish, and their Native Beauty returns more gay than before. Nor
is their eager gazing, and desiring to associate themselves with Men a less
Sign that Nature prompts them to desire what she ordained their due; of which
being sometimes by obdurate Parents debarred in a lawful Way, they break the
Bounds of Modesty rather than endure such violent Agitations and Conflicts
within themselves, and so satiate their Desires in unlawful Love. The same may
in all particulars be observed in young brisk Widows. whom Death (that Enemy of
sweet conjugal Love) has separated from the Bosom of their Husbands.

At 14 Years of Age, commonly the Menses in Virgins begin to flow, and their
they are capable of conceiving, and so contitinue generally to Forty-four; at
what time for the most part they are no longer capable of Generation, unless
such as are exceeding healthful, strong of Body, and have used themselves to
Temperance, who have appeared to be delivered of Children till 55 Years; but
such Prodigies rarely happen, although the Menses continue longer in some Women
than in others, but many times such Efflux proceeds not from any natural cause,
but by reason of some violent Straining, or other Violence, and does often
endanger the Life of the Party: And therefore Young Men that marry Women
surmounting the Age aforesaid, if they expect Children unless by Miracle, must
labor against the Wind: Though if an Old Man, that is not worn out by Diseases
and Incontinency, marry a brisk lively Lass, there is hopes even to Threescore
and Ten, and some that are extraordinary lusty, till Fourscore.

Hypocrates, that Famous and Learned Physician, is of Opinion, that a Youth at
16 Years, or between that and 17, having much Vital Strength, may be capable of
getting Children, and that Force and Heat of procreating Matter continually
increases till 45, 50, and 65. And at the end of the latter begins to flag, the
Seed by little and little becoming unfruitful, the natural Spirits being
extinguished, and the Humors dried up; and in general, most Physicians to this
day do observe it; but as to particulars, as I have before mentioned, it often
happens otherwise; nay, it is reported by a credible Author, that in the Reign
of Ere^us, King of Swedeland, a Man was married at an Hundred Years old to a
Bride of Thirty, and had many Children by her; but looked so fresh, that such
as knew him not, took him not to exceed that Age.

In Campania, where the Air is temperate, serene, and calm, Men of 80 Year
usually marry Young Virgins, and have Children by them; which argues that Age
in Men hinders not Procreation, unless they be exhausted in their Youth, and
their Members shrivelled up. If any ask why a Woman is sooner barren than a
Man? I answer, The Cause is the natural Heat, which is more predominant in the
latter than in the former: For since a Woman is more moist than a Man, as her
Monthly Purgations do most evidently demonstrate, as also the softness of her
Body; it is also apparent that he does exceed her in native Heat; and as for
that Heat, it is the chief thing that concocts the Humors into good and proper
Aliment; which the Woman wanting, grows fat; when a Man, by reason of that
Heat, melts his Fat by Degrees and his Humors are dissolved, and by the
Benefit thereof they are elaborated into Seed. And this may, for the better
confirmation of what I propose, be added, That the Woman generally is not so
strong as a Man, nor so wise and ingenious in contriving her Affairs, whereby
the Faculties are hindered in their Operation. And so I conclude my Assertion.

CHAP. II. General and Particular Rules laid down by Learned Physicians* how to
proceed in getting a Male, or Female Child, and of the Embryo and perfect
Birth, and the fittest Season for Copulation.
WHEN a young likely Couple have entered the holy State of Wedlock, and are
desirous of mutual Enjoyment for Generation-sake, which is the chief end for
which Wedlock was ordained, and rather covet to be blessed with one Sex than
another, let them know fitst for certain, that the success of such things
depends upon Divine Providence though secondary Causes must be active and
instrumental therein, and those are especially two; First, The Genital Humor,
which is brought by the Arteriae Praeparantes to the Testes in the Form of
Blood, and there elaborated into Seed by the Seminifical Faculty resident in
them. To which may be added the Appetite and Desire to Copulation, which fires
the Imagination with unusual Fancies, or by the sight of a brisk, charming
Beauty, whose Wit and Liveliness may much entice, and more inflame the Courage;
But if Nature be enfeebled, then are there fit Artificial Remedies to restore
it, viz. Such Meats as most conduce to the affording such Aliment as proves to
make Seed abound, and restore the Decays of Nature, that the Faculties may
freely operate: For as dung and good muturing restores Ground that is worn out,
and heartless, even so seasonable and proper Diet operates to the restoring the
faint Heart, weak Spirit, coldness and dryness of the Genital parts, and
reduces the weakness of the Nerves to their Temperament, and removes
Impediments, obstructing the Procreation of Children. Then since Diet may and
will after the evil state of the Body to a better, it is necessary that such as
are subject to Barrenness, should eat such Meats only as tend to render them
fruitful; and among such things as are inducing and stirring up thereto, are
all Meats of good Juice, that nourish well, and make the Body lively and full
of Sap, of which faculty are all hot moist Meats: for according to Galen, the
substance of Seed is made of the pure concocted and windy superfluity of Blood;
from whence we may conclude there is in many things a power to accumulate or
heap up Seed, as also to augment it, and other things of force to cause
Erection, as Hen-Eggs, Pheasants, Wood-cocks, Gnatsappers Thrushes,
Black-birds, young Pigeons, Sparrows, Patridges, Capons, Almonds, Pine-Nuts,
Raysons, Currants, all strong Wines moderately taken, especially those made of
the Grapes of Italy; but Erection is chiefly caused and provoked by Styrium,
Eringoes, Cresses. Erysimum, Parsnip^, Artichoaks, Turnips, Rapes, Asparagus,
Candy'd Ginger, Gallinga, Acorns bruised to Powder, and drank in Muscadine,
Scallions, Sea-Shell-Fish, etc. All these (though excellent Restoratives) will
not have present Operation, but you must use yourself to them for a
considerable time or else you will reap little or no benent by them. The Act of
Coition being over, ( wheren the force of Imagination is certainly very
prevalent in the causing of the Child to be of this or that Sex) the Woman (say
the Ancients) must gently repose on her Right Side, with her Head lying low,
and her Body sinking down, that by sleeping in that posture, the Cell on the
Right Side of the Matrix may prove the Place of Conception, in which is the
greatest force of Generative Heat, which is the chief Inducement to the
Procreation of Male Children, and rarely fails to answer the expectation of
those that experience it, especially if they keep themselves warm, and without
much Motion, leaning for the most part to the Right, and drinking a little of
Spirit of Saffron, and Juice of Hysop in a Glass of Mallaga, or Aligant, when
they lie down and rise, for the space of a Week. Now the fittest time (they
say) for the Procreation of Male Children is, when the Sun is in Leo, and the
Moon's in Virgo, Scorpio or Sagittarius.

This Order they will also have observed for a Female Child, by lying as
aforesaid on the left side, and strongly fancying a Female in the time of
Procreation, especially if the Woman drink the Decoction of Female Mercury, 4
days from the 1st day of Purgation; the Male Mercury (both Herbs so called)
having the like Operation in case of a Male Child; for the Juice or Decoction
of those Simples are of Force, the one to purge the Right, and the other the
Left Side of the Womb, and thereby open the Receptacles, making way for the
Seminary of Generation: And the best time to copulate for this Sex is, when the
Moon is in the wane, and the sign in Libra or Aquarius, for then they will be
of a most gentle, affable temper, very fair, and perfect in all their members.
Avicenna, an Author of good repute, describes the time of Procreation thus:
When (says he) the Menses are spent, and the Womb is cleansed, which is
commonly 5 days, or 7 at most, if a man lie with his wife from the first day
she is purged to the fifth, she will conceive a Male; but from the fifth to the
eight a Female, and from the eighth to the twelfth a Male again: But after that
number of days, perhaps neither distinctly, but both in an Hermophradite.

In a word, They that would be commended to their Wedlock Actions, and be happy
in the fruit of their Labor, must observe to copulate at distance of time, not
too often, nor yet too seldom, for both these hurt Fruitfulness alike; for to
eject immoderately weakens a Man and wastes his Spirits, and too often causes
the Seed by long continuance to be ineffectual and not Manly enough. And thus
much for the first general and particular; from whence I shall proceed to the
second, which is to give the Reader to understand how the Child is formed in
the Womb, and what Accidents it is incident to, how, nourished, and how brought
forth,

Certain it is, there are various Opinions concerning this matter: therefore I
shall for the satisfaction of the curious, lay down the Opinion of the Learned,
as thus, Man consists of an Ovum, or Eg impregnated in the Ovaria or Testieles
of the Woman, by the more subtle part of Man's Seed; but there is a forming
Faculty and Virtue in the Seed from a Divine and Heavenly Gift, it being
abundantly endued with Vital and Etherial Spirit, which gives Shape and Form to
the Embryo; so that all the parts and bulk of the Body which is made up in the
space of many months, and is by Degrees framed and formed into a decent and
comely Figure of a Man, do consist in that, and are adumbrated thereby: On
which holy David contemplating, fell into his Divine Rapture and Admiration,
expressed in Psalm. 138. I will praise thee* O Lord, because I am wonderfully
made: Thy Works are wonderful. My Soul searches and knows it right well.
Thou know all my Bones when I was Fashioned in the secret place, and when I
was wonderfully formed in my Mother's Womb. Thy Eyes beheld me yet unmade, and
in thy Book were all my Members written, which day by day were fashioned. Thy
Knowledge is wonderful unto me, whereby I was made, I cannot understand it,
etc. And Physicians that have narrowly contemplated Man's Nature, constitute
four different Times, wherein this Microsm, or little World, is framed, and
perfected in the Womb.

The first is immediately after Coition, and is said to be perfected in the
first Week, if no Efflux happen, which sometimes fall out through the
slipperiness of the Matrix, or the Head thereof that shifts over like a
Rose-bud, opening on a sudden, by reason of some cold Distemper, or
over-weariness in Travel.

The second time of forming is constituted when Nature, and the force of the
Womb, by the use of her own imbred Forces and Virtue, makes a manifest Mutation
in the Conception, so that all the Substance seems Congealed Flesh and Blood,
which happens about the Twelfth and Fourteenth day after Copulation; and though
this Concreation, or Fleshly Mass abound with hot fiery Blood, yet it remains
undistinguishable without form of Figure, and may be called the rough Draught,
or Embrio, and well likened to Seed which is sown in the Ground, which through
kindly Heat and Moisture, grows up by degrees into a perfect Form, either in
Plant or Grain; or as when a Potter Fashons a Vessel out of a rude lump of Clay.

The third time to make up this Fabric, is set when the principle Parts show
themselves evidently and perspiciously; as the Heart, from whence proceeds the
Arteries; the Brain, from which the Nerves proceed like many small Threads
running through the whole Body; and the Liver, whose Office it is to separate
the Bile from the Blood, brought to it by the Vana Portae. The two first are
the Seeds and Fountains of Life, that nourish and support each part of the
Body; in framing which, the Faculty of the Womb is busied from the time of
Conception to the Eighteenth Day of the first Month.

But Lastly, which time reaches to the 28 or 30th day, the outward parts are
seen exquisitely elabourted and distinguished by Joints, and then the Child
begins to grow and pant; from which progress of days, by reason the Limbs are
divided, and the whole frame is perfect, it is no longer held an imperfect
Child or Embrio, that is, a Concretion that springs forth, but is held to be a
perfect and absolute Child. Males for the most part are perfect by the 30th
day, but Females seldom, till the 42 or 45 day; and the reason why the one is
sooner perfected than the other, is, That the heat of the Womb is greater in
producing the Male than the Female: For heat extends the Humor like soft Wax,
diffusing and dilating it, and then by its force, Contracting, Framing, and
Fashoning it, so Heat and Vigor of the Body, and Alacrity of Nature in the
Man, makes the Male to move in 3 Months but the Female rarely under 4, at which
time also his Hair and Nails comes forth, and the Child begins to stir, kick
and tumble in the Womb; so that the motion is plainly perceived, and the Woman
are troubled with Nauseating and Loathing of their Meat, and oftentimes covet,
and greedily long for things contrary to Nutriment; as Coals, Rubbish, Chalk,
Lime, Starch, Oat-meal, raw Flesh and Fish, or the like, which Desire proceeds
from a former contraction of evil Humors, occasioning impure Blood in their
contained Vessel within, and often occasions Abortion and Miscarriages; some
Women, as it has been noted by diverse Authors of Credit, have been so
extravagent in their Longings, that they have coveted Hob-Nails, Leather, Man's
Flesh, Horseflesh, and the Flesh of diverse Ravenous Beasts, for want of which
they have cast their Birth untimely, or the Child has continued Dead in the
Womb for many days, to the eminent hazard of the Woman's Life: But to proceed
in this great Mystery, I shall unfold by what means the Infant is sustained in
the Womb, and what posture it there remains in.

The Disputes among both Philosophers and Physicians, with what, and by what
way the Faetus is nourished, have been very great; some affirming by Blood
only, from the Vmbilical Vein; others only by Chyle, received in by the Month,
but the Truth is, it is nourished diversely, according to the different degrees
of Perfection, that an Ovum, or Egg passes from a Conception to a Faetus, ready
for the Birth.

But before we proceed, it will not be amiss to explain what we mean by this
Ovum, or Egg. You must know then, that there are in the Generation of the
Faetus two Principles, Active, and Passive: The Active is the Man's Seed,,
which is elaborated in the Testicles out of the Arterial Blood, and Animal
Spirits. The Passive Principle is an Ovum, or Egg, impregnated by the Man's
Seed. For to say that Woman has true Seed, is false, and erroneous. But the
manner of Conception is thus; The most Spirituous part of Man's Seed in the Act
of Generation, reaching up to the Ovarium, or Testicles of the Woman (which
contain diverse Eggs, sometimes more, sometimes fewer) secundates one of them,
which being conveyed by the Ovi-ducts, to the bottom of the Womb, presently
begins to swell bigger and bigger, and imbibes the moisture that is sent
plentifully thither, after the same manner that Seeds in the ground suck the
fertile moisture thereof to make them sprout.

When the parts of the Embryo begin to be a little more perfect, and the
Chorion becomes so thick, that the Liquor cannot soak through it, the Vmbilical
Vessels begin to be formed, and to extend the side of the Amnios, which they
pass through, and also through the Allantides and Chorion and are implanted in
the Placenta, which gathering upon the Chorion, joins into the Vterus. And now
the Arteries that before sent out the nutritious juice into the Cavity of the
Womb, open by the Orifices into the Placenta, where they deposite the said
Juice, which is drunk up by the Vmbilical Vein, and conveyed by it first to the
Liver of the Foetus, and then to the Heart, where its more thin and spirituous
part is turned into Blood, whilst the grosser part of it descending by the
Aorta, enters the Vmbilical Arteries, and is discharged into its Cavity by
those Branches of them that run through the Amnios,

As Soon as the Mouth, Stomach, and Gullet, etc. are formed so perfecty that the
Faetus can swallow, it sucks in some of the grosser Nutritious Juice, that is
deposited in the Amnios, by the Vmbilical Arteries* which descending into the
Stomach and Intestines, is received by the Lacteal (...) as in Adust Persons.

The Faetus being perfected at the times before specified in all its parts, it
lies equally balanced in the midst of the Womb as in the Center, all on a
Head, and being something long, is turned round, so that the Head, a little
inclines, and it lays his Chin on its Breast, his Heels and Ancles upon its
Buttocks, its Hands on its Cheeks* and its Thumbs to its Eyes; but its Legs and
Thighs are carried upwards, with its Hams bending, so that they touch the
bottom of its Belly; the former, and that part of the Body which is over
against us, as the Forehead, Nose, Face, are turned toward the Mother's Back,
and the Head inclining downwards toward the Cocyx or Rumpbone that joins to
the Os^ Sacrum, which bone together with Os Pubis, in the time of the Birth
part, and are loosned; whence ^t is, that Male Children commonly come with
their Faces downwards, or with their Heads turned somewhat Oblique, that their
Faces may be seen; but the Famale Children with their Faces upwards, though
some^imes it happens that Births follow not ac^ording to Nature's Order, but
Children ^ome forth with their Feet straddling, their Necks bowed, and their
Heads lying Oblique, with their Hand stretched out, which great^y endangers
themselves and the Mother, ^iving the Midwife great Trouble to intro^uce them
into the World; but when all things proceed orderly and naturally, the Child,
when Nature's set Bounds are accomplished, is desirous to break its bounds and
come forth of the Womb; and by inclining himself, he rowls downward; for he
cannot longer be obscured in those hiding-places, and the heat of the Heart
cannot subsist without external respiration; wherefore being grown great, he is
more and more desirous of Nutriment and Light; when coveting the Etherial Air*
he by strugglig to obtain it, breaks the Membranes and Coverings, whereby he
was restrained and fenced against Attrition; and for the most part, with bitter
pangs of the Mother, issues forth to view the Days, commonly in the ninth
Month; for then the Matrix divided and the Os Pubis being loosned* the Woman
strives what she can to cast forth her Burden, and the Child doing the like to
get forth, by the help of its inbred strength, the Birth comes to be perfect*
but if the Child be dead, the more dangerous is the Delivery, though Nature, as a
kind Commiserator, often helps the Women's Weakness herein; But the Child
that is quick and lively, labors no less than the Woman.

Now these are Births at Seven or Eight Months, and some Women go to the Tenth
Month. But of these, and the Reason of them, I shall speak more largely in
another place, and at present proceed to unravel other Mysteries of Nature.

CHAP. III. (...) Reason why Children are often like their Parents, and what
the Mothers Imagination contributes thereto, whence grows the Kind, viz.
whether the Man or Woman is the Cause of the Male or Female Child, etc.
THat if a Woman in the Act of Copulation affords most Seed, her Likeness will
^^ve the greater Impression upon the Child; (...) if on the contrary, then will
follow the ^^ntrary effects; or if a proportionable ^uantity proceed from
either, then will (...) Similitude depend upon neither.

Lactantius is of Opinion, That when a ^an's Seed falls on the left side of the
Womb ^ Male Child may be gotten; but by rea^^n it is the proper place for a
Female, there ^ill be something in it greatly resembling ^ Woman, viz. It will
be fairer, whiter, and smoother, nor very subject to have Hair on the Body or
Chin, long lank Hair on the Head, Voice small and sharp, and the courage
feeble; and arguing yet further, he says that a Female may perchance (...)
procreated, if the Seed fall on the right ^^de; but then through extraordinary
Heat, (...) will be very large boned, full of Courage, endued with a Big Voice,
and have her Chin and Bosom hairy, not being (...) clear as other of the Sex,
subject to qua^^rel with her Husband, when married, for the Superiority, etc.
In case of the Similitude, nothing is more powerful than the Imagination of the
Mother; for if she con^ceive in her Mind, or do by Chance faste^ her Eyes upon
any Object, and imprint it i^ her Memory, the Child in its outward part
frequently has some representation the^^of; so whilst a Man and Woman are in
the Act of Copulation, if the Woman earnestl^ behold his Countenance, and fix
her Mind thereon; without all peradventure, the Child will resemble the Father;
nay so powerful is its operation, that though ^ Woman be in unlawful
Copulation, yet (...) Fear, or any thing else causes her to fix he^ Mind upon
her Husband, the Child wi^^ resemble him, tho he never got it, The same effect,
according to the Opinion of the Learned, Proceeds from Imagination i^ cause of
Warts, Mold-spots, Stains, Dashes and the Figures of strange things, though
in^deed they sometimes happen through Fright^ or extravagant Longing: Many Women
there are, that seeing a Hare cross them when great with Child, will through
the strength of Imagination, bring forth a Child with a hairy Lip. Some
Children again ar^ ^orn with flat Noses, wry Mouths, great ^lubber lips, and
ill-shap'd Bodies, and most scribe the reason to the strange conceit of ^he
Mother, who has busied her Eyes and Mind upon some ill-shaped or distorted
Creatures; therefore it properly behooves all Women with Child to avoid any
mon^trous Sight, or, at least, to have a steadfast Mind, not easily fixed upon
any thing more than another. And this Opinion Pliny ^onfirms in his 7th Book of
natural things, and the 12 th Chapter. The famous Sir Thomas More likewise
confirms it, and discants merrily on a Passage of his times, wherein ^ Person
having diverse Children, would own none but what was like him, when ^n the end
it was proved, by the ass^veration of the Mother, that all except that, were of
^is own begetting; but whilst another Man was mounted in his Saddle, she
fear^ng that he would come and detect her in ^he Act, had her Imagination so
fixed on him, that, as she conceived, the similitude ^ould proceed from no
other cause; wherefore it is apparent, that likeness can confirm ^o Child to be
a lawful Father's own; Yet (...) Manners, Wit, and Apprehension of the Mind,
daily Examples teach us, that Children are commonly of the same Condition with
their Progenitors, and of the same nature, but there is much in this; whether
Venery be used with great or weak (...) for many are less inclined to it, and
not (...) hot, and consequently not so desirous (...) Copulation, but rather
decline it, unle^^ Civility to their Wives cause them to co^^pliance therein,
and then they proceed fain^^ing and drowsily, whence it happens th^^ the
Children fall short of their Parent's N^^ture, Wit and Manners, and hence it is
the wise Men frequently beget stupid slothf^^ Children of ^eeble Minds, because
they ar^ not much given to those Delights. But (...) I said on the contrary,
when the Progen^^tors are hot in Venerious Actions, and d^^liberally and
abundantly employ themselves therein, it oftentimes happens that the Children
are of the same Desires, Manner^ and Actions of the Mind, with their Parents
And thus much for the first Point: now (...) shall proceed to the second, which
is (...) show what share each of the Parents have in begetting the Child, etc.
And first we wi^^ give the Opinion of the Ancients about it.

Though it is apparent (say they) tha^ the Seed of Man is the chief efficient
and beginning of Action Motion and Gene^ration, yet that the Woman does afford
Seed, and effectually contributes in tha^ particular to the Procreation of the
Child, i^ evinced by strong Reasons. In the fir^^ place Seminary Vessels had
been give^ them in vain, and genital Testicles interverted, if the Woman wanted
Seminal Excressence; for being Nature does nothing in vain, therefore it must
be granted, that they were made for the Use of Seed and Procreation, and fixed
in their proper Places, both the Testicles and Receptacles of Seed, whose
nature and force is to operate, and afford fruitful virtue to the Seed: and to
prove this there needs no stronger Argument (say they) than that, if a Woman do
not use Copulation to eject her Seed, she oftentimes falls into strange
Diseases, as appears by young Widows and Virgins, A second Reason they urge,
That although the Society of a lawful Bed consist not altogether in these
things, yet it is apparent, that the Female Sex is not better won and appear
more blithe and jocund than when they are often satisfied this way, which is an
inducement to believe that they have greater Pleasure and receive more Content
than a Man: For since by Nature much Delight accompanies Ejection by the
breaking forth of the swelling Spirit, and the stiffness of the Nerves, in
which case the Operation of the Woman's Part is double, she suffering both
ways, even by Ejection and Reception, whereby she is more recreated and
delighted in the Venereal Act.

Hence it is (they say) that the Child more frequently resembles the Mother
than the Father, because the Mother confers the most toward its Generation:
And they think it may be further instanced from the great love they bear them;
for that besides their contributing Seminal Matter, they, during the time they
are in the Womb* feed and nourish the Child with the purest Fountain of Blood;
which Opinion Galen confirms, by allowing the Child to participate more of the
Mother than the Father, and refers the Difference of the Sex to the Influence
of Menstrual Blood; but the Reason of the Likeness he attributes to the Force
of the Seed; for as Plants receive more from fruitful Ground than from the
Industry of the Husbandman, so the Infant in more abundance receives from the
Mother than the Father; for first, the Seed of both is heaped and fostered in
the Womb, and there grows to perfection, being nourished with Blood. And hence
they will have it that Children for the most part affect their Mother best, for
it proceeds from the nearness of Nature by a natural Instinct, because the
Mothers force was most employed about 'em. For 9 Months, and sometimes 10, she
nourishes the Child with her purest Blood, then her love toward it newly
born, and the Likeness do clearly demonstrate, that the Woman affords Seed,
and that Women do contribute more toward making the Child than Men. But in all
this the Ancients were very much in an Error, for the Testicles (so called) in
Womem, do not afford any Seed, but are two Eggs, analogous to those of Fowls
and other Creatures; neither have they any such Office as those of Men, but are
indeed Ovarium, wherein those Eggs are nourished by the sanguinary Vessels
dispersed through them, and from whence one or more, (as they are fecundated by
the Man's Seed) separated, and are conveyed into the Womb by the Ovi duces, The
Truth of this is plain; for if you boil them, their liquor will have the same
color, taste, and consistency with the Whites of Birds Eggs; to say they want
shells is nothing at all; for the Eggs of Fowls while they are in the Ovary,
nay, after they have fallen down into the Vterus, have no Shell. And though
when they are laid they have one, yet that is no more than a Fence which Nature
has provided them against outward Injuries, while they are hatched without the
Body, whereas those of Women, being hatced within the Body, need no other Fence
than the Womb, by which they are sufficiently guarded.

And thus much for the clearing of this Point also; and now to the third thing
proposed, viz. Whence grows the Kind, and whether the Man or the Woman is the
Cause of the Male or Female Infant.

The primal Cause, as justly due in this and all other Cases, we must ascribe
to God the Ruler and Disposer of all things, yet many things by his high
Sufferance, proceed in regular order, by the Rules of Nature, and are carried
on by their inbred Motion, according to their usual and natural Course,
without Variation, though indeed by favor from on high. Sarah conceived Isaac;
Hannah, Samuel; and Elizabeth, John the Baptist; but these were to fulfill the
Almighty's Decree; nor since those times have the Prayers of the righteous been
unsuccessful in obtaining Children; but passing over such Supernatural and
Extraordinary Causes that have their peculiar Effects, I shall proceed to speak
of things natural and common. The Ancient Physicians and Philosophers say, That
since there are two Principles, out of which the Body of Man is made, and which
render the Child like the Progenitors, and to be of one or the other Sex, viz.
Seed common to both Sexes, and menstrual Blood proper to the Woman only: The
Similitude (say they) must needs consist in the Force of the Male or Female
Seed, so that it proves like to the one or the other, as more or less Plenty is
afforded by either, but that the difference of Sex is not referred to the Seed,
but to the Menstrual Blood, which is proper to the Woman; for were that force
(say they) altogether retained in the Seed, the Man's Seed being of a hotter
quality than the Woman's, Male Children would be superabundant, and none of the
other Sex (or very rarely) would be propagated, whereof the kind of the
Creature is attributed to the Temperament of the active qualities, which
consist in Heat and cold, and to the substances or nature of the Matter under
them, that is, to the flowing of the Menstrual Blood: Now the Seed (say they)
affords both Force to procreate and form the Child, and Matter for its
Generation, and that in the menstrual Blood there is both Matter and Force; for
as the Seeds most helps the material Principles, so likewise the menstrual
Blood, the potential Seed, is (says Galen) Blood well concocted by the Vessels
that contain it, so that Blood is not only the Matter of generating the Child,
but also Seed, in possibility that Menstrual Blood has both Principles, as
Matter and Faculty of offering. The Ancients say further, That the Seed is not
the strongest Effi^^ent, the Matter of it being very little in quantity, but
that the potential or efficient Faculty of it is very feeble: Wherefore if the
material part or Principle of Generation, according to which the Sex is made,
were only (say they) in the menstrual Blood, then would the Children be all, or
mostly Females, as if the efficient force was in the Seed, they would be all
Males; but that since both have Operation in menstrual Blood, Matter
predominates in quantity, and in the Seeds Force and Virtue. Deservedly (says
Galen) the Child receives its Sex rather from the Mother than from the Father,
although his Seed do contribute something to the material Principles, though
more weakly. But as for Similitude, although Imagination (say the Ancients) be
of extraordinary Force, it is referred rather to the Father than the Mother, as
to the Quality of the Seed, at, or for a short time after Copulation, but
continues not long so to do, for that the Woman's Seed receiving Faculty from
the menstrual Blood, for the space of Nine Months, over-powers the Man's as to
that Particular, because the menstrual Blood flowing into the Vessels, rather
cherishes and augments the one than the other; from which it may be more easily
conjectur^d, that the Woman not only affords Matter to make the Child, but
Force and Virtue to perfect the Conception, though the Woman's Seed be fit
Nutriment for the Man's by Reason of the moisture and thinness of it, being
more fit to frame and make up Conception thereby; for as with soft Wax and
moist Clay, the Workman can frame what he intends, so (say they) the Man's Seed
mixing with the Woman's, as also with the Menstrual Blood, helps effectually to
make the form and perfect Part of Man; but (with all the Respect and Difference
imaginable to the Wisdom of the Ancients) we must needs say, that their
Ignorance in Anatomy has led them into many and great mistakes; and their
Hypothesis of the Formation of the Embryo, from a Commixture of Seeds, and the
Nutrition of it from the menstruous Blood being altogether false, their Opinion
in this Case must needs be false also.

Therefore (to conclude this Chapter) we say, That although a strong
Imagination of the Mother may sometimes determine the Sex, (that is, make it
Male or Female, according as her Imagination is) yet the main Agent in this
Case is the Plastic or Formative Principle, which is the Efficient in Forming
the Child, that gives it this or that Sex, according to those Laws and Rules
that are prescribed to it by the wise Creator of all things.

CHAP. IV. A serious Discourse of the Soul of Man, That it is not propagated
from the Parents, but is infused by God, and can neither die nor corrupt; and
what day of Childbearing it is infused, Of the Immortality thereof and
Certainty of its Resurrection.
THE Soul of Man is of so Divine a Nature and Excellency, that Man himself
cannot any wise comprehend it, it being the infused breath of the Almighty,
Immortal and Incomprehensible, but by him that gave it, it being as it well may
be termed, a part of himself; for Moses by holy Inspiration relating the
O^^ginal of Man, tells us that God had breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of
Life, and be^^me a living Soul. Now, as for all other Creatures, at his word,
they were made and had Life; but the Creature that God has appointed to set
over his works, was favored with the more immediate hand of the Almighty,
forming him out of the Dust of the Earth; and secondly, condescending to breath
into his Nostr^ls the Breath of Life, which implies that there was more care
and (if we may so te^m it) labor used about Man, than about all other Creatur^
on c^^ated things, he only partaking and participating with the Divine Nature,
being made in his likeness, bearing the Image of God, that is, in Innocence and
Purity, whilst he stood firm, but in his Fall, that lively Image was defaced;
yet such was the Infinite love of God toward him, that although he Rebelled
against him, he would not altogether cast him off, but found a way to restore
him. Nay, so much in esteem was he thought, not deserving the least favor,
that the Son of God, the second Person in the Glorious Trinity; when the
fullness of Time was come, laying aside his Crown of Stars, left the Right hand
of Glory, Majesty, and the bright effulgence that adorned him, and descending,
took upon him our Nature. O infinite and unspeakable Love! Nay more, endured
Shame, Reproach, Scourging, Buffetting, Sp^^ting on, and the Death of the
Cross, that he might bruise the Head of the Serp^nt, and deliver the beloved
Man from the Jaws and Brink of utte^ Ruin. And the better to con^irm his love
toward us is ascended on high, leading Captivity Captive, where he is so far
from forgetting us, that he is become our Mediato^, and makes daily
Intercession for us to the Father, whose offend^d J^stice he has sati^^^ed as
to the Original Sin. But to come nearer to my purpose.

If Man would understand the Excellency of the Soul, for as it is capable of
comprehending it self, let him (after serious Recollection, descend into
himself and search diligently his own Mind, and there he shall find so many
admirable Gifts and excellent Ornaments, that it must needs strike him with
Wonder and Amaz, meant, as Reason, Understanding, true Choice, Ability of Wit,
Memory, and diverse other Faculties, that absolutely approve the Soul to be more
admirable, than that any should imagine it be finite, or subject to
Annihilation, yet by Reason of its many Offices and Operations, whilst in the
Body it is specified under sundry denominations. For (as S. Augustine says)
when it enlivens the Body it is called the Soul, when it gives it Knowledge,
the Judgment; the Mind, when it recalls things past, the Memory; whilst it
discourses and discerns, Reason; whilst it contemplates, the Spirits; whilst
it is in the sensitive Parts, the Senses; and as these are the principal
Offices whereby the Soul declares its Power, and performs it Actions; for
placed in the highest Part of the Body, and the nearest Heaven, it difuseth or
disperseth effectually its Force into every Member, not propagated from the
Parents, nor mixed with gross Matter, but the infused Breath of the Almighty,
immediately proceeding from him, nor passing from one to another, as fondly and
absurdly the Pythagoreans have insinuated in their Opinions about the
Transmigration of the Soul; and so vain were they that they did not only
imagine the Souls of the deceased Men passed into newborn Infants, but into
Beasts also; and from thence it was they forbid the eating of Flesh, and
abstained themselves from so doing, lest, as they fondly fansied, they might
(as Tertullian records it) eat their Grandfather in a Calf. But such frivolous
and superstitious Notions are to be rejected by Christians, and those true ones
observed, which are both reasonable and agreeable to humane Capacities: For
Orthodox Divines conclude in general, that the Soul is given to any Infant by
Infusion, when he or she is perfected in the Womb, which happens about the 45th
Day after Conception, especially for Males that in likelihood will be born at
the end of Nine Months, but in Femals, who are of a weaker Constitution, and
not so soon formed and be perfected through the defect of Heat) not till the 50th
Day.

And although this Day in all cases cannot be perfectly set down, yet Hypocrates
has undertaken to give his absolute Opinion, when the Child has its perfect
form, whom it begins to move, and when born, if in due Season; for in his Book
of the Nature of Infants, he affirms, That if it be a Male, and he be perfect
on the thirtieth day, and move at the sixtieth, he will come forth at the
Seventh Month; but if he be perfectly formed on the 35 th day, he will move on
the 70 th, and be born in the 8 th Month. Again, if he be perfectly formed on
the 45 th day he will move on the 90 th day, and be born in the Ninth Month.
Now from these passing of Days and Months, it plainly appears that the day of
Forming being doubled makes up the day of moving; and that day three times
reckoned makes up the day of Birth.

As for Example, where 35 perfect the Form, if you double it, it makes 70; the
day of Motion, and three times 70 amounts to 210 Days or 7 Months, allowing 30
Days to one Month, and so you must consider the rest: But as for the Female, it
is longer perfecting in the Womb, and the Mother ever goes longer with a Boy
than a Girl, so that there is difference in the Account; for a Female formed in
30 Days moves not till the 70 day, and is born in the 7 Month; when she is
formed in the 40 day she moves not till the 80 day, and is born in the 8 Month;
but if she be perfectly formed on the 45 Day, she moves on the 90, and is born
in the 9 th month; but she that is formed on the 50 th day moves on the 100 th
day, then will she be born in the 10 th month. And thus I have more largely
demonstrated it to the Reader, that he may know the reasonable Soul is not
propagated by the Parents, but is infused by God, when the Child has its
perfect Form, and is exactly distinguished in its Lineaments.

Now as the Life of every other Creature, as it is testified in the 17 th Chap.
of Leviticus, is in the Blood, so the life of Man consists in the Soul; the
which although subject to Passion, by Reason of the gross Composure of the
Body, in which it has a temporary Confinement, yet it is immortal, and cannot
in it self corrupt, or suffer change, it being a spa^^ of the Divine mind, and
a bla^^ of Almighty Breath, that distinguishes Man from other Creatures, and
renders him Immo^^al; and that every Man has a peculiar Soul, it plainly
appears by the vast difference between the Wit, Judgment, Opinion, Manners,
Affections, etc. in Men. And this David observes, when he says, God has in
particular fa^^^oned the Hearts and Minds of all Men, and has given to every
one its own being, and a Soul of its own Nature. Hence Solomon rejoiced that
God had given him a happy Soul, and Body agreeable and suitable to it.

It has caused many Disputes amongst the Learned, especially Philosophers, in
what part of the Body the Soul chooses to reside; and some have given their
Opinion that its Residence is in the middle of the Heart, and from thence
communicates its self to every Part; which Solomon in the Fourth of his
Proverbs seems to assert, when he says, Keep thy Heart with all thy Diligence,
because Life proceeds therefrom: but many curious Physicians searching the
Works of Nature in Man's Anatomy, etc. do give their Opinion, That its chief
Seat is in the Brain, from whence proceed the Senses, Faculties and Actions,
diffusing the Operation of the Soul through all Parts of the Body, whereby it
is enlivened with Heat and Force; but it does communicate particular Force to
the Heart by Arteries, Carotides, or sleepy Arteries, that part upon the
Throat; the which, if they happen to be broke or cut, cause Barrenness, and if
stopped, an Apoplexy; for there must necessarily be some Ways, through which the
Spirits Animal and Vital may have intercourse and convey Native Heat from the
Soul. For although the Soul is said to reside in one place, it operates in
every part, exercising every Member, which are the Souls Instruments by which
she manifests her Power; but if it so happen, that any of the Original Parts
are out of Tune, the Work is confused; as it may appear in case of Idiots,
Madmen, etc. Though in some of them the Soul by forcibly working recovers her
supernatural Vigor, and they become right after a long Despondency of Mind,
and in some it is lost in this Life; For as Fire under Ashes, or the Sun
obscured from our sight by thick Clouds, afford not their full Luster, so the
Soul overwhelmed in moist or faulty Matter. is darkened, and Reason thereby
overclouded; and although Reason shines less in Children than in those that are
arrived to maturity, yet no man must imagine that the Soul is an Infant and
grows up with the Child; for then would it again decay; but it suits it self to
the Weakness of Nature, and the Imbecility of Body wherein it is placed, that
it may the better operate. And as the Body is more and more capable of
receiving its Influence, so it shows it self in its proper Luster, having force
and endowments at the time it enters the former Child in the Womb, for the
substance of it can receive nothing less: and thus much to prove that the Soul
comes not from the Parents, but is infused by God. And the next thing now to be
handled is its Immortality, and thereby I shall demonstrate the certainty of
its Resurrection.

That the Soul of Man is a Divine Ray, infu^^d by God, I have already made
apparent, and now come to show you that whatever immediately proceeds from him,
must participate of his Nature, and from thence consequently be as immortal as
the Original; for although all other Creatures are endued with Life and Motion,
yet want they a reasonable Soul; and from thence it is concluded, that Life is
in their Blood and that being corruptible, they perish, and after expiring are
no more. But Man being endued with a reasonable Soul, and stamped with the
Divine Image, is of a different Nature; and though his Body be corruptible, yet
his Soul cannot perish, but must, when it is expelled its Earthly Tabernacle,
return to God that gave it, either to receive reward or punishment; now that
the Body can sin of it self is impossible, because wanting the Soul, it cannot
act nor Proceed to any thing, either good or evil, for could it do so,
additional Sins might be accumulated, even in the Grave; but it is plain, that
after Death there is a Cessation; for as death leaves us, so Judgment finds us.
And St. John, in the Fifth Chapter of his Gospel, tells us. That the hour shall
come, that all that are in the Grave shall hear his Voice, and they that have
done well shall com forth to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done
evil, to the Resurrection of Condemnation, And Holy Job. in the 14 and 19
Chapter, speaking to the same Purpose^, says, For I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth: And though
after (...) Skin Worms destroy this Body, ^et in my Flesh shall I see God, when
I shall see ^or my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not ^^^ther, though my
Reins be consumed within (...). By this it is plainly proved, that the Soul is
made of Immortal Essence, incapable of Death, having a place assigned it after
its separation from the Body, t^ll the day of the general Resurrection, not in
the ^rave in a Mansion prepared by the Almighty for its Reception; and that
through the mightyworking of him that is able to subdue all things to himself,
it shall ^gain enter the same Body that was laid ^own, though the dust thereof be
scattered to (...) four Winds of Heaven; nay, such force (...) vigor shall it
have, that it shall (as (...) were) take up the Body; for Job posi^^vely says,
I shall rise out of the Earth at the (...) day, etc. Which being applicable to
(...) future Tense, may be meant two ways, (...) shall, or will arise; plainly
foreseeing (...) Resurrection, he claimed it as the Pro^ise of his Creator:
Nay, so far were the ^^eathens, by the light of Nature, from ^^ubting the
Immortality of the Soul, that Plato in his Phaedo thus reasons, viz. What
consists out of Elements, (says he) is Immortal, and can never die, The Soul is
not made of Elements, nor of created matter, but came from God, and therefore
it cannot dye, etc, Then may it be without difficulty granted, that the Body
which has been a long Companion of the Souls, will once again enjoy it, never
more to be separated, for the Body at the Resurrection shall be incorruptible,
and so as far from a capacity of perishing any more than the Soul, made so by
him that first created it. For St. Paul speaking of the Resurrection, says, He
shall change our vile Bodies and make them like his glorious Body. The
Consideration of which make^ him in another place cry out, O the depth of the
Riches, of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments
and his ways past finding out, For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who
has (...) his Counselor? For by him, and through (...) and to him, are all
things. Nay, the Resurrection of a Man's Body may be proved by the renewing of
many inconsiderable Creatures, and their returning to Life after they seem
dead; nay some of them thereby also changed; as who has not observed that when
a Grasshopper is grown old, and has cast his Skin, a lively new shrill Insect
will come forth of it? From a dying and ^uggish. Caterpiller, comes out a
lively ^ainted Butterfly: From Ants, a winged ^ly. The Silkworm having spent
her ^owels in weaving out her web, after ma^y days, seeming dead and
motionless, be^omes a Butterfly, proving for increase (...) laying a number of
Eggs, and then ex^ires. But above all, the Phaenex, that (...) Learned
Lactantius writes of, may put (...) in mind, if not confirm to us the
Re^urrection; for after she has lived in the Arabian Fields (as some affirm)
about 600 ^ears, and finding her self wasted with ^ge and infirmity, she
gathers the Sprigs ^f Cassi^, Myrrh, Frankincense, and other ^romatick
Combustables, when laboring ^ith her wings, she firing them by the ^eat of the
Sun, which in those Countries (...) excessive, she expires upon the Funeral
^ile, when out of her Ashes springs a ^orm, and from that Worm another ^^aenez
to supply her place: Nay, further (...) we not behold Grain thrown into the
^round, continue there for a Season, as if ^^st and dead; but when warmth and
moi^^ure gives it force, it springs up, and bears (...) hundredfold? Yea,
Herbs and plants, ^hilst Winter with his Icy Arms grasps (...) Earth, seem
dead, retiring (as it were) ^^to the Grave, and wait the Resurrection (...) the
Spring. But to conclude, as to this point, the infinite Love toward Man may
convince him that he was not made to be annihilated since the second Person of
the Trinity condescended to take his Nature upon him, even He who is the Wisdom
of the Father, and of whom the wise Man testifies it the 3d of Proverbs, viz. I
was with God in the beginning, before any thing (...) made: I was with him from
Eternity, when (...) compassed in the Depth by Law; I was (...) when he
sustained the Heavens above, and (...) Earth beneath; I was with him, ordering
(...) things, and was continually delighted before him, recreating my self in
the Earth; and (...) Delight was with the Sons of Men.

CHAP. V. Of Monsters, and monstrous Births, and the re^^son thereof, according
to the Opinion of su^^dry Learned Men, with serious Considerati^^ whether
Monsters are endued with reasona^^^ Souls.
THAT many Monstrous Births ha^^ happened, (contrary to the Course (...)
Nature) is evident, not only in this, (...) in former Ages; wherefore I shall
ta^^ some Pains, for the Satisfaction of (...) Reader, to enquire into the
cause of such preposterous Forms.

Now a Monstrous Habit, or Shape of Body, is contracted diverse ways, as from
Fear, sudden Frights, exstraordinary Passion ^he Influence of the Stars, the
Mother's strange Imaginations, and diverse Phantasms which the Mind conceive,
deform the Body, and render the Children of an impro^er Shape, and many times
not perfect in either Sex; sometimes the whole course of Nature is changed,
either when the Principles of Generation are vitiated, on the Organs unfit; so
that the natural Faculties, to propogate and form the Child, cannot perform
their Office exactly; for as the most ingenious Artist can bring nothing to
perfection, if his Materials be bad, or out of order, so Nature wanting the
force of her Faculties* or not having fit matter, must of necessity proceed to
preposterously in forming the Child. As in the Art of melting Metals it may be
observed, if the Matter be Impure, and not well cleansed, the Vessels or
Receiver Oblique, and full of Windings, not well joined, the Corners set awry,
and full of Chinks' or Plates; if loosed, or holds ill together, it is
apparent, Men cast ill-shaped Figures, So if the Womb, or the Matter be unfit,
or ill tempered, it is impossible, without an extraordinary overruling
Providence; but above all, unseasonable or intemperate Venery, is the cause of
so many monstrous Shapes.

So the Low Country Women especially those living near the Seaside, being
restless, and troubled in Copulation, bring forth misshapen Embroy's, or rude
and deformed Burdens, not only without motion, but some that pant, and are
alive, and these most commonly happen in case of Sailors, or Mariners who
coming home, rashly Marry, or run upon their Wives without any due regard to
their Menstrual Flux, or the Wombs cleansing it self to the Season of the Year,
or the Moon, or Sun's Progress through the Celestial Signs; not are the Women
without regard to the Health or Shape of their Posterity, less desirous to
receive them, after a long separation, which is not only exceeding hurtful to
themselves, from thence proceed not monstrous and untimely Births only, but
dangerous Diseases often, to those who rashly proceed. The first (say the
Antiants) is because the Seed mixing with Menstrual Blood, contract an
unnatural Mass of corrupt Matter, which either turns to Miscarrage, Abortion,
or a Monstrous and Deformed Birth; for by that means the Faculty of the Womb
(say they) loses its force to Generation, and success of Breeding the Child,
or if it try to come to any thing. it is at most some monstrous Form, not
shaped like a man, unless in some parts which, after a long continuance in the
Womb, will come forth with great pain and labor, not like to this: There is an
Efflux that greatly trobles such, as by their inconsiderate rashness are
subject to it.

Our Women, because Conception begins in the forth Moon, when the Menses flow
down by force, and that Planet in Conjunction, call it a Moon-birth, or many
kinds. And some are of Opinion that this Copulation may be made without the
help of a Man, by force of Imagination, in those that are extremely Lascivious;
for that by often feeling, and touching their Husbands, at the same time
strongly fancying themselves in the Act, their Seed flows to the Blood, and is
by the Heat of the Womb formed into a foul Mass, but arrives at no perfection.
And to the same purpose is it when Men strive against the Stream; entering into
Copulation in the forth and silent Moon, and in the forth day of its
Conjunction; for then not observing Nature's Rules, he either loses his
labor, or Generates a monstrous Birth, or if it chance, which is almost next
to a miracle to be perfect, it is by the Latins called a Birth of the Fourth
Moon, because the Product is commonly unhappy in all the Series of its Life,
having had its entrance by Generation, contrary to Nature's Orders* which Moses
considering, or being so commanded by God, strictly commanded the Hebrew Men
not to touch a Woman that was unclean of her Blood; and those that have been so
rashly profligate of either Sex have many times by sad Experience found their
wilful Folly too late, but especially the Female Sex; for by the violent
Concussion and Motion used in Copulation and evil Mixture, the Contagion by
Degrees will seize upon the whole Body, causing the Pox and Leprosy: The like
Effects i^ has upon Men if the Woman be infected* especially if he deal with
Whores at such times, who commonly are infected, and may be accounted so many
walking-Contagions, or Emissaries of the Prince o^ Darkness, for the
Destruction of Mankind and at this Day the greatest Pest and Grievance of the
Nation.

These things rightly considered, no Man need wonder at so many misshapen
Births and monstrous People, with Scald-Heads bowed and distorted Legs. Arms
and Backs wry Necks, crumpled Feet, incident to Swellings in the Groin, Buboes
and Emeroids as also that their minds are dull, stupid, forgetful, foolish, mad
and unreasonable, which attended the effects of unseasonable and unreasonable
Venery, which every Creature but Man observes in the Season Nature has
allotted; and when their Female have conceived, they desire no longer, but rest
satisfied.

Therefore let Man, who is endued with a rational Soul, and ought above all
other Creatures to have Dominion over his Appetite and Affection, consider how
cruel he is to his Posterity, that brings such mischief upon them, and chiefly
they are here to be understood, that are conceived in the fourth Moon, when the
Woman's natural Flux is upon her; therefore all Men ought to restrain, neither
should the Woman dare to copulate with Man, as better knowing when that is upon
her than some rash inconsiderate and unexperienced Novices of the Masculine
Gender do; for the Children then conceived, want all, or most of those Gifts
and Properties, that Children begotten at seasonable times are endued withal,
being capable of nothing that is good nor great; and if it so happen they do
any thing well, they have ill success in their Undertakings, by Reason their
natural Faculties are short, not by their own, but their Parents Fault, who
undecently in Procreation violate Nature's Law, whence it is that many things
are wanting to them, or else give them sparingly, and with some ill qualities
that others obtain bountifully, and then suffer no less loss in their mind, for
they want almost their common Senses and are extreme dull, without the
sharpness of wit, quickness of Invention, Council and Prudence, that others
have Lavi^ius Leminus, a famous Physician, tells of a monstrous Birth from his
own knowledge, the Relation of which I take in his words, as I find them in his
Book of Generation: In former Years (says he) there was a Woman, an Islander,
who had Married a Mariner, that took Physic of me; and after Copulation,
having Conceived by him, her Belly began to Swell to such a vast magnitude,
that one would have thought it could not have held to support the Burden, When
nine Months were expired, the Midwife was called; and first with great trouble
she was delivered of a rude lump, which I conceive was a Superfatation, after a
lawful Conception; there was fastened unto it on both sides two Handles like two
Arm;, for the length and the fashon of them; it panted and seemed to be alive
as sea Fishes, called Vatica; and by the Dutch, Elschowe, which float in the
Sea in Summer, in infinite numbers; and being taken out, they run abroad and
when you handle them, melt with a burning and prickling, left behind them;
whence they had their Name, after this a Monster came forth of her Womb, with a
crooked Back, long round Neck, and fiery Eyes, and a pointed Tail, being very
nimble-footed; for as soon as it came forth it gave the affrighted Midwife the
slip, and run up and down the Room to seek a hiding place, till at last, one
Woman more courageous than the rest, fell upon it with a Cushion and smothered
it: This Monster had sucked the Blood from the Child, which came forth after
it, being a Male, and so eaten the Flesh, that it scarcely lived to be
Christened; nor could the Woman be in a long time restored to her Strength: And
farther adds, that upon his Enquiry, she told him, that it had proceeded (as
she thought) from unreasonable, and extraordinary and insatiate Venery:
Hereupon (says he) I prescribed her a wholesome Course of Life, and Medicines to
restore her Forces; for she was become wonderful Lean.

These and many such like things should teach all Men and Women to use Decency,
and orderly Proceedings, in their mutual Embracings, lest Nature wronged
thereby, monstrous Births ensue, in which Respect some lascivious People are
much to be condemned, who suppose they may do what they list* and will by no
means have their Pleasure bounded; and above all, Pocket and Gouty People are
most lascivious; the one through the Heat contracted in the Blood, and the other
through the polite Windiness passes through the Veins, and afflicts the Nerves;
Others again observe not whether their Stomach be full or empty, or the Meat be
raw or digested, whether it be by Day or Night; nay, never regard the season or
opportunity of Time, but as their Lusts and Desires prompts them; but such
insatiable Lechers are, or at least seem to be, wilfully ignorant to what end
they were created Male and Female which was to beget Children and propagate
their Kind; not for obscene Purposes* and beastly pleasures; but at last they
pay for their unruly Lust, when the Disorder^ of Body, as Aches, Gout, and many
Diseases contracted thereby, Rack and Torment them.

The last thing in this Chapter to be considered is, whether monstrous Births
have Reasonable Souls, and whether such shall appear at the Day of
Resurrection; in discussing of which, I shall cite the Opinions of such learned
Divines and Physicians as have made curious search, and diligently weighed
these great Mysteries. And first, it is their Opinion, not jointly, but
several, that all those that are like Men, according to the ^rder of
Generation, deduced from our primitive Parents, proceeded by natural means from
either Sex, though they are deformed, and of monstrous shape, having
notwithstanding a Reasonable Soul shall, when they have run the Date of
Mortality, be capable of Resurrection to Immortality: but those that proceed
not from Man, but by the Woman's unnaturally mixing with other Creatures, shall
not participate of Immortality, but perish as brute Beasts, because such a
monstrous Birth is not capacitated to receive a divine Part or Soul, which
should entail him to the Resurrection.

There are indeed amongst the number of Men and Women, that tread the
Terrestial Globe, diverse that are monstrously deformed, and of horrid Aspect,
with distorted Jaws, and Goggle-Eyes, and many other marks of Deformity; but
these though by their Parents rashness in indecent or unseasonable Copulation or
the Defect of Nature being thus disordered, yet are they referred to the number
of Men and Women, because they speak, understand and act, which demonstrate
them to have reasonable Souls; and therefore shall they stand upon the Earth at
the last Day, and at the Resurruction all Deformity shall be done away, and
they shall appear in perfect Shape, and the Organical Parts render the Soul,
that shall then return a free scope to act and operate; but imperfect and
abortve Births, or Mischances, where the Limbs are not fashoned or very
imperfect, want a reasonable Soul, it not being as yet infused by the
Almighty, shall have no part in the Resurection.

Many Phisicians there are and indeed most of them make diffrence between a
Mischance and Abortion: The former of which (say they) is when there is a
Conception, but through the slipperiness, or weakness of the womb, it drops out
ever any shape is contracted, being only a Rude unframed Mass, properly called
Rudiments of a Child, that should have been, and a shadow of what was begun;
but Abortion often times shows the parts of the Infant perfectly composed, which
if it be cast forth by fright or untimely force, and has not accomplished the
day to receive the Soul, then it shall not participate of Immortality; but if
it be quick and cast out, though it live not an our after, it is first
enlivened, then it has received an Imortal Soul, for although many things are
wanting in it, and it come not to its full Magnitude, yet in the Resurrection,
all shall be made up, that time would have produced. And as Children have many
things, inpossibility, that with times progress, shows themselves as Teeth,
Nails, Hair, and fullstature of Body, which increases by degrees, and come to
perfections; so in the Resurection, all things that are defective, shall be
made perfect. Whosoever therefore is both of the seed of Man, and not of some
foul Matter, or vicious Humor concurring though his shape be monstrous, yet,
as I said, he shall rise again from Death to Life, all defects being repared by
the Divine Powers, that then will manifest it self no less then in Creation;
nay more, for St. Austin is of the Opinion, it is easier to Create Men, then to
Raise them when they are Dead, etc. Though the Earthly Matter, wherever
scattered, is not perished in sight of God, who can with his Word recall it from
the Four Winds of Heaven, and restore it to its pristin Vigor, nay though
vanished into Air, and other Elemnets, or what Leanness or Hunger have
consumed, or Diseases have wasted, or what is burnt to Ashes, or is passed in
the first Principles, or in the substance of some other Body, for the Flesh
shall be restored to whom it was taken, as his due that was borrowed from him,
by ^he mighty working of him, who is able ^o subdue all things to himself:
Those that are Men shall find this to be true, and those monstrous Shapes that
proceed from them, endued with rational Souls, and participating the same
Nature with them shall participate the same Benefit of the Resurrection.

CHAP. VI. A more peculiar and exact Treatise of this happy Estate of
Matrimony, as it is appointed by* and the true Felicity that redounds thereby
(...) either Sex, and to what end it was ordained.
CErtainly the joining of Hearts in a matrimonial State is of all Conditions
the happiest; for then a Man has whom to unravel his Thoughts to, as well as a
sweet Companion in his Labor; he has an ^^ternus Sensus, another Self, one in
whose Breast, as in a safe Cabinet, is reposed his inmost Secrets, especially
where reciprocal Love and inviolate Faith is centred; for there no Cares,
Fears, Jealousies, Mistrust o^ Hatred can ever interpose; for what Man, as it is
observed in Holy Writ, ever hated his own Flesh, and indeed a Wife is no less,
(...) rightly considered; for our grand Paren^ well observed, she is, or ought
to be so esteemd of every honest Man, Bone of hi^ Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh,
etc. Nor wa^ it the least care of the Almighty, to ordain so near a Union, and
especially for two Causes; the first for Increase of Posterity, the second to
bridle and bound Man's wandering Desires and Affections; nay, that they might
be yet happier, when God had joined them together, he blessed them, as it is in
the 2d of Genesis. Colamela, no mean Author, considering and contemplating on
this happy State, tells us out of the Economy of Xenophon, That Matrimonial
Conjunction appointed by Nature is not only the most pleasant, but profitable
course of Life that may be entered on for the Preservation and Increase of
Posterity; wherefore, since the Harbor of Marriage is most safe, sure and
delightful Station of Mankind, who is exceeding prone, by the dictates of
Nature, to propagate his Like, he does in no wise provide amiss for his own
Tranquillity, who enters it, especially when he comes to Maturity of Years; for
there are many Abuses and Errors in Marriage, contrary to what is ordained; the
which in the ensuing chapter I shall expose to View; But to proceed,

Seeing our blessed Savior and his Apostles detested obscene and unlawful
Lusts, and pronounced those to be excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, that polluted
themselves with Adultery and Whoring, I cannot conceive any objection be made
hereto, or what Face such lewd Persons can have to color their Impieties; who
hating Matrimony, make it their Study how they may live freely and licentiously
without Marriage; but certainly, in so doing, they rather seek to themselves
Torment, Anxiety, and Disquietude, than certain Pleasure besides the Hazard of
their Immortal Souls; for certain it is, that Mercenary Love, or as the Wise
Man calls them, Harlots Smiles, cannot he true and sincere; and therefore not
pleasant, but rather a Net laid to betray such as thrust them, into all
Mischief, as Solomon observes by the young Man, who turned aside to an Harlot's
House, going, said he, as a Bird to the Snare of the Fowler, or as an Ox to the
Slaughter, till a Dart is struck through the Liver. Nor in this Case can they
have Children, those sweet and endearing Pledges of Conjugal Love, or if they
have, they will rather redound to their Shame than Comfort; Harlots likewise
are like Swallows, Singing and Chattering to their Morning Walk, and Summer
Season of Prosperity, but the black stormy Winter of Adversity coming, they
take Wing, and pass into other Regions to expand themselves before a warmer
Sun; but a virtuous, chaste Wife, fixing entire Love upon her Husband, and
submitting to him as her Head, and him by whose Direction she ought to steer in
all lawful Courses, will like a faithful Companeon, share paitiently with him
in both Adversities, run with cheerfulness through all Difficulties and
Dangers, though never so hazardous, to preserve or assist him in Poverty,
Sickness, or whatever else is incide^^ to Human Frailty, acting ac^ording to
her Duty in all things, when a ^roud imperious Harlot, will do no more ^hen she
list, even in the prosperous Day, and is lik a Horse-leach, ever craving, and
^ever satis fied, still seeming displeased if she ^ave not every thing she
desires not regard^ng the Ruin and Misery of him, she with flatter^ng and
feigning Charms pretends to admire, and (...) upon him, using to confirm her
Hypocrisy, with Crocodile's Tears, Vows and Swoonings, when her Gallant is to
depart for a while, (...) seems, to deny her imodrate Desire; but ^his lasts no
longer then she can gratify her Appetite, and prey upon his Fortunes. Conradus
Gesner tells us a Story, That (...) young Man traveling from Athens to ^hebes,
met by the way a Beautiful Lady, (...) to his Appearance she seemed adorned
with all Perfections of Beauty, glittering with Gold and Precious Stones, who
salu^ed him, and invited him to her House in an ^djacent Vilage, pretending to
be exceedingly ^namour'd of him, and declar,d she had a long ^ime watched the
opportunity to find him a^one, that she might declare the extreme Passion she
conceived for him. When he came to her House he found it, to appearance, very
sumptuously built, and gloriously furnished with whatever could seem costly and
gay, which so far wrought upon his Covetous Inclination, that he resolved to
put off his intended Journey, and comply with her desire; but whilst she was
leading him to see the pleasant Places, came by (...) Holy Pilgrim; who
peceiving in what danger the Youth was, resolved to see him in his righ^
Senses, and show him what he imagined real* was quite otherwise; so that by
powerful Prayer the Mist was taken from before the Youth's Eyes, whenas he
beheld his Lady ugly, deformed and monstrous, and tha^ whatever had appeared
gloreous and beautiful was only Trash. Then he made her confes^ what she was,
and her design upon the Young Man, which she did, saying, She was a Lamiae or
Fury, and that she had enchanted hi^ on purpose to get him unto her Power, that
she might devour him* This Passage may (...) fitly alluded to Harlots, who draw
thos^ that follow their mis-guided Lights, into Places of Danger and
Difficulty, even til^ they have shipwracked their Fortunes and leave them to
struggle with the tempe^stuous Waves of Adversity. But on the contrary, a
loving, Chaste, and even-tem^pered Wife seeks what she may to peve^^ such
danger, striving on the one hand to pre^serve it as much as the other does to
destroy it: And in a word, as there is no content in the Embraces of a Harlot,
so there is no Joy greater than in reciprocal Love, and the indearing Embraces
of a Loving, Obedient, and Chaste Wife; nor is that the principal end for which
Matrimony was ordained; but further, that Man might lawfully procreate his
like, and increase his Generation, to replenish the Earth. To conclude, a
Virtuous Wife is a Crown and Ornament to her Husband, and her Price is above
Rubies; but the Ways of an Harlot are deceitful.

CHAP. VII. Of Errors in Marriage, and what they too frequently are, and the
Prejudice that arises thereby.
IF any be desirous to enter into the Holy State of Matrimony, let them observe
their Ability and Constitution of Body, and not run themselves rashly upon
Inconveniences; for those who marry too young may rightly be termed to marry
unseasonably; not considering their Inability; nor examining the Force of
Nature; as diverse there are, before they are ripe for the consummation of so
weighty a matter, who either rashly of their own accords, (by the instigation
of Bawds. Procures, or Marriage-brokers, or forced thereto by their Parents,
who covet a larg Dowrey) take upon them this Yoke, to their great Prejudice:
Lavinus Lemnius says, That he has known some of them who before the expiration
of a year, have been thereby so infeebled and weakened, that all their vital
Moisture was exausted; so that he was upon their applying themselves to him,
obliged with Medicaments to restore their Strength that was fallen, and sunk
down wherefore his advice is, That it is no way convenient to suffer Children,
or such as are not of Age to mary, or get Children: But whosoever proposes to
marry, must chieft observe this, that he choose one to his Companion and
Partner in his Felicity, that is of an honest Stock and proceeding from
temperate Parents. though her Dowry be not so large as he could wish; that he
observe the Conversation, and find therein that she is chaste, well bred, and
of good manners. For a woman, (as the Comedian says) if she has good
Conditions* she has Portion enough. That of Alcamena in Plautus is a witty
saying; which all Maids and others of the Female Sex, should retain show in
remembrance: I do not think (says she) that to be my Dowry, which is called
so: But Chastity, Modesty, and a settled desire to fear God, to love my Parents;
and agree with my Kindred; to obey my Husband, to be bountiful, and to do good
to such as are Virtuous and Honest. Now, if she proved as good as she promised,
such a Wife was to be valued above the Price of Rubies.

It Is Duty incombent upon Parents, to be careful in bringing up their Children
in the way of Virtue, and have ever a regard that they fully not their Honor
and Reputation, especially the Females, and most of all Virgins, when they grow
up to be marriageble; for if through the unnatural severity of rigid Parents
they be crossed and frustrated in their love, many of them, out of a mad
humor, if temptations lie in their way, throw themselves into the unchaste
Arms of a subtle charming Tempter; being through ahe softness of good Nature,
and strong Desire, to pursue their Appetites, easily induced to believe Men's
Flatteries, and feigned Vows of promised Marriage, to cover the shame; and then
too late the Parents find the effects of their rash Severity, which brought a
lasting stain upon their Family. Now, as it is an Error in marrying too young,
so it is unequality of Marriage between Age and Youth, as a young Man, who to
make his Fortune, marries to a Woman, that for Age might be his Grandmother,
between whom, for the most part Jealousies and Discontents happen; nor is it
possible such Women should have Children, be the Man never so sprightly and
young, The like may be said, though with a little more excuse, when an old
doting Fellow marries a young Virgin, in the Summer Season of her youth and
Vigor, who whilst he strives and vainly strains to please her, is the sooner
wedded to the Grave. For, as in Childhood, or green Youth, it is unfit and
unreasonable to think of Marriage, so in old Age to marry unequal, is
altogether the same; for they that enter upon it too soon, are soon exhausted,
and fall into Consumption, and diverse other Diseases; and those that
Procrastinate and marry unseemly, fall into the like ill conveniences on the
other side, having only the Honor to be dubbed a Knight of the Forked Order,
and have their Names enrolled in the Collony of Cuckoldom; especially if their
Wives have not been trained up in the Paths of Virtue, and lie to much open to
Importunity and Temptation of lewd and debanched Men* And thus much for Errors
or Over-sights in rash, and unseasonable preposterous Marriages.

CHAP. VIII. The Opinions of the Learned concerning Children conceived and born
within the space of Seven Months, with lively Arguments upon the Subject* to
prevent Suspicions of Incontinency, and the bitter Contests that thereon too
often arise between Man and Wife: To which is added Rules for knowing the
Disposition of Man's Body by the General Parts.
CErtain it is, that many bitter Quarrels have arisen through Misunderstanding,
when solid Reason would have rectified the Judgment, and have prevented the
Conception of such an Evil; and from whence does this arise, but through
Suspicion and Jealousy, when indeed it is many times founded upon a slender
Foundation, as the new Married Woman's being brought to Bed before the
Expiration of Nine Months, which is Vulgarly taken from the time of Conception
to the Birth: To remove which groundless Suspicion, I shall endeavor, not that
i^ it is common dare I avouch, but that it is possible, and has been frequently
known, that Children have been born at Seven Months; but the matter being wholly
left (...) the Lawyers, who decide Controversies to the Phisicians to Judge of,
it is in their power to determine, by inspecting the Child, whether it is a
Child of seven, eight, nine, or ten Months. Paul the Councellor has this
Passage in his ninettenth Book of Pleadings, viz. It is now a received Truth,
that a perfect Child may be born in the seventh Month, by the Authority of the
learned Hypocrates. And therefore we must believe, that a Child born at the end
of the seventh Month, in lawful Matrimony, may be lawfully begotten. Galen, in
Chap. 6. of his third Book, handles this Argument but rather according to Men's
Opinion, then according to the truth of the business, or from natural Reasons,
who supposes there is no certain time set for bearing Cheldren. And from the
Authority of Pliny. who makes mention of a Woman that went thirteen Months with
Child: But as to what concerns the seventh Month, says Lemnus, I know many
married people in Holland that had Twins, who lived extreme old Age, their
Bodies lusty, and their Minds apt and lively; wherefore their Opinion is
foolish, and of no moment, who asserts, That at Seven Months a Child cannot be
perfect and long lived, and that he cannot in all parts be perfect till the
ninth Month: and thereupon this learned Author proceeds to tell a passage from
his own knowledge, as follows: Of late, says he, there happened a great
Disturbance amongst us, which ended not without Bloodshed; and was occasioned
by a Virgin whose Chastity had been violated, descending of ^ Noble Family, and
ever before that time held to be of unspotted Fame: Now seve^al there were who
charged the Matter upon a Person of Note, viz. a Judge, President of a City in
Flanders, who strongly denied the Fact, saying, that he was ready ^o swear it
upon the Holy Evangelist, that he never had carnal Copulation with her, and
that he would by no means therefore ^e taken for the Father of the Child that
was not his: and further alleged, that he ^erily believed that it was a Child
born in ^even Months, and that himself was many miles distant from the Mother
of it when ^t was conceived; whereupon the Judges before whom the Hearing was
decreed. That the Child should be viewed by the ^ble Physicians, as also
experienced Women, and that they should make their Report, who having made
diligent Inquiry, all of them with one accord concluded the Child without
respecting who was the Father) was a Child born within the Space of se^en
Months, that it was carried in the Mother's Womb but Twenty seven Weeks and
^ome odd Days, but if she could have carried it to 9 Months, the Child's Parts
and Limbs would have been more firm and strong, and the structure of the Body
more compact and fast, for the Skin was ex^ceeding loose, and the Breast Bone
that de^fends the Heart, and the Sword-like Gri^stle that lies over the
Stomach, were hig^e^ than naturally they should be not plain bu^ crooked and
sharp-ridged, or pointed lik^ those of young Chickens that are hatche^ in the
beginning of the Spring. And ben^ a Female Infant, it wanted its Nails upon her
Fingers, and the utmost Joints of he^ Fingers, upon which from the musculou^ or
cartilaginous matter of the Skin, Nai^^ that are very smooth do come, and by
de^grees harden, she had instead of Nails, thin Skin or Film; as for her Toes,
the^^ was not the least Appearance of Nails ^^bout them, by reason that they
wanted (...) Heat that was communicated to the Fi^^gers from the nearness of
the Heart. The^ and the like weighty Matters being consid^^red, and above all,
one Gentlewoman (...) Quality that assisted, affirms, that (...) had been the
Mother of 19 Children, an^ that diverse of them had been born an^ lived at 7
Months; they without favor any made their Report, that the Infant (...) a
Child of 7 months annd so must be a^^counted, though it was born within the
^^^venth Month, for that in such Cases the revolution or circuit of the Mood
ought to be observed, which perfects it self in 4 bare Weeks, or somewhat less
than 28 Days, in which space of her Revolution the Blood being agitated by the
Moons Force, the Courses of the Woman flow from them, which being spent, and
the Matrix cleansed from the menstrual Blood which happens on the 5th Day; then
if on the 7th Day a Man lie with his Wife, the Copulation is most natural, and
the Conception best, and a Child then gotten may be born in the 7th Month and
prove very healthful, so that upon this report, the supposed Father was
pronounced innocent, upon proof that he was 100 miles distance all that Month
in which the Child was begot: And as for the Mother, she strongly denied that
she knew the Father, being forced in the Dark, and that through Fear and
Surprise was left in Ignorance.

As for Coition, it ought not be had, unless the Parties be in health, lest it
turn to the disadvantage of the Children so begotten, creating in them through
the abundant ill Humors, diverse lingering and languishing Diseases; wherefore
Health is no where better to be discerned than by the Genitals of the Man,
wherefore Midwives and other skilful Women in former days were wont to see the
Testicles of Children, thereby to conjecture or guess at their temper or state
of Body, and young men may know thereby the Signs or Symptoms of Life and
Death; for if the Cases of the Testicles be loose and feeble, and the Gods fall
down, it denotes the natural Faculties, and the vital Spirits, which are the
proper Props of Life, are fallen: But if the secret Part be wrinkled and raised
up, it is a Sign all will be well: But that the Event may exactly answer the
Prediction, it is necessary to consider what Part of the Body the Disease
possesses; for if it chance to be the upper Part that is afflicted, as the
Head or Stomach, then will it not so well appear by the Members, which
frequently are unconcerned with such Grievances; but the lower part of the Body
exactly sympathizing with them, their Liveliness on the contrary, makes it
apparent: for Nature's Force, and the Spirits that have their Intercourse,
first manifest themselves therein, which occasions Midwives to feel the
Genitals of Children, to know in what Part the Grief is resident, and whether
Life or Death be portended thereby, the Symptoms being strongly communicated by
the Vessels that have their intercourse with the principal Seat of Life.

CHAP. IX. The cause of the Green Sickness in Virgins, with its Symptoms, and
Directions for its Cure: Together with the chiefest Occasion of Barrenness in
Women, and by what means to remove the Cause, and render them fruitful.
THE former of these Inconveniences is too apparent in Virgins, especially such
as are of a Phlegmatic Complexion, evidently showing it self by discoloring
the Face, in making it look Green, Pale, or of a dusky Yellow, which proceeds
from raw undigested Humors, nor only does it appear to the Eye, but sensibly
afflicts such as it possesses, with difficulty of breathing, Pains in the Head,
Palpitations of the Heart. unusual beatings, and small throbings of the
Arteries in the Temples, Neck and Back, many times casting them into Fevers, if
the Humor be very vicious, also loathing of Meat, and the distension of the
Hypocondriack Part, by reason of the Inordinate Efflux of the Menstruous Blood
to the greater Vessels, and by reason of the abundance of Humor, the whole
Body is often troubled with swelling, or if not, at least the Thighs, Legs, and
Ankles, all above the Heels: And also there is a Weariness of the whole Body,
without any reason at all for it.

The Galeni^ts say, That this Distemper proceeds chiefly from the Obstruction
of those Vessels that are about the Womb, occasioned by the abundance of gross
viscid and crude Humors, arising from the several inward causes; but there are
also outward (...), which have a share in the production of i^, as taking cold
in the Feet, drinking of Water, Intemperance in Diet, and also the Eating of
things wholly contrary to Nature, viz. raw, or burnt Flesh, Ashes; Coals, old
S^o^s, Chalk, Wax, Nut-shells, Mortar, Lime, Oat-meal, Tobaeco-pipes, which
occasion not only a Suppression of the Menses, but likewise obstructions
through the whole Body, Therefore the first thing necessary to eradicate the
Cause, is Matrimonial Conjunction, and such Copulation that may prove to the
satisfaction of her that is afflicted; for by that means the Menses will begin
to flow according to their natural and due Course, and the Humors being
diffused and dispersed, will soon waste themselves, and then no more matter
being administered to increase them, they will vanish, and a good temperament of
Body will return: But in case such a Conjunction cannot be had so soon as
necessity requires, then let the Damsel blood in the Ankle, and if she be about
16, you may likewise do it in the Arm, though suffer her not to bleed overmuch
especially if the Blood be good. If the Disease be of any Continuance, then it
is to be eradicated by Purgation: Perpetration of the Humor being first
considered, which may be done by the Virgins drinking Decoction of Cuaiacum,
with Dittany of Creet. But the best Purge in this Case ought to be made of
Aloes, Agarick, (...), Rhub^r^. And then for strengthening the Bowels, and
opening Obstructions, Ch^lyheet Medicines are chiefly to be used. The Diet must
be moderate, and sharp things, as Vinegar, etc. to be by all means avoided, And
for the unobstructing of the Humor, take Prepared Steel, Bezoar-Stone, the
Root of Scorzonera, and the Oil of Crystal, in small Wine, and let the Diet be
moderate, but in no wise let Vinegar be used therewith, nor upon any other
Occasion. And in so doing observing, the Humors will be dilated, dissipated
and transfused, by which Means the Complexion will return, and the Body be
lively and full of Vigor. And now since Ba^renness daily occasions Discontent,
and that Discontent creates Difference between Man and Wife, or by immoderate
Grief frequently calls the Woman into one or other violent Distemper; I shall
somewhat largely treat thereof.

Sterility proceeds from diverse Causes, but most commonly from some Defect in
the Organs of Generation. Upon the Woman's Part it most commonly happens from
the strict Closure of the Mouth of the Womb, which will not admit the Seed, and
sometimes from the straitness of the Share-bone, which denies Entrance to the
Penis; sometimes also from Ulcers or Exorescences in the Neck of the Womb. To
these may be added too much Fatness, which straitens the Passage of the Matrix.

Most of the Ancients are of Opinion, that Conception is hindered commonly by
the Humidity and Moisture of the Womb, when by reason thereof it cannot retain
the Seed, or by bad Humors heaped up there, and corrupting it, or strange
Defect of the Menstruous Blood. But certain it is, that it proceeds, either
from some Tumor, Ulcer, Excrescence, or by some faults or other of the Womb,
Ovaria,, or Oviducts: For if the Eggs are not impregnated with the Aura
virilis, or Seminal Spirits, there can be no Conception, the Testicles of Women
having no such Office as those of Men, but containing Eggs analogous to those
of Fowl and other Creatures.

Now, if the Orifice of the Womb be closed that the Seed cannot enter, or
rather the Two Wings or Nymphae, so far that the Penis cannot pass the Neck of
the Womb, it must be opened with an Instrument; and subject to this Defect in
Nature are many Women, especially in hot Countries, but most of all in Egypt,
where the Chyrurgeons are forced with Silver Instruments to make way for the
Instrument of Generation, a thing not altogether unpracticable in England.

In Case the Neck of the Womb be so strait that the Yard cannot enter, then is
the Case to be (...) wh^t^er ^t be Naturally (...) from some Swelling or (...)
^^thin or without, and if any (...), it is ^or the most part (...) it be a
Natural Straitness, (...) Tent dipped in Oil (...) of Eggs, and drink (...)
sweetened with Sugar Candy* (...) and Evening, and by the Operati^n thereof the
Womb will in all parts (...) or if it so happen in a Young (...), Nature will
increase the Passage, and (...) produce things fitting to their (...)
Satisfacti^n; but let no Man by Viol^^^e endeavor to force the Passage, (...)
the Vessels; Nay, endanger (...) it self, which has been broke with such
violent intrusion, and so cost the Woman her Life.

If the Neck of the Womb be ulcerated, or any Excrescences happen there, which
equally hinder Copulation, then may they be known by the Pain and Shooting,
upon the least Compressure, and the Issuing forth of Putrid Humor, and
sometimes Blood, if the Ulcers be great, and the Menses flow, the Water hot,
Pains arising in the Forepart of the Head, and oftentimes they occasion Gentle
Fevers,

And all these Obstructi^ns of Generation happen diverse ways, sometimes from
external Causes, viz, Rash Physic, hard Labors, or excessive Copulation; and
sometimes from internal, as the Corruption of the Secudine, the Courses too
long retained or obstructed Heat, and overflowing of the Vrinal Vessels,
Vi^ulent Gonorrheas, Pox, Inflammations turned into Aposthumes* Humors flowing
from diverse parts of the Body and settling there; all which must be duly
considered.

Now some are in the outward part, and may be the easier come at, and External
Applica^ions are most convenient to be applied thereto; but those that cannot
be come at, must be cured if possible, by Injection; the best Injection in this
Case is as follows, viz.

Break Four Eggs, and take the Whites only, the which heat with an equal
quantity of Rose Water mingled with Plantain-Water, Litharge of Gold, Camphire,
Bole-A^moniack, Ce^us, of each a Dram, half a Dram of Green Coperas, all which
well Beaten* Dissolved, and mixed together, strained through a Fine Cloth, and
with a Syring eject it Morning and Evening till the Gr^ef cease; and if it
smart that it cannot well be endured, you may sometimes inject warm Milk to
cleanse the Putrified Matter.

Others there are that are not so violent, and therefore admit of any easy
Cure, not being so deep, known by a Putrid Greenish Matter that flows from
them. To Cure this, Take Water wherein Barley has been boiled, Honey of Roses,
new Milk and Sugar, with the Decoction of Lentils and after that gentle
Astringents must be applied; some again are sordid, having much contagious
Humor flowing from them; to cure which, stronger Medicaments must be applied:
Others there are that eat into the Flesh, having a green contagion flowing from
them, to cleanse which, Aloes and Wormwood concocted in White Wind are most
requisite.

Another sort of Ulcers there are which appear long eating away the Skin from
off the Neck of the Womb, and are discerned by the Blood and Pain they occasion
immediately upon the Concression appearing in the neck of the Womb, much like
Chilblains, occasioned by ill Lying, extraordinary Venery, by violent
Inflammation or Flux of sharp Humors: The best Cure, after a gentle Purge, is
an Astringent Clyster, and after that to anoint them with the Grease that fryes
out of a Ladle often used in a Kitchen, when it is held to the Fire, mixed with
Vnguentum Album, or Pomatum. If the Defect be in the Seed, through tenderness
of Age in the Woman, then the best Remedy is, convenient Diet, moderate
Exercise, and temperate Air, together with the Patience in the Man, till Nature
in process of time operates so effectually, that all things appear and conspire
to mutual satisfaction.

If the Woman be stricken in Years, and the Time of breeding Children be past,
which in some happens sooner, and others later, according to their several
Constitutions, but generally between 44 and 45, unless strong Preparatives;
viz. an extraordinary Diet, easy Lodging, and a moderate Exercise restore
them, those Women must despair of further Generation: For as the Learned in
this Art frequently observe, Where is neither Buds nor Blossoms can be no Fruit.

If Sterility be occasioned by Obstructions in the Vessels which it often does,
then the Cause must be enquired into, and this often happens, the which is
known by the small desire to Venery, and that little or no Satisfaction
received thereby, a settling in the Courses, and a slimy Phlegmatic matter
mixed therewith, as also by their Inordinate flowing occasioned by the Plenty
of Humors collected in the Womb, which by reason of the abundance of windy
Vapors contracted therein, cause Obstructions, to which may be added a cold
Phlegmatic Constitution, and from thence it is* that sudden Paleness arises in
the Face; to remedy this, the Party must alter her Diet, not eating any Cold,
Raw, Phlegmatic Substance, but rather such things as are apt to stir up
Choleric Hot Humors in the Body, as Anniseeds, or Carraway-seeds, in her
Bread, store of Pennyroyal in her Broth: let her likewise, each Morning for a
Week together, make a Posse^, in which she must boil the Roots of Birthwort.
Angelica, Sage, Rosemary, Cinnamon, and Borage: The taking the Male Herb
Mercury, Dittany, Centaury, Marigolds, Cubebs, Saffron, Mugwort, and
Clove-Gilliflowers, of each a handful, boil them in White Wind, and eject the
Concoction by little and little at sundry times, as the Cold or Obstruction can
be perceived, anointing the Belly and Reins of the Back, one Day with Oil of
Cinnamon, next with the Oil of Nutmeg or Mace, and the third with the Oil of
Myrrh and so continuing to do for a (...) together. When the Woman lies down.
Nature will be wonderfully restored, and recover such Force as to remove the
Obstruction.

Many there are that conceive Barrenness is frequently caused by Inchantation,
but those Opinions are altogether frivolous and vain.

If the Womb be defective in its Retentive Faculty, Men frequently labor in
vain; in such a Case the Women must avoid Sorrow, Anger, or much Sleep, Eating
new Cheese, Milk, and raw Food, especially Lettuce, Endive, Spinach, Beets,
Nuts, Cherries, Pussane, Onions, Garlic, and the like, they all being hurtful
to Generation: Nor must she drink nor use Vinegar, nor eat the Fat of Me^t too
frequently, but the Womb must be cleansed from the over-a^undant Moisture, with
the Decoction of Ha^ts-Tongue, (an herb so called) Cummin, Fennel, and Aniseed,
and strengthened with the Syrup of Wormwood, and for a gentle operative Purge in
this Case, take half an Ounce of Laudanum, Beeswax, Sheeps Suet, and Agarick,
of each a like quantity, melt and bruise them, after which make them up into
little Pills, and take three in the Morning, and next to them take of this
Confection to the Bigness of a Nutmeg, viz. The shavings of Ivory* Ash-Keys,
yellow and wild R^pe-seed, Silver-Montanus, with red and white Behen, of each
One Dram, Cinnamon, Galinga, Long-Pepper, Cloves and Mace, Balsamwood,
Rosemary-Flowers, Blatiae, Bezaria, Gentle-Marjoram, and Pennyroyal, of each 4
Scruples; Balm, Bugloss, Citrons, Reils, of each 2 Scruples, Pearl dissolved,
or beaten to Powder, One Scruple, Musk, two Grains, White Sugar, One Pound and
an half bruise them and sees them over a gentle Fire, in as much Malmsey as
will make them into a Confection. This Confection is indeed of a most singular
and approved one in all cases on Barr^ness, where Cold or Obstructions of the
Vessels do occasion Weakness in the Womb.

Other causes of Barrenness there are when the Womb grows f^t (as we have said
before* ^o that the Caul swelling and bearing beyond its bounds with its
Fatness obstructs the Passage into the Womb* to prevent which the Woman must
not sleep overmuch, especially in the daytime, nor feed riotously, but
exercise her self in walking or moderate Exercises, and often use Purgation and
strong Glisters, made of Herbs and Drugs that are hot and dry, which will in a
short time remove such Obstructions.

But a more dangerous Cause of Barrenness than yet I have named, are the
Whites, which are contracted by an inordinate Erudition of an Excrementous
Humor, collected through the Vitiousness of the Blood, incident to young and
old at such times as they are capable of Generation; and therefore the cure
must be hastened by reason that in short time it derides Art, and renders Women
inevitably Barren, occasioning Leanness, Consumption, Melancholy, Dropsy
Falling of the Womb, Swooning, (...), which renders it Difficult and dangerous
in long continuance, though in the beginning it may be easily removed, In the
Cure of this let Phlebotomy or Blood-Letting be avoided, for as much as the bad
Humor must be by no means recalled to dense the Blood, the Disease it self
being a sufficient Weakening of the Body and vital Spirits. First then, to
discuss the Humor in order to its Expurgation, Take two ounces, of Guaiacum,
the like quantity of China and Leutickwood, boil them in Water and Honey,
drinking a Pint fresh made every Morning, Then to dry up the Contraction of the
Vessels or Humors that lodged there, take the Root of Filipendula, beat it to
Powder, and drink it in White Wind, Morning and Evening: As also for
Astringents, use Bones Burnt, and beat to powder, likewise the Ashes of Capons
Dung ejected after a long time steeping in fair Water: The Patient must
likewise avoid sleeping upon her Back, lest the Humor descend and contract in
the Vessels of the Womb, but let her be rubbed often to disperse them, that
they settle not in any one place.

Sometimes this occasion of Barrenness happens through the violent Attraction
of the Womb, and then appears Signs of afflictions of the Womb, the Flux not
being so great, to cure which, Suffumations are the most proper. and those may
be made of Frankincense, Laudanum, Santalum, or Mastick: The Woman upon such
Occasion, having great regard to her self, that she take not cold, or proceed
to intemperate Diet.

Many Women there are, whose violent Lusts contracts a heat that either
destroys the Eggs, or hinders them from being impregnated. In this case, it is
requisite to avoid hot Air, soft Lying, hot Meats, and Spices, and requisite to
bleed in the Basilick Vein, purge moderately with Decoctum Epithymi and Juice
of Roses. each two Drams and a half, Whey half a Pint, mix them together, and
drink them fasting in the Morning, and so to continue 4 hours after; or, for
want of the former, you may take Trifera Sa^asenica and Rhubarb, of each half a
Dram pulverized and mixed with 2 Ounces of Syrup of Roses, Violets or Endive;
but the most excellent Restorative to cool and moderate the Temper in this
Case, is Diet-drink made as follows, viz. Take Pistachia-Nuts, and
Eringo-Roots, of each half an Ounce, of Saffron a Dram, Lignum-Aloes, Galinga,
Carophilata, Mace, red and white Behen and Balm-flowers, of each 4 Scruples,
Shavings of Ivory, Rhind of Cassia, each 2 Scruples, Syrup of confected Ginger,
12 Ounces, White Sugar 6 Ounces, add to these 12 Ounces of Balm-Water, and set
them over a gentle Fire, permitting them to sees, then take it off, suffer it
to cool, and put more Water to it, stirring the Ingredients: lastly, increasing
them with a Scruple and a half of Musk and Amber, then strain the liquid Part,
and boil ^t up again into a Conserve, of which let the Woman eat three times a
day, but not exceeding the bigness of a Walnut at a time, The times most
convenient are mornings, noons and Nights, and this let her continue till she
^inds her Body in Temper.

Another sort of Barrenness proceeds from the Obstruction; of those Vessels
through which the monthly Purgatione ^low, in which case open the Basilick
Vein, and take from thence a moderate quantity ^f Blood, after which take Hiera
composita and Opponax, of each half a Dram, and ^ Dram of Syrup of
Gilliflowers, make them into 7 Pills, take them in the mor^ing, and sleep upon
them a considerable ^ime, then drink off half a pint of sugared Water, and 3
hours after, a proportion of Syrup of Vinegar compounded; For want of this,
take Syrup of Eupatory, 3 quar^ers of an ounce, Female Mugwort, and
Elecampane-Root, of each an ounce with Syrup of Vinegar a proportionable
quantiy, mix them together, and take them when made into an Electuary, morning
and Evening, to the Quantity of a Hazel-Nat at a time; and if the Courses flow
not within a short time after, let a pessary of Musk, Amber, Wood of Alloes,
and Ash Keys, of each two Grains, Saffron half a Scruple, Hares Renet an Ounce,
be put into the Womb Tent-wise, and continue there for the space of a day, and
it will remove the Obstruction, cause the Course to flow, and in a short time
render the Woman capable of Generation. And thus Reader, have I, with much
caution, performed my promise in these particulars and the next thing I shall
proceed to* amongst other matters relating to the Mystery of Generation, are
the Signs of Virginity, etc.

CHAP. X. Virginity, what it is, in what it consists, and how violated;
together with the Opinions of the Learned, in the Point of Mutation of Sexes in
the Womb, during the Operation of Nature in framing the Body.
SEeing many ignorant People have boasted of their Knowledge as to the first
Particular, and some Virgins have undergone hard Censure, through the ignorant
Determinations of such as have taken upon them to discuss the Matter: I thought
it altogether necessary to clear the Point, that so for the future the
Conceited might not be indulged in their own Opinion, nor by traducing others,
prejudice the Female Sex, whose Virtues are frequently such as do not require
our Admiration, but Imitation. Then since the mysterious Word ^iginity has
puzzled many to define it, I ^an the Cause from whence it arises, for (...) Word
barely in it self signifies the ^ime, chief, or best of any thing: But as (...)
the Point in hand, the main matter bears (...) following Construction. It is
observed (...) the curious Searchers into Nature's Se^^ets, that in young Maids
or Females, in (...) Sinus Pudoris, or in that place that is by ^^me called the
Neck of the Womb, is that ^endulous Production, vulgarly called (...) Hymen,
but more rightly the Claustrum ^irginale, and in French it is termed the ^^teon
de Rose, or Roies Bud, for that it ^uch resembles the Bud of a Rose expan^ed,
or a Clove-Gilliflower, from whence derived the Word Deflora, to Deslower,
(...) the Deflowering of Virgins, because most (...) of Opinion that the
Virginity is altoge^^er annihilated, when this Duplication is ^^actured and
dissipated by Violence, and ^^at when it is found perfect and entire, (...)
Penetration has been made. Also some ^earned Physicians are of Opinion that
^^ere is not either Hymen or Skin expan^ed containing Blood in it, which diverse
^magine in the first Copulation, flows from ^he fractured Expanse.

Now this Claustrum Virginale, or Flow is, as it were composed or consisting o^
Caruncles* or little Buds, like Myrtle-berr^^ which in Virgins are full and
Plump, but Women flag and hang loose; and these (...) placed in the four Angles
of the Sinus ^^^doris, joined or held together by (...) Membranes and Ligatures
like Fibr^ each of them situate in the Intesticles Spaces between each
Caruncle, with wh^^ in a manner they are proportionably ^^^stended, which
Membranes being once (...) lacerated denote Devirgination, and ma^curious
Coxcombs, prying into this (...) the first night of their Marriage, and findi^^
their Wives defective in this Point, ha^^ ever after held them in evil esteem,
conc^^^ding it happened through the Effect of Cop^^lation with some other, who
had been e^^tertained in the Chambers of Venus. N^ one I knew, that upon this
vain Fancy to such Conceit, that he would never go to (...) with his Wife;
when, to undeceive (...) Idiots it is affirmed by the Learned, (...) such
Fracture may happen diverse ways, Accidents as well as Copulation with (...)
viz. By extraordinary Straining, viole^^ Coughing, immoderate Sneezing,
stoppi^^ of Urine, and violent motion of the Vesse^ in forcibly sending down
the Humou^ which pressing for Passage, break the ^^^gatures or Membrane, so
that the intireness or fracture of this thing commonly taken for the Virginity
or Maidenhead, is no absol^te sign of Dishonesty; though c^rtain it is* that
in Cop^lation it is more frequent^y broke than othe^wi^e.

Once at in Assize h^ld for the County of Rutland, a Young Man was put upon
Trial of Life and Death, which ^^yal was founded upon an I^d^ctment, for
forcing a Virgin when (...) d^vers Quest^ons asked, and the Maid swea^ing
positively to the Matter, naming the Time, Place and Manner of the Action; it
was, upon mature ^el^b^ration, resolved that she should be searched by a
ski^f^l Chyrurgion and two Midwives, who were to make their Report upon their
Oaths, which after due Examination they accordingly did affirm, that the
Membranes were entire and not dilacerated, and that it was their Opinion for
that Reason, that her Body had not been penetrated; which so far wrought upon
the Jury, that the Prisoner was acquitted, and the Maid afterward confessed she
swore against him o^t of Revenge, because he had promised to marry her, and
then declined it: And thus much concerning Virginity. And now I shall proceed
to the second Particular, which is, Reader, to show you the Opinions of diverse,
learned Men, in relation to nature's Operation in changing Sexes in the Womb.

This Point is of much necessity, by reason of the different Opinions of Men
relating to it. Therefore before any thing positive can be asserted, it will be
altogether convenient to recite what has been delivered, as well in the
Negative as the Affirmative. And first, of the first, Severus Plinius, who
argues for the Negatives, writes thus* The Genital parts (says he) of both
Sexes, are one so unlike other, in Substance, Composition, Situation, Figure,
Action, and Use, that nothing is more unequal, and by how much more all other
parts of the Body (the Breast excepted, which in Women swell more because of
their secondary Use) have an exact Resemblance, so much the more in Resemblance
are the Genital Parts of one Sex, compared with the other, unalike; and if
their Figure be thus different* much more is their Use. The Venerial Ap^petite
also proceeds from different Causes for in Men it proceeds from a Desire of
Emission, and in Women from a Desire o^ Completion, in Women also the chief^ of
those Parts are concave and apt to re^ceive, but in Men they are only por^^^
and in a Woman solid.

These things considered, I cannot bu^ wonder (added he) how any one can
imagine that the Genital Member of Femal^ Births should be changed into those
that be ^ong to Males) since by those parts only ^he difference and distincton
of Sexes is made, nor can I well impute the reason of ^his vulgar Error to any
thing but the mi^^ake of unexpert Midwife, who have ^een deceived by the evil
confirmation of ^he parts which in some Male Births may ^ave happened to have
had some small protrusion, not to have been discerned, as ^ppear'd by the
Example of a Child Christened at Paris, by the name of Joan, as fit had been a
Girl, when as afterward (...) proved a Boy, and on the contrary the over-far
extension of the Clytoris in Female Births may have occasioned the like
mi^^akes. Thus far Plyny proceeds in the Ne^ative, yet notwithstanding his
Negation, ^here are not wanting diverse learned Phy^^cians that have asserted
the Affirmative, of which number Galen is one, A Man (says (...)) is different
from a Woman in nothing ^^se, but having his Genital Members without (...)
Body: And this is certain, That if Na^^re having formed a Man, would convert
^im into a Woman, she has no other Task to perform, but to turn his Genital
Members inward, and a Woman into a Man ^y doing the contrary. but this is to be
^nderstood of the Child, when it is in the Womb, and not perfectly formed; for
diverse times Nature has made a Femal^ Child, and it has so remained in the
Belly o^ the Mother for a Month or two, and after^wards plenty of Heat
increasing in the Ge^nital Members, upon some oceasion they have issued forth,
and the Child has becom^ a Male, yet retaining some certain Gestures
unbefitting the Masculine Sex, as Femal^ Actions, a shrill Voice, and more
feeble tha^ ordinary. Contrariwise, Nature havin^ often made a Male, and cold
Humor flowing to it, the Genitals have been in^verted, yet still retaining a
Man-like Fa^shion both in Voice and Gesture.

Now these Opinions considered; I am ra^ther inclinable to believe the latter
as thing altogether probable, for there is no^ that vast difference between the
Member of the two Sexes, as Pliny would have (...) believe there is, for the
Woman has in manner the same Members with the (...) though they appear not
outwardly, but (...) inverted for the convenience of Generat^^on, the main
difference being, that one more solid than the other, and that the chief reason
of changing Sexes is, and mu^^ be attributed to heat or cold suddenly (...)
slowly contracted, which operates accord^ing to its greater or lesser Force.
And the much for these two particulars, leavin^ which I shall proceed to lay
down season^^ble and necessary Instructions or directions for Midwives, etc.
opening in that Discourse a Cabinet of many rare Secrets, not vulgarly known,
and indeed only fitting to be known to such as may observe and put them in
practice for the public Good, and ^n no wise convert them to obscenity.

CHAP XI. A Midwife, how she ought to be qualified.
THose that undertake this great Task, ought by no means to enter upon it
rashly or unadvisedly, but with all imaginable Caution, well weighing and
preconsidering that she is ^ccountable for all the Mischief that befalls
^^rough her wilful Ignorance or Neglects; therefore let not unskilful Women
take upon them this Office barely upon pretense of their Maturity of Years and
Childbearing; for in such for the most part there are diverse things wanting
that ought to be observed, which is the Occasion so many Women and Children are
lost. Now, as for a Midwife, in relation to her Person, these things ought to
be observed, viz. She must not be too old nor too young, neither ^xtraordinary
fat, nor weakened by leanness, ^ut in a good habit of Body, not subject to
Diseases, Fear nor sudden Frights; her Body well-shaped and neat in her Attire,
her Hand smooth and small, her Nails ever pared short, not suffering any Rings
to be upon Fingers during the time she is doing her Office, nor any thing upon
her Wrists that may obstruct; and to these ought to be added Activity and a
convenient Strength with much Caution and Diligence; no^ subject to Drowsiness
nor Impatience.

As for her Manners, she ought to be courteous, affable, sober, chaste, and not
subject to Passion; bountiful and compassionate to the Poor, and not covetous
where she attends upon the Poor, and not covetous when she attends upon the
Rich.

Her Temper Cheerful and Pleasant, tha^ she may the better comfort her Patients
i^ their Afflictions; no^ must she at any tim^ make overmuch haste, though her
Bus^^ness be urgent in another Place, left by en^dangering the Mother or Child
she disgrac^ her self and forfeit Heaven's blessing upon her Endeavors for the
future.

Of Spirit she ought to be prudent, wa^^ and cunning, but above all, to have
the Fear of God before her Eyes, and to em^ploy the Talent he has lent her to
(...) Glory.

CHAP XII. Things worthy to be observed by Midwives, tending to their
Advancement, and what they ought to avoid, etc.
LET her that undertakes this Office attended with many Circumstances of Danger
and Disgrace, take good heed to what I shall relate. In the first place, let
her be diligent to leave nothing unsearched, which may be advantageous to her
Practice, never imagining her self so perfect but she may add to her Knowledge
by Study and Experience; yet never let her apply any Remedies in that Case,
unless she has tried them, or known them tried with Success, or at least is
conscious of their Force, that they will do no harm, doing nothing in that
nature to practice upon Poor or Rich, but speaking freely of what she knows,
and giving Reason for the further Confirmation thereof, by no means daring to
give directions for such Medicine as will cause Abortion, to pleasure those
that have unlawfully conceived, which to do, is a high degree of wickedness,
and may be ranked with Murder* but if any come to her with specious Pretenses,
let her send them to able Physicians, and neither for fair Words nor lucre, be
won to hearken to them. If she be sent for, let her know to whom she goes, and
be careful therein, lest by laying any one that has an inf^ctious Disease, as
the Pox, etc. she get it, and so spoil other Women as a Midwife once did, who
laying a Strumpet that had an inveterate Pox, which occasioning a Bubo^ upon
her right Hand, and she not leaving off her Calling, spoiled diverse Women, not
the Women only, but the Men also, to whom it was communicated by their Wives,
which made them think hard of each other, and for a long time could not imagine
how it happened; but at last it was discovered by an able Physician, and the
Midwife for ever after debarred her Practice, and not so only, but followed
with Curses even to her grave. She must likewise observe that she entertains no
great-belly'd Women at Bed and Board in her House, lest thereby she bring a
Scandal upon her self, and so lose her Practice. If the Birth at any time be
hard and difficult, she must not be dismayed, but cheer up the Woman, and try
her utmos^ Skill to make the Labor easy, Directions for which shall hereafter
be inserted; nor must she ever think of any thing but doing well, and using her
utmost Skill, causing all necessary things that are proper for the Work,
Consolation of the Woman, and Reception of the Child to be in a readiness; and
above all let her use her diligence, either by persuasion or otherwise, to keep
the Woman from being unruly in her Pangs, lest thereby she destroy both her
self and her Child, and not in any wise to proceed too hastily in her Business,
but wait God's leisure in all things, and by no means let her suffer her Wits
to scatter by dismay or doubt, if things go not well, for fear it disorders the
Senses, and a Person that keeps her Wits together, is capable of giving
Assistance in weighty Affairs, for when we are most at a Plunge, then there is
most need of Prudence to set things right. And seeing she can never be an
expert Midwife that has no farther Knowledge than of the external Parts, I
shall not think it amiss, briefly with modesty to proceed in describing the
generative Part of a Woman; as they have been anatomized by the Learned of the
present and past Ages, and show the Use of such Vessels, etc. as are
contributing Generation.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Genitals of Women, External and Internal to the Vessels of
the Womb.
WAS it not for the benefit of Practitioners and Professors of the Art of
Midwifry, I should above all things spare to treat of these particulars,
because they may be turned by some Lascivious and lewd Persons into ridicule,
but they being absolutely necessary to be known, I will hope the best, and
proceed in order.

The parts that offer themselves to view, without any Deduction, at the bottom
of th^^ Belly are the Fiss^ra Magna, or the Great Chink, with its Libia, or
Lips, the M^ns Veneris, and the Hair. These parts are called by the general
Name of Pudend^ because when they are bared they bring Pud^r, or Shame upon a
Woman The Fissura magna reaches from the lower part of Os Pubis to within an
Inch of the Anus. It is less and closer in Maids, than in those that have born
Children; and has two Lips, which toward the Pubes, grow thicker and more full
or preturbe^ant, and meeting upon the middle of the Os Pubis make that rising
that is called Mons Veneris or the Hill of Venus.

The next things that offer, are the Nymphae and Clytoris, the former of which
is of a membrany and filmy Substance, spongy, soft* and partly fleshy, being of
a bloody Color in the shape of Wings, two in number, though from their Rise
they are joined in an acute Angle p^oducing there a fleshy Substance, which
clothes the Clyeoris, and many times they spread so ^a^ that incision is
required to make way for the Man's Instrument of Generation,

The Clytoris is a substance in the upper Part of the Division, where the two
Wings concur, and is the S^at of Venereal Pleasure, being like a Yard in
Situation, Substance, Composition and Erection growing sometimes out of the
Body two Inches, but that never happens, unless through extreme Lust or
extraordinary Accident. But to proceed, this Clytoris consists of two spongy
and skinny Bodies, containing a distinct Original from the Pubis Bone, the Head
of it being covered with a tender Skin, having a hole or passage like the
Penis, or Yard of a Man, though not quite through, in which, and the bigness,
it only differs from it.

The next things in course are the Fleshy Knobs, and the great Neck of the
Womb. And these Knobs are behind the Wings, bein four in number, much
resembling Myrtle-Berries, being placed in Quadrangle, one against the other,
and in this Place i^ incerted to the Orifice of the Bladder which opens it self
into the Fissure to eva^cuate the Urine, for securing of which from Cold or the
like inconveniency, one o^ these Knobs are placed before it, and shut^ up the
Passage.

The Lips of the Womb that next ap^pear, being separated, disclose the Neck
thereof, in which two things are to be observed, viz. The Neck it self, and the
Hymen, but more properly the Claustrum Virginale, of which I have before
discoursed* But the Neck of the Womb is to be understood the Channel that is
between the aforesaid Knobs and the inner Bone o^ the Womb, which receives the
Penis like a Sheath; and that it may the better be dilated for the Pleasure of
Procreation, the Substance of it is Sinew, and a little Spongy and in this
Concavity are diverse Folds, o^ Orbicular Pl^ghts, made by Tunicles wrinkled
like an expanded Rose; in Virgins they plainly appear, but Women that have
been used often in Copulation they are extinguished; so that the inner side o^
the Wombs Neck appears smooth, and i^ old Women it becomes more hard and
grisly* And now note, that although thi^ Channel be sometimes writhed and
crooked, sinking down, yet in the time of Copulation, Labor or the monthly
Purgations, and is erected and extended, which over-extension occasioneth the
great Pain in Childbirth.

The Hymen, or Claustrum Virginale, is that which closes the Neck of the Womb,
being, as I have before cited in the Chapter relating to Virginity, broken in
the first Copulation, its use being rather to stay the untimely Courses in
Virgins, than to any other end, and commonly when it is broke in Copulation, or
by any other Accident, a small quantity of Blood flows, with some between the
Duplicity of the two Tunicles which constitute the Neck of the Womb, there are
many Ve^ns and Arteries running along, and arising from the Vessels, descending
on both sides the Thighs, and passing into the Neck of the Womb, being
extremely large, and the reason of their Largeness is, for that the Neck of the
Bladder requires to be filled with abundance of Spirit, thereby to be extend^d
and d^lated for its better taking hold of the Penis* great Heat being required
in such motions, which becoming more Intense by the Act of Fri^ation does
consume a considerable ^uantity of Moisture, in supplying which large Vessels
are altogether necessary.

Another Cause of the Longness of those Vessels there is, viz. by Reason the
Mense^ have their Way through them, which often occasion Women with Child to
continue their Purgations; for although the Womb is shut up, yet the Passage in
the Neck of the Womb through which these Vessels pass, are open: In this Cause
there is further to be observed* that as soon as you penetrate the Pude^dum,
there appears two little Pits, or Holes, wherein is contained an Humor, which
by being expunged in the time of Copulation greatly delights the Woman.

CHAP XIV. A Description of the Wombs Fabric, the preparing Vessels and
Testicles in Women, as also of the deferent or ejaculatory Vessels, etc.
IN the lower part of the Hypogastrion, where the Hips are widest and broadest
(they being greater and broader thereabouts than those of Men, which is the
reason they have likewise broader Buttocks than Men) is the Womb joined to its
Neck, and is placed between the Bladder and strait Gut, which keeps it from
swaying or rolling, yet give it liberty to stretch and dilate it self, and
again to contract as Nature in that case disposes it: Its Figure is in a manner
round, and not unlike a Gourd, lessening a little and growing more acute toward
one end, being knit together by its proper Ligaments, its Neck likewise is
joined by its own Substance, and certa^n Membranes that fasten it to Os Sacrum
and the Share-bone. As to its largeness, that much differs in Woman, especial^y
the Difference is great between such as ^ave born Children, and such as have
^orn none. In Substance it is so thick, that (...) exceeds a Thumbs Breadth,
which after Conception, it is so far from decreasing, that it augments to a
greater Proportion, and the more to strengthen and confirm it, it is interwoven
with Fibers overthwart, strait, and winding, and its proper Vessels are Veins,
Arteries and Nerves, and amongst these are two little Veins, which pass from
the Spermatick Vessels to the Bottom of the Womb, and two larger from the
Hypogastricks, which visit both the Bottom and the Neck, the Mouth of these
Veins, piercing as far as the inward Concavity.

The Womb has also two Arteries on both sides, the Spermatick Vessels and the
Hypogastricks. which still attend or accompany the Veins, and besides these
there are diverse little Nerves and intwined in the Form of a Net, which extend
throughout even from the Bottom to the Pudenda themselves, being chiefly placed
for Sense and Pleasure moving in Sympathy between the Head and Womb,

Now it is to be farther noted, that b^ reason of two Ligaments that hang on
ei^ther side of the Womb, from the Share-bone and piercing through the
Peritonaeum, an^ are joined to the Bone it self: that the Womb is moveable upon
sundry Occasions often falling low, or rising high; as for the Neck of Womb, it
is of an exquisite Feel^ing, so that if it be any time out of Order by being
troubled with a schirrous Brawn, Over-fatness* Moisture, or Relaxation, the
Womb is subjected thereby to Barrenness: In those that are with Child there
frequently stays a most glutinous Matter in the Entrance to facilitate the
Birth; for at the time of Delivery the Mouth of the Womb is opened in a strange
Manner, to such a Wideness as is conformable to the bigness of the Child,
suffering an equal Dilation from the Bottom to the Top.

As for the Preparatery or Spermatick Vessels in Women, they are made of two
Veins and 2 Arteries, not differing from those in a Man, but only in their
largeness and manner of Insertion; for as to their Number there are so many
Veins, and the like proportion of Arteries, as in Men, the Right Vein issuing
from the trunk of the hollow Vein descending, and the left from the emulgent
Vein, and on the side of them are two Arteries, which grow from the Aorta.

As to the Longitude and Latitude of these Vessels they are narrow, and shorter
in Women than in Men; only observe where they are wrinkled or crumpled, they
are more wreathed and con^orted than in Men, as shrinking together, by reason
of their shortness, they may by their Looseness be the better stretched out when
Occasion requires it. And these Vessels in Women are carried on with an oblique
Course through the leser Guts to the Testicles or Stones, but are in the midway
divided into two Branches, the greater going to the Stones, constitu^ing the
various or windy Body, and wonderful Inoculating; the lesser Branch end^ng in
the Womb, in the side of which it d^sperseth it self, and c^iefly at the higher
Part of the bottom of the Womb, for the Nourishment thereof, and that part of
the Courses may purge through these Vessels; and seeing the Testicles in Women
are seated near the Womb, for that cause these Vessels fall not from the
Peritonaeum, neither make they such Passages as in Men, nor extend themselves to
the Share-bone.

The Stones in Women, commonly called the Testicles, perform not the same
Action as Men; they are also different in their Situation, Magnitude,
Temperament, Substance Form and Covering. As for their Seat, it is in the
Hollowness of the Abdomen, neither are they extremely pendulous, but rest upon
the Muscles of the Loins, that so they may, by contracting the greater heat, be
more fruitful, their Office being to contain the Ova, or Eggs, which being
impregnated by the Man's Seed, engender Man; yet they Differ from those of Men
in Figure, by reason of their lessness or flatness at either end, not being so
^ound or Oval. The External Superficies being likewise more unequal, appearing
like the Composition of a great many Knots and Kernels mixed together, there is
also another difference in their Substance, they being much more soft and
pliable, loose, not so well compacted.

Their magnitude and temparament being also different, for they are much colder
and lesser then those in Men; as for their covering or enclosure, it likewise
differs extremely, for as Men's are wrapped or covered in diverse Tunicles, by
reason they are externally Pendulous, and subject to diverse Injuries, unless so
fenced by Nature so Women's Stones being internal and less subject to casualty,
are covered with one Tunicle or Membrance, the which though it closely adhere
to them, yet are they likewise half covered with the Peritonaeum.

The Different or Ejaculatory Vessels are two obscure Passages, and on either
side, nothing differing from the Spermatick Veins in substance; rise they do,
on one part from the bottom of the Womb, not ^eaching from the other extremity
either to the Stones, or any other part, but shut up and unpassable, adhering
to the Womb as the Colon does to the blind Gut, and winding half way about; the
Testicles are every way remote to them, yet though they touch them not, they
are tied to them by certain Membranes, resembling the Wings of a Bat, or
Flutter-mouse through which certain Veins and Arteries passing from the End of
the Testicles, in these beginning, or may be termed here to have their
Passages, proceeding from the Corners of the Womb to the Testicle^ and are
accounted the proper Ligament^ by which the Testicles and Womb are united, and
strongly knit together, and these Ligaments in Women are the Cremesters in Men,
of which I shall speak more largely, when I come to describ^ the Masculine
parts conducing to Generation.

CHAP. XV. A Discourse of the Use and Action of the several Parts in Women
appropriated to Generation, etc.
THE Externals commonly called the Pudenda, are designed to cover the great
Orifice, and that to receive the Penis or Yard in the act of Co^tion, and give
Passage to the Birth and Urine. The use of the Wings and Knobs like
Mirtle-berries are for the security of the Internal parts, shutting the Orifice
and Neck of the Bladder, and by their swelling up cause Titulation in those
parts, and also to obstruct the unvoluntary Passage of the Urine.

The Action of the C^ftoris in Women, is like that of the Penis in Men, viz.
Erection; and its outer end is like the Glans of the Penis, viz. and has the
same Name. And as the Glans in Man is the Seat of the greatest Pleasure in
Copulation, so is this in Women, whence it is called Amoris dulcedo and Aestum
Veneris.

The Action and Use of the Neck of the Womb is also equal with that of the
Penis, viz. Erection, occasioned diverse ways. First, in case of Copulation, it
is erected and made strait for the Passage of the Penis to the Womb. Secondly,
Whilst the Passage is repleated with Spirit and Vital Blood, it becomes more
strait for embracing the Penis, as for the Convenience of Erection it is
twofold; First, Forasmuch as if the Neek of the Womb was not erected, the Yard
could have no convenient Passage to the Womb. Secondly, It hinders any hurt or
damage that might ensue through the violent Concussion of the Yard during the
time of Copulation.

As for the Vessels that pass through the Neck of the Womb, their Office is to
repleat it with Blood and Spirit, that still as the Moisture consumes the Heat
contracted there in Copulation, it may by those Vessels be renewed. But their
principal Business is to convey Nutriment to the Womb.

The Womb it self has many Properties attributed to it, as First, Retention of
the fecundated Egg, which is properly called Conception.

Secondly, To cherish and nourish it, til by the help of Nature, it has framed
the Child, and brought it to Perfection. And then it strongly operates in
sending forth the Birth when the time of its remaining there is expired,
dilating and spreading it self in a wonderful Manner: And indeed is the Field
of Man's Generation, being designed for no other Purpose, and so aptly removed
from the Senses, that nothing of Injury can proceed from thence, retaining in
it self a Power and Strength to operate and cast forth the Bi^th, unless by
Accident or the like it be rendered deficient. When to strengthen and enable it,
besides the Helps of Nature, sundry Remedies are to be applied by skilful Hands
Direction. For which shall be hereafter mentioned.

The Use of the preparing Vessels is this: The Arteries convey the Blood to the
Testicles, where part of it is spent in the nourishment of them, and the
Production of those little Bladders (which do in all things resemble Eggs)
through which the Vasa Praeparantia run, and are obliterate in them. And as for
the Veins, their Office is only to bring back what Blood remains from the uses
aforesaid.

The Vessels in this kind are much shorter in Women than in Men, by reason of
their nearness to the Stones, which Defect is yet legthenned and made good by
the many Intricacies or Windings, to which those Vessels are subject, for in
the middle Way they drive themselves into two Branches, though different in
Magnitude, for one being greater than the other, passes by the Stone.

The Stones in a Woman are very useful for when they are defective, Generation
is at an end; for although those little Bladders, which are on their outward
Superficies, contain nothing of Seed, as the followers of Galen and Hipocrates
did erroneously imagine, yet they contain several Eggs commonly to the number
of twenty in each Testicle) one of which being impregnated by the most
spirituous part of the Man's Seed in the Act of Coition, descends through the
Ovi-ducts into the Womb, and from thence, in process of time becomes a living
Child.

Their Figure is not exactly round, but flat and dispersed on the sides; in
their lower part Oval, but in their upper, where the Blood Vessels enter them,
more plain; and have but one Membrane to encompass 'em, probably that the Heat
may have the easier Access.

CHAP. XVI. Of Conception and the Infallible Signs thereof; as also whether it
be a Male or Female that is conceived, or both at once, commonly called Twins.
THE next thing convenient to be observed in this Treat^se, and as it falls in
course, is Conception and its Symptoms, very material, and worthy (...) more,
not only by (...), but all ^oung Women. N^w the signs of ^onception three or
four days after convenient and satisfactory, are,

Pains ^n the Head, Vertigo and Dimness of the Eye^ the Apple (...) the Eyes
^^crease, the Eyes themselves swell, and become of a dull or dark color, the^
Veins wax^ng red, and shut with Blood: Again, if the Eyes sink, or Eyebrows
grow loose, various colors appear in the Eyes, and little red Pimples suddenly
arise in the Face, and almost as suddenly disappear. Thirdly, if the Veins
between the Eyes and Nose are extended with Blood, the Veins under the Tongue
look greenish, the Neck flusheth with heat, the Backbone cold, the Veins and
Arteries swell, and the Pulses are observed more easily. Fourthly, if the Veins
in the Breast appear Blackish and afterward turn yellow the Teats look fiery,
and upon drinking cold Drink, the woman feels it as it were in her Breast.
Fifthly, If she on a sudden fall to loathing her Meat and Drink, coveting
things unreasonably, and not fit for Sustenance be troubled with Pukings,
weakness of Stomach, sore declining, and there be little Worms found about the
Navel. Sixthly* If the lower part of the Belly swell, and weakness be
contracted in her Loins with inward Gripings and retention of the Courses 7
days after Copulation. After which act, there is a cold and trembling seizes on
the Members External. Seventhly, it is a certain sign of Conception, if the
Midwife putting up her finger, find the Interior Neck of the Womb exactly
closed. If the womb wax round and swell, the Courses stay, the Thighs swell
with some pain, the whole Body grows Weak, the Face at times becomes Pale, the
Urine white with a little Cloud after some standing at the top of it, if many
Atoms appear in it* Eighthly, If Urine be put in a Glass three days, and the
Woman have conceived, certain live things will appear to stir in it: If a
bright Needle be put in a whole Night and she have conceived, diverse little red
Specks will be thereon, but if not, it will be blackish or rusty. Nor are these
Imaginations, but the proved Assertions of the Learned in Physic, and Skilful
in Midwifry, who have made it their Study to search into the Depths of Natures
Secrets: And next comes a nicer Point to be treated of, not without the
Patronage of such whose Wisdom and in^efatigable Labor have rendered them
famous to Posterity; The which take as follows,

After Conception, and the Child be come ^o some Perfection, so that the Sex
may be distinguished, if it happen to be a Male-Child, then the Right Eye of
the Women will, to appearance, move swifter, and sparkle more than the Left:
The right Pap will rise, swell, and be more hard than the left, and the Teats
color will change more suddenly, and the Increase of the Milk will be speedy;
and if it be milked out and set in the Sun, it will look like Pearl,
contracting it self into a more solid Matter than ordinary; or if upon milking
it out, you cast it upon the Woman's Urine, (...) will sink to the Bottom. Her
Right Cheek will often glow, and be more ruddy than the Le^t; and indeed the
whole color of the Face more lively than at other times, she feels less
Sadness than if she Conceived a Female. And when first the Child stirs, it is
more brisk and strong in its Motion than the other having commonly its first
Motion on the right side on the 60th Day, if her Courses flow the 40th Day
after Conception, if her Belly be more acute toward the Navel, and as she
goes, she puts her Right Leg foremost, and rising observe to ease her self on
the Right Side more than on the Left.

Now in case a Female be conceived, the tokens are averse to those, for the
most part the first Motion rarely happening before the 19th day after
Conception, and then it is made on the left Side. Females are carried with more
Pains than Males, through Defect of Heat in the Womb, to attract the Substance;
also the Thighs and Genital Members of the Woman swell more than ordinary, her
Color departs, and her Longings are extreme, and her Courses flow the
Thirtieth Day after Conception.

If Twins are conceived, which many times happens through the Impregnating o^ two
Eggs at the same time, the sign thereof will not appear till the third or
fourth Month after Conception, and then the first Appearance will be by the
Motion of the Infants both ways. that is on either side of the Womb at once,
for they receive their Souls at one and the same time; also if her two Flanks
swell higher than the middle of the Belly; if there does appea^ a Line, or as
it were a Division from the Navel to the Groin, making a kind of a Channel, or
if a Woman with more than ordinary Pain support her Burden: And thus much may
suffice for these, from whence I shall proceed to give the Reader (...) Insight
into false Conceptions that frequently deceive Women, especially such as ^re
over-desirous of Children.

CHAP. XVII. Of false Conceptions, and how to know them.
HAving already treated of true Conceptions, the next thing note-worthy (...),
what relates to false Conceptions, and ^n this case Women are sometimes
deluded, ^hinking themselves with Chiid, when their Bellies only swell with the
Retention of their Natural Purgations* that fall not according to their usual
times: Or else by a Lump of indigested Flesh, for the most ^^rt like the
Gizzard of a Fowl, greater or ^esser, according to the time of its continuance
there, which is frequently four Months, and is called a Moon-Calf.

At other times they are deceived by Moles, which are twofold, viz. The true
and a false, the former of which is fleshy Body, filled with many Ve^^els,
streaked with white, green, or black Lines, (...) deficient of Membranes, but
encompasse with diverse, yet without Growth, Motion Bones, Bowels, or any
Internals, receivi^ its nourishment through certain Vessels; no^^withstanding it
l^es, as we may say, the life of a Plant, without any Figu^e or Ord engendered
in the Concavity of the Matrix It has no Burden or Navel-string fastened (...)
it, as a Child always has, forasmuch as (...) Mole it self adheres to the Womb,
by which means it receives Nourishment from it Vessels

The latter of these,, viz, The false Mol^ may be divided into four
distinctions as fo^lowing. First, the windy Mole, being contraction or conflux
of wind. Sec^ndl^ the watery Mole, being a Gathering (...) Water. Thirdly, the
Humorous Mole, (...) conflux of diverse Humors; and Fourthl^ the membranous
Mole, being many Mem^branes, in the Form of a Bag, filled wi^^ Blood, and of
these in their Order.

Galen holds, that the Mole is bred when the Man's Seed is weak, barren,
imperfect or too little in quantity; and for the mo^^ part choked through the
abundance of the menstruous Blood, which is gross, thic^ and unfit for the
Framing of a Child; (...) that instead thereof is bred a lump of Fles^ that by
little and little increases, being wrapped in its own Membrane, which Nature
effects, as desirous to bring forth any thing rather than be idle.

The windy Mole is occasioned through defect of Heat in the Womb and parts
adjacent, as the Liver and Spleen, which engender a polite or windy Vapor
which fills the membranous Part, and puffs up the Concavity of the Matrix.

The watery Mole is engendered of diverse apt confluences of thin Matter or watery
Fluxes, which passing through the Vessels, evacuates into the Womb, having its
Original from the Spleen, Liver, or parts adjoining; or rather, it proceeds
from the weakness of the Matrix, which cannot assimilate the Blood that ^s
brought to nourish it; part whereof ^s turned into Water, and not being
avoided, stays in the Womb.

The Humorous Mole is engendered by moist attracted Humors, as the Whites, or
certain watery Purgation, which distill from the menstruous Veins, and gathering
into a glutinous Substance, stay in the concavity of the Womb.

The Membranous Mole is no other than a contraction of Blood within a Skin or
Membrane, to which is fastened many white and transparent Vessels, filled with
Blood, the which coming forth, and being thrown into Water, the Blood goes
out* and the Membrane rumples together, shrinking on a Heap like coagulate^
Seed.

Now mow most or all of these Concepti^ons have many Signs or Symptoms coheren^
with the true, as the Depravity of Appe^tite, Puking, Swelling, Suppression of
the Menses, Swelling of the Breast and Belly, so that many are at a plunge to
distinguish them; for, indeed, it is not easily to be done though in these
following Matters there i^ distinction, viz. In case of a false Conception the
Breasts swell and fall again, not con^taining any Milk, the Face is frequently
puffed up, the Arms, the Groin, and the Thighs grow meagre and lanker, the
Bel^ly waxes hard, as if Dropsical being al^most of an equal Roundness, with
many Prickings at the bottom, scarcely admitting of Intermission, which breaks
the Rest o^ the Woman so afflicted; diverse other sign there are to know it by,
especially the tru^ or fleshy Mole, as thus, a Male-Infant be^gins to move at
the beginning of the third Month for the most part, and the Femal^ at the end
of the third, or beginning o^ the fourth: Now when any motion happens, the
Woman ought to consider whe^ther she has any Milk in her Breasts; if she have,
it is a sign of a true Conception, bu^ the contrary, of a false one; it is also
the Sign of a true Conception, if the Chil^ move freely and lively in all parts
of the Womb, for although there is a Motion in a false Conceeption, yet it is
dull, and not quick nor active in Motion, the Motion not being in it self, but
in the expulsive Faculty of the Mother. And further, if the Woman observe, she
may perceive it fall always to the side she lies on, and she lying on her Back,
if her Belly be stroaked down, the Burden will descend, and not have, for want
of inbred Force, Power to recover its Station. But what confirms it more is,
that nine Months expired, no Travel ensues, but her Belly still increases*
whilst all the rest of the Body grows lean and out of order.

The Signs of the Windy Mole are diverse, as the sudden stretching of the Belly
like a Bladder, yet soft and spungy, especially near the Groins, and swelling
thereof, when if it be struck it sounds like a Drum, and that the swelling is
sometimes more and sometimes less; so that according to its Increase and
Decrease the Woman feels more heavy or more light.

The Watery Mole is known by its Distention of the Belly, and especially, when
she lies upon her Back, the sides thereof are more swelled than the middle, or
the bottom which grows flatter by reason the watery humor falls to the sides,
moving up and down, as if it were a fluctuation o^ Water, and much to the same
purpose a^ the Symptoms of the Humorous Mole, only with the Distinction, that
the Flanks and Thighs are more stretched by the Watery Mole than by the other,
because the Water being thinner than the Humor, or not confined in Cells,
flows thither, and that which in case of a watery Mole comes through Nature's
Conduit is clear, when in case of a humorous Mole, the Water is red, and of a
Blood Color.

Further, observe, in case of a false Conception the Courses come not down, and
the Navel of the Mother advances it self little or nothing; which in the true
Conception is otherwise.

Other false Conceptions there are occasioned by diverse Tumors, which the
Ignorant take for Moles, when they are only Rotundities and Swelling the Belly,
which are not discovered till the Womb be opened; and then though the Womb be
not all out of order, there does appear at one or both corners thereof, little
^ags full of Water, in others, there are to be seen a Heap of Kernels, or
superfluous Flesh like a Cluster of Grapes in the Womb, causing it to swell.
Yet, in such Cases, the Courses are observed to proceed in due order, which
denotes the Womb to be in good Order.

Another Excrescency of Flesh there is, which some call a Pendant Mole, being a
piece of fleshy Substance, hanging within the interior Neck of the Womb, being
in breadth about a finger at the Place where it is fastened, increasing bigger
and bigger toward the bottom, like a small Bell possessing the whole Orifices,
nay, sometimes appearing outward to a great bigness.

CHAP. XVIII. Instructions for Women how to govern themselves during their
being with Child.
THese Instructions being exceeding necessary, I thought fit to lay them down
for a Rule to such as are desirous of Self-preservation. And indeed, for want
of due Observance, diverse Diseases afflict Childbearing Women, nay, the Child
is frequently lost, or, if it come to a perfect Birth, proves sickly and
disordered through the Mother's Misobservance.

In the first place then, the Woman with Child ought to choose a temperate Air,
not affected with Fogs arising from Marshes, Ditches, Ponds, Lakes or Rivers,
and not to go abroad in too hot; nor too cold Weather, nor when the South Wind
blows strong; for that Wind, above all others, dis^^rbs and disorders Women
with Child, oftentimes causing Abortion: And next to it the North Wind is
hurtful, causing Catarrhs, Coughs and Rheums, which; opening the Body, causes
the Woman to bring forth before her time. In short, if any evil Vapor be drawn
in during Purgancy, it causes diverse Diseases.

In case of Diet, she ought to be very cautious in choosing such Meats as create
wholesome nourishment, all Meats that are moderately dry, being taken so to do;
and let her observe not to fast immoderately; for that renders the Child sickly
and weak, and often for want of nourishment, constrains it to be born before
its time; nor on the other hand must she be too gluttonous, for that again
stuffs it, and causes it to swell beyond its natural Bounds.

All Meats, either too hot or too cold, and moist, are to be avoided, as
Salads, Spiced meats, and the extraordinary Use of other Meats, which makes the
Children come forth oftentimes without Nails, which is a Sign of short Life.
The most wholesome Meats in this case are Pigeons, Turtles, Larks, Partridges,
Pheasants, Veal Mutton, or any such Meat that is of good Juice, and
contributing to kindly Nourishment; as also such Fruits as are sweet and of
easy Digestion, as Cherries, Pears, Damsons, etc. but let her avoid such things
as subject her Body to Windiness.

Her Longings if extravagant she must restrain, at least as much as in her
lies, not eating any thing that is filthy or contrary to Nourishment, nor let
her sleep immediately after Meals, and not at all in the Daytime if she can
avoid it; the Night being preferable in such cases when she may sleep her fill,
so it exceed not nine hours.

Her Exercise ought to be moderate, for violent motion, either in Walking or
otherwise, molests and disturbs the Womb, Riding in a Coach, especially upon
the Stones or in uneven Way (the last three Months are dangerous) as also
extraordinary Sounds or Noises, and above all, the Ringing of Bells, and
Discharging of Guns.

Laughing, Crying, or immoderate Anger, or any other Passion is extremely
hurtful; nor in the first four Months after Conception ought she to lie with
her Husband, forasmuch as the Act of Copulation moves and shakes the Womb, and
consequently the Fruit therein, and causes the Courses to descend. She must
likewise in the 6 th and 8 th Month abstain, but in the 7 th and 9 th it is not
forbidden, but rather to be encouraged, by reason, as Physicians affirm, it
opens the Passage, and thereby facilitates the Birth; and the better to help
it, the Woman ought to take such things as may keep her ^ody soluble, as
Syrrups and other loosening matters as may help Nature in its Operation;
especially let her observe when she grows any thing big, to lay aside her Busk,
and go loose, that the Child may have free Scope, for two Reasons: First, That
it may not be hurt; and Secondly, That it being unrestrained, may come to its
full Growth.

CHAP XIX. Further Considerations how Women ought to govern themselves during
Pregnancy.
IT IS further to be observed, that after Delivery the Breasts frequently grow
extreme large, and swell overmuch: to prevent which, (and to avoid the Danger
of too much Blood, which causes curdled or crudy Milk, so that from the Effects
thereof diverse Diseases arise in the Breast) so soon as the Woman perceives her
self with Child, let her wear about the Neck a small Necklace of Gold or Steel,
or a small Ingot of the latter, to hang between her two Breasts, fomenting her
Breasts a quarter of an hour every morning with Water distilled from
Sage-Pere-winkle, Ground Ivy, being blood-warm.

In her fourth Month, when the Motion is great, and her Belly swells big, she
may ^wath it with a Swath-band, anointed with Pomatum or the like; to make
which, I shall give direction, and in so doing she will keep it smooth, and
free from wrinkles, as also from hanging down like a Tripe after Delivery.

The Receipt.
Take of the Gall of a Kid, and of a Sow, of each 3 ounces, and Capons grease
and Goose grease, of each one Ounce and an half, and having melted them, put
thereto a quarter of a Pint of Water, after which strain them through a Linen
Cloth into fair Water, casting it to and fro therein, till it be white; at what
time add to it the Marrow of a Red Deer one Ounce* and lay it in Red-Rose-Water
12 hours, after the expiration of which, you may use it in anointing the Swath
as aforesaid, as also the Belly.

If the Ingredients aforesaid cannot be gotten, then the following Leniments
are effectual, though the former is better, viz.

Take of Mutton-Suet adjoining to the Kidne^s, and Dogs-grease, each two
ounces, Whale-Oil an ounce, and of Sweet-Almond-Oil the like Quantity; wash
them well after they are melted together in the Water of Germander, or new
White Wind, and an^int the Belly therewith, or the Swa^hband ordained to
support it.

But for such as are not desirous to anoint their Bellies, may use the
following Bath or Decoction.

Take of all the so^ts of Mallow, and of Mother-wort, each two handfuls,
Lilly-Roots, the white ones, to the weight of three Ounces, Melilot and
Camomile, of both two handfuls* Lime-seeds, Quince-seed^ and Fenugreeck-seed^
three Ounce, proportionable of each, boil them in Spring Water, and bathe
therewith.

If the Woman, during her Pregnancy, feel but little Motion in her Womb, let
her make a ^u^lt as follows, and bind it upon her Navel* and it will greatly
strengthen Infant, viz.

Take the Powd^er of Roses, Red Coral, and Gilliflowers, of each three Ounces,
Mastick a Dr^m, and of Angelica-seeds, two Drams, two grains of Ambergrise, and
one of Musk, all which being well beaten, put them into a Linen Bag, expanded
and quilted, that they may be in every part of it, placing it upon the Navel.

CHAP XX. Rules to be observed upon a Woman's lying down, and her Delivery, etc.
HAving thus far proceeded in what, as I conceived, is highly necessary to be
known by the Professors of this Art, I shall gradually proceed to what remains:
And, First, to inform the Reader what is necessary to be observed upon the
Woman's lying, down in order to her Delivery.

The Hour according to Computation of Time, and the Disposition of the Body
approaching, let the Woman send for a skilful^ Midwife, not delaying so to do,
but rather too soon than too ^ate; at what time let her prepare a little Bed or
Couch, of a moderate Height, and so situate, that it be far from the D^or,
near the Fire, and convenient for the Midwife and her Assistants to pass round
and be ^iding on every side, as Occasion requires, having Change of Linen, and
a small Cricket or little Log of Timber to rest her Feet against, she having
more Force when they are bowed than otherwise.

Having thus provided, when the Woman feels her Pains come, if the Weather be
not extreme cold, let her walk leisurely about the Room, resting her self by
turns upon the Bed, expecting so the coming down of her Water, which is a
Humor that is contracted in one of the outward Membranes and flows thence when
it is broke by the struggling of the Child, or some other Accident, there being
no direct time affixed for its Efflux, though for the most part it flows not
above two hours before the Birth. Motion likewise will cause the Womb to open
and dilate it self, when lying along in Bed will prove troublesome, yet if she
be much spent and weakened, she may take some gentle Cordial to refresh her
self, if her Pains will Permit.

If her Travel be tedious, to revive her Spirits, she may take any Broth of
Chickens or Mutton, and after it a poach'd Egg, but must not take any thing to
excess. As for the Posture Women are delivered in, they are diverse; some lying
in their Bed, others siting in a Chair* supported and held by others, or
resting upon the side of the Bed or Chair; some again upon their Knees, being
supported under their Arms; but the safest and most cemmodious Way is in the
Bed, whenas the Midwife ought to observe these following Rules:

Let her see that the Woman be laid upon her Back, her Head a little elevated*
by the help of a Pillow, having the like help to support her Reins and
Buttocks, and that her Rump lie high; for if she lie low, she cannat be well
delivered; then let her keep her Knees and Thighs as far asunder as she can,
her Legs bowed together, her Buttocks, the Soles of her Feet and Heels being
fixed upon a little Log of Timber, placed for that purpose, that she may have
the greater Force to strain: Now in case her Back be exceeding weak, a
Swathband may be cast under it, the Band being four double, and about 12 Inches
broad, and this must be held by two Persons, who with steady hands and equal
motion must raise her up at the time the Pains happen; but if they be not exact
in their Motion, it is better evaded, and at the same time let two Women hold
her Shoulders that she may the better strain out the Birth with more Advantage;
and the better to facilitate it, let a Woman stroke or press the upper Part of
her Belly gently, and by degrees. Nor must the Woman her self be faint-hearted,
but courageous, and of a good Heart; forcing her self by straining and stopping
her Breath.

In case of Delivery, the Midwife must wait with Patience till the Child's Head
or other Members burst the Membrane; for through Ignorance, or haste to be gone
to other Women, as some have done, the Midwife tear the Membranes with her
Nails, she endangers both the Woman and the Child; for it lying dry, and
wanting that Slipperiness that should facilitate it, its Egress comes forth
with greater Pain.

When the Head appears, the Midwife must gently hold it between her two hands,
and draw the Child at such times as the Woman's Pangs are upon her, and at no
other, slipping by degrees her four fingers under its Armpits, not using a
ro^gh hand in drawing it forth, lest by such means the Child, through its
tenderness, receive any Deformity of Body.

As soon as the Child is taken forth, which is commonly with its Face
downwards, let it be laid upon its Back, that it may more freely receive
External Respiration; then cut the Navel-string with a sharp Instrument about
three Inches from the Body, tying that which adheres to the Belly, with a
silken string, as near as you can, then cover the Head and Stomach of the Child
well, suffering nothing to come upon the Face.

The Child being thus drawn forth, and in Health, lay it aside, and let the
Midwife regard the Patient, in drawing, or causing to come forth the Secundine:
And this may be done by wagging and stirring them up and down, and afterward
with a gentl^ Hand drawing them forth, or if the Work be difficult, let the
Woman hold Salt in her Hands, shut them close, and breath hard into them,
whereby she shall know whether the said Membranes be broken or not: The like
may be known by causing a Strain or Vomiting, by putting one Finger down her
Throat, by straining or moving her inferior Parts, being all observed to be
done out of Hand. If this fail she may take a draught of raw Elder-water, or
the Yolk of a raw Egg, or smell to a piece of Assa foetida, if she be troubled
with the Wind-Cholick, a Remedy for which, I shall hereafter prescribe. If she
have taken cold, it is a great Obstruction to the coming down of the
Secundines; and in such cases the Midwife ought to chafe the Woman's Belly with
a gentle Hand, which breaks not only the Wind, but obliges the Secundines to
come down. And these proving ineffectual, the Midwife must dilate with her Hand
the exterior Orince of the ^omb, and gently draw it forth. Having discoursed of
common Births, or such as for the most part are easy, I shall proced to give
Directions in case of Extremity.

CHAP. XXI. In case of Extremity, what ought to be observed, especially to
Women who in their Travel are accompanied with an Efflux of Blood, Convulsion,
or Fits of the Wind.
IN case of Extremity, greater Regard must be had than at other times; and
first of all, the Situation of the Womb, and her Posture of Lying must be cross
the Bed, being held by such as have Strength to prevent her slipping down, or
moving her self in the Operation of the Man-midwife or Surgeon; her Thighs
must be sundered as wide as may be, and so held, whilst her Legs invert and
bend backward toward her Hips, her Head leaning upon a Bolster, and the Reins
of her Back supported with the like, her Rump and Buttocks likewise elevated,
observing to cover her Stomach, Belly and Thighs with warm Linen, to keep them
from cold Wind.

The Woman being in the Posture aforesaid, let the Operator put up his Hand, if
he finds the Neck of the Womb dilated, and remove the contracted Blood that
obstructs the Passage of the Birth, and having by degrees, with much gentleness
made Way, let him tenderly move the Infant, his Head being first anointed with
sweet Butter, or a harmless Pomatum, and if the Waters are not come down, then
without any difficulty may they be let forth, when if the Infant attempts to
break forth with the Head foremost or cross, he may gently turn it to find the
Feet, which having done, let him draw forth one, and fasten it to a Ribband,
then put it up again and by degrees find the other, when bringing them as close
and as even as may be, and between whiles giving the Woman leave to breathe,
urging her to strain in helping Nature to perfect the Birth, he may draw it
forth: and the better to do it, that his hold may be surer, he must fasten or
wrap a Linen Cloth about the Child's Thighs, observing to bring it into the
World with its Face downward.

In case of a Flux of Blood, if the Neck of the Womb be open, it must then be
maturely considered, whether the Infant or the Secundines come first, which
often the latter happening to do, stop the Mouth of the Womb, and hinder the
Birth, to the endangering both the Woman and Child; in such a case, I say, the
Secundine must be be removed by swift turn, and indeed they have by their so
coming down deceived many, who feeling their Softness, supposed the Womb was
not dilated, and by their being so deceived, the Woman and Child, or at least
the latter has been lost, the Secundines removed, the Child must be sought for
and drawn forth as has been directed; and if in such a case the Woman or Child
die, the Midwife or Surgeon is blameless, because they did their true
Endeavor.

If it appear, upon Enquiry, that the Secundine comes first, let the Woman be
delivered with all convenient Expedition, because great flux of Blood will
follow, for then the Veins are opened, and upon this Account, two things are to
be considered. First, the bigness or smallness of the Secundines advancing; if
the former, and the Head of the Child appear first, it must be guided and
directed toward the Neck of the Womb, as in Case of Natural Births, but if
there, through the Weakness of the Child or Mother, appear any Difficulty in the
Delivery, the best Way is to search for the Feet, and thereby draw it forth;
but if the latter, the Secundines may be put back with a gentle Hand, and the
Child first taken forth,

Another matter is more worthy, viz If the Secundine be far advanced, so that
it cannot be put back, and the Child follow it close, then are the Seundines to
be taken forth with much Care, as swift as may be, and laid aside, without
cutting the Entail that is fastened to them, for by that you may be guided to
the Infant, the which, whether alive or dead, must be drawn ^orth by the Feet
with all Expedition, though ^t is not to be acted unless in case of great
Necessity, for in other cases the Secundine ^ught to come last.

As for a dead Child, in drawing it forth, ^et these directions be carefully
observed by ^he Surgeon, viz. if the Child be found ^tead with its Head
foremost, the danger is ^he greater, and more difficult will be the Delivery;
for it is an apparent Sign the Woman's Strength begins to fail her, and that
the Child being dead, and wanting its (...)-bred Force, can be no Ways assisted
to ^ts Delivery; wherefore the most certain and safe way is for the Chirgeon to
put up ^his lets hand, sliding it as hollow in the Palm ^s he can, into the
Neck of the Womb, in^o the lower part thereof, toward the Feet, and that
between the Head of the Infant and the Neck of the Matrix, when having a Hook
in the right Hand, chuch it close, and slip it up above the Left Hand, between
the Head of the Child, and the ^lat of his hand, fixing it in the bone of the
Temple toward the Eye, or else in the hollow of the Eye, or for want of
conveniently coming at these in the occipital Bone, observing still to keep the
left hand in its place, with it gently moving and stirring the Head; and so
with the Righ^ Hand and Hook, draw the Child forwar^ admonishing the Woman to
put forth he^ utmost Strength, still drawing when the Woman's Pangs are upon
her. The Hea^ being drawn forth, he must with all spee^ slip his Hand under the
Arm-holes of the Child, and take it quite forth, giving the^ things to the
Woman, viz. A Toast of (...) White Bread, in a quarter of a Pint of Ip^^cras
Wine.

Now the former Application and En^deavour failing, and the following
Med^^cines will not enable the Woman to ca^^ forth the Birth, you may proceed
to Instru^ments, after another manner, First, when the Woman is in her bed, let
her receiv^ the ensuing Portion hot, abstaining from all manner of Meats, and
rest till she fe^ the Operation, which is this,

Take Blue Figs, to the number of seven, (...) them in pieces, adding to them
Fenugreek Motherwort, and Seeds of Rice, of each fi^ Drams, Water of
Pennyroyal and Mothe^^wort, six Ounces of each* boil them till (...) half be
consumed, and having strained the^ again, add Trochisces of Myrrh a Dram, an^
of Saffron three Grains, sweetning the Liqu^^ with Loaf-Sugar, and spicing it
with Cinna^mon. Having rested upon this, let her labor ^gain as much as may
be, and if she be not ^et successful, make a Suffumation of Castor, Oppoponax,
Sulpher, and Assa Foetida, of ^uch half a Dram, beating them into Powder, (...)
wetting them with the Juice of Rue ^ntil they become stiff, then Burn them upon
Coals, so that the Smoke or the Fume (...) only come to the Matrix, and no
fur^^er.

If these effect not your desire, then ^his Emplaster is very fitly to be
applied, (...), Take of Galbanum an Ounce and a half, ^olocynthis without
Grains Two Drams. (...) Juice of Motherwort and Rue, of each Half an Ounce, and
Two Ounces of Virgin^^s-wax, bruise and melt them together, ^reading them as a
S^ar Cloth, to reach from (...) Navel to Os Pubis, spreading likewise (...)
the Flanks at the same time, making (...) ^^nvenient Pessary of Wool, closing
it in Bag of Silk, and dipping it in a Concoc^^^n of round B^rthwort, Savin,
Colocyn^his with Grains, Staves (...) Black Hele^^^e, of each a Dram, and of
Rue a little ^rig or two.

These things failing, and the Woman (...) danger, let the Chyrurgeon use his
^nstrument to dilate and widen the womb, (...) which purpose the Woman must be
set (...) a Chair, so that she may turn her Crupper as much from its Back as is
convenie^^ drawing up her Legs as close as she ca^ out spreading her thighs as
wide as may or if through her weakness it appear mo^^ convenient, that she be
laid upon the Be^^ with her Head downwards, her Butto^^ raised, and her Legs
drawn up as much can be, at what time the Chyrurgeon wi^^ his Spiculum Matrices
or his Apertory, (...) dilate or widen the womb, and draw o^ the Child and
Secundines together, if be possible, after which the Womb (...) be well washed
and anointed, and the w^^man laid in her Bed, comforted there (...) Spices,
pleasent Meats, and Cordials: (...) course must be taken in the delivery of
dead Children, likewise with Moles ^^^cundines, or otherwise false Births,
(...) will not of themselves come forth in (...) season, or if the Instruments
aforesaid, (...) not sufficiently widen the Womb, the other Instruments, as the
Drakes Bill, a long Pincers ought to be used.

If it so happen that any Inflamati^^ Swelling, or concreet Blood be contrac^
in the Matrix, under the Film of those T^^mours, either before or after the
Bir^^ where the matter appears thinner, (...) Midwife with a Penknife or
incision ^^^strument may Launch it, and Press out (...) corruption, healing it
with a Pessary d^^ped in Oil of Red Roses.

If at any time through could or some violence, the Child happen to be swelled
in any part, or have contracted a watery Tumor; yet if it remain alive, such
means ought to be used as are least injurious to the Child or mother, but if it
be dead that Tumor must be let out by incision ^o facilitate the Birth.

As it often happens that Children come with their Feet foremost, and the Hands
dilating themselves from the Hips, in such ^ case the Midwife must be well
provided of necessary Ointments to stroke and anoint ^he Infant with, thereby
to help its coming forth, lest it return again into the Womb, before it can be
drawn forth, holding at the same time both the Arms of the Infant, close to the
Hips, that so the Child may ^ssue forth after its own manner, but if then (...)
prove too big, then the Womb must be well anointed. The Woman may likewise ^^ke
sneezing Powder, to cause her the more to strain, and at the same time those
that attend, may gently stroke down her Belly, to make the Birth defend, and
^eep the Child when advanced, from re^^ring back.

Sometimes it falls out, that the Child ^oming with its Feet foremost, has its
Arms ^xtended above its Head, the which so ^appening the Midwife must not
receive in that posture, but put it back into the Womb, unless the Passage be
extraordinar^ wide, and then she must anoint both the Child and the Womb, nor
is it safe to dra^ it forth before it is put into due for^ which must be done
after this manner, (...) Woman lying upon her Back, with (...) Head depressed,
and her Buttocks elevate^ the Midwife with a gentle hand, must com^press the
Belly of the Woman; towar^ the Midrif, by that means to put back (...) Infant,
observing to turn the Face of (...) Child toward the Back, of the Mother,
ra^sing up its Thighs and buttocks towar^ her Navel, thereby to bring it to a
mo^^ regular and natural Production.

If a Child happen to come forth wi^^ one Foot, the Arm being extended alo^^
the side and the other Foot turned bac^^ward, then must the Woman be instan^
braught to Bed, and laid in the post^^ aforesaid, at what time the Midwife
(...) carefully put back the Foot so appeari^^ and the Woman rock her self from
one (...) to the other, till she find the Child is tu^^ed, but she must not
alter her posture, (...) turn upon her Face, after which she (...) expect her
pains, and must have (...) assistance, Cordials especially not bei^^ wanting to
revive and support her Spir^^

At other times it so comes to pass, that ^he Child lies cross in the womb, and
falls upon its side; if it so happen, the Woman ^ust not be urged in her
labor, neither an any expect the Birth in that manner: Therefore the Midwife,
when she so per^^ves it, must use great diligence to reduce (...) to its right
form, or such a form in the Womb, as 'its possible to deliver it; ^sp^^^ally by
moving the Buttocks, and g^iding (...) Head to the Passage, but if she be
su^^essful herein, let her again try by ro^king ^erself to and fro, and wait
with patience ^ll it change its manner of lying.

Sometimes it falls out that the Child ha^^ens the Birth, with its Legs and
(...) ^istorted or expanded, in which, as in the ^ormer, the Woman must rock
her self, but ^ot with any violence till she find the ^egs and Arms fall to
their proper stations, (...) may be done by a gentle Compression (...) the
Womb: but if neither of them pre^ail, the Midwife with her Hand must close
(...) Legs of the Infant, and if possible she (...) reach them, do the like to
the Arms, and so draw it forth, though if it could be ^^duced of it self to the
composure or po^^ure of a natural Birth, it is better.

If the Infant comes forward with both ^nees foremost, the Hands hanging down
^^on the Thigh, then must the Mi^wi^e put both Knees upwards, till the Feet
appear, taking hold of which with her Lef^ Hand, let her keep her Right Hand on
the side of the Child, and in that posture endeavor to bring it forth, but if
she cannot* then must the Woman rock her self till the Child is in a more
convenient posture for Delivery.

When it happens that the Child presses forward, with an Arm extended upon the
Thighs, and the other elevated over his Head, the Feet likewise streached out
a^ length in the Womb, the Midwife in such a posture, must not attempt to
receive the Child, but must lay the Woman upon the Bed, in the manner often
before recited making a soft and gentle Compression upon he^ belly, to oblige
the Infant to retire and if on its own accord it retire not, ther^ must the
Midwife thrust it back by the Shoulders, and bring the Arm that wa^ stretched
above the Head to its right place for certain it is most dangerous in these
Extremities; in this therefore the Mid^wife oug^t to take more care herein
the^^ ordinary, And first, She must observe well to anoint her Hands, then the
Womb o^ the Woman, either with some sweet But^ter, or some convenient P^matom,
thrustin^ up her Hands, as near as she can to the Arm of the Infant, and reduce
it to the sid^ but if she cannot recall it, then must the Woman be laid on her
Bed, there to repose for a while, and then again be conducted to a Seat
prepared for the most convenience in that affair, by which time perhaps ^he
Child may be reduced to a better posture, the which when the Midwife finds, ^he
must draw the Arms cloase to the Hips, and so recive it.

If an Infant come with its Buttocks foremost, being in a manner duble, then
the Midwife anointing her Hands, must thrust ^t up* and by degrees heaving up
the Buttocks, and after them the Back, strive to turn the Head to the passage,
but be not over hasty in so doing, lest the Infant retiring should shape it
worse, therefore if it cannot be turned with the hand, the Woman must to Bed,
and rock her self, taking such comfortable things as may support her Spirits,
till she perceive the Child ^urn.

If a Child come forward with its Shoulders, the Neck being bowed as it often
happens, as also the Hands and Feet stretched upwards: in such a case the
Midwife must with much diligence move the Shoulders, that she may direct the
Head to the passage, and the better to perfect it, ^he Woman must rock her
self, etc. These and such like methods are to be observed in all single Births:
And the same may be observed in case of Twins or Treble Births, for as the
single Birth has but one Natural way and many unnatural Forms even so it
happens with the Birth of many Children; wherefore the Midwife must observe (if
Twins be in the Womb and press foreward according to the natural Form) that she
receive that first which is nearest the passage* not letting the other go, lest
by retiring, it should chang^ the Form; nor must she, when one is born, delay
to bring forth the other; and this Birth in the natural form is the more easy
because the Children are most commonly less then the single Births, and
consequently require a lesser passage; but if this Birth happen in an unnatural
form, it is the more difficult and dangerous. In the Birth of Twins, let the
Midwife be exceeding careful that the Secundines be naturally brought forth,
lest in such a case, the Womb being delivered of its burden, falls, and by its
so doing the Secundines continue there longer than is requisite, to the
indangering of the Woman.

If it so happen, that the Woman is pregnant with Twins, and one come
naturally, and the other unnaturally, as the one with the Head, the other with
the Feet foremost, then must the Midwife consider to deliver the Natural-Birth
first, and then i^ she cannot turn the other, draw it out in the posture it
presses forward, but if that with the Feet downwards, be much before the other,
then may she deliver that first, turning the Head on the other side.

In this case the Midwife must be diligent to search that instead of Twins, it
be not a Monstrous Birth; as a Body with two Heads, or two bodies Joined
together, which she may observe, if both the Hands come foremost, by putting up
her Hands between them as high as she can and if she find they are Twins, she
must gently put one of them aside, to make way for the other, taking at first
that which is most advanced, having regard to the other, that ^he change not
its situation.

Now to prevent the first Child's being in danger of its Life, the Midwife, as
soon as it is come forth, must tie the Navel-string, as has been before
directed, and also bind it again, with a long and large Fillet to that part of
the Navel, that is fastened to the Secundines, the more readily to find them.

The second Infant born, let her diligently inquire whether there be not two
Secundines, for by the shortness of the Ligaments it often happens that it
retires back, to the damage of the Woman: wherefore least in such a case the
Womb should close it is most expedient to hasten them forth with all convenient
speed.

if two Infants are joined togather by the Body, as sometimes monstrously falls
out, then although the Heads come foremost, yet it is convenient, if possible
to turn, them, and draw them forth by the Feet, observing when they come to the
Hips, to draw them forth as swift as may be: and in this case great care ought
to be observed in anointing and widening the Passage.

And thus much for extremity or Unnatural Births. And the next thing I shall
proceed to, is how to order the Woman after Natural or Unnatural Births, or
Delivery.

CHAP, XXII. What ought to be observed after Delivery.
PResently after Delivery, in case of a Natural Birth, especially if the Woman
has had hard labor, it is convenient to wrap her in the Skin of a Sheep taken
off before it is cold, putting the flesh side to her Reens and Belly, or for
want of this the Skin of a Hare, or Coney, being flayed off as soon as killed,
may be applied to her Belly: and in so doing the dilation made in the Birth
will be closed up, and the melancoly Blood, expelled from those parts; And
these may be contributed in Summer the space of an hour, and in Winter too,
after which let the Woman be swathed with a fine linen Cloth, about a quarter
of a Yard in breadth chafing her Belly before with Oil of St. Jons-wort, after
that raise up the Matreix with a linen Cloth many times folded, then with a
lettle Pillow or Quilt over her Flanks, then use the Swath somewhat above the
H^nches winding it pretty stif, applying at the same time a warm Cloth to her
Nipples, nor presently applying Remedies to drive back the Milk, by reason the
body at such a time is disordered, and as it were out of frame, for there is
neither Vein nor Artrey which does not strongly beat, where such remedies to
drive back the Milk being all of a dissolving Nature, it is improper to apply
them to the Breast during such confusion and disorder, lest by so doing evel
Humors be stayed or contracted into the Breast, wherefore Twelve hours ought to
be the least space allowed for the Circulation and settlement of the Blood and
what was cast upon the Lungs by the vehement Agitation during the Labor, to
retire to its proper Receptacles.

A while after Delivery you may make a restrictive of the Yolk of two Eggs, and
a quartter of a point of White Wine, an Ounce of Oil of Saint John'swort, as
much of the Oil of Roses, Plantain and Rose Water, of each One Ounce, bray them
together, fold a Linen cloth, and dip it therein, warm it before a gentle
Fire, and apply it to the Breast, and the pains of those parts will be greatly
eased.

Present sleep is not convenient, but about four hours after Delivery, she may
take Broth, Candle or what other liquid matter is nourishing, and afterward
if she be disposed to sleep, it may be safely permitted, And this is as much in
case of a Natural Birth, as ought immediately to be done.

In case of Extremity or an unnatural Birth, these Rules ought to be observed:
In the fii^st place let the Woman keep a temperate Diet, by no means
overcharging her self, aft^r such an Excessive Evacuation and to say true, her
Diet, must be equal to that of wounded Persons, not being ruled or giving
Credit to unskilful Nurses, who admonish them to feed lustily, the better to
repair the loss of blood, for that blood is not for the most part pure, but
such as has been detained in the Vessels or Membranes, better avoided for the
Health of the Woman than kept, unless there happens an extraordinary Flux of
Blood, for if her nourishment be overgreat, it will endanger her falling into
a fever, nay more, it will increase the Milk to superfluity, which crudling
sometimes, turns to Aposthumes; wherefore it is requisite, for the first five
days especially, that she take moderately Panado, Broth, Poach'd Eggs, Gelly
of Chickens, or Calves Feet, French Barly-Broath, each day somewhat increasing
her allowance; if she intend to be a Nurse to her Child, she may take a little
more then ordinary to increase the Milk by degrees which must be of no
continuance, but drawn off, either by the Child, or otherwise. In this case
likewise, let her have Coriander or Fennel-Seeds, boiled in her barly-broath;
but by any means, for the time specified let her abstain from Meat. If no Fever
trouble her, she may drink now and then a small quantity of White Wind or
Claret as also Syrup of Maidenhair, or other Syrup that is Astringent, taking
it in a little water well boiled: And after the suspicion of a Fever, or fear
of contraction of Humors in the Breast, she may be nourished more plentifully
with the Broth of Pullets, Capons, Pigeons, Mutton, Veal, etc. which must not
be till after eight days, from the day of delive^^ is over, at what time the
Womb, unless some accident hinder, has purged it self; it will be then likewise
expedient to give her cold Meat sparingly, that so she may be enabled to gather
strength, she during the time resting quiet and free from disturbance not
sleeping in the day time if she can avoid it. If there happen any obstruction
in the Evacuation of the Excrement, a Glyster may be adminstred to help the
defect, made after the manner following.

Receipt.
Take of both the Mallows and Pelletory of the Wall, a handful of each,
Cammomile and Mellylot Flowers, of each a handful, Anny-seeds and
Fennel-seeds, of each two ounces, boil them in the decoction of a Sheeps head,
and take of this three quarts disolving in them of common Honey and course
Sugar, two Ounces strained well, and administer it Glysterwise, but if it not
operate to your mind, then may you take an Ounce of Catholicox.

CHAP. XXII. What ought to be done to the Child when newly born, with diverse
other matters relating thereto,
THE Navel of the Child having been before recited, the Midwife must cleanse
the Infant, not only in the Face, but likewise the whole Body, anointing the
Groin, Hips, Buttocks, with Oil of sweet Almonds, or Oil of Ros^s, to make the
Skin supple and cl^se the Pores, thereby to exclude the penetration of the Air,
and strengthen the Members, nor would it be amiss if she should take the
decoction of Roses or Rose-cakes, and red Sage decocted in White Wind, and
bathe the Child therewith, the decoction being blood-warm.

The Infant being thus well anointed, or supplied, and well dried, wrap it up
warm, and give it a spoonful of Sugar and Mollago, or a scruple of Mithridate
or Venice-Treacle, dissolved in half a spoonful of Canary, and after it a
lettle Cardus-water, observing to bathe or anoint it each morning as aforesaid.
If the Child have extreme throws immediately after it comes into the World, it
must be rubbed with Juice of Pellitry or the Decoction unto which fresh Butter
is melted, or for want of that Spinage-Juice, with Hogs Grease applied to the
Navel, with new laid Eggs, mixed or cemented with Nut Oil, laying them
likewise to the Navel; or you may administer a Clyster made with milk, the Yolk
of an Egg, and a small quantity of Sugar, which will undoubtedly ease the Pain.

Now some Children are born of evil constituted Parents, or are defective through
the evil nourishment the Woman has unadvisedly taken during her Pregnancy,
which occasions the Child to be much afflicted with phlegmatic Humors, to
expel which you may lay the Child on one side, and then turn it to the other,
for if you lay it upon the Back, it will be subject to Suffocation or
strangling, by the ascent of the humor, the Belly must above all things, be
kept soluble, causing the Infant to void the Blood kept in the Intrails, from
the time of its being in the Womb, by giving it a small quantity of Suppository
of black Soap mixed with fresh Butter, to take away the Acrimony of it, after
which immediately let the Infant take a Spoonful of Syrup of Violets which
will oblige Phlegm to pass down; but if heat be defective add to the Syrup half
the quantity of Oil of sweet Almonds, bathing the Belly and Stomach of it as it
is undressed.

If it happens that the Child's Cods be full of wind, the Child must be gently
moved to and fro, and the Cods anointed with Oil of Mirrh, giving it the liquid
Anniseeds boiled in small Drink, if they be swelled or extended with Water, rub
and chafe the Skin with fresh Butter, and the Water will swet out. But what is
more to be regarded than any other thing, is the choosing a good Nurse, for upon
that choice depends the thriving or not thriving of the Child, and in such
Cases these things ought to be regarded, viz. Observe that she be not dull
sighted, squint-eyed, have down cast looks; that she be not consumptive, or
subject to Fits, that her Breath is pure, that no noisome Vapor be conveyed to
the Lungs of the Child, that she be not infected with Bloaches, Boyls Blains,
or that she or her Husband never were afflicted with the French Disease, that
she is not given to excessive Drinking, or Gluttony, nor in the least subject
to Epilepsie or falling Evil. For the Nurse being in a manner the second Mother
to the Child, it drawing from her good or evil humors, especial care must
therefore be taken that the Nurse be good conditioned, moderate in meat and
drink, wakeful and vigilant, not fretful nor subject to passion, that her Milk
be clean and sweet, flowing sufficiently, her Breasts well fixed and large, not
over-fleshy nor she over-fat; and above all, that she be not too desirous of
carnal Copulation, by which means the Milk will be rendered unwholsom. Having
thus far proceeded in these affairs, I shall through God's Blessing lay down
diverse necessary matters for the Preservation of Childing Women and Infants,
thereby to prevent the hazard and Loss which too often happens in such Cases.

CHAP, XXIV. To know the Exact time of Delivery by Signs that precede it, and
how to cause the Woman to retain the Birth.
IN the Business of Generation, nothing is more to be regarded by the Woman,
than the time of her Conception and Quickening, that thereby she may be enabled
to be exact in the time of her delivery, every natural Delivery being at the
End of 9 months, especial^y if at the time or near it the Woman is wont to have
her Natural Purgations or that the time fall out with the Full or New Moon:
Nay, though a day or two before or after* for these things so falling out, not
only hasten, but facilitate Delivery, and the knowledge of this must extend to
the Woman for many Reasons. First, that she may prepare and dispose of her self
for so great a task. Second, for that at such a time diverse Maladies are
incident to her, nor can their Cause be penetrated into, unless those things be
well known, etc. Now one thing necessary the better to enable the Woman to
understand it, is the time of Natural Courses, for in case she have forgot, or
by not rightly understandeng their natural Efflux, or is puzzled therein by
reason of some unnatural Retention or extraordinary Evacuation, she may rectify
her Judgment by these Directions, viz. From the Age of 14 to 21, Women have
their courses according to the most natural courses of the new Moon; from 21 to
30 in the first Quarter; from 30 to 37 or 38 in the Full Moon: and from that
time to the time they cease in the last Quarter.

Beside what is beforementioned she will be made sensible of the approaching
time by pain in her Groin, Thighs, the small of her Back, the lower part of her
Navel, together with swelling and hardness in the said places, shivering and
quaking throut the Body, as if possessed with an Ague, and suddenly after with
flushing Heat, Feebleness and Lassitude, sm^ll Sweats on the Face, and
Flushings of the Blood there, and her Body will be in a manner restless, she
shall perceive the Child move downward with more force than ordinary, and a
bloody water will distill from the inferior parts, in case of these
Forerunners, she may be assured her time is at hand, when as she must not
delay sending for her Midwife whose Office it is to order her to the best
advantage, directions for which I have already given, for wonderful it is that
Nature has so well ordered her works that the Matrix opens not unless upon some
extraordinary Casualty, before the time* perfixd and not till then do these
Signs appear. But appearing they ought to be much regarded, if the Woman
desires her own safety and the preservation of the Child.

In case the Woman be subject to Miscarriage, or to come before her time, let
her take Mint, Roses Marjorum, of each a small handful bruise them together,
put them in a bag flat, and hang it about the Woman's Neck, so that it might
reach to the pit of her Stomach, and it will draw the Womb upwards, or keep it
in its place that it shall not fall down, or give the Child occasion to seek
for an untimely passage.

CHAP. XXV. Of the washing of Women after Delivery, with Directions how to make
them.
FOR the first Wash, take a good handful of young Chervil, boil it in two
pints of water, which having done, add to it a spoonful of Honey of Roses, and
let the Midwife use it at her discretion, and it will draw down the Purgations,
heal and cleanse the afflicted Part. There are some that use Milk instead of
water, affirming that it greatly mitigates the Pain: but by those whom
Experience has taught better, it is rejected: this having been used Eight
days, the second Wash may be made,

Take Provence Roses moist if you can, but if not, the dry Cakes, put them into
a litele Linen Bag, and boil them sufficiently in half a pint of Water, and
half a pint of whitewine, and use it as the former for other eight days, viz.
The liquid part well strained.

The third and last wash must be made of the decoction of Province Roses; in a
pint of whitewine, and a quarter of a pint of Mirrh water, and use it only four
days,

CHAP. XXVI. An Astringent for Women when occasion requires, as also directions
for a Sear-Cloth and how to cleanse her before she rise.
TO make an Astringent, Take Pomegranets Roach Alum and Galls of each Two
Ounces, Knot Grass a handful, of Province Roses Four Ounces, the Rinds of
Cassia Pomegranets each three Ounces, of Scarlet Berries, and Spermaceti of
each One ounce. The water of Roses myrrh and Burnet, each one ounce and half,
White wine and Water of the Smiths Forge, of each a quarter of a point; then
take Two little Bags about a quarter of a yard long, and half a quarter broad,
boil them in Water with the Drugs of Simples in them, and in a new glazed
Pipkin, and use them, successively as occasion requires.

To make an exceeding convenient Sear-Cloth to ease the pain, and reduce the
Body into a good temperament.

Take Virgins Wax 8 ounces Spermatici and Venice Turpentine, well washed in
Rose and Plantain Water, of (...) an ounce and a half, adding to then. ^hilst
they are melting an ounce of White Lead of Venice pulverized, and having by the
operation of the Fire well mixed them together, spread them Plaster-wise upon a
Cloth, fit to cover the Belly as far as is convenient; some of this you may lay
upon the Nipples; having first anointed them with the Oil of Acrons or
Spermaciti and it will allay the Inflammation, and much strengthen them.

Take a considerable quantity of bitter Almonds peel them, and bruise them well,
and make them into a Past with the Yolk of an Egg, and Powder of Grise, put the
Paste into a bag of Shamy, dip it in black Wine, tempring it well, and use it
upon the place where the Sear-cloths have been laid on? after that, wash the
said places with black Wine, wherein Oringe flowers have been steeped, and It
will cleanse these parts to admiration.

CHAP. XXVII. How to expel the Cholick from Women in Childbirth, and the
violent Gripings that attend the first Dilivery.
THese pains frequently afflict the Woman, no less then the pangs of her
Labor, and are by the Ignorant taken many times, the one for the other,
sometimes again they join forces, and happen at the same instant, which is
occasioned by the crude Matter in the Stomach, contracted through indignation;
and while such a pain lasts, the Woman advances nothing toward her Travel; to
expel the Fits o^ the Cholick; Therefore.

Take two Ounces of sweet Almonds Oy^ and an Ounce of Cinnamon Water with three
or four drops of Spirit of Ginger and let the Woman drink it off, and if this
work not your desire make a Clyster of Camom^^^ Balm leaves Olive Oil and new
milk, boil the former in the latter; and having strained it very well
administer it, as it is usual in such cases, nor are Fomentations, proper for
dispelling wind, amiss.

If the pain prove the Griping in the Guts, continuing long after Delivery, or
if i^ happen upon the Courses de^ending by rea^son of the smallness of the
Veins, which ^onvey the Blood into the Matrix, which ^ften befalls Women lying
in of the first ^hild; wherefore it its altogether conve^ient to use such a
Remedy, at such a time, ^s may eradicate the Cause for the Future, and above
all, I recommend this most ap^roved one, used with success by many Noble-women,

Receipt. Take the root of great Comfry a dram, ^utmegs and Peach-kernel, of
each two scruples, ^^llow Amber, and Ambergrise, of the former a ^^am and the
latter a scruple, bruise them to^ether* and give them the Woman as soon as she
(...) laid down, in two or three Spoonfuls of White Wind, but if it so happen
that she be Fe^erish, then let it be in as much warm Broth.

CHAP. XXVIII. (...) approved Receipts for hindering the monthly Flux in Women
with Child; also to cause Women that are fearful, and subject to Abortion, to
contain the Birth. Together with preparatory Ointments, to be used before the
time of Delivery, and Directions for stopping or preventing Vomiting, much
incident to Women with Child.
^O hinder the Superfluity or Efflux dangerous to Women far gone with Child.
^^ke the Oil of Roses, Virgin-Wax, Juice of ^ale Knot-grass, of each 3 Ounces,
Bole-Ar^niack, Crocus Martis, of each six drams, melt 'em and bruise 'em till
they become pliable and capable of being spread Plaisterwise; and when the Flux
descends, lay it to her Loins whilst she lies in bed. Or to the same Effect You
may take Crocus Martis a Dram, Knot-grass Juice 4 Ounces, Rose Water and
Vinegar of each an ounce, adding to them the white of an Eg, and apply them
cold upon a linen cloth to her Loins. If the Woman be fearful of containing
the Birth and be subject to Abortion* Take the roots of Tormentile and
Snamwood, of each an Ounce and half, Jobertus's Astringen^ Powder,
Mirtle-berries, Pomegranat-Flowers of each 6 drams, Dragons-blood and
Spong-bedeguar, of each half a ounce, Frankincense and Mastick, of each 3
Drams, Nutmeg and Cloves, of each half a Dram, common Pitch six Ounces,
Cinnamon a Dram, Venice Turpentine washed in the Juice of Shepherds Purse, 2
Ounces, melt and well incorporate them till they become pliable to be spread
plaisterwise, and apply the Plaiste^ upon Leather to the Reins.

To make an Ointment of exceeding Use before Delivery. Take the Oil of
White-Lilly* roots, and Camomile, each 5 Ounces, new Hogs-seam strained, and
fresh Butter, o^ each an Ounce and a half, Mucilage of the Seed of Fenugreck
extracted in Mugwort^ water 2 Ounces, the Powder of roun^ Birth-wort Roots and
Saffron, of each tw^ drams, Wax an Ounce and half, melt them over a gentle
Fire; and having strained it forth, anoint and supple the Woman's Thighs, Hips
and Matrix therewith.

In case of Vomiting or Nauseating, which too frequently befalls young Childing
Women. Take a Sear-cloth, sprinkle it with Galbanum, Powder of Cloves and
Mastick, then covering it with Linen or Silk, in ^orm of a Stomacher, applying
it to the Stomach, renewing it as the Scent decays.

CHAP. XXIX. A Pomatum for the Midwife to anoint her hands with when she is
about her Office, as also the Womb of the Woman to be delivered; Excellent
Applications to straighten and strengthen the Woman's Delivery.
AMong the many excellent Pomatums or Ointment for Midwives Hands, and
anointing the Womb for to render the ^irth easy, I recommend this as chief,
viz. Take of Hempseed-Oil an Ounce, of Castor-Oil an Ounce, Galmoschate half a
Scruple, of Laudanum a Scruple, with a gentle Fire make them into an Ointment,
to be used as before mentioned.

To contract the Womb after Delivery. Take the Leaves of Strawort and Myrtle of
each 3 Ounces, Green Medlars, Pruans and wild Pears, of each 8 or 9 Ounces, the
Stomach of 3 Cocks fresh killed and newly taken out; all which distill, and
dipping Cotton into the Water issuing from them, make it into the Form of a
Pessary, and put it into the Womb, there let it continue a considerable space.

To strengthen the Womb. Take of Pomage and Violet-Flowers, each a handful,
Dittany of Crete an Ounce, Wood Sorrel a handful, Honey of Roses, half an
Ounce, Maidenhair an Ounce, boill them in White Wind and inject the liquid
Part into the Womb, the Woman taking soon after it this Potion, viz. of Fennel,
Succory, and Bugloss-Roots, take 2 Ounces of each, boil them in 24 Ounces of
White Wind, to the Consumption of two Parts, adding afterward Fennel-water,
and Succory-water, of each 3 Ounces, boiling them again, till the 5th part be
consumed, and of this let her Drink an Ounce at a time, continuing so to do
Morning and Evening for ten Days.

CHAP, XXX. To keep the Milk from Curdling in the Breast, or to dry it up; a
most approved Receipt; as also to increase the Milk.
IF the Milk be subject to curdle in the Breast, past doubt, it will contract
Pains or disorder there as well as in the Child that draws it forth; wherefore
to prevent its so doing, Take the Roots of Althaea half a Pound, boil them in
Whitewine Vinegar, strain them through a fine Seive, adding to the liquid Part
Bean-flower one Ounce, Powder of Rue and dried Mint, of each a Dram, Oil of
Mastick 2 Ounces, boil them again till they come to a Thickness or Pliableness,
and so anoint the Breast.

To dry up the Milk, Take Honey newly taken from the Bees, dissolve this water,
and after wash the Breasts therewith, or take the Juice of Spire-mint, and
Shepherds-purse, of each half an Ounce, mix them and sweeten them with a little
of the aforesaid Honey, and drink them in the Morning with the Broth of a Hen
or Chicken: Or she may take the Oil of Violets 2 Ounces, the Juice of Mint and
Parsley a like Quantity, an Ounce of Whitewine Vinegar, Rosewater to Ounces;
boil them over a gentle fire, to the Consumption of the Juice, adding a little
Wax to make them into an Ointment, and anoint the Breast therewith; or for
want of these, take Elder-tops, Sage and Mint, of all of them a Handful, boil
them soft in Spring Water, and lay them to her Breast.

If the Woman be scarce of Milk, and for the benefit of the Child would
increase it, Let her take the Decoction of Fennel, and bathe her Breast
therewith, mixing the Juice of Oak-Appple and the same time take inwardly this
following Powder, viz. Of Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds and Cumminseeds, of each 2
drrms, of beaten Ginger half an Ounce, of both sorts of Pepper 2 Drams, Coral a
Dram, of Crystal and Cinnamon, each a Dram, the Seeds (...) Docks a Dram,
Siser Montanus an Ounce and half, Cardamons and long Pepper, of each a dram and
half, of Seseleus half an Ounce, the Seeds of Sasasum an Ounce, of White-Poppy
one Ounce, mingle and dry them till they are capable of being beat into Powder,
one dram of which the Woman must take at a time, Morning and Evening, in Broth
made of Red Coleworts, anointing her Breasts the mean time with an Ointment
made of Venice Turpentine, Vinegar of Roses and Beeswax, of each an equal
Proportion.

CHAP. XXXI. For a Pain in the Breast immediately upon Delivery, or Fissure.
TAke new Beeswax 2 Ounces, Nut-Oil half an Ounce, of Rape-seed Oil the like
quantity as the latter, when melting the Wax, add the Oil, and temper them well
together to the thickness of a stiff Ointment or Salve, and spread them upon a
Cloth fit to cover the Breast, and apply it with extraordinary Success.

In case a Fissure happen in the Breast, Take of the Powder of Gum Arabic an
Ounce, Rose Water and Aqua Vitae, of each an Ounce, prepare them by beating
them together till they are of an ^pt thickness, then sees them over the Fire,
and when cool apply them plaisterwise to the Fissure; or for want of these take
Unguentum Rosarum* and anoint the Place grieved applying upon it a Pultis of
Ground Ivy.

CHAP. XXXII. The Cause of the Bellies swelling after Delivery, and how to
prevent it; and cure it if it happens.
CErtain it is, and Experience teaches then that many Women have their Bellies
swelled after Delivery, as much almost as before; and this happens through too
much Neglect, and Carelessness in not having regard to foment them, as also
apply a thing convenient to the Privities, by which means Windiness and Vapors
enter and contract in the hollow Concavities, Veins and Arteries, the latter of
which they enter by insensible Ways. Now to prevent it, Take Origanum,
Nightshade and Mastick, of each a scruple, Sagapenum a dram, mix them
together, and make them into 7 Pills, take them all at once, and after them
take the quantity of a quarter of a pint of the Water of white Lillies, viz. of
the Flowers.

In case it be come already, let her take half a pound of Spanish Figs, the
Meces of Barley, and Beans finely sifted 4 Ounces of each, 2 ounces of
well-burnt Brick pulverized, syrup of Nuts an Ounce, boil them in as much Water
of the Smiths Forge as will suffice to bring them to a Thickness, then spread
them on a Linen Cloth and apply them to the Belly twice, and it will return to
its wont^d smallness.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Inflammations of the Breast and its Cure.
THE inflammation in the Breast is no other than the hard Swelling accompanied
with a shooting pain, also a Heating and Redness, and is mostly caused by the
Abundance of Blood drawn or flowing to the Breast, and sometimes, but rarely,
it is occasioned by the suppression of the Menses, the Hemorrhoids, or some
Bruise received by a Blow, or the like, and is known by a certain Redness, and
burning Heat, causing the whole to be Feverish and out of Order. To cure it
then, first let the Diet be comforting, moistening, and of good Nourishment, as
the Broth of Pullets, Capons, Cocks, Chickens, Veal, etc. wherein Endive,
Borage, Purslain or Letuce has been boiled; and if she can get it, let the
Woman drink Juice of Pomegranats; but for want of that, Barly-water wherein
Anniseeds have been boiled; but let her refrain drinking of Wine and strong
Liquors, as likewise hot Spices; and if she find any Obstruction in her
excremental Evacuation, let her take a softning or mollifying Clyster, and
sleep at seasonable times as much as she can. Another way to remedy it, is by
diverting the Humors, which may be done by rubbing the Body in all adjacent
places, letting Blood in the Foot, scarification of the Legs, or Vesicatories
applied in those Places, especially if the Menses are stopped or ready to come
down, if not, it is requisite to bleed in the Arm.

But if what has been mentioned prevail not to remove the Humors make a
Cataplasm of the Leaves of Melilot and Nightshade* each a handful: and when
boiled in Spring Water, add to them Bean meal 2 Ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds
and Oatmeal of each an Ounce, and apply them to the Breast observ^ng so to do
before the Breast be extraordinarily inflamed.

CHAP. XXXIV. A Tumor in the Breast, its Cause and Cure.
OF Tumors there are several sorts, but first of the Flagitious Tumor, the
Cause of which proceeds from a thick and unnatural Vapor, arising from the
Menstrual Blood, which is retained corrupted in the Matrix, and that again
occasioned by the suppression of the Courses, or when Nature is defective in
discharging them into their proper Place in due time; as also from Corruption
of Humors, whereby are engendered evil Vapors, and their passing by several
Ways, causes the Breast to swell or distend as if it were a true swelling, and
is known by a shooting pain, and disorder of Heart, by Reason of the Wind that
oppresses it, the left Breast being for the most part more swelled than the
right, communicating Pains to the Arms and Shoulders, as likewise the Ribs on
the same side, the Breast being white and shining, sounding like a Drum if
touched gently, and swelled in all Parts alike: to cure this, as also the windy
Tumor, you must order to observe a moderation in Diet, and thereby Crudities
may be avoided, and all such things as contract windy Humors in the Veins,
suffering her to drink Water wherein Cinnamon and Anniseeds have been boiled,
as also the Rind of Citron, and then let her observe to take such things as are
proper to provoke the Courses, in doing which she will find the Humors abate,
then let her take Celundine, Camomile, Groundsil, and Ground-Juice, stamp them
and boil them in White wine, and in so doing, you will ease the Pain and
restore the Breast. As for Diseases and Accidents incident to young Children,
there are few Women of any Experience, but are skilful in curing and ordering
them, wherefore for brevities sake I shall pass them over and proceed to
Anatommize the Genital Parts of a Man, that one thing remaining necessary in
this Trreatise; as also to instance what Men and Women ought to marry, that
their Issue may be fair, healthful, and prosperous.

CHAP. XXXV. The Anatomy of the Organs of Generation in Man.
THE Yard, which is called in Latin Penis a Pendendo because it hangs out of
the Organal Part, is made of Skin, Tendons, Veins, Arteries, Sinews and great
Ligaments; and is long, round, and on the upper side flattish, seated under the
Ossa Pubis, and designed by Nature, partly for making of Water, and partly for
conveying the Seed into the Matrix. To which end, there open into it small
Pores, through which the Seed passes to it from the Vesiculae Seminales, and
also the Neck of the Vesica Vrinari^ which pours out the Urine in making of
Water. Besides the common parts, as the Cirticle, the Skin, and the Membrana
Carnosa, it has in these proper or internal Parts, as the two Nervous Bodies,
the Septum, the Vrethra, the Glans, four Muscles, and the Vessels. The Nervous
Body (so called) are surrounded with a thick white nervous Membrane, but their
inner substance is spungy, consisting chiefly of Veins, Arteries and nervous
Fibers interwoven together like a Net: and when the Nerves are repleat with
Animal Spirits, and the Arteries with hot and spiritous Blood, then the Penis
is distended and becomes Erect; but when the Influx of the Spirits ceases, then
the Blood and remaining Spirits absorded by the Veins, and so the Penis becomes
limber and flaggy. Below these nervous Bodies lie the Vrethra, and whenever the
nervous Bodies swell, it swells also. The Muscles of the Penis are Four, two
shorter, arising from the Coxendix, and serving it Erection, are therefore
called Erect^res; and two larger, proceeding from the Spincter of the Arms and
serve to dilate the Vrethra from Miction and Ejection of the Seed, and are
therefore called Dilatantes or Wideners. At the End of the Penis is the Glans,
covered with a very thin Membrane by means of which, and its Nervous Substance,
it becomes most exquisitely ^en^ible, and is the Principal Seat of Pleasure in
Copulation. The outmost Covering of the Glans is called Praeputium; a
praeputanda, from being cut off, it being that which the Jews cut off in
Circumcision: And it is ^^ed in the lower part of it to the Glans by the
Fraenum or Bridle. The Penis is also stocked with Veins, Arteries and Nerves,
and that part that is next above it toward the Belly is called the Pubes, and
its lateral Parts is called Inguina, the Groins.

The Testicles or Stones, (so called because they testify one to be a Man)
elaborate the Blood brought to them by the Spermatick Arteries, into Seed. They
have Coats of two sorts, and invest both the Testes, Cuticula, and true Skin,
and is called Scrotum, hanging out of the Abdomen like a Purse. The inner,
Common Coats in the Membrana Carnosa; the proper Coats are also two, the outer
called Eltroides or Virginales, the ^^nner Albiginea, into the outer are
inserted the Cremister Muscles; to the upper part of the Testes are fixed the
Epididymedes or Prostata, from whence arise the Vasa Deferentia and Ejectoria;
which when they come near the Neck of the Bladder deposite the Seed into the
Vesiculae Seminales. These Vesiculae Seminales are two, each like a bunch of
Grapes, and emit the Seed into the Vrethra in the Act of Copulation.

Near them are the Prostata, about the bigness of a Walnut, and joined to the
Neck of the Bladder, Authors cannot agree about the Use of them, but most are
of Opinion that they afford an Oily, slippery and Fat Humor to besmear the
Vrethra whereby to defend it from the Acrimony of the Seed, and is made like
the Arteria Spermatica and also two. The Veins which carry back the remaining
Blood are two and have the name of Venae Spermaticae.

CHAP, XXVI. What Women ought to Marry, with what Men, that they might have
Children
IN respect of Married Women that prove Childless Hypocrates advises this
Experiment to be tried to know whether the Defect be on the Woman's part, or on
he^ Husbands, which is to make her Suffumigations with Incense or Storax, with
a Garment loose wrapped about her, which may hang down on the Ground, in such
sort that no Vapor nor Fume may issue out, and if within a while after she
feel the Savor of the Incense in her Mouth she may then conclude that the
Barrenness comes not through her own Defect, but through her Husband's
forasmuch as the Fumes found the Passage open, whereby it pierced up the
Nostrils. But although this proof perform that Effect which Hypocrates speaks
of; namely the piercing up to the Inner part of the Mouth; yet is this no
infallible Argument of the Husbands Barrenness, nor of the Fruitfulness of the
Wife, since Want of Children may arise through an unapt disposition in them
both in respect of the Correspondency of Qualities, for it has oftentimes
appeared that a Man that could not have Children by one Wife, has had them by
another; the like also has befallen Women.

Hypocrates gives us his Opinion concerning the correspondency that ought in
that respect to be betwixt Man and Wife, in these Words; If the Hot and Dry,
answer not the Cold and Moist, in Measure and Quantity, that is if there meet
in the Womb two Seeds, the one Hot, the other Cold; the one Dry, the other
Moist, extended in equal Degree, there can be no Generation. For so mavelous
a Work as the Formation of Man (says he) could not be performed without
proportionable Commixture of Seed. To exemplify this Assertion of his, the
Ancient Physicians go on, and say, That a Woman, who is wilely,
ill-conditioned, shrill-voic^d, lean, swarthy-coloured and deformed; (which are
the signs of Cold and Moist in the first Degree) may conceive by a Man who is
ignorant, good-natured, sweet-voic'd* corpulent, having little hair, a
well-col^ur'd Face, and a handsome Body, (which are the Signs of Hot and Dry in
the first Degree) in regard she retains a mean in all those signs
abovementioned, is most like to be fruitful, because she comes nearest in
proportion to Men of each several Temperature. But from the first of these
Unions or Conjoining of Man and Woman, are most likely to issue the wisest
Children (say they) because the dryness of the Mother corrects and amendeth
the Defect of the Father. But this being chiefly grounded upon that old
Opinion, of the Commixture of the Seed of the Man and Woman together, and of
the Child's being formed from thence we think fit to reject it, and to affirm,
That Youth, Strength, and Vigor, a sound body, and a Mind free from Cares,
with a mutual Love and Amity betwixt the Man and Woman seldom fail of their
desired Effects.

CHAP. XXXVII. A Word of Advice to both Sexes in the Act of Copulation.
THE Act of Copulation being ordained by Nature as the Ground of all
Generation, and without which no Birth can be produced; somewhat must be said
of it; but we shall cloth it in the modest Dress, that the chastest Ears may
hear, without being put to the Trouble of a Blush.

It is convenient on this Occasion to cherish the Body with generous
Restoratives, to charm the Imagination with Music, to drown all Cares in good
Wine; that so the Mind being elevated to a Pitch of Joy and Rapture, the
sensual Appetite may be more freely encouraged to gratify it self in the
Delights of Nature: For Melancholy and Grief and whatsoever is troublesome to
the Senses and Fancy, are Enemies to the Pastime of the Nuptial-Bed. Yet is it
necessary to avoid Excesses in Eating and Drinking; for if the Body be
over-charg'd with Wine or Meat, the Spirits will become dull and unactive, and
unable to p^rform their Office. This you may take for a good Rule, That a
little of what is good and well-digested, breeds good blood, good blood creates
good Spirits, and when a Man is invigorated with a plentiful Stock of such, he
is able to do Miracles. Also when the Husband and Wife meet with an equal
Ardour in their conjugal Embraces, it is very rare if it be not attended with
Conception. But when that Act is over, all is not done; for, that it may have
the better Suceess, the Husband must not presently separate himself from his
Wife's Embraces, lest the Air should suddenly strike in, and so prevent the
Issue of their Labors. And when the Man departs the Woman ought to compose her
self to all the Rest and Quietness imaginable, and to avoid heavy Thoughts of
what may cause any Disturbance; and especially she ought to avoid Coughing and
Sneezing, both which are great hindrances to Conception, after the Act of
Copulation.

Parry says, That in the Year, he saw in Paris, a Boy, nine years old, born
near Guise, he had but two Fingers on his right Hand, his Arm was well
proportioned from the top of his Shoulders to bis Wrist, but from thence to the
Fingers Ends, it was very deformed, he wanted his Legs and Thighs, etc. As in
the Page following.

The Effigies of a Monstrous Child, by reason of the Defect of the Matter of
Seed.


In Stecquer a Village of Saxony, they say, a Monster was born with Four Feet,
Eyes, Mouth and Nose like a Calf, with a round and red Excrescence of Flesh on
the Forehad, and also a Piece of Flesh, like a Hood, hung from his Neck upon
his Back, and it was deformed with its Thighs torn and cut, as here shown.



An. Dom, 1393. There was generated of a Woman and a Dog, an Issue which, from
the Navel upward, perfectly resembled the shape of the Mother, but thence
downward the Sire, i. c. the Dog. This Monster was sent to the Pope that then
reigned, as Voluterane writes, Caedane also mentions it, wherefore I have
given you the Figure thereof.



Jovianus Pontanus tells us, in 1529 Jan. 9. there was a Man Child born in
Gormany having 4 Arms and as many Legs. As in this Figure.



In the Year of our Lo^d 1512 (in which year upon Easter day, near Ravenna, was
fought that mortal Battle in which the Popes For^es were ovverthrown) a Monster
was born in Ravenna having a horn upon the Crown of his head, and besides two
VVings, and one Foot alone, most like the Feet of Birds of Birds of Prey, and
in the Knee thereof one Eye, the Privities of Male and Female, the rest of the
Body like a Man as you may see by the Figure.



FINIS.
The Effigies of a Maid all Hairy, and an Infant that was Black, by the
Imagination of their Parents.



