A Generous Discovery Of many Curious and Useful MEDICINES and PREPARATIONS,
BOTH IN PHYSIC, CHEMISTRY, COOKERY, and STIFFENRY; AS A Drink for the Small
Pox, Phosphorus Powder to Light a Pipe with, Ketchup for Sauce, Starch from
Potatoes.


And many others both Profitable and Delightful, hitherto Secrets; now made
Public for the Benefit of Mankind in General.

To be had at Mrs. Hey 's near the Wax-Candle in St. Andrew's NORWICH.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1725:

Price 3 d.

GENTLEMEN and LADIES,
WHEN a Physician puts out a Book upon any Distemper incident to human Body, he
is hugely careful to observe the following Method: First, in the Presace to his
Book, he very cunningly and artf^lly prepares his Bait, and fixes his Trap, by
a long Declaration of his good Intentions to serve the Public; and that the
following Treatise is published with that View only, and without any private
Ends or selfish Designs as Quacks usually have: In the Body of the Book he
affords you most delightful Entertainment, by Reasoning so finely upon the
Variety of its Causes, and setting forth in a most ample Manner, both the
Ancient and Modern Methods of Cure; and in the End he is almost sure to catch
his Prey by a sly Insinuation of the wonderful Success he himself has had in
the Cure of that Distemper, by a Method entirely new, and unknown to any but
himself; Now it is certain this is no more than a lar^e Advertisement, and must
be allowed upon due Consideration to amount to only this;

In Or -- d-Street lives the Great Doctor M -- d,
Who cures the Pl -- e indeed and ind -- d.
Or,
IS -- l M -- l born and bred in this Nation,
Can cure the Smallpox without Inoculation.
THE difference therefore in this Point between the Regular and Quack Physician
consists only in the former's making you pay largely for his Advertisement and
Physic too; whilst the latter is obliged to give away his Advertisement, and
Perhaps is never half paid for his Physic: But this I must observe to you,
That both of them still agree in the Concealment of their Methods, and would by
no means discover them, no not for Five Hundred Pounds.

THAT there are many Physical Druggs and Plants yet undiscovered to the World,
whose effects may be very conducive toward the continuation of Health and long
Life, I believe is the Opinion of most Men; and that there are many Secrets or
Nostrums now in the Hands of particular Persons which are known to work
surprising Cures is certain and without dou^t and the Reason why they do now,
and will still remain Secrets, and in private Hands, is for want of a Public
Reward being offered, equal to the Advantage a private Man may make of them.

IN other Countries, I find, the King or Government is generally the Purchaser
of such Secrets, and then generously publish them for the Good of all their
Subjects; a piece of Policy, in my Opinion, in no wise contemptible, and what
can never be a dear Purchase or hard Bargain to a Crowned Head or Government.

BUT our Countrymen either having less Money, or more Frugality, go a cheaper
way to work, and oblige their Authors and Inventors either to run the Hazard of
having their Secrets by some Accident or other discovered to the World, or to
purchase a Patent under the Great Seal, for the Sole making, using or vending
such a Machine, Preparation or Commedity, (of which the Patentee has proved
himself the Original Author and Inventor) for a certain term of Years, on
condition that he then publishes it to the World; a sure way of saving their
own Money, whatever the Subjects may suffer in the mean time for want of such a
Publication: Besides, all Men are not able to purchase a Patent, which will
cost no less than Sol. with an infinite deal of trouble to follow it through
the various Offices to get it confirmed.

Now for a Man to be a master of some Secrets, and not to be placed in such a
Station as may Capacitate him to make a private Advantage of them, nor able to
purchase a Patent, what has he else to do but make an Honest Publication of
them, and leave the Consequence to the Generosity of the World; in compliance
wherewith I take this Opportunity of publishing some curious and useful
Preparations and Remedies as may be of universal Advantage, nay I may safely
say, that there are but sew Families whose common Contingencies will not
furnish them with Opportunities of experiencing many, if not most of them, in
less than the Space of one Annual Circumvolution; and as a Proof of the Truth
of what I have hereafter offered, I will be always ready, not only to perform
the Experimental Part of any, but likewise account for the other Preparations
herein contained, to Persons of all or any Denominations, that will ordinarily
satisfy for such Trouble.

THE Vomit herein discovered by far exceeds the Hypecacuana, (which costs the
late King of France no less than 1500 Pistols) both for the certainty and
easiness of its Operation, as well as those other good Effects which it
generally produces; and what renders it still more valuable is its readiness to
be come at, both in all Places and at all Times, it being a Root growing in
most Yards and Gardens, and never, as I have yet seen, mentioned or accounted
for by any Author: At Nantwytch in Cheshire lives a Person who has acquired a
large Estate by virtue of this incomparable Vomit only.

THE Friars Vulnerary Ball, heals almost an^ Wound at the first intention, as
is demonstrated by striking a Nail through a Cock's Head, and nailing him down
to your Table: which Wound is cured by the immediate use of this Ball in less
than Ten Minutes time, and your Cock appears as well and brisk as ever.

THE famous Stiptick with which Sir William Read performed so many wonderful
Cures, both outwardly and inwardly, is what I have very often experienced, and
don't remember it has ever once failed, it is a very easv and very cheap
Preparation, and what no Family ought to be without.

THE Imperial Snuff is a very valuable Remedy, and will seldom if ever be
found to fail in giving Ease in the most violent Pains of the Head, though of
long standing; great Care must be taken that the Patient does not catch Cold:
This grows in many Gardens, and is not very difficult to come at

THE Receipt which I have here given you for the Smallpox is what I have often
wished to have seen published, because of its surprising good Effects in the
worst Symptoms of the most dangerous kind; this I had from a very noted Nurse
in London, who told me it very rarely, if ever, failed of Success. I had a Son
about nine Years old seized with the worst sort of the Confluent Kind of the
Small Pox, intermixed with the Purples, for whom I had the Advice of two eminent
Physicians in London, notwithstanding whose Skill and Care he died on the
fourteenth Day; about three Weeks after, another Son of four Years old fell
down with the same dangerous Confluent Kind, and very full of the Purples, and
then it was I first heard of this notable Receipt, which had just recovered a
Neighbor's Child; I was persuaded to use this, and to desist from sending for
a Physician, and by God's Blessing it happily recovered my Child, in a
Condition perhaps as bad as ever was seen; and I do verily believe it would
have had the same Effect upon the other, had I but then known and used it; and
tho I believe it impossible to contrive an universal Remedy in the Smallpox,
yet I am apt to think this Drink will do more good, and preserve more lives
than their new fangled and unjustifiable way of Inoculation: Unjustifiable I
call it, because be the Practice never so laudable in some particular and far
distant Places, yet no one can justify it in the middle of a large and populous
Town, any more than a Man can justify the setting Fire to his own House in the
middle of a thick and close built Neighborhood; nay it is certain, that by a
parity of Reason, both the Inoculator and the Inoculated are liable to the same
Prosecution with Highwaymen, who often suffer the Law when they have not
actually robbed a Man, but only for putting him in Bodily Fear, and these not
only put whole Towns in Bodily Fears, but oftentimes prove the occasion of the
Death of many, which whether to call Manslaughter or Murder I leave the World
to judge.

IF therefore some Men will be so hardy as to venture upon such an uncertain
Practice, they ought at their own Cost and Charge to erect a Lazoretto or
Bedlam, at some convenient distance from a Town, and not near a Highway, and
appoint Physicians and Surgeons, who are most zealous for such Practice,
constantly to reside there for the Reception and Care of such Mad People as
would either come themselves, or send their Children; and not infect whole
Towns and Countries as must necessarily be the Consequence of their Public
Practice. I cannot understand from the best Information I have been yet able to
get, that this have ever been the Practice of any Christian Countries, but used
only among the Mahometans, who hearing of our Ripeness for Infidelity, made a
Present to us of this Custom by the Hands of a Scotchman; and this I believe
may be depended on, That the nearer we approach to Infidelity, the more will
their Customs flow in upon us; and so vice versa.

MANY other good Receipts and Directions you will find in this small Book, which
I generously publish for the Benefit of Mankind in general, and hope the World
will readily accept of, at a Price so small, that it is hardly sufficient to
answer the Charge and Trouble of Printing and Publishing, but will be a means
to introduce it into a greater number of Families, and prevent the copying out
any of the Receipts herein contained.

A Generous Discovery, etc.
THIS Life is generally begun in Tears, continued in Uneasiness, and ended in
Groans; and as Children are subject to various Diseases while they are yet in
their Mothers Womb, and frequentl make their first Appearances with them, so I
shall begin with them first.

IT was the Practice of the late Sir David Hamilton, a famous Man-Midwife in
London, to Vomit Children soon after they were born; and this was chiefly done
to prevent sore Mouths, which otherwise too frequently happen, and grievously
torment the poor Infants; But since Nurses are generally capable of managing
that Disorder, I need not say any thing more concerning it, nor do I think it
an easy matter to persuade People to Vomit their Children, though nothing is
more agreeable to their Flegmatic Constitutions, which almost immediately turns
every thing sour, and then coagulates, and makes Tough Phlegm, which is
generally the cause of Stoppages, by which many are thrown into Convulsions,
and so die. Two or three Tea Spoonfuls of the incomparable Vomit I have
hereafter discovered, sweetened with a little Sugar, will operate as kindly, nay
with more ease and as much safety as a larger Proportion for an adult Person.

For the GRIPES.
THE next Disorder which frequently arise in Children is from the Gripes, and
these proceed from a violent sharp Humor in the Bowels, for which two or three
Tea Spoonfulls of the following Mixture, well shaken, ought to be given two or
three times in a Day.

Crabs Eyes half a Dram, Syrup of Roses solutive one Ounce, Black Cherry
Water one Ounce, mix.

This will both absorb the Acidity and carry off the Humors.

For the RICKETS.
THE Rickets claim the next Place among Childrens Diseases, the cause of which
is from viscid pituitous Humors lodged upon the Joints, occasioning an unequal
circulation and distribution of the Fluids to the Parts beyond; therefore such
Medicines as will attenuate and thin the Blood, and make it subtle enough to
circulate through the smallest Passages, must by a continued use not only break
its Sizy State, but dislodge tough Humors already fixed upon the Joints; for
this let the Child take Morning and Evening for a Constancy, avoiding all acid
or sharp things, 2 or 3 Drops more or less according to the Age, Strength, and
Constitution of the Child, in a Spoonful of Black Cherry Water, either of Sal
Volatile, or Spirits of Hartshorn, anointing the Spine or Backbone of the Child
with the Gall of an Ox; a Secret which the Lady Moor for a long while had, and
gave away to the Poor, and which alone have cured hundreds of Ricketty Children.

For WORMS.
VARIOUS are the Medicines which will certainly destroy those pernicious
Vermin, the only difficulty is to contrive them into Forms as Children may not
too soon be tired of taking; these are generally bred from a putrid Slime in
their Bowels, which both hardens the Belly, and gives a stinking Scent to the
Breath. The following are certain Remedies, if Children can but be persuaded to
take them.

Take Tin, Coral, and Wormseed, all in Powder, of each one Ounce, Savin und
Saffron Powder, of each one Dram, mix.

Of this let the Child take in Beer or any other vehicle every Night from ten
to twenty Grains.

Or,

Aethiops Mineral, which is made of equal Parts of Crude Mercury and Sulphur,
rubbed in a Mortar till they become exceeding black, and may be given from ten
to twenty Grains, according to the Age of the Child. These are Infallible, but
in all Childrens Medicines the greatest Nicety consists in the closests
concealment.

For the SMALLPOX.
Take 2 Ounces of Sheep's Dung tied up in a Rag, 2 or 3 Spriggs of Knotted
Marjoram, a few Marigold Flowers, a few Tares, 2 or 3 Leaves of Sage, a Sprig
or two of Rosemary, Rue, Mint, and Balm, 6 or 7 Grains of Cochineal in Powder,
and a little Saffron, to be boiled in 3 Pints of Water to 2, and to be the
common Drink, both in the beginning, height, and declination of the Smallpox.

THIS is the Receipt, as delivered to me and several others; and whatever fault
some Carping Physicians and Stiff Apothecaries may find with the manner of it,
yet Experience tells me, and many besides me, that there is no one now extant
to be compared with it; and I defy any of the aforesaid to equal or come near
it as a general good Remedy in the Smallpox.

For the HEADACHE, violent, and of long standing.
Take of the Leaves of Azarum or Azarabacca and dry them gently before the Fire
till you can reduce them to a fine Powder; of this take at Night up of each
N^stril two Grains, repeat the same the next Morning, and again the Night
following, unless you find your Head Purge pretty much through the Nose, and
then leave of a Day or two, or till you find a decrease of the Purging, and
then repeat again, and let this be continued about the Space of a Fortnight, in
which time it will purge, or rather salivate the Head, and discharge the Matter
which too frequently occasions those violent Pains. A Woman of about 60 Years
of Age took but twice of it, and it purged or salivated her Head for a whole
Fortnight, and effectually cured her of the Headache, without which she had not
been for seven Years before. I can Instance in many others who have been
effectually cured by Virtue of this Herb only, but great Care must be taken
that the Patient does not catch Cold.

For the HEMORROIHDS or PILES.
Take of Lucatellus Balsam, Powder of Liquorice and Sulphur, of each equal
Parts, make these into common ordinary Pills, and take four every two Hours
during the time you find violent Pain; and in the Blind Piles, roll up a piece
of Brown Paper and dip in Treacle, and gently trust up the Fundament: These
will rarely fail of giving present Ease, and if continued, will almost conquer
any degree of that Distemper.

For a VOMIT.
Take one Ounce of the common Daffodill Roots peeled, and sliced into a Pint of
fair Water, and boil to Half a Pint, or you may to a Quarter, and drink it just
warm, when it operates drink warm Water.

THIs is the most certain and easy Vomit in the World, and may be given to a
newborn Babe; or any Age, Sex, or Condition, where Vomiting is proper, and was
never before publicly discovered to the World; I can produce many to attest
its Virtues, and will attend any one that has a mind to make Trial. The
Nobility and Gentry in Cheshire when they have found their Stomachs disordered
have gone directly to Nantwytch, taken a Vomit, and laid an Hour after it, and
gone home again with a clean Stomach, Hungry, and free from Pain.

Sir William Read's STIPTIC.
Take of Roch Alum one Ounce and a half, Aloes one Dram, Spring Water one
Pint, boil and Scum these about a Quarter of an Hour.

WITH this Simple Thing it was, Sir William performed so many wonderful Cures:
It immediately stops all effusions of Blood, as is demonstrable by an
Experiment with warm Blood or Serum, and will heal almost any Ulcer whatsoever;
It is an incomparable Remedy for a Sore Mouth, and will put a stop to almost
any inward Bleeding: I knew a Shoemaker who had vomited and spitted Blood for
almost two Years, and was reduced to a perfect Skeleton, and was cured by the
use of this only, in less than one Month's time.

The Friars VULNERARY BALL.
Take of Round Birthwort Root one Ounce, Rhenish Tartar four Ounces, Filings of
Iron four Ounces, well cleaned; let these be well powdered, and put into a
glazed Pot, with a Pint of common Brandy, which set over a gentle Fire and
evaporate; then add two Pints of Brandy more, and let it evaporate till it
comes to a Consistence, which you may form into Balls about the bigness of a
Walnut, and gently dry.

THIS will heal almost any Green Wound; which is demonstrated by the aforesaid
Experiment with the Cock; you must scrape a little of it into a Spoon with a
little Brandy in it, then put clean Lint in and suck it up and apply it to the
Wound. These Balls I know were, and I do believe, are now sold by Mrs. Raw, at
the North Entrance into the Royal Exchange at Half a Crown each Ball.

Gordon's new invented PHOSPHORUS, or Powder to light a Pipe with.
Take of Alum three Ounces, powdered, fine Wheat Flower one Ounce, rub these
in a Mortar set over a gentle Fire till they become very black, then put that
Powder into a Stoughton's Bottle, which place in a Crucible and fill it up with
Sand; set the Crucible in an open Furnace, and make a gentle Fire, which
gradually increase to the third Degree, and so let it stand till the Bottle has
done smoking, then gently take away the Fire and let it cool, then put it into
smaller Vials for use.

THIS is a very curious and surprising Experiment, and will serve to light a
Pipe or a piece of Paper in the Field when Gentlemen are Sporting: This is the
true manner of making it, which I will readily show to any Gentleman; but it is
of no use in Physic.

To make STARCH from Potatoes.
Pare your Potatoes and grate them upon a large clean Grater as you do Bread,
and let them fall into a fine lawn Sieve, placed in a clean Basin half full of
Water, and the Starch will sink down to the bottom; wash it with two or three
Waters, and then gently dry it between two Papers.

THIS is the finest and whitest Starch in the World, and will go further than
any other; and any one may make it for private use.

To make a KETCHUP for Sauce.
Take one Hundred Walnuts just before they begin to be fit for pickling, bruise
them well, and put them into a Pot, with a Quart of the best White Wine
Vinegar, and a good handful of Salt, let them stand about twenty four Hours,
and then press out the Liquor, and Bottle it for use.

LET it stand 3 or 4 Months before it be used, and when you use it shake the
Bottle, and one Spoonful or two will not only thicken, but add a most grateful
Flavor to the Sauce; and is not at all inferior to the Foreign Ketchup of
seven Shillings a Pint, made of we know not what.

Of Distempers more peculiarly incident to the FEMALE SEX.
How Wretched and Unhappy (says the Great Dr. Friend) are the Circumstances of
the Female Sex, who are yet appointed to be the Storehouses of Human Kind; for
let them choose what State or Condition of Life they will, Misery will attend
them; If they choose the Married State, then forthwith comes on the Fatigue and
Danger of Childbearing; if they choose a Maiden Life, they are subject to
various Disorders, which a Married State would probably have freed them from.

As to the Miseries consequent from the first state, I can offer no Remedy but
Patience, only with some God is pleased to deal so favorably as not to subject
them to the great Hardship and Hazard of Childbearing, and yet these generally
make very heavy Complaints for the want of those Miseries which they see others
undergo. For the Disorders which too frequently atttend the Virgin State, I can
recommend a Remedy which is called The VIRGINS TINCTURE, whose Virtues are well
known to great Numbers in this County; and this may modestly be said of it,
that there is no Degree of the Green Sickness, from Girls of Eight, when they
first begin to look pale and wan, to any Age, but this Remedy will absolutely
(if possible) and effectually Cure, if regularly and constantly taken: And
because the Stubborness of some Cases may require a longer time, and more of
the Tincture than will Cure Children and young Virgins, for that very Reason it
is put up in 1 s and 2 s. Bottles, and is sold with Directions, with the
following Preparations, viz. The purging Spirit of Mustard Seed for the Dropsy,
1 s. a Bottle; Sal Volatile, Bitter Tincture, Daffey's Elixir, Pleasant Sugar
Cakes for Children for the Worms, and the true Specific for the Venereal
Disease, exactly the same with that sold at Mr. Laws's on Tombland for half a
Guinea, at 5 s. all to be had as good and cheaper than any where else in Town
at Mrs. Hey's near the Wax-Candle in St. Andrew's Parish NORWICH.

N. B. If any Gentlemen or Ladies have any Family Receipts, or Secrets in
Physic, which may be of Service to the Public, and they desirous of doing
Good; if they will be pleased to communicate them to me, they shall be
faithfully Experienced, and as faithfully Published, with some other
extraordinary Preparations and Medicines, the next Spring; particularly one
which cures Agues without the Jesuits Bark, and another for the Rheumatism,
which any Persons under either of those Grievances may, if they please, in the
mean time experience, being both very cheap and successful: I shall likewise
then publish a Chemical Liquor to steep Corn or Grain in, which will occasion
it to grow upon Poor and Barren Land, and produce a large Increase; a Trial of
this was made in the Temple Gardens, where one single Grain of Wheat produced
seventy Ears.

FINIS.

