THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, UNDER THE HOUSE of TUDOR.

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, UNDER THE HOUSE of TUDOR. Comprehending the REIGNS of
K. HENRY VII. K. HENRY VIII. K. EDWARD VI. Q. MARY,and Q. ELIZABETH.


By DAVID HUME, Esquire

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand. MDCCLIX.

CONTENTS Of the FIRST VOLUME.
HENRY VII.
CHAP. I. Accession of Henry VII. -- His title to the crown. -- King's
prejudice against the House of York. -- His joyful reception in London. -- His
coronation. -- Sweating sickness. -- A Parliament. -- Entail of the crown. --
King's marriage. -- An insurrection. -- Discontents of the people. -- Lambert
Simnel. -- Revolt of Ireland. -- Intrigues of the Duchess of Burgundy. --
Lambert Simnel invades England. -- Battle of Stoke. Page 1 CHAP. II. State of
foreign affairs. -- State of Scotland -- of Spain -- of the Low Countries -- of
France -- of Britanny. -- French invasion of Britanny. -- French embassy to
England. -- Dissimulation of the French Court. -- An insurrection in the North
-- suppressed. -- King sends forces into Britanny. -- Annexation of Britanny to
France. -- A Parliament. -- War with France. -- Invasion of France. Peace with
France. -- Perkin Warbec. -- His imposture. -- He is avowed by the duchess of
Burgundy -- and by many of the English nobility. -- Trial and execution of
Stanley. -- A Parliament. 18 CHAP. III. Perkin returns to Scotland --
Insurrection in the West. -- Battle of Blackheath. -- Truce with Scotland. --
Perkin taken prisoner. -- Perkin executed. -- The earl of Warwic executed. --
Marriage of prince Arthur with Catherine of Arragon. -- His death. -- Marriage
of the princess Margaret with the King of Scotland. -- Oppressions of the
people. -- A Parliament. -- Arrival of the King of Castile. -- Intrigues of the
earl of Suffolk. -- Sickness of the King -- His death -- and character. -- His
laws. 43
HENRY VIII.
CHAP. I. Popularity of the new King. -- His ministers. -- Punishment of Empson
and Dudley. -- King's marriage. -- Foreign affairs. -- Julius the second. --
League of Cambray. -- War with France. -- Expedition to Fontarabia. -- Deceit
of Ferdinand. -- Return of the English. -- Leo the tenth. -- A Parliament. --
War with Scotland. -- Wolsey minister. -- His character. -- Invasion of France.
Battle of Guinegate. -- Battle of Flouden. -- Peace with France. 69 CHAP. II.
Wolsey's administration. -- Scotch affairs. -- Progress of Francis the first.
-- Jealousy of Henry. -- Tournay delivered to France. -- Wolsey appointed
legate. -- His manner of exercising that office. -- Death of the emperor
Maximilian. -- Charles, King of Spain, chosen emperor. -- Interview between
Henry and Francis at Calais. -- The emperor Charles arrives in England. --
Mediation of Henry. -- Trial and condemnation of the duke of Buckingham. 96
CHAP. III. Digression concerning the ecclesiastical state. -- Origin of the
reformation. -- Martin Luther. -- Henry receives the title of defender of the
faith. -- Causes of the progress of the reformation. -- War with France. --
Invasion of France. -- War with Scotland. -- A Parliament. -- Invasion of
France. -- Italian wars. -- The King of France invades Italy. -- Battle of
Pavia and captivity of Francis. -- Francis recovers his liberty. -- Sack of
Rome. -- League with France. 116 CHAP. IV. Scruples concerning the King's
marriage. -- The King enters into these scruples. -- Anne Boleyn. -- Henry
applies to the pope for a divorce. -- The pope favorable. -- The emperor
threatens him. -- The pope's ambiguous conduct. -- The cause evoked to Rome.
Wolsey's fall. -- Commencement of the reformation in England. -- Foreign
affairs. -- Wolsey's death. -- A Parliament. -- Progress of the reformation. --
A Parliament. -- King's final breach with Rome. -- A Parliament. 149 CHAP. V.
Religious principles of the people -- of the King -- of the ministers. --
Farther progress of the reformation. -- Sir Thomas More. -- The maid of Kent.
-- Trial and execution of Fisher bishop of Rochester -- of Sir Thomas More. --
King excommunicated. -- Death of Queen Catherine. -- Suppression of the lesser
monasteries. -- A Parliament. -- A convocation. -- Translation of the Bible.
Disgrace of Queen Anne. -- Her trial -- and execution. -- A Parliament. -- A
Convocation. -- Discontents among the people. -- Insurrection. -- Birth of
prince Edward and death of Queen Jane. -- Suppression of the greater
monasteries. -- Cardinal Pole. 183 CHAP. VI. Disputation with Lambert. -- A
Parliament. -- Law of the six articles. -- Proclamations made equal to laws. --
Settlement of the succession. -- King's projects of marriage. -- He marries
Anne of Cleves. -- He dislikes her. -- A Parliament. -- Fall of Cromwell. -- His
execution. -- King's divorce from Anne of Cleves. -- His marriage with
Catherine Howard. -- State of affairs in Scotland. -- Discovery of the Queen's
crimes. -- A Parliament. -- Ecclesiastical affairs. 226 CHAP. VII. War with
Scotland. -- Victory at Solway. -- Death of James the fifth. -- Treaty with
Scotland. -- New rupture. -- Rupture with France. -- A Parliament. -- Affairs
of Scotland. -- A Parliament. -- Campaign in France. -- A Parliament. -- Peace
with France and Scotland. -- Persecutions. -- Execution of the earl of Surrey.
-- Attainder of the duke of Norfolk. -- Death of the King. -- His character. --
His laws. 252
EDWARD VI.
CHAP. I. State of the regency. -- Innovations in the regency. -- Somerset
protector. -- Reformation completed. -- Gardiner's opposition. -- Foreign
affairs. -- Progress of the reformation in Scotland. -- Assassination of
cardinal Beaton. -- Conduct of the war with Scotland. -- Battle of Pluckey. --
A Parliament. -- Farther progress of the reformaiton. -- Affairs of Scotland.
-- Young Queen of Scots sent into France. -- Cabals of lord Seymour. -- Dudley
earl of Warwick. -- A Parliament. -- Attainder of lord Seymour. -- His
execution. -- Ecclesiastical affairs. 287 CHAP. II. Discontents of the people.
-- Insurrections. -- Conduct of the war with Scotland -- with France. --
Factions in the council. -- Cons^^^acy against Somerset. -- Somerset resigns
the protectorship. -- A Parliament. -- Peace with France and Scotland. --
Boulogne surrendered. -- Persecution of Gardener. -- Warwic created duke of
Northumberland. -- His ambition. -- Trial of Somerset. -- His execution. -- A
Parliament. -- A new Parliament. -- Succession changed. -- The King's sickness
-- and death. 319
MARY.
CHAP. I. Lady Jane Gray proclaimed Queen. -- Deserted by the people. -- The
Queen proclaimed and acknowledged. -- Northumberland executed. -- Catholic
religion restored. -- A Parliament. -- Deliberations with regard to the Queen's
marriage. -- Queen's marriage with Philip. -- Wyat's insurrection. --
Suppressed. -- Execution of lady Jane Gray. -- A Parliament. -- Philip's
arrival in England. 347 CHAP. II. Reasons for and against Toleration. --
Persecutions. -- A Parliament. -- The Queen's extortions. -- The Emperor
resigns his crown. -- Execution of Cranmer. -- War with France. -- Battle of
St. Quintin. -- Calais taken by the French. -- Affairs of Scotland. -- Marriage
of the Dauphin and the Queen of Scots. -- A Parliament. -- Death of the Queen.
373
THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, UNDER THE HOUSE of TUDOR.
HENRY VII.
CHAP. I.
Accession of Henry VII. -- His title to the crown. -- King's prejudice against
the House of York. -- His joyful Reception in London. -- His Coronation. --
Sweating sickness. -- A Parliament -- Entail of the crown. -- King's marriage.
-- An insurrection. -- Discontents of the people. -- Lambert Simnel. -- Revolt
of Ireland. -- Intrigues of the Duchess of Burgundy. -- Lambert Simnel invades
England. -- Battle of Stoke.

August 22.
THE victory, which the earl of Richmond gained at Bosworth over Richard the
third, was entirely decisive; being attended, as well with the total rout and
dispersion of the royal army, as with the death of the King himself. Accession
of Henry VII.
The joy of so great success suddenly prompted the soldiers, in the field of
battle, to bestow on their victorious general the appellation of King, which he
had not hitherto assumed; and the acclamations of Long live Henry the seventh,
by a natural and unpremeditated movement, resounded from all quarters. To
bes^ow some appearance of formality on this species of military election, Sir
William Stanley brought a crown of ornament, which Richard wore in battle, and
which had been found among the spoils; and he put it on the head of the
conqueror. Henry himself remained not in suspense, but immediately, without
hesitation, accepted of the magnificent present, which was tendered him. He was
come to the great crisis of his fortune; and being obliged suddenly to
determine himself, amidst great difficulties, which he must have frequently
revolved in his mind, he chose that party, which his ambition suggested to him,
and to which he seemed to be conducted by his present prosperous success.

His title to the crown.
THERE were many titles, on which Henry could found his right to the throne;
but no one of them free from great objections, if considered, either with
respect to justice or to policy.

DURING some years, Henry had been regarded as heir to the house of Lancaster,
by the party attached to that family; but the title of the house of Lancaster
itself to the crown was generally esteemed to be very ill founded. Henry the
fourth, who had first raised that family to royal dignity, had never clearly
determined the foundation of his claim; and while he plainly invaded the order
of succession, he had not acknowledged the election of the people. The
Parliament had indeed often recognized the title of the Lancastrian princes;
but these votes had little authority, being considered as instances of prudent
complaisance toward a family in possession of present power: And they had
accordingly been often reversed during the late prevalence of the house of
York. Prudent men also, who had been willing, for the sake of peace, to submit
to any established authority, desired not to see the claims of a family
revived, which must produce many convulsions at present, and which disjointed
for the future the whole system of hereditary right. Besides; allowing the
title of the house of Lancaster to be legal, Henry himself was not the true
heir of that family; and nothing but the obstinacy of faction, which never,
without the utmost reluctance, will submit to their antagonists, could have
engaged the partisans of that house to adopt the earl of Richmond as their
head. His mother indeed, Margaret, countess of Richmond, was sole daughter and
heiress of John duke of Somerset, grandson to John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster:
But the birth of the first of the Somerset line was itself illegitimate and
even adulterous. And though the duke of Lancaster had obtained the legitimation
of his natural children by a patent of Richard the second, confirmed in
Parliament; it might justly be doubted, whether this Deed could bestow any
title to the Crown; since in the patent itself all the privileges conferred by
it are fully enumerated, and the succession to the kingdom, by being omitted,
is thereby tacitly excluded. In all the settlements of the crown, made during
the reigns of the Lancastrian princes, the line of Somerset had been entirely
overlooked; and it was not till the failure of the legitimate branch, that men
had paid any attention to their claim. And to add to the general
dissatisfaction against Henry's title, his mother, from whom he derived all his
right, was still alive; and evidently preceded him in the order of succession.

THE title of the house of York, both from the plain reason of the case, and
from the late popular government of Edward the fourth, had obtained universally
the preference in the sentiments of the people; and Henry might engraft his
claim on the right of that family, by his intended marriage with the princess
Elizabeth, the heiress of it; a marriage, which he had solemnly promised to
celebrate, and to the expectation of which he had chiefly owed all his past
successes. But many reasons di^^waded Henry from adopting this expedient. Were
he to receive the crown only in right of his spouse, his power, he knew, would
be very limited; and he must expect rather to enjoy the bare title of king by a
species of courtesy, than possess the real authority which belongs to it.
Should the princess die before him without issue, he must descend from the
throne, and give place to the next in succession: And even, if his bed should
be blessed with offspring, it seemed dangerous to expect, that filial piety in
his children would prevail over the ambition of obtaining present possession of
regal power. An act of Parliament, indeed, might be easily procured to settle
the crown on him during his life, but Henry knew how much superior the claim of
succession by blood was to the votes of an assembly Bacon in Kennet's complete
History, p. 579.
, which had always been overborne by violence in the shock of contending
titles, and which had ever been more governed by the conjunctures of the times,
than by any considerations derived from reason or public interest.

THERE was yet a third foundation, on which Henry might rest his claim, the
right of conquest, by his victory over Richard, the present possessor of the
crown. But besides that Richard himself was deemed no better than an usurper,
the army, which fought against him, consisted chiefly of Englishmen; and a
right of conquest over England could never be established by such a victory.
Nothing also would give greater umbrage to the nation than a claim of this
nature; which might be construed as an abolition of all their rights and
privileges, and the establishment of despotic authority in the sovereign Bacon,
p. 579.
. William himself, the Norman, though at the head of a powerful and victorious
army of foreigners, had at first declined the invidious title of conqueror; and
it was not till the full establishment of his authority that he had ventured to
advance so violent and destructive a pretension.

BUT Henry knew, that there was another foundation of authority, somewhat
resembling the right of conquest, to wit, present possession; and that this
title, guarded by vigor and ability, would be sufficient to secure perpetual
possession of the throne. He had before him the example of Henry the fourth;
who, supported by no better pretension, had subdued many insurrections, and had
at last been able to transmit the crown peaceably to his posterity. He was
sensible, that this title, which had been perpetuated through three successions
of the family of Lancaster, might still have subsisted, notwithstanding the
preferable claim of the house of York; had not the scepter devolved into the
hands of Henry the sixth, which were too feeble to sustain it. Instructed by
these recent experiences, Henry was determined to put himself in present
possession of regal authority; and to show all opposers, that nothing but force
of arms and a successful war would be able to expel him. His claim as heir to
the house of Lancaster he was resolved to advance; and never allow it to be
discussed: And he hoped that this title, favored by the partisans of that
family, and seconded by present power, would secure him a perpetual and an
independent authority.

THESE views of Henry are not exposed to much blame; because founded on good
policy, and even on a species of necessity: But there entered into all his
measures and councils another motive, which admits not of the same apology.
King's prejudice against the house of York.
The violent contentions, which, during so long a period, had been maintained
between the rival families of York and Lancaster, and the many sanguinary
revenges which they had mutually exercised on each other, had inflamed the
opposite factions into a high pitch of animosity. Henry himself, who had seen
most of his near friends and relations perish in the field or on the scaffold,
and who had been exposed in his own person to many hardships and dangers, had
imbibed a violent antipathy to the York party, which no time nor experience
were ever able to efface. Instead of embracing the present happy opportunity of
abolishing these fatal distinctions, of uniting his title with that of his
spouse, and of bestowing favor indifferently on the friends of both families;
he carried into the throne all the partialities which belong to the head of a
faction, and even the passions, which are carefully guarded against by every
true politician in that situation. To exalt the Lancastrian party, to depress
the retainers of the house of York, were still the favorite objects of his
pursuit; and through the whole course of his reign, he never forgot these early
prepossessions. Incapable from his natural temper of a more enlarged and more
benevolent system of policy, he exposed himself to many present
inconveniences, by too anxiously guarding against that future possible event,
which might disjoin his title from that of the princess, whom he espoused. And
while he treated the Yorkists as enemies, he soon rendered them such, and
taught them to discuss that right to the crown, which he so carefully kept
separate; and to perceive its weakness and invalidity.

TO these passions of Henry, as well as to his suspicious politics, we are to
ascribe the measure, which he embraced two days after the battle of Bosworth.
Edward Plantagenet, earl of Warwic, son to the unfortunate duke of Clarence,
was detained in a species of consinement at Sherif-Hutton in Yorkshire by the
jealousy of his uncle, Richard; whose title to the throne was inferior to that
of the young prince. Warwic had now reason to expect better treatment, as he
was no obstacle to the succession either of Henry or Elizabeth; and from a boy
of such tender years no danger could reasonably be apprehended. But Sir Robert
Willoughby was dispatched by Henry with orders to take him from Sherif-Hutton,
to convey him to the Tower, and to retain him in close custody Bacon, p. 579.
Polydore Virgil, p. 565.
. The same messenger carried directions, that the princess Elizabeth, who had
been confined to the same place, should be conducted to London, in order to
meet Henry, and there celebrate her espousals.

HENRY himself set out for the capital, and advanced by slow journies. Not to
rouse the jealousy of the people, he took care to avoid all appearance of
military triumph; and so to restrain the insolence of victory, that every thing
about him bore the appearance of an established monarch, making a peaceable
progress through his dominions, rather than of a prince who had opened a way to
the throne by force of arms. His joyful reception in London.
The acclamations of the people were every whereloud, and no less sincere and
hearty. Besides the favor, naturally attending a young and victorious prince
on his accession, the nation promised themselves great felicity from the new
scene, which opened before them. During the course of near a whole century the
kingdom had been laid waste by domestic wars and convulsions; and if at any
time the noise of arms had ceased, the sound of faction and discontent still
threatened new disorders. Henry, by his marriage with Elizabeth, seemed to
ensure an union of the contending titles of their families; and having
prevailed over a hated tyrant, who had anew disjointed the succession even of
the house of York, and filled his own family with blood, an unfeigned favor
was observed every where to attend him. Numerous and splendid troops of gentry
and nobility accompanied his progress. The mayor and companies of London
received him as he approached the city: The crowds of people and citizens were
zealous in their expressions of satisfaction. But Henry, amidst these general
effusions of joy, discovered still the stateliness and reserve of his temper,
which made him scorn to court popularity: He entered London in a close chariot,
and gratified not the people with the sight of their new monarch. He went first
to St. Paul's church, where he offered up the standards, taken in the field of
battle; and sung orisons for the victory, which he had there obtained. He
departed thence to the bishop of London's palace, where lodgings were prepared
for him.

BUT Henry did not so much neglect the favor of the people, as to delay giving
them assurance of his marriage with the princess Elizabeth, which he knew to be
so passionately desired by the whole nation. On his leaving Britanny, he had
artificially dropped some hopes, that, if he should succeed in his enterprise,
and obtain the crown of England, he would espouse Anne, the heiress of that
duchy; and the report of this engagement had already reached England, and had
begot anxiety in the people, and even in the princess Elizabeth herself. Henry
took care to dissipate these apprehensions, by solemnly renewing, before the
council and principal nobility, the promise, which he had already given, to
celebrate his marriage with Elizabeth. His coronation.
But though bound by honor, as well as interest, to complete this alliance, he
was resolved to postpone it, till the ceremony of his own coronation should be
finished, and till his title should be recognized by the Parliament. Anxious
still to support his personal and hereditary right to the throne, he dreaded
lest a preceding marriage with the princess should imply a participation of
sovereignty in her, and raise doubts of his own title by the house of Lancaster.

Sweating sickness.
THERE raged at that time in London, and other parts of the kingdom, a species
of Malady, unknown to any other age or nation, the Sweating sickness, which
occasioned a sudden death to great multitudes; though it was not propagated by
any contagious infection, but arose from the general disposition of the air and
of the human body. In less than twenty-four hours the patient commonly died or
recovered; but when the pestilence had committed ravages for a few weeks, it
was observed, either from alterations in the air, or from a more proper
regimen, which was discovered, to be considerably abated Polydore Virgil, p.
567.
. Preparations were then made for the ceremony of Henry's coronation. In order
to heighten the splendour of that appearance, he bestowed the rank of knights
banneret on twelve persons; and he conferred peerages on three. Jasper earl of
Pembroke, his uncle, he created duke of Bedford; Thomas lord Stanley, his
father-in-law, earl of Darby; and Edward Courteney, earl of Devonshire. 30th of
October.
At the coronation likewise there appeared a new institution, which the king
had established for security as well as pomp, a band of fifty archers, who were
denominated yeomen of the guard. But lest the people should take umbrage at
this unusual symptom of jealousy in the prince, as if it implied a personal
diffidence of his subjects, he declared the institution to be perpe^ual. The
ceremony of coronation was performed by cardinal Bourchier, archbishop of
Canterbury.

7th of November.
A Parliament.
THE Parliament being assembled at Westminster, the majority immediately
appeared to be devoted partisans of Henry; all persons of another disposition,
either declining to stand in these dangerous times, or being obliged to
dissemble their principles and inclinations. The Lancastrian party had every
where been successful in the elections; and even many of them had been returned
knights and burge^^es, who, during the prevalence of the house of York, had
been exposed to the rigor of the law, and been condemned by sentence of
attainder or outlawry. Their right to take seats in the house being questioned,
the case was referred to all the judges, who assembled in the Exchequer
Chamber, in order to deliberate on so delicate a subject. The sentence
pronounced was very prudent, and contained a just temperament between law and
expediency Bacon, p. 581.
. They determined, that the members attainted should forbear taking their seats
till an act were passed for the reverfal of their attainder. There was no
difficulty of obtaining this act; and in it were comprehended an hundred and
seven persons of the King's party Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. VII. n. 2, 3, 4. -- 15, 17,
26-65.
!

BUT a difficulty was started of a nature still more important. The King
himself had been attainted; and his right of succession to the crown might
thence be exposed to some doubt. The judges extricated themselves from this
dangerous question, by a singular position, which they established; "That the
crown takes away all defects and stops in Blood; and that from the time the
King assumed royal authority, the fountain was cleared, and all attainders and
corruptions of blood discharged Bacon, p 581.
." Besides the urgent necessity of the case, which admitted of no deliberation;
the judges probably thought, that no sentence of a court of judicature ought to
bar the right of succession; that the jealousy of a King toward his heir might
readily occasion stretches of law and justice against him; and that a prince
might even be engaged in unjustifiable measures during his predecessor's reign,
without meriting on that account to be excluded from the throne, which was his
birthright.

WITH a Parliament so obsequious as the present, the King could not fail to
obtain whatever act of settlement he was pleased to require. He seems only to
have entertained some doubts within himself on what title he should found his
pretensions. In his first address ^o the Parliament he mentioned his just title
by hereditary right: But lest that title should not be esteemed sufficient, he
subjoined his claim by the judgment of God, who had given him victory over his
enemies in the field of battle. And again, lest this pretension should be
interpreted as assuming a right of conquest, he ensured his subjects in the
entire enjoyment of their former properties and possessions.

Entail of the crown.
THE entail of the crown was drawn, according to the sense of the King, and
probably in the words, dictated by himself. He made no mention in it of the
princess Elizabeth, nor any branch of the family of York; but in other respects
the act was composed with sufficient reserve and moderation. He did not insist,
that it should contain a declaration or recognition of his preceding right; as
on the other hand, he avoided the appearance of a new law or ordinance. He
chose a middle course, which, as is commonly unavoidable in such cases* was not
entirely free from uncertainty and obscurity. It was voted, "That the
inheritance of the crown should rest, remain, and abide in the King Bacon, p.
581.
;" but whether as rightful heir, or only as present possessor, was not
determined. In like manner, the King was contented that the succession should
be secured to the heirs of his body; but he pretended not, in case of their
failure, to exclude the house of York, or give the preference to that of
Lancaster: He left that great point ambiguous for the present; and trusted,
that, if ever its determination should become requisite, future incidents would
open the way for the decision.

BUT after all these precautions, the King was so little satisfied with his own
title to the crown, that, in the following year, he applied to Rome for a
confirmation of it; and as that court gladly laid hold of all opportunities,
which the imprudence, weakness, or necessities of princes afford it to extend
its authority, Innocent the eighth, the reigning pope, readily granted a bull,
in whatever terms the King was pleased to desire. All Henry's titles, by
succession, marriage, parliamentary choice, even conquest, are there
enumerated; and to the whole the sanction of religion is added; excommunication
is denounced against every one who should either disturb him in the present
possession, or the heirs of his body in their future succession to the crown;
and from this penalty, no criminal, except in the article of death, can be
absolved but by the pope himself, or his special commissioners. It is difficult
to imagine, that the security derived from this bull, could be a compensation
for the defect which it betrayed in Henry's title, and to the danger of thus
inviting the pope to interpose in these concerns.

IT was natural, and even laudable in Henry to reverse the attainders, which
had passed against the partisans of the house of Lancaster: But the revenges,
which he exercised against the retainers of the York family, to which he was so
soon to be allied, cannot be considered in the same light. Yet the Parliament,
at his instigation, passed an act of attainder against the late King himself,
against the duke of Norfolk, the earl of Surrey, viscount Lovel, the lords
Zouche and Fe^rars of Chartley, Sir Walter and Sir James Harrington, Sir
William Berkeley, Sir Humphrey Stafford, Catesby, and about twenty other
gentlemen, who had fought on Richard's side in the battle of B sworth. How men
could be guilty of treason, by supporting the King in possession against the
earl of Richmond, who assumed not the title of King, it was not easy to
determine, and nothing but a servile complaisance in the Parliament could have
engaged them to make this stretch of justice. Nor was it a small mortification
to the people in general, to find, that the King, prompted either by avarice or
resentment, could, in the very beginning of his reign, so far violate the
cordial union, which had been previously concerted between the parties, and to
the expectation of which he had plainly owed his accession to the throne.

THE King, having gained so many points of consequence from his Parliament,
thought it not expedient to demand any supply from them, which the profound
peace enjoyed by the nation, and the late forfeitures of Richard's adherents,
seemed to render somewhat superfluous. 10th of December.
The Parliament, however, conferred on him during life the duty of tonnage and
poundage, which had been enjoyed in the same manner by some of his immediate
predec^ssors; and they added, before they broke up, other lucrative bills of no
great moment. The King, on his part, made some returns of grace and favor to
his people. He published his royal proclamation, offering pardon to all such as
had taken arms, or formed any attempts against him; provided they submitted
themselves to mercy by a certain day, and took the usual oath of fealty and
allegiance. Upon this proclamation many came out of their sanctuaries, and the
minds of men were every where much quieted. Henry chose to take wholly to
himself the merit of an act of grace, so agreeable to the nation; rather than
communicate it with the Parliament, (as was his first intention) by passing a
bill to that purpose. The earl of Surrey, however, though he had submitted, and
delivered himself into the King's hands, was sent prisoner to the tower.

DURING this parliament, the King also bestowed favors and honors on some
particular persons, who were attached to him. Edward Stafford, eldest son to
the duke of Buckingham, forfeited in the late reign, was restored to all the
honors of his family, as well as to all its fortune, which was very ample.
This generosity, so unusual in Henry, was the effect of his gratitude to the
memory of Buckingham, who had first concerted the plan of his succession to the
crown, and who by his own ruin had made way for that great event. Chandos of
Britanny was created earl of Bath, Sir Giles Daubeny lord Daubeny, and Sir
Robert Willoughby lord Broke. These were all the titles of nobility, conferred
by the King Polydore Virgil, p. 566.
.

BUT the ministers, whom the King most trusted and favored, were not chosen
from among the nobility, or even from among the laity. John Morton, and Richard
Fox, two clergymen, persons of industry, vigilance, and capacity, were the men
to whom he most confided his affairs and secret councils. They had shared with
him all his former dangers and distresses; and he now forgot not to make them
participate in his good fortune. They were both called to the privy council;
and Morton was created bishop of Ely, Fox of Exeter. The former soon after,
upon the death of Bourchier, was raised to the sea of Canterbury. The latter
was made lord privy seal; and successively, bishop of Bath and Wells, Durham,
and Winchester. For Henry, as lord Bacon observes, loved to employ and advance
prelates, because, having rich bishoprics to bestow, it was easy for him to
reward their services: And it was his maxim to raise them by slow steps, and
make them first pass through the inferior bishoprics Bacon, p. 582. Bacon adds,
that the King's reason for these gradual promotions, was in order to enjoy the
more first fruits; not reflecting that these belonged not to the crown, till
after the reformation.
. He probably expected, that as they were naturally more dependant on him than
the nobility, who, during that age, enjoyed possessions and jurisdictions
dangerous to royal authority; so the prospect of some farther elevation would
render them still more active in his service, and more obsequious to his
commands.

18th of January.
IN presenting the bill of tonnage and poundage, the Parliament, anxious
topreserve the true and undisputed succession to the crown, had petitioned
Henry, with demonstrations of the greatest earnestness, to espouse the princess
Elizabeth; but they covered their real reason under the dutiful pretense of
their desire to have heirs of his body. He now thought in earnest of satisfying
the minds of his people in that particular. King's marriage.
His marriage was celebrated at London; and that with greater appearance of
universal joy, than either his first entry or his coronation. Henry remarked
with much displeasure this general favor which was borne the house of York.
The suspicions, which arose from it, not only disturbed his tranquillity during
his whole reign; but bred disgust toward his spouse herself, and poisoned all
his domestic enjoyments. Though virtuous, amiable, and obsequious to the last
degree, she never met with a proper return of affection, or even of
complaisance from her husband; and the malignant ideas of faction still, in his
sullen mind, prevailed over all the sentiments of conjugal tenderness.

THE King had been carried along with such a tide of success ever since his
arrival in England, that he thought nothing could withstand the fortune, and
authority which attended him. He now resolved to make a progress into the
North, where the friends of the house of York, and even the partisans of
Richard were most numerous; in hopes of curing, by his presence and
conversation, the prejudices of the malcontents. When he arrived at
Nottingham, he heard that viscount Lovel, with Sir Humphry Stafford and Thomas,
his brother, had withdrawn themselves secretly from their sanctuary at
Colchester: But this news appeared not to him of such importance as to stop his
journey; and he proceeded forward to York. An insurrection.
He there heard, that the Staffords had levied an army in the county of
Worcester, and were approaching to besiege that city: And that Lovel, at the
head of an army of three or four thousand men, was marching to attack him in
York. Henry was not dismayed with this intelligence. His active courage, full
of resources, immediately prompted him to find the proper remedy. Though he knew
himself to be surrounded with enemies in these disaffected counties, he
assembled a small body of troops, in whom he could confide; and he put them
under the command of the duke of Bedford. He joined to them all his own
attendants; but he found that this hasty armament was more formidable by their
spirit and their zealous attachment to him, than by the arms or military stores
of which they were provided. He therefore gave Bedford orders not to approach
the enemy; but previously to try every proper expedient to dissipate them.
Bedford published a general promise of pardon to the rebels, which had a
greater effect on their leader than on his followers. Lovel, who had undertaken
an enterprise, that exceeded his courage and capacity, was so terrified with
the fears of desertion among his troops, that he suddenly withdrew himself,
and, after lurking some time in Lancashire, he made his escape into Flanders,
where he was protected by the duchess of Burgundy. His army submitted to the
King's clemency; and the other insurgents, hearing of this success, raised the
siege of Worcester, and dispersed themselves. The Staffords took sanctuary in
the church of Colnham, a village near Abingdon; but as it was found, that that
church had not the privilege of giving protection to rebels, they were taken
thence: The eldest Stafford was executed at Tyburn; the younger, pleading that
he was misled by his brother, obtained his pardon Polydore Virgil, p. 569.
.

20th of September.
HENRY'S joy for this success was followed, some time after, with the birth of
a prince, to whom he gave the name of Arthur, in memory of the famous British
King of that name, from whom, it was pretended, the family of Tudor derived
their descent.

Discontents of the people.
THOUGH Henry had been able to dissipate that hasty rebellion, which was raised
by the relicts of Richard's parrizans, his government was become in general
very unpopular: The source of the public discontent arose chiefly from his
prejudice against the house of York, which was universally beloved by the
nation, and which, for that very reason, became every day more the object of
his hatred and jealousy. Not only a preference on all occasions, it was
observed, was given to the Lancastrians; but many of the opposite party had
been exposed to great severity, and had been bereaved of their fortunes by acts
of attainder. A general resumption likewise had passed of all grants made by
the princes of the house of York; and though this rigor had been covered under
the pretense, that the revenue was become insufficient to support the crown,
and though the liberalities, during the latter years of Henry the sixth, were
resumed by the same law, yet the Yorkparty, as they were the principal
sufferers by the resumption, thought it chiefly levelled against them. The
severity, exercised against the earl of Warwic, begot compassion toward youth
and innocence, exposed to such oppression; and his confinement in the tower,
the very place where Edward's children had been murdered by their uncle, made
the public expect a like catastrophe for him, and led them to make a comparison
between Henry and that detested tyrant. And when it was remarked, that the
queen herself met with harsh treatment, and even after the birth of a son, was
not admitted to the honor of a public coronation, Henry's prepossessions were
then concluded to be absolutely incurable, and men became equally obstinate in
their disgust against his government. Nor was the manner and address of the
King calculated to cure these prejudices contracted against his administration;
but had, in every thing, a tendency to promote fear, or at best reverence,
rather than good will and affection Bacon, p. 583.
. And while the high idea, entertained of his policy and vigor, retained the
nobility and men of character in obedience; the effects of his unpopular
government soon appeared in the public, by incidents of a very extraordinary
nature.

THERE lived in Oxford, one Richard Simon, a priest, who possessed some
subtlety, and still more boldness and temerity. This man had entertained the
design of disturbing Henry's government, by raising up a pretender to his
crown; Lambert Simnel.
and for that purpose, he cast his eyes on Lambert Simnel, a youth of fifteen
years of age, who was son of a baker, and who, being endowed with understanding
above his years, and address above his condition, seemed well fitted to
personate a prince of royal extraction. A report had been spread among the
people, and received with great avidity, that Richard, duke of York, second son
to Edward the fourth, had, by a secret escape, saved himself from his uncle's
cruelty, and lay somewhere concealed in England. Simon, taking advantage of
this rumor, had at first instructed his pupil to assume that name, which he
found to be so fondly cherished by the public: But hearing afterward a new
report, that Warwic had made his escape from the tower, and observing that this
news was attended with no less general satisfaction, he changed the plan of his
imposture, and made Simnel personate that unfortunate prince Polydore Virgil,
p. 569, 570.
. Though the youth was qualified by nature for the part which he was instructed
to act; yet was it remarked, that he was better informed in circumstances
relating to the royal family, and particularly in the adventures of the earl of
Warwic, than he could be supposed to have learned from one of Simon's
condition: And it was thence conjectured, that persons of higher rank,
partisans of the house of York, had laid the plan of this conspiracy, and had
conveyed proper instructions to the actors. The queen dowager herself was
exposed to great suspicion; and it was indeed the general opinion, however
unlikely it might seem, that she had secretly given her consent to this
imposture. This woman was of a very restless disposition. That character of
ambition and intrigue, which she had betrayed during the reign of her husband,
had not abandoned her during the usurpation of Richard; and in her closet was
first laid the plan of that great confederacy, which overturned the throne of
the tyrant, and raised the earl of Richmond to royal dignity. Finding, that,
instead of receiving the reward of these services, she herself was fallen to
absolute insignificance, her daughter treated with severity, and all her
friends brought under subjection, she had conceived the most violent animosity
against Henry, and had resolved to make him feel the effects of her resentment.
The impostor, she knew, however succes^ful, it would be easy at last to set
aside; and if a way could be found at his risque to subvert the King's
government, she hoped that a scene would be opened, which, though difficult at
present exactly to foresee, would gratify her revenge, and be on the whole less
irksome to her than that slavery and contempt, to which she was reduced
Polydore Virgil, p. 570.
.

BUT whatever care Simon might take to convey instruction to his pupil, Simnel,
he knew, that the imposture would not bear a cl^se inspection; and he was
therefore determined to open the first public scene of it in Ireland. That
island, which was zealously attached to the house of York, and bore an
affectionate regard to the memory of Clarence, Warwick's father, who had been
their lieutenant, was improvidently allowed by Henry to remain in the same
condition, in which he found it; and all the counselors and officers, who had
been appointed by his predecessor, still retained their authority. No sooner
did Simnel present himself to Thomas Fitzgerald, earl of Kildare, the deputy,
and claim his protection, as the unfortunate Warwic, than that credulous
nobleman, not suspecting so bold a fiction, lent attention to him, and began to
consult some persons of rank with regard to this extraordinary incident. These
he found even more sanguine in their zeal and belief than himself: And in
proportion a^ the story diffused itself among those of lower condition, it
became the object of still higher passion and credulity; till the people in
Dublin with one consent tendered their allegiance to Simnel as to the true
Plantagenet. Revolt of Ireland.
Fond of a novelty, which flattered their natural propension, they overlooked
the daughters of Edward the fourth, who stood before Warwic in the order of
Succession; they paid the pretended prince attendance as their sovereign,
lodged him in the castle of Dublin, crowned him with a diadem taken from a
statue of the virgin, and publicly proclaimed him King, under the appellation
of Edward the sixth. The whole island followed the example of the capital; and
not a sword was any where drawn in Henry's quarrel.

WHEN this intelligence was conveyed to Henry, it reduced him to some
perplexity. Determined always to face his enemies in person, he yet scrupled at
present to leave England, where he suspected the conspiracy was first framed,
and where, he knew, many persons of condition, and the people in general were
much disposed to lend it countenance. In order to discover the secret source of
the contrivance, and take measures against this open revolt, he held frequent
consultations with his ministers and counselors, and laid plans for a vigorous
defense of his authority, and the suppression of his enemies.

THE first event, which followed these deliberations, gave great surprise to
the public: It was the seizure of the queen dowager, the forfeiture of all her
lands and revenue, and the close confinement of her person to the nunnery of
Bermondesey. So arbitrary and violent an act of authority was covered with a
very thin pretense. It was alleged, that, notwithstanding the secret agreement
to marry her daughter to Henry, she had yet yielded to the solicitations and
menaces of Richard, and delivered that princess and her sisters into the hands
of the tyrant. This crime, which was now become obsolete, and might admit of
many alleviations, was therefore suspected not to be the real cause of the
severity, with which she was treated; and men believed, that the King,
unwilling to accuse so near a relation of a conspiracy against him, had cloaked
his vengeance or precaution under the pretext of an offense, known to the whole
world Bacon, p. 583. Polydore Virgil, p. 571.
. They were afterward the more confirmed in this suspicion, when they found,
that the unfortunate queen, though she survived this disgrace several years, was
never treated with any more lenity, but was allowed to end her life in poverty,
solitude, and confinement. This woman had been raised to the throne from a very
private station; possessed great authority during her husband's lifetime; fell
afterward into the deepest distress; saw the murder of all her male children;
had again the satisfaction of contributing to the exaltation of her daughter;
an event which immediately involved her in vexation, and soon after in misery:
And on the whole, she furnishes ample materials for reflections on the
instability of fortune; reflections, which history, as it relates the
adventures of the great, does more frequently suggest than even the incidents
of common life.

THE next measure of the King was of a less exceptionable nature. He ordered
that Warwic should be taken from the Tower, be led in procession through the
streets of London, be conducted to St. Paul's, and there exposed to the eyes of
the whole people. He even gave directions, that some persons of condition, who
were attached to the house of York, and were best acquainted with the person of
this prince, should approach him and converse with him: And he trusted, that
these, being convinced of the absurd imposture of Simnel, would put a stop to
the credulity of the people. The expedient had its effect in England: But in
Ireland the people still persisted in their revolt, and zealously retorted on
the King the reproach of propagating an imposture, and of having shown a
counterfeit Warwic to the people.

HENRY had soon reason to apprehend, that the design against him was not laid
on such slight foundations as the absurdity of the contrivance seemed to
promise. John earl of Lincoln, son of John de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, and of
Elizabeth, eldest sister to Edward the fourth, was engaged to take part in the
conspiracy. This nobleman, who possessed capacity and courage, had entertained
very aspiring views; and his ambition was encouraged by the known intentions of
his uncle, Richard, who had formed a design, in cafe himself should die without
issue, of declaring Lincoln successor to the crown. The King's jealousy against
all eminent persons of the York-party, and his rigor toward Warwic, had
farther struck Lincoln with apprehensions, and made him resolve to seek for
safety in the most dangerous councils. Having fixed a secret correspondence
with sir Thomas Broughton, a man of great interest in Lancashire, he set out
for Flanders, where Lovel had arrived a little before him; and he joined the
court of his aunt, the duchess of Burgundy, by whom he had been invited over.

Intrigues of the duchess of Burgundy.
MARGARET, widow of Charles the bold, duke of Burgundy, having born no children
to her husband, attached herself with an entire friendship to her
daughter-in-law, married to Maximilian, archduke of Austria; and after the
death of that princess, she persevered in her affection to Philip and Margaret,
her children, and occupied herself in their education and in the care of their
persons. By her virtuous conduct and demeanor, she had acquired great
authority among the Flemings; and lived with much dignity, as well as economy,
upon that ample dowry, which she inherited from her husband. The resentments of
this princess were no less warm than her friendships; and that spirit of
faction, which it is so difficult for a social and sanguine temper to guard
against, had taken strong possession of her heart, and entrenched somewhat on
the probity, which shone forth in other parts of her character. Hearing of the
malignant jealousy, entertained by Henry against her family, and his oppression
of all its partisans; she was moved with the highest indignation, and
determined to make him repent of that enmity, which he seemed so wantonly to
court. After consulting with Lincoln Polydore Virgil, p. 572, 573.
; and sent them over, together with these two noblemen, to join Simnel in
Ireland. The countenance, given by persons of such high condition, and the
accession of this military force, raised extremely the courage of the Irish,
and made them entertain the resolution of invading England, where they believed
the spirit of disaffection to prevail as much as it had appeared to do in
Ireland. Lambert Simnel invades England.
The poverty also, under which they labored, made it impossible for them to
maintain any longer their new court and army, and inspired them with a strong
desire of enriching themselves by plunder and preferment in England.

HENRY was not ignorant of these intentions of his enemies; and he prepared
himself for resistance. He ordered troops to be mustered in different parts of
the kingdom, and put them under the command of the duke of Bedford, and the
earl of Oxford. He confined from jealousy the marquis of Dorset, who was
brother to the queen regent; and who, he suspected, would revenge the injuries
suffered by his sister. And to allure the people by an appearance of devotion,
he made a pilgrimage to our lady of Walsingham, famous for miracles; and there
offered up prayers for success and for deliverance from his enemies.

BEING informed that Simnel and his forces were landed at Foudrey in
Lancashire, he drew together his own troops, and advanced toward them as far
as Coventry. The rebels had entertained hopes, that the disaffected counties in
the North would rise in their favor: But the people, averse to join Irish and
German invaders, convinced of Lambert's imposture, and kept in awe by the
King's reputation for success and conduct, either remained in tranquillity, or
gave all assistance to the royal army. The earl of Lincoln, therefore, who
commanded the rebels, finding no hopes but in speedy victory, was determined to
bring the matter to a decision; and the King, supported by the native courage
of his temper, and emboldened by a great accession of volunteers, which had
joined him, under the earl of Shrewsbury and lord Strange, declined not the
combat. 6th of June.
Battle of Stoke.
The opposite armies met at Stoke in the county of Nottingham, and fought a
battle, which was more bloody and more obstinately disputed than could have
been expected from the inequality of their force. All the leaders of the rebels
were resolved to conquer or to die, and they inspired their troops with a like
resolution. The Germans also, being veteran and experienced soldiers, kept the
victory long doubtful; and even the Irish, though ill-armed and almost
defenseless, showed themselves not defective in spirit and bravery. The King's
victory was purchased with loss, but was entirely decisive. Lincoln, Broughton
and Swart perished in the field of battle, with four thousand of their troops.
Lovel, never having been heard of more, was believed to have undergone the same
fate. Simnel with his tutor, Simon, was taken prisoner. Simon, being a priest,
was not tried at law, and was only committed to close custody: Simnel was too
contemptible either to excite apprehension or resentment in Henry. He was
pardoned, and made a scullion in the King's kitchen; whence he was afterward
advanced to the rank of a falconer Bacon, p. 586. Pol. Virg. p. 574.
.

HENRY had now leisure to revenge himself of his enemies. He took a progress
into the northern parts, where he made the people fully sensible of the rigours
of his justice. A strict inquiry was made after those who had assisted or
favored the rebels. The punishments were not all sanguinary. The King made his
revenge subservient to his avarice. Heavy fines were levied from the
delinquents. In giving sentence, the proceedings of the courts, and even the
courts themselves, were entirely arbitrary. Either the criminals were tried by
commissioners appointed for that purpose, or they suffered punishment by
sentence of a court martial. And as a rumor had prevailed before the battle of
Stoke, that the rebels had gained the victory, that the King's army was cut in
pieces, and that the King himself had escaped by flight, Henry was resolved to
interpret the belief or propagation of this report as a mark of disaffection;
and he punished many for that pretended crime. But such, in this age, was the
situation of the English government, that the royal prerogative, which was but
little restrained during the most peaceable periods, was sure, in tumultuous,
or even suspicious times, which frequently occurred, to break all bounds of law
and order.

AFTER the King had satisfied his rigor by the punishment of his enemies, he
resolved to give contentment to the people, in a point, which, though a mere
ceremony, was very passionately desired by them. The Queen had been married
near two years, but had not yet been crowned; and this affectation of delay had
given great discontent to the public, and had been one principal source of the
disaffection which prevailed. 25th of November.
The King, instructed by experience, now finished the ceremony of her
coronation; and to show a still more gracious disposition, he gave liberty to
her uncle, the marquess of Dorset, who had been able to clear himself of all
the crimes of which he was accused.

CHAP. II.
State of foreign affairs. -- State of Scotland -- of Spain -- of the Low
Countries -- of France -- of Britanny. -- French invasion of Britanny. --
French embassy to England. -- Dissimulation of the French Court. -- An
insurrection in the North -- suppressed. -- King sends forces into Britanny. --
Annexation of Britanny to France. -- A Parliament. -- War with France. --
Invasion of France. -- Peace with France. -- Perkin Warbec. -- His imposture.
-- He is avowed by the duchess of Burgundy -- and by many of the English
nobility. -- Trial and execution of Stanley. -- A Parliament.

State of foreign affairs.
THE King acquired great reputation throughout all Europe by the prosperous and
vigorous conduct of his domestic affairs; and as some incidents, about this
time, invited him to look abroad, and exert himself in behalf of his allies, it
will be necessary, in order to give a just account of his foreign measures, to
explain the condition of the neighboring kingdoms; beginning with Scotland,
which lies most contiguous.

State of Scotland.
THE kingdom of Scotland had not as yet attained that state, which
distinguishes a civilized monarchy, and which enables the government, by the
force of its laws and institutions alone, without any extraordinary capacity in
the sovereign, to maintain itself in order and tranquillity. James the third,
who now filled the throne, was a man of little industry and of a narrow genius;
and though it behoved him to yield the reins of government to his ministers, he
had never been able to make any choice, which could give contentment both to
himself and to his people. When he bestowed his confidence on any of the
principal nobility, he found, that they exalted their own family to such a
height, as was dangerous to the prince, and gave umbrage to the state: When he
conferred favor on any person of meaner birth, on whose submission he could
more depend, the barons of his kingdom, enraged at the power of an upstart
minion, proceeded to the utmost extremities against their sovereign. Had Henry
entertained the ambition of conquests, a tempting opportunity now offered of
reducing that kingdom to subjection; but as he was probably sensible, that a
warlike people, though they might be overrun by reason of their domestic
divisions, could not be retained in obedience without a regular military force,
which was then unknown in England, he rather proposed the renewal of the peace
with Scotland, and sent an embassy to James for that purpose. But the Scotch,
who never desired a long peace with England, and who thought that their
security consisted in preserving themselves constantly in a warlike posture,
would not agree to more than a seven years truce, which was accordingly
concluded Polyd. Virg. p. 575.
.

THE European states on the continent were then hastening fast to that
situation, in which they have remained, without any material alterations, for
near three centuries; and began to unite themselves into one extensive system
of policy, which comprehended the chief powers of Christendom. State of Spain.
Spain, which had hithertobeen almost entirely occupied within herself, now
became formidable by the union of Arragon and Castile, in the persons of
Ferdinand and Isabella, who, being princes of great capacity, employed their
force in enterprises the most advantageous to their combined monarchy. The
conquest of Granada over the Moors was then undertaken, and brought near to a
happy conclusion. And in that expedition the military genius of Spain was
revived; honor and security were attained; and her princes, no longer held in
fear by a domestic enemy so dangerous, began to enter into all the transactions
of Europe, and make a great figure in every war and negotiation.

Of the Low Countries.
MAXIMILIAN, King of the Romans, son to the emperor Frederic, had, by his
marriage with the heiress of the house of Burgundy, acquired an interest in the
low country provinces; and though the death of his spouse had weakened his
connection with that territory, he still pretended to the government as tutor to
his son Philip, and his authority had been acknowledged by Brabant, Holland,
and several of the provinces. But as Flanders and Hainault still refused to
submit to his regency, and even appointed other tutors to Philip, he had been
engaged in long wars against those obstinate people, and never was able
thoroughly to subdue their spirit. That he might free himself from the
opposition of France, he had concluded a peace with Lewis the eleventh, and had
given his daughter, Margaret, then an infant, in marriage to the Dauphin;
together with Artois, Franchecomte, and Charolois as her dowry. But this
alliance had not produced the desired effect. The dauphin succeeded to the
crown of France under the appellation of Charles the eighth; but Maximilian
still found the mutinies of the Flemings fomented by the intrigues of the Court
of France.

State of France.
FRANCE, during the two preceding reigns, had made a mighty increase in power
and greatness; and had not other states of Europe at the same time received an
accession of force, it had been impossible to have retained her within her
ancient boundaries. Most of the great fiefs, Normandy, Champagne, Anjou,
Dauphiny, Guienne, Provence, and Burgundy had been united to the crown; the
English had been expelled from all their conquests; the authority of the prince
had been raised to such a condition as enabled him to maintain law and order; a
considerable military force was kept on foot, and the finances were able to
support them. Lewis the eleventh indeed, from whom many of these advantages
were derived, was dead, and had left his son, in very early youth and ill
educated, to sustain the weight of the monarchy: But having entrusted the
government to his daughter, Anne Lady of Beaujeu, a woman of spirit and
capacity, the French power suffered no check or decline. On the contrary, this
princess formed the great project, which at last she happily effected, of
uniting to the crown Britanny, the last and most independent fief of the
monarchy.

Of Britanny.
FRANCIS the second, duke of Britanny, was a good, but a weak prince, who,
conscious of his own unfitness for government, had resigned himself entirely to
the direction of Peter Landais, a man of very mean birth, more remarkable for
his ability than for his virtue or integrity. The nobles of Britanny,
displeased with the great advancement of this favorite, had even proceeded to
disaffection against their sovereign; and after many tumults and conspiracies,
they at last united among themselves, and in a violent manner, seized, tried,
and put to death the obnoxious minister. Fearing the resentment of the prince
for this invasion of his authority, many of them retired to France; and others,
for their protection and safety, maintained a correspondence with that court.
The French ministry, observing the great dissentions among the Bretons, thought
the opportunity favorable for invading that duchy; and so much the more, that
they could cover their ambition under the specious pretense of providing for
domestic security.

LEWIS, duke of Orleans, first prince of the blood, and presumptive heir of the
monarchy, had disputed the administration with the lady of Beaujeu; and though
his pretensions had been rejected by the states, he still maintained cabals
with many of the grandees, and laid schemes for subverting the authority of
that princess. Finding his schemes detected, he took arms, and fortified
himself in Beaugenci; but as his revolt was precipitate, before his
confederates were ready to rise with him, he had been obliged to submit, and to
receive whatever conditions the French ministry were pleased to impose upon
him. Actuated however by his ambition, and even by his fears, he soon retired
out of France, and took shelter with the dexcl=Yke of Britanny, who was
desirous of strengthening himself against the designs of the lady of Beaujeu by
the friendship and credit of the duke of Orleans. This prince also, observing
the ascendant which he soon acquired over the duke of Britanny, had engaged
many of his partisans to join him at that court, and had formed the design of
aggrandizing himself by a marriage with Anne, the heiress of that opulent
duchy.

THE barons of Britanny, who saw all favor engrossed by the duke of Orleans
and his train, renewed a stricter correspondence with France, and even invited
the French King to make an invasion on their country. Desirous however to
preserve its independancy, they had regulated the number of succors, which
France was to send, and had stipulated that no fortified place in Britanny
should remain in the possession of that monarchy. A vain precaution, where
revolted subjects treat with a power so much superior! French invasion of
Britanny.
The French invaded Britanny with forces three times more numerous than those
which they had promised to the barons; and advancing into the heart of the
country, laid siege to Ploermel. To oppose them, the duke raised a numerous,
but ill-disciplined army, which he put under the command of the duke of
Orleans, the count of Dunois, and others of the French nobility. The army,
discontented with this choice, and jealous of their confederates, soon
disbanded, and left their prince with too small a force to keep the field
against his invaders. He retired to Vannes; but being hotly pursued by the
French, who had made themselves masters of Ploermel, he escaped to Nantz; and
the enemy, having taken and garrifoned Vannes, Dinant, and other places, laid
close siege to that city. The barons of Britanny, finding their country menaced
with total subjection, began gradually to withdraw from the French army, and
make peace with their sovereign.

THIS desertion, however, of the Bretons discouraged not the court of France
from pursuing their favorite project of reducing Britanny to subjection. The
situation of Europe appeared very favorable to the execution of this design.
Maximilian was engaged in close alliance with the duke of Britanny, and was
even in treaty for marrying his daughter; but he was on all occasions so
necessitous of money, and at that time so disquieted by the mutinies of the
Flemings, that little effectual assistance could be expected from him.
Ferdinand was entirely occupied in the conquest of Granada; and it was also
known, that if Franexcl=Ye resigned to him Rousillon and Cerdagne, to which he
had pretensions, she would at any time engage him to abandon the interests of
Britanny. England alone was both enabled by her power, and engaged by her
interests, to support the independency of that duchy; and the most dangerous
opposition was therefore, by the French, expected from that quarter. In order
to cover their real designs, no sooner were they informed of Henry's success
against Simnel and his partisans, than they dispatched ambassadors to the court
of London, and made professions of the utmost trust and confidence in that
monarch.

French embassy to England.
THE ambassadors, after congratulating Henry on the late victory, and
communicating to him in the most cordial manner, as to an intimate friend, some
successes of their master against Maximilian, came in the progress of their
discourse to mention the late transactions in Britanny. They told him that the
duke of Britanny having given protection to French fugitives and rebels, the
King had been necessitated, contrary to his intention and inclination, to carry
war into that duchy: That the honor of the crown was interested not to suffer
a vassal so far to forget his duty to his liege lord; nor was the security of
the government of France less concerned to prevent the consequences of this
dangerous temerity: That the fugitives were no mean nor obscure persons; but,
among others, the duke of Orleans, first prince of the blood, who, finding
himself obnoxious to justice for treasonable practices in France, had fled into
Bexcl=Yitanny; where he still persevered in laying schemes of rebellion against
his sovereign: That the war being thus, on the part of the French moexcl=Yarch,
entirely defensive, it would immediately cease, when the duke of Britanny, by
returning to his duty, should remove the causes of it: That their master was
sensible of the obligations which that duke, in very critical times, had
conferred on Henry; but it was known also, that, in times still more critical,
he or his mercenary counselors had deserted him, and put his life in the
utmost hazard: That his sole refuge in such desperate extremities had been the
court of France, which not only protected his person, but supplied him with men
and money, with which, aided by his own valor and conduct, he had been enabled
to mount the throne of England: That France, in this transaction, had, from
friendship to Henry, acted contrary to what, in a narrow view, might be
esteemed her own interest; since, instead of an odious tyrant, she had
contributed to establish on a rival throne a prince endowed with such virtue
and ability: And that as both the justice of the cause and the obligations
conferred on Henry thus preponderated on the side of France, their master
expected, that, if the situation of Henry's affairs allowed him not to give
assistaexcl=Ice to that kingdom, he would at least preserve a neutrality
between the contending parties Bacon, p. 589.
.

THIS discourse of the French ambassadors was plausible; and to give it greater
weight, they communicated to Henry, as in confidence, their master's
intentexcl=Yon, after he should have composed the differences with Britanny, to
lead an army into Italy, and make good his pretensions to the kingdom of
Naples: A project, which, they knew, would give no umbrage to the court of
England. But all these artifices were in vain employed against the penetration
of the King. He clearly saw, that France had entertained the view of subduing
Britanny; but he also perceived, that she would meet with great, and, as he
thought, insuperable difficulties in the execution of her project. The native
force of that duchy, he knew, had always been considerable, and had often,
without any foreign assistance, resisted the power of France; the natural
temper of the French nation, he imagined, would make them easily abandon every
enterprise, which required perseverance; and as the heir of the crown was
confederated with the duke of Britanny, the courtiers would be still more
remiss in prosecuting a scheme which must draw on them his resentment and
displeasure. Should even these internal obstructions be removed, Maximilian,
whose enmity to France was well known, and who now paid his addresses to the
heiress of Britanny, would be able to make a diversion on the side of Flanders;
nor could it be expected, that France, if she prosecuted such ambitious
projects, would be allowed to remain in tranquillity by Ferdinand and Isabella.
Above all, he thought, the French court could never expect, that England, so
deeply interested to preserve the independancy of Britanny, so able by her
power and situation to give effectual and prompt assistance, would permit such
an accession of force to be made to her rival. He imagined, therefore, that the
ministers of France, convinced of the impracticability of their schemes, would
at last embrace pacific views, and would abandon an enterprise, so obnoxious to
all the potentates of Europe.

THIS reasoning of Henry was solid, and might very justly engage him in
dilatory and cautious measures: But there entered into his conduct another
motive, which was apt to draw him beyond the just bounds, because founded on a
ruling passion. His frugality, which by degrees degenerated into avarice, made
him averse to all warlike enterprises and distant expeditions; and engaged him
previously to try the expedient of negotiation. He dispatched Urswic, his
almoner, a man of address and ability, to make offer of his mediation to the
contending parties: An offer, which, he thought, if accepted by France, would
soon lead to a composure of all differences; if refused or eluded, would at
least discover the perseverance of that court in their ambitious projects.
Urswic found the lady of Beaujeu, now duchess of Bourbon, engaged in the siege
of Nantz, and had the satisfaction to find that his master's mediation was very
readily embraced, and with many expressions of confidence and moderation.
Dissimulation of the French Court.
That able princess concluded, that the duke of Orleans, who governed the court
of Britanny, forseeing that every accommodation must be made at his expense,
would use all his interest to have Henry's proposal rejected; and would by that
means make an effectual apology for the French measures, and draw on the
Bretons the reproach of obstinacy and injustice. The event justified her
prudence. When the English ambassador made the same applications to the duke of
Britanny, he received for answer, in name of that Prince, that having so long
acted the part of protector and guardian to Henry, during his youth and
adversity, he had expected, from a monarch of such virtue, more effectual
assistance, in his present distresses, than a barren offer of mediation, which
suspended not the progress of the French arms: That if Henry's gratitude was
not sufficient to engage him in such a measure, his prudence, as King of
England, should discover to him the pernicious consequences attending the
conquest of Britanny, and its annexation to the crown of France: That that
kingdom, already become too powerful, would be enabled, by so great an
accession of force, to display, to the ruin of England, that hostile
disposition, which had always subsisted between those rival nations: That
Britanny, so useful an ally, which, by its situation, gave the English an
entrance into the heart of France; being annexed to that kingdom, would be
equally enabled from its situation to disturb, either by pyracies or naval
armaments, the commerce and peace of England: And that if the duke refused
Henry's mediation, it proceeded neither from an inclination to a war, which he
experienced to be so ruinous to him, nor from a confidence in his own force,
which he knew to be so much inferior to that of the enemy; but merely from a
sense of his present necessity, which must engage the King to act the part of
his confederate, not of a mediator.

WHEN this answer was reported to the King, he abandoned not the system of
conduct which he had formed: He only concluded, that some more time was
requisite to quell the obstinacy of the Bretons and make them submit to reason.
And when he learned, that the people of Britanny, anxious for their duke's
safety, had formed a tumultuary army of 60,000 men, and had obliged the French
to raise the siege of Nantz, he fortified himself the more in his opinion, that
the court of France would at last be reduced, by multiplied obstacles and
difficulties, to abandon the project of reducing Britanny to subjection. He
continued therefore the scheme of negotiation, and thereby exposed himself to
be deceived by the artifices of the French ministry; who, still pretending
pacific intentions, sent lord Bernard Daubigni, a Scotch man of quality, to
London, and pressed Henry not to be discouraged in offering his mediation to
the court of Britanny. The King on his part dispatched another embassy composed
of Urswic, the abbot of Abingdon and Sir Richard Tonstal, who carried new
proposals for an amicable accommodation. No effectual succors, mean while,
were provided for the distressed Bretons. The lord Woodville, brother to the
queen dowager, a man of courage and enterprise, having asked leave to raise
underhand a body of volunteers and transport them into Britanny, met with a
refusal from the King, who was desirous of preserving the appearance of a
strict neutrality. That nobleman, however, still persisted in his intentions.
He went over to the Isle of Wight, of which he was governor; levied a body of
400 men; and having at last obtained, as is supposed, the secret permission of
Henry, sailed with them to Britanny. This enterprise proved fatal to the
leader, and brought small relief to the unhappy Duke. 28th of July.
The Bretons rashly engaged in a general action with the French at St. Aubin,
and were totally discomfited. Woodville and all the English were put to the
sword; together with a body of Bretons, who had been accouttered in the garb of
Englishmen, in order to strike a greater terror into the French, to whom the
martial prowess of that nation was always formidable Argentre Hist. de
Bretagne, Live. 12.
. The duke of Orleans, the prince of Orange, and many other persons of rank
were taken prisoners. And the military force of Britanny was totally
dissipated. 9th September.
The death of the duke, which followed soon after, threw affairs into still
greater confusion, and seemed to threaten the state with a final subjection.

THOUGH the King prepared not against these events, so hurtful to the interest of
England, with sufficient vigor and precaution, he had not altogether
overlooked them. Determined to observe a pacific conduct, as far as the
situation of affairs would permit, he yet knew the warlike disposition of his
subjects, and observed, that their ancient and inveterate animosity to France
was now revived by the prospect of this great accession to its power and
grandeur. He resolved therefore to make advantage of those humors, and to draw
some supplies of money from the people, under pretext of giving assistance to
the Duke of Britanny. He had summoned a Parliament to meet at Westminster 9th
November, 1487.
; and he soon persuaded them to grant him a considerable subsidy Polydore
Virgil, p. 579, says that this imposition was a capitation tax; the other
historians say it was a tax of two shillings on the pound.
. But this supply, though voted by Parliament, involved the King in unexpected
difficulties. An insurrection in the North.
The counties of Durham and York, always discontented with Henry's government,
and farther provoked by the late oppressions, under which they had labored,
after the suppression of Simnel's rebellion, resisted the commissioners who
were appointed to levy the new tax. The commissioners, terrified with this
appearance of sedition, made application to the Earl of Northumberland, and
desired of him advice and assistance in the execution of their office. That
nobleman thought the matter of importance enough to consult the King; who,
unwilling to yield to the humors of a discontented populace, and foreseeing
the pernicious consequences of such a precedent, renewed his orders for a
strict levy of the imposition. Northumberland summoned together the justices
and chief freeholders, and delivered the King's commands in the most imperious
terms, which, he thought, would enforce obedience, but which tended only to
provoke the people, and make them believe him the adviser of those orders which
he delivered to them Bacon, p. 595.
. They flew to arms, and attacked Northumberland's house, whom they put to
death. Having incurred such deep guilt, their mutinous humor prompted them to
declare against the King himself; and being instigated by one John Achamber, a
seditious fellow of mean birth, they chose Sir John Egremond their leader, and
prepared themselves for a vigorous resistance. Henry was not dismayed with an
insurrection so precipitant and ill supported. He immediately levied a force
which he put under the command of the earl of Surrey, whom he had delivered
from confinement, and restored to his favor. His intention was to send down
these troops, in order to check the progress of the rebels; while he himself
should follow with a greater body, which would absolutely insure success. But
Surrey thought himself strong enough to encounter a raw and unarmed multitude;
and he succeeded in the attempt. Suppressed.
The rebels were dissipated; John Achamber taken prisoner, and afterward
executed with some of his accomplices; Sir John Egremond fled to the duchess
of Burgundy, who gave him protection; the greater number of the rebels received
their pardon.

HENRY had probably expected, when he obtained this grant from the Parliament,
that he would be able to terminate the affair of Britanny by negotiation, and
that he might thereby fill his coffers with the money levied by the imposition.
But as the distresses of the Bretons still multiplied, and became every day
more urgent; he found himself under the necessity of taking some measures, in
order to support them. On the death of the duke, the French had revived some
antiquated claims to the dominion of the duchy; and as the duke of Orleans was
now captive in France, their former pretext for hostilities could no longer
serve as a cover to their ambition. The King resolved therefore to engage as
auxiliary to Britanny; and to consult the interest, as well as desires of his
people, by opposing himself to the progress of the French power. Besides
entering into a league with Maximilian, and another with Ferdinand, which were
distant resources, he levied a body of troops, to the number of 6000 men, with
an intention of transporting them into Britanny. Du Tillet, Recueil des Traitez.
. Though he engaged for the service of these troops during the space of eight
months only, yet was the dutches^ obliged, by the necessity of her affairs, to
submit to such rigid conditions, imposed by an ally, s^ much concerned in
interest to protect her. King send^ forces into Britanny.
The forces arrived under the command of lord Willoughby of Broke; and made the
Bretons, during some time, masters of the field. The French retired into their
garrisons; and proposed by dilatory measures to waste the fire of the English,
and disgust them with their enterprise. The scheme was well laid, and met with
success. Lord Broke found such discord and confusion in the councils of
Britanny, that no measures could be concerted for any undertaking; no supply
obtained; no provisions, carriages, ar^illery, or military stores procured. The
whole court was rent into factions: No one minister had acquired the ascendant:
And whatever project was formed by one, was sure to be traversed by another.
The English, disconcerted in every enterprise, by these animosities and
uncertain councils, returned home as soon as the time of their service was
elapsed; leaving only a small garrison in those towns which had been put into
their hands. During their stay in Britanny, they had done nothing but
contributed still farther to waste the country; and by their departure, they
left it entirely at the mercy of the enemy. So feeble was the succor, which
Henry in this important conjuncture afforded his ally, whom the invasion of a
foreign enemy, concurring with domestic dissensions, had reduced to the utmost
distress.

THE great object of dissension among the Bretons was the disposal of the young
duchess in marriage. The marshall Rieux seconded the suit of the lord Albert,
who led some forces to her assistance. The chancellor Montauban, observing the
aversion of the duchess to this suitor, insisted, that a petty prince, such as
Albert, was unable to support Anne in her present extremities; and he
recommended some more powerful alliance, particularly that of Maximilian, King
of the Romans.

THE French court began now to change their scheme with regard to the subject
on of Britanny. Charles had formerly been assianced to Margaret daughter of
Maximilian; who, though too young to consummate her marriage, had been sent to
Paris to be educated, and bore at this time the title of queen of France.
Besides the rich dowry, which she brought the King, she was, after her brother,
Philip, then in early youth, heiress to the whole dominions of the house of
Burgundy; and seemed in many respects the most proper match, which could be
chosen for the young monarch. These circumstances had so blinded the councils
both of Maximilian and Henry, that they never suspected any other intentions in
the French court; nor were able to discover, that engagements, so advantageous
and so solemnly entered into, could be infringed and set aside. But Charles
began to perceive, that the conquest of Britanny, in opposition to the natives,
and to all the great powers in Christendom, would prove a very difficult
enterprise; and that even, if he should overrun the country and make himself
master of the fortresses, it would be impossible for him long to retain
possession of them. The marriage alone of the duchess could fully re-annex
that fief to the crown; and the present and certain enjoyment of so
considerable a territory seemed preferable to the prospect of inheriting the
dominions of the house of Burgundy; a prospect which became every day more
distant and precarious. Above all, the marriage of Maximilian and Anne appeared
destructive to the grandeur and even security of the French monarchy; while
that prince should possess Flanders on the one hand, and Britanny on the other,
and might thus from both quarters make inroads into the heart of the country.
The only remedy for these evils was therefore concluded to be the dissolution
of the two marriages, which had been celebrated, but not consummated; and the
espousals of the duchess of Britanny, and the King of France.

THIS expedient, which had not been foreseen by any court of Europe, and which
they were, all of them, so much engaged in point of interest to oppose, it was
requisite to keep a profound secret, and only to discover to the world by the
full execution of it. The measures of the French ministry were in the conduct
of this delicate enterprise very wise and political. While they pressed
Britanny with all the rigours of war, they secretly gained the count of Dunois,
who possessed great authority with the Bretons; and having also engaged in
their interests the prince of Orange, cousin-german to the duchess, they gave
him his liberty, and sent him into Britanny. These persons, supported by other
emissaries of France, prepared the minds of men for the great revolution
projected, and displayed, though still with many precautions, all the advantages
of an union with the French monarchy. They represented to the British barons,
that their country, harrassed during so many years with perpetual war, had need
of some repose, and of a solid and lasting peace with the only power that was
formidable to them: That their alliance with Maximilian was not able to afford
them even present protection; and by uniting them closely with a power, which
was rival to the greatness of France, fixed them in perpetual enmity with that
powerful monarchy: That their near neighborhood exposed them first to the
inroads of the enemy; and the happiest event, which in such a situation could
befall them, would be to attain peace, though by a final subjection to France, and
by the loss of that liberty, transmitted them from their ancestors: And that
any other expedient, compatible with the honor of the state, and their duty to
their sovereign, was preferable to a scene of such disorder and devastation.

THESE suggestions had influence on the Bretons: But the chief difficulty lay
in surmounting the prejudices of the young duchess herself. That princess had
imbibed in her education a strong prejudice against the French nation, and
particularly against Charles, who had been the author of all the calamities,
which, from her earliest infancy, had befallen her family. She had also fixed
her affections on Maximilian; and as she now deemed him her husband, she could
not, she thought, without incurring the greatest guilt, and violating the most
solemn engagements, contract a marriage with another person. Annexation of
Britanny to France.
She was married at Langey in Touraine; conducted to St. Denis, where she was
crowned; and thence made her entry into Paris, amidst the joyful acclamations
of the people, who regarded this marriage as the most prosperous event that
could have befallen their monarchy.

THE triumph and success of Charles was the most sensible mortification to the
King of the Romans. He had lost a considerable territory, which he thought he
had acquired, and an accomplished princess whom he had espoused; he was
affronted in the person of his daughter Margaret, who was sent back to him,
after being treated during some years as queen of France; he had reason to
reproach himself with his own supine security, in neglecting the consummation
of his marriage, which was easily practicable for him, and which would have
rendered the tie indissoluble: These considerations threw him into the most
violent rage, which he vented in very indecent expressions; and he threatened
France with an invasion from the united arms of Austria, Spain, and England.

THE King of England had also just reason to reproach himself with misconduct
in this important transaction; and though the affair had terminated in a manner
which he could not precisely foresee, his negligence, in leaving so long his
most useful* ally exposed to the invasion of superior power, could not but
appear on reflection the result of timid caution and narrow politics. As he
valued himself very much on his extensive foresight and profound judgment, the
ascendant acquired over him, by a raw youth, such as Charles, could not but
give him the highest displeasure, and prompt him to seek vengeance, after all
remedy for his miscarriage was become absolutely impracticable. But he was
farther actuated by avarice, a motive still more predominant with him than
either pride or revenge; and he sought even from his present disappointments,
the gratification of this ruling passion. 7th July.
Under pretext of a French war, he issued a commission for levying a
Benevolence on his people Rymer, Vol. XII. p. 446. Bacon says that the
benevolence was levied with consent of Parliament, which is a mistake.
; an arbitrary taxation, which had been abolished by a recent law of Richard
the third, and which was the more provoking, that, though really raised by
menaces and extortion, it was nevertheless pretended to be given by the
voluntary consent of the people. This violence fell chiefly on the commercial
part of the nation, who were possessed of the ready money. London alone
contributed to the amount of near 10,000 pounds. Archbishop Morton, the
chancellor, instructed the commissioners to employ a dilemma, in which every
one might be comprehended: If the persons applied to lived frugally, they were
told, that their parsimony must necessarily have enriched them: If their method
of living was splendid and hospitable, they were concluded opulent on account
of their expenses. This device was by some called chancellor Morton's fork, and
by others his crutch.

27th October.
A Parliament.
SO little apprehensive was the King of a Parliament, on account of his levying
this arbitrary imposition, that he soon after summoned that assembly to meet at
Westminster; and he even expected to enrich himself farther by working on their
passions and prejudices. He knew the resentment, which the English had
conceived against France, by reason of the conquest of Britanny; and he took
care to insist on that topic, in the speech, which he himself pronounced to the
Parliament. He told them, that France, elevated with her late successes, had
even proceeded to a cont mpt of England, and had refused to pay that tribute,
which Lewis the eleventh had stipulated to Edward the fourth: That it became so
warlike a nation as the English to be rouzed with this indignity, and not to
limit their pretensions merely to repressing the present injury: That for his
part, he was determined to lay claim to the crown of France itself, and to
maintain by force of arms so just a title transmitted to him by his gallant
ancestors: That Cressy, Poictiers, and Agincourt were sufficient to instruct
them in their superiority over the enemy; nor did he despair of adding new
names to the glorious catalogue: That a King of France had been prisoner at
London, and a King of England had been crowned at Paris; events which should
animate them to an emulation of like glory with that enjoyed by their
forefathers: That the domestic dissensions of England had been the ^^le cause
of her losing these foreign dominions; and her present union and harmony would
be the effectual means of recovering them: That where such lasting honor was
in view, and such an important acquisition, it became not brave men to repine
at the advance of a little treasure: And that for his part, he was determined
to make the war maintain itself, and hoped, by the invasion of so opulent a
kingdom as France, to increase, rather than diminish, the riches of the nation
Bacon, p. 601.


kingdom, they gave into the snare prepared for them, and voted the supply
which the King demanded. Two fifteenths were granted him; and the better to
enable his vassals and nobility to attend him, an act was passed, empowering
them to sell their estates, without paying any fines for alienation.

THE nobility were universally seized with a desire of military glory; and
having credulously swallowed all the boasts of the King, they dreamed of no
less than carrying their triumphant arms to the gates of Paris, and putting the
crown of France on Henry's head. Many of them borrowed large sums or sold off
manors, that they might appear in the field with greater splendor, and lead
out their followers in more complete order. War with France.
The king crossed the seas, and arrived at Calais on the sixth of October, with
an army of twenty-five thousand foot and sixteen hundred horse, which he put
under the command of the duke of Bedford and the earl of Oxford: But as some
inferred, from his opening the campaign in so late a season, that peace would
soon be concluded between the crowns, he was desirous of suggesting a contrary
inference. "He had come over," he said, "to make an entire conquest of France,
which was not the work of one summer. It was therefore of no consequence at
what season he began the invasion; especially as he had Calais ready for winter
quarters." As if he had seriously intended this enterprise, he instantly
marched with his army into the enemy's country, and laid siege to Bulloigne:
Invasion of France.
But notwithstanding this appearance of a hostile disposition, there had been
secret advances made toward a peace above three months before; and
commissioners had been appointed to treat of the terms. The better to reconcile
the minds of men to this unexpected measure, the king's ambassadors arrived in
the camp from the Low Countries, and informed him, that Maximilian was in no
readiness to join him; nor was any assistance to be hoped for from that
quarter. Soon after, messengers came from Spain, and brought news of a peace
concluded between that kingdom and France, in which Charles had made a cession
of the counties of Roussillon and Cerdagne to Ferdinand. Though these articles of
intelligence were carefully dispersed through the army, the King was still
apprehensive, lest a sudden peace, after such magnificent promises and high
expectations, would expose him to great reproach. That he might more
effectually cover the intended measures, he secretly engaged the marquess of
Dorset, together with twenty three persons of condition, to present him a
petition for his agreeing to a treaty with France. The pretense was founded on
the late season of the year, the difficulty of supplying the army at Calais
during winter, the obstacles which arose in the siege of Bulloigne, the
desertion of those allies whose assistance had been most relied on: Events
which might, all of them, have been foreseen before the embarkation of the
forces.

IN consequence of these preparatory steps, the bishop of Exeter and the lord
Daubeney were sent to confer at Estaples with the marshall of Cords, and to
put the last hand to the treaty. A few days sufficed for this purpose: The
demands of Henry were wholly pecuniary; and the King of France, who esteemed
the peaceable possession of Britanny an equivalent for any money, and who was
all on fire for his projected expedition into Italy, readily agreed to the
proposals made him. 3d of November.
Peace with France.
He engaged to pay Henry seven hundred and forty-five thousand crowns, about
one hundred and eighty-six thousand two hundred and fifty pounds sterling;
partly as a reimbursement of the sums advanced for Britanny, partly as arrears
of the pension due to Edward the fourth. And he stipulated a yearly pension to
Henry and his heirs of twenty-five thousand crowns. Thus the King, as remarked
by his historian, made profit upon his subjects for the war; and upon his
enemies for the peace Bacon, p. 605. Pol. Virg. p. 586.
. And the people agreed, that he had fulfilled his promise, when he said to the
parliament, that he would make the war maintain itself. Maximilian was
comprehended in Henry's treaty, if he pleased to accept of it; but he disdained
to be in any respect beholden to an ally, of whom, he thought, he had reason to
complain: He made a separate peace with France, and obtained restitution of
Artois, Franchecomte and Charolois, which had been given as the dowry of his
daughter, when she was affianced to the King of France.

THE peace, concluded between England and France, was the more likely to
continue, that Charles, full of ambition and youthful hopes, bent all his
attention to the side of Italy, and soon after undertook the conquest of
Naples; an enterprise, which Henry regarded with the greater indifference, that
Naples lay remote from him, and France had never, in any age, been successful
on that quarter. The King's authority was fully established at home; and every
rebellion, which had been attempted against him, had hitherto tended only to
confound his enemies, and consolidate his power and influence. His reputation
for policy and conduct was every day augmenting; his treasures had increased
even from the most unprosperous events; the hopes of all pretenders to his
throne were cut off, as well by his marriage, as by the issue which it had
brought him. In this promising situation, the King had reason to flatter
himself with the prospect of a durable peace and tranquillity: But his
inveterate and indefatigable enemies, whom he had wantonly provoked, raised up
to him an adversary, who kept him long in inquietude, and sometimes even
brought him into danger.

THE duchess of Burgundy, full of resentment for the depression of her family
and its partisans, rather irritated than discouraged with the bad success of
her past enterprises, was determined at least to disturb that government, which
she found it so difficult to subvert. By means of her emissaries, she
propagated the report, that her nephew, Richard Plantagenet, duke of York, had
escaped* from the Tower when his elder brother was murdered, and that he lay
still somewhere concealed: And finding this rumor, however improbable, to be
greedily received by the people, she had been looking out for some young man,
proper to personate that unfortunate prince.

Perkin Warbec.
THERE was one Osbec or Warbec, a renegado Jew of Tournay, who had been carried
by some business to London in the reign of Edward the fourth, and had there a
son born to him. Having had opportunities of being known to the King, and
obtaining his favor, he prevailed with that prince, whose manners were very
affable, to stand godfather to his son, to whom he gave the name of Peter,
corrupted after the Flemish manner into Peter-kin, or Perkin. It was by some
believed, that Edward, among his other amorous adventures, had had a secret
correspondence with Warbec's wife; and from this incident people accounted for
that resemblance, which was afterward remarked between young Perkin and that
monarch Bacon, p. 606.
. Some years after the birth of this child, Warbec returned to Tournay; where
Perkin his son remained not long, but by different accidents was carried from
place to place, and his birth and fortunes became thereby unknown, and
difficult to be traced by the most careful enquiry. The variety of his
adventures had happily favored the natural versatility and sagacity of his
genius; and he seemed to be a youth perfectly fitted to act any part, or assume
any character. In this light he had been represented to the duchess of
Burgundy, who, struck with the concurrence of so many circumstances suited to
her purpose, desired to be made acquainted with the person, on whom she began
already to ground her hopes of success. His imposture.
She found him to exceed her most sanguine expectations; so beautiful did he
appear in his person, so graceful in his air, so courtly in his address, so
full of docility and good sense in his behavior and conversation. The lessons,
which were necessary to be taught him, in order to his personating the duke of
York, were soon learned by a youth of such quick comprehension; but as the
season seemed not then favorable for his enterprise, Margaret, in order the
better to conceal him, sent him, under the care of Lady Brampton, into
Portugal, where he remained a year, unknown to all the world.

THE war, which was then ready to break out between France and England, seemed
to afford a proper opportunity for the discovery of this new phenomenon; and
Ireland, which still retained its attachments to the house of York, was pitched
on as the proper place for his first appearance Polyd. Virg. p. 589.
. He landed at Cork; and immediately assuming the name of Richard Plantagenet,
drew to him partisans among that ignorant and credulous people. He wrote
letters to the earls of Desmond and Kildare, inviting them to join his party:
He dispersed every where the strange intelligence of his escape from his uncle
Richard's cruelty; and men, fond of every thing new and wonderful, began to
make him the general subject of their discourse, and even the object of their
favor.

THE news soon reached France; and Charles, prompted by the private
solicitations of the duchess of Burgundy, and the intrigues of one Frion, a
secretary of Henry, who had deserted his service, sent Perkin an invitation to
repair to him at Paris. He received him with all the marks of regard due to the
duke of York; settled on him a handsome pension, assigned him magnificent
lodgings, and in order to provide at once for his dignity and security, gave
him a guard for his person, of which lord Congresall accepted the office of
captain. The French courtiers readily embraced a fiction, which their sovereign
thought it his interest to adopt: Perkin, both by his deportment and person,
supported the prepossession, which was spread abroad of his royal pedigree: And
the whole kingdom was full of the accomplishments, as well as singular
adventures and misfortunes, of the young Plantagenet. Wonders of this nature
are commonly augmented at a distance. From France, the admiration and credulity
diffused themselves into England: Sir George Neville, Sir John Tailor, and a
hundred gentlemen more came to Paris, in order to offer their service to the
supposed duke of York, and to share his fortunes: And the impostor had now the
appearance of a court attending him, and began to entertain hopes of final
success in his undertakings.

WHEN peace was concluded between France and England at Estaples, Henry applied
to have Perkin put into his hands; but Charles, resolute not to betray a young
man, of whatever birth, whom he had invited into his kingdom, would agree only
to dismiss him. The pretended Plantagenet retired to the duchess of Burgundy
in Flanders, and craving her protection and assistance, offered to lay before
her all the proofs of that birth, to which he laid claim. He is ^^^wed by the
duchess of B^rgundy,
The princess affected ignorance of his pretensions; even put on the appearance
of distrust; and having, as she said, been already deceived by Simnel's claim,
she was determined never again to be seduced by any impostor. She desired
before all the world to be instructed in his reasons for assuming the name
which he bore; seemed to examine every circumstance with the most scrupulous
nicety; put many particular questions to him; affected astonishment at his
answers; and at last, after long and severe scrutiny, burst out into joy and
admiration at his wonderful delivery, embraced him as her nephew, the true
image of Edward, the sole heir of the Plantagenets, and the legitimate
successor of the English throne. She immediately White Rose of England. The
Flemings, moved by the authority, which Margaret, both from her rank and
personal character, enjoyed among them, readily adopted the fiction of Perkin's
royal descent: No surmize of his true birth was as yet heard of: Little
contradiction was made to the prevailing opinion: And the English, from their
great communication with the natives of the Low Countries, were every day more
and more prepossessed in favor of the impostor.

IT was not the populace alone of England, that gave credit to Perkin's
pretensions. Men of the highest birth and quality, disgusted with Henry's
government, by which they found the nobility depressed, began to turn their
eyes toward this new claimant, and some of them even entered into a
correspondence with him. and by many of the English nobility.
Lord Fitzwater, Sir Simon Mountfort, Sir Thomas Thwaites betrayed their
inclination toward him: Sir William Stanley himself, lord chamberlain, who had
been so active in raising Henry to the throne, moved either by blind credulity
or a restless ambition, entertained the project of a revolt in favor of his
enemy Bacon, p. 608.
. Sir Robert Clifford and William Barley were still more open in their
measures: They went over to Flanders, offered their service to Perkin, and were
introduced by the duchess of Burgundy to his acquaintance. Clifford wrote back
to England, that he knew perfectly the person of Richard duke of York, that
this young man was undoubtedly that prince himself, and that no circumstance of
his story was exposed to the least difficulty. Such positive intelligence,
conveyed by a person of such high rank and character, was sufficient with many
to put the matter beyond all question, and excited the wonder and attention
even of the most indifferent. The whole nation were held in suspense; a regular
conspiracy was formed against the King's authority; and a correspondence
settled between the malcontents in Flanders and those in England.

THE King was well informed of all these particulars; but agreeable to his
character, which was both cautious and resolute, he proceeded very
deliberately, but steadily, in counter-working the projects of his enemies. His
first object was to ascertain the death of the real duke of York, and to
confirm the opinion, which had always prevailed with regard to that event. Four
persons had been employed by Richard in the murder of his nephews; Sir James
Tirrel, to whom he had committed the government of the Tower for that purpose,
and who had seen the dead princes; Miles Forest and John Dighton, who
perpetrated the action; and the priest who buried the bodies. Tirrel and
Dighton alone were alive, and they agreed in the same story; but as the priest
was dead, and as the bodies had been removed by Richard's orders from the place
where they were first interred, and could not now be found, it was not in
Henry's power to put the fact, so much as he wished, beyond all doubt and
controversy.

HE met at first with more difficulty, but was in the end more successful, in
detecting who this wonderful person was that thus boldly advanced pretensions
to his crown. He dispersed his spies all over Flanders and England; he engaged
many to pretend that they had embraced Perkin's party; he directed them to
insinuate themselves into the considence of his friends; in proportion as they
conveyed intelligence of any conspirator, he bribed his retainers, his domestic
servants, nay sometimes his confessor, and by these means traced up some other
confederate; Clifford himself he engaged by hopes of reward and pardon, to
betray the secrets committed to him; the more trust he gave any of his spies,
the higher resentment did he feign against them; some of them he even caused to
be excommunicated and publicly anathematized, in order the better to procure
them the confidence of his enemies: And in the issue, the whole plan of the
conspiracy was laid clearly before him; and the whole pedigree, adventures,
life and conversation of the pretended duke of York. This latter story was
immediately published for the satisfaction of the nation: The conspirators he
reserved for a flower and more secure vengeance.



HE had it in his power to inflict more effectual punishment on his domestic
enemies; and when his projects were sufficiently matured, he failed not to make
them feel the effects of his resentment. Almost in the same instant, he
arrested Fitzwater, Mountfort, and Thwaites, together with William Daubeney,
Robert Ratcliff, Thomas Cressenor, and Thomas Astwood. All these were
arraigned, convicted, and condemned for high treason, in adhering and promising
aid to Perkin. Mountfort, Ratcliff, and Daubeney were immediately executed:
Fitzwater was sent over to Calais, and retained in custody; but having
practiced on his keeper for an escape, he soon after underwent the same fate.
The rest were pardoned, together with William Worseley, dean of St. Paul's, and
some others, who had been accused and examined, but not brought to public trial
Polydore Virgil, p. 592.
.

GREATER and more solemn preparations were esteemed requisite for the trial of
Stanley, lord chamberlain, whose authority in the nation, whose domestic
connexions with the King, as well as his former great services, seemed to
secure him against any accusation or punishment. Clifford was directed to come
over privately to England, and to throw himself at the King's feet, while
placed at the council table; craving pardon for his past offenses, and offering
to atone for them by any services, which should be required of him. Henry told
him, that the best proof he could give of penitence, and the only service he
could now render him, was the full confession of his guilt, and the discovery
of all his accomplices, however distinguished by rank or character. Encouraged
by this exhortation, Clifford accused Stanley then present, as his chief
abettor; and offered to lay before the council the whole proofs of his guilt.
Stanley himself could not discover more surprise than was affected by Henry on
this occasion. He received the intelligence as absolutely false and incredible;
that a man, to whom he was, in a great measure, beholden for his crown, and
even for his life; a man, to whom, by every honor and favor, he had
endeavored to express his gratitude; whose brother, the earl of Derby, was the
King's father-in-law; to whom he had even committed the trust of his person, by
creating him lord chamberlain: That this man, enjoying his full confidence and
affection, not actuated by any motive of discontent or apprehension, should
engage in a conspiracy against him. Clifford was therefore exhorted to weigh
well the consequences of this accusation; but as he persisted in the same
positive asseverations, Stanley was committed to custody, and soon after
examined before the council Bacon, p. 611. Polyd. Virg. p. 593.
. He denied not the guilt imputed to him by Clifford; he did not even endeavor
much to extenuate it; whether he thought that a frank and open confession would
serve for an atonement, or trusted to his present connexions, and his former
services, for pardon and security. Trial and execution of Stanley.
But princes are often apt to regard great services as a ground of jealousy,
especially if accompanied with a craving and restless disposition, in the
person who has performed them. The general discontent also, and mutinous humor
of the people, seemed to require some great example of severity. And as Stanley
was one of the most opulent subjects in the kingdom, being possessed 15th of
February.
After six weeks delay, which was interposed in order to show that the King was
restrained by doubts and scruples; he was brought to his trial, condemned, and
presently after beheaded. Historians are not well agreed with regard to the
crime which was proved against him. The general report is, that he should have
said in confidence to Clifford, that, if he was sure the young man, who
appeared in Flanders, was really son to King Edward, he never would bear arms
against him. This sentiment might disgust Henry as implying a preference of the
house of York to that of Lancaster, but could scarcely be the ground, even in
those arbitrary times, of a sentence of high treason against Stanley. It is
more probable, therefore, what is asserted by some historians, that he had
expressly engaged to assist Perkin, and had actually sent him some supply of
money.

THE fate of Stanley made great impression on the whole kingdom, and struck all
Perkin's retainers with the deepest dismay. From Clifford's desertion, they
found that all their secrets were discovered; and as it appeared, that Stanley,
even while he seemed to live in the greatest confidence with the King, had been
continually surrounded by spies, who reported and registered every action which
he committed, nay, every word which fell from him, a general distrust took
place, and all mutual confidence was destroyed, even among the most intimate
friends and acquaintance. The jealous and severe temper of the King, together
with his great reputation for sagacity and penetration, kept men in awe, and
quelled not only the movements of sedition, but the very murmurs of faction.
Libels, however, crept out against Henry's person and administration; and being
greedily propagated, by every secret art, showed that there still remained
among the people a considerable root of discontent, which wanted only a proper
opportunity to discover itself.

BUT Henry continued more intent on increasing the terrors of his people, than
on gaining their affections. Trusting to the great success which attended him
in all his enterprises, he gave every day, more and more, a loose to his
rapacious temper, and employed the arts of perverted law and justice, in order
to exact fines and compositions from his people. Sir William Capel, alderman of
London, was condemned on some penal statutes to pay the sum of 2743 pounds, and
was obliged to compound for sixteen hundred and fifteen. This was the first
noted case of that nature; but it became a precedent, which prepared the way
for many others. The management, indeed, of these oppressive arts was the great
secret of the King's administration. While he depressed the nobility, he
exalted, and honored and caressed the lawyers; and by that means both bestowed
authority on the laws, and was enabled, whenever he pleased, to pervert them to
his own advantage. His government was oppressive; but it was so much the less
burdensome, that, by extending his own authority, and curbing the nobles, he
became in reality the sole oppressor in his kingdom.

AS Perkin found, that the King's authority gained ground daily among the
people, and that his own pretensions were becoming obsolete, he resolved to
attempt something, which might revive the hopes and expectations of his
partisans. Having gathered together a band of outlaws, pirates, robbers, and
necessitous persons of all nations, to the number of 600 men, he put to sea
with a resolution of making a descent in England; and of exciting the common
people to arms, since all his correspondence with the nobility was cut off by
Henry's vigilance and severity. Information being brought him, that the King
had made a progress to the north, he cast anchor on the coast of Kent, and sent
some of his retainers ashore, who invited the country to join him. The
gentlemen of Kent gathered together some troops to oppose him; but they
proposed to do more essential service than by repelling the invasion: They
carried the semblance of friendship to Perkin, and invited him to come himself
ashore, in order to take the command over them. But the wary youth, observing
that they had more order and regularity in their movements than could be
supposed in new levied forces, who had taken arms against established
authority, refused to commit himself into their hands; and the Kentish troops
despairing of success in their stratagem, set upon such of his retainers, as
were already landed; and besides some who were slain and some who escaped, they
took an hundred and fifty prisoners. These were tried and condemned; and all of
them executed, by order from the King, who was resolved to use no mixture of
lenity toward men of such desperate fortunes Polydore Virgil, p. 595.
.

A Parliament.
THIS year a Parliament was summoned in England, and another in Ireland; and
some remarkable laws were passed in both countries. The English Parliament
enacted, that no person who should assist in arms or otherwise the King for the
time being should ever afterward, either by course of law or act of
Parliament, be attainted for such an instance of obedience. This statute might
be exposed to some blame, as favorable to usurpers; were there any precise
rules, which always, even during the most factious times, could determine the
true successor, and render every one inexcusable, who did not submit to him.
But as the titles of princes are then the great subject of dispute, and each
party pleads topics in their own favor, it seems but equitable to secure those
who act in support of established tranquillity, an object at all times of
undoubted benefit and importance. Henry, conscious of his disputed title,
promoted this law in order to secure his partisans against all events; but as
he had himself observed a different practice with regard to Richard's
adherents, he had reason to apprehend, that, during the violence which usually
ensues on public convulsions, his example, rather than his law, would, in case
of a new revolution, be followed by his enemies. And the attempt to bind the
legislature itself, by prescribing rules to future Parliaments, was plainly
contradictory to the fundamental principles of political government.

THIS Parliament also passed an act, impowering the King to levy by course of
law, all the sums which any person had agreed to pay by way of benevolence: A
statute, by which that arbitrary method of taxation was directly authorized and
justified.

THE King's authority appeared equally prevalent and uncontrolable in Ireland.
Sir Edward Poynings had been sent over with some troops into that country, with
an intention of quelling the partisans of the house of York, and of reducing
the natives to subjection. He was not supported with forces sufficient for that
important enterprise: The Irish, by flying into their woods, and morasses, and
mountains, in some measure, eluded his efforts: But Poynings summoned a
parliament at Dublin, where he was more successful. He passed that memorable
statute, which still bears his name, and which establishes the authority of the
English government in Ireland. By this statute, the Parliament of England were
empowered to make laws for Ireland; and no bill can be introduced into the
Irish parliament, unless it previously receive the sanction of the council of
England.

WHILE Henry's authority was thus established throughout his dominions, and
general tranquillity prevailed, the whole continent was thrown into combustion
by the French invasion of Italy, and by the rapid success which attended
Charles in that rash and ill-concerted enterprise. The Italians, who had
entirely lost the use of arms, and who, in the midst of continual wars, had
become every day more unwarlike, were astonished to meet with an enemy, that
made the field of battle, not a pompous tournament, but a scene of blood, and
sought at the hazard of their own lives the death of their enemy. Their
e^^eminate troops were dissipated every where on the approach of the French
army: Their best fortified cities opened their gates: Kingdoms and states were
in an instant overturned: And through the whole length of Italy, which the French
penetrated without resistance, they seemed rather to be taking quarters in
their own country, than making conquests over an enemy. The maxims, which the
Italians, during that age, followed in negotiations, were as ill calculated to
support their states, as the habits to which they were addicted in war. A
treacherous, deceitful, and inconstant system of politics prevailed; and even
those small remains of fidelity and honor, which were preserved in the
councils of the other European princes, were ridiculed in Italy, as proofs of
ignorance and rusticity. Ludovico, duke of Milan, who invited the French to
invade Naples, had never desired nor expected their success; and was the first
alarmed at the prosperous issue of those projects, which he himself had
concerted. By his intrigues a league was formed among several potentates to
oppose the progress of Charles's conquests and secure their own independency.
This league was composed of Ludovico himself, the pope, Maximilian King of the
Romans, Ferdinand of Spain, and the republic of Venice. Henry too entered into
the confederacy; but was not put to any expense or trouble in consequence of
his engagements. The King of France, terrified by so powerful a combination,
retired from Naples with the greatest part of his army, and returned to France.
The forces, which he left in his new conquests, partly by the revolt of the
inhabitants, partly by the invasion of the Spaniards, were soon after subdued;
and the whole kingdom of Naples suddenly returned to its allegiance under
Ferdinand, son to Alphonso, who had been suddenly expelled by the irruption of
the French. Ferdinand died soon after; and left his uncle, Frederic, in
peaceable possession of the throne.

CHAP. III.
Perkin returns to Scotland. -- Insurrection in the West. -- Battle of
Blackheath. -- Truce with Scotland. -- Perkin taken prisoner. -- Perkin
executed. -- The earl of Warwic executed -- Marriage of prince Arthur with
Catherine of Arragon. -- His death. -- Marriage of the princess Margaret with
the King of Scotland. -- Oppressions of the People. -- A Parliament. -- Arrival
of the King of Castile. -- Intrigues of the Earl of Suffolk. -- Sickness of the
King -- his death -- and character. -- His laws.

AFTER Perkin was repulsed from the coast of Kent, he retired into Flanders;
but as he found it impossible to subsist himself and his followers, while he
remained in tranquillity, he soon after made an attempt upon Ireland, which had
always appeared forward to join every invader of Henry's authority. But
Poinings had now put the affairs of that island in so good a posture, that
Perkin met with little success; and being tired of the savage life, which he
was obliged to lead, while skulking among the wild Irish, he bent his course
toward Scotland, and presented himself to James the fourth, who then governed
that kingdom. He had been previously recommended to that prince by the King of
France, who was disgusted that Henry had entered into the league against him;
and this recommendation was even seconded by Maximilian, who, though one of the
confederates, stood on ill terms with the King, on account of his prohibition
of commerce with the Low Countries. Perkin (...) to Scotland.
The countenance given Perkin by these princes procured him a favorable
reception with the King of Scotland, who assured him, that, whatever he were,
he never should repent the putting himself into his hands Bacon, p. 6. 5. Pol.
Vi^g. p. 596, 5^7.
: The insinuating address and plausible behavior of the youth himself seem
even to have gained him credit and authority. James, whom years had not yet
taught distrust and caution, was seduced to believe the story of Perkin's birth
and adventures; and he carried his confidence so far as to give him in marriage
the lady Catherine Gordon, daughter of the Farl of Huntley, and a near
kinswoman of his own; a young woman too, eminent for virtue as well as beauty.

Polydore Virgil, p. 598.
: But James told him, that he doubted his concern was employed only in behalf
of his enemy, and that he was anxious to preserve what never would belong to
him. That prince now began to perceive, that his attempt would be fruitless;
and hearing of an army, which was on its march to attack him, he thought proper
to retreat into his own country.

THE King discovered little anxiety to procure either reparation or vengeance
for this insult committed on him by the Scotch nation: His chief concern was to
draw advantage from it, by the pretense which it would afford him to levy
impositions on his own subjects. He summoned a Parliament, to whom he made
bitter complaints against the irruption of the Scotch, the absurd imposture
which was countenanced by that nation, the cruel devastation which they had
spread over the northern counties, and the complicated affront which had thus
been offered both to the King and kingdom of England. The Parliament made the
expected return to this discourse of the King, by granting him a subsidy to the
amount of 120,000 pounds, together with two fifteenths. After making this
grant, they were dismissed.

Insurrection in the West.
When the subsidy began to be levied in Cornwall, the inhabitants, numerous and
poor, robust and courageous, murmured against a tax, occasioned by a sudden
inroad of the Scotch, from which they esteemed themselves entirely secure, and
which had commonly been repelled by the force of the northern counties. Their
ill humor was farther incited by one Michael Joseph, a farrier of Bodmin, a
notable, talking fellow, who, by thrusting himself forward on every occasion,
and being loudest in every complaint against the government, had acquired an
authority among these rude people. Thomas Flammoc too, a lawyer, who had become
the oracle of the neighborhood, encouraged the sedition, by informing them,
that the tax, though imposed by Parliament, was entirely illegal; that the
northern nobility, by their tenures, were obliged to defend the nation against
the Scotch; and that if these new impositions were tamely submitted to, the
avarice of Henry and of his courtiers would soon render the burden intolerable
upon the nation. A petition, he said, must be delivered to the King, seconded
by such force as would give it authority; and in order to procure the
concurrence of the rest of the kingdom, care must be taken, by their orderly
deportment, to show that they had nothing in view but the public good, and the
redress of all those grievances, under which the people had so long labored.

ENCOURAGED by these speeches, the multitude flocked together, and armed
themselves with axes, bills, bows, and such weapons as country people are
usually possessed of. Flammoc and Joseph were chosen their leaders. They soon
conducted the Cornish through the county of Devon, and reached that of
Somerset. At Taunton the insurgents killed in their fury an officious and eager
commissioner for the subsidy, whom they called the provost of Perin. When they
reached Wells, they were joined by lord Audley, a nobleman of an ancient
family, popular in his deportment, but vain, ambitious, and restless in his
temper. He had from the beginning entertained a secret correspondence with the
first movers of the insurrection; and was now joyfully received by them as
their leader. Proud of the countenance given them by so considerable a
nobleman, they pushed on their march; breathing destruction to the King's
ministers and favorites, particularly Morton, now a cardinal, and Sir Reginald
Bray, who were deemed his most active instruments in all his oppressions.
Amidst their rage against the administration, they carefully followed the
directions given them by their leaders; and as they met with no resistance,
they committed, during their march, no violence or disorder.

THE insurgents had been told by Flammoc, that the inhabitants of Kent, as they
had ever, during all ages, remained unsubdued, and had even maintained their
independancy during the Norman conquest, would surely embrace their party, and
declare themselves for a cause, which was no other than that of public good and
general liberty. But the Kentish people had very lately distinguished
themselves by repelling Perkin's invasion; and having received from the King
many gracious acknowledgments for this service, their affections were, by that
means, much conciliated to his government. It was easy therefore, for the earl
of Kent, lord Abergavenny, and lord Cobham, who possessed great authority in
those parts, to retain the people in obedience; and the Cornish rebels, though
they pitched their camp near Eltham, at the very gates of London, and invited
all the people to join them, got reinforcement from no quarter. There wanted
not discontent every where, but no one would take part in so rash and
ill-concerted an enterprise; and the situation in which the King's affairs then
stood, discouraged even the boldest and most daring.

HENRY, in order to oppose the Scotch, had already levied an army, which he put
under the command of lord Daubeney, the chamberlain; and so soon as he heard of
the Cornish insurrection, he ordered it to march southwards, and suppress the
rebels. Not to leave the northern frontier defenseless, he dispatched thither
the earl of Surry, who summoned out the forces on the borders, and made head
against the enemy. Henry found here the concurrence of the three most fatal
incidents, which can befall a monarchy; a foreign enemy, a domestic rebellion,
and a pretender to his throne; but he enjoyed great resources in his army and
treasure, and still more, in the intrepidity and courage of his own temper. He
gave not, however, immediately full scope to his military spirit. On other
occasions, he had always hastened to a decision, and it was an usual saying
with him, that he desired but to see his rebels: But as the Cornish insurgents
behaved in an inoffensive manner, and committed no spoil on the country, as
they received no accession of force on their march or in their encampment, and
as such hasty and popular tumults might be expected to diminish every moment by
delay, he took post in London, and carefully prepared the means of ensuring the
victory.

Battle of Blackheath.
AFTER all his forces were collected, he divided them into three bodies, and
marched out to assail the enemy. The first body, commanded by the earl of
Oxford, and under him by the earls of Essex and Suffolk, were appointed to
place themselves behind the hill on which the rebels were encamped: The second
and most considerable Henry put under the command of lord Daubeney, and ordered
him to attack the enemy in front, and bring on the action. The third, he kept
as a body of reserve about his own person, and took post in St. George's field;
where he secured the city, and could easily, as occasion served, either restore
the fight or finish the victory. 22d of June.
To put the enemy off their guard, he had spread a report that he was not to
attack them till some days after; and the better to confirm them in this
opinion, he began not the action till near the evening. Daubeney beat a
detachment of the rebels from Deptford-bridge; and before the main body could
be in order to receive him, he had gained the ascent of the hill, and placed
himself in array before them. They were very formidable for their numbers,
being sixteen thousand strong, and were not defective in valor; but being
tumultuary troops, ill armed, and unprovided of cavalry or artillery, they were
but an unequal match for the King's forces. Daubeney began the attack with
courage, and even with a contempt of the enemy, which had almost proved fatal
to him. He rushed into the midst of them, and was taken prisoner; but soon
after was relieved by his own troops. After some resistance, the rebels were
broke, and put to flight Polydore Virgil, p. 601.
. Lord Audley, Flammoc, and Joseph, their leaders, were taken, and all three
executed. The latter seemed even to exult in his end, and boasted, with a
preposterous ambition, that he would make a figure in history. The rebels,
being surrounded on every side by the King's troops, were almost all made
prisoners; and immediately dismissed without farther punishment. Whether, that
Henry was satisfied with the victims who had fallen in the field, and who
amounted to near two thousand, or that he pitied the ignorance and simplicity
of the multitude, or favored them on account of their inoffensive behavior,
or was pleased that they had never, during their insurrection, disputed his
title, and had shown no attachment to the house of York, the most capital crime
of which in his eyes they could have been guilty.

THE Scottish King was not idle during these commotions in England. He levied a
considerable army, and sat down before the castle of Norham in Northumberland;
but found that place, by the precaution of Fox, bishop of Durham, so well
provided both in men and ammunition, that he made little or no progress in the
siege. Hearing that Surrey had collected some forces and was advancing upon
him, he retreated backwards into his own country, and left the frontiers
exposed to the inroads of the English general, who besieged and took Aiton, a
small castle that lies a few miles beyond Berwic. These unsuccessful or
frivolous attempts on both sides prognosticated a speedy end to the war; and
Henry, notwithstanding his superior force, was no less desirous than James of
terminating the differences between the nations. Not to depart, however, from
his dignity, by making the first advances toward peace, he employed in this
friendly office Peter Hialas, a man of address and learning, who had come to
him as ambassador from Ferdinand and Isabella, and who was charged with a
commission of negotiating the marriage of the infanta Catherine, their
daughter, with Arthur prince of Wales Polydore Virgil, p. 603.
.

HIALAS took a journey northwards, and offered his mediation between James and
Henry, as minister of a prince, who was in alliance with both potentates.
Commissioners were soon appointed to meet, and confer of the terms of
accommodation. The first demand of the English was, that Perkin should be put
into their hands; but James replied, that he himself was no judge of Perkin's
pretensions, but having received him as a supplicant, and promised him
protection, he was determined not to betray a man, whatever he was, who had
trusted to his good faith and his generosity. The next demand of the English
met with no better reception: They required reparation for the ravages
committed by the late inroads into England: The Scotch commissioners replied,
that the spoils were like water spilt upon the ground, which never could be
recovered, and that Henry's subjects were better able to bear the loss than
their master's to repair it. Henry's commissioners next proposed, that the two
Kings should have an interview at Newcastle, in order to adjust all
differences; but James said, that he meant to treat of a peace, not to go a
begging for it. Truce with Scotland.
Lest the conferences should break off altogether without effect, a truce was
concluded for some months; and James perceiving, that while Perkin remained in
Scotland, he never would enjoy a solid peace with Henry, privately desired him
to depart the Kingdom.

ACCESS was now barred Perkin into the low countries; his usual retreat in all
his disappointments. The Flemish merchants, who felt severely the loss
resulting from their want of commerce with England, had made such interest in
the arch-duke's council, that commissioners were sent to London, in order to
treat of an accommodation. The Flemish court agreed that all English rebels
should be excluded the low countries; and in this prohibition the demesnes of
the duchess dowager were expressly comprehended. When this principal article
was agreed to, all the other terms were easily adjusted. A treaty of commerce
was finished, which was favorable to the Flemings, and to which they gave long
the appellation of Intercursus magnus, the great treaty. And when the Engli^h
merchants returned to their usual mansion at Antwerp, they were publicly
received, as in procession, with great joy and ^estivity.

PERKIN was a Fleming by descent, though born in England; and it might therefore
be doubted, whether he was comprehended in the treaty between the two nations:
But as he must dismiss all his English retainers if he took shelter in the low
countries, and as he was sure of a cold reception, if not bad usage, among a
people who were determined to keep on terms of friendship with the court of
England; he thought fit rather to hide himself, during some time, in the wilds
and fastnesses of Ireland. Impatient however of a retreat, which was both
disagreeable and dangerous, he held consultations with his followers, Herne,
Skeleton, and Astley, three broken tradesmen; and by their advice, resolved to
try the affections of the Cornish, whose mutinous disposition, notwithstanding
the King's lenity, still subsisted, after the suppression of their rebellion.
No sooner did he appear at Bodmin in Cornwall, than the populace, to the number
of three thousand men, flocked to his standard; and Perkin, elated with this
appearance of success, took on him, for the first time, the appellation of
Richard the fourth, King of England. Not to suffer the expectations of his
followers to languish, he presented himself before Exeter; and by many fair
promises, invited that city to join his cause. Finding that the inhabitants
shut their gates against him, he laid siege to the place; but being unprovided
of artillery, ammunition, and of every thing requisite for that attempt, he
made no progress in his undertaking. Messengers were sent to the King,
informing him of this insurrection; and the citizens meanwhile were determined
to hold out to the last extremity, in expectation of receiving succor from the
known vigilance of that monarch.

WHEN Henry was informed, that Perkin was landed in England, he expressed great
joy, and prepared himself with alacrity to attack him, in hopes of being able,
at last, to put a period to a pretension, which had so long given him vexation
and inquietude. All the courtiers, sensible that their activity on this
occasion would be the most acceptable service which they could render the King,
prepared themselves for the enterprise, and forwarded his preparations. The
lords Daubeney, and Broke, with Sir Rice ap Thomas, hastened forward with a
small body of troops to the relief of Exeter. The earl of Devonshire, and the
most considerable gentlemen in the country of that name, took arms of
themselves, and marched to join the King's generals. The duke of Buckingham put
himself at the head of a troop of young nobility and gentry, who served as
volunteers, and who longed for an opportunity of displaying their courage and
their loyalty. The King himself prepared to follow with a considerable army;
and thus all England seemed united against a pretender, who had at first
engaged their attention, and divided their affections.

PERKIN, informed of these great preparations* immediately broke up the siege
of Exeter, and retired to Taunton. Though his followers now amounted to the
number of near seven thousand men, and seemed still resolute to defend his
cause, he himself despaired of success, and secretly withdrew to the sanctuary
of Beuley in the new forest. The Cornish rebels submitted themselves to the
King's mercy, and found that it was not yet exhausted in their behalf. Except a
few persons of desperate fortunes, who were executed, and some others who were
severely fined, all the rest were dismissed with impunity. The Lady Catherine
Gordon, wife to Perkin, fell into the conqueror's hands, and was treated with a
generosity, which does him honor. He soothed her mind with many tokens of
regard, placed her in a reputable station about the queen, and assigned her a
pension, which she enjoyed even under his successor.

HENRY next deliberated what course to take with Perkin himself. Some
counseled him to make the privileges of the church yield to reasons of state,
to take him by violence from the sanctuary, to inflict on him the punishment
due to his temerity, and thus at once to put an end to an imposture which had
long disturbed the government, and which the credulity of the people and the
artifices of malcontents were still capable of reviving. But the King deemed
not the matter of such importance as to merit so violent a remedy. Perkin taken
prisoner.
He employed some persons to deal with Perkin, and persuade him, under promise
of pardon, to deliver himself into the King's hands Polydore Virgil, p. 606.
. The King conducted him in a species of mock triumph to London. As Perkin
passed along the road, and through the streets of that city, men of all ranks
flocked about him, and the populace treated with the highest derision his
fallen fortunes. They seemed desirous of revenging themselves by their insults
for the shame which their former belief of his impostures had thrown upon them.

of the prior of that monastery. The prior had obtained great credit by his
character of sanctity; and he prevailed with the King again to grant a pardon
to Perkin. But in order to reduce him to still greater contempt, he was set in
the stocks Westminster and at Cheapside, and obliged in both places to read
aloud to the people the confession which had been formerly published in his
name. He was thrown into the Tower, where his habits of restless intrigue and
enterprise still followed him. He insinuated himself into the intimacy of four
servants of Sir John Digby, lieutenant of the Tower; and by their means, opened
a correspondence with the earl of Warwic, who was confined to the same prison.
That unfortunate prince, who had from his earliest infancy been shut up from
the commerce of men, and who was ignorant even of the most common affairs of
life, had fallen into a simplicity which made him susceptible of any
impressions. The continued dread also of the more violent effects of Henry's
tyranny, joined to the natural love of liberty, engaged him to embrace a
project for his escape, by the murder of the lieutenant; and Perkin offered to
conduct the whole enterprise. The conspiracy escaped not the King's vigilance:
It was even very generally believed, that the scheme was laid by himself, in
order to draw Perkin and Warwic into the snare: But the subsequent execution of
two of Digby's servants for the contrivance seems to clear the King of that
imputation, which was indeed founded more on the general idea entertained of
his character, than on any positive evidence.

Perkin executed.
PERKIN, by this new attempt, after so many enormities, had rendered himself
totally unworthy of mercy; and he was accordingly arraigned, condemned, and
soon after hanged at Tyburn, persisting still in the confession of his
imposture Stow, Baker, Speed, Biondi, Holingshed, Bacon* Some late writers have
been so whimsical as to doubt, whether Perkin was an impostor, and even to
assert him to be the real Richard Plantagenet, duke of York. But to refute this
fancy, we need but reflect on the few following particulars. 1. Had not the
queen mother, and the other heads of the York party, been fully assured of the
death of both the young princes, would they have agreed to call over the earl
of Richmond, the head of the Lancastrian party, and marry him to the princess
Flizabeth? 2. The story told constantly by Perkin of his escape is utterly
incredible, that those who were sent to murder his brother took pity on him,
and granted him his liberty. 3. What became of him during the course of seven
years, from his supposed death till his appearance in Ireland in 1491? Why was
not the queen mother, the duchess of Burgundy, and the other friends of the
family applied to, during that time, for his support and education? 4. Though the
duchess of Burgundy at last acknowledged him for her nephew, she had lost all
pretense to authority by her former acknowledgment and support of Lambert
Simnel, an avowed impostor. It is remarkable, that Mr. Carte, in order to
preserve the weight of the dutchess's testimony, in favor of Perkin,
suppresses entirely this material fact. A remarkable effect of party
prejudices, and the author's desire of blackening Henry the seventh, whose
hereditary title to the crown was defective. 5. Perkin himself confessed his
imposture more than once, and read his confession before the whole people. It
is pretended that this confession was drawn from him by torture; but no ancient
historian gives any ground for this surmise. 6. He renewed his confession at
the foot of the gibbet on which he was executed. 7. After Henry the eighth's
accession, the titles of the house of York and Lancaster were fully confounded,
and there was no longer any necessity for defending Henry the seventh and his
title; yet all the historians of that time, when the events were recent, some
of these historians too, such as Sir Thomas More, of the highest authority,
agree in treating Perkin as an impostor.
. It happened about that very time, that one Wilford, a cordwainer's son*
encouraged by the surprising credit which had been given to other impostures,
had undertaken to personate the earl of Warwic; and a priest had even ventured
from the pulpit to recommend his cause to the people, who seemed still to
retain a propensity to adopt it. This incident served Henry as an apology for
his severity toward that unfortunate prince. He was brought to trial, and
accused, not of contriving his escape, (for as he was committed for no crime,
the desire of liberty must have been regarded as natural and innocent) but of
forming designs to disturb the government, and raise an insurrection among the
people. The earl of Warwic executed.
21st of November.
Warwic confessed the indictment, was condemned, and the sentence was executed
upon him.

THIS violent tyranny, the great stain of Henry's reign, by which he destroyed
the last remaining male of the line of Plantagenet, begot great discontent
among the people, who saw an unhappy prince, that had long been deprived of all
the privileges of his high birth, even cut off from the common benefits of
nature, now at last deprived of life itself, merely for resisting that
oppression under which he labored. In vain did Henry endeavor to alleviate
the odium of this guilt, by sharing it with his ally, Ferdinand of Arragon,
who, he said, had scrupled to give his daughter Catherine in marriage to
Arthur, while any prince of the house of York remained alive. Men, on the
contrary, felt higher indignation at seeing a young prince sacrificed, not to
law and justice, but to the jealous politics of two subtle and crafty tyrants.

BUT though these discontents festered in the minds of men, they were so checked
by Henry's watchful policy and steady severity, that they appeared not to
weaken his government; and foreign princes, deeming his throne now entirely
secure, paid him rather the greater courtship and attention. The archduke
Philip, in particular, desired an interview with the King; and this monarch,
who had passed over to Calais, agreed to meet him at St. Peter's church near
that city. The archduke, on his approaching the King, made haste to alight,
and offered to hold Henry's stirrup; a mark of condescension, which that prince
would not admit of. He called the King father, patron, protector; and by his
whole behavior expressed a strong desire of conciliating the friendship of
England. The duke of Orleans had succeeded to the kingdom of France under the
appellation of Lewis the twelfth; and having carried his arms into Italy, and
subdued the duchy of Milan, his progress begot jealousy in Maximilian,
Philip's father, as well as in Ferdinand, his father-in-law. By the council,
therefore, of these monarchs, the young prince endeavored by every art to
acquire the amity of Henry, whom they regarded as the chief counterpoize to the
greatness of France. No particular plan however of alliance seems to have been
concerted between these two princes in their interview: All passed in general
professions of affection and regard; at least, in remote projects of a closer
union, by the future intermarriages of their children, who were then in a state
of infancy.



BUT the prince, whose alliance Henry valued the most, was that of Ferdinand of
Arragon, whose vigorous and steady policy, always attended with success, had
rendered him, in many respects, the most considerable monarch in Europe. There
was also a remarkable similarity of character between these two princes: Both
were full of craft, intrigue, and design; and though a resemblance of this nature
be a slender foundation of confidence and friendship, where the interests of
the parties in the least interfere; yet such was the situation of Henry and
Ferdinand, that no jealousy ever on any occasion arose between them. Marriage
of prince Arthur with Catherine of Arragon.
12th of November.
The King had now the satisfaction of completing a marriage, which had been
projected and negotiated during the course of seven years, between Arthur
prince of Wales and 2d of April.
His death.
The young prince, a few months after, sickened and died, very much regreted by
the whole nation. Henry, desirous to continue his alliance with Spain, and also
unwilling to restore Catherine's dowry, which was two hundred thousand ducats,
obliged his second son, Henry, whom he created prince of Wales, to be
contracted to the princess. The prince made all the opposition which a youth of
twelve years of age was capable of; but as the King persisted in his
resolution, the espousals were at last, by means of the pope's dispensation,
concluded between the parties: An event, which was afterward attended with the
most important consequences.

Marriage of the princess Margaret with the King of Scotland.
THE same year, another marriage was concluded, which was also, in the next
age, productive of great events: The marriage of Margaret, the King's eldest
daughter, with James King of Scotland. This alliance had been negotiated during
three years, though interrupted by several broils; and Henry hoped, from the
completion of it, to remove all source of discord with that neighboring
kingdom, by whose animosity England had been so often infested. When this
marriage was deliberated on in the English council, some objected, that England
might, by means of that alliance, fall under the dominion of Scotland. "No;"
replied Henry, "Scotland, in that event, would only become an accession to
England." 11th of February.
Amidst these prosperous events, the King met with a domestic calamity, which
made not such impression on him as it merited. His queen died in childbed; and
the infant lived not long after. This princess was deservedly a great favorite
of the nation; and the general affection for her increased, on account of the
harsh treatment, which, it was thought, she met with from her consort.

THE situation of the King's affairs, both at home and abroad, was now, in
every respect, very desirable. All the efforts of the European princes, both in
war and negotiation, were turned to the side of Italy; and the various events,
which there arose, made Henry's alliance be courted by every party, and yet
interested him so little as never to touch him with concern or anxiety. His
close connexions with Spain and Scotland ensured his tranquillity; and his
continued successes over domestic enemies, owing to the prudence and vigor of
his conduct, had reduced the people to entire submission and obedience.
Oppressions of the people.
Henry therefore, uncontrouled by apprehension or opposition of any kind, gave
full scope to his natural propensity; and avarice, which had ever been his
predominant passion, being encr^ased by age, and encouraged by absolute
authority, broke all restraints of shame or justice. He had found two
ministers, Empson and Dudley, perfectly qualified to second his rapacious and
tyrannical inclinations, and prey upon his defenseless people. These
Instruments of oppression were both lawyers, the first of mean birth, of brutal
manners, of an unrelenting temper; the second better born, better educated, and
better bred, but equally unjust, severe, and inflexible. By their knowledge in
the law, these men were qualified to pervert the forms of justice to the
oppression of the innocent; and the formidable authority of the King supported
them in all their iniquities.

IT was their usual practice to observe so far the appearance of law as to give
indictments to those whom they intended to oppress: Upon which the persons were
committed to prison, but never brought to trial; and were at last obliged to
recover their liberty, by paying heavy fines and ransoms, which were called
mitigations and compositions. By degrees, the very appearance of law was
neglected: They sent forth their precepts to attach men, and summon them before
themselves and some others, at their private houses, in a court of commission;
where, in a summary manner, without trial or jury, arbitrary decrees were
issued, both in pleas of the crown and controversies between private parties.
Juries themselves, when summoned, proved but small security to the subject;
being brow-beat by these oppressors; nay, fined, imprisoned, and punished, if
they gave sentence against the inclination of the ministers. The whole system
of the feudal law, which then prevailed, was turned into a scheme of
oppression. Even the King's wards, after they came to full age, were not
suffered to enter in possession of their lands without paying exorbitant fines.
Men were also harassed with informations of intrusion upon scarce colorable
titles. When an outlawry in a personal action was issued against any man, he
was not allowed to purchase his charter of pardon, except on the payment of a
great sum; and if he refused the composition required of him, the strict law,
which, in such cases, allows forfeiture of goods, was rigorously insisted on.
Nay, without any color of law, the half of men's lands and rents were seized
during two years, as a penalty in case of outlawry. But the chief instrument of
oppression, employed by these ministers, were the penal Statutes, which,
without consideration of rank, quality, or services, were strictly put in
execution against all men: Spies, informers, and inquisitors were rewarded and
encouraged in every corner of the kingdom: And no difference was made whether
the statute was beneficial or hurtful, recent or obsolete, possible or
impossible to be executed. The sole end of the King and his ministers was to
amass money, and bring every one under the lash of their authority Bacon, 629,
30. Hollingshed, p. 504. Polyd. Virg. p. 613, 615.
.

BY the prevalence of such an arbitrary and iniquitous administration, the
English, it may safely be affirmed, were considerable losers by the ancient
privilege, which secured them from all taxations and impositions, except such
as were levied by their own consent. Had the King been empowered to lay on
general taxes at his pleasure, he would naturally have abstained from these
oppressive expedients, which destroyed all security in private property, and
begot an universal diffidence through the nation. In vain did the people look for
protection from the Parliament, which was pretty frequently summoned during
this reign. 25th January.
A Parliament.
That assembly was so overawed, that, at this very time, during the greatest
rage of Henry's oppression, the commons chose Dudley their speaker, the very
man who was the chief instrument of his oppressions. And though the King was
known to be immensely opulent, and had no pretense of wars or expensive
enterprises of any kind, they granted him the subsidy, which he demanded.
Silver was during this reign at 37 shillings and six pence a pound, which makes
Henry's treasure above 2,750*000 pounds sterling. Besides* many commodities
became twice as dear by the increase of gold and silver in Europe. And what is
a circumstance of still greater weight, all other states were then very poor,
in comparison of what they are at present: These circumstances make Henry's
treasure appear very great; and may lead us to conceive the oppressions of his
government.
.

BUT while Henry was enriching himself with the spoils of his oppressed people,
there happened an event abroad, which engaged his attention, and was even the
object of his anxiety and concern. Isabella, queen of Castile, d^ed about this
time; and it was foreseen, that by this incident the fortunes of Ferdidand, her
husband, would be much affected. The King was not only attentive to the sat of
his ally, and watchful lest the general system of Europe should be affected by
so important an event: He also considered the similarity of his own situation
with that of Ferdinand, and regarded the issue of these transactions as a
precedent for himself. Joan, the daughter of Ferdinand by Isabella, was married
to the archduke Philip, and being, in right of her mother, heiress of Castile,
seemed entitled to dispute with Ferdinand the present administration of that
kingdom. Henry knew, that, notwithstanding his own pretensions by the house of
Lancaster, the greatest part of the nation were convinced of the superiority of
his wife's title; and he dreaded lest the prince, who was daily advancing
toward manhood, might be tempted by ambi ion to lay immediate claim to the
throne. By his perpetual attention to depress the partisans of the York family,
he had more closely united them into one party, and increased their desire of
shaking off that yoke, under which they had so long labored, and of taking
every advantage, which his oppressive government would give his enemies against
him. And as he possessed no independent force like Ferdinand, and governed a
kingdom more turbulent and unruly, which he himself, by his narrow politics,
had confirmed in factious prejudices; he apprehended that his situation would
prove in the issue still more precarious.

NOTHING could turn out more contrary to the King's inclination than the
transactions in Spain. Ferdinand had become very unpopular in Castile, chiefly
by reason of his former exactions and impositions; and the states of the
kingdom discovered an evident resolution of preferring the title of Philip and
Joan. A rival of the King of Castile.
Sir John Trenchard, a gentleman of authority in the county of Dorset, hearing
of a fleet upon the coast, had assembled some forces; and being joined by Sir
John Carry, who was also at the head of an armed body, he came to that town.
Finding, that Philip, in order to relieve his sickness and fatigue, was already
come ashore, he invited him to his house; and immediately dispatched an express
to inform the court of this important incident. The King sent in all haste the
earl of Arundel to congratulate the archduke on his arrival in England, and to
inform him, that he intended to pay him a visit in person, and give him a
suitable reception in his kingdom. Philip knew, that he could not now depart
without the King's consent; and therefore, for the sake of dispatch, he
resolved to anticipate his visit, and to have an interview with him at Windsor.
Henry received him with all the magnificence possible, and with all the seeming
cordiality; but he resolved, notwithstanding, to extract some advantage from
this involuntary visit, paid him by his royal guest.

Intrigues of the Earl of Suffolk.
EDMOND de la Pole, earl of Suffolk, nephew to Edward the fourth, and brother
to the earl of Lincoln, slain at the battle of Stoke, had some years before
killed for a man in a sudden fit of passion, and had been obliged to apply to
the King for a remission of his crime. The King had granted his request; but
being little indulgent to all persons connected with the house of York, he
obliged him to appear openly in court and plead his pardon. Suffolk more
resenting the affront, than grateful for the favor, had fled into Flanders,
and taken shelter with his aunt, the duchess of Burgundy: But being promised
forgiveness by the King, he returned into England, and obtained a new pardon.
Actuated, however, by the natural inquietude of his temper, and uneasy from
debts which he had contracted by his expenses at prince Arthur's marriage, he
again made an elopement into Flanders. The King, well acquainted with the
general discontent which prevailed against his administration, neglected not
this incident, which might become of importance; and he employed his usual
artifices to elude the efforts of his enemies. He directed Sir Robert Curson,
governor of the castle of Hammes, to fly from his charge, and to insinuate
himself into the confidence of Suffolk, by making him a tender of his services.
Upon information secretly conveyed by Curson, the King seized William Courtney,
earl of Devonshire, his brother in law, married to the lady Catherine, daughter
of Edward the fourth; William de la Pole, brother to the earl of Suffolk; Sir
James Tirrel, and Sir James Windham, with some persons of inferior quality; and
he committed them all to custody. The lord Abergavenny and Sir Thomas Green
were also apprehended; but were soon after freed from their confinement.
William de la Pole was retained in prison during a long time: And the earl of
Devonshire recovered not his freedom during the King's life. But Henry's chief
severity fell upon Sir James Windham, and Sir James Tirrel, who were both
brought to their trial, condemned, and executed: The fate of the latter gave
universal satisfaction, on account of his participation in the murder of the
young princes, sons to Edward the fourth. Notwithstanding these discoveries and
executions, Curson was still able to maintain his credit with the earl of
Suffolk; and Henry, in order to remove all suspicions, had ordered him to be
excommunicated, together with Suffolk himself, for his pretended rebellion. But
after that traitor had performed all the services expected from him, he
suddenly deserted the earl, and came over to England, where the King received
him with unusual marks of favor and confidence. Suffolk, astonished at this
instance of perfidy, finding even that the duchess of Burgundy, tired with so
many fruitless attempts, had become indifferent to his cause, fled secretly
into France, thence into Germany, and returned at last into the Low Countries;
where he was protected, though not countenanced, by the archduke Philip, then in
close alliance with the king.

HENRY neglected not the present opportunity of compliaining to Philip of the
reception, which Suffolk had met with in his dominions. "I really thought,"
replied the King of Castile, "that your greatness and felicity had set you far
above apprehensions from any person of so little consequence: But to give you
satisfaction, I shall banish him my state." "I expect, that you will carry your
complaisance farther," said the King: "I desire to have Suffolk put into my
hands, where alone I can depend upon his submission and obedience." "That
measure," said Phillip, "will reflect dishonor upon you as well as myself. You
will be thought to have used me as a prisoner." "Then the matter is at an end,"
replied the King, "for I will take that dishonor upon me; and so your honor
is saved Bacon, p. 633.
." The king of Castile found himself under a necessity of complying; but he
first exacted Henry's promise that he would spare Suffolk's life. That nobleman
was invited over to England by Philip; as if the King would grant him a pardon,
by the intercession of his friend and ally. Upon his appearance, he was
committed to the Tower; and the King of Castile, having fully satisfied Henry,
as well by this concession, as by signing a treaty of commerce between England
and Castile, which was advantageous to the former kingdom Rymer, vol. 13. p.
14^.
, was at last allowed to depart, after a stay of three months.

THE King survived these transactions two years; but little memorable occurs in
the remaining part of his reign, except his affiancing his second daughter Mary
with the young archduke Charles, son of Philip of Castile. Sickness of the King.
But the decline of his health put an end to all such thoughts; and he began to
cast his eye toward that future existence, which the iniquities and severities
of his reign rendered a very dismal prospect to him. To allay the terrors,
under which he labored, he endeavored, by distributing of alms and founding
of religious houses, to make atonement for his crimes, and to purchase, with
the sacrifice of part of his ill-gotten treasures, a reconcilement to his
offended Maker. Remorse even seized him by intervals for the abuses of his
authority by Empson and Dudley; but not sufficient to make him stop the
repacious hand of those oppressors. Sir William Capel was again fined two
thousand pounds under some frivolous pretenses, and was committed to the Tower
for daring to murmur against that iniquity. Harris, an alderman of London, was
indicted, and died of vexation before his trial came to an issue. Sir Lawrence
Ailmer, who had been mayor, and his two sheriffs, were condemned in heavy
fines, and sent to prison till they made payment. The King gave countenance to
all these oppressions; till death, by its nearer approaches, impressed new
terror upon him; and he then ordered, by a general clause in his will, that His
death. 22d April.
He died of a consumption at his favorite palace of Richmond, after a reign of
twenty-three years and eight months, and in the fifty-second year of his age
Dugd. baronage II. p. 237.
.

And character
THE reign of Henry the seventh was, in the main, fortunate for his people at
home, and honorable abroad. He put an end to the civil wars with which the
nation had been long harrassed, he maintained peace and order in the state, he
depressed the former exorbitant power of the nobility, and, together with the
friendship of some foreign princes, he acquired the consideration and regard of
all. He loved peace without fearing war; though agitated with continual
suspicions of his servants and ministers, he discovered no timidity either in
the conduct of his affairs, or in the day of battle; and though often severe in
his punishments, he was commonly less actuated by revenge than by the maxims of
policy. The services, which he rendered the people, were derived from his views
of private interest, rather than the motives of public spirit; and where he
deviated from selfish regards, it was unknown to himself, and ever from the
malignant prejudices of faction or the mean projects of avarice; not from the
sallies of passion, or allurements of pleasure; still less, from the benign
motives of friendship and generosity. His capacity was excellent, but somewhat
contracted, by the narrowness of his heart; he possessed insinuation and
address, but never employed these talents, except where some great point of
interest was to be gained; and while he neglected to conciliate the affections
of his people, he often felt the danger of resting his authority on their fear
and reverence alone. He was always extremely attentive to his affairs, but
possessed not the faculty of seeing far into futurity; and was more expert at
providing a remedy for his mistakes than judicious in avoiding them. Avarice
was on the whole his ruling passion As a proof of Henry's attention to the
smallest profits, Bacon tells us, that he had seen a book of Accounts kept by
Empson, and subscribed in almost every leaf by the King's own hand. Among other
articles was the following. " Item, Received of such a one five marks for a
pardon, which, if it do not pass, the money to be repayed, or the party
otherwise satisfied." Opposite to this memorandum, the King had wrote with his
own hand, "otherwise satisfied." Bacon, p. 630.
; and he remains an instance, almost singular, of a man, placed in a high
station, and possessed of talents for great affairs, in whom that passion
predominated above ambition. Even among private persons, avarice is commonly
nothing but a species of ambition, and is chiefly incited by the prospect of
that regard, distinction and consideration which are derived from riches.

THE power of the Kings of England had always been somewhat irregular or
discretionary; but was scarce ever so absolute during any reign as during that
of Henry. Besides the personal character of the man, full of vigor, industry,
and severity, deliberate in all projects, steady in every purpose, and attended
with caution, as well as good fortune, in each enterprise; became to the throne
after long and bloody civil wars, which had destroyed all the great nobility,
who alone could resist the encroachments of his authority: The nation was tired
with discord and intestine convulsions, and willing to submit to usurpations,
and even injuries, rather than plunge themselves anew into like miseries: The
fruitless efforts made against him served always, as is usual, to confirm his
authority: As he ruled by a faction, and the lesser faction, all those on whom
he conferred offices, sensible that they owed every thing to his protection,
were content to support his power, though at the expense of justice and national
privileges: These seem the chief causes which at this time bestowed on the
crown so considerable an addition of prerogative, and rendered the present
reign a kind of epoch in the English constitution.

THIS prince, though he exalted his own prerogative above law, is celebrated by
his historian for many good laws, which he caused to be enacted for the
government of his subjects. Several considerable regulations, indeed, are found
among the statutes of this reign, both with regard to the police of the
kingdom, and its commerce: But the former are commonly contrived with much
better judgment than the latter. His laws.
The more simple ideas of order and equity are sufficient to guide a legislator
in every thing that regards the internal administration of justice: But the
principles of commerce are much more complicated, and require long experience
and deep reflection to be well understood in any state. The real consequence of
a law or practice is there often contrary to first appearances. No wonder, that
during the reign of Henry the seventh, these matters were often misunderstood;
and it may safely be affirmed, that even in the age of lord Bacon, very
imperfect and erroneous ideas were formed on that subject.

EARLY in Henry's reign, the authority of the Star Chamber, which was before
founded on common law and very ancient practice, was in some cases confirmed by
act of Parliament Rot. Parl. 3. H. 7. n. 17.
: Lord Bacon extols the use of this court; but men began, during the age of
that historian, to feel that so arbitrary a jurisdiction was totally
incompatible with liberty; and in proportion as the spirit of independance rose
still higher in the nation, the aversion against it increased, till it was
entirely abolished by act of Parliament in the reign of Charles the first, a
little before the commencement of the civil wars.

LAWS were passed in this reign, ordering the King's suit for murder to be
carried on within a year and day 3. H. 7. cap. 1.
. Formerly, it did not usually commence till after that term; and as the
friends of the person murdered, in the interval, often compounded matters with
the criminal, that crime was apt to pass unpunished. Suits were given to the
poor in forma pauperis, as it is called: That is, without paying dues for the
writs, or any fees to the council 11 H 7. cap. 12.
: A good law at all times, especially in that age, when the people labored
under the oppression of the great; but a law very difficult to be reduced to
execution. A law was made against carrying off any woman by force 3 H. 7. cap.
2.
. The benefit of clergy was abridged 4 H 7. cap. 13.
, and the criminal, on the first offense, was ordered to be burned in the hand
with a letter marking his crime; after which, he was punished capitally for
every new offense. This law was much too indulgent, yet was in those days
regarded as a violation of the rights of the church. Sheriffs were no longer
allowed to fine any person, without previously summoning him before their court
11 H. 7. cap. 15.
. It is strange, that such a practice should ever have prevailed. Attaint of
juries was granted in cases which exceeded forty pounds value 11 H. 7. cap. 2^.
1^ H. 7. cap. 3.
. A law which has an appearance of equity, but which was afterward found
inconvenient. Actions popular were not allowed to be eluded by fraud or covin.
If any servant of the King conspired against the life of the steward,
treasurer, or comptroller of the King's house, this design, though not followed
by any execution, was made liable to the punishment of felony 3 H. 7. cap. 1^.
. This statute was procured by the jealousy of archbishop Morton, who found
himself exposed to the enmity of great numbers.

THERE scarce passed any session during this reign without some statute against
engaging retainers, and giving them badges or liveries 3 H. 7. cap. 1. and 1^.
11 H. 7. cap. 3. 19 H 7. cap. 14.
; a practice, by which they were, in a manner, inlisted under some great lord,
and were kept in readiness to assist him in all wars, insurrections, riots,
violences, and even in bearing evidence for him in courts of justice 3 H. 7.
cap. 12. 11 H. 7. cap. 25.
. This disorder, which had arisen during turbulent times, when the law could
give little protection to the subject, was then deeply rooted in England; and
it required all the vigilance and rigor of Henry to extirpate it. There is a
story of his severity against that abuse; which seems to merit praise, though it
is commonly cited as an instance of his avarice and rapacity. The earl of
Oxford, his favorite general, to whom he always gave great and deserved trust,
having splendidly entertained him at his castle of Heningham, was desirous of
making a show of his magnificence at the departure of his royal guest; and
ordered all his retainers, with their liveries and badges, to be drawn up in
two lines, that their appearance might be more ga lant and splendid. "My lord,"
said the King, "I have heard much of your hospitality; but the truth far
exceeds the report. These handsome gentlemen and yeomen, whom I see on both
sides of me, are surely your menial servants." The earl smiled, and confessed
that his fortune was too narrow for such magnificence. "They are most of them,"
subjoined he, "my retainers, who are come to do me service at such a time, when
they knew I was honored with your majesty's presence." The King started a
little, and said, "By my faith, my lord, I thank you for my good cheer, but I
must not allow my laws to be broken in my sight. My attorney must speak with
you." Oxford is said to have paid no less than fifteen thousand marks, as a
composition for his offense.

THE increase of the arts, more effectually than all the severities of laws,
put an end to this pernicious practice. The nobility, instead of vying with
each other, in the number and boldness of their retainers, acquired a more
civilized species of emulation, and endeavored to excel in the splendor and
elegance of their equipage, houses, and tables. The common people, no longer
maintained in a vicious idleness by their superiors, were obliged to learn some
calling or industry, and became useful both to themselves and others. And it
must be acknowledged, in spite of those who declaim so violently against the
refinement of the art, or what they are pleased to call luxury, that, as much
as an industrious tradesman is both a better man and a better citizen that one
of those idle retainers, who fo merly depended on the great families; as much
is the life of a modern nobleman more laudable than that of an ancient baron.

BUT the most important law in its consequences, which was enacted during the
reign of Henry, was that by which the nobility and gentry acquired a power of
breaking the ancient entails, and of alienating their estates 4 H. 7. cap. 24.
. By means of this law, joined to the beginning luxury and refinements of the
age, the great fortunes of the barons were gradually dissipated, and the
property of the commons increased in England. It is probable, that Henry
foresaw and intended this consequence; because the constant scheme of his
policy consisted in depressing the great, and exalting churchmen, lawyers, and
men of new families, who were more dependant on him.

THIS King's love of money naturally led him to encourage commerce, which
increased his customs; but, if we may judge by most of the laws enacted during
his reign, trade and industry were rather hurt than promoted by the care and
attention which were given to them. Severe laws were made against taking
interest for money, which was then denominated usury 3 H. 7. cap. 5.
. Even the profits of exchange were prohibited, as savouring of usury 3 H. 7.
cap. 6.
, which the superstition of that age zealously proscribed. All evasive
contracts, by which profits could be made from the loan of money, were also
carefully guarded against 7. H. 7. cap. 8.
. It is needless to observe how unreasonable and iniquitous these laws, how
impossible to be executed, and how hurtful to trade, if they could take place.
We may observe, however, to the praise of this King, that sometimes, in order
to promote commerce, he lent to merchants sums of money, without interest; when
he knew, that their stock was not sufficient for those enterprises, which they
proposed to undertake Polyd. Virg.
.

LAWS were made against the exportation of money, plate, or bullion 4 H. 7.
cap. 23.
: A precaution, which serves no other purpose than to make more be exported.
But so far was the anxiety on this head carried, that merchant aliens, who
imported commodities into the kingdom, were obliged to invest, in English
commodities, all the money acquired by their sales, in order to prevent their
conveying away the money in a clandestine manner 3 H. 7. cap. 8.
.

HORSES were forbid to be exported; as if that exportation did not encourage
the breed, and render them more plentiful 11 H. 7. cap. 13.
. To promote archery, no bows were to be sold at a higher price that six
shillings and four pence 3 H. 7. cap. 12.
, reducing money to the denomination of our time. The only effect of this
regulation must be either that the people would be supplied with bad bows or
none at all. Prices were also affixed to woollen cloth 4 H. 7. cap. 8.
, to caps and hats 4 H. 7. cap. 9.
: And laborers wages were regulated by law 11 H. 7. cap. 22.
. It is evident, that these circumstances ought always to be left free, and
must be trusted to the common course of business and commerce. To some it may
appear surprising, that the price of a yard of scarlet cloth should be limited
to six and twenty shillings, that of a yard of colored cloth to eighteen;
higher prices than these commodities bear at present: And that the wages of a
tradesman, such as a mason, bricklayer, tyler, etc. should be regulated at near
ten pence a day; which is not much inferior to the present wages given in some
places of England. There is a vulgar error in imagining, that the price of
labor and commodities has in general risen extremely since the discovery of
the West Indies. The greater industry of the present times has increased the
number of tradesmen and laborers, so as to keep wages nearer a par than could
be expected from the great increase of gold and silver. And the additional art
employed in the finer manufactures, has even made some of these commodities
fall below their former value. Not to mention, that merchants and dealers,
being contented with less profit than formerly, afford the goods cheaper to
their customers. It appears by a statute of this reign 4 H. 7. cap. 9.
. that goods bought for sixteen pence would sometimes be sold by the merchants
for three shillings. The commodities, whose price has chiefly risen, are
butcher-meat, fowl, and fish, (especially the latter) which cannot be much
augmented in quantity by the increase of art and industry. The profession which
then abounded most, and was embraced by persons of the lowest rank, was the
church: By a clause of a statute, all clerks or students of the university were
forbid to beg, without a permission from the vice chancellor 11 H. 7. cap. 22.
.

ONE great cause of the low state of industry during this period, was the
ridiculous restraints put upon it; and the parliament, or rather the King, (for
he was the prime mover in every thing) enlarged a little some of these
limitations; but not to the degree that was requisite. A ridiculous law had
been enacted during the reign of Henry the fourth 7 H. 7. cap. 17.
, that no man could bind his son or daughter to an apprenticeship, unless he
was possessed of twenty shillings a year in land; and Henry the seventh,
because the decay of manufactures was complained of in Norwich from the want of
hands, exempted that city from the penalties of this law 11 H. 7. cap. 11.
. Afterward, the whole county of Norfolk obtained a like exemption with regard
to some branches of the woollen manufacture 12 H. 7. cap 1.
. These absurd limitations proceeded from a desire of promoting husbandry,
which however is never more effectually encouraged than by the increase of
manufactures. For a like reason, the law enacted against enclosures, and for
the keeping up farm houses 4 H. 7. cap. 19.
, scarce deserves the high praises bestowed on it by lord Bacon. If husbandmen
understand agriculture, and have a ready vent for their commodities, we need
never dread a diminution of the people, employed in the country. All methods of
supporting populousness, except by the interest of the proprietors, are violent
and ineffectual. During a century and a half after this period, there was a
continual renewal of laws and edicts against depopulation; whence we may infer,
that none of them were ever executed. The natural course of improvement at last
provided a remedy.

ONE great check to industry in England was the erecting corporations; an abuse
which is not yet entirely corrected. A law was enacted, that corporations
should not pass any bylaws without the consent of three of the chief officers
of state 19 H. 7. cap. 7.
. They were prohibited to impose tolls at their gates 19 H. 7. cap. 8.
. The cities of Gloucester and Worcester had even imposed tolls on the Severne,
which were abolished 19 H. 7. cap. 18.
.

THERE is a law of this reign 12 H. 7. cap. 6.
, containing a preamble, from which it appears, that the company of merchant
adventurers in London, had, by their own proper authority, debarred all the
other merchants of the kingdom, from trading to the great marts in the low
countries, unless each trader previously paid them the sum of near seventy
pounds. It is surprising that such a by-law (if it deserves that name) could
ever be carried into execution, and that the authority of Parliament should be
requisite to abrogate it.

IT was during this reign, on the second of August 1492, a little before sun
set, that Christopher Columbus, a Florentine, set out from Cadiz on his
memorable voyage for the discovery of the western world; and a few years after,
Vasquez de Gama, a Portuguese, passed the cape of Good Hope, and opened a new
passage to the East Indies. These great events were attended with the most
important consequences to all the nations of Europe, even to such as were not
immediately concerned in those naval enterprises. The enlargement of commerce
and navigation encr^ased industry and the arts every where: The nobles
dissipated their fortunes in expensive pleasures: Men of an inferior rank both
acquired a share in the landed property, and created to themselves a
considerable property of a new kind, in stock, commodities, art, credit, and
correspondence. In some nations the privileges of the commons increased, by
this increase of property: In most nations, the Kings, finding arms to be dropped
by the barons, who could no longer endure their former rude manner of life,
established standing armies, and subdued the liberties of the kingdom: But in
all places, the condition of the people, from the depression of the petty
tyrants, by whom they had formerly been oppressed, rather than governed,
received great improvement, and they acquired, if not entire liberty, at least
the most considerable advantages of it. And as the general course of events
thus tended to depress the nobles and exalt the people, Henry the seventh, who
also embraced that system of policy, has acquired more praise, than his
institutions, strictly speaking, seem of themselves to deserve, on account of
any profound wisdom attending them.

IT was by accident only, that the King had not a considerable hand in those
great naval discoveries, by which the present age was so much distinguished.
Columbus, after meeting many repulses from the courts of Portugal and Spain,
sent his brother Bartholomew into England, in order to explain his projects to
Henry, and crave his protection for the execution of them. Henry invited him to
England; but his brother, in returning to Spain, being taken by pirates, was
detained in his voyage; and Columbus, meanwhile, having obtained the
countenance of Isabella, was equipped with a small fleet, and happily executed
his enterprise. Henry was not discouraged with this disappointment: He fitted
out Sebastian Cabot, a Venetian, dwelling in Bristol; and sent him westwards in
1498 in search of new countries. Cabot discovered the main land of America
toward the sixtieth degree of northern latitude: He sailed southwards along
the coast, and discovered Newfoundland, and other countries: But returned to
England without making any conquest or settlement. Elliot and other merchants
in Bristol made a like attempt in 1502 Rymer, vol. XIII. p. 37.
. The King expended fourteen thousand pounds in building one ship called the
Great Harry Stowe, p. 484.
. This was properly speaking the first ship in the English navy. Before this
period, when the prince wanted a fleet, he had no other expedient but the
hiring ships from the merchants.

BUT though this improvement of navigation, and the discovery of both the
Indies, was the most memorable incident that happened during this or any other
period, it was not the only great event by which the age was distinguished. In
1453 Constantinople was taken by the Turks; and the Greeks, among whom some
remains of learning were still preserved, being scattered by these Barbarians,
took shelter in Italy, and imported, together with their admirable language, a
tincture of their science and their refined taste in poetry and eloquence.
About the same time, the purity of the Latin tongue was revived, the study of
antiquity became fashionable, and the esteem for literature gradually
propagated itself through every nation of Europe. The art of printing, invented
about that time, facilitated extremely the progress of all these improvements:
The invention of gunpowder changed the whole art of war: Mighty innovations
were soon after made in religion, such as not only affected those states that
embraced them, but even those that adhered to the ancient faith and worship:
And thus a general revolution was made in human affairs throughout this part of
the world; and men attained that situation with regard to commerce, arts,
sciences, government, police, and cultivation, in which they have ever since
persevered. Here therefore commences the useful, as well as agreeable part of
modern annals; certainty has place in all the considerable, and even most of
the minute parts of historical narration; a great variety of events, preserved
by printing, give the author the power of selecting, as well as adorning, the
facts, which he relates; and as each incident has a reference to our present
manners and situation, instructive lessons occur every moment during the course
of the narration. Whoever carries his anxious researches into preceding periods
is moved by a curiosity, liberal indeed and commendable; not by any necessity
for acquiring a knowledge of public affairs, or the arts of civil government.

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, UNDER THE HOUSE of TUDOR.
HENRY VIII.
CHAP. I.
Popularity of the new King. -- His ministers. -- Punishment of Empson and
Dudley. -- King's marriage. -- Foreign affairs. -- Julius the second. -- League
of Cambray. -- War with France. -- Expedition to Fontarabia. -- Deceit of
Ferdinand. -- Return of the English. -- Leo the tenth. -- A Parliament. -- War
with Scotland. -- Wolsey minister. -- His character. -- Invasion of France. --
Battle of Guinegate. -- Battle of Flouden. -- Peace with France.

THE death of Henry the seventh had been attended with as open and visible a
joy as decency would permit; Popularity of the new King.
and the accession and coronation of his son, Henry the eighth, spread
universally a declared and unfeigned satisfaction. Instead of a monarch,
jealous, severe, and avaritious, who, in proportion as he advanced in years,
was sinking still deeper in those unpopular vices; a young prince of eighteen
had succeeded to the throne, who, even in the eyes of men of sense, gave very
promising hopes of his future conduct, much more in those of the people, always
enchanted with novelty, youth, and royal dignity. The beauty and vigor of his
person, accompanied with dexterity in every manly exercise, was farther adorned
with a blooming and ruddy countenance, with a lively air, with the appearance
of spirit and activity in all his demeanor T. Mori, Lucubr. p. 182.
. His father, in order to remove him from the knowledge of public business, had
hitherto occupied him entirely in the study of literature; and the proficiency,
which he made, gave no bad prognostic of his parts and capacity Father Paul,
lib. 1.
. Even the vices of vehemence, ardour, and impatience, to which he was subject,
and which afterward degenerated into tyranny, were interpreted only as faults,
incident to unguarded youth, which would be corrected, when time had brought
him to greater moderation and maturity. And as the contending titles of York
and Lancaster were now at last fully united in his person, men justly expected
from a prince, obnoxious to no party, that impartiality of administration,
which had so long been unknown in England.

THE favorable prepossessions of the public were encouraged by the measures,
which Henry embraced in the commencement of his reign. His grandmother, the
countess of Richmond and Derby, was still alive; and as she was a woman much
celebrated for prudence and virtue, he very wisely showed great deference to
her opinion in the establishment of his new council. His ministers.
The members were, Warham, archbishop of Canterbury, and chancellor; the earl
of Shrewsbury, steward* lord Herbert, chamberlain; Sir Thomas Lovel, master of
the wards and constable of the Tower; Sir Edward Poynings, knight of the
garter, comptroller; Sir Henry Marney, afterward lord Marney; Sir Thomas
Darcy, afterward lord Darcy; Thomas Ruthal, doctor of laws; and Sir Henry Wyat
Herbert, Stow, p. 486. Hollingshed, p. 799.
. These men had been long accustomed to affairs under the late King, and were
the least unpopular of all the ministers employed by that monarch.

BUT the chief competitors for favor and authority under the new King were the
earl of Surrey, treasurer, and Fox, bishop of Winchester, secretary and privy
seal. This prelate, who had enjoyed great credit during all the former reign,
had acquired such habits of caution and frugality as he could not easily lay
aside; and he still opposed, by his remonstrances, those schemes of dissipation
and expense, which the youth and passions of Henry rendered agreeable to him.
But Surrey was a more dextrous courtier; and though few had borne a greater share
in the frugal politics of the last King, he knew how to conform himself to the
humors of his new master; and no one was so forward in promoting that
liberality, pleasure, and magnificence, which began to prevail under the young
monarch Lord Herbert.
. By this policy he ingratiated himself with Henry; he made profit, as well as
the other courtiers, of the lavish disposition of his master; and he engaged
him in such a course of play and idleness as rendered him negligent of affairs,
and willing to entrust the government of the state entirely into the hands of
his ministers. The immense treasures, amassed by the late King, were gradually
dissipated in the giddy expenses of Henry. One party of pleasure succeeded
another: Tilts, tournaments and carousels were exhibited with all the
magnificence of that age: And as the present tranquillity of the public
permitted the court to indulge itself in every amusement, serious business was
but little attended to. Or if the King intermitted the course of his festivity,
he employed himself chiefly in an application to music and literature, which
were his favorite pursuits, and which were well adapted to his genius. He had
made such proficiency in the former art, as even to compose some pieces of
church music which were sung in his chapel Lord Herbert.
. He was initiated in the elegant learning of the ancients. And though he was so
unfortunate as to be seduced into a study of the barren controversies of the
schools, which were then fashionable, and had chosen Thomas Aquinas for his
favorite author, he still discovered a capacity fitted for more useful and
entertaining knowledge.

THE frank and careless humor of the King, as it led him to dissipate the
treasures, amassed by his father, rendered him negligent in protecting the
instruments, whom that prince had employed in his extortions. A proclamation
being issued to encourage complaints, the rage of the people was let loose on
all the delators and informers, who had so long exercised an unbounded tyranny
over the nation Herbert, Stow, p. 486. Hollingshed, p. 799. Pol. Virg. lib. 27.
: They were thrown into prison, condemned to the pillory, and most of them lost
their lives from the violence of the populace. Punishment of Empson and Dudley.
Empson and Dudley, who were most exposed to public hatred, were immediately
cited before the council, in order to answer for their conduct, which had
rendered them so obnoxious. Empson made a shrewd apology for himself, as well
as for his associate. He told the council, that so far from his being justly
exposed to censure for his past conduct, his enemies themselves grounded their
clamor on actions, which seemed rather to merit reward and approbation: That a
strict execution of law was the crime, of which he and Dudley were accused;
though that law had been established by the voluntary consent of the people, and
though they had acted in obedience to the King, to whom the administration of
justice was entrusted by the constitution: That it belonged not to them, who
were instruments in the hands of the supreme power, to determine what laws were
recent or obsolete, expedient or hurtful; since they were all alike valid, so
long as they remained unrepealed by the legislature: That it was natural for a
licentious populace to murmur against the restraints of authority; but all wise
states had ever made their glory to consist in the just distribution of reward
and punishment, and had annexed the former to the observance and enforcement of
the laws, the latter to their violation and infraction: And that a sudden
overthrow of all government might be expected; where the judges were committed
to the mercy of the criminals, the rulers to that of the subjects Herbert,
Hollingshed, p. 804.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING this defense, Empson and Dudley were sent to the Tower; and
soon after brought to their trial. The strict execution of laws, however
obsolete, could never be imputed to them as a crime in a court of judicature;
and it is likely, that even where they had exercised arbitrary power, the King,
as they had acted by the secret commands of his father, was not willing to have
their conduct exposed to too severe a scrutiny. In order, therefore, to gratify
the people with the punishment of these obnoxious ministers, crimes very
improbable, or indeed absolutely impossible, were charged upon them, that they
had entered into a conspiracy against the King, and had intended, on the death
of the late King, to have seized by force the administration of the government.
The jury were so far moved by popular prejudices, joined to court influence, as
to give sentence against them; which was afterward confirmed by a bill of
attainder in Parliament This Parliament met on the 21st January, 1510. A law
was there enacted, in order to prevent some abuses which had prevailed during
the late reign. The forfeiture upon the penal statutes was reduced to the term
of three years. Costs and damages were given against informers upon acquital of
the accused: More severe punishments were enacted against perjury: the false
inquisitions procured by Empson and Dudley were declared null and invalid.
Traverses were allowed; and the time of tendering them enlarged. 1. H. 8. c. 8,
10, 11, 12.
, and, at the earnest desire of the people, was executed by warrant from the
King. Thus, in those arbitrary times, justice was equally violated, whether the
King sought power and riches, or courted popularity.

King's marriage.
THE King, while he punished the instruments of past tyranny, had yet such
deference to former engagements as to deliberate, immediately after his
accession, concerning the consummation of his marriage with the infanta
Catherine, to whom he was affianced during his father's lifetime. Her former
marriage with his brother, and the inequality of their years, were the chief
objections, which were urged against the espousing her: But on the other hand,
the advantages of her known virtue, modesty, and sweetness of disposition were
insisted on; the affection which she bore the King; the large dowry to which
she was entitled as princess of Wales; the interest of cementing a close
alliance with Spain; the necessity of finding some confederate to
counterballance the power of France; the expediency of fulfilling the
engagements of the late King. June 3.
When these considerations were weighed, they determined the council, though
contrary to the opinion of the primate, to give Henry their advice for
completing the marriage; which was done accordingly. The countess of Richmond,
who had concurred in the same sentiments, died soon after the marriage of her
grandson.

Foreign affairs.
The situation of foreign affairs was no less happy and desirable. Italy
continued still, as during the late reign, to be the center of all the wars and
negotiations of the European princes; and Henry's alliance was courted by both
sides; at the same time, that he was not engaged by any immediate interest or
necessity to take part with either. Lewis the twelfth of France, after the
conquest of Milan, was the only great prince who possessed any territory in
Italy; and could he have remained in tranquillity, he was enabled by his
situation to prescribe laws to all the Italian princes and republics, and to
hold the balance among them. But the desire of making a conquest of Naples, to
which he had the same title or pretension with his predecessor, still engaged
him in new enterprises; and as he foresaw opposition from Ferdinand, who was
connected both by treaties and affinity with Frederic of Naples, he
endeavored, by the offers of interest, to which the ears of that monarch were
ever open, to engage him in an opposite confederacy. He settled with him a plan
for the partition of the Kingdom of Naples and the expulsion of Frederic: A
plan, which the politicians of that age regarded as the most egregious
imprudence in the French monarch, and the basest treachery in the Spanish.
Frederic, supported only by subjects, who were either discontented with his
government, or indifferent about his fortunes, was unable to resist so powerful
a confederacy, and was deprived of his dominions: But he had the satisfaction
to see Naples immediately prove the source of contention among his enemies.
Ferdinand gave secret orders to his general, Gonsalvo, whom the Spaniards
honor with the appellation of the great captain, to attack the armies of
France, and make himself master of all the dominions of Naples. Gonsalvo
prevailed in every enterprise, defeated the French in two pitched battles, and
ensured to his prince the entire possession of that fine kingdom. Lewis, unable
to procure redress by force of arms, was obliged to enter into a fruitless
negotiation with Ferdinand for the recovery of his share of the partition; and
all Italy, during some time, was held in suspense between these two powerful
monarchs.

THERE scarce has been any period, when the balance of power was better
secured in Europe, and seemed more able to maintain itself, without any anxious
concern or attention of the princes. Several great monarchies were established;
and no one so far surpassed the rest as to give any foundation, or even
pretense, for jealousy. England was united in domestic peace, and by its
situation happily secured from the invasion of foreigners. The coalition of the
several kingdoms of Spain, had formed one powerful monarchy, which Ferdinand
administered with arts, fraudulent indeed and deceitful, but full of vigor and
ability. Lewis the twelfth of France, a gallant and generous prince, by
espousing Anne of Britanny, widow to his predecessor, had preserved the union
with that principality, on which the safety of his kingdom so much depended.
Maximilian, the emperor, besides the hereditary dominions of the Austrian
family, maintained authority in the empire, and notwithstanding his levity of
disposition, was able to unite the German princes in any great plan of
interest, at least, of defense. Charles, prince of Castile, grandson to
Maximilian and Ferdinand, had already succeeded to the rich dominions of the
house of Burgundy; and being as yet in early youth, the government was
entrusted to Margaret of Savoy, his aunt, a princess endowed with signal
prudence and virtue. The internal force of these several powerful states, which
balanced each other, might long have maintained general tranquillity, had not
the active and enterprizing genius of an ambitious pontiff first excited the
flames of war and discord among them.

Julius the 2d.
ALEXANDER the sixth was dead; a man of a singular character, and, excepting
his son Caesar Borgia, almost the only man who ever joined great capacity with
the blackest vices and the most abandoned profligacy of manners. After a short
interval, Julius the second had succeeded to the papal throne, who, though
endowed with many virtues, gave almost as much scandal to the world as his
detested predecessor: His virtues were deemed unsuitable to his station of
sovereign pontiff, the spiritual judge and common father of all christians.
Animated with an unextinguishable thirst of glory, inflexible in his schemes,
undaunted in his enterprises, indefatigable in his pursuits; magnanimous,
imperious, domineering; his vast soul broke through all the ^etters, which old
age and a priestly character imposed upon it, and, during his pontificate, kept
the world in perpetual agitation. (...) of Cambray.
By his intrigues, a league had been formed at Cambray In 1508.
, between himself, Maximilian the emperor, Lewis the twelfth of France, and
Ferdinand of Arragon; and the object of this great confederacy was to
overwhelm, by their united arms, the commonwealth of Venice.

THIS illustrious commonwealth, the great bulwark of Europe against the
Barbarians, and the admired model of civil poli^y, had risen to a considerable
power, and began to make a figure, which during that age bore some proportion
to that of the great monarchies. Her riches surpassed those of any European
city, her finances were great, her commerce extensive, her naval power
formidable, her armies numerous and well supplied. Trusting only to her own
power, she had neglected to maintain a cordial friendship with any other state;
and by the endless political suspicions, which she entertained even of her
allies, she had taught them to regard her progress with like jealousy. No state
could reasonably complain of any injustice and usurpations in her measures: But
as great monarchs never see without displeasure a republic nearly on a level
with themselves, it was easy for Julius, by his negotiations among the European
princes, to complete his scheme of a confederacy against her. Ferdinand desired
to wrest from the Venetians some towns on the coast of Naples, which his
predecessor had voluntarily, for money, consigned into their hand: Lewis
proposed to recover a part of the territory of Milan, which he himself had
delivered to them by treaty: Maximilian laid claim to great part of their
dominions, which they had acquired from petty princes or tyrants, that had
formerly, as he pretended, in some distant period, usurped them from the
empire: The pope, from like pretenses, challenged another part of their
dominions, as the patrimony of the church. In order to cover the sch^me of this
confederacy, the cardinal d'Amboise, prime minister of France, had met at
Cambray with Margaret of Savoy, under color of accommodating a difference
between her and the duke of Guelders; and it was there, that the alliance
against Venice was secretly signed by the contracting powers; and all the
measures of operation concerted Guicciardini, lib. 8. Bembo
.

THE Venetians were apprised of their danger, and prepared themselves for
resistance. They provided every means of defense, except the most essential,
brave and warlike forces, which it is impossible to raise, where the ideas of
military glory are extinguished, and men* have, from long habit, acquired other
objects of ambition. They sent into the field an army of 40,000 men under
experienced l^aders, the count of Pi^^gliano and Bartholomew Alviano; and
hop^d, that so great a force would secure them from the invasion of Lewis, who
had le^ an army into Italy, and first to^k the field against them. But the
marti ^ nobility of France, headed by their gallant sovereign, utterly
discom^ited these enervated forces; and in the action of Ghi^rradadda the power
and glory of Venice, the result of consummate wisdom, and the work of ages,
suffered in one day a cheque, which it has never yet been able thoroughly to
recover Seissel. hist. Louis XII. St. Gelais, Guicciard. lib. 8.
. Dismayed with this loss, the Venetians took a hasty resolution of abandoning
all their dominions on the continent of Italy; and they accordingly withdrew
their garrisons from every place, and freed their subjects from their oaths of
allegiance. Lewis immediately put himself in possession of Cremona, Bergamo,
Brescia, Creme, and all the places which had been dismembered from the
Milanese. Even Verona, Padua, Vicenza, and other towns, which, by the treaty of
Cambray, fell under the partition of Maximilian, offered to open their gates to
the French monarch. Had Maximilian, instead of wasting his time at Trent, led
his forces early into Italy, an end had been put for ever to the power and
dominion of Venice. But Lewis, well acquainted with the fickleness and
inconstancy of that prince, was determined to give him no pretext for deserting
his alliance; and therefore ordered the magistrates of those towns to make
their submissions to the emperor, whom, he told them, they were now to regard
as their lawful sovereign Buonacorsi, Pettus de Angleria, epist. 418.
. The Venetian senate, observing those delays, and remarking the extreme
regret, which their subjects discovered on losing their mild and equitable
government Guicciard. lib. 8.
, began again to assume courage, and reinstated themselves in the dominion of
those cities, which they had abandoned. From this time, their prudence and
sound policy gave a cheque to the malignity of their fortune and the
superiority of their enemies. They voluntarily made a sacrifice to Ferdinand of
those towns, which he laid claim to, and thereby detached him from the alliance
Petrus de Angleria.
. They gratified the ambition of the Pope by a like sacrifice; and farther
flattered his vanity by the lowest obeisance and the most dutiful submissions
Bembo.
. After trying like arts with Maximilian, and finding his pretensions to be
utterly exorbitant, they rouzed their patriot spirit, and prepared themselves
for resistance, with a courage, which, though ill seconded by the unwarlike
genius of their people, might have done honor to the Roman senate during the
most flourishing period of the republic.

THE great force and secure situation of the considerable monarchies, prevented
any one of them from aspiring to any conquest of moment; and though this
consideration could not maintain general peace, or remedy the natural
inquietude of men, it rendered the princes of this age more easy in deserting
engagements and changing their alliances, in which they were retained more by
humor and caprice than by any natural or durable interest. Julius had no
sooner humbled the Venetian republic, than he was inspired with a nobler
ambition, that of expelling all foreigners from Italy, or, to speak in the
style affected by the Italians of that age, the freeing that country entirely
from the dominion of the Barbarians Guicciard. lib. 8.
. He was determined to make the tempest fall first upon Lewis; and in order to
pave the way for this great enterprise, he at once sought for a ground of
quarrel with that monarch, and courted the alliance of other princes. He
declared war against the Duke of Ferrara, the closest confederate of Lewis. He
solicited the favor of England, by sending Henry a sacred rose, perfumed with
musk and anointed with chrism Spelman, Council. vol. 2. p. 725.
. He engaged in his interest Bambrige, archbishop of York, and Henry's
ambassador at Rome, whom he soon after created cardinal. He drew over Ferdinand
to his side, though that monarch, at first, made no declaration of his
intentions. And what he chiefly valued, he framed a treaty with the Swiss
cantons, who, enraged by some neglects put upon them by Lewis, accompanied with
contumelious expressions, had deserted the alliance of France, and waited an
opportunity of revenging themselves on that nation.

LEWIS was determined not to abandon the duke of Ferrara, who suffered merely
for his attachment to the crown of France. Chaumont, his lieutenant in the
Milanese, received orders to defend him against Julius, who, supported by his
own dauntless spirit, and confiding in the sacredness of his character, had set
his enemy at defiance. By a happy and unexpected movement, Chaumont surrounded
the pope and all his court in Bologna; and had he not allowed himself to be
amused by a treaty, which his profound respect for the holy father made him the
more willing to hearken to, he had been able, without any bloodshed, to have
reduced him to captivity. Finding himself exposed to severe censure for not
pushing his advantages, he was agitated with such violent regret that he fell
into a languishing illness, of which he soon after died; though opposite remorses
took place on his deathbed, and he very humbly claved of his holiness a
remission of his grievous sin, in having at all born arms against him L'abbe du
Bos, Histoire de la Ligue de Cambray.
.

summoned at Pisa, which from the beginning bore a very inauspicious aspect,
and promised little success to its adherents. Except a few French bishops, who
unwillingly obeyed their King's orders in attending the council, all the other
prelates kept at a distance from an assembly, which they regarded as the
offspring of faction, intrigue, and worldly politics. Even Pisa, the place of
their residence, showed them signs of contempt; which engaged them to transfer
their session to Milan, a town under the dominion of the French monarch.
Notwithstanding this advantage, they did not experience much more respec^^^^
treatment from the inhabitants of Milan; and found it necessary to make another
^^move to Lions Guicciardini, lib. 10.
. Lewis himself fortified these violent prejudices in favor of (...) papa^
authority, by the symptoms, which he discovered, of regard, deference, and
submission to Julius, whom he always spared, even when fortune had thrown into
his hands the most inviting opportunities of humbling him. And as it was known,
that his consort, who had great authority with him, was extremely disquieted in
mind, on account of his dissentions with the holy father, all men
prog^osticated to Julius final success in this unequal contest.

THAT enterprizing pope knew his advantages, and availed himself of them with
the utmost temerity and insolence. So much had he neglected his pontifical
character, that he assisted in person at the siege of Mirandola, visited the
trenches, saw some of his attendants killed by his side, and, like a young
soldier, cheerfully bore all the rigours of winter and a severe season, in
pursuit of military glory Guicciardini, lib. 9.
: Yet was he still able to throw, even on his most moderate opponents, the
charge of impiety and profaneness. He summoned a council at the Lateran: He
put Pisa under an interdict, and all the places which gave shelter to the
schismatical council: He excommunicated the cardinals and prelates who attended
it: He even directed his spiritual thunders against the princes who adhered to
it: He freed their subjects from all oaths of allegiance, and gave their
dominions to every one, who could take possession of them.

most Christian King, which had hitherto been annexed to the crown of France,
and which was regarded as its most precious ornament, would, in reward of his
services, be transferred to that of England Guicciard. lib. 11. P. Daniel, vol.
II. p. 1893. Herbert. Hollingshed, p. 831.
. Impatient also of acquiring that distinction in Europe, to which his power
and opulence entitled him, he could not long remain neuter amidst the noise of
arms; and the natural enmity of the English against France, as well as their
ancient claims upon that kingdom, led Henry to join that alliance which the
pope, Spain, and Venice had formed against the French monarch. A herald was
sent to Paris, to exhort Lewis not to wage impious war against the pope; and
when he returned without success, another was sent to make a demand of the
ancient patrimon^al provinces, Anjou, Maine, Guienne, and Normandy. War with
France.
4th of February.
This message was understood as a declaration of war; and a Parliament, being
summoned, readily granted supplies for a purpose so much favored by the
English nation Herbert. Hollingshed, p. 811.
.

BUONAVISO, an agent of the pope at London, had been corrupted by the court of
France, and had previously revealed to Lewis all the measures which Henry was
concerting against him. But this infidelity did the King inconsiderable
prejudice, in comparison of what he experienced from the selfish purposes of
the ally, to whom he chiefly trusted for assistance. Ferdinand, his
father-in-law, had so long persevered in a course of crooked politics, that he
began even to value himself on his dexterity in fraud and artifice; and he made
a boast of those shameful successes. Being told one day, that Lewis the
twelfth, a prince of a very different character, had complained that he had
once cheated him: "He lies, the drunkard!" said he, "I have cheated him above
twenty times." This prince considered his close connection with Henry, only as
the means which enabled him the better to take advantage of his want of
experience. He advised him not to invade France by the way of Calais, where he
himself would not have it in his power to assist him: Expedition to Fontarabia.
He exhorted him rather to send forces to Fontarabia, whence he could easily
make a conquest of Guienne, a province, in which, it was imagined, the English
had still some adherents. He promised to assist this conquest by the junction
of a Spanish army. And so forward did he seem to promote the interest of his
son-in-law, that he even sent vessels into England, to transport over the
forces which Henry had levied for that purpose. The marquess of Dorset
commanded these troops, which consisted of ten thousand men, mostly infantry;
the lord Howard, son to the earl of Surrey, the lord Broke, lord Ferrars, and
many others of the young gentry and nobility, accompanied him in this service.
All were on fire to distinguish themselves by military achievements, and to
make a conquest of importance for their master. The secret purpose of Ferdinand
in this unexampled generosity was suspected by no body.

THE small kingdom of Navarre lies on the frontiers between France and Spain;
and as John d'Albert, the present King, was connected in friendship and
alliance with Lewis, the opportunity seemed favorable to Ferdinand, while the
English forces were conjoined with his own, and while all adherents to the
council of Pisa lay under the sentence of excommunication, to put himself in
possession of these dominions. No sooner, therefore, was Dorset landed in
Guipiscoa, than the Spanish monarch declared his readiness to join him with his
forces, to make jointly an invasion of France, and to form the siege of
Bayonne, which opened the way into Guienne Herbert. Hollingshed, p 813.
: But he remarked, how dangerous it might prove to leave behind them the
kingdom of Navarre, which, being in close alliance with France, could easily
give admittance to the enemy, and cut off all communication between Spain and
the combined armies. To provide against so dangerous an event, he required,
that John should stipulate a neutrality in the present war; and when that
prince expressed his willingness to enter into any engagement for that purpose,
he also required that he should give security for his strict observance of it.
John having likewise agreed to this condition, Ferdinand demanded, that he
should deliver into his hands six of the most considerable places of his
dominions, together with his eldest son as a hostage. These were not conditions
to be proposed to a sovereign; and as the Spanish monarch expected a refusal,
he gave immediate orders to the duke of Alva, his general, to make an invasion
of Navarre, and to reduce the whole kingdom to subjection. Alva soon made
himself master of all the smaller towns; and being ready to form the siege of
Pampeluna, the capital, he summoned the marquis of Dorset to join him with the
English army, and to concert together all their operations.

DORSET began to suspect, that his master's interests were very little regarded
in all these transactions; and having no orders to invade the kingdom of
Navarre, or make war any where but in France, he refused to take any part in
that enterprise. Deceit of Ferdinand.
He remained therefore in his quarters at Fontarabia; but so politic was the
contrivance of Ferdinand, that even while the English army lay in that
situation, it was almost equally serviceable to his purposes, as if it had
acted in conjunction with his own. It kept the French army in awe, and
prevented it from advancing to succor the kingdom of Navarre; so that Alva,
having full leisure to conduct the siege, made himself master of Pampeluna, and
obliged John to seek for shelter in France. The Spanish general applied again
to Dorset, and proposed to conduct with united councils the operations of the
holy league, so it was called, against Lewis: But as he still declined forming
the siege of Bayonne, and rather insisted on the invasion of the principality
of Bearne, a part of the King of Navarre's dominions, which lies on the French
side of the Pyrences, Dorset, justly suspicious of his sinister intentions,
represented, that, without new orders from his master, he could not concur in
such an undertaking. In order to procure such orders, Ferdinand dispatched
Martin de Ampios, as his envoy, to London; and persuaded Henry, that, by the
refractory and scrupulous humor of the English general, the most favorable
opportunities were lost, and that it was necessary he should, in all things,
act in concert with the Spanish commander, who was best acquainted with the
situation of the country, and the reasons of every operation. But before orders
to this purpose reached Spain, Dorset had become extremely impatient; and
observing that his farther stay served not to promote the main undertaking, and
that his army was daily perishing by want and sickness, he demanded shipping
from Ferdinand to transport them back into England. Ferdinand, who was bound by
treaty to furnish him with this supply, whenever demanded, was at last, after
many delays, obliged to yield to his importunity; and Dorset embarked his
troops, and prepared himself for the voyage. Return of the English.
Mean while, a messenger arrived with orders from Henry, that the troops should
remain in Spain; but the soldiers were so discontented with the treatment which
they had met with, that they mutinied, and obliged their commanders to set sail
for England. Henry was much displeased with the ill success of this enterprise;
and it was with difficulty, that Dorset, by explaining the fraudulent
intentions of Ferdinand, was at last able to appease him.

THERE happened this summer an action at sea, which brought not any more
decisive advantage to the English. Sir Thomas Knevet, master of Horse, was sent
to the coast of Britanny with a fleet of forty-five sail; and he carried with
him Sir Charles Brandon, Sir John Carew, and many other young courtiers, who
longed for an opportunity of displaying their valor. After committing some
depredations, a French fleet of thirty-nine sail issued from Breast, under the
command of Primauget Or rather Porsmauget, according to P. Daniel's conjecture,
vol. II. p. 1901. Hence the English seamen called him Sir Pierce Morgan.
, and began an engagement with the English. Primauget's ship was set on fire,
who finding his destruction inevitable, bore down upon the vessel of the
English admiral, and grappling with her, resolved to make her share the same
fate. The ships of both fleets stood some t me in suspense, as spectators of
this dreadful engagement; and all men saw with horror the flames which consumed
both vessels, and heard the cries of fury and despair which came from the
miserable combatants. At last, the French vessel blew up; and at the same time
destroyed the English Polydore Virg. lib. 27. Stow, p 490. Lanquet's epitome of
chronicles, fol. 273.
. The rest of the French fleet made their escape into different harbors.

THE war, which England waged against France, though it brought little
advantage to the former kingdom, was of infinite prejudice to the latter; and
by obliging Lewis to withdraw his forces for the defense of his own dominions,
lost him that superiority, which his arms, in the beginning of the campaign,
had attained in Italy. Gaston de Foix, his nephew, a young hero, had been
entrusted with the command of the French forces; and in a few months performed
such feats of military art and prowess, as were sufficient to render
illustrious the whole life of the oldest captain Guicciard, lib. 10.
. His carreer finished with the great battle of Ravenna, which, after the most
obstinate conflict, he gained over the Spanish and papal armies. He perished
the very moment his victory was complete; and with him perished the fortune of
the French arms in Italy. The Swiss, who had rendered themselves extremely
formidable by their bands of disciplined infantry, invaded the Milanese with a
numerous army, and raised up that inconstant people to a revolt against the
dominion of France.

21st of February.
JULIUS discovered extreme joy on the discomfiture of the French; and the more
so, that he had been beholden for it to the Swiss, a people, whose councils, he
hoped, he should always be able to govern and direct. The pontiff survived this
success a very little time; Leo the tenth.
and in his place was chosen John de Medici, who took the appellation of Leo
the tenth, and proved one of the most illustrious princes that ever sat on that
throne. Humane, beneficent, generous, affable; the patron of every art, and
friend of every virtue Father Paul, lib. 1.
; he had a soul no less capable of forming great designs than his predecessor,
but was more gentle, pliant, and artful in employing means for the execution of
them. By his intrigues, the emperor Maximilian was detached from the French
interest; and Henry, notwithstanding his disappointments in the former
campaign, was still encouraged to prosecute his warlike measures against Lewis.

A Parliament.
HENRY had summoned a new session of Parliament 4th of November, 1512.
, and obtained a supply for his enterprise. It was a poll-tax, and imposed
different sums, according to the station and riches of the person. A duke paid
ten marks, an earl five pounds, a lord four pounds, a knight four marks; every
man valued at eight hundred pounds in goods, four marks. An imposition was also
granted of two fifteenths and four tenths Stowe.
. With these supplies, joined to the treasure which was left by his father, and
which was not yet entirely dissipated, he was enabled to levy a great army, and
render himself very formidable to his enemy. The English are said to have been
much encouraged in this enterprise, by the arrival of a vessel in the Thames
under the papal banner. It carried presents of wine and hams to the King, and
all the most eminent courtiers; and such fond devotion was at that time
entertained toward the court of Rome, that these trivial presents were every
where received with the greatest triumph and exultation.

IN order to prevent all disturbance from Scotland, while the King's arms
should be employed on the continent, Dr. West, Dean of Windsor, was dispatched
in an embassy to James, the King's brother-in-law; and instructions were given
him to accommodate all differences between the kingdoms, as well as discover
the intentions of the court of Scotland Polydore Virgil, lib. 27.
. Some complaints had already passed on both sides. One Barton, a Scotchman,
having suffered some injuries from the Portugueze, for which he could obtain no
redress, had procured letters of marque against that nation; but not content
with this liberty, he committed depredations upon the English, and much
infested the narrow seas Stowe, p. 489. Hollingshed, p. 811.
. Lord Howard and Sir Edward Howard, admirals, and sons to the earl of Surrey,
sailing out against him, fought him in a desperate rencounter, where the pyrate
was killed; and they brought his ships into the Thames. As Henry refused all
satisfaction for this act of justice, some of the borderers, who wanted but a
pretense for depredations, entered England under the command of lord Hume,
warden of the marches, and committed great ravages on that kingdom.
Notwithstanding these mutual grounds of dissatisfaction, matters might easily
have been accommodated, had it not been for Henry's intended invasion of
France, which rouzed up the jealousy of the Scotch nation Buchannan, lib. 13.
Drummond in the life of James IV.
. The ancient league, which subsisted betwixt France and Scotland, was
conceived to be the strongest band of connection; and the Scotch universally
believed, that, were it not for the countenance which they received from this
foreign alliance, they had never been able so long to maintain their
independance against a people so much superior in force and riches. War with
Scotland.
James was farther incited to take part in the quarrel by the invitations of
Anne, queen of France, whose knight he had ever in all tournaments professed
himself, and who summoned him, according to the ideas of romantic gallantry,
prevalent in that age, to take the field in her defense, and prove himself her
true and valorous champion. The remonstrances of his consort and of his wisest
counselors, were in vain opposed to the martial ardour of that prince. He
first sent a squadron of ships to the assistance of France; the only fleet
which Scotland seems ever to have possessed. And though he made profession
still to maintain a neutrality, the English ambassador easily foresaw, that a
war would prove in the end inevitable, and he gave his master warning of the
danger, who sent the earl of Surrey to put the borders in a posture of defense,
and to resist the invasion of the enemy.

HENRY, all on fire for military ^ame, was little discouraged by this
appearance of a diversion from the North; and so much the less, that he
flattered himself with the assistance of all the considerable potentates of
Europe in his invasion of France. The pope still continued to thunder out his
excommunications against Lewis, and all the adherents to the schismatical
council: The Swiss cantons made professions of the most violent animosity
against France: The ambassadors of Ferdinand and Maximilian had signed with
those of Henry a treaty of alliance against that power, and had stipulated the
time and place of their intended invasion: And though Ferdinand disavowed his
ambassador, and even signed a truce for a twelvemonth with the common enemy;
Henry was not yet fully convinced of his selfish and sinister intentions, and
still hoped for his concurrence after the expiration of that term. He had now
got a minister who complied with all his inclinations, and flattered him in
every scheme to which his sanguine and impetuous temper was inclined.

Wolsey minister.
THOMAS WOLSEY, dean of Lincoln, and almoner to the King, surpassed in favor
all his ministers and courtiers, and was fast advancing toward that unrivalled
grandeur, which he afterward attained. This man was the son of a butcher at
Ipswich; but having got a learned education, and being endowed with an
excellent capacity, he was admitted into the marquis of Dorset's family as
tutor to that nobleman's children, and soon gained the friendship and
countenance of his patron Stowe, p. 997.
. He was recommended as chaplain to Henry the seventh, and being employed by
that monarch in a secret negotiation, which regarded his intended marriage with
Margaret of Savoy, Maximilian's daughter, he acquitted himself to the King's
satisfaction, and obtained the praise both of diligence and dexterity in his
conduct Cavendish, Fiddes's life of Wolsey. Stowe.
. That prince having given him a commission to the emperor, who at that time
resided in Brussels, was surprised, in less than three days after, to see
Wolsey present himself before him; and supposing that he had protracted his
departure, he began to reprove him for the dilatory execution of his orders.
Wolsey informed him, that he was just returned from Brussels, and had
successfully fulfilled all his majesty's commands. "But on second thoughts,"
said the King, "I found that somewhat was omitted in your orders; and have sent
a messenger after you with fuller instructions." "I met the messenger," replied
Wolsey, "on my return: But as I had reflected on that omission, I ventured of
myself to execute what, I knew, must be your majesty's intentions." The death
of Henry, soon after this incident, was the reason why Wolsey reaped no
advantage from the good opinion, which that monarch had entertained of him: But
from that moment he was looked on at court as a rising man; and the bishop of
Winchester cast his eye upon him as one, who might be serviceable to him in his
present situation Antiq. Brit. Ecles. p. 309. Polydore Virgil, lib. 27.
. This prelate, observing that the earl of Surrey had totally eclipsed him in
favor, resolved to introduce Wolsey into the young prince's familiarity, and
hoped, that he might rival Surrey in his insinuating arts, and yet be contented
to act in the cabinet a part subordinate to Fox himself, who had promoted him.
In a very little time, Wolsey gained so much on Henry's good graces, that he
supplanted both Surrey in his favor, and Fox in his trust and confidence.
Being admitted to the King's parties of pleasure, he took the lead in every
jovial conversation, and promoted all that frolic and entertainment, which he
found suitable to the age and inclination of the young monarch. Neither his own
years, which were near forty, nor his character of a clergyman, were any
restraint upon him, or engaged him to check, by any useless severity, the
gaiety, in which Henry, who had small propension to debauchery, passed his
careless hours. During the intervals of amusement he introduced business and
state affairs, and insinuated those maxims of conduct, which he was desirous
his master should adopt. He observed to him, that, while he entrusted his
affairs into the hands of his father's counselors, he had the advantage of
employing men of wisdom and experience, but men who owed not their promotion to
his favor, and who scarce thought themselves accountable to him for the
exercise of their authority: That by the factions, and cabals, and jealousies,
which prevailed among them, they more obstructed the advancement of his
affairs, than they promoted it by the knowledge which age and practice had
conferred upon them: That while he thought proper to pass his time in those
pleasures, to which his age and royal fortune invited him, and in those
studies, which would in time enable him to sway the scepter with absolute
authority, his best system of government would be to entrust his authority into
the hands of some one person, who was the creature of his will, and who could
entertain no view but of promoting his service: And that if this minister had
also the same relish for pleasure with himself, and the same taste for science;
he could the more easily account to him for his whole conduct, and introduce
his master gradually into the knowledge of public busine^ss, and thus, without
tedious constraint or application, initiate him in the science of government
Cavendish, p. 12. Stowe, 499.
.

HENRY entered into all the views of Wolsey; and finding no one so capable of
executing this plan of administration as the person who proposed it, he soon
advanced his favorite, from being the companion of his careless hours, to be a
member of his council; and from being a member of his council, to be his sole
and absolute minister. His character.
By this rapid advancement and uncontrouled authority, the character and genius
of Wolsey had full opportunity to display itself. Insatiable in his
acquisitions, but still more magnificent in his expense: Of extensive capacity,
but still more unbounded enterprise: Ambitious of power, but still more
desirous of glory: Insinuating, engaging, persuasive; and, by turns, lofty,
elevated, commanding: Haughty to his equals, but affable to his dependants;
oppressive to the people, but liberal to his friends; more generous than
grateful; less moved by injuries than by contempt; he seemed framed to take the
ascendant in every intercourse with others, but exerted this superiority of
nature with such ostentation as exposed him to envy, and made every one willing
to recall the original inferiority or rather meanness of his fortune.

THE branch of administration, in which Henry most exerted himself, while he
gave his entire confidence to Wolsey, was the military, which, as it suited the
natural gallantry and bravery of his temper, as well as the ardour of his
youth, was the principal object of his attention. Finding, that Lewis had made
great preparations both by sea and land to resist him, he was no less careful
to raise a formidable army and equip a considerable fleet for the invasion of
France. The command of the fleet was entrusted to Sir Edward Howard; who, after
scouring the channel some time, presented himself before Breast, where the
French navy then lay; and he challenged them to a combat. The French admiral,
who expected from the Mediterranean a reinforcement of some Galleys under the
command of Prejeant de Bidoux, kept within the harbor, and saw with patience
the English burn and destroy the country in the neighborhood. At last Prejeant
arrived with six galleys, and put into Conquet, a place within a few leagues of
Breast, where he secured himself behind some batteries, which he had planted on
rocks, that lay on each side of him. 25th April.
Howard was notwithstanding determined to make an attack; and as he had but two
galleys, he took himself the command of one, and gave the other to Devereux
lord Ferrars. He was followed by some row-barges and some crayers under the
command of Sir Thomas Cheyney, Sir William Sidney, and other officers of
distinction. He immediately fastened on Prejeant's ship, and leaped on board of
her, attended with one Carroz, a Spanish cavalier, and seventeen English more.
The cable, meanwhile, which fastened his ship to that of the enemy, being cut,
the admiral was thus left in the hands of the French; and as he still continued
the fight with great gallantry, he was pushed overboard by their pikes It was a
maxim of Howard's, that no admiral was good for any thing, that was not brave
even to a degree of madness. As the sea-service requires much less plan and
contrivance and capacity than the land, this maxim has great plausibility and
appearance of truth: Though the fate of Howard himself may serve as a proof that
even there courage ought to be tempered with discretion.
. Lord Ferrars, seeing the admiral's galley fall off, followed with the other
vessels; and the whole fleet was so discouraged by the loss of their admiral,
that they retired from before Breast Stowe, p. 491. Herbert, Hollingshed, p. 816.
. The French navy came out of harbor; and even ventured to invade the coast of
Sussex. They were repulsed, and Prejeant, their admiral, lost an eye by the
shot of an arrow. Lord Howard, brother to the deceased admiral, received the
command of the English fleet; and little memorable passed at sea during this
summer.

GREAT preparations had been making at land, during the whole winter, for an
invasion of France by the way of Calais; but the summer was well advanced
before every thing was in sufficient readiness for the intended enterprise. The
long peace, which the kingdom had enjoyed, had somewhat unfitted the English
for military expeditions; and the great change, which had lately been
introduced in the art of war, had rendered it still more difficult to inure
them to the use of the weapons now employed in action. The Swiss, and after
them the Spaniards, had shown the advantage of a stable infantry, who fought
with pike and sword, and were able to repulse even the heavy-armed cavalry, in
which the great force of the armies formerly consisted. The practice of
firearms was become very common; though the caliver, which was the weapon now
used, was so inconvenient, and attended with so many disadvantages, that it had
not entirely discredited the use of bows, a weapon in which the English
excelled all European nations. The English archers still maintained their
reputation; and even during the present reign, the king's allies had solicited
him for supplies of this kind. The second year after his accession, he sent a
thousand archers, under the command of lord Dacres, to the assistance of
Ferdinand, his father-in-law, in his projected expedition against the Moors of
Barbary; but as that prince turned his arms against the French in Italy, Darcy
was sent back without being employed in any service. The King had also sent
fifteen hundred archers under the command of Sir Edward Poinings to the
assistance of Margaret, duchess of Savoy, who made use of them with great
advantage against the duke of Guelders, the great disturber of the Netherlands.
A considerable part of the forces, which Henry now levied for the invasion of
France, consisted also of archers; and so soon as affairs were in readiness,
the vanguard of the army, amounting to 8000 men, under the command of the earl
of Shrewsbury, sailed over to Calais. Shrewsbury was accompanied with the earl
of Derby, the lords Fitzwater, Hastings, Cobham, and Sir Rice ap Thomas,
captain of the light horse. Another Body of 6000 men soon after followed under
the command of lord Herbert, the chamberlain, attended with the earls of
Northumberland and Kent, the lords Audley and Delawar, together with Carew,
^urson, and other gentlemen.

THE King himself prepared to follow with the main body and rear of the army;
and he appointed the queen regent of the kingdom during his absence. That he
might secure her administration from all disturbance, he ordered Edmond de la
Pole, earl of Suffolk, to be beheaded in the Tower, the nobleman who had been
attainted and imprisoned during the late reign. The King was led to commit this
act of violence by the dying commands, as is imagined, of his father, who told
him, that he never would be free from danger, while a man of so turbulent a
disposition as Suffolk was alive. And as his brother, Richard de la Pole, had
accepted of a command in the French service, and attempted very foolishly to
revive the York faction, and to animate them against Henry, he probably drew
more suddenly the King's vengeance on the unhappy Suffolk.

30th of June.
AT last, Henry, attended with the duke of Buckingham and many others of the
nobility, arrived in Calais, and entered upon his French expedition, whence he
fondly expected so much success and glory Polydore Virgil, lib. 27. Belcarius,
lib. 14.
. Of all those allies, on whose assistance he so much relied, the Swiss alone
fully performed their engagements. Invasion of France.
Being put in motion by a sum of money sent them by Henry, and incited by their
victories obtained in Italy, and by their animosity against France, they were
preparing to enter that kingdom with an army of twenty-five thousand men; and
no equal force could be opposed to their incursion. Maximilian had received an
advance of 120,000 crowns from Henry, and had engaged to reinforce the Swiss
with 8000 men, but failed in his engagements. That he might make atonement to
the King, he himself appeared in the Low Countries, and joined the English army
with some German and Flemish soldiers, who were useful in giving an example of
discipline to Henry's new-levied forces. Observing the disposition of the
English monarch to be more bent on glory than on interest, he inlisted himself
in his service, wore the cross of St. George, and received pay, a hundred
crowns day, as one of his subjects and captains. But while he exhibited this
extraordinary spectacle, of an emperor of Germany serving under a King of
England, he was treated with the highest respect by Henry, and really directed
all the operations of the combined army.

BEFORE the arrival of Henry and Maximilian in the camp, the earl of Shrewsbury
and lord Herbert had formed the siege of Terouane, a town situate on the
frontiers of Picardy; and they began to attack the place with vigor. Teligini
and Crequi commanded in the town, and had a garrison, which exceeded not a
thousand men; yet made they such stout resistance as protracted the siege a
month; and they found themselves at last more in danger from want of provisions
and ammunition than from the assaults of the besiegers. Having conveyed
intelligence of their situation to Lewis, who had advanced to Amiens with his
army, that prince gave orders to throw relief into the place. 16th August.
Fontrailles appeared at the head of 800 horsemen, each of whom carried a sack
of gunpowder behind him, and two quarters of bacon. With this small force he
made a sudden and unexpected irruption into the English camp, and surmounting
all resistance, advanced* to the fossee of the town, where each horseman threw
down his burden. They immediately returned at the gallop, and were so
fortunate as again to break through the English, and to receive little or no
loss, in this dangerous attempt Hist. de Chev. Bayard, chapter 57. Memoires de
Bellai.
.

Battle of Guinegate.
BUT the English had, soon after, full revenge for that insult. Henry had
received intelligence of the approach of the French Horse, who had advanced to
protect this incursion of Fontrailles; and he ordered some troops to pass the
Lis, in order to oppose them. The cavalry of France, though they consisted
chiefly of gentlemen, who had behaved with great valor in many desperate
actions in Italy, were, on sight of the enemy, seized with so unaccountable a
panic, that they immediately took to flight, and were pursued by the English.
The duke of Longueville, who commanded the French, Bussi d'Amboise, Clermont,
Imbercourt, the chevalier Bayard, and many other officers of distinction were
taken prisoners Memoires de Bellai* live. 1. Polydore Virgil, lib. 27.
Hollingshed, p. 822. Herbert.
. This action, or rather rout, is sometimes called the battle of Guinegate,
from the place where it was fought; but more commonly the battle of Spurs,
because the French, that day, made more use of their spurs than of their swords
or military weapons.

AFTER so considerable an advantage, the King, who was at the head of a
complete army of above 50,000 men, might have made incursions to the gates of
Paris, and spread confusion and desolation every where. It gave Lewis great
joy, when he heard, that the English, instead of pushing their victory, and
attacking the dismayed troops of France, returned to the siege of an
inconsiderable place like Terouane. The governors were obliged soon after to
surrender the town; and Henry found his acquisition of so little consequence,
though gained at the expense of some blood, and what, in his present
circumstances, was more important, of much valuable time, that he immediately
demolished the fortifications. The anxieties of the French were again renewed
with regard to the motions of the English. The Swiss at the same time had
entered Burgundy with a very formidable army, and laid siege to Dijon, which
was in no condition to resist them. Ferdinand himself, though he had made a truce
with Lewis, seemed disposed to lay hold of every advantage which fortune should
present to him. Scarce ever was the French monarchy in greater danger, or less
in a condition to defend itself against those powerful armies, which on every
side assailed or threatened it. Even many of the inhabitants of Paris, who
believed themselves exposed to the rapacity and violence of the enemy, began to
dislodge, without knowing what place could afford them greater safety and
protection.

BUT Lewis was extricated from his present difficulties by the manifest
blunders of his enemies. The Swiss allowed themselves to be seduced into a
negotiation by Tremouille, governor of Burgundy; and without making enquiry,
whether he had any powers to treat, they accepted of the conditions which he
offered them. Tremouille, who knew, that he would be disavowed by his master,
stipulated whatever they were pleased to demand; and thought himself happy, at
the expense of some payments, and very large promises, to get rid of so
formidable an enemy Memoires du marshall de Fleuranges Beliarius, lib. 14.
.

THE measures of Henry showed equal ignorance in the art of war with those of
the Swiss in negotiation. Tournay was a great and rich city, which, though it lay
within the frontiers of Flanders, belonged entirely to France, and afforded the
troops of that kingdom a passage into the middle of the Netherlands.
Maximilian, who was desirous to free his grandson from so troublesome a
neighborhood, advised Henry to lay siege to this place; and the English
monarch, not considering that such an acquisition no way advanced his conquests
in France, was so imprudent as to follow this interested council. The city of
Tournay, by its ancient charters, being exempted from the burden of a
garrison, the burghers, even against the remonstrance of their sovereign,
strenuously insisted on maintaining this dangerous privilege; and they engaged,
by themselves, to make a vigorous defense against the enemy Memoires de
Fleuranges.
. Their courage failed them when matters came to extremity; 24th September.
and after a few days siege, the place was surrendered to the English. Henry so
little regarded its privileges, that he immediately quartered a garrison in it,
under the command of Sir Edward Poinings. The bishop of Tournay was lately
dead; and as a new bishop was already elected by the chapter, but not installed
in his office, the King bestowed the administration of the sea on his
favorite, Wolsey, and put him in immediate possession of the revenues, which
were considerable Strype's Memorials, vol. 1. p. 5, 6.
. Hearing of the retreat of the Swiss, and observing the season to be far
advanced, he thought proper to retire into England; and he carried the greatest
part of his army with him. Success had attended him in every enterprise; and
his youthful mind was much elated with this seeming prosperity; but all men of
judgment, comparing the advantages of his situation with his progress, his
expenses with his acquisitions, were convinced, that this campaign, so much
vaunted, was, in reality, both ruinous and inglorious Cuicciardini.
.

THE success, which, during this summer, had attended Henry's arms in the
north, was much more decisive. The King of Scotland had summoned out the whole
force of his kingdom; and having passed the Tweed with a brave, though a
tumultuary army of above 50,000 men, he ravaged those parts of Northumberland
which lay nearest that river, and employed himself in taking the castles of
Norham, Etal, Work, Ford, and other places of little importance. The lady
Ford, a woman of great beauty, being taken prisoner in her castle, was
presented to James, and so gained on the affections of that monarch, that he
wasted in idle pleasure that critical time, which, during the absence of his
enemy, he should have employed in pushing his conquests. His troops, lying in a
barren country, where they soon consumed all the provisions, began to be
pinched with necessity; and as the authority of the prince was feeble, and
military discipline, during that age, extremely relaxed, many of them had
stolen from the camp, and retired to their houses. Mean while, the earl of
Surrey, having collected a force of 26,000 men, of which 5000 had been sent
over from the King's army in France, marched to the defense of the country, and
approached the Scotch, who lay on some high ground near the hills of Cheviot.
The river Till ran between the armies, and prevented an engagement: Surrey
therefore sent a herald to the Scotch camp, challenging them to descend into
the plain of Milfield, which lay toward the south; and there, appointing a day
for the combat, try their valor on equal ground. As he received no
satisfactory answer, he made a feint of marching toward Berwic; as if he
intended to enter Scotland, to lay waste the borders, and cut off the
provisions of the enemy. The Scotch army, in order to prevent his purpose, put
themselves in motion; and having set fire to the huts in which they had
quartered, they descended from the hills. Surrey, taking advantage of the
smoke, which was blown toward him, and which covered his movements, passed the
Till with his artillery and vanguard at the bridge of Twisel, and sent the rest
of his army to find a sord farther up the river.

AN engagement was now become inevitable between the (...), a^^ both sides
prepared for it with great tranquillity and order Buchannan, lib. 13. Drummond.
Herbert. Polydore Virgil, lib. 27. Stowe, p. 493. Paullus Jovius.
. 9th September.
Battle of Flouden.
The English divided their army into two lines: Lord Howard led the main body
of the ^^^st line, Sir Edmond Howard the right wing, Sir Marmaduke Constable
the left. The earl of Surrey himself commanded the main body of the second
line, lord Dacres the right wing, Sir Edward Stanley the left. The Scotch front
presented three divisions to the enemy: The middle was led by the King himself:
The right by the earl of Huntley, assisted by lord Hume: The left by the earls
of Lenox and Argyle. A fourth division under the earl of Bothwel made a body of
reserve. Huntley began the battle; and after a sharp conflict, put to flight
the left wing of the English, and chaced them off the field: But on returning
from the pursuit, he found the whole Scotch army in great disorder. The
division under Lenox and Argyle, elated with the success of the other wing, had
broke their ranks, and notwithstanding the remonstrances and entreaties of La
Motte, the French ambassador, had rushed headlong upon the enemy. Not only Sir
Edmond Howard, at the head of his division, received them with great valor;
but Dacres, who commanded in the second line, wheeling about during the action,
fell upon their rear, and put them to the sword without resistance. The
division under the King himself and that under Bothwel, animated by the valor
of their leaders, still made head against the English, and throwing themselves
into a circle, protracted the action till night separated the combatants. The
victory seemed yet uncertain, and the numbers which fell on each side were
nearly equal, amounting to above 5000 men: But the morning discovered evidently
where the advantage lay. The English had lost only persons of small note; but
the flower of the Scotch nobility had fallen in battle, and the King himself,
after the most diligent enquiry, could no where be found. In searching the
field, the English met with a dead body, which resembled him, and was arrayed
in a similar habit; and they put it in a lead coffin and sent it to London.
During some time it was kept unburied; because James died under sentence of
excommunication, on account of his confederacy with France, and his opposition
to the holy see Buchannan, lib. 13. Herbert.
: But upon Henry's application, who pretended that that prince, in the instant
before his death, had discovered signs of repentance, absolution was given him,
and his body was interred. The Scotch, however, still asserted, that it was not
James's body, which was found in the field of battle, but that of one
Elphinston, who had been arrayed in arms resembling the King's, in order to
divide the attention of the English, and share the danger with his master. It
was believed that James had been seen crossing the Tweed at Kelso; and some
imagined that he had been killed by the clients of lord Hume, whom that
nobleman had instigated to commit so enormous a crime. But the populace
entertained the opinion, that he was still alive, and having gone secretly in
pilgrimage to the holy land, would soon return, and take possession of the
throne. This fond conceit was long entertained in Scotland.

THE King of Soots and most of the chief nobility being killed in the field of
Flouden, so this battle was called, a very inviting opportunity was offered to
Henry of gaining advantages over that kingdom, perhaps of reducing it to
subjection. But he discovered on this occasion a mind truly great and generous.
When the queen of Scotland, Margaret, who was created regent during the infancy
of her son, applied for peace, he readily granted it; and took compassion of
the helpless condition of his sister and nephew.

THOUGH peace with Scotland gave Henry security toward the north, and enabled
him to prosecute in tranquillity his enterprise against France, some other
incidents had happened, which more than counterballanced this fortunate event,
and served to open his eyes with regard to the rashness of an undertaking, into
which his youth and high fortune had betrayed him.

LEWIS, fully sensible of the dangerous situation to which his kingdom had been
reduced during the former campaign, was resolved, by every expedient, to
prevent the return of like perils, and to break the confederacy of his enemies.
The pope was no way disposed to push the French to extremity; and provided they
returned not to take possession of Milan, his interest rather led him to
preserve the balance among the contending parties. He accepted therefore of
Lewis's offer to renounce the council of Lions; and he took off the
excommunication which his predecessor and himself had denounced against that
King and his kingdom. Ferdinand was now fast declining in years, and as he
entertained no farther ambition than that of keeping possession of Navarre,
which he had subdued by his arms and policy, he readily hearkened to the
proposals of Lewis for prolonging the truce another year; and he even showed an
inclination of forming a more intimate connection with that monarch. Lewis had
dro^t hints of his intention to marry his second daughter, Renee, either to
Charles, prince of Spain, or his brother, Ferdinand, both of them grandchildren
to the Spanish monarch; and he declared his resolution of bestowing on her, as
her portion, his claim to the duchy of Milan. Ferdinand not only embraced
these schemes with avidity; but also engaged the emperor, Maximilian, in the
same views, and procured his consent to a treaty, which opened so inviting a
prospect of aggrandizing their common grandchildren.

WHEN Henry was informed of Ferdinand's renewal of the truce with Lewis, he
fell into the most violent rage, and loudly complained, that his father-in-law
had first, by the highest promises and professions, engaged him in enmity with
France, and afterward, without giving him the least warning, had now again
sacrificed his interest to his own selfish purposes, and had left him exposed
alone to all the dangers and expenses of the war. In proportion to his easy
credulity and unsuspecting reliance on Ferdinand, was the vehemence with which
he exclaimed against the treatment, which he met with; and he threatened
revenge for this egregious treachery and breach of Faith Petrus de Angleria,
Epis. 545, 546.
. But he lost all patience when informed of the other negotiation, where
Maximilian was also seduced from his alliance, and where proposals had been
hearkened to, for the marriage of the prince of Spain with the daughter of
France. Charles, during the lifetime of the late King, had been affianced to
Mary, Henry's second sister; and as the prince now approached the age of
puberty, the King had expected the immediate completion of the marriage, and
the honorable settlement of a fi^^er, for whom he had entertained a very
tender affection. Such a complication, therefore, of injuries gave him the
highest displeasure, and inspired him with a desire of expressing his disdain
toward those who had taken advantage of his youth and inexperience, and had
abused his too great facility.

THE duke of Longueville, who had been made prisoner at the battle of
Guinegate, and who was still detained in England, was ready to take advantage
of all these dispositions of Henry, in order to procure a peace and even an
alliance, which he knew to be so passionately desired by his master. He
represented to the King, that Anne, queen of France, being lately dead, a door
was thereby opened for an affinity, which might tend to the advantage of both
kingdoms, and which would serve to terminate honorably all the differences
between them: That she had left Lewis no male children; and as he had ever
entertained a strong desire of having heirs to the crown, no marriage seemed
more suitable to him than that with the princess of England, whose youth and
beauty afforded the most flattering hopes in that particular: That though the
marriage of a princess of sixteen, with a King of fifty three, might seem
unsuitable; yet the other advantages, attending the alliance, were more than a
sufficient compensation for this inequality: And that Henry, in loosening his
connexions with Spain, whence he had never experienced any advantage, would
contract a close affinity with Lewis, a prince, who, through his whole life, had
invariably maintained the character of probity and honor.

AS Henry seemed to hearken to this discourse with very willing ears,
Longueville informed his master of the probability, which he discovered, of
bringing this matter to a happy conclusion; and he received full powers for
negotiating the treaty. Peace with France.
7th of August.
The articles were easily adjusted between the monarchs. Lewis agreed that
Tournay should remain in the hands of the English; that Richard de la Pole
should be banished to Metz, there to live on a pension assigned him by Lewis;
that Henry should receive payment of a million of crowns, being the arrears due
by treaty to his father and himself; and that the princess Mary should bring
four hundred thousand crowns as her portion, and enjoy as large a jointure as
any queen of France, even the former, who was heiress of Britanny. The two
princes also stipulated the succors, with which they should mutually supply
each other, in case either of them was attacked by any enemy Du Tillet.
.

9th of October.
IN consequence of this treaty, Mary was sent over to France with a splendid
retinue, and Lewis met her at Abbeville, where the espousals were celebrated.
He was enchanted with the beauty, grace, and numerous accomplishments of the
young princess; and being naturally of an amorous disposition, which his
advanced age had not entirely cooled, he was seduced into such a course of
gaiety and pleasure, as proved very unsuitable to his declining state of health
Brantome Eloge de Louis XII.
. 1st of January.
He died in less than three months after his marriage, to the infinite regret
of his subjects, who, sensible of his tender concern for their welfare, gave
him with one voice the honorable appellation of father of his people.

FRANCIS, duke of Angouleme, a youth of one and twenty, who had married Lewis's
eldest daughter, succeeded him on the throne; and by his activity, valor,
generosity, and other virtues, gave prognostics of a happy and glorious reign.
This young monarch had been extremely struck with the charms of the English
princess; and even during his predecessor's lifetime, had paid her such close
attendance, as made some of his friends apprehend that he had entertained views
of gallantry toward her. But being warned, that, by indulging himself in this
passion, he might readily exclude his own title to the throne, he fo^bore all
farther addresses; and even watched the young dowages with a very careful eye
during the first months of her widowhood. Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, was
at that time in the court of France, the most comely personage of his time, and
the most accomplished in all the exercises, which were then thought to be^^t a
courtier and a soldier. He was Henry's chief favorite; and that monarch had
even once entertained thoughts of marrying him to his sister, and had given
indulgence to that mutual passion, which took place between them. The queen
asked Suffolk, whether he had now the courage, without farther reflection, to
espouse her; and she told him, that her brother would more easily forgive him
for not asking his consent, than for acting contrary to his orders. Suffolk
declined not so inviting an offer; and the marriage was secretly completed at
Paris. Francis, who was pleased with this marriage, as it prevented Henry from
forming any powerful alliance by means of his sister Petrus de Angleria, Epist.
544.
, interposed his good offices in appealing him: And even Wolsey, having
entertained no jealousy of Suffolk, who was content to participate in the
King's pleasures, and had no ambition to interpose in state affairs, was active
in reconciling the King to his sister and brother-in-law; and he obtained them
permission to return to England.

CHAP. II.
Wolsey's administration. -- Scotch affairs. -- Progress of Francis the first.
-- Jealousy of Henry. -- Tournay delivered to France. -- Wolsey appointed
legate. -- His manner of exercising that office. -- Death of the emperor
Maximilian. -- Charles, King of Spain, chosen emperor. -- Interview between
Henry and Francis at Calais. -- The emperor Charles arrives in England. --
Mediation of Henry. -- Trial and condemnation of the duke of Buckingham.

Wolsey's administration.
THE numerous enemies, whom Wolsey's sudden elevation, his aspiring character,
and his haughty deportment had raised, served only to rivet him faster in
Henry's confidence; who placed a pride in supporting the choice, which he had
made, and who was incapable of yielding either to the murmurs of the people or
the discontents of the great. That artful prelate likewise, well acquanted with
the King's imperious temper, concealed from him the absolute ascendant, which
he acquired; and while he secretly directed all public councils, he ever
pretended a blind submission to the will and authority of his master. By
entering into the King's pleasures, he still preserved his affections; by
conducting his business, he gratified his indolence; and by his unlimited
complaisance in both capacities, he prevented all that jealousy, to which his
exorbitant acquisitions, and his splendid, ostentatious train of life should
naturally have given birth. The archbishopric of York falling vacant by the
death of Bambrige, Wolsey was promoted to that see, and resigned the bishopric
of Lincoln. Besides enjoying the administration of Tournay, he got possession,
at very low leases, of the revenues of Bath, Worcester, and Hereford,
bishoprics filled by Italians, who were allowed to reside abroad, and who were
glad to compound for this indulgence, by parting with a considerable share of
their profits. He held in commendam the abbey of St. Albans, and many other
church preferments. He was even allowed to unite with the sea of York, first
that of Durham, next that of Winchester; and there seemed to be no end of his
acquisitions. His advancement in ecclesiastical dignity served him as a
pretense for engrossing still more revenues: The pope, observing his great
influence over the King, was desirous of engaging him in his interest, and had
created him a cardinal. Never churchman, under color of exacting regard to
religion, carried to a more exorbitant height, the state and dignity of that
character. His train consisted of eight hundred servants, of whom many were
knights and gentlemen: Some even of the nobility put their children into his
family as a place of education; and in order to ingratiate them with their
patron, allowed them to bear offices as his servants. Whoever was distinguished
by any art or science paid court to the cardinal; and none paid court in
vain. Literature, which was then in its infancy, found in him a generous
patron; and both by his public institutions and private bounty, he gave
encouragement to every branch of erudition Erasm. Epist lib. 2. Epist. 1. lib.
16. Epist. 3.
. Not content with this munificence, which gained him the approbation of the
wise, he strove to dazzle the eyes of the populace, by the splendor of his
equipage and furniture, the costly embroidery of his liveries, the luster of
his apparel. He was the first clergyman in England who wore silk and gold, not
only on his habit, but also on his saddles and the trappings of his horses
Polydore Virgil, lib. 27. Stowe, p. 501. Holligshed, p. 847.
. He caused his cardinal's hat to be borne aloft by a person of rank; and when
he came to the King's chapel, would permit it to be laid on no place but the
altar. A priest, the tallest and most comely he could find, carried before him
a pillar of silver, on whose top was placed a cross: But not content with this
parade, to which he thought himself entitled as cardinal, he provided another
priest of equal stature and beauty, who marched along, bearing the cross of
York, even in the diocese of Canterbury; contrary to the ancient rule and
agreement between the prelates of these rival sees. Polydore Virgil, lib. 27.
. The people made merry with the cardinal's ostentation; and said they were now
sensible, that one cross alone was not sufficient for the expiation of his sins
and offenses.

WARHAM, chancellor and archbishop of Canterbury, a man of a very moderate
temper, averse to all dispute, chose rather to retire from public employment,
than maintain an unequal contest with the haughty cardinal. He resigned his
office of chancellor; and the seals were immediately entrusted to Wolsey. If
this new accumulation of dignity increased his enemies, it also served to exalt
his personal character, and prove the extent of his capacity. A strict
administration of justice took place during his enjoyment of this high office;
and no chancellor ever discovered greater impartiality in his decisions, deeper
penetration of judgment, or more enlarged knowledge of law and equity Sir
Thomas More. Stowe, p. 504.
.

THE duke of Norfolk, finding the King's money almost all exhausted by projects
and pleasures, while his inclination for expense still continued, was glad to
resign his office of treasurer, and retire from court. His rival, Fox, bishop
of Winchester, profited not by his absence; but partly overcome by years and
infirmities, partly disgusted at the ascendant acquired by Wolsey, withdrew
himself entirely to the care of his diocese. The duke of Suffolk had also taken
offense, that the King, by the cardinal's persuasion, had refused to pay a
debt, which he had contracted during his abode in France; and he thenceforth
affected to live in privacy. These incidents left Wolsey to enjoy without a
rival the whole power and favor of the King; and put into his hands every
species of authority. In vain, did Fox, before his retirement, warn the King
"not to suffer the servant to be greater than his master:" Henry replied, "that
he knew well how to retain all his subjects in obedience;" but he continued
still an unlimited deference in every thing to the directions and counsels of
the cardinal.

THE public tranquillity was so well established in England, the obedience of
the people so entire, the general administration of justice, by the cardinal's
means Eras^. lib. 2. ^pist. 1. Cavendish, Hall.
, so exact, that no domestic occurrence happened so remarkable as to disturb
the repose of the King and his minister: They might even have dispensed with
themselves from giving any strict attention to foreign affairs, were it
possible for men to enjoy any situation in absolute tranquillity, or abstain
from projects and enterprises, however fruitless and unnecessary.

Scotch affairs.
THE will of the late King of Scotland, who left his widow regent of the
Kingdom, and the vote of the convention of Estates, which confirmed that
destination, had expressly limited her authority to the condition of her
remaining unmarried Bachanan, lib. 14. D^ummond. Herbert.
: But notwithstanding this limitation, a few months after her husband's death,
she espoused the earl of Angus, of the name of Douglas, a nobleman of great
family and very promising hopes. Some of the nobility now proposed the election
of Angus as regent, and recommended this choice as the most likely means of
preserving peace with England: But the jealousy of the great families, and the
fear of exalting the Douglasses, begot opposition to this measure. Lord Hume in
particular, the most powerful chieftain in the kingdom, insisted on recalling
the duke of Albany, son to a brother of James the third, who had been banished
into France, and who, having there married, had lest posterity, that were the
next heirs to the crown, and the nearest relations to their young sovereign.
Albany, though first prince of the blood, had never been in Scotland, was
totally unacquainted with the manners of the people, ignorant of their
situation, unpracticed in their language; yet such was the favor attending the
French alliance, and so great the authority of Hume, that this prince was
invited to accept the reins of government. Francis, careful not to give offense
to the King of England, detained Albany some time in France; but at last,
sensible how important it was to keep Scotland in his interests, he permitted
him to go over, and take possession of the regency: He even renewed the ancient
league with that kingdom, though it implied such a close connection, as might be
thought somewhat to infringe his alliance with England.

WHEN the regent arrived in Scotland, he made enquiries concerning the state of
the country, and character of the people; and discovered a scene, with which he
was hitherto but little acquainted. That turbulent kingdom, he found, was
rather to be considered as a confederacy, and that not a close one, of petty
princes, than a regular system of civil polity; and even the King, much more
the regent, possessed an authority very uncertain and precarious. Arms, more than
laws, prevailed; and courage, preserably to equity or justice, was the virtue
most valued and respected. The nobility, in whom the whole power resided, were
so connected by hereditary alliances, or so divided by inveterate enmiti^s,
that it was impossible, without employing force, either to punish the most
^^^grant guilt, or give security to the most entire innocence. Rapine and
violence, when exercised on a hostile tribe, instead of making a person* odious
among hi^ own clan, rather recommended him to esteem and approbation, and by
rendering him useful to the chieftain, entitled him to a preference above his
fellows. And though the necessity of mutual support served as a close cement of
friendship among those of the same kindred, the spirit of revenge against
enemies, and the desire of pros^cuting the deadly feuds, (so they were called)
still appeared to be passions the most predominant among that uncultivated
people.

THE persons, to whom Albany first applied for information with regard to the
state of the country, happened to be inveterate enemies of Hume Buchanan, lib.
14. Drummond.
; and they represented that powerful nobleman as the chief source of public
disorders, and the great obstacle to the execution of the laws, and
administration of justice. Before the authority of the magistrate could be
established, it was necessary, they said, to make an example of this great
offender; and by the terror of his punishment, teach all lesser criminals to
pay respect to the power of their sovereign. Albany, moved by these reasons,
was induced to forget Hume's past services, to which he had been, in a great
measure, beholden for the regency; and he no longer bore toward him that
favorable countenance, with which he was wont to receive him. Hume perceived
the change, and was incited, both by views of his own security and his revenge,
to take measures in opposition to the regent. He applied himself to Angus and
the queen dowager, and represented to them the danger to which the infant
prince was exposed, from the ambition of Albany, the next heir to the crown, to
whom the states had imprudently entrusted the whole authority of government. By
his persuasion, she formed the design of carrying off the young King, and
putting him under the protection of her brother; and when that conspiracy was
discovered, she herself, accompanied with Hume and Angus, withdrew into
England, where she was soon after delivered of a daughter.

HENRY, in order to check the authority of Albany and the French party, gave
encouragement to these malcontents, and assured them of his protection.
Matters being afterward in appearance accommodated between Hume and the
regent, that nobleman returned into his own country; but mutual suspicions and
jealousies still prevailed. He was committed to custody, under the care of the
earl of Arran, his brother-in-law; and was, for some time, detained prisoner in
his castle. But having persuaded Arran to enter into the conspiracy with him,
he was allowed to make his escape; and he openly made war upon the regent. A
new accommodation ensued, no more sincere than the foregoing; and Hume was so
imprudent as to put himself, together with his brother, into the hands of the
regent. They were immediately seized, committed to custody, brought to their
^^^al, condemned, and executed. No legal crime was proved against these
brothers: It was only alleged, that, at the battle of Flouden, they had not
done their duty in supporting the King; and as this backwardness could not,
from the whole course of their past life, be ascribed to cowardice, it was
commonly imputed to a more criminal motive. The evidences, however, of guilt
produced against them, were far from being valid or convincing; and the people,
who hated them while alive, were very much dissatisfied with their execution.

SUCH violent remedies often produce, for some time, a deceitful tranquillity;
but as they destroy mutual confidence, and beget the most inveterate
animosities, their consequences are commonly very satal both to the public, and
to those who make trial of them. The regent, however, took advantage of the
present calm which prevailed; and being invited by the French king, who was, at
that time, willing to gratify Henry, he went over into France; and was detained
there during five years. A great part of his authority he entrusted into the
hands of Darcy, a Frenchman, whom he created warden of the marches, and who was
extremely vigilant in the distribution of justice, and the punishment of crimes
and oppression. But Sir David Hume, a kinsman of the nobleman lately executed,
desirous of revenging his friend's death on the friend of the regent, waylaid
Darcy near Dunse; and after reproaching him with that execution, made an attack
upon him. Darcy finding himself too weak to resist, and trusting to the
swiftness of his horse, fled toward Dunbar; but being ignorant of the roads,
he ran into a bog, was overtaken by the pursuers, and put to death. As he wore
long flowing hair, Hume, exulting in this assassination as a gallant exploit,
cut out these locks, and pleating them into a wreath, wore them ever after at
the pummel of his saddle Buchanan, lib. 14. Pitscotti^.
. During the absence of the regent, such confusions prevailed in Scotland, and
such mutual enmity, rapine, and violence, among the great families, that that
kingdom was, for a long time, utterly disabled both from offending its enemies,
and assisting its friends. We have carried on the Scotch history some years
b^yond the present period; that as that country had little connection with the
general system of Europe, we might be the less interrupted in the narration of
those memorable events, which were there transacted.

IT was soreseen, that a young, active prince, like Francis, and of so m^rtial
a disposition, would not suffer to lie useless the great preparations, which
his predecessor, before his death, had made for the conquest of Milan. He had
been observed even to weep at the recital of the military exploits of G^ston de
Foix; and these tears of emulation were held to be sure prognostics of his
future valor. He renewed the treaty which Lewis had made with Henry; and
having left every thing, as he thought, secure behind him, he marched his
armies toward the south of France; pretending, that his sole purpose was to
secure his kingdom against the incursions of the Swiss. That formidable people
still retained their animosity against France; and having taken Maximilian,
duke of Milan, under their protection, and indeed reduced him to absolute
dependence, they were determined, from views both of honor and interest, to
defend him against his invader Memoires du (...) l b. 1. Guicciardini lib. 12.
. They fortified themselves with numerous forces in all those valleys of the
Alps, through which, they thought, the French must necessarily pass; Progress of
Francis the first.
and when Francis, with great secrecy, industry, and perseverance, made his
entrance into Piemont by another passage, they were not dismayed, but descended
into the plain, though unprovided of cavalry, and opposed themselves to the
progress of the French arms. 13th September.
At Marignan near Milan, they fought with Francis one of the most furious and
best contested battles, which is to be met with in the history of these latter
ages; and it required all the heroic valor of that prince to inspire his
troops with courage sufficient to resist the desperate assault of those
mountainers. After a bloody action in the evening, night and darkness parted
the combatants; but next morning, the Swiss renewed the attack with equal
alacrity; and it was not till they had lost all their bravest troops that they
could be prevailed with to retire. The field was strowed with twenty thousand
slain of both sides; and the marshall Trivulzio, who had been present at
eighteen pitched battles, declared that every engagement, which he had yet
seen, was only the play of children, but that the action of Marignan was a
combat of heroes (...) de la L^gue de Cambr^y
.

AFTER this great victory, the conquest of the Milaneze was easy and open.
Francis, sensible how important the alliance of the cantons was, even in their
lowest fortune, gave them all the conditions, which they could have demanded,
had they been ever so successful; and he courted their friendship by every
possible condescension. The Venetians were in alliance with France; and as they
trusted entirely to the successes of that crown for the final recovery of their
dominions on the continent, they seconded Francis in every enterprise. Pope
Leo, whose sole fault was too great finesse and artifice, a fault, which, both
as a priest and an Italian, it was difficult for him to avoid, had hitherto
temporized between the parties; and Francis's victory at Marignan determined
him absolutely to embrace the friendship of that monarch Gui^cciardini, lib.
12. Paullus Jovius.
. But what both facilitated most, and secured the conquest of the Milaneze, was
the resolution of Maximilian Sforza himself, who, tired of the vicissitudes of
his fortune, disgusted with the tyranny of the Swiss, and desirous of privacy
and repose, put himself into Francis's hands; and having stipulated a yearly
pension of thirty thousand ducats, resigned all pretensions to that duchy, and
retired into France.

Jealousy of Henry.
THE success and glory of the French monarch began to excite jealousy in Henry;
and his rapid progress, though in so distant a country, was not regarded without
apprehensions by the English ministry. Italy was during that age the seat of
religion, of literature, and of commerce; and as it possessed alone that
luster, which has since been shared among other nations, it fixed the attention
of all Europe, and every acquisition which was made there, appeared more
important than its weight in the balance of power should, strictly speaking,
have demanded. Henry also thought, that he had reason to complain of Franc^s
for sending the duke of Albany into Scotland, and undermining the power and
credit of his sister, the queen dowager Pere Daniel, vol. 3. p. 31.
. The repairing the fortifications of Terouenne was also regarded as a breach
of treaty. But above all, what tended to alienate the court of England, was the
disgust which Wolsey had taken against the French monarch.

HENRY, on the conquest of Tournay, had refused to admit Lewis Gaillart, the
bishop elect, to the possession of the temporalities, because that prelate
declined taking the oath of allegiance to his new sovereign; and Wolsey was
appointed, in his room, administrator of the bishopric. As the cardinal wished
to obtain free and undisturbed possession, he applied to Francis, and desired
him to bestow on Gaillart some see of equal value in France, and to obtain his
resignation of Tournay. Francis, who still hoped to recover possession of that
city, and who feared that the full settlement of Wolsey in the bishopric would
prove an obstacle to his purpose, had hitherto neglected to gratify the haughty
prelate; and the bishop of Tournay, by applying to the court of Rome, had
obtained a bull for his settlement in that see. Wolsey, who expected to be
complied with in every request, and who exacted respect even from the greatest
monarchs, resented the slight put upon him by Francis; and he pushed his master
to seek an occasion for wreaking his vengeance against that monarch Polydore
Virgil, lib. 27.
.

MAXIMILIAN the emperor was ready to embrace every proposal of a new
enterprise, especially if attended with an offer of money, of which he was
extremely greedy, extremely prodigal, and extremely necessitous. Richard Pace,
formerly secretary to cardinal Bambrige, now secretary of state, was dispatched
Petrus de Angleria, epist. 568.
: He thence made a journey into Switzerland; and by like motives engaged some
of the cantons to furnish troops to the emperor. That prince invaded Italy with
a considerable army; but being repulsed from before Milan, he retreated with
his army into Germany, made peace with France and Venice, delivered Verona to
that republic for a sum of money, and thus excluded himself, in some measure,
from all future access into Italy. And Henry found, that, after expending five
or six hundred thousand ducats, in order to gratify the cardinal's resentment,
he had only loosened his alliance with Francis, without diminishing the power
of that prince.

THERE were many reasons, which engaged the King not to proceed farther at
present in his enmity against France. He could hope for assistance from no
power in Europe. Ferdinand, his father in law, who had often deceived him, was
now declining fast from age and infirmities; and a speedy end was looked for to
the long and prosperous reign of that great monarch. Charles, prince of Spain,
sovereign of the Low Countries, desired nothing but peace with Francis, who had
it so much in his power, if provoked, to obstruct his peaceable accession to
that rich inheritance, which was waiting him. The pope was overawed by the
power of France, and Venice was engaged in a close alliance with that monarchy
Guicciardini, lib. 12.
. Henry therefore remained in tranquillity during some time; and seemed to give
himself no concern with regard to the affairs of the continent. In vain did
Maximilian endeavor to allure him into some expense, by offering to make a
resignation of the imperial crown in his favor. That artifice was too gross to
succeed even with a prince so little political as Henry; and Pace, his envoy,
who was perfectly well acquainted with the emperors motives and character, gave
him warning, that the sole view of that prince in making him so liberal an
offer, was to draw money from him.

15th January.
WHILE an universal peace prevailed in Europe, that event happened, which had
so long been looked for, and from which such important consequences were
expected, the death of Ferdinand, the catholic, and the succession of his
grandson, Charles, to his extensive dominions. No commotion, however, or
alteration followed immediately upon that great incident. This young prince,
who had not yet reached his sixteenth year, was already a great statesman, from
the excellent education which he had received, and from the mature and solid
judgment, with which nature had endowed him. He was sensible how important it
was to preserve peace with foreigners, till he should have established his
authority in his new dominions; and finding Francis desirous to take advantage
of his present situation, he made him an offer of such terms as gained the
friendship and alliance of that monarch. He engaged to marry Francis's
daughter, though only an infant of a year old; to receive as her dowry all her
father's pretensions on the kingdom of Naples; to pay him a hundred thousand
crowns a year, till the consummation of the marriage; and to give the King of
Navarre satisfaction with regard to his dominions Recueil de Traites par
Leonard, tom. 2.
.

THE more Charles advanced in power and authority, the more was Francis
sensible of the necessity he lay under of gaining the confidence and friendship
of Henry; and he took at last the only method by which he could obtain success,
the paying court, by presents and flattery, to the haughty cardinal.

Polydore Virgil, lib. 27.
.

WHEN matters seemed sufficiently prepared, Bonnivet opened to the cardinal his
master's desire of recovering Tournay; and Wolsey immediately, without
hesitation, engaged to effectuate his purpose. He took an opportunity of
representing to the King and council, that Tournay lay so remote from Calais,
that it would be very difficult, if not impossible, in case of a war, to keep
the communication open between those two places: That as it was situate on the
frontiers both of France and the Netherlands, it was exposed to the attacks of
both these powers, and must necessarily, either by force or famine, fall into
the hands of the first assailant: That even in time of peace, it could not be
preserved without a large garrison, to restrain the numerous and mutinous
inhabitants, ever discontented with the English government: And that the
possession of Tournay, as it was thus precarious and expensive, so was it
entirely useless, and gave little or no access to annoy, on occasion, the
dominions either of Charles or of Francis.

THESE reasons were of themselves very convincing, and were sure of meeting
with no opposition, when they came from the mouth of the cardinal. Tournay
delivered to France.
A treaty therefore was entered into for the delivering up of Tournay; and in
order to give to that measure a more graceful appearance, it was agreed, that
the Dauphin and the princess Mary, both of them infants, should be betrothed,
and that this city should be considered as the dowry of the princess. Such
kinds of agreement were then common among sovereigns, though it was very rare,
that the interests and views of the parties continued so steady as to render
the intended marriages effectual. But as Henry had been at considerable expense
in building a citadel at Tournay, Francis agreed to pay him 600,000 crowns at
twelve yearly payments, and to put into his hands eight hostages, all of them
men of quality, for the performance of the article Memoires du Bellay, live. 1.
. And lest the cardinal should think himself neglected in these stipulations,
he promised him a yearly pension of twelve thousand livres, as an equivalent
for his administration of the bishopric of Tournay. He also engaged to recall
Albany from Scotland.

FRANCIS having succeeded so well in this negotiation, began to enlarge his
views, and to hope for more considerable advantages, by practicing on the
vanity and self conceit of this haughty favorite. He redoubled his flatteries
to the cardinal, consulted him more frequently in every doubt or difficulty,
called him in each letter, father, tutor, governor, and professed the most
unbounded deference to his advice and opinion. All those caresses were
preparatives to a negotiation for the delivery of Calais, in consideration of a
sum of money to be paid for it; and if we may credit Polydore Virgil, who bears
a particular spite to Wolsey, on account of his being dispossessed of his
employment and thrown into prison by that minister, so extravagant a proposal
met with a very favorable reception from the cardinal. He ventured not,
however, to lay the matter before the council: He was contented to sound
privately the opinions of men, by dropping hints in conversation, as if he
thought Calais a useless burden to the kingdom Polydore Virgil, lib. 27.
: But when he found, that all men were strongly riveted in a contrary
persuasion, he thought it dangerous to proceed any farther in his purpose; and
falling, soon after, into new attachments with the King of Spain, the great
friendship between Francis and him began gradually to decline.

Wolsey appointed legate.
THE enormous pride of Wolsey was now farther increased by a great accession of
dignity and power which he had received. Cardinal Campeggio had been sent as
legate into England, in order to procure a tithe from the clergy, for enabling
the pope to oppose the progress of the Turks; a danger which was real, and was
formidable to all christendom, but which had been so often made use of to serve
the interested purposes of the court of Rome, that it had lost all influence on
the minds of the people. The Clergy refused to comply with Leo's demand:
Campeggio was recalled; and the King desired of the pope, that Wolsey, who had
been joined in this commission, might alone be invested with the legantine
power, together with the right of visiting all the clergy and monasteries, and
even with suspending the whole laws of the church during a twelve month.
Wolsey, having obtained this new dignity, made a new display of that state and
parade, to which he was so much addicted. On solemn feast-days, he was not
contented without saying mass after the manner of the pope himself: Not only he
had bishops and abbots to serve him; he even engaged the first nobility to give
him water and the towel. He affected a rank superior to what had ever been
claimed by any churchman in England. Warham, the primate, having wrote him a
letter, where he subscribed himself, your loving brother, Wolsey complained of
his presumption, in thus challenging an equality with him. When Warham was told
what offense he had given, he made light of the matter. "Know ye not," he said,
"that this man is drunk with too much prosperity."

His manner of (...) that office.
BUT Wolsey carried the matter much farther than vain pomp and ostentation. He
erected an office, which he called the legantine court; and as he was now, by
means of the pope's commission and the King's favor, invested with all power,
both ecclesiastical and civil, no man knew what bounds were to be set to the
authority of this new tribunal. He conferred on it a species of inquisitorial
and censorial powers even over the laiety, and directed it to examine into all
matters of conscience; into all conduct which had given scandal; into all
actions, which, though they escaped the law, might appear contrary to good
morals. Offense was justly taken at this commission, which was really
unbounded; and the people were the more disg^^ted, when they saw a man, who
ind^^ged himself in the licenses of pleasure, so severe in repressing the least
appearance of immorality in others. But to render his court more obnoxious,
Wolsey made one John Allen the judge in it, a person of scandalous life
Strype's Memorials, vol. 1. p. 125.
, whom he himself, as chancellor, had condemned for perjury: And as this man
either exacted fines from every one whom he was pleased to find guilty, or took
bribes to drop prosecutions, men concluded, and with some appearance of reason,
that he shared with the cardinal these wages of iniquity. The clergy, and in
particular the monks, were exposed to this tyranny; and as the libertinism of
their lives often gave a just handle against them, they were obliged to buy an
indemnity, by paying large sums of money to the legate or his judge. Not
contented with this authority, Wolsey pretended, by virtue of his commission,
to assume the power of all the bishops courts; particularly that of judging of
Wills and Testaments; and his decisions in these important points were esteemed
not a little arbitrary. As if he himself were pope, and as if the pope could
dispose absolutely of every ecclesiastical establishment, he presented to
whatever priories or benefices he pleased, without regard to the right of
election in the monks, or of patronage in the nobility and gentry Polydore
Virgil, lib. 27. This whole narration has been copied by all the historians
from the author here cited: There are many circumstances, however, very
suspicious, both because of the obvious partiality of the historian, and
because the parliament, when they afterward examined Wolsey's conduct, could
find no proof for any material crime he had committed.
.

NO one durst carry to the King any complaint against these usurpations of
Wolsey, till Warham ventured to inform him of the discontents of his people.
Henry professed his ignorance of the whole matter. "A man," said he, "is not so
blind any where as in his own house: But do you, father," added he to the
primate, "go to Wolsey, and tell him, if any thing be amiss, that he amend it."
A reproof of this kind was not likely to be effectual: It only served to
augment Wolsey's enmity to Warham: But one London having prosecuted Allen, the
legate's judge, in a court of law, and convicted him of malversation and
iniquity, the clamor at last reached the King's ears, and he expressed such
displeasure to the cardinal as made him ever after more cautious in exerting
his authority This year and the foregoing the sweating sickness raged anew in
England. It was called Sudor Anglicus, because few, except the English nation,
were at acked by it. Its malignity was such, that it commonly killed within
three hours of its commencement. Some towns lost by it an half, others two
thirds of their inhabitants.
.

12th of January.
Death of the emperor Maximilian.
Maximilian the emperor died, a man, who, of himself, was indeed of little
consequence; but as his death left vacant the first station among christian
princes, it put all men's spirits into agitation, and proved a kind of era in
the general system of Europe. The Kings of France and Spain immediately
declared themselves candidates for the imperial throne; and employed every
expedient of money or intrigue, which promised them success in so great a point
of ambition. Henry also was encouraged to put in his pretensions; but his
minister, Pace, who was dispatched to the electors, found that he began to
solicit too late, and that the votes of all these princes were already pre
engaged either on the one side or the other.

FRANCIS and Charles made profession from the beginning of carrying on this
rivalship with emulation, but without enmity; and Francis in particular
declared, that his brother Charles and he were, fairly and openly, suitors to
the same mistress: The more fortunate, added he, will carry her; and the other
must rest contented Belcario, lib. 16. Guicciardin, lib. 13.
. But all men apprehended, that this extreme moderation, however reasonable,
would not be of long duration; and that incidents would certainly occur to
sharpen the minds of the candidates against each other. Charles, King of Spain,
chosen emperor.
It was Charles who at last prevailed, to the great disappointment of the
French monarch, who still continued in the belief, that the majority of the
electoral college was engaged in his favor. And as he was some years superior
in age to his rival, and, after his victory at Marignan, and conquest of the
Milanese, much superior in renown, he could not suppress his indignation, at
being thus, in the face of all mankind, after long and anxious expectation,
post-poned in so important a pretension. From this concurrence, as much as from
opposition of interest, arose that emulation between those two great monarchs,
which, while it kept their whole age in agitation, sets them in so remarkable a
contrast to each other: Both of them princes endowed with talents and
abilities; brave, aspiring, active, industrious; beloved by their servants and
subjects, dreaded by their enemies, and respected by all the world: Francis,
open, frank, liberal, munificent, carrying these virtues to an excess which
prejudiced his affairs: Charles, political, close, artificial, frugal; better
calculated to obtain success in wa^s and in negotiations, especially the
latter. The one, the more amiable man; the other, the greater monarch. The
King, from his oversights and indiscretions, naturally exposed to misfortunes;
but qualified, by his spirit and magnanimity, to extricate himself from them
with honor: The emperor, by his designing, interested character, fitted, in
his greatest successes to excite jealousy and opposition even among his allies,
and to rouse up a multitude of enemies, in the place of one whom he had
subdued. And as the personal qualities of these princes thus counterpoised each
other, so did the advantages and disadvantages of their dominions. Fortune
alone, without the concurrence of prudence or valor, never reared up of a
sudden so great a power as that which centered in the emperor Charles. He
reaped the succession of Castile, of Arragon, of Austria, of Burgundy: He
inherited the conquest of Naples, of Granada: Election entitled him to the
empire: Even the bounds of the globe seemed to be enlarged a little before his
time, that he might possess the whole treasures, as yet entire and unrifled, of
the new world. But though the concurrence of all these advantages formed an
empire greater and more extensive than any known in Europe since that of the
Romans, the kingdom of France alone, being close, compact, united, rich,
populous, and being interposed between all the provinces of Charles's
dominions, was able to make a vigorous opposition to his progress, and maintain
the contest against him.

HENRY possessed that felicity, of being able, both by the native force of his
kingdom and its situation, to hold the balance between those two powers; and
had he known to improve, by policy and prudence, this singular and inestimable
advantage, he was really, by means of it, a greater prince than either of those
mighty monarchs, who seemed to strive for the dominion of Europe. But the
character of this King was heedless, inconsiderate, capricious, impolitic;
guided by his passion or his favorite; vain, imperious, haughty; sometimes
actuated by friendship for foreign powers, oftener by resentment, seldom by his
true interest. And thus, though he triumphed in that superiority which his
situation in Europe gave him, he never employed it to the essential and durable
advantage of his kingdom or his own.

Interview between Henry and Francis at Calais.
FRANCIS was well acquainted with Henry's character, and endeavored to
accommodate his conduct to it. He solicited an interview near Calais; in
expectation of being able, by familiar conversation, to gain upon his
friendship and confidence. Wolsey earnestly seconded this proposal; and hoped,
in the presence of both courts, to make parade of his riches, his splendor,
and his influence over both monarchs Polydore Virgil, lib. 27.
. And as Henry himself loved pomp and magnificence, and had entertained a
curiosity of being personally acquainted with the French King, he very
cheerfully adjusted all the preliminaries of this interview. The nobility of
both nations strove to surpass each other in pomp and expense: Many of them
involved themselves in large debts, and were not able, by the penury of their
whole lives, to repair the vain splendor of a few days. The duke of
Buckingham, who, though immensely rich, was somewhat addicted to frugality,
finding the preparations for this festival amount to immense sums, threw out
some expressions of displeasure against the cardinal, whom he believed the
author of that measure Polydore Virgil, lib. 27. Herbert. Hollingshed, p. 855.
. An imprudence which proved afterward to Buckingham the source of great
misfortunes.

The emperor Charles arrives in England.
25th of May.
WHILE Henry was preparing to depart for Calais, he was surprised to hear that
the emperor was arrived at Dover; and he immediately hastened thither with the
queen, in order to give a suitable reception to his royal guest. That great
prince, politic though young, having heard of the intended interview between
Francis and Henry, was apprehensive of the consequences, and was resolved to
take the opportunity, in his passage from Spain to the Low Countries, to make
the King still a higher compliment, by paying him a visit in his own dominions.
Besides the marks of regard and attachment which he gave to Henry, he strove,
by every testimony of friendship, by flatteries, protestations, promises and
presents, to gain on the vanity, the avarice, and the ambition of the cardinal.
He here instilled into this aspiring prelate the hope of attaining the papacy;
and as that was the sole point of elevation, beyond his present greatness, it
was sure to attract his wishes with the same ardour, as if fortune had never,
as yet, favored him with any of her presents. In hopes of reaching this
dignity by the emperor's assistance, he secretly devoted himself to that
monarch's interests; and Charles was perhaps the more liberal of his promises,
that Leo was a very young man; and it was not likely, that, for many years, he
would be called upon to fulfill his engagements. Henry easily observed this
courtship paid to his minister; but instead of taking umbrage at it, he only
made it a subject of vanity; and believed, that, as Wolsey's sole support was
his favor, the obeisance of such mighty monarchs to his servant, was in
reality a more conspicuous homage to his own grandeur.

30th of May.
THE day of Charles's departure, Henry went over to Calais with the queen and
his whole court; and from thence proceeded to Guisnes, a small town near the
frontiers. Francis, attended in like manner, came to Andres, a few miles
distant; and the two monarchs met, for the first time, in the fields, at a
place situate between these two towns, but still within the English pale: For
Francis agreed to pay that compliment to Henry, in consideration of that
prince's passing the sea, that he might be present at the interview. Wolsey, to
whom both Kings had entrusted the regulation of the ceremonial, contrived this
circumstance, in order to do honor to his master.

THE two monarchs, after saluting each other in the most cordial manner,
retired into a sent which had been erected on purpose, and they held a secret
conference together. Henry here proposed to make some amendments on the
articles of their former alliance; and he began to read the treaty, I Henry
King: These were the first words; and he stopped a moment. He subjoined only the
words, of England, without adding, France, the usual of the English monarchs
Memoires de Fleuranges.
. Francis remarked this delicacy, and expressed by a smile his approbation of
it.

HE took an opportunity soon after of paying a compliment to Henry of a more
essential nature. That generous prince, full of honor himself, and incapable
of distrusting others, was shocked at all the precautions which were observed,
whenever he had an interview with the English monarch: The number of their
guards and attendants was carefully counted on both sides: Every step was
scrupulously measured and adjusted: And if the two Kings proposed to pay a
visit to the queens, they departed from their several quarters at the same
instant, which was marked by the firing of a culverin; they passed each other
in the middle point between the places; and at the same instant that Henry
entered Ardres, Francis put himself into the hands of the English at Guisnes.
In order to break off this tedious ceremony, which contained so many
dishonorable implications, Francis, one day, took with him two gentlemen and a
page, and rode directly into Guisnes. The guards were surprised at the presence
of the monarch, who called aloud to them, You are all my prisoners: Carry me to
your master. Henry was equally astonished at the appearance of Francis; and
taking him in his arms, "My brother," said he, "you have here played me the
most agreeable trick in the world, and have showed me the full confidence I may
place in you: I surrender myself your prisoner from this moment." He took from
his neck a collar of pearls, worth 15000 angels An angel was then estimated at
seven shillings, or near twelve of our present money.
; and putting it about Francis's, begged him to wear it, for the sake of his
prisoner. Francis agreed, but on condition that Henry should wear a bracelet,
of which he made him a present, and which was double in value to the collar
Memoires de Fleuranges.
. The King went next day to Ardres, without guards or attendants; and
confidence being now fully established between the monarchs, they employed the
rest of the time entirely in tournaments and festivals.

A DEFIANCE had been sent by the two Kings to each others court, and through all
the chief cities of Europe, importing, that Henry and Francis, with fourteen
aids, would be ready, in the plains of Picardy, to answer all comers, that were
gentlemen, at tilt, tourney, and barriers. The monarchs, in order to fulfill
this challenge, advanced into the field on horseback, Francis surrounded with
Henry's guards, and Henry with those of Francis. They were gorgiously
apparelled; and were both of them the most comely personages of the age, as
well as the most expert in every military exercise. They carried away the prize
at all trials in those rough and dangerous pastimes; and several horses and
riders were overthrown by their vigor and dexterity. The ladies were the
judges in these seats of chivalry, and put an end to the rencounter whenever
they judged it expedient. Henry erected a spacious house of wood and canvas,
which had been framed in London; and he here feasted the French monarch. He had
placed a motto on this fabric, under the figure of an English archer
embroidered on it, Cui adhaereo praeest. He prevails whom I favor Mezcray.
: Expressing his own situation, as holding in his hands the balance of power
among the potentates of Europe. 24th of June.
In these entertainments, more than in any serious business, did the two Kings
pass the time, till their departure.

HENRY, after his return to Calais, paid a visit to the emperor and Margaret of
Savoy at Gravelines, and engaged them to go along with him to Calais, and pass
some days in that fortress. The artful and politic Charles here completed the
impression, which he had begun to make on Henry and his favorite, and effaced
all the friendship, to which the frank and liberal nature of Francis had given
birth. As the house of Austria began sensibly to take the ascendant over the
French monarchy, the interests of England required that some support should be
given to the latter, and above all, that any important wars should be
prevented, which might bestow on either of them a decisive superiority over the
other. But the jealousy of the English against France has ever prevented a
cordial union between these nations: And Charles, sensible of this hereditary
animosity, and desirous farther to flatter Henry's vanity, had made him an
offer, (an offer in which Francis was afterward obliged to concur) that he
should be entire arbiter in any dispute or difference that should arise between
the monarchs. But the great masterpiece of Charles's politics was the securing
Wolsey in his interests, by very important services, and still higher promises.
He renewed assurances of assisting him in obtaining the papacy; and he put him
in present possession of the revenues, belonging to the sees of Badajox and
Palencia in Castile. The acquisitions of Wolsey were now become so exorbitant,
that, joined to the pensions from foreign powers, which Henry allowed him to
possess, his revenues were computed nearly to equal those which belonged to the
crown itself; and he spent them with a magnificence, or rather an ostentation,
which gave general offense to the people; and much lessened his master in the
eyes of all foreign nations Polydore Virgil. Hall.
.

War between Charles and Francis.
THE violent personal emulation and political jealousy which had taken place
between the emperor and the French King, soon broke into action. Francis sent
an army into Navarre under the command of De Foix, in order to replace the
family of Albert in the possession of that kingdom; and this enterprise could
not have been complained of as a breach of treaty, if De Foix had confined
himself to that equitable design. But after he had subdued Navarre, finding
Spain in great disorder from the insurrections of the people, he thought the
opportunity favorable, and he ventured, with Francis's approbation, to lay
fiege to Logrogno in Castile. This invasion, contrary to what was expected, put
an end to the domestic dissentions of the Castilians; who attacked the French,
obliged them to raise the siege, pursued the advantage, and entirely expelled
them Navarre, which has ever since remained united with the Spanish monarchy
Vera, hist. de Charl. V.
. Robert de la Marck, duke of Bouillon and prince of Sedan, having received
some disgust from the governess of the Low Countries, had taken arms and
invaded those provinces; and had even sent a challenge or defiance to the
emperor himself Memoires de Bellay, lib. 1.
: A boldness, which seemed entirely unaccountable, except on the supposition
that this petty prince had received secret encouragement from Francis. On the
other hand, Charles, in order to chastise the insolence of Robert, had levied a
powerful army, and advanced to the frontiers of France, which he threatened
with an invasion. Hostilities were soon carried farther; his generals besieged
Mouson, which they took; they invested Mezieres, where they met with a repulse.
In Italy likewise the two monarchs were not inactive. Francis negotiated with
the Pope, in order to engage him to concur in expelling the imperialists from
Naples: But Charles had the address to finish his league with the same power
for expelling the French from Milan; and the united arms of the allies had
invaded that duchy, and had almost entirely finished their enterprise.

WHILE these ambitious and warlike princes were committing hostilities on each
other in every part of Europe, they still made professions of the strongest
desire of peace; and both of them carried incessantly their complaints to
Henry, as to the arbiter or umpire between them. Mediation of Henry.
The King, who appeared neutral, engaged them to send their ambassadors to
Calais, there to negotiate a peace under the mediation of Wolsey and the pope's
nuntio. The emperor was well acquainted with the partiality of these mediators;
and his demands in the conference were so unreasonable, as plainly proved him
conscious of this advantage. He required the restitution of Burgundy, a
province, which had been ceded many years before by treaty, and which would
have given him access into the midst of France: And he demanded to be freed
from the homage, which his ancestors had ever paid for Flanders and Artois, and
which he himself had, by the treaty of Noyon, promised to renew. On Francis's
rejecting these terms, the congress at Calais broke up, and Wolsey, soon after,
took a journey to Bruges, where he met with the emperor. 24th of November.
He was received with the same state, magnificence, and respect, as if he had
been the King of England himself; and he concluded in his master's name an
offensive alliance with the pope and the emperor against France. He engaged
that England should next summer invade that kingdom with forty thousand men;
and he betrothed to Charles the princess Mary, the King's only child, who had
now some prospect of inheriting the crown. This extravagant alliance, which was
prejudicial to the interests, and might have proved fatal to the liberty and
independance of the kingdom, was the result of the humors and prejudices of
the King, and the private views and expectations of the cardinal.

THE people saw every day new instances of the uncontrouled authority of this
minister. Trial and condemnation of the duke of Buckingham.
The duke of Buckingham, constable of England, the first nobleman both for
family and fortune in the kingdom, had been so unfortunate as to give disgust
to the cardinal, and it was not long before he found reason to repent his
indiscretion. He seems to have been a man full of levity and rash projects; and
being infatuated with judicial astrology, he entertained commerce with one
Hopkins, a carthusian monk, who encouraged him with the notion of mounting one
day the throne of England. He was descended by a female from the duke of
Gloucester, youngest son of Edward the third; and though his claim to the crown
was thereby very remote, he had been so imprudent as to let fall some
expressions, as if he thought himself best entitled, in case the King should
die without issue, to possess the royal dignity. He had not even abstained from
threats against the King's life, and had provided himself of arms, which he
intended to employ, in case a favorable opportunity should offer. He was
brought to a trial; and the duke of Norfolk, whose son, the earl of Surrey, had
married Buckingham's daughter, was created loed steward, in order to preside at
this solemn procedure. The jury consisted of a duke, a marquis, seven earls,
and twelve barons; and they gave sentence against Buckingham, which was soon
after put in execution. There is no reason to think the sentence unjust
Herbert. Hall. Stow, 513. Hollingshed, p. ^62.
; 17th of May.
but as Buckingham's crime seemed to proceed more from indiscretion than
deliberate malice, the people, who loved that nobleman, expected that the King
would grant him a pardon, and ascribed their disappointment to the malice and
revenge of the cardinal. The King's own jealousy, however, against all
pretenders to the crown, was, notwithstanding his undoubted title, very
remarkable during the whole course of his reign; and was alone sufficient to
render him implacable against Buckingham. The office of constable, which
Buckingham inherited from the Bohuns, earls of Hereford, was forfeited, and was
never after revived by Henry.

CHAP. III.
Digression concerning the ecclesiastical state. -- Origin of the reformation.
-- Martin Luther. -- Henry receives the title of defender of the faith. --
Causes of the progress of the reformation. -- War with France. -- Invasion of
France. -- War with Scotland. -- A Parliament. -- Invasion of France. --
Italian wars. -- The King of France invades Italy. -- Battle of Pavia and
captivity of Francis. -- Francis recovers his liberty. -- Sack of Rome. --
League with France.

DURING some years, many parts of Europe had been agitated with those religious
controversies, which produced the reformation, one of the greatest events in
history: But as it was not till this time, that the King of England publicly
took part in the quarrel, we had no occasion to give any account of its rise
and progress. It will now be necessary to explain these theological disputes;
or what is more material, to trace from their origin those abuses, which so
generally diffused the opinion, that a reformation of the church or
ecclesiastical order was become highly expedient, if not absolutely necessary.
We shall be better enabled to comprehend the subject, if we take the matter a
little higher, and reflect a moment on the reasons, why there must be an
ecclesiastical order, and a public establishment of religion in every civilized
community. The importance of the present occasion will, I hope, excuse this
short digression.

Digression concerning the ecclesiastical state.
MOST of the arts and professions in a state are of such a nature, that, while
they promote the interests of the society, they are also useful or agreeable to
some individuals; and in that case, the constant rule of the magistrate,
except, perhaps, on the first introduction of any art, is, to leave the
profession to itself, and trust its encouragement to the individuals, who reap
the benefit of it. The artizans, finding their profits to rise by the favor of
their customers, increase, as much as possible, their skill and industry; and
as matters are not disturbed by any injudicious tampering, the commodity is
always sure to be at all times exactly proportioned to the demand.

BUT there are also some callings, which, though useful and even necessary in a
state, bring no advantage nor pleasure to any individuals; and the supreme
power is obliged to alter its conduct with regard to the retainers of those
professions. It must give them public encouragement in order to their
subsistence; and it must provide against that negligence, to which they will
naturally be subject, either by annexing particular honor to the profession,
by establishing a long subordination of ranks and a strict dependence, or by
some other expedient. The persons employed in the finances, armies, fleets, and
magistracy are instances of this order of men.

IT may naturally be thought, at first view, that the ecclesiastics belong to
the first class, and that their encouragement, as well as that of lawyers and
physicians, may safely be trusted to the liberality of individuals, who are
attached to their doctrines, and who find benefit or consolation from their
spiritual ministry and assistance. Their industry and vigilance will, no doubt,
be whetted by such an additional motive; and their skill in the profession, as
well as their address in governing the minds of the people, must receive daily
increase, from their increasing practice, study, and attention.

BUT if we consider the matter more closely, we shall find, that this
interested diligence of the clergy is what every wise legislator will study to
avoid; because in every religion, except the true, it is highly pernicious, and
has even a natural tendency to pervert the true, by infusing into it a strong
mixture of superstition, folly, and delusion. Each ghostly practitioner, in
order to render himself more precious and sacred in the eyes of his retainers,
must inspire them with the most violent abhorrence against all other sects, and
continually endeavor, by some novelty, to excite the languid devotion of his
audience. No regard will be paid to truth, morals, or decency in the doctrines
inculcated. Every tenet will be adopted, that best suits the disorderly
affections of the human frame. Customers will be drawn to each conventicle by
new industry and address in practicing on the passions and credulity of the
populace. And in the end, the civil magistrate will find, that he has paid
dearly for his pretended frugality, in saving a settled foundation for the
priests; and that in reality the most decent and advantageous composition,
which he can make with the spiritual guides, is to bribe their indolence, by
affixing stated sallaries to their profession, and rendering it superfluous for
them to be farther active, than merely to preserve their flock from straying in
quest of new pastures. And in this manner ecclesiastical establishments, though
commonly they arose at first from religious views, prove in the end
advantageous to the political interests of society.

BUT we may observe, that few ecclesiastical establishments have been fixed
upon a worse foundation than that of the church of Rome, or have been attended
with circumstances more hurtful to the peace and happiness of mankind.

THE large revenues, privileges, immunities, and powers of the clergy rendered
them formidable to the civil magistrate, and armed with too extensive authority
an order of men, who always adhere closely together, and who never want a
plausible pretense for their encroachments and usurpations. The higher
dignities of the church served, indeed, to the support of gentry and nobility;
but by the establishment of monasteries, many of the lowest vulgar were taken
from the useful arts, and maintained in those receptacles of sloth and
ignorance. The supreme head of the church was a foreign potentate, who was
guided by interests, always different, sometimes contrary to those of the
community. And as the hierarchy was necessarily solicitous to preserve an unity
of faith, rites and ceremonies, all liberty of thought ran a manifest risque of
being extinguished; and violent persecutions, or what was worse, a stupid and
abject credulity, took place every where.

TO increase these evils, the church, though she possessed large revenues, was
not contented with her acquisitions, but retained a power of practicing farther
on the ignorance of mankind. She even bestowed on each individual priest a
power of enriching himself by the voluntary oblations of the faithful, and left
him still a powerful motive for diligence and industry in his calling. And
thus, that church, though an expensive and burdensome establishment, was liable
to many of the inconveniences, which belong to an order of priests, trusted
entirely to their own art and invention for attaining a subsistence.

THE advantages, attending the Romish hierarchy, were but a small compensation
for its inconveniences. The ecclesiastical privileges, during barbarous times,
had served as a cheque to the despotism of Kings. The union of all the western
churches under the supreme pontiff facilitated the intercourse of nations, and
tended to bind Europe into an immense republic. And the pomp and splendor of
worship, which belonged to so opulent an establishment, contributed, in some
respects, to the encouragement of the fine arts, and began to diffuse a general
elegance of taste, by uniting it with religion.

IT will easily be conceived, that, though the balance of evil prevailed in the
Romish church, this was not the chief reason, which produced the reformation. A
concurrence of incidents must have contributed to forward that great work.

Origin of the reformation.
POPE Leo the tenth, by his generous and enterprizing temper, had very much
exhausted the treasury, and was obliged to make use of every invention, which
might yield money, in order to support his projects, pleasures, and
liberalities. The scheme of selling indulgences was suggested to him, as an
expedient which had often served in former times to draw money from the
christian world, and make devout people willing contributors to the grandeur
and riches of the court of Rome. The church, it was supposed, was possessed of
a great stock of merit, as being entitled to all the good works of the saints,
beyond what were employed in their own justification; and even to the merits of
Christ himself, which were infinite and unbounded: And from this unexhausted
treasury, the pope might retail particular portions, and by that traffic
acquire money, to be employed in pious purposes, the resisting the Turk, or
subduing schismatics. When the money came into his treasury, the greatest part
of it was usually diverted to other purposes Father Paul and Sleidan.
.

IT is commonly believed, that Leo, from the penetration of his genius, and his
familiarity with literature, was fully acquainted with the ridicule and fallacy
of the doctrines, which, as supreme pontiff, he was obliged by his interest to
promote: And it is the less wonder, therefore, that he employed for his profit
those pious frauds, which his predecessors, the most ignorant and credulous,
had always, under plausible pretexts, made use of for their selfish purposes.
He published the sale of a general indulgence In 1517.
; and as his expenses had not only exhausted his usual revenue, but even
anticipated the income of this extraordinary expedient, the several branches of
it were openly given away to particular persons, who were entitled to levy the
imposition. The produce particularly of Saxony and the countries bordering on
the Baltic was assigned to his sister, Magdalene, married to Cibo, natural son
of Innocent the eighth; and she, in order to enhance her profit, had farmed out
the revenue to one Arcemboldi, a Genoese, now a bishop, formerly a merchant,
who still retained all the lucrative arts of his former profession Father Paul,
Sleidan.
. The Austin friars had usually been employed in Saxony to preach the
indulgences, and from this trust had derived both profit and consideration: But
Arcemboldi, fearing, lest practice might have taught them means to secret the
money Father Paul, lib. 1.
, and expecting no extraordinary success from the ordinary methods of
collection, gave this occupation to the dominicans. These monks, in order to
prove themselves worthy of the distinction conferred on them, exaggerated the
benefit of indulgences by the most unbounded panegyrics; and advanced doctrines
on that head, which, though not more ridiculous than those already received, were
such as the ears of the people were not yet fully accustomed to. To add to the
scandal, the collectors of this revenue are said to have lived very licentious
lives, and to have spent in taverns, gaming houses, and places still more
infamous, the money, which devout persons had saved from their usual expenses,
in order to purchase a remission of their sins Father Paul, lib. 1.
.

ALL these circumstances might have given offense, but would have been attended
with no event of any importance, had there not arisen a man, qualified to take
advantage of the incident. Martin Luther.
Martin Luther, an Austin friar, professor in the university of Wirtemberg,
resenting the affront put upon his order, began to preach against these abuses
in the sale of indulgences; and being naturally of a fiery temper, and being
provoked by opposition, he proceeded even to decry indulgences themselves; and
was thence carried, by the heat of dispute, to question the authority of the
pope, from which his adversaries derived their chief arguments against him
Father Paul, Sleidan.
. Still as he enlarged his reading, in order to support these tenets, he
discovered some new abuse or error in the church of Rome; and finding his
opinions greedily hearkened to, he promulgated them by writing, discourses,
sermons, conferences; and daily increased the number of his disciples. All
Saxony, all Germany, all Europe were in a very little time filled with the
voice of this daring innovator; and men, rouzed from that lethargy, in which
they had so long slept, began to call in question the most ancient and most
received opinions. The elector of Saxony, favorable to Luther's doctrine,
protected him from the violence of the papal jurisdiction: The republic of
Zuric even reformed their church according to the new model: Many sovereigns of
the empire, and the imperial diet itself, showed a favorable disposition
toward it: And Luther, a man naturally inflexible, vehement, opinionative, was
become incapable, either from promises of advancement, or terrors of severity,
to relinquish a sect, of which he was himself the founder, and which brought
him a glory, superior to all others, the glory of dictating the religious faith
and principles of multitudes.

THE rumor of these innovations soon reached England; and as there still
subsisted in that kingdom great remains of the Lollards, whose principles
resembled those of Luther, the new doctrines gained secretly many partisans
among the laiety of all ranks and denominations. Henry had been educated in a
strict attachment to the church of Rome, and he bore a particular prejudice
against Luther, who, in his writings, spoke with contempt of Thomas Aquinas,
the King's favorite author: He opposed himself therefore to the progress of
the Lutheran tenets, by all the influence which his extensive and almost
absolute authority conferred upon him: He even undertook to combat them with
weapons not usually employed by monarchs, especially those in the flower of
their age, and force of their passions. He wrote a book in Latin against the
principles of Luther; a performance, which, if allowance be made for the
subject and the age, does no discredit to his capacity. He sent a copy of it to
Leo, who received so magnificent a present with great testimony of regard;
Henry receives the title of defender of the faith.
and conferred on him, the title of defender of the faith; an appellation still
retained by the Kings of England. Luther, who was in the heat of controversy,
soon wrote an answer to Henry; and without regard to the dignity of his
antagonist, treated him with all the acrimony of style, to which, in the course
of his polemics, he had so long been accustomed. The King, by this ill usage,
was still more prejudiced against the new doctrines; but the public, who
naturally favor the weaker party, were inclined to attribute to Luther the
victory in the dispute Father Paul, lib. 1.
. And as the controversy became more illustrious, by Henry's entering the
lists, it drew more the attention of mankind; and the Lutheran doctrine
acquired daily new converts in every part of Europe.

Causes of the progress of the reformation.
THE quick and surprising progress of this bold sect may justly in part be
ascribed to the late invention of printing, and revival of learning: Not that
reason bore any considerable part, in opening men's eyes with regard to the
impostures of the Romish church: For of all branches of literature, philosophy
had, as yet, and till long afterward, made the most inconsiderable progress;
neither is there any instance where argument has been able to free the people
from that enormous load of absurdity, with which superstition has every where
overwhelmed them: Not to mention, that the rapid advance of the Lutheran
doctrine, and the violence, with which it was embraced, prove sufficiently,
that it owed not its success to reason and reflection. The art of printing and
the revival of learning forwarded its progress in another manner. By means of
that art, the books of Luther and his sectaries, full of vehemence, declamation
and a rude eloquence, were propagated more quickly, and in greater numbers. The
minds of men, somewhat awakened from a profound sleep of so many centuries,
were prepared for every novelty, and scrupled less to tread in any unusual
path, which was opened to them. And as copies of the scriptures and other
ancient monuments of the christian faith became more common, men perceived the
innovations, which were introduced after the first centuries; and though
argument and reasoning could not give conviction, an historical fact, well
supported, was able to make impression on their understandings. Many of the
powers, indeed, assumed by the church of Rome, were very ancient, and were
prior to almost every political government established in Europe: But as the
ecclesiastics would not submit to possess their privileges as matters of civil
right, which time could render valid, but appealed still to a divine origin,
men were tempted to look into their primitive charter; and they could, without
much difficulty, perceive its defect in truth and authenticity.

IN order to bestow on this topic the greater influence, Luther and his
followers, not satisfied with opposing the pretended divinity of the Romish
church, and displaying the temporal inconveniences of that establishment,
carried matters much farther, and treated the religion of their ancestors, as
abominable, detestable, damnable; foretold by sacred writ itself as the source
of all wickedness and pollution. They denominated the pope antichrist, called
his communion the scarlet whore, and gave to Rome the appellation of Babylon;
expressions, which, however applied, were to be found in scripture, and which
were better calculated to operate on the multitude than the most solid
arguments. Excited by contest and persecution on the one hand, by success and
applause on the other, many of the reformers carried their opposition to the
greatest extremity against the church of Rome; and in contradiction to the
multiplied superstitions, with which that communion was loaded, they adopted an
enthusiastic strain of devotion, which admitted of no observances, rites or
ceremonies, but placed all merit in a mysterious species of faith, in inward
vision, rapture, and extacy. The new sectaries, seized with this spirit, were
indefatigable in the propagation of their doctrine, and set at defiance all the
anathemas and punishments, with which the Roman pontiff endeavored to
overwhelm them.

THAT the civil power, however, might afford them protection against the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, the Lutherans advanced doctrines favorable, in
some respects, to the temporal authority of sovereigns. They inveighed against
the abuses of the court of Rome, with which men were at that time generally
discontented; and exhorted princes to reinstate themselves in those powers, of
which the incroaching spirit of the ecclesiastics, and especially of the
sovereign pontiff, had so long bereaved them. They condemned celibacy and
monastic vows, and thereby opened the doors of the convents to those who were
either tired of the obedience and chastity, or disgusted with the license, in
which they had hitherto lived. They blamed the excessive riches, the idleness,
the libertinism of the clergy; and pointed out their treasures and revenues as
lawful spoil to the first invader. And as the ecclesiastics had hitherto
conducted a willing and a stupid audience, and were totally unacquainted with
controversy, and even every species of literature; they were unable to defend
themselves against men, armed with authorities, citations, and popular topics,
and qualified to triumph in every altercation or debate. Such were the
advantages, with which the reformers began their attack of the Roman hierarchy;
and such were the causes of their rapid and astonishing success.

1st December.
LEO the tenth, whose oversights and too supine trust in the profound ignorance
of the people, had given rise to this sect, but whose sound judgment,
moderation and temper, were well qualified to retard its progress, died in the
flower of his age, a little after he received the King's book against Lusher;
and he was succeeded in the papal chair, by Adrian, a Fleming, tutor to the
emperor Charles. This man was qualified to gain on the reformers by the
integrity, candor, and simplicity of manners, by which he was distinguished;
but, so violent were their prejudices against the church, he rather hurt the
cause by his imprudent exercise of those virtues. He frankly confessed, that
many abominable and detestable practices prevailed in the court of Rome; and by
this sincere avowal, he gave occasion of much triumph to the Lutherans. This
pontiff also, whose penetration was not equal to his good intentions, was
seduced to concur in that league, which Charles and Henry had formed against
France Guicciardini, lib. 14.
; and he thereby augmented the scandal, occasioned by the practice of so many
preceding popes, who still made their spiritual arms subservient to political
purposes.

26th May.
He paid a new visit to England; and besides flattering the vanity of the King
and the cardinal, he repeated to Wolsey all the promises, which he had made
him, of seconding his pretensions to the papal throne. Wolsey, sensible that
Adrian's great age and infirmities promised a sudden vacancy, dissembled his
resentment, and was willing to hope for a more prosperous issue of the next
election. The emperor renewed the treaty made at Bruges, to which some articles
were added; and he agreed to indemnify both the King and Wolsey for the
revenues which they should lose by a breach with France. The more to ingratiate
himself with Henry and the English nation; he gave to Surrey, admiral of
England, a commission for being admiral of his dominions; and he himself was
installed knight of the garter at London. After a stay of six weeks in England,
he embarked at Southampton, and in ten days arrived in Spain, where he soon
pacified the tumults which had arisen in his absence Petrus de Angleria, epist.
765.
.

War with France.
THE King declared war against France; and this measure was founded on so
little reason, that he could allege nothing as a ground of quarrel, but
Francis's refusal to submit to his arbitration, and his sending Albany into
Scotland. This last step had not been taken by the French King, till he was
quite assured of Henry's resolution to attack him. Surrey landed some troops at
Cherbourg in Normandy; and after laying waste the country, he ^ailed to
Morlaix, a rich town in Britanny, which he took and plundered. The English
merchants had great property in that place, which was no more spared by the
soldiers, than the goods of the French. Surrey then left the charge of the
fleet to the vice admiral; and ^ailed to Calais, where he took the command of
the English army, destined for the invasion of France. This army, when joined
by forces from the Low Countries under the command of the count of Buren,
consisted in the whole of 18,000 men.

Invasion of France.
THE French had made it a maxim in all their wars with the English, since the
reign of Charles the fifth, never, without great necessity, to hazard a general
engagement; and the duke of Vendome, who commanded the French army, now
embraced this wise policy. He supplied the towns most exposed, especially
Boulogne, Montreuil, Terouenne, Hedin, with strong garrisons and plenty of
provisions: He himself took post at Abbeville, with some Swiss and French
infantry, and a body of cavalry: The count of Guise encamped under Montreuil
with six thousand men. These two bodies were in a situation to join upon
occasion; to throw succor into any town, that was threatened; and to harrass
the English in every movement. Surrey, who was not supplied with magazines,
first divided his army for the convenience of sublisting them; but finding that
his quarters were every moment beaten up by the activity of the French
generals, he drew together the forces, and laid siege to Hedin. But neither did
he succeed in this enterprise. The garrison made vigorous sallies upon his
army: The French forces assaulted them from without: Great rains fell: Fatigue
and bad weather threw the soldiers into dysenteries: And Surrey was obliged to
raise the siege, and put his troops into winter quarters about the end of
October. His rear guard was attacked at Pas in Artois; and five or six hundred
men were cut off; nor could all his efforts make him master of one place within
the French frontier.

THE allies were more successful in Italy. Lautrec, who commanded the French,
lost a bloody battle at Bicocca near Milan; and was obliged to retire with the
remains of his army. This misfortune, which proceeded from Francis's negligence
in not supplying Lautrec with money Guicciardini, lib. 14.
, was followed by the loss of Genoa. The castle of Cremona was the sole
fortress in Italy, which remained in the hands of the French.

EUROPE was now in such a situation, and so connected by alliances and
interest, that it was almost impossible for war to be kindled in one part, and
not diffuse itself through the whole: But of all the leagues among kingdoms, the
closest was that which had so long subsisted between France and Scotland; and
the English, while at war with the former nation, could not expect to remain
long unmolested on the northern frontier. War with Scotland.
No sooner had Albany arrived in Scotland, than he took measures for kindling a
war with England; and he summoned the whole force of the kingdom to meet in the
fields of Rosline Buchannan, lib. 14. Drummond. Pitscottie.
. He thence conducted the army southwards into Annandale; and prepared to pass
the borders at Solway-Firth. But many of the nobility were disgusted with the
regent's administration; and observing, that his connexions with his native
country were very feeble in comparison of those with France, they murmured,
that for the sake of foreign interests, their peace should be so often
disturbed, and war, during their King's minority, be wantonly entered into with
a neighboring nation, so much superior in force and riches. The Gordons, in
particular, refused to advance any farther; and Albany, observing a general
discontent to prevail, was obliged to conclude a truce with lord Dacres, warden
of the English west marches. Soon after, he departed for France; and lest the
opposite faction should gather force in his absence, he sent thither before him
the earl of Angus, husband to the queen dowager.

Buchannan, lib. 14. Herbert.
. He even gave them hopes of contracting a marriage between the lady Mary,
heiress of England, and their young monarch; an expedient, which would for ever
unite the two kingdoms Le Grand, vol. III. p. 39.
: And the queen dowager, with her whole party, recommended (...) where the
advantages of this (...) and or a confederacy with England. They said, that the
interests of Scotland had too long been sacrificed to those of the French
nation, who, whenever they found themselves reduced to difficulties, called for
the assistance of their allies, but were ready to abandon them, so soon as they
found their advantage in making peace with England: That where a small state
entered into so close a confederacy with a greater, it must always expect this
treatment, as a consequence of the unequal alliance; but that there were
peculiar circumstances in the situation of the kingdoms, which, in the present
case, rendered it inevitable: That France was so distant and so divided from
them by seas, that she scarce could by any means, and never could in time, send
succors to the Scotch, sufficient to protect them against ravages from the
neighboring kingdom: That nature had, in a manner, framed an alliance between
the two British nations; having enclosed them in the same island; given them
the same manners, language, laws, and form of government; and prepared every
thing for an intimate union between them: And that, if national antipathies
were abolished, which would soon be the effect of peace, these two kingdoms,
secured by the ocean and by their domestic force, could set at defiance all
foreign enemies, and remain for ever secure and unmolested.

THE partisans of the French alliance said, on the other hand, that the very
reasons, which were urged in favor of a league with England, the close
neighborhood of the kingdom and its superior force, were the real causes, why
a sincere and durable confederacy could never be framed with that hostile
nation: That among neighboring states, occasions of quarrel were frequent; and
the more powerful people would be sure to seize every frivolous pretense for
oppressing the weaker, and reducing them to subjection: That as the near
neighborhood of France and England had kindled a war almost perpetual between
them, it was the interest of the Scotch, if they wished to maintain their
independancy, to preserve their league with the former kingdom, which balanced
the force of the latter: That if they deserted that old and salutary alliance,
on which their importance in Europe chiefly depended, their ancient enemies,
stimulated both by interest and by passion, would soon invade them with
superior force, and reduce them to subjection: Or if they delayed the attack,
the insidious peace, by making the Scotch lose the use of arms, would only
prepare the way for a slavery more certain and more irretrieveable Buchannan,
lib. 14.
.

THE arguments employed by the French party, being seconded by the natural
prejudices of the people, seemed rather to prevail: And when the regent
himself, who had been long detained beyond his appointed time by the terror of
the English fleet, at last appeared among them, he was able to throw the
balance entirely on that side. By the authority of the convention of states, he
assembled an army, with a view of avenging the ravages committed by the English
in the beginning of the campaign; and he led them southwards toward the
borders. But when they were passing the Tweed at the bridge of Melross, the
English party were again able to raise such opposition, that Albany thought
proper to make a retreat. He marched downwards, along the banks of the Tweed,
keeping that river on his right; and fixed his camp opposite to Werk-Castle,
which Surrey had lately repaired. He sent over some troops to besiege that
fortress, who made a breach in it, and stormed some of the outworks: But the
regent, hearing of the approach of an English army, and discouraged by the
advanced season, thought proper to disband his forces and retire to Edinburgh.
Soon after he went over to France, and never again returned to Scotland. The
Scotch nation, agitated by their domestic factions, were not, during several
years, in a condition to give any more disturbance to England; and Henry had
full leisure to prosecute his designs on the continent.

THE reason, why the war against France proceeded so slowly on the part of
England was the want of money. All Henry the seventh's treasures were long
since dissipated; the King's habits of expense still remained; and his revenues
were unequal even to the ordinary support of his government, much more to his
military enterprises. He had last year caused a general survey to be made of
the kingdom; the numbers of men, their years, profession, stock, revenue
Herbert. Stowe, 514.
; and expressed great satisfaction on finding the nation so opulent. He then
issued out privy seals to the most wealthy, demanding loans of particular sums;
and this act of power, though somewhat irregular and tyrannical, had been
formerly practiced by the Kings of England; and the people were now
familiarized to it. But Henry carried his authority much farther on this
occasion. He issued an edict for a general tax upon his subjects, which he
still called a loan; and he levied five shillings in the pound from the clergy,
two shillings from the laity. This pretended loan, as being more regular, was
really more dangerous to the liberties of the people; and was a precedent for
the King's imposing taxes without consent of Parliament.

15th of April.
A Parliament.
HENRY summoned a Parliament this year, together with a convocation; and ^ound
neither of them in a disposition to complain of the infringement of their
privileges. It was only doubted, how far they would carry their liberality to
the King. Wolsey, who had undertaken the management of this affair, began with
the convocation; in hopes, that their example would influence the Parliament to
grant a large supply. He demanded a moiety of their ecclesiastical revenues to
be levied in five years, or two shillings in the pound during that time, and
though he met with opposition, he reprimanded so severely the refractory members,
that his request was at last complied with. The cardinal afterward, attended
by several of the nobility and prelates, came to the house of commons; and in a
long and elaborate speech laid before them the public necessities, the dangers
of an invasion from Scotland, the affronts received from France, the league in
which the King was engaged with the pope and the emperor; and he demanded a
grant of 800,000 pounds, divided into four yearly payments; a sum, computed
from the late survey or valuation, to be equivalent to four shillings in the
pound of one year's revenue, or one shilling in the pound yearly, according to
the division proposed. So large a grant was unusual from the commons; and though
the cardinal's demand was seconded by Sir Thomas More the speaker, and several
other members attached to the court, the house could not be prevailed with to
comply Herbert. Stowe, 518. Parliamentary History. Strype, vol. I. p. 49, 50.
. They only voted two shillings in the pound on all possessed of twenty pounds
a year and upwards, one shilling on all between twenty pounds and forty
shillings a year; and on all the rest of the subjects above sixteen years of
age a groat ahead. This last sum was divided into two yearly payments; the
former into four yearly payments, and was not therefore at the outmost above
sixpence in the pound. The grant of the commons was but the moiety of the sum
demanded; and the cardinal, therefore, much mortified with the disappointment,
came again to the house, and desired to reason with such as refused to comply
with the King's request. He was told, that it was a rule of the house never to
reason but among themselves; and his desire was rejected. The commons, however,
enlarged a little their former grant, and voted an imposition of three
shillings in the pound on all possessed of fifty pounds a year, and upwards It
is said, that when Henry heard that the commons made a great difficulty of
granting the required supply, he was so provoked, that he sent for Edward
Montague, one of the members, who had a considerable influence on the house;
and he being introduced to his majesty, had the mortification to hear him speak
in these words: Ho! man! will they not suffer my bill to pass? And laying his
hand on Montague's head, who was then on his knees before him: Get my bill
passed by to morrow, or else tomorrow this head of yours shall be off. This
cavalier manner of Henry succeeded: For next day the bill was passed. Collin's
British peer^ge. Grove's life of Wolsey. We are told by Hall, fol. 38. That
cardinal Wolsey endeavored to terrify the citizens of London into the general
loan, exacted in 1525, and told them plainly, that it were better, that some
should suffer indigence than that the King at this time should lack; and
therefore beware and resist not, nor ruffle not in this (...). Such was the
style, employed by this King and his (...).
. The proceedings of this house of commons discover evidently the humor of the
times: They were extremely tenacious of their money, and refused a demand of
the crown, which was far from unreasonable; but they allowed an encroachment on
national privileges to pass uncensured, though its direct tendency was to subvert
entirely the liberties of the people. The King was so dissatisfied with this
saving disposition of the commons, that, as he had not called a Parliament
during seven years before, he allowed seven more to elapse, before he summoned
another. And under pretense of necessity, he levied, in one year, from all who
were worth forty pounds, what the parliament had granted him payable in four
years Speed. Hall. Herbert.
; a new invasion of national privileges. These irregularities were commonly
ascribed to the cardinal's counsels, who, trusting to the protection, afforded
him by his ecclesiastical character, was less scrupulous in his encroachments
on the civil rights of the nation.

THAT ambitious prelate received this year a new disappointment in his aspiring
views. The pope, Adrian the sixth, died; and Clement the seventh, of the family
of Medici, was elected in his place, by the concurrence of the imperial party.
Wolsey began now to perceive the insincerity of the emperor, and concluded that
that prince would never second his pretensions to the papal chair. This injury
was highly resented by the cardinal; and he began thenceforth to estrange
himself from the imperial court, and to pave the way for an union between his
master and the French King. Meanwhile, he dissembled his resentment; and after
congratulating the new pope on his promotion, applied for a continuation of the
legantine powers, which the two former popes had conferred upon him. Clement,
knowing the importance of gaining his friendship, granted him a commission for
life; and by this unusual concession, he in a manner transferred to him the
whole papal authority in England. In some particulars, Wolsey made a good use
of this extensive power. He erected two colleges, one at Oxford, another at
Ipswich, the place of his nativity: He sought, all over Europe, for learned men
to supply the chairs of these colleges: And in order to bestow endowments on
them, he suppressed some smaller monasteries, and distributed the monks into
other convents. The execution of this project became the l^ss difficult for
him, that the Romish church began to perceive, that she over-abounded in monks,
and that she wanted some supply of learning, in order to oppose the
inquisitive, or rather disputative, humor of the new reformers.

THE consederacy against France seemed more formidable than ever, on the
opening this campaign Guicciardin, lib 14.
. Adrian, before his death, had renewed the league with Charles and Henry. The
Venetians had been induced to desert the French alliance, and to form
engagements for the securing Sforza in possession of the Milanese. The
Florentines, the dukes of Ferrara and Mantua, and all the powers of Italy
combined in the same measure. The emperor in person menaced France with a
powerful invasion on the side of Guienne: The forces of England and the
Netherlands seemed ready to break into Picardy: A numerous body of Germans were
preparing to ravage Burgundy: But all these perils from foreign enemies were
less threatening than a domestic conspiracy, which had been forming, and which
was now come to full maturity against the French monarch.

CHARLES duke of Bourbon, constable of France, was a prince of the most shining
merit; and, beside distinguishing himself in many military enterprises, he was
adorned with every accomplishment, which became a person of his high station.
His virtues, embellished with the graces of youth, had made such impression on
Louise of Savoy, Francis's mother, that, without regard to the inequality of
their years, she made him proposals of marriage; and meeting with a refusal,
she formed schemes of unrelenting vengeance against him. She was a woman,
false, deceitful, vindictive, malicious; but, unhappily for France, had by her
capacity, which was considerable, acquired an absolute ascendant over her son.
By her instigation, Francis put many affronts on the constable, which it was
difficult for a gallant spirit to endure; and at last he permitted Louise to
prosecute a lawsuit against him, by which, under the most frivolous pretenses,
he was deprived of his ample possessions; and inevitable ruin was brought upon
him.

BOURBON, provoked at all these indignities, and thinking, that, if any
injuries could justify a man in rebelling against his prince and country, he
must stand acquitted, had entered into a secret correspondence with the emperor
and the King of England Memoires du Bellay, live. 2.
. Francis, pertinacious in his design of recovering the the Milanese, had
proposed to lead his army in person into Italy; and Bourbon, who feigned
sickness, in order to have a pretense for staying behind, intended, so soon as
the King had passed the Alps, to raise an insurrection among his numerous
vassals, by whom he was extremely beloved, and to introduce foreign enemies
into the heart of the kingdom. Francis got intimation of his design; but not
being prompt enough in securing so dangerous a foe, the constable made his
escape Belcarius, lib. 17.
; and putting himself in the emperor's service, did all the injuries to his
native country, which his enterprizing spirit and his great talents for war
enabled him to perform. Charles professed such regard for him, that he promised
him his sister in marriage, Eleonora, widow to Emanuel, King of Portugal; and
when the constable came to Madrid, some time after, the emperor received him
with all the demonstrations of friendship. He said to a Spanish grandee, that
he must desire him, while Bourbon resided in that city, to allow him to take up
his residence in his house, as most suitable to his rank and quality. The
nobleman replied, with a Castilian dignity, that his majesty's desire was to
him a sufficient reason; but he must tell him beforehand, that so soon as
Bourbon departed he would raze to the ground the house which had been polluted
by the presence of such a traitor Gulcciardini
.

THE King of England, desirous that Francis should undertake his Italian
expedition, did not openly threaten Picardy this year with an invasion; 24th
August.
and it was late before the duke of Suffolk, who commanded the English forces,
passed over to Calais. He was attended with the lords Montacute, Herbert,
Ferrars, Morney, Sandys, Berkeley, Powis, and many other noblemen and gentlemen
Herbert.
. The English army, reinforced by some troops, drawn from the garrison of
Calais, amounted to about 12,000 men; Invasion of France.
and having joined an equal number of Flemings under the count of Buren, they
prepared for an invasion of France. The siege of Boulogne was first proposed;
but that enterprise appearing difficult, it was thought more advisable to
leave this town behind them. The frontier of Picardy was very ill provided of
troops; and the only defense of that province was the activity of the French
officers, who infested the allied army in their march, and threw garrisons,
with great expedition, into every town, which was threatened by them. After
coasting the Sum, and passing Hedin, Montreuil, Dourlens, the English and
Flemings presented themselves before Bray, a place of small force, which
commanded a bridge over the Sum. Here they were resolved to pass, and, if
possible, to take up winter quarters in France; but Crequi threw himself into
the town, and seemed determined to defend it. The allies attacked him with
vigor and success; and when he retreated over the bridge, they pursued him so
hotly, that they allowed him not time to break it down, but passed it along
with him, and put him to route. They next advanced to Montdidier, which they
besieged and took by capitulation. Meeting with no opposition, they proceeded
to the river Oise, within eleven leagues of Paris, and threw that city into
great consternation; till the duke of Vendome hastened with some forces to its
relief. The confederates, then, afraid of being surrounded, and reduced to
extremities during so advanced a season, thought proper to retire. Montdidier
was abandoned: And the English and Flemings went each into their own country.

FRANCE defended herself from the other invasions with equal facility and equal
good so tune. Twelve thousand Lansquenets broke into Burgundy under the command
of the count of Fustemberg. The count of Guise, who defended that frontier, had
nothing to oppose to them but some militia, and about nine hundred heavy-armed
cavalry. He threw the militia into the garrison-towns; and with his cavalry, he
kept the field, and so harrassed the Germans, that they were glad to make their
retreat into Lorraine. Guise attacked them as they passed the Meuse, put them
into disorder, and cut off the greatest part of their rear.

THE emperor made great preparations on the side of Navarre; and, though that
frontier was well guarded by nature, it seemed now exposed to great danger from
this powerful invasion which threatened it. Charles besieged Fontarabia, which
had fallen a few years before into Francis's hands; and when he had drawn
thither Lautrec, the French general, he raised the siege of a sudden, and sat
down before Bayonne. Lautrec, aware of that stratagem, made a sudden march and
threw himself into Bayonne, which he defended with such vigor and courage,
that the Spaniards were constrained to raise the siege. The emperor would have
been totally unfortunate on this side, had he not turned back upon Fontarabia,
and, contrary to the advice of all his generals, sat down, in the winter
season, before that city, well fortified and strongly garrisoned. The cowardice
or misconduct of the governor saved him the shame of a new disappointment. The
place was surrendered in a few days; and the emperor, having finished this
enterprise, put his troops into winter quarters.

Italian wars.
SO obstinate was Francis in prosecuting his Italian expedition, that,
notwithstanding these dangerous invasions, with which his kingdom was menaced
on every side, he had determined to lead in person a powerful army to the
conquest of Milan. The intelligence of Bourbon's revolt and escape stopped him
at Lions; and fearing some insurrection in the kingdom from the intrigues of a
man so powerful and so beloved, he thought it prudent to remain in France; and
to send forward his army, under the command of admiral Bonnivet. The duchy of
Milan had been purposely left in a condition somewhat defenseless, with a view
of alluring Francis to attack it; and no sooner had Bonnivet passed the Tesin,
than the army of the league, and even Prosper Colonna, who commanded it, a very
prudent general, were in the utmost confusion. It is agreed, that if Bonnivet
had immediately advanced to Milan, that great city, on which the whole duchy
depends, would have opened its gates without resistance: But as he wasted his
time in frivolous enterprises, Colonna had opporunity to reinforce the
garrison, and to put the place in a posture of defense. Bonnivet was now
obliged to attempt reducing the city by blockade and famine; and he took
possession of all the posts, which commanded the passages to it. But the army
of the league, meanwhile, was not inactive; and they so straitened and
harrassed the quarters of the French, that it seemed more likely the latter
would themselves perish by famine, than

THE Swiss had in that age so great a superiority in the field above almost
every other nation, and had been so much courted by all the great potentates of
Europe, that they were become extremely capricious and haughty, and thought
that the fate of kingdoms depended entirely on their assistance or opposition.
Francis had promised to this body of mercenaries, whom he had hired to join
Bonnivet, that so soon as they arrived in the plains of Piedmont, the duke of
Longueville should join them with four hundred lances, and conduct them to the
French camp: But by some accident Longueville's march had been retarded, and
the Swiss had been obliged to march, without the honor of being escorted by
him. Offended at this neglect, as they interpreted it, they no sooner came
within sight of the French camp, than they stopped, and instead of joining
Bonnivet, they sent orders to a great body of their countrymen, who then served
under him, immediately to begin their march, and to return home in their
company Guicciardini, lib. 15. Memoires du Bellay, live. 2.
.

AFTER this desertion of the Swiss, Bonnivet had no other choice, than that of
making his retreat, as fast as possible, into France. He accordingly put
himself in motion for that purpose; but the allies, who foresaw this measure,
were ready to fall upon his rear. The French army, however, after a sharp
action, made good their retreat, though not without considerable loss both in
officers and private men. Among the rest, fell in this action the brave
chevalier Bayard, esteemed in that age the model of soldiers and men of honor,
and denominated the knight without fear and without reproach. When this gallant
gentleman felt his wounds to be mortal, and could no longer support himself on
horseback, he ordered his attendants to set him under a tree, and turn his face
toward the enemy, that he might die in that posture. The generals of the
allies, and among the rest the duke of Bourbon, came about him, and expressed
their concern for his present condition. "Pity not me," cried he to Bourbon; "I
die in the discharge of my duty: They are to be pitied alone, who fight against
their prince and country Pere Daniel, vol. 3. p. 152.
.

THE French being thus expelled Italy, the pope, the Venetians, the Florentines
were satisfied with the advantage obtained over them, and were resolved to
prosecute their victory no farther. All these powers, especially Clement, had
entertained a violent jealousy of the emperor's ambition; and their jealousy
was extremely augmented, when they saw him refuse the investiture of Milan, a
fief of the empire, to Francis Sforza, whose title he had acknowledged, and
whose defense he had embraced Guicciardini, lib. 15.
. They all concluded, that he intended to put himself in possession of that
important duchy, and reduce Italy to subjection: Clement in particular,
actuated by this jealousy, proceeded so far in opposition to the emperor, that
he sent orders to his nuncio at London to mediate a reconciliation between
France and England. But affairs were not yet fully ripe for this change.
Wolsey, disgusted with the emperor, but still more actuated by vainglory, was
determined, that he himself should have the renown of bringing about that great
alteration; and he engaged the King to reject the pope's mediation. A new
treaty was even concluded between Henry and Charles for the invasion of France.
Charles stipulated to supply the duke of Bourbon with a powerful army, in order
to conquer Provence and Dauphiny: Henry agreed to pay him a hundred thousand
crowns for the first month; after which, he might either choose to continue the
same monthly payments, or invade Picardy with a powerful army. Bourbon was to
possess these provinces with the title of King; but to hold them in fief of
Henry as King of France. The duchy of Burgundy was to be given to Charles: The
rest of the Kingdom to Henry.

THIS chimerical partition immediately failed of execution in the article,
which was most easily performed: Bourbon refused to acknowledge Henry as King
of France. His enterprise, however, against Provence still took place. A
numerous army of imperialists invaded that country under his command and that
of the marquis of Pescara. They laid siege to Marseilles, which, being weakly
garrisoned, they expected to carry in a little time: But the burgesses defended
themselves with such valor and obstinacy, that Bourbon and Pescara, who heard
of the French King's approach with a numerous army, found themselves under a
necessity of raising the siege; and they led their forces, much weakened,
baffled, and disheartened, into Italy.

FRANCIS might now have enjoyed in safety the glory of repulsing all his
enemies, in every attempt which they had hitherto made of breaking into his
kingdom: But as he received intelligence, that the King of England, discouraged
with his former fruitless enterprises, and disgusted with the emperor, was
making no preparations for the invasion of Picardy, his ancient ardour seized
him for the conquest of Milan; and, notwithstanding the advanced season, he was
immediately determined, contrary to the advice of his wisest counselors, to
lead his army into Italy.

The King of France nvades Italy.
HE passed the Alps at Mount Cenis, and no sooner appeared in Piedmont, than he
threw the whole Milanese into consternation. There was no army in the field
able to oppose him; and Milan itself, though affectionate to its duke, was not in
the same posture of defense as last year, when blockaded by admiral Bonnivet.
It was almost wholly destitute of inhabitants: Great numbers had died of the
plague; and the rest had fled into the country for safety. Francis immediately
marched to that city, which opened its gates to receive him. The forces of the
emperor and Sforza fled to Lodi; and had Francis been so fortunate as to pursue
them, they had abandoned that place, and had been totally dissipated
Guicciardin, lib. 15. Du Bellay, lib. 2.
. But his ill fate led him to besiege Pavia, a town of considerable strength,
well-garrisoned, and defended by Leyva, one of the bravest officers in the
Spanish service. Every attempt, which the French king made to gain this
important place, proved fruitless. He battered the walls, and made breaches;
but by the vigilance of Leyva, new retrenchments were instantly thrown up
behind the breaches: He attempted to divert the course of the Tesin, which ran
by one side of the city, and defended it; but an inundation of the river
destroyed in one night all the mounds which the soldiers, during a long time,
and with infinite pains, had been erecting. Fatigue and the bad season (for it
was now the depth of winter) had wasted the French army.

The state of Europe was such, during that age, that, partly from the want of
commerce and industry every where, except in Italy and the Low Countries,
partly from the extensive privileges still possessed by the people in all the
great monarchies, and their frugal maxims in granting money, the revenues of
the princes were extremely narrow, and even the small armies, which they kept
on foot, could not be regularly paid by them. The imperial forces, commanded by
Bourbon, Pescara, and Lannoy, exceeded not twenty thousand men; they were the
only body of troops maintained by the emperor (for he had not been able to levy
any army for the invasion of France, either on the side of Spain or Flanders).
Yet so poor was that mighty monarch, that he could transmit no money for the
payment of this army; and it was chiefly the hopes of sharing the plunder of
the French camp, which had made them advance, and kept them to their standards.
Had Francis raised the siege before their approach, and retired to Milan, they
must immediately have dispe^^t themselves; and he had obtained a complete
victory, without danger or bloodshed. But it was the character of this monarch,
to become obstinate in proportion to the difficulties which he encountered; and
having once said, that he would take Pavia or perish before it, he was resolved
rather to endure the utmost extremities than depart from this resolution.

25 February.
Battle of Pavia, and captivity of Francis.
THE imperial generals, after cannonading the French camp for several days, at
last gave a general assault, and broke into the entrenchments. Leyva sallied
from the town, and threw the besiegers into still greater confusion. The Swiss
infantry, contrary to their usual practice, behaved in a dastardly manner, and
deserted their post. Francis's whole army was put to rout, and he himself,
surrounded by his enemies, after fighting with the most heroic valor, and
killing seven men with his own hand, was at last obliged to surrender himself
prisoner. Almost the whole army, full of nobility and brave officers, either
perished by the sword, or were drowned in the river. The few, who escaped with
their lives, fell into the hands of the enemy. The imperial generals had so
little authority over their own troops, even after this signal victory, that
Lannoy, apprehensive left the Lansquenets should seize Francis as security for
the pay due to them, immediately removed him from the camp, and sent him to
Pizzighitone. And taking advantage of the terrors, which had seized the pope,
the Florentines, the Duke of Ferrara, and other Italian states, he obliged
them, though secretly enemies, to advance money for the subsistence of his army.

THE emperor received this news by Pennalosa, who passed through France, by means
of a safe conduct, which he received from the captive King. The moderation,
which he displayed on this occasion, had it been real, would have done him
great honor. Instead of rejoicing, he expressed sympathy with Francis's ill
fortune, and discovered his sense of those calamities, to which the greatest
monarchs are exposed Vera. (...). de Charle^ V.
. He refused the city of Madrid permission to make any public expressions of
triumph; and said that he reserved all his exultation till he should be able to
obtain some victory over the infidels. He sent orders to his frontier garrisons
to commit to hostilities upon France. He spoke of concluding immediately a
peace on reasonable terms. But all this seeming equity was only hypocrisy, so
much the more dangerous, that it was profound. And his sole occupation was the
forming schemes, how, from this great incident, he might draw the utmost
advantage, and gratify that exorbitant ambition, by which, in all his actions,
he was wholly governed.

THE same Pennalosa, in passing through France, carried also a letter from
Francis to his mother, whom he had left regent, and who then resided at Lions.
It contained only these few words, Madam, all is lost, except our honor. The
princess was struck with the greatness of the calamity. She saw the kingdom
without a sovereign, without an army, without generals, without money;
surrounded on every hand by implacable and victorious enemies: And her sole
resource, in her present distresses, was the hope, which she entertained, of
peace and even of assistance from the King of England.

HAD the King entered into the war against France from any concerted political
views, it is evident, that the victory of Pavia, and the captivity of Francis,
were the most fortunate incidents which could have befallen him, and the only
ones which could render his schemes effectual. While the war was carried on in
the former feeble manner, without any decisive advantage, he might have been
able to possess himself of some frontier towns, or perhaps of a small
territory, which he could not keep possession of, without expending much more
than its value. By some great calamity alone, which annihilated the power of
France, could he hope to acquire the dominion of considerable provinces, or
dismember that mighty monarchy, so affectionate to its own government and its
own sovereigns. But as it is probable, that Henry had never before carried his
reflections so far; he was startled at this important event, and became
sensible of his own danger, as well as that of all Europe, from the loss of a
proper counterpoise to the great power of Charles. Henry embraces the alliance
of France.
Instead of taking advantage, therefore, of the distressed condition of France,
he was determined to lend her his assistance in her present calamities; and as
the glory of generosity, in raising a fallen enemy, concurred with his
political interests, he hesitated the less in embracing these new measures.

SOME disgusts also had previously taken place between Charles and Henry, and
still more between Charles and Wolsey; and that powerful minister waited only a
favorable opportunity of revenging the disappointments, which he had met with.
The behavior of Charles, immediately after the victory of Pavia, gave him
occasion to revive the King's jealousy and suspicions of his ally. The emperor
supported so ill the appearance of moderation, which he at first assumed, that
he had already changed his usual style to Henry; and instead of writing to him
with his own hand, and subscribing himself your affectionate son and cousin; he
dictated his letters to his secretary, and simply subscribed himself Charles
Guicciardin, lib. 16.
. Wolsey also perceived a diminution in the caresses and professions, with
which the emperor's letters to him were usually loaded, and this last
imprudence, proceeding from the intoxication of success, was probably more
dangerous to Charles's interests than the other.

HENRY, though determined to embrace new measures, was careful to save
appearances in the change; and he caused rejoicings to be every where made on
account of the victory of Pavia, and the captivity of Francis. He publicly
dismissed a French envoy, whom he had formerly allowed, notwithstanding the
war, to reside at London Du Bellay, Live. 3. Stow. p. 221. Baker, p. 273.
: But upon the regent's submissive applications to him, he again opened a
correspondence with her; and besides assuring her of his friendship and
protection, he exacted a promise, that she never would consent to the
dismembering any province of the monarchy for her son's ransom. With the
emperor, however, he put on the appearance of vigor and enterprise; and in
order to have a pretense for breaking with him, he dispatched Tonstal, bishop
of London, to Madrid, with proposals for a powerful invasion of France. He
required, that Charles should immediately enter Guienne at the head of a great
army, in order to put him in possession of that province; and he demanded the
payment of large sums of money, which that prince had borrowed from him in his
last visit at London. He knew, that the emperor was in no condition of
executing either of these conditions; and that he had as little inclination to
make him master of such considerable territories upon the frontiers of Spain.

TONSTAL likewise informed him, that Charles, on his part, wanted not
complaints against England; and in particular was displeased with Henry,
because last year he had neither continued his monthly payments to Bourbon, nor
invaded Picardy, according to his stipulations; that, instead of expressing his
intentions to espouse Mary, when she should be marriageable, he had hearkened
to proposals, for marrying his niece Isabella, princess of Portugal; and that
he had entered into a separate treaty with Francis, and seemed determined to
reap alone all the advantages of the success, with which fortune had crowned
his arms.

30 August.
THE King, influenced by all these motives, concluded at Moore his alliance
with the regent, and engaged to procure Francis his liberty on reasonable
conditions Du Tillet, Recucil des Traites de Leonard, tom. 2. Herbert.
: The regent also, in another treaty, acknowledged the kingdom to be Henry's
debtor for one million eight hundred thousand crowns, to be discharged in half
yearly payments of fifty thousand crowns: After which, Henry was to receive
during his own life, a yearly pension of a hundred thousand crowns*
Notwithstanding his generosity, he could not for bear taking advantage of the
calamitous situation of France, in order to exact this lucrative condition from
her. A large present of a hundred thousand crowns was also made Wolsey, for his
good offices, but covered under the pretense of arrears due on the pension
granted him for relinquishing the administration of Tournay.

MEANWHILE, as Henry foresaw, that this treaty with France might involve him in
a war with the emperor, he was also determined to fill his treasury by
impositions upon his own subjects; and as the parliament had discovered some
reluctance in complying with his demands, he followed the advice of Wolsey, and
resolved to make use of his prerogative alone for that purpose. He issued out
commissions to all the counties of England, for levying four shillings in the
pound from the clergy, three shillings and four pence from the laity; and so
uncontrollable did he deem his authority, that he took no care to cover, as
formerly, this arbitrary exaction, even under the slender pretense of a loan.
Discontents of the English.
But he soon found, that he had presumed too far on the passive submission of
his subjects. The people, displeased with an exaction beyond what was usually
levied in those days, but still more disgusted with the illegal method of
imposing it, broke out in murmurs, complaints, opposition to the commissioners;
and their refractory disposition even threatened a general insurrection. Henry
had the prudence to stop short, in that dangerous path, into which he had
entered. He sent letters to all the counties; declaring, that he meant no force
by this last imposition, and that he would take nothing of his subjects but by
way of benevolence. He flattered himself, that his condescension in employing
that disguise would satisfy the people, and that no one would dare to render
himself obnoxious to royal authority, by refusing any payment required of him
in this manner. But the spirit of opposition was once roused, and could not so
easily be quieted at pleasure. A lawyer in the city objecting the statute of
Richard the third, by which benevolences were for ever abolished, it was
replied by the court, that Richard being an usurper, and his Parliaments
factious assemblies, his statutes could not bind a lawful and absolute monarch,
who held his crown by hereditary right, and needed not to court the favor of a
licentious populace (...)
. The judges even went so far as to affirm positively, that the King might
exact by commission any sum which he pleased; and the privy council gave a
ready assent to this decree, which annihilated the most valuable privilege of
the people, and rendered all their other privileges precarious. Armed with such
formidable authority, of royal prerogative and a pretext of law, Wolsey sent
for the mayor of London, and desired to know what he was willing to give for
the supply of his majesty's necessities. The mayor seemed desirous, before he
should declare himself, to consult the common council; but the cardinal
required, that he and all the aldermen should separately confer with himself
about the benevolence; and he eluded by that means the danger of formed
opposition. Matter, however, went not so smoothly in the country. An
insurrection was begun in some places; but as the people were not headed by any
considerable person, it was easy for the duke of Suffolk, and the earl of
Surrey, now duke of Norfolk, by employing persuasion and authority, to induce
the ringleaders to lay down their arms, and surrender themselves prisoners. The
king, finding it dangerous to punish criminals, engaged in so popular a cause,
was determined, notwithstanding his violent, imperious temper, to grant them a
general pardon; and he very prudently imputed their guilt, not to their want of
loyalty or affection, but to their poverty. The offenders were brought before
the star chamber; where, after a severe charge laid against them by the King's
council, the cardinal said, "That, notwithstanding their grievous offenses, the
King, in consideration of their necessities, had granted them his gracious
pardon, upon condition, that they would give in sureties for their future good
behavior." But they replying, that they had no sureties, the cardinal first,
and after him the duke of Norfolk, said, that they would stand bound for them.
Upon which they were discharged Herbert, Hall, Stow, 525. Hollinshed, p. 891.
.

THESE arbitrary impositions, being generally imputed to the cardinal's
counsels, increased the general odium, under which he labored; and the
clemency of the pardon, being ascribed to the King, was considered as an
atonement on his part for the illegality of the measure. But Wolsey, supported
both by royal and papal authority, proceeded, without scruple, to violate all
ecclesiastical privileges, which, during that age, were much more sacred than
civil; and having once prevailed in that unusual attempt of suppressing some
monasteries, he kept all the rest in awe, and exercised over them the most
arbitrary jurisdiction. By his commission as legate, he was empowered to visit
them, and reform them, and chastise their irregularities; and he employed his
usual agent, Allen, in the exercise of this authority. The religious houses
were obliged to compound for their guilt, real or pretended, by giving large
sums to the cardinal or his deputy; and this oppression was carried so far,
that it reached at last the King's ears, which were not commonly open to
complaints against his favorite. He reproved Wolsey in severe terms, which
rendered him, if not more innocent, at least more cautious for the future. That
haughty minister had built a splendid palace at Hampton court, which he
probably intended, as well as that of York place in Westminster, minister, for
his own use; but fearing the increase of envy on account of this magnificence,
and desirous to appease the King, he made him a present of that building, and
told him, that, from the first, he had erected it for his service.

THE absolute authority, possessed by the King, rendered his domestic
government, both over his people and his ministers, easy and expeditious: The
conduct of foreign affairs alone required effort and application; and they were
now brought to such a pass, that it was no longer safe for England to be
entirely neutral. The feigned moderation of the emperor was of very short date;
and it was soon obvious to all the world, that his great dominions, far from
gratifying his ambition, were only regarded as the means of acquiring an empire
more extensive. The terms, proposed by him to his prisoner, were such as must
have for ever annihilated the power of France, and destroyed the balance of
Europe. He required, that that monarch should restore to him the duchy of
Burgundy, usurped, as he pretended, by Lewis the eleventh upon his ancestors;
that he should yield Provence and Dauphiny to the duke of Bourbon, to be
possessed by him in full sovereignty, without fief or homage to the crown of
France; that he should satisfy the King of England with regard to the
provinces, which that prince claimed as his inheritance; and that he should
renounce all title to Naples, Milan, Genoa, or any territory in Italy
Guicciardini, lib. 16.
.

THESE demands were proposed to Francis, soon after the battle of Pavia, while
he was detained in Pizzighitone; and as he had hitherto trusted somewhat to the
emperor's generosity, the disappointment excited in his breast the most lively
indignation. He said, that he would rather live and die a prisoner than agree
to dismember, his kingdom; and that, even were he so base as to submit to such
terms, his subjects would never permit him to carry them into execution. The
offers which he made for obtaining his liberty, were, that he would renounce
all claims in Italy, that he would assist the emperor in recovering the
territories usurped upon the empire by the Venetians, that he should relinquish
the homage due by the emperor for Artois and Flanders, that he would marry
Eleonora, the emperor's sister, (for he was now a widower) and acknowledge the
duchy of Burgundy to be possessed as her dowry; and to be inherited by her
children De Vera Hist. de Charles V.
.

FRANCIS was encouraged to persist in these offers, by the favorable accounts,
which he heard of Henry's dispositions toward him, and of the alarms which had
seized all the chief powers in Italy, upon his defeat and captivity. Francis
removed to Madrid.
He was uneasy, however, to be so far distant from the emperor with whom he
must treat; and he desired to be removed to Madrid, in hopes that a personal
interview would operate much in his favor, and that Charles, if not influenced
by his ministers, might be found possessed of the same frankness of
disposition; by which he himself was distinguished. He was soon convinced of
his mistake. The emperor, under pretense of an assembly of the states at
Toledo, kept, during some time, at a distance from him; and even after they
broke up, delayed his visit to the captive King; feigning a del^cacy in that
particular, as if his company, in the present situation of affairs, before any
terms were agreed on, would be regarded as an insult upon the royal prisoner.
Francis, partly from want of exercise, partly from reflections on his present
melancholy situation, fell into a languishing illness; which begot
apprehensions in Charles, left the death of his captive should bereave him of
all those advantages, which he proposed to extort from him. He then paid him a
visit in the castle of Madrid; and as he approached the bed in which Francis
was laid, the sick monarch called to him, "You come, Sir, to visit your
prisoner." "No," replied the emperor, "I come to visit my brother, and my
friend, who shall soon obtain his liberty." He soothed his affliction with many
speeches of a like nature, which had so good an effect, that the King daily
recovered H^^bert, De V^ra, Sandoval.
; and thenceforth employed himself in concerting with the ministers of the
emperor, the terms of his treaty.

WHILE this negotiation advanced slowly, fortune threw into the emperor's hands
a new opportunity of aggrandizing his dominions in Italy. Francis Sforza,
impatient that his investiture of Milan should so long be delayed, and that
even after it was granted, it should be encumbered with many exorbitant
conditions, had endeavored to seduce Pescara, the imperial general, from his
fidelity, and to engage him in a conspiracy against his master. Pescara feigned
to enter into the design; but having revealed the whole contrivance, he
received orders to take possession of the Milanese; and Charles made no secret
of his intention to try Sforza and forfeit his fief, on account of the treason,
which he had committed against his liege-lord and sovereign Guicciard^ni, lib.
16.
. This incident retained the Italian powers in closer union with France; and
the emperor, by grasping too much, found himself in danger of losing all his
advantages. His apprehensions were increased, when he heard, that Francis had
sent a resignation of his crown to the re^ent, and had desired that the dauphin
might be crowned King; orders, which, though they were not obeyed, showed his
determined resolution never to submit to the unreasonable t^rms required of
him. The chief difficulty of the treaty was now reduced to the duchy of
Burgundy; and even that territory, Francis had agreed to yield, but he still
insisted on first recovering his liberty. All mutual confidence was lost
between the princes; and each feared, le^t advantage should be taken of his
simplicity, should he first execute his part of the treaty.

14 January.
AT last the emperor was willing to relax of his rigor in this particular; and
the treaty of Madrid was signed, by which, it was hoped, an end would be
finally put to the differences between these two great monarchs. The principal
condition was the restoring of Francis's liberty, and the delivery of his two
eldest sons as hostages to the emperor for the restitution of Burgundy: If any
difficulty should afterward occur in the execution of this article, with
regard to Burgundy, from the opposition of the states, either of France or of
that province, Francis stipulated, that in six weeks time, he should return to
his prison, and remain there till the full performance of the treaty. There
were many other articles in this famous convention, all of them rigorous and
severe to the last degree against the captive monarch; and Charles discovered
evidently his intention of reducing Italy, as well as France, to subjection and
dependence.

MANY of Charles's ministers foresaw, that Francis, however solemn the oaths,
promises, and protestations exacted of him, never would execute a treaty, which
was so disadvantageous, or rat^er ruinous and destructive, to himself, his
posterity, and his country. By putting Burgundy into the emperor's hands, he
gave his powerful enemy an entrance into the heart of the kingdom: By
sacrificing his allies in Italy, he deprived himself of all foreign assistance;
and arming his oppressor with the whole force and riches of that opulent
country, rendered him absolutely irresistible. To these great views of
interest, were added the motives, no less cogent, of passion and resentment;
while Francis, a prince, who piqued himself on generosity, reflected on the
rigor with which he had been treated during his captivity, and the cruel terms
which had been exacted of him for the recovery of his freedom. It was also
foreseen, that the emulation and rivalship, which had so long subsisted between
these two monarchs, would make him feel the strongest reluctance on yielding
the superiority to an antagonist, who, by the whole tenor of his conduct, he
would be apt to think, had shown himself ^o little worthy of that advantage,
which fortune, and fortune alone, had put into his hands. His ministers, his
friends, his subjects, his allies, with one voice, would be sure to suggest to
him, that the first object of a prince, was the preservation of his people; and
that the laws of honor, which with a private man ought to be absolutely
supreme, and superior to all interests, were with a sovereign subordinate to
the great duty of ensuring the safety of his country. Nor could it be imagined,
that Francis would be so romantic in his principles, as not to hea^ken to a
casui^^ry, which was so plausible in itself, and which so much flattered all
the passions, by which, both as a prince and a man, he was strongly actuated.

SUCH was the reasoning of several of Charles's ministers, particularly of
Gattinara, his chancellor Guicciardini, lib. 16.
, who counseled him to treat Francis with more generosity, and to give him his
liberty on such terms, as would engage him, not by the feeble band of treaties,
but by the more forcible tie of honor, to a strict and faithful performance.
But the emperor's avidity prevented him from following this wiser and more
honorable council; at the same time, that the prospect of a general
combination of Europe hindered him from detaining Francis in captivity, and
taking advantage of the confusions, which his absence must necessarily occasion
in his kingdom. Still suspicious, however, of the sincerity of his prisoner, he
took an opportunity, before they parted, of asking him, privately and as a
friend, whether he seriously intended to execute the treaty of Madrid;
protesting, that, in all cases, he was firmly determined to restore him to his
liberty, and that the prospect of obtaining this advantage needed no longer
engage him to dissemble. Francis was too well acquainted with Charles's
character to trust to the sincerity of this protestation; and therefore renewed
his assurances of fidelity, and a strict observance of his word. The emperor
replied, that Francis was now his best friend and ally; but if he should
afterward break his engagements, which he could not suspect, he should think
himself entitled to reproach him with a conduct so base and unworthy: And on
these terms the two monarchs parted.

18th March.
Francis recovers his liberty.
FRANCIS, on entering into his own dominions, delivered his two eldest sons as
hostages into the hands of the Spaniards. He mounted a Turkish horse, and
immediately putting him to the gallop, he waved his hand over his head, and
cried aloud several times, I am yet a King. He soon reached Bayonne, where he
was joyfully received by the regent and his whole court. He immediately wrote
to Henry; acknowledging that to his good offices alone he owed his liberty, and
protesting, that he should be entirely governed by his councils in all
transactions with the emperor. When the Spanish envoy demanded his ratification
of the treaty of Madrid, now that he had fully recovered his liberty, he waved
the proposal; under color, that it was necessary to assemble previously the
States both of France and of Burgundy, and obtain their consent. The States of
Burgundy soon met; and declaring against the clause, which contained an
engagement of alienating their province, they expressed their resolution of
opposing, even by force of arms, the execution of so ruinous and unjust an
article. The imperial minister then required, that Francis, in conformity to
the treaty of Madrid, should now return to his prison; 22d May.
but the French monarch, instead of compliance, made public the treaty, which,
a little before, he had secretly concluded at Cognac, against the ambitious
schemes and usurpations of the emperor Guicciardini, lib. 17.
.

THE pope, the Venetians, and other Italian states, who were deeply interested
in these events, had been held in the most anxious suspense with regard to the
resolutions, which Francis should take, after the recovery of his liberty; and
Clement, who suspected, that that prince would never execute a treaty so
hurtful to his interests, and even destructive of his independancy, had very
frankly offered him a dispensation from all his oaths and engagements. Francis
remained not in suspense; but entered immediately into the confederacy proposed
to him. It was stipulated, between that King, the pope, the Venetians, the
Swiss, the Florentines, the duke of Milan, among other articles, that they
would oblige the emperor to deliver up the two young princes of France on
receiving a suitable sum of money; and that he would restore Milan to Sforza,
without farther conditions or encumbrances. The King of England was invited to
accede, not only as a contracting party, but also as protector of the holy
league, so it was called: And if Naples should be conquered from the emperor,
in prosecution of this confederacy, it was agreed, that Henry should enjoy a
principality of the yearly revenue of 30,000 ducats: And that cardinal Wolsey,
in consideration of the services, which he had rendered to christendom, should
also, in such an event, be put in possession of a yearly revenue of 10,000
ducats.

FRANCIS was extremely desirous, that the appearance of this great confederacy
should engage the emperor to relax somewhat of the extreme rigor of the treaty
of Madrid; and while he entertained these hopes, he was the more remiss in his
warlike preparations, nor did he send in due time reinforcements to his allies
in Italy. 6th May.
He was himself killed, as he was planting a ladder to scale the walls; Sack of
Rome.
but his soldiers, rather enraged than discouraged by his death, mounted to the
assault with the utmost valor, and entering the city, sword in hand, exercised
all those brutalities, which may be expected from ferocity excited by
resistance, and from insolence which takes place when that resistance is no
more. That renowned city, exposed by her renown alone to so many calamities,
never endured in any age, even from the barbarians, by whom she was often
subdued, such indignities as she was now constrained to suffer. The
unrestrained massacre and pillage, which continued for several days, were the
least ills, to which the unhappy Romans were exposed Guicciardiani, lib. 18.
Bellay. Stowe, p. 527.
. Whatever was respectable in modesty or sacred in religion seemed but the more
to provoke the insults of the soldiery. Virgins suffered violation in the arms
of their parents, and upon those very altars, to which they had fled for
protection. Aged prelates, after enduring every indignity, and even every
torture, were thrown into dungeons, and menaced each moment with the most cruel
death, in order to engage them to reveal their secret treasures, or purchase
liberty by exorbitant ransoms. Clement himself, who had trusted for protection
to the sacredness of his character, and neglected to make his escape in time,
was taken captive, and found that his dignity, which procured him no regard
from the Spanish soldiers, did but draw on him the insolent moquery of the
German, who, being generally attached to the Lutheran principles, were pleased
to gratify their animosity by the abasement of the sovereign pontiff.

WHEN intelligence of this great event was conveyed to the emperor, that young
prince, habituated to hypocrisy, expressed the most profound sorrow for the
success of his arms: He put himself and all his court into mourning: He stopped
the rejoicings for the birth of his son Philip: And knowing that every
artifice, however gross, is able, when seconded by authority, to impose upon
the people, he ordered prayers, during several months, to be put up in all the
churches for the Pope's liberty; an event, which, all men knew, a letter under
his hand could in a moment have procured.

THE concern, expressed by Henry and Francis for the calamity of their ally,
was much more sincere. These two monarchs, a few days before the sack of Rome,
had concluded a treaty 30th April.
at Westminster, in which, besides renewing former alliances, they agreed to
send ambassadors to Charles, requiring him to accept of two millions of crowns
as the ransom of the French princes, and to repay the money, borrowed of Henry;
and in case of refusal, the ambassadors, attended with heralds, were to
denounce war against him. This war, it was agreed to prosecute in the Low
Countries, with an army of thirty thousand infantry and fifteen hundred men at
arms, two thirds to be supplied by Francis, the rest by Henry. And in order to
strengthen the alliance between the princes, it was stipulated, that either
Francis or his son, the duke of Orleans, as should afterward be agreed on,
should espouse the princess Mary, Henry's daughter. 29th May.
No sooner did the monarchs receive intelligence of Bourbon's enterprise, than
they changed, by a new treaty, the scene of the projected war from the
Netherlands to Italy; and hearing of the pope's captivity, they were farther
stimulated to undertake the war with vigor for the restoring his liberty.
Wolsey himself crossed the seas, in order to have an interview with Francis,
and to concert measures for that purpose; 11th July.
and he displayed all that grandeur and magnificence, with which he was
intoxicated. He was attended with a train of a thousand horse. The cardinal of
Lorraine, and the chancellor Alancon, met him at Boulogne: Francis himself,
besides granting to that haughty prelate the power of giving in every place,
where he came, liberty to all prisoners, made a journey as far as Amiens to
meet him, and even advanced some miles from the town, the more to honor his
reception. It was here stipulated, that the duke of Orleans should espouse the
princess Mary; and as the emperor seemed to be taking some steps toward
assembling a general council, the two monarchs agreed not to acknowledge it,
but, during the interval of the pope's captivity, to govern the churches in
their dominions, each by his own authority. Wolsey made some attempts to get
his legantine power extended into France, and even into Germany; but finding
his efforts fruitless, he was obliged, though with great reluctance, to desist
from these ambitious enterprises Burnet, book 3. coll. 12, 13.
.

18th September.
THE more to cement the union between these princes, a new treaty was, some
time after, concluded at London; in which Henry agreed to renounce for ever all
claims upon the crown of France; claims, which might now indeed be esteemed
chimerical, but which often served as a pretense for exciting the unwary
English to wage war upon the French monarchy. League with France.
As a return for this concession, Francis bound himself and his successors to
pay for ever fifty thousand crowns a year to Henry and his successors; and that
a greater solemnity might be given to this treaty, it was agreed, that the
Parliaments and great nobility of both kingdoms should give their consent to
it. The marshall Montmorency, accompanied with many persons of distinction,
and attended by a pompous equipage, was sent over to ratify the treaty; and was
received at London with all the parade, which suited the solemnity of the
occasion. The terror of the emperor's greatness had entirely extinguished the
ancient animosity between the nations; and Spain, during more than a century,
became, though a more distant power, the chief object of jealousy to the English.

THIS appearance of a cordial union between France and England, though it added
influence to the joint embassy which they sent to the emperor, was not able to
bend that ambitious monarch to submit entirely to the conditions insisted on by
the allies. He departed indeed from his demand of Burgundy as the ransom of the
French princes; but he required, previously to their recovery of liberty, that
Francis should evacuate Genoa, and all the fortresses held by him in Italy: And
he declared his intention of bringing Sforza to a trial, and confiscating the
duchy of Milan, on account of his pretended treason. The English and French
heralds, therefore, according to agreement, declared war against him, and set
him at defiance. Charles answered the English herald with moderation; but to
the French, he reproached his master with breach of faith, remembered him of
the private conversation which had passed between them at Madrid before their
separation, and offered to prove by single combat, that that monarch had acted
dishonourably. Francis retaliated this challenge by giving Charles the lie;
and, after demanding security of the field, he offered to maintain his cause by
single combat. Many messages passed to and fro between them; but though both the
princes were undoubtedly brave, the intended duel never took place. The French
and Spaniards, during that age, disputed zealously which of the monarchs
incurred the blame of this failure; but all men of moderation every where
lamented the power of fortune, that the prince the more candid, generous, and
sincere, should, by unhappy incidents, have been reduced to that cruel
situation, that nothing but the breach of his word could preserve his people,
and that he must ever after, without being able to make a proper reply, bear to
be reproached with this infidelity by a rival, inferior to him both in honor
and in virtue.

BUT though this famous challenge between Charles and Francis had no immediate
consequences with regard to these monarchs themselves, it produced a
considerable alteration on the manners of the age. The practice of challenges
and duels, which had been part of the ancient barbarous jurisprudence, which
was still preserved on very solemn occasions, and which was even countenanced
by the civil magistrate, began thenceforth to prevail on the most trivial
occasions; and men, on any affront or injury, thought themselves entitled, or
even required in honor, to take private revenges on their enemies, by
vindicating their right in single combat. These absurd, though generous maxims,
shed much of the best blood in christendom during more than two centuries; and
notwithstanding the severity of law, such is the prevailing force of custom,
they are far from being as yet entirely exploded.

CHAP. IV.
Scruples concerning the King's marriage. -- The King enters into these
scruples. -- Anne Boleyn. -- Henry applies to the pope for a divorce. -- The
pope favorable. -- The emperor threatens him. -- The pope's ambiguous conduct.
-- The cause evoked to Rome. -- Wolsey's fall. -- Commencement of the
reformation in England. -- Foreign affairs. -- Wolsey's death. -- A Parliament.
-- Progress of the reformation. -- A Parliament. -- King's final breach with
Rome. -- A Parliament.

Scruples concerning the King's marriage.
NOtwithstanding the submissive deference, paid to the papal authority before
the reformation, the marriage of Henry the eighth with Catherine of Arragon,
his brother's widow, had not passed, without much scruple and difficulty. The
prejudices of the people were in general bent against a conjugal union between
such near relations; and the late King, though he had solemnized the espousals,
when his son was but twelve years of age, gave evident proofs of his intention
to take afterward a proper opportunity of annulling them Morison's Apomaxis,
p. 13.
. He ordered the young prince, so soon as he came of age, to enter a
protestation against the marriage Morison, p. 13. Heylin's Queen Mary, p. 2.
; and on his deathbed he charged him, as his last injunction, not to finish an
alliance, so unusual and exposed to such insuperable objections. After the
King's accession, some members of the Privy Council, particularly Warham, the
primate, openly declared against the resolution taken, of completing the
marriage; and though Henry's youth and dissipation kept him, during some time,
from entertaining any scruples with regard to the measure which he had
embraced, there happened incidents, sufficient to rouse his attention, and to
inform him of the sentiments, generally entertained on that subject. The states
of Castile had opposed the emperor, Charles's, espousals with Mary, Henry's
daughter; and among other objections, had much insisted on the illegitimate
birth of the young princess Lord Herbert, Fiddes's life of Wolsey.
. And when the negotiations were afterward opened with France, and mention was
made of betrothing her to Francis or the duke of Orleans, the bishop of Tarbe,
the French ambassador, revived the same objection Rymer, XIV. 192, 203. Heylin,
p. 3.
. But though these events naturally raised some doubts in Henry's mind, there
concurred other causes, which tended much to fortify his remorse, and render
his conscience more scrupulous.

The King enters into these scruples.
THE queen was older than the King by no less than six years; and the decay of
her beauty, together with particular infirmities and diseases, had contributed,
notwithstanding her blameless character and deportment, to render her person
unacceptable to him. Though she had borne him several children, they all died in
early infancy, except one daughter; and he was the more struck with this
misfortune, that the curse of being childless is the very threatening,
contained in the Mosaical law against those who espouse their brother's widow.
The King was actuated by a strong desire of having male issue: With a view to
that end, it is believed, more than from desire toward other gratification, he
had, a few years before this period, made addresses to a young lady, Catherine,
daughter of Sir John Blount; and when she bore him a son, he expressed the
highest satisfaction, and immediately created him duke of Richmond. The
succession of the crown too was a consideration, that occurred to every one,
whenever the lawfulness of Henry's marriage was questioned; and it was
apprehended, that, if doubts of Mary's legitimacy concurred with the weakness
of her sex, the King of Scots, the next heir, would certainly advance his own
pretensions, and throw the kingdom into confusion. The evils, as yet recent, of
civil wars and convulsions, arising from a disputed title, made great
impression on the minds of men, and rendered the people universally desirous of
any event, which might obviate so irreparable a calamity. And the King was thus
impelled, both by his private passions, and by motives of public interest, to
seek the dissolution of his inauspicious, and, as it was esteemed, unlawful
marriage with Catherine.

HENRY afterward affirmed, that his scruples of conscience arose entirely from
private reflection; and that on consulting his confessor, the bishop of
Lincoln, he found that prelate possessed with the same doubts and difficulties.
The King himself, being so great a casuist and a divine, proceeded then to
examine the question more carefully by his own learning and study; and having
had recourse to Thomas of Aquine, he observed that this celebrated doctor,
whose authority was great in the church and absolute with him, had treated of
that very case, and had expressly declared against the lawfulness of such
marriages Burnet, Fiddes.
. The prohibitions, said Thomas, contained in Leviticus, and among the rest,
that of marrying a brother's widow, are moral, eternal, and founded on a divine
sanction; and though the pope may dispense with the rules of the church, the laws
of God cannot be set aside by any authority less than that which enacted them.
The archbishop of Canterbury was next applied to; and he was required to
consult his brethren: All the prelates of England, except Fisher, bishop of
Rochester, declared unanimously, under their hand and seal, that they deemed
the King's marriage unlawful Burnet, vol. 1. p. 38. Stowe, p. 548.
. Wolsey also fortified the King's scruples Le Grand, vol. 3. p. 46, 166, 168.
Saunders. Heylin, p. 4.
, partly with a view of promoting a total breach with the emperor, Catherine's
nephew, partly desirous of connecting the King more closely with Francis, by
marrying him to the duchess of Alencon, sister to that monarch; and perhaps
too somewhat disgusted with the queen herself, who had reproved him for certain
freedoms, unbefitting his character and station Burnet, vol. 1. p. 38. Strype,
vol. 1. p. 88.
. But Henry was carried forward, though perhaps not at first excited, by a motive
more forcible than even the suggestions of that powerful favorite.

Anne Boleyn.
ANNE Boleyn, who lately appeared at court, had been created maid of honor to
the queen; and having had frequent opportunities of being seen by the King, and
of conversing with him, she had acquired an entire ascendant over his
affections. This young lady, whose grandeur and misfortunes have rendered her
so celebrated, was daughter to Sir Thomas Boleyn, who had been employed by the
King in several embassies, and who was allied to all the principal nobility of
the kingdom. His wife, mother to Anne, was daughter of the duke of Norfolk; his
own mother was daughter of the earl of Ormond; his grandfather Sir Geoffrey
Boleyn, who had been mayor of London, had espoused one of the daughters and
coheirs of the lord Hastings Camden's preface to the life of Elizabeth.
Burnet, vol. 1. p. 44.
. Anne herself, though then in very early youth, had been carried over to Paris
by the King's sister, when she espoused Lewis the twelfth of France; and upon
the decease of that monarch, and the return of his dowager into England, Anne,
whose accomplishments even in her tender years were always much admired, was
retained in the service of Claude, queen of France, spouse to Francis; and
after her death, she passed into the family of the duchess of Alancon, a
princess of singular merit. The exact time, when she returned to England, is
not certainly known; but it was after the King had entertained doubts with
regard to the lawfulness of his marriage with Catherine; if the account is to
be credited, which he himself afterward gave of that transaction. Henry's
scruples had made him break off all conjugal commerce with the queen; but as he
still supported an intercourse of civility and freindship with her, he had
occasion, in the visits, which he paid her, to observe the beauty, the youth,
the charms of Anne Boleyn. Finding the accomplishments of her mind no way
inferior to her exterior graces, he even entertained the design of raising her
to the throne; and was the more confirmed in this resolution, when he found
that her virtue and modesty prevented all hopes of gratifying his passion after
any other manner. And as every motive of inclination and policy, seemed thus to
concur in making the King desirous of a divorce from Catherine, and as his
prospect of success was inviting, he resolved to make applications to Clement,
and he sent Knight, his secretary, to Rome for that purpose.

Henry applies to the pope for a divorce.
THAT he might not shock the haughty claims of the pontiff, it was resolved not
to found the application on any general doubts of the papal power to permit
marriage in the nearer degrees of consanguinity; but only to insist on
particular grounds of invalidity in the bull, which Julius had granted for the
marriage of Henry and Catherine. It was a maxim in the court of Rome, that, if
the pope be surprised into any concession, or grant any indulgence upon false
suggestions, the bull may afterward be annulled; and this pretense had usually
been employed, wherever one pope had recalled any deed, executed by any of his
predecessors. But Julius's bull, when examined, afforded plentiful matter of
this kind; and any tribunal, favorable to Henry, needed not want a specious
color for gratifying him in his applications for a divorce. It was said in the
preamble, that the bull had been granted upon his solicitation; though it was
known, that, at that time, he was below twelve years of age: It was also
affirmed, as another motive for the bull, that the marriage was requisite, in
order to preserve peace between the two crowns; though it is certain, that there
was not then any ground or appearance of quarrel between them. These false
premises in Julius's bull, seemed to afford Clement a sufficient reason or
pretense for annulling it, and granting Henry a dispensation for a second
marriage Collier, Eccles. Hist. vol. II. p. 25. from the Cott. Lib. Vitell. B.
9.
.

The pope favorable.
BUT though the pretext for this indulgence had been less plausible, the pope was
in such a situation, that he had the strongest motive to embrace every
opportunity of gratifying the English monarch. He was then a prisoner in the
hands of the emperor, and had no hopes of recovering his liberty on any
reasonable terms, unless by the efforts of the league, which Henry had formed
with Francis and the Italian powers, in order to oppose the exorbitant ambition
of Charles. When the English Secretary, therefore, made private applications to
him, he received a very favorable answer; and a dispensation was forthwith
promised to be expeded to his master Burnet, vol. I. p. 47.
. Soon after, the march of a French army into Italy, under the command of
Lautrec, obliged the imperialists to give Clement his liberty; and he retired
to Orvietto, where the Secretary, with Sir Gregory Cussali, the King's resident
at Rome, renewed their applications to him. They found him still full of high
professions of friendship, gratitude, and attachment to the King; but not so
expeditious in granting his request as they expected. The emperor, who had got
intelligence of Henry's application to Rome, had exacted a promise of the pope,
to take no steps in that affair before he communicated them to the imperial
ministers; and Clement, confined by this promise, and still more overawed by
the emperor's forces in Italy, seemed willing to postpone those concessions
desired of him by Henry. Importuned, however, by the English ministers, he at
last put into their hands a commission to Wolsey, as legate, in conjunction
with the archbishop of Canterbury, or any other English prelate, to examine the
validity of the King's marriage, and of Julius's dispensation Rymer, XIV. 237.
: He also granted them a provisional dispensation for the King's marriage with
any other person; and promised soon to expede a decretal bull, annulling the
marriage with Catherine. But he represented to them the dangerous consequences,
which must ensue to him, if these concessions should come to the emperor's
knowledge; and he conjured them not to publish those papers, or make any
further use of them, till his affairs were in such a situation as to secure his
liberty and independance. And his secret advice was, whenever they should find
the proper time of opening the scene, that they should prevent all opposition,
by proceeding immediately to a conclusion, by declaring the marriage with
Catherine invalid, and by Henry's instantly espousing some other person. Nor
would it be so difficult, he said, for himself to confirm these proceedings,
after they were passed, as previously to render them valid, by his consent and
authority Collier, from Cott. Lib. Vitell. B. 10.
.

Burnet, vol. I. p. 51.
. And Henry's apprehensions of the possibility, or even probability, of such an
event, were much confirmed, when he reflected on the character and situation of
the sovereign pontiff.

CLEMENT the seventh was a prince of excellent judgment, whenever his timidity,
to which he was extremely subject, allowed him to make full use of those
talents, and that penetration, with which he was endowed Father Paul, lib. 1*
Guicciardini.
. The captivity, and other misfortunes, which he had undergone, by entering
into a league against Charles, had so affected his imagination, that he never
afterward exerted himself with vigor in any public measures, especially if
the interests or inclinations of that potentate stood in opposition to him. The
imperial forces were, at present, powerful in Italy, and might return to the
attack of Rome, which was still defenseless, and exposed to the same calamities
with which it had already been overwhelmed. And besides these dangers, Clement
found or fancied himself exposed to perils, which threatened, still more
immediately, his person and dignity.

The emperor threatens him.
CHARLES, apprized of the timid disposition of the holy father, threw out
perpetual menaces of summoning a general council; which, he represented, as
necessary to reform the church, and correct those exorbitant abuses, which the
ambition and avarice of the court of Rome had introduced into every branch of
ecclesiastical administration. The power of Clement himself, he said, the
sovereign pontiff, required limitation; his conduct called aloud for amendment;
and even his title to the throne, which he filled, might justly be brought in
question. That pope had always passed for the natural son of Julian of Medici,
who was of the sovereign family of Florence; and though Leo the tenth, his
cousin, had declared him legitimate, upon a pretended promise of marriage
between his father and mother, few persons believed that declaration to be
founded on any just reason or authority Father Paul, lib. 1.
. The canon law, indeed, had been entirely silent with regard to the promotion
of bastards to the papal throne; but, what was still dangerous, the people had
entertained a violent prepossession, that that stain in the birth of any person
was sufficient to incapacitate him for so holy an office. And in another point,
the canon law was express and positive, that no man, guilty of simony, could
attain that dignity. A severe bull of Julius the second had added new sanctions
to this law, by declaring, that a simoniacal election should not be rendered
valid, even by a posterior consent of the cardinals. But unfortunately Clement
had given to cardinal Colonna a billet, containing promises of advancing that
cardinal, in case he himself should attain the papal dignity by his
concurrence: And this billet, Colonna, who was in entire dependence on the
emperor, threatened every moment to expose to public view Ibid.
.

WHILE Charles terrified the pope with these menaces, he also allured him by
hopes, which were no less prevalent over his affections. At the time that the
emperor's forces sacked Rome, and reduced Clement to captivity, the
Florentines, passionate for their ancient liberty, had taken advantage of his
distresses, and revolting against the family of Medici, had entirely abolished
their authority in Florence, and re-established the former democracy. The
better to protect themselves in their freedom, they had entered into the
alliance with France, England, and Venice, against the emperor; and Clement
found, that, by this interest, the hands of his confederates were tied from
assisting him in the restoration of his family; the event, which, of all
others, he most passionately desired. The emperor alone, he knew, was able to
effectuate this purpose; and therefore, whatever professions he made of
fidelity to his allies, he was always, on the least glimpse of hope, ready to
embrace every proposal of a cordial reconcilement with that monarch Father Paul.
.

THESE views and interests of the pope were well known in England; and as the
opposition of the emperor was foreseen to Henry's divorce, both on account of
the honor and interests of Catherine, his aunt, and the obvious motive of
distressing an enemy, it was esteemed dangerous to take any measure of
consequence, in expectation of the subsequent concurrence of a man of Clement's
character, whose behavior contained always so much duplicity, and who was at
present so little at his own disposal. The safest measure seemed to consist in
previously engaging him so far, that he could not afterward recede, and in
making use of his present ambiguity and uncertainty, to extort the most
important concessions from him. 10 February.
For this purpose, Stephen Gardener, the cardinal's secretary, and Edward Fox,
the King's almoner, were dispatched to Rome, and were ordered to solicit a
commission from the pope, of such a nature as would oblige him to confirm the
sentence of the commissioners, whatever it was, and disable him, on any
account, to recall the commission, or evoke the cause to Rome Lord Herbert.
Burnet, vol. I. p. 29. in the collect. Le Grand, vol. III. p. 28. Strype, vol.
I. p. 93. with App. No. 23, 24, etc.
.

BUT the same reason which made the King so desirous of obtaining this
concession, confirmed the pope in the resolution to refuse it: The pope's
ambiguous conduct.
He was still determined to keep the door open to an agreement with the
emperor, and made no scruple of sacrificing all other considerations to a point
which he esteemed, of all others, the most important to his own security, and
to that of his family. He granted, therefore, a new commission, in which
cardinal Campeggio was joined to Wolsey, for the trial of the King's marriage;
but he could not be prevailed on to insert the clauses desired of him. And
though he put into Gardiner's hands a letter, promising not to recall the
present commission; this promise was found, on examination, to be couched in
such ambiguous terms, as left him still the power, whenever he pleased, of
departing from it Lord Herbert, p. 221. Burnet, p. 59.
.

(...) obligations to the King; but his dependence on the pope was so much
greater, that he conformed himself entirely to the (...) of his holiness* and
though he received his commission in April, he protracted his departure by so
many artificial delays, that it was October before he arrived in England. The
first step which be took, was to exhort the King to desist from the prosecution
of his divorce* and finding that this counsel gave great offense, he said, that
his intention was also to exhort the queen to enter into a convent, and that he
thought it his duty, previously to attempt an amicable composure of all
differences Herbert, p. 225.
. The more to pacify the King, he showed to him, as also to the cardinal, the
decretal bull, annulling the former marriage with Catherine; but no entreaties
could prevail with him to make any other of the King's council privy to the
secret Burnet, p. 58.
. In order to atone, in some degree, for this obstinacy, he expressed to the
King and the cardinal, the pope's great desire of satisfying them in every
reasonable demand; and in particular, he showed, that their request for
suppressing some more monastries, and converting them into cathedrals and
bishops sees, had obtained the consent of his holiness Rymer, vol. XIV. p. 270.
Strype, vol. I. p. 110, 111. Appen. No. 28.
.

Burnet, vol. I. p. 63.
; and it appears, that if a vacancy had then happened, there was a probability
of his reaching that summit of his ambition. But the pope recovered his health,
though after several relapses; and he returned to the same train of false and
deceitful politics, by which he had hitherto amused the English court. He still
flattered Henry with professions of the most cordial attachment, and promised
him a sudden and favorable issue of his process: He still continued his secret
negociations with Charles, and persevered in the resolution of sacrificing all
his promises, and all the interests of the Romish religion, to the elevation of
his family. Campeggio, who was perfectly acquainted with his views and
intentions, protracted the decision by the most artificial delays; and gave
Clement full leisure to adjust all the terms of his treaty with the emperor.

THE emperor, (...) with the King's extreme earnestness in this affair, was
determined, that he should obtain success by no other means but by an
application to him, and by deserting his alliance with Francis, which had
hither^^ supported, against the superior force of Spain, the tottering state of
the French monarchy. He willingly hearkened, therefore, to the applications of
Catherine, his aunt; and promising her his utmost protection, exhorted her
never to yield to the malice and persecutions of her enemies. The queen herself
was naturally of a firm and resolute temper; and was engaged by every motive to
persevere in protesting against the injustice to which she thought herself
exposed. The imputation of incest, which was thrown upon her marriage with
Henry, struck her with the highest indignation: The illegitimacy of her
daughter, which seemed a necessary consequence, gave her the most just concern:
The reluctance of yielding to a rival, who, she believed, had supplanted her in
the King's affections, was a very natural motive. Actuated by all these
considerations, she never ceased soliciting her nephew's assistance, and
earnestly entreating an avocation of the cause to Rome, where alone, she
thought, she could expect justice. And the emperor, in all his negociations
with the pope, made the recall of the commission, which Campeggio and Wolsey
exercised in England, a fundamental article Herbert, p. 225. Burnet, vol. I. p.
69.
.

31 May.
Trial of the King's marriage.
THE two legates, meanwhile, opened their court at London, and cited the King
and Queen to appear before it. They both presented themselves; and the King
answered to his name, when called: But the Queen, instead of answering, rose
from her seat, and throwing herself at the King's feet, made a very pathetic
harangue, which her virtue, her dignity, and her misfortunes, rendered the more
affecting. She told him, that she was a stranger in his dominions, without
protection, without council, without assistance; exposed to all the injustice,
which her enemies were pleased to impose upon her: That she had quitted her
native country without other resource, than her connexions with him and his
family, and had expected, that, instead of suffering thence any violence or
iniqu^ty, she was assured in them of a safeguard against every misfortune: That
she had been his wife during twenty years, and would here appeal to himself,
whether her affectionate submission to his will had not merited other
treatment, than to be thus, after so long a time, thrown from him with so much
indignity: That she was conscious -- he himself was assured -- that her virgin
honor was yet unstained, when he received her into his bed, and that her
connections with his brother had been carried no further than the ceremony of
marriage: That their parents, the Kings of England and Spain, were esteemed the
wisest princes of their time, and had undoubtedly acted by the best council,
when they formed the agreement for that marriage, which was now represented as
so criminal and unnatural: And that she acquiesced in their judgment, and would
not submit her cause to be tried by a court, whose dependence on her enemies
was too visible, ever to allow her any hopes of obtaining from them an
equitable or impartial decision Burnet, vol. I. p. 73. Hall. Stow, p. 543.
. Having spoke these words, she rose, and making the King a low reverence, she
departed from the court, and never would again appear in it.

AFTER her departure, the King did her the justice to acknowledge, that she had
ever been a dutiful and affectionate wife, and that the whole tenor of her
behavior had been conformable to the strictest rules of probity and honor. He
only insisted on his own scruples, with regard to the lawfulness of their
marriage; and he explained the origin, the progress, and the foundation of
those doubts, by which he had been so long and so violently agitated. He
acquitted cardinal Wolsey of having any hand in encouraging his scruples; and
he begged a sentence of the court, conformable to the justice of his cause.

THE legates, after citing the queen anew to appear before them, declared her
contumacious, notwithstanding her appeal to Rome; and then proceeded to the
examination of the cause. The first point which came before them, was, the
proof of prince Arthur's consummation of his marriage with Catherine; and it
must be confessed, that no stronger arguments could reasonably be expected of
such a fact after so long an interval. The age of the prince, who had passed
his fifteenth year, the good state of his health, the long time that he had
cohabited with his spouse, many of his expressions to that very purpose; all
these circumstances form a violent presumption, in favor of the King's
assertion Herbert.
. Henry himself, after his brother's death, was not allowed for some time to
bear the title of prince of Wales, in expectation of her pregnancy: The Spanish
ambassador, in order the better to ensure possession of her jointure, had sent
over to Spain, proofs of the consummation of her marriage Burnet, vol. II. p.
35.
: Julius's bull itself was founded on the supposition, that Arthur had perhaps
had knowledge of the princess: In the very treaty, fixing Henry's marriage, the
consummation of the former marriage with prince Arthur, is acknowledged on both
siles Ryme^, XIII. p. 81.
. These particulars were all laid before the court; accompanied with many
reasonings concerning the extent of the pope's authority, and his power of
granting a dispensation to marry within the prohibited degrees. Campeggio heard
these doctrines with great impatience; and notwithstanding his resolution to
protract the cause, he was often tempted to interrupt and silence the King's
council, when they insisted on such disagreeable topics. The trial was spun out
till the 23d of July; and Campeggio chiefly took on him the part of conducting
it. Wolsey, though the elder cardinal, permitted him to act as president of the
court; because it was thought, that a trial, managed by an Italian cardinal,
would carry the appearance of greater candor and impartiality, than if the
King's own minister and favorite had presided in it. The business now seemed
to be drawing near a period; and the King was every day in expectation of a
sentence in his favor; when, to his great surprise, Campeggio, on a sudden,
without any warning, and upon very frivolous pretenses Burnet, vol. 1. p. 76,
77.
, prorogued the court, till the first of October. The cause evoked to Rome.
The avocation, which came a few days after from Rome, put an end to all the
hopes of success, which the King had so long and so anxiously cherished
Herbert, p. 254.
.

DURING the time, that the trial was carried on before the legates at London,
the emperor had by his ministers earnestly solicited Clement to evoke the
cause to Rome; and had employed every topic of hope or terror, which could
operate either on the passion or timidity of the pontiff. The English
ambassadors, on the other hand, in conjunction with the French, had been no
less earnest in their applications, that the legates should be allowed to
finish the trial; but, though they employed the same engines of promises and
menaces, the objects, which they could set before the pope, were not so instant
nor immediate as those which were held up to him by the emperor Burnet, vol. 1.
p. 75.
. The dread of losing England, and of fortifying the Lutherans by so
considerable an accession, made small impression on Clement's mind, in
comparison of the anxiety for his own personal safety, and the fond desire of
restoring the Medici to their dominion in Florence. So soon, therefore, as he
had adjusted all terms with the emperor, he laid hold of the pretense of
justice, which required him, he said, to pay regard to the queen's appeal; and
suspending the commission of the legates, he evoked the cause to Rome. The
legate, Campeggio, had beforehand received private orders, delivered by
Campana, to burn the decretal bull, with which he was entrusted.

WOLSEY had long foreseen this measure as the sure forerunner of his own ruin.
Though he had at first desired, that the King should rather marry a French
princess than Anne Boleyn, he had employed himself with the utmost assiduity
and earnestness to bring the affair to an happy issue Collier, vol. 2. p. 45.
Burnet, vol. 1. p. 53.
: He was not therefore to be blamed for the unprosperous event, which the
pope's partiality had produced. But he had sufficient experience of the extreme
ardour and impatience of Henry's temper, who could bear no contradiction, and
who was wont, without examination or distinction, to make his ministers
answerable for the issue of those transactions, with which they were entrusted.
Anne Boleyn also, who was prepossessed against him, had imputed to him the
failure of her hopes; and as she was newly returned to court, whence she had
been removed, from a regard to decency, during the trial before the legates,
she had naturally acquired an additional influence on Henry's mind, and she
served much to fortify his prejudices against the cardinal Cavendish, p. 40.
. Even the queen and her partisans, judging of Wolsey by the part which he had
openly acted, had expressed the highest animosity against him; and the most
opposite factions seemed now to combine in the ruin of this haughty minister.
The high opinion itself, which Henry had entertained of the cardinal's
capacity, tended to hasten his downfall; while he imputed the bad success of
that minister's undertakings, not to fortune or mistake, but to the malignity
or infidelity of his intentions. The blow, however, fell not instantly on his
head. The King, who probably could not justify by any good reason his
alienation from his ancient favorite, seems to have remained some time in
suspense; and he received him, if not with all his former kindness, at least
with the appearance of trust and regard.

Wolsey's fall.
BUT it is found almost impossible for a high confidence and affection to
receive the least diminution, without sinking into absolute indifference or
even running into the opposite extreme of hatred and aversion. The King was now
determined to bring on the ruin of the cardinal with a motion almost as
precipitate as he had formerly employed in his elevation. 18th October.
The dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk were sent to require the great seal from him;
and on his scrupling to deliver it Cavendish, p. 41.
, without a more express warrant, Henry wrote him a letter, upon which it was
surrendered, and was delivered by the King to Sir Thomas More, a man, who,
besides the ornaments of an elegant literature, possessed the highest virtue,
integrity and capacity.

WOLSEY was ordered to depart from York Place, a palace which he had built in
London, and which, though it really belonged to the sea of York, was seized by
Henry, and became afterward the residence of the Kings of England, under the
title of Whitehall. All his furniture and plate were converted to the King's
use. Their riches and splendor besitted rather a royal than a private fortune.
The walls of his palace were covered with cloth of gold or cloth of silver: He
had a cupboard of plate of massy gold: There were found a thousand pieces of
sine holland belonging to him. All the rest of his riches and furniture was in
proportion; and his opulence was probably no small inducement to this violent
persecution against him.

THE cardinal was ordered to retire to Asher, a country seat which he possessed
near Hampton Court. The world, who had paid him such abject court during his
prosperity, now entirely deserted him, on this fatal reverse of all his
fortunes. He himself was much dejected with the change; and from the same turn
of mind, which had made him be so vainly elated with his grandeur, he felt the
blow of adversity with double rigor Strype, vol. 1. p. 114, 115. App. No 31,
etc.
. The smallest appearance of his return to favor threw him into transports of
joy, unbecoming a man. The King had seemed willing, during some time, to
intermit the blows, which overwhelmed him. He granted him his protection, and
lest him in possession of the sees of York and Winchester. He even sent him a
gracious message, accompanied with a ring, as a testimony of his affection.
Wolsey, who was on horseback when the messenger met him, immediately alighted;
and throwing himself on his knees in the dirt, received in that humble posture
these marks of his majesty's gracious disposition toward him Stowe, p. 547.
.

BUT his enemies, who dreaded his return to court, never ceased plying the King
with accounts of his several offenses; and Anne Boleyn in particular, who bore
him no kindness, contributed her endeavors, in conjunction with her uncle the
duke of Norfolk, to exclude him from all hopes of ever being reinstated in his
former authority. He dismissed therefore his numerous retinue; and as he was a
kind and beneficent master, the separation passed not without a plentiful
effusion of tears on both sides Cavendish. Stowe, 549.
. The King's heart, notwithstanding some gleams of kindness, seemed now totally
hardened against his old favorite. He ordered him to be indicted in the Star
Chamber, where a sentence was passed upon him. And not contented with this
severity, he abandoned him to all the rigor of the Parliament, which now,
after a long interval, was again assembled. 3d November.
The house of lords voted a long charge against Wolsey, consisting of
forty-four articles; and accompanied it with an application to the King for his
punishment, and his removal from all authority. Little opposition was made to
this charge in the upper house: No evidence of any part of it was so much as
called for; and as it consists chiefly of general accusations, it was scarce
susceptible of any The first article of the charge against the cardinal is his
procuring the legantine power, which, however, as it was certainly done with
the King's consent and permission, could be no wise criminal. Many of the other
articles also regard the mere exercise of that power. Some articles impute to
him as crimes, particular actions, which were natural or unavoidable to any
man, that was prime minister with so unlimited an authority; such as receiving
first all letters from the King's ministers abroad, receiving first all visits
from foreign ministers, desiring that all applications should be made through
him. He was also accused of naming himself with the King, as if he had been his
fellow, the King and I: It is reported that sometimes he even put his own name
before the King's, ego et rex meus. But this mode of expression is justified by
the Latin idiom. It is remarkable, that his whispering in the King's ^ar,
knowing himself to be affected with venereal distempers, is an article against
him. Many of the charges are general and incapable of proof. Lord Herbert goes
so far as to affirm, that no man ever fell from so high a station, who had so
few real crimes objected to him. This opinion is perhaps too favorable to the
cardinal Yet the refutation of the articles by Cromwell, and their being
rejected by a house of commons even in this arbitrary reign, is almost a
demonstration of Wolsey's innocence. Henry was, no doubt, entirely bent on his
destruction, when, on his failure by a parliamentary impeachment, he attacked
him upon the statute of provisors, which afforded him so little just hold on
that minister. For that this indictment was subsequent to the attack in
parliament, appears by Cavendish's life of Wolsey, Stowe, p. 551, and more
certainly by the very articles of impeachment themselves. Parliamentary
History, vol. 3. p. 42. article 7. Coke's Inst. pt. 4 fol. 89.
. The articles were sent down to the house of commons; where Thomas Cromwell,
formerly a servant of the cardinal, and who had been raised by him from a very
low station, defended his unfortunate patron with such spirit, generosity, and
courage, as acquired him great honor, and laid the foundation of that favor,
which he afterward enjoyed with the King.

WOLSEY'S enemies, finding that either his innocence or his caution prevented
them from having any just ground of accusing him, had recourse to a very
extraordinary expedient. An indictment was lodged against him; that, contrary
to a statute of Richard the second, commonly called the statute of provisors,
he had procured bulls from Rome, particularly that investing him with the
legantine power, which he had exercised with very extensive authority. He
confessed the indictment, pleaded ignorance of the statute, and threw himself
on the King's mercy. He was perhaps within reach of the law; but besides that
this statute was fallen altogether into disuse, nothing could be more rigorous
and severe than to impute to him as a crime, what he had openly, during a
course of so many years, practiced with the consent and approbation of the
King, and the acquiescence of the Parliament and kingdom. Not to mention, what
he always asserted Cavendish, page 72.
, and what we can scarce doubt of, that he had obtained the royal license in
the most formal manner, which, had he not been apprehensive of the dangers
attending any opposition to Henry's lawless will, he might have pleaded in his
own defense before the judges. Sentence, however, was pronounced against him,
"That he was out of the King's protection; his lands and goods forfeited, and
that his person might be committed to custody." But this prosecution of Wolsey,
though it was not disagreeable to Henry, was carried no farther. He even granted
him his pardon for all offenses; restored him part of his plate and furniture;
and still continued, from time to time, to drop expressions of favor and
compassion toward him.

Commencement of the reformation in England.
THE complaints against the usurpations of the ecclesiastics had been very
ancient in England, as well as in most other European kingdoms; and as this
topic was now become popular every where, it had paved the way for the Lutheran
tenets, and reconciled the people, in some measure, to the frightful idea of
heresy and innovation. The commons, finding the occasion favorable, passed
several bills, restraining the impositions of the clergy; one for regulating of
mortuaries; another against the exactions for the probates of wills These
exactions were quite arbitrary, and had risen to a great height. A member said
in the house, that a thousand m^rks had been exacted from him on that account.
Hall, fol 188. Strype, vol. 1. p. 7^.
; a third against non-residence and pluralities, and against churchmen's being
farmers of land. But what appeared chiefly dangerous to the ecclesiastical
order, were the severe invectives, thrown out, almost without opposition, in
the house, against the dissoluteness of the priests, their ambition, their
avarice, and their endless encroachments on the laity. Lord Herbert P. 293.
has even preserved the speech of a gentleman of Grey's-Inn, which is of a very
singular nature, and contains such topics as we should little expect to meet
with during that period. The member insists upon the vast variety of
theological opinions, which prevailed in different nations and ages; the
endless inextricable controversies maintained by the several sects; the
impossibility, that any man, much less the people, could ever know, much less
examine, the tenets and principles of each sect; the necessity of ignorance and
a suspense of judgment with regard to all these objects of dispute: And upon
the whole, he infers, that the only religion obligatory on mankind is the
belief of one supreme Being, the author of nature; and the necessity of good
morals, in order to obtain his favor and protection. Such sentiments would be
esteemed latitudinarian, even in our time; and would not be advanced, without
some precaution, in a public assembly. But though the first broaching of
religious controversy might encourage the skeptical turn in a few persons of a
studious disposition; the zeal, with which men soon after attached themselves
to their several parties, served effectually to banish for a long time all such
obnoxious liberties.

THE bills for regulating the clergy met with some opposition in the house of
lords. Bishop Fisher in particular imputed th^se measures of the commons to
their want of faith; and to a formed design, derived from heretical and
Lutheran principles, of robbing the church of her patrimony, and overturning
the national religion. The duke of Norfolk reproved the prelate, in very
severe, and even somewhat indecent terms. He told him, that the greatest clerks
are not always the wisest men. But Fisher replied, that he did not remember any
fools in his time, that had proved great clerks. The exceptions taken at the
bishop of Rochester's speech stopped not there. The commons, by the month of
Sir Thomas Audley, their speaker, made complaints to the King of the
reflections ^hrown upon them; and the bishop was obliged to put a move
favorable construction on his words Parliamentary History, vol. 3. p. 59.
Burnet, vol. 2. p. 82.
.

HENRY was not displeased, that the court of Rome and the clergy should be
sensible, that they were entirely dependant on him, and that his Parliament, if
he were willing to second their inclinations, were sufficiently disposed to
reduce the power and privileges of the ecclesiastics. The commons gratified the
King in another particular of moment: They granted him a discharge of all those
debts, which he had contracted since the beginning of his reign: And they
grounded this bill, which occasioned many complaints, on a pretense of the
King's great care of the nation, and of his employing regularly all the money,
which he had borrowed, in the public service. Most of the King's creditors
consisted of friends to the cardinal, who had been engaged by their patron to
contribute to the supply of Henry's demands; and the present courtiers were
well pleased to take the opportunity of mulcting them Burnet, vol. 1. p. 83.
. Several also approved of an expedient, which, they hoped, would ever after
discredit a method of supply, so irregular and so unparliamentary.

Foreign affairs.
THE domestic transactions of England were at present so interesting to the
King, that they chiefly engaged his attention; and he regarded foreign affairs
only in subordination to them. He had declared war against the emperor; but the
mutual advantages reaped by the commerce between England and the Netherlands
had engaged him to stipulate a neutrality with those provinces; and except by
money contributed to the Italian wars, he had in effect exercised no
hostilities against any of the imperial dominions. A general peace was this
summer established in Europe. Margaret of Austria and Louise of Savoy met at
Cambray, and settled the terms of pacification between the French King and the
emperor. Charles accepted of two millions of crowns in lieu of Burgundy; and he
delivered up the two princes of France, whom he had retained as hostages. Henry
was so generous to his friend and ally Francis, that he sent him an acquital of
near 600,000 crowns, which that prince owed him. Francis's Italian confederates
were not so well satisfied as the King with the peace of Cambray: They were
there almost wholly abandoned to the will of the emperor; and seemed to have no
other means of security left, but his equity and moderation. Florence, after a
brave resistance, was subdued by the imperial arms, and finally delivered over
to the dominion of the family of Medici. The Venetians were better treated:
They were only obliged to relinquish some acquisitions, which they had made on
the coast of Naples. Even Francis S^orza obtained the investiture of Milan, and
was pardoned all his past offenses. The emperor in person passed over into
Italy with a magnificent train, and received the imperial crown from the hands
of the pope at Bologna. He was but twenty nine years of age; and having
already, by his vigor and capacity, succeeded in every enterprise, and reduced
to captivity the two greatest potentates in Europe, the one spiritual, the
other temporal, he attracted the eyes of all men; and many prognostications
were formed of his growing empire.

BUT though Charles seemed to be prosperous on every side, and the conquest of
Mexico and Peru now began to prevent that searcity of money, under which he had
hitherto labored, he found himself threatened with difficulties in Germany;
and his desire of remedying them was the chief cause of his granting such
moderate conditions to the powers in Italy. Sultan Solomon, the greatest and
most accomplished prince, that ever sat on the Ottoman throne, had almost
entirely subdued Hungary, had besieged Vienna, and, though repulsed, still
menaced the hereditary dominions of the house of Austria with conquest and
subjection. The Lutheran princes in the empire, finding, that liberty of
conscience was denied them, had combined in a league for their own defense at
Smalcalde; and because they protested against the votes of the imperial diet,
they thenceforth received the appellation of protestants. Charles had
undertaken to reduce them to obedience; and under pretense of securing the
purity of religion, he had laid a scheme of aggrandizing his own family, by
extending its dominions over all Germany.

THE friendship of Henry was one material circumstance yet wanting to Charles,
in order to render his ambitious projects feasible; and the King was
sufficiently acquainted, that the concurrence of that prince would at once
remove all the difficulties, which lay in the way of his divorce; that point,
which had long been the object of his most earnest wishes. But besides that the
interests of his kingdom seemed to require a confederacy with France, his
haughty spirit could not brook a friendship imposed on him by constraint; and
as he had ever been accustomed to receive courtship, submission, and
solicitation from the greatest potentates, he could ill bear that dependence,
to which this unhappy affair seemed to have reduced him. Amidst the anxieties
with which he was agitated, he was often tempted to break off all connection
with the court of Rome; and though he had been educated in a superstitious
reverence to the papal authority, it is likely, that his personal experience of
the duplicity and selfish politics of Clement, had served much to open his eyes
in that particular. He found his royal prerogative firmly established at home:
He observed that his people were in general much disgusted with clerical
usurpations, and disposed to reduce the powers and privileges of the
ecclesiastical order: He knew, that they had cordially taken part with him in
his prosecution of a divorce, and highly resented that unworthy treatment,
which, after so many services and such devoted attachment, he had received from
the court of Rome. Anne Boleyn also could not fail, by her insinuations, to
engage him into extremities with the pope, both as it was the readiest way to
her attaining royal dignity, and as her education in the court of the duchess
of Alancon, a princess inclined to the reformers, had already disposed her to a
belief of the new doctrines. But notwithstanding all these inducements, Henry
had strong motives still to desire a good agreement with the sovereign pontiff.
He apprehended the danger of such great innovations: He dreaded the reproach of
heresy: He abhorred all connexions with the Lutherans, the chief opponents of
papal power: And having once exerted himself with such applause, as he
imagined, in defense of the Romish communion, he was ashamed to retract his
former opinions, and betray from passion such a palpable inconsistency. While
he was agitated by these contrary motives, an expedient was proposed, which, as
it promised a solution of all difficulties, was embraced by him with the
greatest joy and satisfaction.

The universities consulted about the King's marriage.
DR. Thomas Cranmer, a fellow of Jesus-College in Cambridge, was a man
remarkable in that university for his learning, and still more, for the candor
and disinterestedness of his temper. He fell one evening by accident into
company with Gardener, now secretary of state, and Fox the King's almoner; and
as the business of the divorce became the subject of conversation, he observed,
that the readiest way either to quiet Henry's conscience or extort the pope's
consent, would be to consult all the universities of Europe with regard to this
controverted point: If they agreed to approve the King's marriage with
Catherine, his remorses would naturally cease; if they condemned it, the pope
would find it difficult to resist the solicitations of so great a monarch,
seconded by the opinion of all the learned men in Christendom Fox, p. 1860. 2d
edit. Burnet, vol 1. p. 79. Speed, p. 769. Heylin, p. 5.
. When the King was informed of this proposal, he was delighted with it; and
swore, with more alacrity than delicacy, that Cranmer had got the right sow by
the ear: He sent for that divine: Entered into conversation with him: Conceived
a high opinion of his virtue and understanding: Engaged him to write in defense
of the divorce: And immediately, in prosecution of the scheme proposed,
employed his agents to collect the judgment of all the universities in Europe.

HAD the question of Henry's marriage with Catherine been examined by the
principles of sound philosophy, exempt from superstition, it seemed not liable
to much difficulty. The natural reason, why marriage in certain degrees is
prohibited by the civil laws, and condemned by the moral sentiments of all
nations, is derived from men's care to preserve purity of manners; while they
reflect, that if a commerce of love were authorized between the nearest
relations, the frequent opportunities of intimate conversation, especially
during early youth, would introduce an universal dissoluteness and corruption.
But as the customs of countries vary considerably, and open an intercourse,
more or less restrained, between different families, or between the several
members of the same family, so we find, that the moral precept, varying with
its cause, is susceptible, without any inconvenience, of very different
latitude in the several ages and nations of the world. The extreme delicacy of
the Greeks, permitted no converse between persons of the two fexes, except
where they lived under the same roof; and even the apartments of a stepmother,
and her daughters, were almost as much shut up against visits from the
husband's sons, as against those from any strangers or more remote relations:
Hence in that nation it was lawful for a man to marry, not only his niece, but
his half*sister by the father: A liberty unknown to the Romans, and other
nations, where a more open intercourse was authorized between the sexes.
Reasoning from this principle, it would appear, that the ordinary commerce of
life among great princes, is so obstructed by ceremony, and numerous
attendants, that no ill consequence would result among them, from the marriage
of a brother's widow; especially if the dispensation of the sovereign priest is
previously required, in order to justify what may in common cases be condemned,
and to hinder the precedent from becoming too common and familiar. And as
strong motives of public interest and tranquillity may frequently require such
alliances between the sovereign families, there is less reason for extending
toward them the full rigor of that rule which has place among individuals
Even judging of this question by the scripture, to which the appeal was every
moment made, the arguments for the King's cause appear but lame and imperfect.
Marriage in the degree of affinity which had place between Henry and Catherine,
is, indeed, prohibited in Leviticus; but it is natural to interpret that
prohibition as a part of the Jewish ceremonial or municipal law: And though it is
there said, in the conclusion, that the gentile nations, by violating these
degrees of consangu nity, had incurred the divine displeasure, the extension of
this maxim to every precise ca^e before specified, is supposing the scriptures
to be composed with a minute accuracy and precision, to which, we know with
certainty, the sacred penmen did not think proper to confine themselves. The
descent of mankind. from one common father, obliged them in the first
generation to matry in the nearest degrees of consanguinity: Instances of a
like nature occur among the patriarchs: And the marriage of a brother's widow
was, in certain cases, not only permitted, but even enjoined as a positive
precept by the Mosaical law. It is in vain to say, that this precept was an
exception to the rule; and an exception confined merely to the Jewish nation.
The inference is still just, that such a marriage can contain no natural or
moral turpitude; otherwise God, who is the author of all purity, would never,
in any case, have enjoined it.
.

BUT in opposition to these reasons, and many more which might be collected,
Henry had custom and practice on his side, the principle by which men are
almost wholly governed in their actions and opinions. Marriages with a
brother's widow were so unusual, that no other instance of it could be found in
any history or record of any Christian nation; and though the popes were
accustomed to dispense with more essential precepts of morality, and even
permitted marriages within other prohibited degrees, such as those of uncle and
niece, the imaginations of men were not as yet reconciled to this particular
exercise of his authority. Herbert. Burnet.
, gave verdict in the King's favor; not only those of France, Paris, Orleans,
Bourges, Toulouse, Angiers, which might be supposed to lie under the influence
of their prince, ally to Henry; but also those of Italy, Venice, Ferrara,
Padua; even Bologna itself, though under the immediate jurisdiction of Clement.
Oxford alone Wood. hist. and ant. Ox. lib. I. p. 225.
and Cambridge Burnet, vol. I. p. 6.
made some difficulty; because these universities, alarmed with the progress of
Lutheranism, and fearing a defection from the holy see, scrupled to give their
sanction to measures, whose consequences, they feared, would prove so fatal to
the ancient religion: Their opinion however, conformable to that of the other
universities of Europe, was at last procured; and the King, in order to give
weight to all these authorities, engaged his nobility to write a letter to the
pope, recommending his cause to the holy father, and threatening him with the
most dangerous consequences in case of a denial of justice Rymer XIV. 405.
Burnet, vol. I. p. 95.
. The convocations too both of Canterbury and York, pronounced the King's
marriage invalid, irregular, and contrary to the law of God, with which no
human power had authority to dispense Rymer XIV. 454, 472.
. But Clement lying still under the influence of the emperor, continued to
summon the King to appear, either by himself or proxy, before his tribunal at
Rome; and the King, who knew that he could expect no fair trial there, refused
to submit to such a condition, and would not even admit of any citation, which
he regarded as a high insult, and a violation of his royal prerogative. The
Father of Anne Boleyn, created earl of Wiltshire, carried to the pope the
King's reasons for not appearing by proxy; and as the first instance of
disrespect from England, refused to kiss his holiness's foot, which he very
graciously held out to him for that purpose Burnet, vol. I. p. 94.
.

THE extremities to which Henry was pushed, both against the pope and the
ecclesiastical order, were naturally very disagreeable to cardinal Wolsey; and
as Henry foresaw his opposition, it is the most probable reason which can be
assigned for his continuing to persecute with so much rigor his ancient
favorite. After Wolsey had remained some time at Asher, he was allowed to
remove to Richmond, a palace which he had received as a present from Henry, in
return for Hampton Court: But the courtiers, dreading still his near
neighborhood to the King, procured an order for him to remove to his see of
York. The cardinal knew it was vain to resist: He took up his residence at
Cawood in Yorkshire, where he rendered himself extremely popular to the
neighborhood, by his affability and hospitality Cavendish. Stowe, p. 554.
: but he was not allowed to remain long unmolested in this retreat. The earl of
Northumberland received orders, without regard to Wolsey's ecclesiastical
character, to arrest him for high treason, and to conduct him to London, in
order to his trial. The cardinal, partly from the fatigues of the journey,
partly from the agitation of his anxious mind, was seized with a disorder which
turned into a dysentery; and he was able, with some difficulty, to reach
Leicester-abbey. When the abbot and monks advanced to receive him with much
respect and ceremony, he told them, that he was come to lay his bones among
them; and he immediately took his bed, whence he never rose more. 28 November.
A little before he expired, he addressed himself in the following words to Sir
William Kingston, constable of the Tower, who had him in custody. "I pray you,
have me heartily recommended unto his royal majesty, and beseech him on my
behalf to call to his remembrance all matters that have passed between us from
the beginning, especially with regard to his business with the queen; and then
will he know in his conscience whether I have offended him. "HE is a prince of
a most royal carriage, and has a princely heart; and rather than he will miss
or want any part of his will, he will endanger the one half of his kingdom.

"I DO assure you, that I have often kneeled before him, sometimes three hours
together, to persuade him from his will and appetite; but could not prevail:
Had I but served God as diligently as I have served the King, he would not have
given me over in my gray hairs. But this is the just reward that I must receive
for my indulgent pains and study, not regarding my service to God, but only to
my prince. Therefore, let me advise you, if you be one of the privy council, as
by your wisdom you are fit, take care what you put into the King's head: For
you can never put it out again Cavendish.
."



Wolsey's death.
THUS died this famous cardinal, whose character seems to have contained as
singular a variety as the fortune to which he was exposed. The obstinacy and
violence of the King's temper may alleviate much of the blame which some of his
favourite's measures have undergone; and when we consider, that the subsequent
part of Henry's reign was much more unfortunate and criminal than that which
was directed by Wolsey's councils, we shall be inclined to suspect of
partiality those historians, who have endeavored to load his memory with such
violent reproaches. If in foreign politics, he sometimes employed his influence
over the King for his private purposes, rather than his master's interest,
which, he boasted, he had solely at heart; we must remember, that he had in
view the papal throne; a dignity, which, had he attained it, would have enabled
him to make Henry a suitable return for all his favors. The cardinal
d'Amboise, whose memory is precious in France, always made this apology for his
own conduct, which was, in some respects, similar to Wolsey's; and we have
reason to think, that Henry was well acquainted with the motives by which his
minister was influenced. He regreted very much his death, when informed of it;
and always spoke favorably of his memory: A proof, that humor more than
reason, or any discovery of treachery, had occasioned his last persecutions
against him.

16 January.
A Parliament
A NEW session of Parliament was held, together with a convocation; and the
King gave strong proofs of his extensive authority, as well as of his intention
to employ it to the depression of the Clergy. As an ancient statute, now almost
become obsolete, had been made use of to ruin Wolsey, and render his exercise
of the legantine power criminal, notwithstanding the King's permission; the
same law was now turned against the ecclesiastics. It was pretended, that every
one who had submitted to the legantine authority, that is, the whole church,
had violated the statute of provisors; and the attorney general brought
accordingly an indictment against them Antiq Brit. Eccles. p. 325. Burnet, vol.
I. p. 106.
. The convocation knew that it would be vain to oppose reason or equity to the
King's arbitrary will, or plead that their ruin would have been the certain
consequence of not submitting to Wolsey's commission, which was procured by
Henry's consent, and supported by his authority. They chose therefore to throw
themselves on the mercy of their sovereign; and they agreed to pay 118,840 l.
for their pardon Hollingshed, p. 923.
. A confession was likewise extorted from them, that the King was the protector
and the supreme head of the church and clergy of England; though some of them had
the dexterity to get a clause inserted, which invalidated the whole submission,
and which ran in these terms, in so far as is permitted by the law of Christ.

THE commons, finding that a pardon was granted the clergy, began to be
apprehensive for themselves, lest either they should afterward be brought into
trouble, on account of their submission to the legantine court, or a supply be
extorted from them, in return for their pardon. They therefore petitioned the
King, to grant a remission to his lay subjects; but met with a repulse. He told
them, that, if he ever pleased to forgive their offense, it would be from his
own goodness, not from their application, lest he should seem to be compelled
to it. Some time after, when they despaired of obtaining this concession, he
was pleased to issue a pardon to the laity; and the commons expressed great
gratitude for this act of clemency Hall's Chronicle. Hollingshed, p. 923.
Baker, p. 208.
.

15 January.
An act was passed against levying the annates or first fruits Burnet, vol. I.
Collect. N^. 41. Strype, vol. I. p. 144.
; being a year's rent of all the bishoprics that fell vacant: Progress of the
reformation.
A tax which was imposed by the court of Rome for granting bulls to the new
prelates, and which was found to amount to considerable sums. Since the second
of Henry the seventh, no less than one hundred and sixty thousand pounds had
been transmitted to Rome, on account of this claim; which the Parliament,
therefore, reduced to five per cent. of all the episcopal benefices. The better
to keep the pope in awe, the King was entrusted with a power of regulating
these payments, and of confirming or infringing this act at his pleasure: And
it was voted, that any censures which should be passed by the court of Rome, on
account of that law, should be entirely disregarded, and that mass should be
said, and the sacraments administered, as if no such censures had been issued.

THIS session the commons preferred to the King, a long complaint against the
abuses and oppressions of the ecclesiastical courts; and they were proceeding
to enact laws for remedying them, when a difference arose, which put an end to
the session, before the Parliament had finished all their business. It was
become a custom for men to make such settlements, or trust deeds, of their land
by will, that they defrauded, not only the King, but all other lords, of their
wards, marriages, and reliefs; and by the same artifice the King was deprived
of his primier seisin, and the profits of the livery, which were no
inconsiderable branches of the revenue. Henry made a bill be drawn to moderate,
not remedy altogether, this abuse: He was contented, that every man should have
the liberty of disposing in this manner of the half of his land; and he told
the Parliament in plain terms, "If they would not take a reasonable thing, when
it was offered, he would search out the extremity of the law; and then would
not offer them so much again." The lords came willingly into his terms; but the
commons rejected the bill: A singular instance, where Henry might see, that his
power and authority, though extensive, had yet some boundaries. The commons,
however, found reason to repent of their victory. The King made good his
threats: He called together the judges and ablest lawyers, who argued the
question in chancery; and it was decided, that a man could not by law bequeath
any part of his lands, in prejudice of his heir Burnet, vol. I. p. 116. Hall*
Parliamentary History.
.

10 April.
THE Parliament being again assembled after a short prorogation, the King
caused the two oaths to be read to them, that which the bishops took to the
pope, and that to the King, on their installation; and as a contradiction might
be suspected between them, while the prelates seemed to swear allegiance to two
sovereigns Burnet, vol. I. p. 123, 124.
, the Parliament showed their intention of abolishing the oath to the pope,
when their proceedings were suddenly stopped by the breaking out of the plague
at Westminster, which occasioned a prorogation. It is remarkable, that one
Temse ventured this session to move, that the House should address the King, to
take back the queen, and stop the prosecution of his divorce. This motion
occasioned the King to send for Audley, the Speaker; and to explain to him the
scruples with which his conscience had so long been agitated; scruples, he
said, which had proceeded from no wanton appetite, which had arisen after the
fervours of youth were over, and which were confirmed by the concurring
sentiments of all the learned societies in Europe. Except in Spain and
Portugal, he added, it was never heard of, that any man had espoused two
sisters; but he himself had the misfortune, he believed, to be the first
christian man who had ever married his brother's widow Herbert. Hall, fol. 205.
.

AFTER the prorogation, Sir Thomas More, the chancellor, foreseeing that all
the measures of the King and Parliament tended to a breach with the church of
Rome, and to an alteration of religion, which his principles would not permit
him to concur with, desired leave to resign the seals; and he descended from
this high station with more joy and alacrity than he had mounted up to it. The
austerity of this man's virtue, and the sanctity of his manners, had no way
encroached on the gentleness of his temper, nor even diminished that frolic and
gaity to which he was naturally inclined. He sported with all the varieties of
fortune into which he was thrown; and neither the pride naturally attending a
high station, nor the melancholy incident to poverty and retreat, could ever
lay hold of his serene and equal spirit. While his family discovered symptoms
of sorrow on laying down the grandeur and magnificence to which they had been
accustomed, he drew a subject of mirth from their distresses; and made them
ashamed of losing even a moment's cheerfulness, on account of such trivial
misfortunes. The King, who had entertained a high opinion of his virtue,
admitted his resignation with some difficulty; and he bestowed the seals soon
after on Sir Thomas Audley.

DURING these transactions in England, and these invasions of the papal and
ecclesiastical authority, the court of Rome were not without solicitude; and
they entertained very just apprehensions of losing entirely their authority in
England; the kingdom, which, of all others, had long been most devoted to the
holy see, and which had yielded it the most ample revenue. While the imperial
cardinals pushed Clement to proceed to extremities against the King, his more
moderate and impartial counselors represented to him the indignity of his
proceedings; that a great monarch, who had signalized himself, both by his pen
and his sword, in the pope's cause, should be refused a favor, which he
demanded on such just grounds, and which had scarce ever before been denied to
any person of his rank and station. Notwithstanding these remonstrances, the
Queen's appeal was received at Rome; the King was cited to appear; and several
consistories were held, to examine the validity of their marriage. Henry was
determined not to send any proxy to plead his cause before this court: He only
dispatched Sir Edward Karne and Dr. Bonner, in quality of excusators, so they
were called, to carry his apology, for not paying that deference to the papal
authority. The prerogative of his crown, he said, must be sacrificed, if he
allowed of appeals from his own kingdom; and as the question regarded
conscience, not power or interest, no proxy could supply his place, or convey
that satisfaction which the dictates of his own mind could alone confer. 11
October.
In order to support himself in this measure, and add greater security to his
defection from Rome, he procured an interview with Francis at Boulogne and
Calais, where he renewed his personal friendship, as well as public alliance,
with that monarch, and concerted all measures for their mutual defense. He even
employed arguments, by which, he believed, he had persuaded Francis to imitate
his example in withdrawing his obedience from the bishop of Rome, and
administering ecclesiastical affairs without having farther recourse to that
see. 14 November.
And being now fully determined in his own mind, as well as resolute to stand
all consequences, he privately celebrated his marriage with Anne Boleyn, whom
he had created marchioness of Pembroke. Rouland Lee, soon after raised to the
bishopric of Coventry, officiated at the marriage. The duke of Norfolk, uncle
to the new Queen, her father, mother, and brother, together with Dr. Cranmer,
were present at the ceremony Herbert, 340, 341.
. Anne became pregnant soon after her marriage; and this event, both gave great
joy to the King, and was regarded by the people as a strong proof of the
Queen's former modesty and virtue.

4 February. A Parliament.
THE Parliament was again assembled; and Henry, in conjunction with the great
council of the nation, proceeded still in those gradual and secure steps, by
which they loosened their connections with the sea of Rome, and repressed the
usurpations of the Roman pontiff. An act was made against all appeals to Rome
in causes of matrimony, divorces, wills, and other suits cognizable in
ecclesiastical courts; appeals esteemed dishonorable to the kingdom, by
subjecting it to a foreign jurisdiction; and found to be infinitely vexatious,
by the expense and the delay of justice, which necessarily attended them 24
Hen. VIII. c. 12.
. 12 April.
The more to show his disregard to the pope, Henry, finding the new Queen's
pregnancy to advance, publicly owned his marriage; and in order to remove all
doubts with regard to its lawfulness, he prepared measures for declaring, by a
formal sentence, the invalidity of his former marriage with Catherine: A
sentence which ought naturally to have preceded his espousals of Anne Collier,
vol. II. p. 31. and Records, No. 8.
.

THE King, notwithstanding his scruples and remorses on account of his first
marriage, had always treated Catherine with respect and distinction; and he
endeavored, by every soft and persuasive art, to engage her to depart from her
appeal to Rome, and her opposition to his divorce. Finding her obstinate in
maintaining the justice of her cause, he had totally forborne all visits and
intercourse with her; and had desired her to make choice of any one of his
palaces in which she should please to reside. She had fixed her court for some
time at Amphill near Dunstable; 10 May.
and it was in this latter town that Cranmer, now created archbishop of
Canterbury, on the death of Warham Bishop Burnet has given us an account of the
number of bulls requisite for Cranmer's installation. By one bull* directed to
the King, he is, upon the royal nomination, made archbishop of Canterbury. By a
second, directed to himself, he is made archbishop. By a third, he is absolved
from all censures. A fourth, is to the suffragans, requiring them to receive
and acknowledge him as archbishop. A fifth to the dean and chapter, to the same
purpose. A sixth to the clergy of Canterbury. A seventh to all the laity in his
see. An eighth to all that held lands of it. By a ninth he was ordained to be
consecrated, taking the oath that was in the pontifical. By a tenth bull the
pall was sent him. By an eleventh, the archbishop of York, and the bishop of
London, were required to put it on him. These were so many artifices to draw
fees to offices, which the popes had erected, and disposed of for money. It may
be worth observing, that Cranmer, before he took the oath to the pope, made a
protestation, that he did not intend thereby to restrain himself from any thing
that he was bound to, either by his duty to God, the King, or the country; and
that he renounced every thing in it that was contrary to any of these. This
device was the invention of some casuist, and not very compatible with that
strict sincerity, and that scrupulous conscience, of which Cranmer made
profession. Collier, vol. II. in Coll. No. 22. Burnet, vol. I. p. 128, 129.
, was appointed to open his court for examining the validity of her marriage.
The near neighborhood of the place was chosen in order to deprive her of all
plea of ignorance; and as she made no answer to the citation, neither by
herself nor proxy, she was declared contumacious; and the primate proceeded to
the examination of the cause. The evidences of Arthur's consummation of the
marriage were produced; the opinions of the universities were read; together
with the judgment pronounced two years before by the convocations both of
Canterbury and York; and after these preparatory steps, Cranmer proceeded to a
sentence, and annulled the King's marriage with Catherine as unlawful and
invalid. By a subsequent sentence, he ratified the marriage with Anne Boleyn,
who soon after was publicly crowned Queen, with all the pomp and dignity suited
to that ceremony Heylin, p. 6.
. 7 September.
To complete the King's satisfaction, on the conclusion of this intricate and
vexatious affair, she was safely delivered of a daughter, who received the name
of Elizabeth, and who afterward swayed the scepter with such renown and
felicity. Henry was so much delighted with the birth of this child, that soon
after he conferred on her the title of princess of Wales Burnet, vol. I. p. 134.
; a step somewhat irregular, as she was only presumptive, not apparent heir of
the crown. But he had, during his former marriage, thought proper to honor his
daughter Mary with that title; and he was determined to bestow on the offspring
of his present marriage, the same marks of distinction, as well as exclude Mary
from all hopes of the succession. His regard for the new Queen seemed rather to
increase than diminish by his marriage; and all men expected to see the entire
ascendant of one who had mounted a throne, from which her birth had set her at
so great a distance, and who, by a proper mixture of severity and indulgence,
had long managed so intractable a spirit as that of Henry. In order to efface,
as much as possible, all marks of his first marriage, Lord Mountjoy was sent to
the unfortunate and divorced Queen, to inform her, that she was henceforth to
be treated only as princess dowager of Wales; and all means were employed to
make her acquiesce in that determination. But she continued obstinate in
maintaining the validity of her marriage; and she would admit of no service
from any person, who did not approach her with the accustomed ceremonial.
Henry, forgetting his wonted generosity toward her, employed menaces against
such of her servants as complied with her commands in this particular; but was
never able to make her relinquish her title and pretensions Herbert, p. 326.
Burnet, vol. 1. p. 132.
.

WHEN intelligence was conveyed to Rome of these transactions, so injurious to
the authority and reputation of the holy see, the conclave were in a rage, and
all the cardinals of the imperial faction urged the pope to proceed to a
definitive sentence, and to emit his spiritual thunders against Henry. But
Clement proceeded no farther than to declare the nullity of Cranmer's sentence,
as well as that of Henry's second marriage; threatening him with
excommunication, if, before the first of November ensuing, he did not replace
every thing in the condition, in which they formerly stood Le Grand, vol. 3. p.
566.
. An event had happened, from which the pontiff expected a more amicable
conclusion of the difference, and which hindered him from carrying matters to
extremity against the King.

THE pope had claims upon the duchy of Ferrara for the sovereignty of Reggio
and Modena Burnet, vol. 2. p. 133. Guicciardini.
; and having submitted his pretensions to the arbitration of the emperor, he
was surprised to find a sentence pronounced against him. Enraged at this
disappointment, he hearkened to proposals of amity from Francis; and when that
monarch made overtures of marrying the duke of Orleans, his second son, with
Catherine of Medici, niece to the pope, Clement gladly embraced an alliance, by
which his family was so much honored. An interview was even appointed of the
pope and French King at Marseilles; and Francis, as a common friend, employed
his good offices in mediating an agreement between his new ally and the King of
England.

HAD this connection of France with the sea of Rome taken place a few years
sooner, there had been little difficulty in composing the quarrel with Henry.
The King's request was an ordinary one; and the same plenary power of the pope,
which had granted a dispensation for his espousing Catherine, could easily have
annulled the marriage. But in the progress of the quarrel, the state of affairs
was much changed on both sides. Henry had shaken off much of that reverence
with which he had been early imbued for the apostolical see; and finding, that
his subjects of all ranks had taken part with him, and willingly complied with
his movements for breaking foreign dependence, he had taken a relish for his
spiritual authority, and would scarce, it was apprehended, be induced to renew
his submissions to the Roman pontiff. The pope, on the other hand, ran now a
manifest risque of infringing his authority by a compliance with the King; and
as a sentence of divorce could no longer be rested on nullities in Julius's
bull, but would be construed as an acknowledgment of papa^ usurpations, it was
foreseen, that the Lutherans would thence take occasion of triumph, and would
persevere more obstinately in their present principles. But notwithstanding
these obstacles, Francis did not despair of mediating an agreement. He still
observed that the King had some remains of prejudice in favor of the apostolic
see, and was apprehensive of the consequences, which might onsue from too
violent innovations. He saw plainly the interest, that Clement had in
preserving the obedience of England, which was one of the richest jewels in the
papal crown. And he hoped, that these motives on both sides would facilitate a
mutual agreement, and would forward the effects of his good offices.

FRANCIS first prevailed on the pope to promise, that, if the King would send a
proxy to Rome, and thereby submit his cause to the holy see, he would appoint
commissioners to meet at Cambray, and form the process; and he would
immediately afterward pronounce the sentence of divorce, required of him.
Bellay, bishop of Paris, was next dispatched to London, and obtained a promise
of the King, that he would submit his cause to the Roman consistory, provided
the cardinals of the imperial faction were excluded from it. King's final
breach with Rome.
A day was appointed for the return of the messengers; and all the world
regarded this affair, which had threatened a violent rupture between England
and the Romish church, as drawing toward an amicable conclusion Father Paul,
lib. 1.
. But the greatest affairs often depend on the most frivolous incidents. The
courier, who carried the King's written promise, was detained beyond the day
appointed: News are brought to Rome that a libel had been published in England
against the court of Rome, and a farce acted before the King in derision of the
pope and cardinals Father Paul, lib. 1.
. 23d March.
The pope and cardinals enter into the consistory enflamed with anger; and by a
precipitate sentence, the marriage of Henry and Catherine was pronounced valid,
and Henry declared to be excommunicated if he refused to adhere to it. Two days
after, the courier arrived; and Clement, who had been hurried from his usual
prudence, found, that, though he repented heartily of this hasty measure, it
would be difficult for him to retract it, or replace affairs on the same
footing as before.

IT is not probable, that the pope, had he conducted himself with ever so great
moderation and temper, could hope, during the lifetime of Henry, to have
regained much authority or influence in England. That monarch was both
impetuous and obstinate in his character; and having proceeded so far in
throwing off the papal yoke, he never could again have been induced tamely to
bend his neck to it. 15 January.
Even at the time, when he was negotiating a reconcilement with Rome, he either
entertained so little hopes of success, or was so indifferent about the event,
that he had assembled a Parliament; A Parliament.
and continued to enact laws totally destructive of the papal authority. The
people had been prepared by degrees for this great innovation. Each preceding
session had retrenched something from the power and profit of the pontiff. Care
had been taken, during some years, to teach the nation, that a general council
was much superior to the pope. But now a bishop preached every Sunday at Paul's
Cross, in order to inculcate the doctrine, that the pope was entitled to no
authority at all beyond the bounds of his own diocese Burnet, vol. 1. p. 144.
. The proceedings of the Parliament showed that they had entirely adopted this
opinion; and there is reason to believe, that the King, after having procured a
favorable sentence from Rome, which would have removed all the doubts with
regard to his second marriage and the succession, might indeed have lived on
terms of civility with the apostolic see, but never would have surrendered to
it any considerable share of his assumed prerogative. The nature and importance
of the laws, passed this session, even before news arrived of the violent
resolutions taken at Rome, is sufficient to justify this opinion.

ALL payments made to the apostolic chamber; all provisions, bulls,
dispensations, were abolished: Monasteries were subjected to the visitation and
government of the King alone: The law for punishing heretics was moderated; the
ordinary was prohibited to imprison or try any person upon suspicion alone,
without presentment by two lawful witnesses; and it was declared, that to speak
against the pope's authority was no heresy: Bishops were to be appointed, by a
conge d'elire from the crown, or in case of the dean and chapter's refusal, by
letters patent; and no recourse was to be had to Rome for palls, bulls, or
provisions: Campeggio and Ghinucci, two Italians, were deprived of the
bishoprics of Salisbury and Worcester, which they had hitherto enjoyed Le
Neve's Fasti eccles. Ang.
: The law which had been formerly made against paying annates or first fruits,
but which had been left in the King's power to suspend or enforce, was finally
established: And a submission, which was exacted two years before from the
clergy, and which had been obtained with great difficulty, received this
session the sanction of Parliament 25. ^. 8. c. 1^.
. In this submission, the clergy acknowledge, that convocations ought only to
be assembled by the King's authority; they promise to enact no new canons
without his consent; and they agree, that he should appoint thirty-two
commissioners, in order to examine the old canons, and abrogate such as should
be found prejudicial to his royal prerogative Collier, vol. 2. p. 69, 70.
. An appeal was also allowed from the bishop's court to the King in Chancery.

BUT the most important law passed this session, was that which regulated the
succession to the crown: The marriage of the King with Catherine was declared
unlawful, void, and of no effect: The primate's sentence, annulling it, was
ratified: And the marriage with Queen Anne was established and confirmed. The
crown was appointed to descend to the issue of that marriage, and failing them
to the King's heirs for ever. An oath likewise was ordered to be taken in
favor of this succession, under penalty of imprisonment during the King's
pleasure, and forfeiture of goods and chattels. And all slander against the
King, Queen, or their issue, was subjected to the penalty of misprision of
treason. After these compliances, the Parliament was prorogued; 30th March.
and those acts, so contemptuous toward the pope, and so destructive of his
authority, were passed at the very time that Clement pronounced his hasty
sentence against the King. Henry's resentment against Queen Catherine, on
account of her obstinacy, was the reason why he excluded her daughter from all
hopes of succeeding to the crown; contrary to his first intention, when he
began the suit of divorce, and of dispensation for a second marriage.

THE King found his ecclesiastical subjects as compliant as the laity. The
convocation ordered, that the act against appeals to Rome, together with the
King's appeal from the pope to a general council, should be affixed to the
doors of all the churches in the kingdom: And they voted, that the bishop of
Rome had, by the law of God, no more jurisdiction in England than any other
foreign bishop; and that the authority, which he and his predecessors had
exercised there, was only by usurpation and the sufferance of English princes.
Four persons only opposed this vote in the lower house, and one doubted. It
passed unanimously in the upper. The bishops went so far in their complaisance,
that they took out new commissions from the crown, where all their spiritual
and episcopal authority was expressly affirmed to be derived ultimately from
the civil magistrate, and to be entirely dependent on his good pleasure
Collier's Eccl. Hist. vol. 2.
.

THE oath regarding the succession was generally sworn throughout the kingdom.
Fisher, bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More, were the only persons of
note, who entertained scruples with regard to its legality. Fisher was
obnoxious on account of some practices, into which his credulity, rather than
any bad intentions, seems to have betrayed him. But More was the person of
greatest reputation in the kingdom for virtue and integrity; and as it was
believed, that his authority would have influence on the sentiments of others,
great pains were taken to convince him of the lawfulness of the oath. He
declared, that he had no scruple with regard to the succession, and thought
that the Parliament had full power to settle it: He offered to draw an oath
himself, which would assure his allegiance to the heir appointed; but he
refused the oath prescribed by law; because the preamble of that oath asserted
the legality of the King's marriage with Anne, and thereby implied, that his
former marriage with Catherine was unlawful and invalid. Cranmer, the primate,
and Cromwell, now secretary of state, who highly loved and esteemed More,
earnestly solicited him to lay aside his scruples; and their friendly
entreaties seemed to weigh more with him, than all the penalties attending his
refusal Burnet, vol. 1. p. 156.
. He persisted however, in a mild, though firm manner, to maintain his
resolution; and the King, irritated against him as well as Fisher, ordered them
both to be indicted upon the slatute, and committed prisoners to the Tower.

3d November.
THE Parliament, being again assembled, conferred on the King the title of the
only supreme head on earth of the church of England; as they had already
invested him with all the real power belonging to it. In this memorable act,
the Parliament granted him power, or rather acknowledged his inherent power,
"to visit, and repress, redress, reform, order, correct, restrain, or amend all
errors, heresies, abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities, which fell under
any spiritual authority or jurisdiction 26 H. 8. c. 1.
." They also declared it treason to attempt, imagine, or speak evil against the
King, Queen, or his heirs, or to endeavor the depriving them of their
dignities or titles. They gave him a right to all the annates and tithes of
benefices, which had formerly been paid to the court of Rome. They granted him
a subsidy and a fifteenth. They attainted More and Fisher for misprision of
treason. And they united England and Wales together, by giving to that
principality all the benefit of the English laws.

THUS the authority of the popes, like all exorbitant power, was ruined by the
excess of its acquisitions, and by stretching its pretensions beyond what it
was possible for any human principles or prepossessions to sustain. The right
of granting indulgences had in former ages contributed extremely to enrich the
holy see; but being openly abused, served to excite the first commotions and
oppositions in Germany. The prerogative of granting dispensations had also
contributed much to attach all the sovereign princes and great families in
Europe to the papal authority; but meeting with an unlucky concurrence of
circumstances, was now the cause, why England separated herself from the Romish
communion. The acknowledgment of the King's supremacy introduced there a
greater simplicity into the government, by uniting the spiritual with the civil
power, and preventing disputes about limits, which never could be exactly
determined between the contending parties. A way was also prepared for checking
the exorbitancy of superstition, and breaking those shakles, by which all human
reason, policy, and industry had so long been incumbered. The prince, it may be
supposed, being head of the religion, as well as of the temporal jurisdiction
of the kingdom, though he might sometimes employ the former as an engine of
government, had no interest, like the Roman pontiff, in nourishing its
excessive growth; and, except when blinded by ignorance or bigotry, would be
sure to retain it within tolerable limits, and prevent its abuses. And on the
whole, there followed from these revolutions very beneficial consequences; though
perhaps neither foreseen nor intended by the persons who had the chief hand in
conducting them.

WHILE Henry proceeded with so much order and tranquillity in changing the
ancient religion, and while his authority seemed entirely secure in England, he
was held in some inquietude by the state of affairs in Ireland and in Scotland.

THE earl of Kildare was deputy of Ireland, under the duke of Richmond, the
King's natural son, who bore the title of lieutenant; and as Kildare was
accused of some violences against the family of Ossory, his hereditary enemy,
he was called over to answer for his conduct. He left his authority in the
hands of his son, who hearing that his father was thrown into prison, and was
in danger of his life, immediately took up arms, and joining himself to Oneale,
Ocarrol, and other Irish nobility, committed many ravages, murdered Allen,
archbishop of Dublin, and laid siege to that city. Old Kildare meanwhile died
in prison, and his son, persevering in his revolt, made applications to the
emperor, who promised him assistance. The King was obliged to send over some
forces to Ireland, which so harrassed the rebels, that Kildare, finding the
emperor backward in fulfilling his promises, was reduced to the necessity of
surrendering himself prisoner to lord Leonard Gray, the new deputy, brother to
the marquis of Dorset. He was sent over to England, together with his five
uncles; and after trial and conviction, they were all brought to public
justice; though two of the uncles, in order to save the family, had pretended to
join the King's party.

THE earl of Angus had acquired the entire ascendant in Scotland, and having
got possession of the King's person, then in early youth, he was able, by means
of that advantage, and by employing the power of his own family, to retain the
reins of government. The queen dowager, however, his spouse, bred him great
disturbance: For having separated herself from him, on account of some
jealousies and disgusts, and having procured a divorce, she had married another
man of quality of the name of Stuart; and she joined all the discontented
nobility, who opposed Angus's authority. James himself was dissatisfied with
the slavery, to which he was reduced; and by secret correspondence, he excited
first Walter Scot, then the earl of Lenox, to attempt, by force of arms, to
free him from the hands of Angus. Both enterprises failed of success; but
James, impatient of restraint, found means at last of flying to Stirling, where
his mother then resided; and having summoned all the nobility to attend him, he
overturned the authority of the Douglasses, and obliged Angus and his brother
to fly into England, where they were protected by Henry. The King of Scotland,
being now arrived at years of majority, took the government into his own hands;
and employed himself with great spirit and valor, in repressing those feuds,
ravages, and disorders, which, though they disturbed the course of public
justice, served to support the martial spirit of the Scotch, and contributed,
by that means, to maintain national independancy. He was desirous of renewing
the ancient league with the French nation; but finding Francis in close union
with England, and on that account somewhat cold in hearkening to his proposals,
he received the more favorably the advances of the emperor, who hoped, by
means of such an ally, to breed disturbance to England. He offered the Scotch
King the choice of three princesses, his near relations, and all of the name of
Mary; his sister the dowager of Hungary, his niece a daughter of Portugal, or
his cousin, the daughter of Henry; whom he pretended to dispose of unknown to
her father. James was more inclined to the latter proposal, had it not, upon
reflection, been found impracticable; and his natural propensity to France at
last prevailed over all other considerations. The alliance with Francis
necessarily engaged James to agree to terms of peace with England. But though
invited by his uncle, Henry, to confer with him at Newcastle, and concert
common measures for repressing the ecclesiastics in both kingdoms, and shaking
off the yoke of Rome, he could not be prevailed with to put himself in the
King's power. In order to have a pretext for refusing the conference, he
applied to the pope, and obtained a brief, forbidding him to engage in any
personal negotiations with an enemy of the holy see. By these measures, Henry
easily concluded, that he could very little depend on the friendship of his
nephew. But those events took not place till some time after our present period.

CHAP. V.
Religious principles of the people -- of the King -- of the ministers. --
Farther progress of the reformation. -- Sir Thomas More. -- The maid of Kent.
-- Trial and execution of Fisher bishop of Rochester -- of Sir Thomas More. --
King excommunicated. -- Death of Queen Catherine. -- Suppression of the lesser
monasteries. -- A Parliament. -- A convocation. -- Translation of the Bible. --
Disgrace of Queen Anne. -- Her trial -- and execution. -- A Parliament. -- A
Convocation. -- Discontents among the people. -- Insurrection. -- Birth of
prince Edward and death of Queen Jane. -- Suppression of the greater
monasteries. -- Cardinal Pole.

Religious principles of the people.
THE ancient and almost uninterrupted opposition of interest between the laity
and clergy in England, and between the English Clergy and the court of Rome,
had sufficiently prepared the nation for a breach with the Roman pontiff; and
men had penetration enough to discover abuses, which were plainly calculated
for the temporal advantages of the hierarchy, and which they found destructive
of their own. These subjects seemed proportioned to human understanding; and
even the people, who felt the power of intere^t in their own breasts, could
perceive the purpose of those numerous inventions, which the interested spirit
of the sovereign pontiff had introduced into religion. But when the reformers
proceeded thence to dispute concerning the nature of the sacraments, the
operations of grace, the terms of acceptance with the dei^y, men were thrown
into amazement, and were, during some time, at a loss how to choose their party.
The profound ignorance, in which both the clergy and laity formerly lived, and
their freedom from theological altercations, had produced a sincere, but
indolent acquiescence in received opinions; and the multitude were neither
attached to them by topics of reasoning, nor by those prejudices and
antipathies against opponents, which have ever a more natural and powerful
influence over them. As soon as a new opinion therefore was advanced, supported
by such an authority as to call up their attention, they felt their capacity
totally unfitted for such disquisitions; and they perpetually fluctuated
between the contending parties. Hence the sudden and violent movements by which
the people were agitated, even in the most opposite directions: Hence their
seeming prostitution in sacrificing to present power the most sacred
principles: And hence the rapid progress during some time, and the sudden as
well as entire check given afterward to the new doctrines. When men were once
settled in their particular sects, and had fortified themselves in a habitual
detestation against those esteemed heretics, they adhered with more obstinacy
to the principles of their education; and the limits of the two religions
remained thenceforth fixed and unchangeable.

NOTHING forwarded more the first progress of the reformers, than the offer,
which they made, of submitting all religious doctrines to private judgment, and
the summons given every one to examine the principles formerly imposed upon
him. Though the multitude were totally unqualified for this undertaking, they yet
were highly pleased with it. They fancied that they were exercising their
judgment; while they opposed to the prejudices of ancient authority more
powerful prejudices of another kind. The novelty itself of the doctrines; the
pleasure of an imaginary triumph in dispute; the fervent zeal of the reformed
preachers; their patience, and even alacrity, in suffering persecution, death,
and torments; a disgust against the restraints of the old religion; an
indignation against the tyranny and interested spirit of the ecclesiastics;
these motives were prevalent with the people, and by such considerations were
men so generally induced during that age, to throw off the religion of their
ancestors.

BUT in proportion as the practice of submitting religion to private judgment
was acceptable to the people, it appeared, in some respects, dangerous to the
rights of sovereigns, and seemed to destroy that implicit obedience on which
the authority of the civil magistrate is chiefly founded. The very precedent of
shaking such an ancient and deep founded establishment as that of the Roman
hierarchy might, it was apprehended, prepare the way for new innovations. The
republican spirit, which naturally took place among the reformers, increased
this jealousy. The furious insurrections of the populace, excited by Muncer and
other anabaptists in Germany Sleidan, lib. 4. and 5.
, furnished a new pretense for decrying the reformation. Nor should we
conclude, because protestants in our time prove as dutiful subjects as those of
any other religion, that therefore such apprehensions were altogether without
any appearance or plausibility. Though the liberty of private judgment be
tendered to the disciples of the reformation, it is not in reality accepted of;
and men are generally contented to acquiesce in those establishments, however
new, into which their early education has thrown them.

NO prince in Europe was possessed of such absolute authority as Henry, not
even the pope himself, in his own capital, where he united both the civil and
ecclesiastical powers Here are the terms in which the King's minister expressed
himself to the pope. An non, inquam, sanctitas vestra plerosque habet quibuscum
arcanum aliquid crediderit, putet id non minus celatum esse quam si uno tantum
pectore contineretur; quod multo magis serenissimo Angliae Regi evenire debet,
cui singuli in suo regno sunt subjecti, neque etiam velint, possunt Regi non
esse ^idelissimi. Vae namque illis, si vel parvo momento ab illius voluntate
recederent. Le Grand, tom. III. p. 113. The King once said publicly before the
council, that if any one spoke of him or his actions, in terms which became
them not, he would let them know, that he was master. Et qu'il n*y auroit si
belle tete qu'il ne fit voler. Id. p. 218.
; and there was small likelihood, that any doctrine, which lay under the
imputation of encouraging sedition, could ever pretend to his favor and
countenance. Of the King.
But besides this political jealousy, there was another reason which inspired
this imperious monarch with an aversion to the reformers. He had early declared
his sentiments against Luther; and having entered the lists in those scholastic
quarrels, he had received, from his courtiers and theologians, infinite
applause for his performance. Elated by this imaginary success, and blinded by
a natural arrogance and obstinacy of temper, he had entertained the most lofty
opinion of his own erudition, and he received with impatience, mixed with
contempt, any contradiction to his sentiments. Luther also had been so
imprudent, as to treat in a very indecent manner his royal antagonist; and though
he afterward made the humblest submissions to Henry, and apologized for the
vehemence of his former expressions, he never could efface the hatred which the
King had conceived against him and his doctrines. The idea of heresy still
appeared detestable as well as formidable to that prince; and whilst his
resentment against the sea of Rome had removed one considerable part of his
early prejudices, he had made it a point of honor never to relinquish the
rest. Separate as he stood from the catholic church, and from the Roman
pontiff, the head of it, he still valued himself on maintaining the catholic
doctrine, and on guarding, by fire and sword, the imagined purity of his
speculative principles.

Of the ministers.
HENRY'S ministers and courtiers were of as motley a character as his conduct;
and seemed to waver, during this whole reign, between the ancient and the new
religion. The Queen, engaged by interest as well as inclination, favored the
cause of the reformers: Cromwell, who was created secretary of state, and who
was every day advancing in the King's confidence, had embraced the same views;
and as he was a man of prudence and ability, he was able, very effectually,
though in a covert manner, to promote the late innovations: Cranmer, archbishop
of Canterbury, had secretly adopted the protestant tenets; and he had gained
Henry's friendship by his candor and sincerity; virtues which he possessed in
as eminent a degree as those times, equally distracted with faction and
oppressed with tyranny, could easily permit. On the other hand, the duke of
Norfolk adhered to the ancient faith; and by the greatness of his rank, as well
as by his talents, both for peace and war, he had great weight in the King's
council: Gardener, lately created bishop of Winchester, had inlisted himself in
the same party; and the suppleness of his character, as well as the dexterity
of his conduct, had rendered him extremely useful to it.

ALL these ministers, while they stood in the most irreconcilable opposition of
principles, were obliged to disguise their particular opinions, and to pretend
an entire agreement with the sentiments of their master. Cromwell and Cranmer
still carried the appearance of a conformity to the ancient speculative tenets;
but they artfully made use of Henry's resentment to widen the breach with the sea of Rome. Norfolk and Gardener feigned an assent to the King's supremacy,
and to his renounciation of the sovereign pontiff; but they encouraged his
passion for the catholic faith, and instigated him to punish those daring
heretics, who had presumed to reject his theological principles. Both sides
hoped, by their unlimited compliance, to bring him over to their party: The
King mean while, who held the balance between the factions, was enabled, by
the courtship paid him both by protestants and catholics, to assume an
immeasurable authority: And though in all these measures he was really driven by
his ungoverned humor, he casually held a course, which led more certainly to
arbitrary power, than any which the most profound politics could have traced
out to him. Artifice, refinement, and hypocrisy, in his situation, would have
put both parties on their guard against him, and would have taught them reserve
in complying with a monarch, whom they could never hope thoroughly to have
gained: But while the frankness, sincerity, and openness of Henry's temper were
generally known, as well as the dominion of his furious passions; each side
dreaded to lose him by the smallest opposition, and flattered themselves that a
blind compliance with his will, would throw him, cordially and fully, into
their interests.

THE ambiguity of the King's conduct, though it kept the courtiers in awe, served
to encourage the protestant doctrine among his subjects, and promoted that
spirit of innovation with which the age was generally seized, and which nothing
but an entire uniformity, as well as a steady severity in the administration,
could be able to repress. There were some Englishmen, Tindal, Joye,
Constantine, and others, who, dreading the exertion of the King's authority,
had fled to Antwerp Burnet, vol. I. p. 159.
; where the great privileges possessed by the Low Country provinces, served,
during some time, to give them protection. Farther progress of the reformation.
These men employed themselves in writing books, in English, against the
corruptions of the church of Rome; against images, relicts, pilgrimages; and
they excited the curiosity of men with regard to that question, the most
important in theology, the terms of acceptance with the Supreme Being. In
conformity to the Lutherans and other protestants, they asserted, that
salvation was obtained by faith alone; and that the most infallible road to
perdition Sacrilegium est and impietas velle placere Deo per opera and non per
solam ^idem. Luther adversus regem. Ita vides quam dives sit homo christianus
five baptizatus, qui etiam volens non potest p^rdere salutem suam quantiscunque
p^ccatis. Nulla enim peccata possunt cum damnare nisi incredulitas. Id. de
ca^tivitate Babylonica.
was a reliance on good works; by which terms they understood, as well the moral
duties, as the ceremonial and monastic observances. The defenders of the
ancient religion, on the other hand, maintained the efficacy of good works; but
though they did not exclude from this appellation the social virtues, it was
still the superstitions, gainful to the church, which they chiefly extolled and
recommended. The books, composed by these fugitives, being stole over to
England, began to make converts every where; but it was a translation of the
scriptures by Tindal, that was esteemed most dangerous to the established
faith. The first edition of this work, composed with little accuracy, was found
liable to considerable objections; and Tindal, who was poor, and could not
afford to lose a great part of the impression, was longing for an opportunity
of correcting his errors, of which he had been made sensible. Tonstal, then
bishop of London, soon after of Durham, a man of great moderation, being
desirous to discourage, in the gentlest manner, these innovations, gave private
orders for buying up all the copies, which could be found at Antwerp; and he
burnt them publicly in Cheapside. By this contrivance, he supplied Tindal with
money, enabled him to print a new and correct edition of his work, and gave
occasion to great scandal and reproach, in thus committing to the flames the
word of God Hall, fol. 186. Fox, vol. I. p. 138. Burnet, vol. I. p. 159.
.

THE disciples of the reformation met with little severity during the ministry
of Wolsey, who, though himself a clergyman, bore too small regard to the
ecclesiastical order, to serve as an instrument of their tyranny: It was even
an article of impeachment against him Articles of impeachment in Herbert.
Burnet.
, that by his connivance he had encouraged the growth of heresy, and that he
had protected and acquitted some notorious offenders. Sir Thomas More.
Sir Thomas More, who succeeded Wolsey as chancellor, is at once an object
deserving our compassion, and an instance of the usual progress of men's
sentiments during that age. This man, whose elegant genius and familiar
acquaintance with the noble spirit of antiquity, had given him very enlarged
sentiments, and who had in his early years advanced principles, which even at
present would be esteemed somewhat libertine, had, in the course of events,
been so irritated by polemics, and thrown into such a superstitious attachment
to the ancient faith, that few inquisitors have been guilty of greater violence
in their prosecutions of heresy. Though adorned with the gentlest manners, and
the purest integrity, he carried to the utmost height his aversion to
heterodoxy; and one James Bainham, in particular, a gentleman of the temple,
experienced from him the highest severity. Bainham, accused of favoring the
new opinions, was carried to More's house, and having refused to discover his
accomplices, the chancellor ordered him to be whipped in his presence, and
afterward sent him to the Tower, where he himself saw him put to the torture.
The unhappy gentleman, overcome by all these severities, abjured his opinions;
but feeling afterward the deepest compunction for this apostasy, he openly
returned to his former tenets, and even courted the crown of martyrdom. He was
condemned as an obstinate and relapsed heretic, and was burned in Smithfield
Fox. Burnet, vol. I. p. 165.
.

MANY were brought into the bishops courts for offenses, which appear very
trivial, but which were regarded as symbols of the party: Some for teaching
their children the Lord's prayer in English; others for reading the new
testament in that language, or for speaking against pilgrimages. To harbor the
persecuted preachers, to neglect the fasts of the church, to declaim against
the vices of the clergy, were capital offenses. One Thomas Bilney, a priest,
who had embraced the new doctrine, had been terrified into an abjuration; but
was so haunted by remorse, that his friends dreaded some fatal effects of his
despair. At last, his mind seemed to be more composed; but this appearing calm
proceeded only from the resolution which he had taken, of expiating his past
offense, by an open confession of the truth, and by dying a martyr to it. He
went through Norfolk, teaching every where the people to beware of idolatry, and
of trusting either to pilgrimages, or to the cowle of St. Francis, to the
prayers of the saints, or to images. He was soon seized, tried in the bishop's
court, and condemned as a relapse; and the writ was sent down to burn him. When
brought to the stake, he discovered such patience, fortitude, and devotion,
that the spectators were much affected with the horrors of his punishment; and
some mendicant friars, who were present, fearing that his death would be
imputed to them, and make them lose those alms, which they received from the
charity of the people, desired him publicly to acquit them Ibid. p. 164.
of having any hand in his death. He very willingly complied; and by this
meekness gained the more on the sympashy of the people. Another person, still
more heroic, being brought to the stake for denying the real presence, seemed
almost in a transport of joy; and he tenderly embraced the faggots, which were
to be the instruments of his punishment, as the means of procuring him eternal
rest. In short, the tide turning toward the new doctrine, those severe
executions, which, in another disposition of men's minds, would have sufficed
to suppress it, now served only the more to diffuse it among the people, and to
inspire them with horror against the unrelenting persecutors.

BUT though Henry neglected not to punish the protestant doctrine, which he
esteemed heresy, his most formidable enemies, he knew, were the zealous
adherents to the ancient religion, chiefly the monks, who, having their
immediate dependence on the Roman pontiff, apprehended their own ruin to be the
certain consequence of abolishing his authority in England. Peyto, a friar,
preaching before the King, had the assurance to tell him, "That many lying
prophets had deceived him, but he, as a true Micajah, warned him, that the dogs
would lick his blood, as they had done Ahab's Strype, vol. I. p. 167.
." The King took no notice of this insult; but allowed the preacher to depart
in peace. Next Sunday, he employed Dr. Corren to preach before him; who
justified the King's proceedings, and gave Peyto the appellations of a rebel, a
slanderer, a dog, and a traitor. Elston, another friar of the same house,
interrupted the preacher; and told him, that he was one of the lying prophets,
who sought by adultery to establish the succession to the crown; but that he
himself would justify all that Peyto had said. Henry silenced this petulant
friar; but showed no other mark of resentment than ordering Peyto and him to be
summoned before the council, and to be rebuked for their offense Collier, vol.
II. p. 86. Burnet, vol. I. p. 151.
. He even bore patiently some new instances of their obstinacy and arrogance.
For when the earl of Essex, a privy counselor, told them, that they deserved
for their offense to be thrown into the Thames; Elston replied, that the road
to heaven lay as near by water as by land Stow, p. 562.
.

BUT several monks were detected in a conspiracy, which, as it might have
proved more dangerous to the King, was attended with more fatal consequences to
themselves. The Maid of Kent.
Elizabeth Barton, of Aldington in Kent, commonly called the holy Maid of Kent,
had been subject to hysterical fits, which threw her body into unusual
convulsions; and having produced an equal disorder in her mind, made her utter
strange sayings, which, as she was scarce conscious of them during the time,
had soon after entirely escaped her memory. The silly people in the
neighborhood were struck with these appearances, which they imagined to be
supernatural; and Richard Masters, vicar of the parish, a designing fellow,
founded on them a project, by which he hoped to draw both profit and
consideration to himself. He went to Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, who was
at that time alive; and having given him an account of Elizabeth's revelations,
he so far wrought on that prudent, but superstitious prelate, as to receive
orders from him to watch her in her-trances, and to note down carefully all her
future speeches. The regard paid her by a person of so high a rank, soon
rendered her still more the object of attention to the neighborhood; and it
was easy for Masters to persuade them, as well as the maid herself, that her
ravings were inspirations of the Holy Ghost. Knavery, as is usual, soon after
succeeding to illusion, she learned to counterfeit trances; and she then
uttered, in an unusual tone of voice, such speeches as were dictated to her by
her spiritual director. Masters associated with him Dr. Bocking, a canon of
Canterbury; and their design was to raise the credit of an image of the virgin,
which stood in a chapel belonging to Masters, and to draw such pilgrimages to
it as usually frequented the more famous images and relicts. In prosecution of
this design, Elizabeth pretended revelations, which directed her to have
recourse to that image for a cure; and being brought before it, in the presence
of a great multitude, she fell anew into convulsions; and after distorting her
limbs and countenance during a competent time, she affected to have obtained a
perfect recovery by the intercession of the virgin Stowe, p. 570. Blanquet's
Epitome of chronicles.
. This miracle was soon bruited abroad; and the two priests, finding the
imposture to succeed beyond their own expectations, began to extend their
views, and to lay the foundation of more important enterprises. They taught
their penitent to declaim against the new doctrines, which she denominated
heresy; against innovations in ecclesiastical government; and against the
King's divorce from Catherine. She went so far as to assert, that, if he
prosecuted that design, and married another, he would not be a King a month
longer, and would not an hour longer possess the favor of the Almighty, but
should die the death of a villain. Many monks throughout England, either from
folly, or roguery, or from faction, which is often a complication of both,
entered into this delusion; and one Deering, a friar, wrote a book of the
revelations and prophecies of Elizabeth Strype, vol I. p. 181.
. Miracles were daily added, to increase the wonder; and the pulpit every where
resounded with accounts of the sanctity and inspirations of this new
prophetess. Messages were carried from her to Queen Catherine, by which that
princess was exhorted to persist in her opposition to the divorce; the pope's
ambassadors gave encouragement to the popular credulity; and even Fisher,
bishop of Rochester, though a man of sense and learning, was carried away with an
opinion so favorable to the party, which he had embraced Collier, vol. II. p.
87.
. The King at last began to think the matter worthy of his attention; and
having ordered Elizabeth and her accomplices to be arrested, he brought them
before the star chamber, where they freely, without being put to the torture,
made confession of their guilt. The Parliament, in the session held the
beginning of this year, passed an act of attainder against some who were
engaged in this treasonable imposture 25 Hen. VIII. c. 12. Burnet, vol. I. p.
149. Hall, fol. 220.
; and Elizabeth herself, Masters, Bocking, Deering, Rich, Risby, Gold, suffered
for their crime. The bishop of Rochester, Abel, Addison, Laurence, and some
others, were condemned for misprision of treason; because they had not
discovered some criminal speeches which they heard from Elizabeth Godwin's
Annals, p. 53.
: And they were thrown into prison. The better to undeceive the multitude, the
forgery of many of the prophetess's miracles was detected; and even the
scandalous prostitution of her manners was laid open to the public. Those
passions, which so naturally insinuate themselves amidst the warm intimacies
maintained by the devotees of different sexes, had taken place between
Elizabeth and her confederates; and it was found, that a door to her dormitory,
which was said to have been miraculously opened, in order to give her access to
the chapel, for the sake of frequent converse with heaven, had been contrived
by Bocking and Masters for less refined purposes.

with these sanguinary measures; and he went so far as to change his garb and
dress, pretending sorrow for the necessity, by which he was pushed to such
extremities. Still impelled, however, by his violent temper, and desirous of
striking a terror into the whole nation, he proceeded, by making examples of
Fisher and More, to consummate his lawless tyranny.

Trial and execution of Fisher, bishop of Rochester.
JOHN Fisher, bishop of Rochester, was a prelate, eminent for his learning and
morals, no less than for his ecclesiastical dignities, and for the high favor
which he had long possessed with the King. When he was thrown into prison, on
account of his refusing the oath of succession, and his concealment of
Elizabeth Barton's treasonable speeches, he had not only been deprived of all
his revenues, but stripped of his very clothes, and, without consideration of
his extreme age, was allowed nothing but rags, which scarce sufficed to cover
his nakedness Fuller's Church Hist. book 5. p. 203.
. In this condition, he lay in prison above a twelvemonth; when the pope,
willing to recompense the sufferings of so faithful an adherent, created him a
cardinal; though Fisher was so careless of that dignity, that even if the purple
were lying on the ground, he declared that he would not stoop to take it. This
promotion of a man, merely for his opposition to royal authority, rouzed the
indignation of the King; and he resolved to make the innocent person feel the
effects of his resentment. 22d of June.
Fisher was indicted for denying the King's supremacy, was tried, condemned,
and beheaded.

Of Sir Thomas More.
THE execution of this prelate was intended as a warning to More, whose
compliance, on account of his great authority both abroad and at home, and his
high reputation for learning and virtue, was anxiously desired by the King.
That prince also bore as great personal affection and regard to More, as his
imperious mind, the sport of passions, was sus^eptible of toward a man, who in
any particular, opposed his violent inclinations. But More could never be
prevailed on, contrary to his principles, to acknowledge the King's supremacy;
and though Henry exacted that compliance from the whole nation, there was, as
yet, no law obliging any one to take an oath to that purpose. Rich, the
solicitor general, was sent to confer with More, then a prisoner, who kept a
cautious silence with regard to the supremacy: He was only inveigled to say,
that any question with regard to the law, which established that prerogative,
was like a two-edged sword: If a person answer one way, it will confound his
soul; if another, it will destroy his body. No more was wanted to found an
indictment of high treason against the prisoner. His silence was called
malicious, and made a part of his crime; and these words, which had casually
dropped from him, were interpreted as a denial of the supremacy More's Life of
Sir Thomas More. Herbert, p. 393.
. Trials were mere formalities during this reign: The jury gave sentence
against More, who had long expected this fate, and who needed no preparation to
fortify him against the terrors of death. Not only his constancy, but even his
cheerfulness, nay, his usual facetiousness, never forsook him; and he made a
sacrifice of his life to his integrity with the same indifference that he
maintained in any ordinary occurrence. When he was mounting the scaffold, he
said to one, "Friend, help me up, and when I go down again let me shift for
myself." The executioner asking him forgiveness, he granted the request, but
told him, "You will never get credit by beheading me, my neck is so short."
Then laying his head on the block, he bid the executioner stay till he put
aside his beard: "For," said he, "it never committed treason." Nothing was
wanting to the glory of this end, except a better cause, more free from
weakness and superstition. But as the man followed his principles and sense of
duty, however misguided, his constancy and integrity are equally objects of our
admiration. 6th July.
He was beheaded in the fifty-third year of his age.

WHEN the execution of Fisher and More was reported at Rome, especially that of
the former, who was invested with the dignity of cardinal, every one discovered
the most violent rage against the King; and numerous libels were published, by
the wits and orators of Italy, comparing him to Caligula, Nero, Domitian, and
all the most unrelenting tyrants of antiquity. Clement the seventh had died
about six months after he pronounced sentence against the King; and Paul the
third, of the name of Farnese, had succeeded to the papal throne. This pontiff,
who had always favored Henry's cause while a cardinal, had hoped, that,
personal animosities being buried with his predecessors, it might not be
impossible to form an agreement with England: And Henry himself was so desirous
of accommodating matters, that in a negotiation, which he entered into with
Francis a little before this time, he required, that that monarch should
conciliate a friendship between him and the court of Rome. But Henry was
accustomed to prescribe, not to receive terms; and even while he was
negotiating peace, his usual violence often carried him to commit offenses,
which rendered the quarrel totally incurable. 30th August.
The execution of Fisher was regarded by Paul, as so capital an injury, that he
immediately passed censures against the King, citing him and all his adherents
to appear in Rome within ninety days, in order to answer for their crimes: King
excommunicated.
If they failed, he excommunicated them; deprived the King of his realm;
subjected the kingdom to an interdict; declared his issue by Anne Boleyn
illegitimate; dissolved all leagues with him; gave his kingdom to any invader;
commanded the nobility to take arms against him; freed his subjects from all
oaths of allegiance; cut off their commerce with foreign states; and declared
it lawful for any one to seize them, to make slaves of their persons, and to
convert their effects to their own use Sanders, p. 148.
. But though these censures were passed, they were not at that time openly
denounced: The pope delayed the publication, till he should find an agreement
with England entirely desperate; and till the emperor, who was at present
pressed by the Turks and the protestant princes in Germany, should be in a
condition to execute the censures.

THE King knew, that he might expect any injury, which it should be in
Charles's power to inflict; and he therefore made it the chief object of his
policy to incapacitate that monarch from wreaking his resentment upon him
Herbert, p. 350, 351.
. He renewed his friendship with Francis, and opened negotiations for marrying
his infant-daughter, Elizabeth, with the duke of Angouleme, third son of
Francis. These two princes also made advances to the protestant league in
Germany, who were ever jealous of the emperor's ambition: And Henry, besides
remiting them some money, sent Fox, bishop of Hereford, as Francis did Bellay,
lord of Langey, to treat with those princes. But during the first fervours of
the reformation, an agreement in theological tenets was held, as well as an
union of interest, to be essential to a good correspondence among states; and
though both Francis and Henry flattered the German princes with hopes of their
embracing the confession of Ausbourg, it was looked upon as a bad symptom of
their sincerity, that they exercised such extreme rigor against all preachers
of the reformation in their respective dominions Sleidan, lib. 10.
. Henry carried the feint so far, that, while he thought himself the first
theologian in the world, he yet invited over Melancthon, Bucer, Sturmius,
Draco, and other German divines, in order to confer with him, and to instruct
him in the foundation of their tenets. These theologians were now of great
importance in the world; and no poet or philosopher, even in ancient Greece,
where they were treated with most respect, had ever reached equal applause and
admiration with these wretched composers of metaphysical polemics. The German
princes told the King, that they could not spare their divines; and as Henry
had no hopes of agreement with such zealous disputants, and knew that in
Germany the followers of Luther would not associate with the disciples of
Zuinglius, because, though they agreed in every thing else, they differed in some
particulars with regard to the eucharist, he was the more indifferent on
account of this refusal. He could also fores^e, that even while the league of
Smalcalde did not act in concert with him, they would always be carried by
their interest to oppose the emperor: And the hatred between Francis and that
monarch was so inveterate, that he esteemed himself sure of a sincere ally in
one or other of these potentates.

6th January.
Kimbolton in the county of Huntingdon, in the fiftieth year of her age. A Death
of Queen Catherine.
little before she expired, she wrote a very tender letter to the King; where
she gave him the appellation of her most dear Lord, King, and Husband. She told
him, that as the hour of her death was now approaching, she laid hold of this
last opportunity to inculcate on him the importance of his religious duty, and
the comparative emptiness of all human grandeur and enjoyment: That though his
fondness toward these perishing advantages had thrown her into many
calamities, as well as created to himself much trouble, she yet forgave him all
past injuries, and hoped that this pardon would be ratified in heaven: And that
she had no other request to make, but to recommend to him his daughter, the
sole pledge of their loves, and to crave his protection for her maids and
servants. She concluded with these words, I make this vow, that mine eyes
desire you above all things Herbert, p. 403.
. The King was touched, even to the shedding of tears, by this last tender
proof of Catherine's affection; but Queen Anne is said to have expressed her
joy for the death of a rival beyond what decency or humanity could permit
Burnet, vol. 1. p 1^2.
.

THE emperor thought, that as the decease of his aunt had removed all
foundation for personal animosity between him and Henry, it might not now be
impossible to detach him from the alliance of France, and renew that
confederacy with England from which he had formerly reaped so much advantage.
He sent Henry proposals for a return to ancient amity, upon these conditions Du
Bellay, live* 5. Herbert. Burnet, vol. 3. in Coll. No 50.
; that he should be reconciled to the pope, that he should assist him in his
war with the Turk, and that he should take party with him against Francis, who
now threatened the duchy of Milan. The King replied, that he was willing to be
on good terms with the emperor, provided he would acknowledge, that the former
breach of friendship came entirely from himself: As to the conditions proposed;
the proceedings against the bishop of Rome were so just, and so fully ratified
by the Parliament of England, that they could not now be revoked; when
christian princes should have settled peace among themselves, he would not fail
exert that vigor, which became him, against the enemies of the faith; and
after amity with the emperor was once fully restored, he would then be in a
situation, as a common friend both to him and Francis, either to mediate an
agreement between them, or to assist the injured party.

WHAT rendered Henry more indifferent to the advances made by the emperor, was
his experience of the usual duplicity and insincerity of that monarch, and the
intelligence which he received of the present transactions in Europe. Francis
Sforza, duke of Milan, was dead without issue; and the emperor maintained, that
the duchy, being a fief of the empire, was devolved to him, as the head of the
Germanic body: Not to give umbrage, however, to the states of Italy, he
professed his intention of bestowing that principality on some prince, who
should be obnoxious to no party, and he even made offer of it to the duke of
Angouleme, third son to Francis. The French monarch, who pretended that his own
right to Milan was now revived upon Sforza's death, was contented to substitute
his second son, the duke of Orleans, in his place; and the emperor pretended to
close with this proposal. But his sole intention in that liberal concession was
to gain time, till he should put himself in a warlike posture, and be able to
carry an invasion into Francis's dominions. The ancient enmity between these
princes broke out anew in bravadoes, and in personal insults on each other, not
becoming persons of their rank, and still less suitable to men of such
unquestioned bravery. Charles soon after invaded Provence in person, with an
army of fifty thousand men; but met with no success. His army perished with
sickness, fatigue, famine, and other disasters; and he was obliged to raise the
siege of Marseilles, and retire into Italy with the broken remains of his
forces. An army of imperialists, near 30,000 strong, which invaded France on
the side of the Netherlands, and laid siege to Peronne, made no greater
progress, but retired upon the approach of a French army. And Henry had thus
the satisfaction to find, both that his ally, Francis, was likely to support
himself without foreign assistance, and that his own tranquillity was fully
ensured by these violent wars and animosities on the continent.

IF any inquietude remained with the English court, it was solely occasioned by
the state of affairs in Scotland. James, hearing of the distressed situation of
his ally, Francis, very generously levied some forces; and embarking them on
board vessels, which he had hired for that purpose, landed them safely in
France. He even came over in person; and making haste to join the French King's
camp, which then lay in Provence, and to partake of his danger, he met that
prince at Lions, who, having repulsed the emperor's invasion, was now returning
to his capital. Recommended by so agreeable and seasonable an instance of
friendship, the King of Scots made suit to Magdalen, daughter to the French
monarch, who had no other scruple in agreeing to the match, than what was
derived from the infirm state of his daughter's health, which seemed to
threaten her with an approaching end. But James having gained the affections of
the princess, and obtained her consent, the father would no longer oppose the
united desires of his daughter and friend; and they were accordingly married,
and soon after set sail for Scotland, where the young Queen, as was foreseen,
died in a little time after her arrival. Francis, however, was afraid, lest his
ally, Henry, whom he likewise looked on as his friend, and who lived with him
on a more cordial footing than is usual among great princes, should be
displeased that this close confederacy between France and Scotland was
concluded without his participation. He therefore dispatched Pommeraye to
London, in order to apologize for this measure; but Henry, with his usual
openness and freedom, expressed such displeasure, that he refused even to
confer with the ambassador; and Francis was apprehensive of a rupture with a
prince, who regulated his measures more by humor and passion than by the rules
of political prudence. But Henry was so fettered by the opposition, in which he
was engaged against the pope and the emperor, that he pursued no farther this
disgust against Francis; and in the end every thing remained in tranquillity
both on the side of France and Scotland.

THE domestic peace of England seemed to be exposed to more hazard, by the
violent innovations in religion; and it may be affirmed, that, in this
dangerous conjuncture, nothing ensured public tranquillity so much as the
decisive authority acquired by the King, and his great ascendant over all his
subjects. Not only the devotion paid the crown, was profound during that age:
The personal respect, inspired by Henry, was considerable; and even the
terrors, with which he overawed every one, were not attended with any
considerable degree of hatred. His frankness, his sincerity, his magnificence,
his generosity, were virtues which counterballanced his violence, cruelty, and
impetuosity. And the important rank, which his vigor, more than address,
acquired him in all foreign negotiations, flattered the vanity of Englishmen,
and made them the more willingly endure those domestic hardships, to which they
were exposed. The King, conscious of his advantages, was now proceeding to the
most dangerous trial of his authority; and after paving the way for that
measure by several expedients, he was at last determined to suppress the
monasteries, and to put himself in possession of their ample revenues.

THE great increase of monasteries, if matters be considered merely in a
political light, will appear the radical inconvenience of the catholic
religion; and every other disadvantage, attending that communion, seems to have
an inseparable connection with these religious institutions. Papal usurpations,
the tyranny of the inquisition, the multiplication of holidays; all these
letters on liberty and industry, were ultimately derived from the authority and
insinuation of monks, who being scattered every where, proved so many colonies
of superstition and of folly. This order of men were extremely enraged against
Henry; and regarded the abolition of the papal authority in England, as the
removal of the sole protection which they enjoyed against the rapacity of the
crown and of the courtiers. They were now subjected to the King's visitation;
the supposed sacredness of their bulls from Rome was rejected; the progress of
the reformation abroad, which had every where been attended with the abolition
of the monastic state, gave them reason to expect like consequences in England;
and though the King still maintained the ancient doctrine of purgatory, to which
most of the convents owed their origin and support, it was foreseen, that, in
the progress of the contest, he would every day be led to depart wider from
ancient institutions, and be drawn nearer the tenets of the reformers, with
whom his political interests naturally induced him to ally himself. Moved by
these considerations, the friars made use of all their influence to inflame the
people against the King's government; and Henry, finding their safety
irreconcilable with his own, was determined to seize the present opportunity,
and utterly destroy his declared enemies.

CROMWELL, secretary of state, had been appointed vicar general, or vicegerent,
a new office, by which the King's supremacy, or the absolute, uncontrollable
power assumed over the church, was delegated to him. He employed Layton,
London, Price, Gage, Petre, Bellasis, and others, as commissioners, who carried
on, every where, a rigorous enquiry with regard to the conduct and deportment
of all the friars. During times of faction, especially of the religious kind,
no equity is to be expected from adversaries; and as it was known, that the
King's intention in this visitation, was to find a pretense for abolishing
monasteries, we may naturally conclude, that the reports of the commissioners
are very little to be relied on. Friars were encouraged to bring in
informations against their brethren; the slightest evidence was credited; and
even the calumnies spread abroad by the friends to the reformation, were
regarded as grounds of proof. Monstrous disorders are therefore said to have
been found in many of the religious houses: Whole convents of women abandoned
to lewdness: Signs of abortions procured, of infants murdered, of unnatural
lusts between persons of the same sex. It is indeed probable, that the blind
submission of the people, during those ages, would render the friars and nuns
more unguarded, and more dissolute, than they are in any roman catholic country
at present: But still, the reproaches, which it is safest to credit, are such
as point at vices, naturally connected with the very institution of convents,
and with the monastic life. The cruel and inveterate factions and quarrels
therefore which the commissioners mentioned, are very credible, among men, who,
being confined together within the same walls, never can forget their mutual
animosities, and who, being cut off from all the most endearing connections of
nature, are commonly cursed with hearts more selfish, and tempers more
unrelenting, than fall to the share of other men. The pious frauds, practiced
to increase the devotion and liberality of the people, may be regarded as
certain, in an order founded on illusions, lies, and superstition. The supine
idleness, also, and its attendant, profound ignorance, with which the convents
were reproached, admit of no question; and though monks were the true preservers,
as well as inventors, of the dreaming and captious philosophy of the schools,
no manly or elegant knowledge could be expected among men, whose life,
condemned to a tedious uniformity, and deprived of all emulation, afforded
nothing to raise the mind, or cultivate the genius.

SOME few monasteries, terrified with this rigorous inquisition carried on by
Cromwell and his commissioners, surrendered their revenues into the King's
hands; and the monks received small pensions as the reward of their
obsequiousness. Orders were given to dismiss such nuns and friars as were below
four and twenty, and whose vows were, on that account, supposed not to be
binding. The doors of the convents were opened, even to such as were above that
age; and all those recovered their liberty who desired it. But as all these
expedients did not fully answer the King's purpose, he had recourse to his
usual instrument of power, the Parliament; and in order to prepare men for the
innovations projected, the report of the visitors was published, and a general
horror was endeavored to be excited in the nation against institutions which,
to their ancestors, had been the objects of the most profound veneration.

4 February.
A Parliament.
THE King, though determined to abolish utterly the monastic order, resolved to
proceed gradually in this great work; and he gave directions to the Parliament
to go no further at present, than to suppress the lesser monasteries, who
possessed revenues below two hundred pounds a year value 27 Hen. VIII. c. 28.
. These were found to be the most corrupted, as lying less under the restraint
of shame, and being exposed to less scrutiny Burnet, vol. I. p. 193.
; and it was esteemed safest to begin with them, and thereby prepare the way
for the greater innovations projected. Suppression of the lesser monasteries.
By this act three hundred and seventy six monasteries were suppressed, and
their revenues, amounting to thirty two thousand pounds a year, were granted to
the King; besides their goods, chattels, and plate, computed at a hundred
thousand pounds more It is pretended, see Hollingshed, p. 939, that ten
thousand monks were turned out on the dissolution of the l^sser monasteries. If
so, most of them must have been Mendicants: For the revenue could not have
supported near that number. The Mendicants, no doubt, still continued their
former profession.
. It appears not that any opposition was made to this important law: So
absolute was Henry's authority! A court, called the court of augmentation of
the King's revenue, was appointed for the management of these funds. The people
naturally concluded, from the erection of this court, that Henry intended to
proceed in spoiling the church of her patrimony 27 Hen. VIII. c. 27.
.

THE act formerly passed, empowering the King to name thirty-two commissioners
for framing a body of canon law, was renewed; but the project was never carried
into execution. Henry thought, that the present confusion of that law increased
his authority, and kept the clergy in still greater dependence.

FARTHER progress was made in completing the union of Wales with England: The
separate jurisdictions of several great lords or marchers, as they were called,
which obstructed the course of justice in Wales, and encouraged robbery and
pillaging, were abolished; and the authority of the King's courts was extended
every where. Some jurisdictions of a like nature in England were also abolished
27 Hen. VIII. c. 4.
this session.

THE commons, sensible that they had gained nothing by opposing the King's
will, when he formerly endeavored to secure the profits of wardships and
liveries, were now contented to frame a law 27 Hen. VIII. c. 10.
, such as he dictated to them. It was enacted, that the possession of land
shall be adjudged to be in those who have the use of it, not in those to whom
it is transferred in trust.

14 April.
AFTER all these laws were passed, the King dissolved the Parliament; a
Parliament memorable, not only for the great and important innovations which it
introduced, but also for the long time it had sat, and the frequent
prorogations which it had undergone. Henry had found it so obsequious to his
will, that he did not choose, during these religious ferments, to hazard a new
election; and he continued the same Parliament above six years: A practice, at
that time, quite unprecedented in England.

A convocation.
THE convocation, which sat during this session, were engaged in a very
important work, the deliberating on the new translation which was projected of
the scriptures. Tindal had formerly given a translation, and it had been
greedily read by the people; but as the clergy complained of it, as very
inaccurate and unfaithful, it was now proposed that they should themselves
publish a translation, which would not be liable to those objections. The
friends of the reformation asserted, that nothing could be more absurd than to
conceal, in an unknown tongue, the word itself of God, and thus to counteract
the will of heaven, which, for the purpose of universal salvation, had
published that salutary doctrine to all nations: That if this practice was not
very absurd, the artifice at least was very barefaced, and proved a
consciousness, that the glosses and traditions of the clergy stood in direct
opposition to the original text, dictated by Supreme Intelligence: That it was
now necessary for the people, so long abused by interested pretensions, to see
with their own eyes, and to examine whether the claims of the ecclesiastics
were founded on that charter, which was on all hands acknowledged to be derived
from heaven: And that as a spirit of research and curiosity was happily
revived, and men were now obliged to make a choice among the pretensions of
different sects, the proper materials for decision, and above all, the holy
scriptures, should be set before them, and the revealed will of God, which the
change of language had somewhat obscured, be again, by their means, revealed to
mankind.

THE favorers of the ancient religion maintained, on the other hand, that the
pretense of making the people see with their own eyes, was a mere cheat, and
was itself a very barefaced artifice, by which the new preachers hoped to
obtain the guidance of them, and seduce them from those pastors, whom the laws,
whom ancient establishments, whom heaven itself had appointed for their
spiritual direction: That the people were, by their ignorance, their stupidity,
their necessary avocations, totally unqualified to choose their own principles,
and it was a mocquery to set materials before them, of which they could not
possibly make any proper use: That even in the affairs of common life, and in
their temporal concerns, which lay more within the compass of human reason, the
laws had, in a great measure, deprived them of the right of private judgment,
and had, happily, for their own and the public interest, regulated their
conduct and behavior: That theological questions were placed much beyond the
sphere of vulgar comprehension; and ecclesiastics themselves, though assisted by
all the advantages of education, erudition, and an assiduous study of the
science, could not be fully assured of a just decision; except by the promise
made them in scripture, that God would be ever present with his church, and
that the gates of hell should not prevail against her: That the gross errors
adopted by the wisest heathens, proved how unfit men were to grope their own
way, through this profound darkness; nor would the scriptures, if trusted to
every man's judgment, be able to remedy; on the contrary, they would much
augment, these fatal illusions: That sacred writ itself was involved in so much
obscurity, was exposed to so many difficulties, contained so many appearing
contradictions, that it was the most dangerous weapon which could be entrusted
into the hands of the ignorant and giddy multitude: That the poetical spirit,
in which a great part of it was composed, at the same time that it occasioned
uncertainty in the sense, by its multiplied tropes and figures, was sufficient
to kindle the zeal of fanaticism, and thereby throw civil society into the most
furious combustion: That a thousand sects must arise, which would pretend, each
of them, to derive its tenets from the scripture; and would be able, by
specious arguments, or even without specious arguments, to seduce silly women,
and ignorant mechanics, into a belief of the most monstrous principles: And
that if ever this disorder, dangerous to the magistrate himself, received a
remedy, it must be from the tacit acquiescence of the people in some new
authority; and it was evidently better, without farther contest or enquiry, to
adhere peaceably to ancient, and therefore the more secure establishments.

THESE latter arguments being more agreeable to ecclesiastical government,
would probably have prevailed in the convocation, had it not been for the
authority of Cranmer, Latimer, and some other bishops, who were supposed to
speak the King's sense of the matter. A vote was passed for publishing a new
translation of the scriptures; and in three years time this great work was
finished, and printed at Paris. This was deemed a great point gained by the
reformers; and a considerable advancement of their cause. Farther progress was
soon expected, after such important successes.

BUT while the retainers to the new religion were triumphing in their
prosperity, they met with a mortification, which seemed to blast all their
hopes: Disgrace of Q. Anne.
Their patroness, Anne Boleyn, lost the King's favor, and soon after her life,
from the rage of that furious monarch. Henry had persevered constantly in his
love to this lady, during six years that his prosecution of the divorce lasted;
and the more obstacles he met with to the gratification of his passion, the
more determined zeal did he exert in pursuing his purpose. But the affection
which had subsisted so long under difficulties, had no sooner attained secure
possession of its object, than it languished from satiety; and the King's heart
was apparently alienated from his consort. Anne's enemies soon perceived this
fatal change; and they were very forward to widen the breach, when they found
that they incurred no danger by interposing in those delicate concerns. She had
brought forth a dead son; and Henry's extreme fondness for male issue being
thus, for the present, disappointed, his temper, equally violent and
superstitious, was disposed to make the innocent mother answerable for this
misfortune Burnet, vol I. p. 19^.
. But the chief means which Anne's enemies employed to inflame the King against
her, was his jealousy.

ANNE, though she appears to have been entirely innocent, and even virtuous, in
her conduct, had a certain gaiety, if not levity, of character, which threw her
off her guard, and made her less circumspect than her situation required. Her
education in France rendered her the more prone to these freedoms; and it was
with difficulty she conformed herself to that strict ceremonial which was
practiced in the court of England. More vain than haughty, she was pleased to
see the influence of her beauty on all around her, and she indulged herself in
an easy familiarity with persons, who were formerly her equals, and who might
then have pretended to her friendship and good graces. Henry's dignity was
offended with these popular manners; and though the lover had been entirely
blind, the husband possessed but too quick discernment and penetration. Wicked
instruments interposed, and put a malignant interpretation on the harmless
liberties of the Queen: The viscountess of Rocheford, in particular, who was
married to the Queen's brother, but who lived on bad terms with her
sister-in-law, insinuated the most cruel suspicions into the King's mind; and
as she was a woman of a very profligate character, she paid no regard either to
truth or humanity in those calumnies which she suggested. She pretended, that
her own husband was engaged in a criminal correspondence with his sister; and
not contented with this imputation, she poisoned every action of the Queen, and
represented each instance of favor which she conferred on any one, as a token
of affection. Henry Norris, groom of the stole, Weston, and Brereton, gentlemen
of the King's chamber, together with Mark Smeton, groom of the chamber, were
observed to possess much of the Queen's friendship; and they served her with a
zeal and attachment which, though chiefly derived from gratitude, might not
improbably be seasoned with some mixture of tenderness for so amiable a
princess. The King's jealousy laid hold of the slightest circumstance; and
finding no particular object on which it could fasten, it vented itself equally
on every one who came within the verge of its fury.

HAD Henry's jealousy been derived from love, though it might on a sudden have
proceeded to the most violent extremities, it would have been subject to many
remorses and contrarieties; and might at last have served only to augment that
affection, on which it was founded. But it was a more stern jealousy, fostered
entirely by pride: His love was wholly transferred to another object. Jane
Seymour, daughter of Sir John Seymour, and maid of honor to the Queen, a young
lady of singular beauty and merit, had obtained an entire ascendant over him;
and he was determined to sacrifice every thing to the gratification of this new
appetite. Unlike to most monarchs, who judge lightly of the crime of gallantry,
and who deem the young damsels of their court rather honored than disgraced by
their passion, he never thought of any other attachment than that of marriage;
and in order to attain this end, he underwent more difficulties and committed
greater crimes than those which he sought to avoid by forming that legal
connection. And having thus entertained the design of raising his new mistress
to his bed and throne, he more willingly hearkened to every suggestion, which
threw any imputation of guilt on the unfortunate Anne Boleyn.

1st May.
THE King's jealousy first appeared openly in a tilting at Greenwich, where the
Queen happened to drop her handkerchief; an incident probably casual, but
interpreted by him as an instance of gallantry to some of her paramours Burnet,
vol. 1. p. 198.
. He immediately retired from the place; sent orders to confine her to her
chamber; arrested Norris, Brereton, Weston, and Smeton, together with her
brother, Rocheford; and threw them into prison. The Queen, astonished at these
instances of his fury, thought that he meant only to try her; but finding him
in earnest, she reflected on his obstinate unrelenting spirit, and she prepared
herself for that melancholy doom, which was awaiting her. Next day, she was
sent to the Tower; and on her way thither, she was informed of her supposed
offenses, of which she had been hitherto ignorant: She made earnest
protestations of her innocence; and when she entered the prison, she fell on
her knees, and prayed God so to help her, as she was not guilty of the crime
imputed to her. Her surprise and confusion threw her into histerical disorders;
and in that situation, she thought that the best proof of innocence was to make
an entire confession, and she discovered some indiscretions and levities, which
her simplicity had equally betrayed her to commit and to avow. She owned, that
she had once rallied Norris on his delaying his marriage, and had told him,
that he probably expected her, when she should be a widow: She had reproved
Weston, she said, for his affection to a kinswoman of hers, and his
indifference toward his wife: But he told her, that she had mistaken the
object of his affection, for it was herself: Upon which, she defied him Strype,
vol. 1. p. 281.
. She affirmed, that Smeton had never been in her chamber but twice when he
played on the harpsicord: But she acknowledged, that he had once had the
boldness to tell her, that a look sufficed him. The King, instead of being
satisfied with the candor and sincerity of her confession, regarded these
indiscretions only as preludes to greater and more criminal intimacies.

OF all those multitudes, whom the beneficence of the Queen's temper had
obliged, during her prosperous fortune, no one durst interpose between her and
the King's fury; and the person, whose advancement every breath had favored,
and every countenance had smiled upon, was now left neglected and abandoned.
Even her uncle the duke of Norfolk, preferring the connexions of party to the
t^es of blood, was become her most dangerous enemy; and all the retainers to
the catholic religion hoped, that her death would terminate the King's quarrel
with Rome, and leave him again to his natural and early bent, which had
inclined him to support the most intimate connexions with the apostolic ^ee.
Cranmer alone, of all the Queen's adherents, still retained his friendship for
her; and, as far as the King's impetuosity permitted him, he endeavored to
moderate the violent prejudices, entertained against her.

THE Queen herself wrote Henry a letter from the Tower, full of the most tender
expostulations, and of the warmest protestations of innocence. It contains so
much nature and even elegance, as to deserve to be transmitted to posterity,
without any alteration of the expression. It is as follows.

SIR, your grace's displeasure, and my imprisonment are things so strange unto
me, as what to write, or what to excuse, I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you
send unto me (willing me to confess a truth, and so obtain your favor) by such
an one, whom you know to be mine ancient professed enemy, I no sooner received
this message by him, than I rightly conceived your meaning; and, if, as you
say, confessing a truth indeed may procure my safety, I shall with all
willingness and duty perform your command.

BUT let not your grace ever imagine, that your poor wife will ever be brought
to acknowledge a fault, where not so much as a thought thereof preceded. And to
speak a truth, never prince had wife more loyal in all duty, and in all true
affection, than you have ever found in Anne Boleyn: With which name and place I
could willingly have contented myself, if God and your grace's pleasure had
been so pleased. Neither did I at any time so far forget myself in my
exaltation or received queenship, but that I always looked for such an
alteration as I now find; for the ground of my preferment being on no surer
foundation than your grace's fancy, the least alteration I knew was fit and
sufficient to draw that fancy to some other object. You have chosen me from a
low estate to be your Queen and companion, far beyond my desert or desire. If
then you found me worthy of such honor, good your grace let not any light
fancy, or bad counsel of mine enemies, withdraw your princely favor from me;
neither let that stain, that unworthy stain, of a disloyal heart toward your
good grace, ever cast so foul a blot on your most dutiful wife, and the infant
princess your daughter. Try me, good King, but let me have a lawful trial, and
let not my sworn enemies sit as my accusers and judges; yea let me receive an
open trial, for my truth shall fear no open shame; then shall you see either
mine innocence cleared, your suspicion and conscience satisfied, the ignominy
and slander of the world stopped, or my guilt openly declared. So that
whatsoever God or you may determine of me, your grace may be freed from an open
censure, and mine offense being so lawfully proved, your grace is at liberty,
both before God and man, not only to execute worthy punishment on me as an
unlawful wife, but to follow your affection, already settled on that party, for
whose sake I am now as I am, whose name I could some good while since have
pointed unto, your grace not being ignorant of my suspicion therein.

BUT if you have already determined of me, and that not only my death, but an
infamous slander must bring you the enjoying of your desired happiness; then I
desire of God, that he will pardon your great sin therein, and likewise mine
enemies, the instruments thereof, and that he will not call you to a strict
account for your unprincely and cruel usage of me, at his general
judgment seat, where both you and myself must shortly appear, and in whose
judgment I doubt not (whatsoever the world may think of me) mine innocence
shall be openly known, and sufficiently cleared.

MY last and only request shall be, that myself may only bear the burden of
your grace's displeasure, and that it may not touch the innocent souls of those
poor gentlemen, who (as I understand) are likewise in strait imprisonment for
my sake. If ever I have found favor in your sight, if ever the name of Anne
Boleyn has been pleasing in your ears, then let me obtain this request, and I
will so leave to trouble your grace any further, with mine earnest prayers to
the Trinity to have your grace in his good keeping, and to direct you in all
your actions. From my doleful prison in the Tower, this sixth of May;

Your most loyal and ever faithful wife, ANNE BOLEYN.


Her trial.
THIS letter had no influence on the unrelenting mind of Henry, who was
determined to pave the way for his new marriage by the death of Anne Boleyn.
Norris, Weston, Brereton, and Smeton, were tried; but no legal evidence was
produced against them. The chief proof of their guilt consisted in a hearsay
report from one lady Wingfield, who was dead. Smeton was prevailed on, by the
vain hope of life, to confess a criminal correspondence with the Queen Burnet,
vol. I. p. 202.
; but even her enemies expected little advantage from this confession: For they
never dared to confront him with her; and he was immediately executed; as were
also Brereton and Weston. Norris had been much in the King's favor; and an
offer was made him of life, if he would confess his crime, and accuse the
Queen: But he generously rejected that proposal; and said, that in his
conscience he believed her entirely guiltless: But, for his part, he could
accuse her of nothing, and he would die a thousand deaths rather than
calumniate an innocent person.

THE Queen and her brother were tried by a jury of peers, consisting of the
duke of Suffolk, the Marquis of Exeter, the earl of Arundel, and twenty-three
more: Their uncle, the duke of Norfolk, presided as lord high steward. Upon
what proof or pretext the crime of incest was imputed to them is unknown: The
chief evidence, it is said, amounted to no more than that Rocheford had been
seen to lean on her bed before some company. Part of the charge against her
was, that she had affirmed to her minions, that the King never had her heart;
and had said to each of them apart, that she loved him better than any person
whatsoever: Which was to the slander of the issue begot between the King and
her: By this strained interpretation, her guilt was brought under the statute
of the 25th of this reign; in which it was declared criminal to throw any
slander upon the King, Queen, or their issue. Such palpable absurdities were,
at that time, admitted, and they were regarded by the peers of England as a
sufficient reason for sacrificing an innocent Queen to the cruelty of their
tyrant. Though unassisted by counsel, she defended herself with great judgment
and presence of mind; and the spectators could not forbear pronouncing her
entirely innocent. Judgment, however, was given by the court, both against the
Queen and lord Rocheford; and her verdict contained, that she should be burned
or beheaded at the King's pleasure. When this dreadful sentence was pronounced,
she was not terrified, but lifting up her hands to heaven, said, "O! Father, O!
Creator, thou who art the way, the truth, and the life, thou know that I
have not deserved this death." And then turning to the judges, made the most
pathetic declarations of her innocence.

HENRY, not satisfied with this cruel vengeance, was resolved entirely to annul
his marriage with Anne Boleyn, and to declare her issue illegitimate: He
recalled to his memory, that, a little after her appearance in the English
court, some attachment had been acknowledged between her and the earl of
Northumberland, then lord Piercy; and he now questioned the nobleman with
regard to these engagements. Northumberland took an oath before the two
archbishops, that no contract nor promise of marriage had ever passed between
them: He received the sacrament upon it, before the duke of Norfolk and others
of the privy council; and this solemn act he accompanied with the most solemn
protestations of his veracity. Herbert, page 384.
. The Queen, however, was shaken by menaces of executing the sentence against
her in its greatest rigor, and was prevailed on to confess in court, some
lawful impediment to her marriage with the King Heylin, p. 94.
. The afflicted primate, who sat as judge, thought himself obliged by this
confession, to pronounce the marriage null and invalid. Henry, in the
transports of his fury, did not perceive that his proceedings were totally
inconsistent, and that if her marriage was, from the beginning, invalid, she
could not possibly be guilty of adultery.

And execution.
THE Queen now prepared for suffering that death to which she was sentenced.
She sent her last message to the King, and acknowledged the obligations which
she owed him, in continuing thus uniformly his endeavors for her advancement:
From a private gentlewoman, she said, he had first made her a marchioness, then
a queen, and now, since he could raise her no higher in this world, he was
sending her to be a saint in heaven: She then renewed the protestations of her
innocence, and recommended her daughter to his care. Before the lieutenant of
the Tower, and all who approached her, she made the like declarations; and
continued to behave herself with her usual serenity, and even with
cheerfulness. "The executioner," she said to the lieutenant, "is, I hear, very
expert; and my neck is very slender:" 29th May.
Upon which she grasped it in her hand, and laughed heartily. When brought,
however, to the scaffold, she softened her tone a little with regard to her
protestations of innocence. She reflected, that the obstinacy of Queen
Catherine, and her resistance to the King's will, had much alienated him from
the lady Mary; and her maternal concern, therefore, for Elizabeth, prevailed in
these last moments over that indignation, which the unjust sentence, by which
she suffered, naturally excited in her. She said, that she was come to die, as
she was sentenced, by the law: She would accuse none, nor say any thing of the
ground upon which she was judged. She prayed heartily for the King; and called
him a most merciful and gentle prince, and acknowledged, that he had always
been to her a good and gracious sovereign; and if any one should think proper
to canvass her cause, she desired him to judge the best Burnet, vol. I. p. 2^5.
. She was beheaded by the executioner of Calais, who was brought over as more
expert than any in England. Her body was negligently thrown into a common chest
of elm-tree, made to hold arrows; and was buried in the Tower.

THE innocence of this unfortunate Queen cannot reasonably be called in
question. Henry himself, in the violence of his rage, knew not whom to accuse
as her lover; and though he imputed guilt to her brother, and four persons more,
he was able to bring proof against none of them. The whole tenor of her
conduct forbids us to ascribe to her an abandoned character, such as is implied
in the King's accusation; and had she been so lost to all prudence and sense of
shame; she must have exposed herself to detection, and afforded her enemies the
clearest evidence against her. But the King made the most effectual apology for
her, by marrying Jane Seymour the very day after her execution Burnet vol I. p.
2^7.
. His impatience to gratify this new passion, caused him to forget all regard
to decency; and his cruel heart was not softened a moment by the bloody
catastrophe of a person, who had so long been the object of his most tender
affections.

THE lady Mary thought the death of her stepmother a proper opportunity for
reconciling herself with the King, who, besides other causes of disgust, had
been offended with her, on account of the part which she had taken in her
mother's quarrel. Her advances were not at first received; and Henry exacted
from her some further proofs of submission and obedience: He required this
young princess, then about twenty years of age, to adopt his theological
tenets; to acknowledge his supremacy; to renounce the pope; and to own her
mother's marriage to be incestuous and unlawful. These points were of hard
digestion with the princess; but after some delays, and even refusals, she was
at last prevailed with to write a letter to her father Ibid. (...) vol. I. p
(...).
, containing her assent to the articles required of her: Upon which she was
received into favor. But notwithstanding the return of the King's affection to
the issue of his first marriage, he divested not himself of kindness toward
the lady Elizabeth; and the new Queen, who was blessed with a singular sweetness
of disposition, discovered strong proofs of attachment to that young princess.

8th June.
A Parliament.
THE trial and conviction of Queen Anne, and the subsequent events, made it
necessary for the King to summon a new Parliament; and he here, in his speech,
made a merit to his people, that, notwithstanding his misfortunes in his two
former marriages, he had been induced, for their good, to venture on a third.
The speaker received this profession with a suitable gratitude; and he took
thence occasion to praise the King for his wonderful gifts of grace and nature:
He compared him, for justice and prudence, to Solomon; for strength and
fortitude to Sampson; and for beauty and comeliness to Absalom. The King very
humbly replied, by the mouth of his chancellor, that he disavowed these
praises; since, if he was really possessed of such virtues, they were the gifts
of Almighty God only. Henry found that the Parliament were equally submissive
in deeds as (...) in their expressions; and that they would go the same lengths
as the ^o mer in gratifying even his most lawless passions. His divorce from
Anne Boleyn was ratified; that Queen, and all her accomplices, were attainted;
the issue of both the two former marriages were declared illegitimate, and it
was even made treason to assert the legitimacy of either of them; to throw any
slander upon the present King, Queen, or their issue, was subjected to the same
penalty; the crown was settled on the King's issue by Jane Seymour, or any
subsequent wife; and in case he should die without children, he was empowered
by his will, or letters patent, to dispose of the crown: An enormous concession
The King is thought to have had a design of leaving the crown, in case of the
failure of his lawful male issue, to his favorite son, the duke of Richmond.
But the death of that promising nobleman, which happened soon after,
disappointed all projects in his favor. Heylin, p. 6.
, especially when entrusted to a prince so violent and capricious in his
humor. Whoever being required, refused to answer upon oath to any article of
this act of settlement, was declared to be guilty of treason; and by this
clause a species of political inquisition was established in the kingdom, as
well as the accusations of treason multiplied to an unreasonable degree. The
King was also empowered to confer on any one, by his will, or letters patent,
any castles, honors, liberties, or franchises; words which might have been
extended to the dismembring the kingdom, by the erection of principalities and
independent jurisdictions. It was also, by another act, made treason to marry,
without the King's consent, any princess related in the first degree to the
crown. This act was occasioned by the discovery of a design, formed by Thomas
Howard, brother to the duke of Norfolk, to espouse the lady Margaret Douglas,
niece to the King by his sister the Queen of Scots and the earl of Angus.
Howard, as well as the young lady, was committed to the Tower. She recovered
her liberty soon after; but he died in that confinement. An act of attainder
passed against him this session of parliament.

A NEW accession was likewise gained to the authority of the crown: The King or
any of his successors was empowered to repeal or annul, by letters patent,
whatever acts of parliament had been passed before he was four and twenty years
of age. Whoever maintained the authority of the bishop of Rome, by word or
writ, or endeavored in any manner to restore it in England, was subjected to
the penalty of a praemunire; that is, his goods were forfeited, and he was put
out of the protection of the laws. And any person who possessed any office,
ecclesiastical or civil, or received any grant or charter from the crown; and
yet refused to renounce the pope by oath, was declared to be guilty of treason.
The renounciation prescribed runs in the style of So help me God, all saints,
and the holy evangelists 28 Hen. VIII. c. 10.
. The pope, hearing of Anne Boleyn's disgrace and death, hoped that the door
was opened to a reconciliation, and had been making some advances to Henry: But
this was the reception he met with. Henry was now become absolutely indifferent
with regard to papal censures; and finding a great increase of authority, as
well as revenue, to accrue from his quarrel with Rome, he was determined to
persevere in his present measures. This Parliament also, even more than any
foregoing, convinced him how much he commanded the respect of his subjects, and
what confidence he might repose in them. Though the elections had been made of a
sudden, without any preparation or intrigue, the members discovered an
unlimited attachment to his person and government Burnet, vol. I. p. 212.
.

A convocation.
THE extreme complaisance of the convocation, which sat at the same time with
the Parliament, encouraged him in his resolution of breaking entirely with the
court of Rome. There was a division of sentiments in the minds of this
assembly; and as the zeal of the reformers had been augmented by s me late
successes, the resentment of the catholics was no less excited by their fears
and losses: But the authority of the King kept every thing submissive and
silent; and the new assumed prerogative, the supremacy, whose limits no one was
fully acquainted with, restrained even the most furious movements of
theological rancour. Cromwell sat as vicar general; and though the catholic party
expected, that, on the fall of Queen Anne, his authority would receive a great
check, they were surprised to find him still maintain equal credit as before.
With the vicar general concurred Cranmer the primate, Latimer bishop of
Worcester, Shaxton of Salisbury, Hilsey of Rochester, Fox of Hereford, Barlow
of St. David's. The opposite party were led by Lee archbishop of York,
Stokesley bishop of London, Tonstal of Durham, Gardener of Winchester, Longland
of Lincoln, Sherborne of Chichester, Nix of Norwich, and Kite of Carlisle. The
former party, by their opposition to the pope, seconded the King's ambition and
love of power: The latter party, by maintaining the ancient theological tenets,
were more conformable to his speculative principles: And both of them had
alternately the advantage of gaining on his humor, by which he was more
governed than by either of these motives.

THE church in general was averse to the reformation; and the lower house
framed a list of opinions, in the whole sixty seven, which they pronounced
erroneous, and which was a collection of principles, some held by the ancient
Lollards, others by the modern protestants, or Gospellers, as they were
sometimes called. This catalogue they sent to the upper house to be censured;
but in the preamble of their representation, they discovered the servile spirit
by which they were governed. They said, "that they intended not to do or speak
any thing which might be unpleasant to the King, whom they acknowledge their
supreme head, and whose commands they were resolved to obey; renouncing the
pope's usurped authority, with all his laws and inventions, now extinguished
and abolished; and addicting themselves to Almighty God and his laws, and unto
the King and the laws made within this kingdom Collier, vol. II p. 119.
."

THE convocation came at last, after some debate, to decide articles of
religion; and their tenets were of as compounded a nature as the assembly
itself, or rather as the King's system of theology, by which they were resolved
entirely to square their principles. They determined the standard of faith to
consist in the scriptures and the three creeds, the Apostolic, the Nicene, and
the Athanasian; and this article was a signal victory to the reformers:
Auricular confession and penance were admitted, a doctrine agreeable to the
catholics: No mention was made of marriage, extreme unction, confirmation, or
holy orders, as sacraments; and in this omission the influence of the
protestants appeared. The real presence was asserted, conformable to the
ancient doctrine: The terms of acceptance were established to be the merits of
Christ, and the mercy and good pleasure of God, suitable to the new principles.

SO far the two sects seem to have made a fair partition, by sharing
alternately the several clauses. In framing the subsequent articles, each of
them seems to have thrown in their ingredient. The catholics prevailed in
asserting, that the use of images was warranted by scripture; the protestants,
in warning the people against idolatry, and the abuse of these sensible
representations. The ancient faith was adopted in maintaining the expediency of
praying to saints; the late innovations in rejecting the peculiar patronage of
saints to any trade, profession, or course of action. The former rites of
worship, the use of holy water, the ceremonies practiced on Ash Wednesday,
Palm Sunday, and Good Friday, etc. were still maintained; but the new
resinements were also adopted, which made light of these institutions, by the
convocation's denying that they had any immediate power of remitting sin, and
by its asserting that their sole merit consisted in promoting pious and devout
dispositions in the mind.

BUT the article with regard to purgatory, contains the most curious jargon,
ambiguity, and hesitation, arising from the mixture of opposite tenets. It was
to this purpose: "Since according to due order of charity, and the book of
Maccabees, and diverse ancient authors, it is a very good and charitable deed to
pray for souls departed; and since such a practice has been maintained in the
church from the beginning; all bishops and teachers should instruct the people
not to be grieved for the continuance of the same. But since the place where
departed souls are retained, before they reach Paradise, as well as the nature
of their pains, is left uncertain by scripture; all such questions are to be
submitted to God, to whose mercy it is meet and convenient to commend the
deceased, trusting that he accepts our prayers for them." Collier, vol. ii.
p. 122, and seq. Fuller. Burnet, vol. i. p. 215.


THESE articles, when framed by the convocation, and corrected by the King,
were subscribed by every member of that assembly; while, perhaps, neither there
nor throughout the whole kingdom, could one man be found, except the King
himself, who had adopted precisely these very doctrines and opinions. For though
there be not any contradiction in the tenets here advanced, it had happened in
England, as in all other states where factious divisions have place; a certain
creed was embraced by each party; few neutrals were to be found; and these
consisted only of speculative or whimsical people, of whom two persons could
scarce be brought to an agreement in the same dogmas. The protestants, all of
them, carried their opposition to Rome farther than these articles: None of the
catholics went so far: And the King, by being able to retain the nation in such
a delicate medium, displayed the utmost power of an imperious despotism, of
which any history furnishes an example. To change the religion of a country,
even when seconded by a party, is one of the most perilous enterprises, which
any sovereign can attempt, and often proves the most destructive to royal
authority. But Henry was able to set that furious machine in movement, and yet
regulate and even stop its career: He could say to it, thus far shall thou go
and no farther: And he made every vote of his parliament and convocation
subservient, not only to his interests and passions, but even to his smallest
caprices; nay, to his most refined and most scholastic subtilties.

THE concurrence of these two national assemblies served, no doubt, to increase
the King's power among the people, and raised him to an authority more
absolute, than any prince, in a simple monarchy, even by means of military
force, is ever able to attain. But there are certain bounds, beyond which the
most slavish submission cannot be extended. All the late innovations,
particularly the dissolution of the smaller monasteries, and the imminent
danger, to which all the rest were exposed A proposal had formerly been made in
the convocation for the (...) of the lesser monasteries: and had been much
opposed by Bishop Fish^r, who was then alive. He told (...) brethren, that
(...) was sa^rl showing the ^^^g the way, how he might come at the greater
monasteries. "An a^, which wanted a handle, came upon a time into the wood,
m^^ing his m^^^ to the great trees, that he wanted a handle to wor^ withal, and
for that cause he was constrained to sit idle; therefore he made it (...)
request to them, that they would be pleased to grant him ^ne of them ^^^ll
saplings (...) the wood to make him a handle; who, mistrusting no guile,
granted him one of their smaller trees to make him a handle. But now becoming a
complete ax, he fell so to work, within the same wood, that, in process of
time, there was neither great nor small trees to be found in the place, where
the wood stood. And so, my lords, if you grant the King these smaller
monasteries, you do but make him a handle, whereby, at his own pleasure, he may
cut down all the cedars within your Lebanons." Dr. Bailies' Life of Bishop
Fisher, p. 108.
, had bred discontent in the people, and disposed them to a revolt. Discontents
among the people.
The expelled monks, wandering about the country, excited both men's piety and
compassion; and as the ancient religion held the populace by powerful motives,
suited to their capacity, it was able, now that it was brought in apparent
hazard, to excite the strongest zeal in its favor Strype, vol. i. p. 249.
. Discontents had even reached some of the nobility and gentry, whose ancestors
had founded the monasteries, and who placed a vanity in those institutions, as
well as reaped some benefit from them, by the provisions, which they afforded
them for their younger children. The more superstitious were interested in the
fate of their forefathers souls, which, they believed, must now lie, during
many ages, in the torments of purgatory, for want of masses to relieve them. It
seemed unjust to abolish pious institutions for the faults, real or pretended,
of individuals. Even the most moderate and reasonable thought it somewhat
iniquitous, that men, who had been invited into a course of life by all the
laws, human and divine, which prevailed in their country, should be turned out
of their possessions, and so little care be taken of their future subsistence.
And when it was observed, that the rapacity and bribery of the commissioners
and others employed in visiting the monasteries, intercepted much of the
profits resulting from these confiscations, it tended much to increase the
general discontent Burnet, vol. i. p. 223.
.

BUT the people did not break out into open sedition, till the complaints of
the secular clergy concured with those of the regular. As Cromwell's person was
very little acceptable to the ecclesiastics; the authority, which he exercised,
being so new, so absolute, so unlimited, inspired them with great disgust and
terror. He published, in the King's name, without the consent either of
parliament or convocation, an ordonance, by which he retrenched a great many of
the ancient holydays; prohibited several superstitions, gainful to the clergy,
such as pilgrimages, images, relicts; and even ordered the incumbents in the
parishes to set apart a considerable portion of their revenues for repairs and
for the support of exhibitioners and the poor of their parish. The secular
priests, finding themselves thus reduced to a grievous slavery, instilled into
the people those discontents, which they had long harbored in their own bosoms.

Insurrection.
THE first rising was in Lincolnshire. It was headed by Dr. Mackrel, prior of
Barlings, who was disguised like a mean mechanic, and who bore the name of
captain Cobbler. This tumultuous army amounted to above 20,000 men Burnet, vol.
i. p. 227. Herbert.
; but notwithstanding their number, they showed little disposition of
proceeding to extremities against the King, and seemed still overawed by his
authority. They acknowleged him to be supreme head of the church of England;
but they complained of his suppressing the monasteries, of evil counselors, of
men of mean birth entrusted by him, of the danger to which the jewels and plate
of their parochial churches were exposed: And they prayed him to consult the
nobility of the realm concerning the redress of these grievances Herbert, p.
410.
. The King was little disposed to entertain apprehensions of danger, especially
from a low multitude, whom he despised. 6th of October.
He sent forces against the insurgents under the command of the Duke of
Suffolk; and he returned them a very sharp answer to their petition. There were
some gentry, whom the populace had forced to take party with them, and who kept
a secret correspondence with Suffolk. They informed him, that resentment
against the King's reply was the chief cause, which retained the malcontents
in arms, and that a milder answer would probably dissipate the rebellion: Henry
had levied a great force at London, with which he was preparing to march
against the rebels; and being so well fortified with power, he thought, that,
without losing his dignity, he might now show them some greater condescension.
He sent a new proclamation, requiring them to return to their obedience, with
secret assurances of pardon. This expedient had its effect: The populace were
dissipated: Mackrel and some of their leaders fell into the King's hands, and
were executed: The greater part of the multitude retired peaceably to their
usual occupations: A few of the more obstinate fled into the North, where they
joined the insurrection, that was raised in those parts.

THE northern insurgents, as they were more numerous, were also more formidable
than those of Lincolnshire, because the people were more accustomed to arms,
and because of the near neighborhood to Scotland, which might make advantage
of these disorders. One Ask, a gentleman, had taken the command of them, and
he possessed the art of governing the populace. Their enterprise they called
the Pilgrimage of Grace: Some priests marched before in the habits of their
order, carrying crosses in their hands: In their banners was inwove a crucifix,
with the representation of a chalice, and of the five wounds of Christ Fox,
vol. ii. p. 992*
: They wore on their sleeve an emblem of the five wounds, with the name of
Jesus wrought in the midst: They all took an oath, that they had entered into
the pilgrimage of grace from no other motive, than their love to God, their
care of the King's person and issue* their desire of purifying the nobility, of
driving base-born persons from about the King, of restoring the church, and of
suppressing heresy. Allured by these fair pretenses, about 40,000 men from the
counties of York, Durham, Lancaster, and those northern provinces, flocked to
their standard; and their zeal, no less than their numbers, inspired the court
with apprehensions.

THE Earl of Shrewsbury, moved by his zeal for the King's service, raised
forces, though at first without any commission, in order to oppose the rebels.
The Earl of Cumberland repulsed them from his castle of Skipton: Sir Ralph
Evers defended Scarborow-castle against them Stowe, p 574. Ba^^r, p. 258.
: Courtney, marquess of Exeter, the King's cousin-german, obeyed orders from
court, and levied troops. The earls of Huntingdon, Derby, and Rutland, imitated
his example. The rebels, however, prevailed in taking both Hull and York: They
laid siege to Pomfret castle, into which the archbishop of York and lord Darcy
had thrown themselves. It was soon surrendered to them; and the prelate and
nobleman, who secretly favored the cause, seemed to yield to the force imposed
on them, and joined the rebels.

THE duke of Norfolk was named general in chief of the King's forces against
the northern insurgents; and as he headed the party, which supported the
ancient religion, he was also suspected of bearing some favor to the cause,
which he was sent to oppose. His prudent conduct, however, seems to acquit him
of this imputation. He encamped at Doncaster, together with the earl of
Shrewsbury; and as his army was small, scarce exceeding five thousand men, he
made choice of a post, where he had the river in front, the ford of which he
proposed to desend against the rebels. They had intended to attack him in the
morning; but during the night, there fell such violent rains as rendered the
river utterly impassible; and Norfolk very wisely laid hold of the opportunity
to enter into treaty with them. In order to open the door for negotiation, he
sent them a herald; whom Ask, their leader, received with great ceremony; he
himself sitting in a chair of state, with the archbishop of York on one hand,
and lord Darcy on the other. It was agreed that two gentlemen should be
dispatched to the King with proposals from the insurgents; and Henry protracted
giving an answer, and allured them with hopes of entire satisfaction, in
expectation that necessity would soon oblige them to disperse themselves. Being
informed, that his artifice had in a great measure succeeded, he required them
instantly to lay down their arms and submit to m^rcy; promising a pardon to all
except six whom he named, and four whom he reserved to himself the power of
naming. But though the greatest part of the rebels had gone home for want of
subsistence, they had entered into the most solemn engagements to return to
their standards, in case the King's answer should not prove satisfactory.
Norfolk, therefore, soon found himself in the same difficulty as before; and he
opened again a negotiation with the leaders of the multitude. He engaged them
to send three hundred persons to Doncaster, with proposals for an
accommodation; and he hoped to be able, by intrigue and separate interests, to
throw dissension among so great a number. Ask himself had proposed to be one
of the deputies, and he required a hostage for his security: But the King, when
consulted, replied, that he knew no gentleman or other, whom he esteemed so
little as to put him in pledge for such a villain. The demands of the
insurgents were so exorbitant, that Norfolk rejected them; and they prepared
again to decide the contest by force of arms. They were as formidable as ever
both by their numbers and spirit; and notwithstanding a small river, which lay
between them and the royal army, Norfolk had great reason to dread the effects
of their fury. But while they were preparing to pass the ford, rain fell a
second time in such abundance, as made it impracticable for them to execute
their design; and the populace, partly reduced to necessity by the want of
provisions, partly struck with superstition at being thus again disappointed by
the same accident, suddenly dispersed themselves. The duke of Norfolk, who had
received powers for that end, forwarded the dispersion, by the promise of a
general amnesty; and the King ratified this act of clemency. 9th of December.
He published, however, a manifesto against the rebels, and an answer to their
complaints; where he employed a very lofty style, suited to so haughty a
monarch. He told them, that they ought no more to pretend giving a judgment
with regard to government, than a blind man with regard to colors: "And we,"
he added, "with our whole council think it right strange, that ye, who be but
brutes and inexpert folk, do take upon you to appoint us, who be meet or not
for our council."

Musgrave, who escaped, he instantly put them to death by martial law, to the
number of seventy persons. An attempt made by Sir Francis Bigot and Halam to
surprise Hull, met with no better success; and several other risings were
suppressed by the vigilance of Norfolk. The King, enraged by these multiplied
revolts, was determined not to adhere to the general pardon, which he had
granted; and from a movement of his usual violence, he made the innocent suffer
for the guilty. Norfolk, by command from his master, spread the royal banner,
and, wherever he thought proper, executed martial law in the punishment of
offenders. Besides Ask, leader of the first insurrection, Sir Robert
Constable, Sir John Bulmer, Sir Thomas Piercy, Sir Stephen Hamilton, Nicholas
Tempest, William Lumley, and many others, were thrown into prison; and most of
them were condemned and executed. Lord Huffey was found guilty as an accomplice
in the insurrection of Lincolnshire, and was executed at Lincoln. Lord Darcy,
though he pleaded compulsion, and appealed to a long life, passed in the service
of the crown, was beheaded on Tower Hill. Before his execution, he accused
Norfolk of having secretly encouraged the rebels; but Henry, either sensible of
that nobleman's great services and convinced of his fidelity, or afraid to
offend one of such extensive power and great capacity, rejected the
information. Being now satiated with punishing the rebels, he published anew a
general pardon, to which he faithfully adhered Herbert, p. 428.
; and he erected by patent a court of justice at York, for deciding lawsuits to
the northern counties: A demand which had been made by the insurgents.

12 October.
Birth of prince Edward, and death of Q. Jane.
SOON after this prosperous success against the rebels, an event happened,
which crowned Henry's joy, the birth of a son, who was baptized under the name
of Edward. Yet was not this happiness complete: The Queen died twelve days
after Strype, vol. ii. p. 5.
. But a son had so long been ardently longed for by Henry, and was now become
so necessary, in order to prevent disputes with regard to the succession, after
the successive illegitimation of the two Princesses, that the King's affliction
was drowned in his joy, and he expressed great satisfaction on this occasion.
The Prince, not six days old, was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and
Earl of Chester. Sir Edward Seymour, the Queen's brother, formerly made Lord
Beauchamp, was raised to the dignity of Earl of Hertford. Sir William Fitz
Williams, high admiral, was created Earl of Southampton; Sir William Paulet,
Lord St. John; Sir John Russel, Lord Russel.

his alliance be courted by all parties. He maintained, however, a neutrality
in the wars, which were carried on, with various success, and without any
decisive event, between Charles and Francis; and though inclined more to favor
the latter, he was determined not to incur, without necessity, either hazard or
expense in his behalf. A truce, concluded about this time, between these
potentates, and which was afterward prolonged for ten years, freed him from
all anxiety on account of his ally, and re-established the tranquillity of
Europe.

HENRY was very desirous of cementing an union with the German protestants; and
for that purpose, he sent Christopher Mount to a congress which they held at
Brunswick; but that minister made no great progress in his negotiations. The
princes desired to know, what were the articles in their confession which Henry
disliked; and they sent new ambassadors to him, who had orders both to
negotiate and to dispute. They endeavored to convince the King, that he was
guilty of a mistake, in administering the eucharist in one kind only, in
allowing of private masses, and in requiring the celibacy of the clergy
Collier, vol. ii. p. 145. from the Cott. Lib. Cleopatra, E. 5. fol. 173.
. Henry would by no means acknowledge any error in these particulars; and was
offended that they should pretend to prescribe rules to so great a monarch and
theologian. He found arguments and syllogisms enough to defend his cause; and
he dismissed the ambassadors without coming to any conclusion. Jealous also
lest his own subjects should become such theologians as to question his tenets,
he used great precautions in publishing that translation of the scripture,
which was finished this year. He would only allow a copy of it to be deposited
in each parish church, where it was fixed by a chain: And he took care to
inform the people by proclamation, "That this indulgence was not the effect of
his duty, but of his goodness and his liberality to them; who therefore should
use it moderately, for the increase of virtue, not of strife: And he ordered
that no man should read the Bible aloud, so as to disturb the priest, while he
sang mass, nor presume to expound doubtful places, without advice from the
learned." In this measure, as in the rest, he still halted half way between the
catholics and the protestants.

THERE was only one particular, in which Henry was quite decisive, because he
was there impelled by his avarice, or more properly speaking, his rapacity,
occasioned by profuseness: This measure was the entire destruction of the
monasteries. Suppression of the greater monasteries.
The present opportunity seemed favorable for that great enterprise; while the
suppression of the late rebellion fortified and increased the royal authority;
and as some of the abbots were suspected of having encouraged the insurrection,
and of corresponding with the rebels, the King's resentment was farther incited
by that motive. A new visitation was appointed of all the monasteries in
England; and a pretense only being wanted for their suppression, it was easy
for a prince, possessed of such exorbitant power, and seconding the present
humor of a great part of the nation, to find or feign one. The abbots and
monks knew the danger, to which they were exposed; and having learned, by the
example of the lesser monasteries, that nothing could withstand the King's
will, they were most of them induced, in expectation of better treatment, to
make a voluntary resignation of their houses. Where promises failed of effect,
menaces and even extreme violence were employed; and as several of the abbots,
since the breach with Rome, had been named by the court, with a view to this
event, the King's intentions were the more easily effectuated. Some also,
having secretly embraced the doctrine of the reformation, were glad to be freed
from their vows; and on the whole, the design was conducted with such success,
that, in less than two years, the King had got possession of all the monastic
revenues.

IN several places, particularly in the county of Oxford, great interest was
made to preserve some convents of women, who, as they lived in the most
irreproachable manner, justly merited, it was thought, that their houses should
be saved from the general destruction Burnet, vol. i. p. 328.
. There appeared also great difference between the case of nuns and friars; and
the one institution might be very laudable, while the other was exposed to much
blame. The males of all ranks, if endowed with industry, might be of service to
the public; and none of them could want employment, suited to his station and
capacity. But a woman of family, who failed of a settlement in the married
state, an accident to which such persons were more liable than women of lower
station, had really no rank which she properly filled; and a convent was a
retreat both honorable and agreeable, from the inutility and often want, which
attended her situation. But the King was determined to abolish monasteries of
every denomination; and probably thought, that these ancient establishments
would be the sooner forgot, that no remains of them, of any kind, were allowed
to subsist in the kingdom.

THE better to reconcile the people to this great innovation, stories were
published of the detestable lives of the friars in many of the convents; and
great care was taken to defame those whom the court was determined to ruin. The
relicts also, and superstitions, which had so long been the object of the
people's veneration, were exposed to their ridicule; and the religious spirit,
now less bent on exterior observances and sensible objects, was encouraged in
this new direction. It is needless to be particular in such an enumeration:
Protestant historians mention on this occasion with great triumph the sacred
repositories of convents; the parings of St. Edmond's toes; some of the coals
that roasted St. Laurence; the girdle of the Virgin shown in eleven several
places; two or three heads of St. Ursula; the felt of St. Thomas of Lancaster,
an infallible cure for the headache; part of St. Thomas of Canterbury's shirt,
much reverenced by big bellied women; some relicts, an excellent preventive
against rain; others, a remedy to weeds in corn. But such fooleries, as they
are to be found in all ages and nations of the world, and even took place
during the most refined periods of antiquity, form no peculiar nor violent
reproach on the catholic religion.

THERE were also discovered in the monasteries some impostures of a more
artificial nature. At Hales, in the county of Gloucester, had been shown,
during several ages, the blood of Christ brought from Jerusalem; and it is easy
to imagine the veneration, with which such a relict was regarded. A miraculous
circumstance also attended this miraculous relict; the sacred blood was not
visible to any one in mortal sin, even when set before him; and till he had
performed good works sufficient for his absolution, it would not deign to
discover itself to him. At the dissolution of the monastery, the whole
contrivance was discovered. Two of the monks, who were let into the secret, had
taken the blood of a duck, which they renewed every week: They put it into a
phial, one side of which consisted of thin and transparent crystal, the other
of thick and obscure. When any rich pilgrim arrived, they were sure to show him
the dark side of the phial, till masses and offerings had expiated his
offenses; and then finding his money, or patience, or faith, near exhausted,
they made him happy by turning the phial Herbert, p. 431, 432. Stowe, p. 575.
.

A MIRACULOUS crucifix had been kept at Boxley in Kent, and bore the
appellation of the Rood of Grace. The lips, and eyes, and head of the image
moved on the approach of its votaries. Hilsey, bishop of Rochester, broke the
crucifix at St. Paul's cross, and showed the whole people the springs and
wheels by which it had been secretly moved. A great wooden idol of Wales,
called Darvel Gatherin, was also brought to London, and cut in pieces: And by a
cruel refinement of vengeance, it was employed as fuel to burn friar Forest
Goodwin's Annals. Stowe, p. 575. Herbert. Baker, p. 286.
, who was punished for denying the supremacy, and for some pretended heresies.
A finger of St. Andrew's, covered with a thin plate of silver, had been pawned
by a convent for a debt of forty pounds; but as the King's commissioners
refused to release the pawn, people made themselves very merry with the poor
creditor, on account of his security.

BUT of all the instruments of ancient superstition, no-one was so zealously
destroyed as the shrine of Thomas a Becket, commonly called St. Thomas of
Canterbury. This saint owed his canonization to the zealous defense, which he
had made for the apostolic see; and on that account also, the monks had
extremely encouraged the devotion of pilgrimages toward his tomb, and
numberless were the miracles, which, they pretended, his relicts wrought on his
devout votaries. They raised his body once a year; and the day, on which this
ceremony was performed, which was called the day of his translation, was a
general holyday: Every fiftieth year there was celebrated a jubilee to his
honor, which lasted fifteen days: Plenary indulgences were then granted to all
that visited his tomb; and a hundred thousand pilgrims have been registered at
a time in Canterbury. The devotion toward him had quite effaced in that town
the adoration of the Deity; nay, even that of the Virgin. At God's altar, for
instance, there was offered in one year three pounds two shillings and
sixpence; at the Virgin's, sixty three pounds five shillings and sixpence; at
St. Thomas's, eight hundred and thirty two pounds twelve shillings and
threepence. But next year, the disproportion was still greater: There was not
a penny offered at God's altar; the Virgin's gained only four pounds one
shilling and eight-pence; but St. Thomas had got for his share nine hundred and
fifty four pounds six shillings and threepence Burnet, vol. i. p. 244.
. Lewis the seventh of France had made a pilgrimage to this miraculous tomb,
and had bestowed on the shrine a jewel, which was esteemed the richest in
Christendom. It is obvious, how obnoxious to Henry a saint of this character
must appear, and how much contrary to all his projects for degrading the
authority of the court of Rome. He not only pillaged the rich shrine, dedicated
to St. Thomas: He made the saint himself be cited to appear in court, and be
tried and condemned as a traitor: He ordered his name to be struck out of the
calender; the office for his festival to be expunged from all breviaries; and
his bones to be burned, and the ashes to be dissipated.

ON the whole, the King, at different times, suppressed six hundred and forty
five monasteries: Of which twenty eight had abbots, who enjoyed a seat in
parliament. Ninety colleges were demolished in several counties; two thousand
three hundred and seventy four chantries and free chapels: A hundred and ten
hospitals. The whole revenue of these establishments amounted to one hundred
and sixty one thousand one hundred pounds Lord Herbert, Camden, Speed.
. It is worthy of observation, that the whole lands and possessions of England
had, a little before this period, been rated at three millions a year; so that
the revenues of the monasteries did not really much exceed the twentieth part
of the national income: A sum vastly inferior to what is commonly apprehended.
The lands belonging to the convents, were commonly let at very low leases; and
the farmers, who regarded themselves as a species of proprietors, took always
care to renew their leases before they expired.

GREAT murmurs were every where excited against these violences; and men much
questioned, whether priors and monks, who were only trustees or tenants for
life, could by any deed, however voluntary, transfer to the King the entire
property of their estates. In order to reconcile the people to such mighty
innovations, they were told, that the King would never henceforth have occasion
to levy taxes, but would be able, from the abbey lands alone, to bear, during
war as well as peace, the whole charges of the government Coke's 4th Inst. fol.
44.
. While such topics were employed to pacify the populace, the King took an
effectual method of engaging the nobility and gentry to take part with his
measures Dugdale's Warwickshire, p. 800.
: He either made a gift of the revenues of convents to his favorites and
courtiers, or sold them at low prices, or exchanged them for other lands on
very disadvantageous terms. He was so profuse in these liberalities, that he is
said to have given a woman the whole revenues of a convent, as a reward for
making a pudding, which happened to gratify his palate Fuller.
. He also settled sallaries on the abbots and priors, proportioned to their
former revenues or to their merits; and gave each monk a yearly pension of
eight marks: He erected six new bishoprics, Westminster, Oxford, Peterborow,
Bristol, Chester, and Gloucester; of which the last five subsist at this day:
And by all these means of expense and dissipation, the profit which the King
reaped by the seizure of church lands, fell much short of vulgar opinion. As
the ruin of convents had been foreseen some years ere it happened, the monks
had taken care to dissipate beforehand most of their stock, furniture, and
plate; so that the spoils of the great monasteries bore not, in these respects,
any proportion to those of the lesser.

BESIDE the lands, possessed by the monasteries, the regular clergy enjoyed a
considerable part of the benefices of England, and of the tithes, annexed to
them; and these were also at this time transferred to the crown, and by that
means came into the hands of laymen: An abuse which many zealous churchmen
regard as the most criminal sacrilege. The monks were formerly much at their
ease in England, and enjoyed revenues, which much exceeded the regular and
stated expense of the house. We read of the abbey of Chertsey in Surrey, which
possessed 744 pounds a year, though it contained only fourteen monks: That of
Furness, in the county of Lincoln, was valued at 960 pounds a year, and
contained but thirty monks Burnet, vol. i. p. 237.
. In order to dissipate their revenues, and support popularity, the monasteries
lived in a very hospitable manner; and besides the poor, maintained from their
offals, there were many decayed gentlemen, who passed their lives in traveling
from convent to convent, and were entirely subsisted at the tables of the
friars. By this hospitality, as much as by their own inactivity, did the
convents prove nurseries of idleness; but the King, not to give offense by too
sudden an innovation, bound the new proprietors of abbey lands, to support the
ancient hospitality. But this engagement was fulfilled in very few places, and
for a very short time.

IT is easy to imagine the indignation with which intelligence of all these
violences was received at Rome; and how much the ecclesiastics of that court,
who had so long kept the world in subjection by big sounding epithets, and by
holy execrations, would now vent their rhetoric against the character and
conduct of Henry. The pope was provoked at last to publish the bull, which he
had passed against that monarch; and in a public manner delivered over his soul
to the devil, and his dominions to the first invader. Libels were dispersed,
where he was compared to the most furious persecutors in antiquity; and the
preference was even given on their side: He had declared war with the dead,
whom the pagans themselves respected; was at open enmity with heaven; and had
engaged in professed hostility with the whole host of saints and angels. Above
all, he was often reproached with his resemblance to the emperor Julian, whom,
it was said, he imitated in his apostasy and learning, though he fell short of
him in his morals. Henry could distinguish in many of these libels the style
and animosity of his kinsman, Pole; and he was thence anew incited to vent his
rage, by every possible expedient, on that famous cardinal.

Cardinal Pole.
REGINALD de la Pole, or Reginald Pole, was descended of the royal family,
being fourth son of the countess of Salisbury, daughter of the duke of
Clarence. He discovered in very early youth evident symptoms of that fine
genius, and generous disposition, by which, during his whole life, he was so
much distinguished; and Henry having conceived great friendship for him,
proposed to raise him to the highest ecclesiastical dignities; and, as a pledge
of future favors, he conferred on him the deanery of Exeter Goodwin's Annals.
, in order to help him to bear the expenses of his education. Pole was carrying
on his studies in Paris, at the time when the King solicited the suffrages of
that university in favor of his divorce; but though applied to by the English
agent, he declined taking any part in that affair. Henry bore this neglect with
more temper than was natural to him; and he appeared unwilling, on that
account, to renounce friendship with a person, whose virtues and talents, he
hoped, would prove useful, as well as ornamental, to his court and kingdom. He
allowed him still to possess his deanery, and gave him permission to finish his
studies at Padua: He even paid him some court, in order to bring him into his
measures; and wrote to him, while in Italy, desiring him to give his opinion
freely, with regard to the late measures taken in England, for abolishing the
papal authority. Pole had now entered into an intimate friendship with whatever
was eminent for dignity or merit in Italy; Sadolet, Bembo, and other revivers
of true taste and learning; and he was moved by these connections, as well as
by religious zeal, to forget, in some respect, the duty which he owed to Henry,
his benefactor, and his sovereign. He replied, by writing a treatise of the
unity of the church, where he inveighed against the King's supremacy, his
divorce, his second marriage; and even exhorted the emperor to revenge on him
the injury done to his family, and to the catholic cause. Henry, though provoked
beyond measure at this outrage, dissembled his resentment; and sent a message
to Pole, desiring him to return to England, in order to explain certain
passages in his book, which he found somewhat obscure and difficult: But Pole
was on his guard against this insidious invitation; and was determined to
remain in Italy, where he was extremely beloved and esteemed by all the world.

THE pope and emperor thought themselves obliged to provide for a man of Pole's
eminence and dignity, who, in support of their cause, had sacrificed all his
pretensions to fortune in his own country. He was created a cardinal; and though
he never took higher orders than those of a deacon, he was sent legate into
Flanders about the year 1536 Herbert.
. Henry was sensible, that Pole's chief intention in choosing that employment,
was to foment the mutinous disposition of the English catholics; and he
therefore remonstrated in such a vigorous manner with the queen of Hungary,
regent of the Low Countries, that she dismissed the legate, without allowing
him to exercise his commission. The enmity which he bore Pole, was now open, as
well as violent; and the cardinal, on his part, kept no farther measures in his
intrigues against Henry. He is even suspected of aspiring to the crown, by
means of a marriage with the lady Mary; and the King was every day alarmed by
informations, which he received, of the correspondence maintained in England by
that fugitive. Courtney, marquis of Exeter, had entered into a conspiracy with
him; Sir Edward Nevil, brother to the lord Abergavenny, Sir Nicholas Carew,
master of horse, and knight of the garter; Henry de la Pole, lord Montacute,
and Sir Geoffrey de la Pole, brothers to the cardinal. These persons were
indicted, and tried, and convicted, before lord Audley, who presided in the
trial, as lord high steward. They were all executed, except Sir Geoffrey de la
Pole, who was pardoned; and he owed this grace to his having first carried to
the King secret intelligence of the conspiracy* We know little of the justice
or iniquity of the sentence pronounced against these men* We only know, that
the condemnation of a man, who was, at that time, prosecuted by the court,
forms no presumption of his guilt; though as no historian of credit mentions, in
the present case, any complaints occasioned by these trials, we may presume,
that sufficient evidence was produced against the marquis of Exeter, and his
associates Herbert in Kennet, p. 216.
.

CHAP. VI.
Disputation with Lambert -- A Parliament -- Law of the six articles --
Proclamations made equal to laws -- Settlement of the succession -- King's
projects of marriage -- He marries Anne of Cleves -- He dislikes her -- A
Parliament -- Fall of Cromwell -- His execution -- King's divorce from Anne of
Cleves -- His marriage with Catherine Howard -- State of affairs in Scotland --
Discovery of the Queen's crimes -- A Parliament -- Ecclesiastical affairs.

THE rough hand of Henry seemed well adapted for rending asunder those bands,
by which the ancient superstition had fastened itself on the kingdom; and though,
after renouncing the pope's supremacy, and suppressing monasteries, most of the
political ends of a reformation were already attained, few people expected,
that he would stop at those innovations. The spirit of opposition, it was
thought, would carry him to the utmost extremity against the church of Rome;
and lead him to declare war against the whole doctrine and worship, as well as
discipline, of that mighty hierarchy. He had formerly appealed from the pope to
a general council; but now, that a general council was summoned to meet at
Mantua, he previously renounced all submission to it, as being summoned by the
pope, and lying entirely under subjection to that spiritual usurper. He engaged
his clergy to make a declaration to the like purpose; and he had prescribed to
them many other alterations on ancient tenets and practices. Cranmer took
advantage of every opportunity to carry him on in this course; and while Queen
Jane lived, who favored the reformers, he had, by means of her insinuation and
address, been very successful in his endeavors. After her death, Gardener, who
was returned from his embassy to France, kept the King more in suspense; and by
feigning an unlimited submission to his will, he was frequently able to guide
him to his own purposes. Fox, bishop of Hereford, had supported Cranmer in his
schemes for a more entire reformation; but his death had made way for the
promotion of Bonner, who, though he had hitherto seemed a furious enemy to the sea of Rome, was determined to sacrifice every thing to present interest, and
had joined the confederacy of Gardener and the partisans of the old religion.
Gardener himself, it was believed, had secretly entered into measures with the
pope, and even with the emperor; and in concert with these powers, he
endeavored to preserve, as much as possible, the ancient faith and worship.

HENRY was so much governed by passion, that nothing could have retarded his
animosity and opposition against Rome, but some other passion, which stopped
his career, and raised him new subjects of animosity. Though he had gradually,
since he came to years of maturity, been changing the tenets of that
theological system, in which he had been educated, he was equally positive and
dogmatical in the few articles which remained to him, as if the whole fabric
had continued entire and unshaken: And though he stood alone in his opinion, the
flattery of courtiers had so enflamed his tyrannical arrogance, that he thought
himself entitled to regulate, by his own particular standard, the religious
faith of the whole nation. The point, where he chiefly placed his orthodoxy,
happened to be the real presence; that very doctrine, in which, among the
numberless victories of superstition over common sense, her triumph is the most
signal and egregious. All departure from this principle he held to be heretical
and detestable; and nothing, he thought, would be more honorable for him,
than, while he broke off all connections with the Roman pontiff, to maintain,
in this essential article, the purity of the catholic faith.

Disputation with Lambert.
THERE was one Lambert Fox, vol. II. p. 396.
, a schoolmaster in London, who had been questioned for unsound opinions by
archbishop Warham; but, upon the death of that prelate, and the changing of
councils at court, he had been released. Not terrified with the danger which he
had incurred, he still continued to promulgate his tenets; and having heard Dr.
Tailor, afterward bishop of Lincoln, defend in a sermon the corporal presence,
he could not forbear expressing to Tailor his dissent from that doctrine; and
he drew up his objections under ten several head. Tailor carried the paper to
Dr. Barnes, who happened to be a Lutheran, and who maintained, that, though the
substance of bread and wine remained in the sacrament, yet the real body and
blood of Christ were there also, and were, in a certain mysterious manner,
incorporated with the material elements. By the present laws and practice,
Barnes was no less exposed to the stake than Lambert; yet such was the
persecuting rage which prevailed, that he was determined to bring this man to
condign punishment; because, in their common departure from the ancient faith,
he had dared to go one step farther than himself. He engaged Tailor to delate
Lambert to Cranmer and Latimer, who, whatever their private opinion might be on
these points, were obliged to conform themselves to the standard of orthodoxy,
established by Henry. When Lambert was cited before these prelates, they
endeavored to bend him to a recantation; and they were surprised, when,
instead of compliance, he ventured to appeal to the King.

THE King, not displeased with an opportunity, where he could at once exert his
supremacy, and display his learning, accepted the appeal; and was determined to
mix, in a very unfair manner, the disputant with the judge. Public notice was
given, that he intended to enter the lists with this schoolmaster: Scaffolds
were erected in Westminster Hall, for the accommodation of the audience: Henry
appeared on his throne, accompanied with all the ensigns of majesty: The
prelates were placed on his right hand: The temporal peers on his left. The
judges and most eminent lawyers had a place assigned them behind the bishops:
The courtiers of greatest distinction behind the peers: And in the midst of
this splendid assembly was produced the unhappy Lambert, and he was required to
defend his opinions against his royal antagonist Fox, vol. II. p. 426.
.

THE bishop of Chichester opened the conference, by saying, that Lambert, being
charged with heretical pravity, had appealed from his bishop to the King; as if
he expected more favor from this application, and as if the King could ever be
induced to protect a heretic: That though his majesty had thrown off the
usurpations of the sea of Rome; had disincorporated some idle monks, who lived
like drones in a beehive; had remedied the idolatrous worship of images; had
published the bible in English, for the instruction of all his subjects; and
had made some lesser alterations, which every one must approve of; yet was he
determined to maintain the purity of the catholic faith, and to punish with the
utmost severity all departure from it: And that he had taken the present
opportunity, before so learned and grave an auditory, of convincing Lambert of
his errors; but if he still persevered obstinately in them, he must expect the
most condign punishment Goodwin's Annals.
.

AFTER this preamble, which was not very encouraging, the King asked Lambert,
with a stern countenance, what his opinion was of Christ's corporal presence in
the sacrament of the altar; and when Lambert began his discourse with some
compliment to his majesty, he rejected the praise with disdain and indignation.
He afterward pressed Lambert with some arguments, drawn from scripture and the
schoolmen: The audience applauded the force of his reasoning, and the extent of
his erudition: Cranmer seconded his proofs by some new topics: Gardener entered
the lists as a support to Cranmer: Tonstal took up the argument after Gardener:
Stokesley brought fresh aid to Tonstal: Six bishops more appeared successively
in the field after Stockesley. And the disputation, if it deserves the name,
was prolonged for five hours; till Lambert, fatigued, confounded, brow-beaten,
and abashed, was at last reduced to silence. The King then, returning to the
charge, asked him whether he was convinced; and he proposed, as a concluding
argument, this interesting question, whether he was resolved to live or die?
Lambert, who possessed that courage which consists in obstinacy, replied, that
he cast himself wholly on his majesty's clemency: The King told him, that he
would be no protector of heretics; and therefore, if that was his final answer,
he must expect to be committed to the flames. Cromwell, as vicegerent, read the
sentence against him Collier, in his ecclesiastical history, vol. II. p. 152,
has preserved an account which Cromwell gave of this conference, in a letter to
Sir Thomas Wyat, the King's ambassador in Germany. "The King's majesty," says
Cromwell, "for the reverence of the holy sacrament of the altar, did sit openly
in his hall, and there presided at the disputation, process and judgment of a
miserable heretic sacramentary, who was burned the 20th of November. It was a
wonder to see how princely, with how excellent gra^ity, and inestimable majesty
his highness exercised there the very office of supreme head of the church of
England. How benignly his grace essayed to convert the miserable man: How
strong and manifest reasons his highness alleged against him. I wish the
princes and potentates of Christendom to have had a meet place to have seen it.
Undoubtedly they should have much marvelled at his majesty's most high wisdom
and judgment, and reputed him no other wise after the same, than in a manner
the mirror and light of all other Kings and princes in Christendom." It was by
such flatteries, that Henry was engaged to make his sentiments the standard to
all mankind; and was determined to enforce, by the severest penalties, his
strong and manifest reasons for transubstantiation.
.

LAMBERT, whose vanity had probably incited him the more to persevere on
account of the greatness of this public appearance, was not daunted by the
terrors of that punishment, to which he was condemned. His executioners took
care to make the sufferings of a man who had personally opposed the King, as
cruel as possible: He was burned at a slow fire; his legs and thighs were
consumed to the stumps; and when there appeared no end of his tortures, some of
the guards, more merciful than the rest, lifted him on their halberts, and
threw him into the flames, where he was consumed. While they were employed in
this friendly office, he cried aloud several times, None but Christ, none but
Christ, and these words were in his mouth when he expired Fox's acts and
monuments, p. 427. Burnet.
.

SOME few days before this execution, four Dutch anabaptists, three men and a
woman, had faggots tied to their backs at Paul's cross* and were burned in that
manner. And a man and a woman of the same sect and country, were burned in
Smithfield Stowe, p. 556.


A Parliament.
28th April.
This abject servility never more eminently appeared than in a new Parliament,
which the King now assembled, and which, if he had so pleased, might have been
the last that ever sat in England. But he found them too useful instruments of
dominion ever to entertain thoughts of giving them a total exclusion.

THE chancellor opened the Parliament by informing the house of Lords, that it
was his majesty's earnest desire, to extirpate from his kingdom all diversity
of opinions with regard to religion; and as this enterprise was difficult and
important, he desired them to choose a committee among themselves, who might
frame certain articles, and communicate them afterward to the Parliament. The
lords named the vicar general, Cromwell, now created a peer, the archbishops of
Canterbury and York, the bishops of Durham, Carlisle, Worcester, Bath and
Wells, Bangor, and Ely. The house might have seen what a hopeful task they were
undertaking: This small committee itself was agitated with such diversity of
opinions, that it could come to no conclusion. The duke of Norfolk then moved
in the house, that, since there were no hopes of having a report from the
committee, the articles of faith, proposed to be established, should be reduced
to six; and new committees be appointed to frame an act with regard to them. As
this peer was understood to speak the King's mind, his motion was immediately
assented to; and, after a short prorogation, the bill of the six articles, or
the bloody bill, as the protestants justly termed it, was introduced, and
having passed the two houses, had the King's assent affixed to it.

Law of the six articles.
IN this law, the real presence was established, the communion in one kind, the
perpetual obligation of vows of chastity, the utility of private masses, the
celibacy of the clergy, the necessity of auricular confession. The denial of
the first article, with regard to the real presence, subjected the person to
death by fire, and to the same forfeiture as in cases of ^reason; and admitted
not the privilege of abjuring: An unheard of severity, and unknown to the
inquisition itself. The denial of any of the other five articles, even though
recanted, was punishable by the forfeiture of goods and chattels, and
imprisonment during the King's pleasure: An obstinate adherence to error, or a
relapse, was adjudged to be felony, and punishable with death. The marriage of
priests was subjected to the same punishment: Their commerce with women, for
the first offense, was forfeiture and imprisonment; for the second, death.
Abstaining from confession, and from receiving the eucharist at the accustomed
times, subjected the person to fine and imprisonment, during the King's
pleasure; and if the criminal persevered after conviction, he was punishable by
death and forseiture, as in cases of felony 31 Hen. VIII. c. 14. Herbert in
Kennet, p. 219.
. Commissioners were to be appointed by the King, for enquiring into these
heresies and irregular practices, and the criminals were to be tried by a jury.

THE King, in framing this law, laid his oppressive hand on both parties; and
even the catholics had reason to complain, that the friars and nuns, though
dismissed their convent, should be capriciously restrained to the practice of
celibacy There is a story, that the duke of Norfolk, meeting, soon after this
act was passed, one of his chaplains, who was suspected of favoring the
reformation, said to him, "Now, Sir, what think you of the law to hinder
priests from having wives?" "Yes, my lord," replies the chaplain, "you have
done that; but I will answer for it, you cannot hinder men's wives from having
priests."
: But as the protestants were chiefly exposed to the severity of the act, the
misery of adversaries, according to the usual maxims of party, was regarded by
the adherents to the ancient religion, as their own prosperity and triumph.
Cranmer had the courage to oppose this bill in the house; and though the King
desired him to absent himself, he could not be prevailed on to give this proof
of compliance Burnet, vol. I. p. 249, 270. Fox, vol. II. p. 1037.
. Henry was accustomed to Cranmer's freedom and sincerity; and being convinced
of the general rectitude of his intentions, gave him an unusual indulgence in
that particular, and never allowed even a whisper against him. That prelate,
however, was now obliged, in obedience to the statute, to dismiss his wife, the
niece of Osiander, a famous divine of Nuremburg Herbert in Kennet, p. 210
; and Henry, satisfied with this proof of submission, showed him his former
countenance and favor. Latimer and Shaxton threw up their bishoprics, on
account of this law, and were committed to prison.

Proclamations made equal to laws.
THE Parliament having thus resigned all their ecclesiastical liberties,
proceeded to an entire surrender of their civil; and without scruple or
deliberation they made by one act a total subversion of the English
constitution. They gave to the King's proclamations the same force as to a
statute enacted by Parliament; and to render the matter worse, if possible,
they framed this law as if it were only declarative, and were intended to
explain the natural extent of the regal authority. The preamble contains, that
the King had formerly set forth several proclamations, which froward persons
had wilfully contemned, not considering what a King by his royal power may do;
that this license might encourage offenders not only to disobey the laws of
Almighty God, but also to dishonor the King's most royal majesty, who may full
ill bear it; that sudden emergencies often occur, which require speedy
remedies, and cannot await the slow assembling and deliberations of Parliament;
and that, though the King was empowered, by his authority, derived from God, to
consult the public good on these occasions, yet the opposition of refractory
subjects might push him to extremity and violence: For these reasons, the
Parliament, that they might remove all occasion of doubt, ascertained by a
statute this prerogative of the crown, and enabled his majesty, with the advice
of his council, to set forth proclamations, enjoining obedience under whatever
pains and penalties he shall think proper: And these proclamations were to have
the force of perpetual laws 31 Hen. VIII. ^. 8.
.

WHAT shows either a stupid or wilful blindness of the Parliament; they
pretended, even after this statute, to maintain some limitations in the
government; and they enacted, that no proclamation should deprive any person of
his lawful possessions, liberties, inheritances, privileges, franchises; nor
yet infringe any common law or laudable custom of the realm. They considered
not, that no pains could be inflicted on the disobedience of proclamations,
without invading some liberty or property of the subject; and that the power of
enacting new laws, joined to the dispensing power, then exercised by the crown,
amounted to a full legislative authority. It is true, the Kings of England had
been always accustomed, from their own authority, to issue proclamations, and
to exact obedience to them; and this prerogative was, no doubt, a strong
symptom of absolute government: But still there was a difference between a
power, which was exercised on a particular emergence, and which must be
justified by the present expediency or necessity; and an authority conferred by
a positive statute, which could no longer admit of control or limitation.

Settlement of the succession.
COULD any act be more opposite to the spirit of liberty than this law, it
would have been another of the same parliament. They passed attainders, not
only against the Marquess of Exeter, the Lords Montacute, Darcy, Hussy, and
others, who had been legally tried and condemned; but also against some
persons, of the highest quality, who had never been accused, or examined, or
convicted. The violent hatred, which Henry bore to cardinal Pole, had extended
itself to all his friends and relations; and his mother in particular, the
countess of Salisbury, had, on that account, become extremely obnoxious to him.
She was also accused of having employed her authority with her tenants, to
hinder them from perusing the new translation of the Bible; of having procured
bulls from Rome, which, it is said, were found at Coudray, her country seat; of
having kept a correspondence with her son, the cardinal: But Henry found,
either that these offenses could not be proved, or that they would not by law
be subject to such severe punishment as he desired to inflict upon her. He
resolved, therefore, to proceed against her in a more summary and more
tyrannical manner; and for that purpose, he sent Cromwell, who was but too
obsequious to his will, to demand of the judges, whether the Parliament could
attaint a person, who was forthcoming, without giving him any trial, or citing
him to appear before them Coke's 4th Inst. p. 37, 38.
. The judges replied, that it was a dangerous question, and that the high court
of Parliament ought to give examples to inferior courts of proceeding according
to justice: No inferior court could act in that arbitrary manner, and they
thought that the parliament never would. Being pressed to give a more explicit
answer, they replied, that, if a person were attainted in that manner, the
attainder could never after be brought in question, but must remain good in
law. Henry learned by this decision, that such a method of proceeding, though
directly contrary to all the principles of equity, was yet practicable; and
this being all he was anxious to know, he resolved to employ it against the
countess of Salisbury. Cromwell showed to the house of peers a banner, on which
was embroidered the five wounds of Christ, the symbol, chosen by the northern
rebels; and this banner, he affirmed, was found in the Countess's house Rymer
xiv. 652.
. No other proof seems to have been produced, in order to ascertain her guilt:
The Parliament, without farther enquiry, passed a bill of attainder against
her; and they involved in the same act, without any better proof, as far as
appears, Gertrude Marchioness of Exeter, Sir Adrian Fortescue, and Sir Thomas
Dingley. These two gentlemen were executed: The marchioness was pardoned, and
survived the King; the countess received a reprieve.

THE only beneficial act, passed this session, was that by which the parliament
confirmed the surrender of the monasteries; and yet even this act contains much
falsehood, much tyranny, and were it not that all private rights must submit to
public interest, much injustice and iniquity. The scheme of engaging the
abbots* to make a surrender of their monasteries had been conducted, as may
easily be imagined, with many invidious circumstances: Arts of all kinds had
been employed upon them; every motive, that could work on the frailty of human
nature, had been set before them; and it was with great difficulty that these
dignified conventuals were brought to a concession, which most of them regarded
as destructive of their interests, as well as sacr^legious and criminal in
itself Collier, vol. ii. p. 158. and seq.
. Three abbots had shown more constancy than the rest, the abbot of Colchester,
of Reading, and of Glassenbury; and in order to punish them for their
opposition, and make them an example to others, means had been found to convict
them of treason; they had perished by the hands of the executioner, and the
revenues of the convents had been forfeited 31 II. VIII. c. 10.
. Besides, though none of these violences had had place, the King knew, that a
surrender made by men, who were only tenants for life, would not bear
examination; and he was therefore resolved to make all sure by his usual
expedient, an act of parliament. In the preamble to this act, the parliament
asserts, that all the surrenders, made by the abbots, had been, "without
constraint, of their own accord, and according to the due course of common
law." And in consequence, the parliament confirms the surrenders, and
ascertains the property of the abbey lands to the King and his successors for
ever 31 H. VIII. c. 13.
* It is remarkable, that all the mitred abbots still sat in the house of peers;
and that none of them made any protestation against this statute.

IN this session, the rank of all the great officers of state was fixed:
Cromwell, as vicegerent, had the precedence assigned him above all of them. It
was thought singular, that a black-smith's son, for he was no other, should
have precedence next the royal family; and that a man possessed of no manner of
literature, should be placed at the head of the church.

AS soon as the act of the six articles had passed, the catholics were
extremely vigilant to inform against offenders; and no less than five hundred
persons were in a little time thrown into prison. But Cromwell, who had not had
interest enough to prevent that act, was able, for the present, to elude its
execution. Seconded by the Duke of Suffolk, and lord chancellor Audley, as well
as Cranmer, he remonstrated against the cruelty of punishing so many
delinquents; and he obtained permission to set them at liberty. The uncertainty
of the King's humor gave each party an opportunity of triumphing in its turn.
No sooner had Henry passed this law, which seemed to give so deep a wound to
the reformers, than he granted a general permission, for every one to have the
new translation of the Bible in his family: A concession regarded by that
party, as a most important victory.

Henry's projects of marriage.
BUT as Henry was observed to be much governed by his wives, while he retained
his fondness for them, the final prevalence of either party, seemed to depend
much on the choice of the future Queen. Immediately after the death of Jane
Seymour, the most beloved of all his wives, he began to think of a new
marriage. He first cast his eye on the duchess dowager of Milan, niece to the
Emperor; and he made proposals for obtaining that alliance. But meeting with
difficulties in this design, he was carried, by his friendship for Francis,
rather to think of a French princess. He demanded the duchess dowager of
Longueville, daughter of the Duke of Guise, a prince of the house of Lorraine;
but Francis told him, that that lady was already betrothed to the King of
Scotland. The King, however, would not take a repulse: He had set his heart
extremely on the match: The information, which he had received, of the
dutchess's accomplishments and beauty, had prepossessed him in her favor; and
having privately sent over Meautys to examine her person, and get certain
intelligence of her conduct, the accounts, which that agent brought him, served
farther to inflame his desires. He learned, that she was big made; and he
thought her, on that account, the more proper match for him, who was now become
somewhat corpulent. The pleasure too of mortifying his nephew, whom he did not
love, was a farther incitement to his prosecution of this match; and he
insisted, that Francis should give him the preference to the King of Scots. But
Francis, though sensible that the alliance of England was of much greater
importance to his interest, would not affront his friend and ally; and to
prevent farther solicitation, he immediately sent the Princess to Scotland.
Not to shock, however, Henry's humor, Francis made him an offer of Mary of
Bourbon, daughter of the Duke of Vendome; but as the King was informed, that
James had formerly rejected this Princess, he would not hear any farther of
such a proposal. The French monarch then offered him the choice of the two
younger sisters of the new Queen of Scots; and he assured him, that they were
no way inferior either in merit or size to their elder sister, and that one of
them was even superior in beauty. The King was as scrupulous with regard to the
person of his wives, as if his heart had been really susceptible of a delicate
passion; and he was unwilling to trust any relations, or even pictures, with
regard to this important particular. He proposed to Francis, that they should
have a conference at Calais on pretense of business; and that that monarch
should bring along with h m the two Princesses of Guise, together with the
finest ladies of quality in France, that he might make a choice among them. But
the gallante spirit of Francis was shocked with this proposal; and he was
impressed with too much regard for the fair sex, to carry ladies of the first
quality, like geldings, to a market, there to be chosen or rejected by the
humor of the merchant Le Grand, vol. iii. p. 638.
. Henry would hearken to none of these niceties, but still insisted on his
proposal; which, however, notwithstanding Francis's earnest desire of
continuing a good correspondence with him, was at last finally rejected.

THE King began then to turn his thoughts toward a German alliance; and as the
princes of the Smalcaldic league were extremely disgusted against the Emperor
on account of the persecution of their religion, he hoped, by matching himself
into one of their families, to renew an amity, which he regarded as so useful
to him. Cromwell joyfully seconded this intention; and propo^ed to him Anne of
Cleves, whose father, the duke of that name, had great interest among the
Lutheran princes, and whose sister, Sibylla, was married to the elector of
Saxony, the head of the protestant alliance. He marries Anne of Cleves.
A flattering picture, drawn for the Princess by Hans Holben, determined Henry
to apply to her father; and after some negotiations, the marriage,
notwithstanding the opposition of the elector of Saxony, was at last concluded;
and the Princess was sent over into England. The King, impatient to be
satisfied with regard to the person of his bride, came privately to Rochester,
and got a sight of her. He found her big, indeed, and tall, as he could wish;
but utterly devoid both of beauty and grace; very unlike the pictures and
representations, which he had received: He swore she was a great Flanders-mare;
and declared, that he never could possibly bear her any affection. Dislikes her.
The matter was worse, when he found, that she could speak no language but
Dutch, of which he was entirely ignorant; and that the charms of her
conversation were not likely to compensate for the homeliness of her person. He
returned to Greenwich very melancholy; and much lamented his hard fate to
Cromwell, as well as to Lord Russel, Sir Anthony Brown, and Sir Anthony Denny.
This last gentleman, in order to give him comfort, told him, that his
misfortune was common to Kings, who could not, like private persons, choose for
themselves; but must receive their wives from the judgment and fancy of others.

IT was the subject of debate among the King's counselors, whether the
marriage could not yet be broke; and the Princess be sent back to her own
country. Henry's situation seemed at that time very critical. After the ten
years truce, concluded between the Emperor and the king of France, a good
understanding seemed to have taken place between these rival monarchs; and such
marks of union appeared, as gave great jealousy to the court of England. The
Emperor, who knew the generous nature of Francis, even put a confidence in him,
which is rare, to that degree, among great princes. An insurrection had been
raised in the Low Countries by the inhabitants of Ghent, and seemed to threaten
the most dangerous consequences. Charles, who resided at that time in Spain,
resolved to go in person to Flanders, in order to appease these disorders; but
he found great difficulties in contriving the manner of his passage thither.
The road by Italy and Germany was tedious: The voyage through the Channel
dangerous, by reason of the English naval power: He asked Francis's permission
to pass through his dominions; and he entrusted himself into the hands of a
rival, whom he had so mortally offended. The French monarch received him at
Paris, with great magnificence and courtesy; and though prompted both by revenge
and interest, as well as by the advice of his mistress and favorites, to make
advantage of the present opportunity, he conducted the Emperor safely out of
his dominions; and would not so much as speak to him of business during his
abode in France, lest his demands should bear the air of violence upon his
royal guest.

HENRY, who was informed of all these particulars, believed that an entire and
cordial union had taken place between these two great monarchs; and that their
religious zeal might prompt them to fall with combined arms upon England Stowe,
p. 579.
. An alliance with the German princes seemed now, more than ever, requisite for
his interest and safety; and he knew, that, if he sent back the Princess of
Cleves, such an affront would be highly resented by her friends and family. 6
January.
He was therefore resolved, notwithstanding his aversion to her, to complete
the marriage; and he told Cromwell, that, since matters had gone so far, he must
put his neck into the yoke. Cromwell, who knew how much his own interest was
concerned in this affair, was very anxious to learn from the King, next morning
after the marriage, whether he now liked his spouse any better. The King told
him, that he hated her worse than ever; and that her person was more loathsome
on a near approach: He was resolved never to meddle with her; and even
suspected her not to be a true maid: A point, about which he had entertained an
extreme delicacy. He continued however to be civil to Anne; he even seemed to
repose his usual confidence in Cromwell; but though he exerted this command over
his temper, a discontent lay lurking in his breast, and was ready to burst out
on the first opportunity.

12 April.
A Parliament.
A session of Parliament was held; and none of the abbots were now allowed a
place in the house of peers. The King, by the mouth of the chancellor,
complained to the Parliament of the great diversity of religions, which still
prevailed among his subjects: A grievance, he said, which ought the less to be
endured; because the s^riptures were now published in English, and ought
universally to be the standard of belief to all mankind. But he had appointed,
he said, some bishops and divines to draw up a list of tenets, to which his
people were to assent; and he was determined, that Christ, the doctrine of
Christ, and the truth should have the victory. The King seems to have expected
more effect in ascertaining truth, from this new book of his doctors, than had
ensued from the publication of the scriptures. Cromwell, as vicar general, made
also in the King's name a speech to the upper house; and the peers, in return,
bestowed such flattery on him, that they said he was worthy, by his desert, to
be vicar general of the universe. That minister seemed to be no less in his
master's good graces: He received, soon after the sitting of the Parliament,
the title of Earl of Essex, and was installed knight of the garter.

THERE remained only one religious order in England; the knights of St. John of
Jerusalem, or the knights of Malta, as they are commonly called. This order,
partly ecclesiastical, partly military, had, by their valor, done great
service to Christendom; and had very much retarded, at Jerusalem, Rhodes, and
Malta, the rapid progress of the barbarians. During the general surrender of
the religious houses in England, they had exerted their spirit, and had
obstinately refused to yield up their revenues to the King; and Henry, who
would endure no society that professed obedience to the pope, was obliged to
have recourse to the Parliament for the dissolution of this order. Their
revenues were large; and formed an addition no way contemptible to the many
acquisitions, which the King had already made. But he had very ill husbanded
the great revenue obtained by the plunder of the church: His profuse generosity
dissipated faster than this rapacity could supply; and the Parliament were
surprised this session to find a new demand made upon them of four tenths and a
subsidy of one shil ing in the pound during two years: So ill were the people's
expectations answered, that the crown was never more to require any supply from
the people. The commons, though lavish of their liberty, and of the blood of
their fellow subjects, were extremely frugal of their money; and it was not
without difficulty that that grant could be obtained by this absolute and
dreaded monarch. The convocation gave the King four shillings in the pound to
be levied in two years. The pretext for these grants was the great expense,
which Henry had been put to for the defense of the nation, in building forts
along the sea coast, and in equipping a navy. As he had at present no ally on
the Continent, in whom he reposed much confidence, he relied only on his
domestic strength, and was on that account obliged to be more expensive in his
preparations against the dangers of an invasion.

THE King's favor to Cromwell, and his acquiescence in the marriage of Anne of
Cleves, were b th of them deceitful appearances: His aversion to the Queen
secretly increased every day; and having at last broke all restraint, it
prompted him at once to seek the dissolution of a marriage so odious to him,
and to involve his minister in ruin, who had been the author of it. Fall of
Cromwell.
The fall of Cromwell was hastened by other causes. All the nobility hated a
man, who, being of such base extraction, had not only mounted above them by his
station of vicar general, but had engrossed many of the other considerable
offices of the kingdom: Besides that commission, which gave him a high, and
almost absolute authority over the clergy, and even over the laity, he was Lord
privy seal, Lord chamberlain, and Master of the wards: He had also obtained the
order of the garter, a dignity which had ever been conferred only on the most
illustrious families, and which seemed to be profaned by its being communicated
to so mean a person. The people were averse to him, as the supposed author of
the violences on the monasteries; establishments, which were still revered and
beloved by the commonalty. The catholics regarded him as the concealed enemy of
their religion: The protestants, observing his exterior concurrence with all
the persecutions exercised against them, were inclined to bear him as little
favor; and reproached him with the timidity, if not treachery, of his conduct.
And the King, who found, that great clamours had on all hands arifen against
the administration, was not displeased to throw on Cromwell the load of public
hatred, and he hoped, by so easy a sacrisice, to regain the affections of his
subjects.

BUT there was another cause, which suddenly set all these motives in action,
and brought about an unexpected revolution in the ministry. The King had fixed
his affection on Catherine Howard, niece to the Duke of Norfolk; and being
determined to gratify this new passion, he could find no other expedient but by
procuring a divorce from his present consort, to raise Catherine to his bed and
throne. The Duke, who had long been engaged in enmity with Cromwell, made the
same use of her insinuations, to ruin that minister, that he had formerly done
of Anne Boleyn's against Wolsey: And when all engines were prepared, he
obtained a commission from the King, to arrest Cromwell at the council board on
the accusation of high treason, and to commit him to the Tower. Immediately
after, a bill of attainder was framed against him; and the house of peers
thought proper, without trial, examination, or evidence, to condemn to death a
man, whom, a few days before, they had declared worthy to be vicar general of
the universe. The house of commons passed the bill, though not without some
opposition. Cromwell was accused of heresy and treason; but the instances of his
treasonable practices are utterly improbable, or even absolutely ridiculous
Burnet, vol. i. p. 278.
. The only circumstance of his conduct, by which he seems to have merited this
fate, was his being the instrument of the King's tyranny, in conducting like
iniquitous bills, in the former session, against the countess of Salisbury and
others.

CROMWELL endeavored to soften the King by the most humble s^pplications; but
all to no purpose: It was not the practice of that Prince to ruin his ministers
and favorites by halves; and though the unhappy prisoner wrote once in so moving
a strain as even to draw tears from his eyes, he hardened himself against all
movements of pity, and refused his pardon. The conclusion of Cromwell's letter
ran in these words. "I a most woeful prisoner, am ready to submit to death when
it shall please God and your majesty; and yet the frail flesh incites me to
call to your grace for mercy and pardon of mine offenses. Written at the Tower
with the heavy heart and trembling hand of your highness's most miserable
prisoner and poor slave, Thomas Cromwell. And a little below, Most gracious
Prince, I cry for mercy, mercy, mercy." Burnet, vol. i. p. 281, 282.
28th July.
His execution.
When brought to execution, he avoided all earnest protestations of his
innocence, and all complaints against the sentence pronounced upon him. He knew
that Henry would resent on his son these symptoms of opposition to his will,
and that his death alone would not terminate that monarch's vengeance. He was a
man of prudence, industry, and ability; worthy of a better master and of a
better fate. Though raised to the summit of power from a very low origin, he
betrayed no insolence or contempt of his inferiors; and was careful to remember
all the obligations, which, during his lower fortune, he had owed to any one.
He had served as a private sentinel in the Italian wars, where he received some
good office from a Lucquese merchant, who had entirely forgot his person, as
well as the service, which he had rendered him. Cromwell, in his grandeur,
happened, at London, to cast his eye on his benefactor, now reduced to poverty,
by misfortunes. He immediately sent for him, put him in mind of their ancient
friendship, and by his grateful assistance, re-instated him in his former
prosperous circumstances Burnet, vol. i. p. 172
.

King's divorce from Anne of Cleves.
THE measures for divorcing the King from Anne of Cleves, were carried on at
the same time with the bill of attainder against Cromwell. The house of peers,
in conjunction with the commons, applied to him by petition, desiring that he
would allow his marriage to be examined; and orders were immediately given to
lay the matter before the convocation. Anne had been formerly contracted by her
father to the Duke of Lorrain; but she, as well as the Duke, were at that time
under age, and the contract had been afterward annulled by the consent of both
parties. The King, however, pleaded this contract as a ground of divorce; and
he added two reasons more, which may seem a little extraordinary; that, when he
espoused Anne, he had not inwardly given his consent, and that he had not
consummated the marriage. The convocation were satisfied with these reasons,
and solemnly annulled the marriage between the King and Queen: The Parliament
ratified the decision of the clergy To show how much Henry sported with law and
common sense; how servilely the Parliament followed all his caprices; and how
much both of them were lost to all sentiment of shame; an act was passed this
session, declaring, that a precontract should be no ground of annulling a
marriage; as if that pretext had not been made use of both in the case of Anne
Boleyn and Anne of Cleves. But the King's intention in this law is said to be a
design of restoring the princess Elizabeth to her right of legitimacy; and it
was his character never to look farther than the present object, without
regarding the inconsistency of his conduct. The Parliament made it high treason
to deny the dissolution of Henry's marriage with Anne of Cleves. Herbert.
; and the sentence was soon after notified to that princess.

ANNE was blessed with a happy insensibility of temper, even in the points which
the most nearly affect her sex; and the King's aversion toward her, as well as
his prosecution of the divorce, had never given her the least uneasiness. She
willingly hearkened to terms of composition with him; and when he offered to
adopt her as his sister, to give her place next the Queen, and his own
daughter, and to make a settlement of three thousand pounds a year upon her;
she accepted the conditions, and gave her consent to the divorce Herbert, p.
458, 459.
. She even wrote to her brother, (for her father was dead) that she had been
very well used in England, and desired him to live on good terms with the King.
The only instance of pride which she betrayed was, that she refused to return
into her own country after the affront which she had received; and she lived
and died in England.

NOTWITHSTANDING Anne's moderation, this incident produced a great coldness
between the King and the German princes; but as the situation of Europe was now
much altered, Henry was the more indifferent to their resentment. The close
intimacy which had taken place between Francis and Charles, had subsisted
during a very short time: The dissimilarity of their characters soon renewed,
with greater violence than ever, their former jealousy and hatred. While
Charles remained at Paris, Francis had been imprudently engaged, by his open
temper, and by that satisfaction which a noble mind naturally feels in
performing generous actions, to make some very dangerous confidences to that
interested monarch; and having now lost all suspicion of his rival, he hoped,
that the emperor and he, supporting each other, might neglect every other
alliance. He not only communicated to his guest the state of his negociations
with Sultan Solomon and the Venetians: He also laid open the ^ollicitations
which he had received from the court of England, to enter into a confederacy
against him Pere Daniel, Du Tillet.
. Charles had no sooner reached his own dominions, than he showed himself
unworthy of the friendly reception which he had met with. He flatly refused to
execute his promise, and put the duke of Orleans in possession of the Milanese:
He informed Solomon, and the senate of Venice, of the treatment which they had
received from their ally: And he took care that Henry should not be ignorant
how willingly Francis had abandoned his ancient friend, to whom he owed such
important obligations, and had sacrificed him to a new confederate: He even
poisoned and misrepresented many things, which the unsuspecting heart of the
French monarch had disclosed to him. Had Henry possessed true judgment and
generosity, this incident alone had been sufficient to guide him in the choice
of his allies. But his domineering pride carried him immediately to renounce
the friendship of Francis, who had so unexpectedly given the emperor the
preference: And as Charles invited him to a renewal of ancient amity, he
willingly accepted the offer; and thinking himself secure in this alliance, he
neglected the friendship both of France and of the German princes.

8th August.
THE new turn which Henry had taken with regard to foreign affairs, was
extremely agreeable to his catholic subjects; and as it had perhaps
contributed, among other reasons, to the ruin of Cromwell, it made them
entertain hopes of a final prevalence over their antagonists. His marriage with
Catherine Howard.
The marriage of the King with Catherine Howard, which followed soon after his
divorce from Anne of Cleves, was also regarded as a very favorable incident to
their cause; and the subsequent events corresponded perfectly to their
expectations. The King's councils being now directed by Norfolk and Gardener, a
surious persecution commenced against the protestants; and the law of the six
articles was executed with rigor. Dr. Barnes, who had been the cause of
Lambert's execution, felt, in his turn, the severity of the persecuting spirit;
and, by a bill which passed in parliament, without trial, he was condemned to
the flames, together with Jerome and Gerrard. He discussed theological
questions even at the stake; and as the debate between him and the sheriff,
turned upon the invocation of saints, he said, that he doubted whether the
saints could pray for us; but if they could, he hoped in half an hour, to be
praying for the sheriff and all the spectators. He next entreated the sheriff
to carry to the King his dying requests, which he fondly imagined would have
authority with that monarch, who had sent him to the stake* The purport of his
requests was, that Henry, besides repressing superstitious ceremonies, should
be extremely vigilant in preventing fornication and common swearing Burnet,
vol. I. p. 298. Fox.
.

WHILE Henry was exerting this violence against the protestants, he spared not
the catholics who denied his supremacy; and a foreigner, who was at that time
in England, had reason to say, that those who were against the pope were
burned, and those who were for him were hanged For, vol. II. p. 5^9.
. The King even displayed, in an oftentatious manner, this tyrannical equity
and impartiality, which reduced both parties to subjection, and infused terror
into every breast. Barnes, Gerrard, and Jerome had been carried to the place of
execution on three hurdles; and along with them there was placed on each hurdle
a catholic, who was also executed for his religion. These catholics were Abel,
Fetherstone, and Powel, who declared, that the most grievous part of their
punishment was the being coupled to such heretical miscreants as suffered with
them Saunders de schism. Angl.
.

THOUGH the spirit of the English seemed to be totally sunk under the despotic
power of Henry, there appeared some symptoms of discontent: An inconsiderable
insurrection broke out in Yorkshire, headed by Sir John Nevil; but it was soon
suppressed, and Nevil, with the other ringleaders, was executed. The rebels
were supposed to have been instigated by the intrigues of cardinal Pole; and
the King was instantly determined to make the countess of Salisbury suffer for
her son's offenses. 27 May.
He ordered her to be carried to the place of execution, and this venerable
matron maintained still, in these distressful circumstances, the spirit of that
long race of monarchs from whom she was descended (...) p ^^8.
. She refused to lay her head on the block, or submit to a sentence where she
had received no trial. She told the executioner, that, if he would have her
head, he must win it the best way he could: And thus shaking her venerable gray
locks, she ran about the scaffold; and the executioner followed her with his
ax, aiming many fruitless blows at her neck, before he was able to give her the
fatal stroke. Thus perished the last of the line of Plantagenet, which, with
great glory, but still greater crimes and misfortunes, had governed England for
the space of three hundred years. The lord Leonard Gray, a man who had formerly
rendered great service to the crown, was also beheaded for treason, soon after
the countess of Salisbury. We know little of the grounds of his prosecution.

THE insurrection in the North engaged Henry to make a progress thither, in
order to quiet the minds of his people, to reconcile them to his government,
and to abolish the ancient superstitions, to which those parts were much
addicted. He had also another motive for this journey:

State of affairs in Scotland.
THE same spirit of religious innovation, which had seized the other parts of
Europe, had made its way into Scotland, and had begun, long before this period,
to exci^^ the same jealousies, fears, and persecutions. About the year 1527,
Patrick Hamilton, a young man of a noble family, having been created abbot of
Fern, was sent abroad for his education; but had fallen into company with some
reformers, and he returned into his own country very ill disposed toward that
church, of which his birth and his merit entitled him to attain the highest
honors. The fervor of youth, and his zeal for novelty, made it impossible for
him to conceal his sentiments; and Campbel, prior of the Dominicans, who, under
color of friendship, and a sympathy in opinion, had insinuated himself into
his confidence, delated him to Beaton, archbishop of St. Andrews. Hamilton was
invited to St. Andrews, in order to maintain, with some of the clergy, a
dispute concerning the controverted points; and after much reasoning with
regard to justification, freewill, original ^in, and other topics of that
nature, the conference ended with their condemning Hamilton to be burnt for his
errors. The young man, who had been deaf to the insinuations of ambition, was
less likely to be shaken with the fears of death, while he proposed to himself
both the glory of bearing testimony to the truth, and the immediate reward
attending his martyrdom. The people, who compassionated his youth, his virtue,
and his noble birth, were much moved with the constancy of his end; and the
event still more confirmed them in their favorable sentiments toward him. He
cited Campbel, who still insulted him at the stake, to answer before the
judgment seat of Christ; and as that persecutor, either astonished with these
events, or overcome with remorse, or, perhaps, seized with a distemper, soon
after lost his senses, and fell into a fever, of which he died; the people
regarded Hamilton as a prophet, as well as a martyr Spotswood's Hist, church of
Scotland, p. 62.
.

AMONG the disciples converted by Hamilton, was one friar Forest, who became a
zealous preacher; and who, though he did not openly discover his sentiments, was
suspected to lean toward the new opinions. His diocesan, the bishop of Dunkel,
enjoined him, when he met with a good epistle or good gospel, which favored
the liberties of holy church, to preach on it, and let the rest alone. Forest
answered, that he had read both old and new restament, and had not found an ill
epistle, or ill gospel in any part of them. The extreme attachment to the
scriptures was regarded in those days as a sure characteristic of here^y; and
Forest was soon after brought to his trial, and condemned to the flames. While
the priests were deliberating on the place of his execution, a bystander
advised them to burn him in (...) cellar: For that the smoke of Mr. Patrick
Hamilton had infected all those on whom it blew Spotswood, p. 65.


THE clergy were at that time reduced to great difficulties, not only in
Scotland, but all over Europe. As the reformers aimed at a total subversion of
ancient establishments, which they represented as idolatrous, impious,
detestable, the priests, who found both their honors and properties at stake,
thought that they had a right to resist, by every extremity, these dangerous
invaders, and that the same simple principles of equity, which justified a man
in killing a pyrate or a robber, would acquit them for the execution of such
heretics. A toleration, though it is never acceptable to ecclefiastics, might,
they said, be admitted in other cases; but seemed an absurdity where
fundamentals were shaken, and where the possessions, and even the subsistence
of the established clergy were brought in danger. But though the church was thus
carried by policy, as well as inclination, to kindle the fires of persecution,
they found the success of this remedy very precarious, and observed, that the
enthusiastic zeal of the reformers, inflamed by punishment, was apt to prove
very contagious on the compassionate minds of the spectators. The new doctrine,
amidst all the dangers to which it was exposed, spread itself secretly every
where; and the minds of men were gradually disposed to a revolution in religion.

BUT the most dangerous symptom for the clergy in Scotland was, that the
nobility, moved by the example of England, had cast a wistful eye on the church
revenues, and hoped, if a reformation took place, to enrich themselves by the
plunder of the ecclesiastics. James himself, who was very poor, and was
somewhat inclined to magnificence, particularly in building, had been swayed by
like motives; and began to threaten the clergy with the same fate which
attended them in the neighboring country. Henry also, never ceased exhorting
his nephew to imitate his example; and being moved both by the pride of making
proselytes, and the prospect of security, if Scotland should embrace a close
union with him, he solicited the King of Scots to meet him at York; and he
obtained a promise to that purpose.

THE ecclesiastics were extremely alarmed with this resolution of James; and
they employed every expedient, in order to prevent it. They represented the
dangers of innovation; the pernicious consequences of aggrandizing the
nobility, already too powerful; the hazard of putting himself into the hands of
the English, his hereditary enemies; the dependence which must ensue upon
losing the friendship of France, and all foreign potentates. To these
considerations, they added the prospect of present interest, by which they
found the King to be much governed: They offered him a present gratuity of
fifty thousand pounds Scots: They promised him, that the church should always
be ready to contribute to his supply: And they pointed out to him, the
confiscations of heretics, as the means of filling his exchequer, and of adding
a hundred thousand pounds a year to the crown revenues Buchanan, lib. XIV.
Drummond in Ja. 5. Pitscoti^, ibid. Knox.
. The insinuations of his new Queen, to whom youth, beauty, and address had
given a powerful influence over him, seconded all these reasons; and James was
at last engag^d, first to delay his journey, then to send excuses to the King
of England, who had already come to York, in order to be present at the
conference.

HENRY, vexed with the disappointment, and enraged at the affront, vowed
vengeance against his nephew; and he began, by permitting pyracies at sea, and
incursions at land, to put his threats in execution. But he received soon
after, in his own family, an affront to which he was much more sensible, and
which touched him in a point where he had always shown an extreme delicacy. He
had thought himself very happy in his new marriage: The youth, beauty, and
agreeable disposition of Catherine, had entirely captivated his affections; and
he made no secret of his devoted attachment to her. He had even put up a prayer
in his chapel, returning thanks to heaven for the felicity which the conjugal
state afforded him; and he desired the bishop of Lincoln to compose a form of
thanksgiving for that purpose. Discovery of the Queen's crimes.
But the Queen very little merited this tenderness which he bore her: She had
abandoned herself to lewdness. One Lascelles brought intelligence of her
dissolute life to Cranmer, and told him, that his sister, formerly a servant in
the old duchess of Norfolk's family, with whom Catherine was educated, had
given him a particular a^count of all her disorders. Derham and Mannoc, both of
them servants of the duchess, had been admitted to her bed; and she had even
taken little care to conceal her shame from the other servants of the family.
The primate, struck with this intelligence, which it was equally dangerous to
conceal or to discover, communicated the matter to the earl of Hertford and to
the chancellor. They agreed, that the matter should by no means be buried in
silence; and the archbishop himself seemed the most proper person to disclose
it to the King. Cranmer, unwilling to speak on so delicate a subject, wrote a
narrative of the whole, and conveyed it to Henry, who was infinitely astonished
at the intelligence. So confident was he of the fidelity of his consort, that
he gave at first no credit to the information; and he said to the lord
privyseal, to lord Russel, high admiral, Sir Anthony Brown, and Wriothesley,
that he regarded the whole as a forgery. Cranmer was now in a very perilous
situation; and had not full proofs been found, certain and inevitable
destruction hung over him. The King's impatience, however, and jealousy
prompted him to search the matter to the bottom: The privy seal was ordered to
examine Lascelles, who persisted in the information he had given; and still
appealed to his sister's testimony. That nobleman made next a pretense of
hunting, and went to Sussex, where the woman at that time resided: He found her
both constant in her former intelligence, and particular as to the facts; and
the whole bore but too much the face of probability. Mannoc and Derham, who
were arrested at the same time, and examined by the chancellor, made the
Queen's guilt entirely certain by their confession; and discovered other
particulars, which redounded still more to her dishonor. Three ma^ds of the
family were admitted into her secrets; and some of them had even past the night
in bed with her and her lovers. All the examinations were laid before the King,
who was so deeply affected, that he remained a long time speechless, and at
last burst into tears. The Queen being now questioned, denied her guilt; but
when informed, that a full discovery was made, she confessed, that she had been
criminal before her marriage; and only insisted, that she had never been false
to the King's bed. But as there was evidence, that one Colepeper had passed the
night with her alone since her marriage; and as it appeared, that she had taken
Derham, her old paramour, into her service; she seemed to deserve very little
credit in this asseveration; and the King besides, was not of a disposition to
make any difference between these degrees of guilt.

16 January.
HENRY found, that he could not so fully or expeditiously satiate his vengeance
on all these criminals as by assembling a Parliament, the usual instrument of
his tyranny. The two houses, having received the Queen's confession, began by
an address to the King; which consisted of several particulars. They entreated
him not to be vexed with this untoward accident, to which all men were subject;
but to consider the frailty of human nature, and the mutability of human
affairs; and from these views to derive a subject of consolation. They desired
leave to frame a bill of attainder against the Queen and her accomplices; and
they begged him to give his assent to this bill, not in person, which would
renew his vexation, and might endanger his health, but by commissioners
appointed for that purpose. And as there was a law in force, making it treason
to speak ill of the Queen, as well as King, they craved his royal pardon, if
any of them should, on the present occasion, have transgressed any part of that
statute.

HAVING obtained a gracious answer to these requests, the Parliament proceeded
to an act of attainder for treason against the Queen, and the viscountess of
Rocheford, who had conducted her secret amors; and in this act Colepeper, and
Derham, were also comprised. At the same time, they passed a bill of attainder
for misprision of treason against the old duchess of Norfolk, Catherine's
grandmother, her uncle, lord William Howard, and his lady, together with the
countess of Bridgewater, and nine persons more; because they knew the Queen's
vicious life before her marriage, and yet concealed it. This was an effect of
Henry's usual extravagance, to expect that parents should so far forget the
ties of natural affection, and the sentiments of shame and decency, as to
reveal to him the most secret disorders of their family. He himself seems to
have been sensible of the cruelty of this sentence: For he pardoned the
duchess of Norfolk, and most of the others, condemned for misprision of
treason.

HOWEVER, to secure himself for the future, as well as his successors, from
this fatal accident, he engaged the Parliament to frame a law, equally full of
extravagance. It was enacted, that any one, who knew, or vehemently presumed
any guilt in the Queen, and did not, within twenty days, disclose it to the
King or council, should be guilty of treason; prohibiting every one, at the
same time, from spreading the matter abroad, or even privately whispering it to
others. It was also enacted, that if the King married any woman, who had been
incontinent, taking her for a true maid, she should be guilty of treason, in
case she did not previously reveal her guilt to him. The people made merry with
this extraordinary clause, and said, that the King must henceforth look out for
a widow; for no reputed maid would ever be persuaded to incur the penalty of
the statute Burnet, vol. I. p. 314.
. After all these laws were passed, the Queen was beheaded on Tower Hill,
together with the lady Rocheford. They behaved in a manner suitable to their
dissolute life; and as the lady Rocheford was known to be the chief instrument,
who had brought Anne Boleyn to her end, she died unpitied; and men were farther
confirmed, by the discovery of this woman's guilt, in the favorable sentiments
which they had entertained of that unfortunate Queen.

THE King made no demand of any subsidies from this Parliament; but he found
means of enriching his exchequer from another quarter: He took farther steps
toward the dissolution of colleges, hospitals, and other foundations of that
nature. The courtiers had been practicing on the presidents and governors, to
make a surrender of their revenues to the King; and they had been successful
with eight of them. But there was an obstacle to their farther progress: It had
been provided, by the local statutes of most of these foundations, that no
president, nor any fellows, could make such a deed without the unanimous vote
of all the fellows; and this consent was not easily obtained. All such statutes
were now annulled by Parliament; and the revenues of these houses, so useful to
the It was enacted by this Parliament, that there should be trial of treason in
any country where the King should appoint by commission. The statutes of
treason had been extremely multiplied in this reign; and such an expedient
saved trouble and charges in trying that crime. The same Parliament erected
Ireland into a kingdom; and Henry henceforth annexed the title of King of
Ireland to his other titles. This session, the commons first began the practice
of freeing any of their members, who were arrested, by a writ issued by the
speaker. Formerly it was usual for them to apply for a writ from chancery to
that purpose. This precedent increased the authority of the commons, and had
afterward considerable consequences. Hollingsh^^, p. 955* 956. Baker, p. 289.
. The church had been so long their prey, that nobody was surprised at any new
inroads made upon it. From the regular, Henry now proceeded to make
devastations on the secular clergy. He extorted from many of the bishops a
surrender of chapter lands; and by this devise he pillaged the sees of
Canterbury, York, and London, and enriched his greedy parasites and flatterers
with their spoils.

Ecclesiastical affairs.
THE clergy have been commonly so fortunate as to make a concern for their
temporal interests go hand in hand with a jealousy for orthodoxy; and both
these passions be regarded, by the people, ignorant and superstitious, as a
zeal for religion: But the violent and headstrong character of Henry now
disjoined these objects. His rapacity was gratified by plundering the church;
his bigotry and arrogance by persecuting heretics. Though he engaged the
Parliament to mitigate the penalties of the six articles, so far as regards the
marriage of priests, which was now only subjected to a forfeiture of goods,
chattles, and lands during life; he was still equally bent on maintaining a
rigid purity in speculative principles. He had appointed a commission,
consisting of the two archbishops and several bishops of both provinces,
together with a considerable number of doctors of divinity; and by virtue of
his ecclesiastical supremacy he had given them in charge to choose a religion
for his people. Before the commissioners had made any progress in this arduous
undertaking, the Parliament, in 1541, had passed a law, by which they ratified
all the tenets, which these divines should establish with the King's consent:
And they were not ashamed of expressly declaring that they took their religion
upon trust, and had no other rule, in religious as well as temporal concerns,
than the arbitrary will of their master. There is only one clause of the
statute, which may seem to savor somewhat of the spirit of liberty: It was
enacted, that the ecclesiastical commissioners should establish nothing
repugnant to the laws and statutes of the realm. But in reality this proviso
was inserted by the King, to serve his own purposes. By introducing a confusion
and contradiction into the laws, he became more the master of every one's life
and property. And as the ancient independance of the church still gave him
jealousy, he was well pleased, under cover of such a clause, to introduce
appeals from the spiritual to the civil courts. It was for a like reason, he
would never promulgate a body of canon law* and encouraged the judges on all
occasions to interpose in ecclesiastical causes wherever they thought the law
or royal prerogative concerned. A happy innovation; though at first invented for
arbitrary purposes!

THE King, armed by the authority of Parliament, or rather by their
acknowlegement of that spiritual supremacy, which he believed inherent in him,
employed his commissioners to select a system of tenets for the assent and
belief of the nation. A small volume was soon after published, called, the
Institution of a Christian Man, which was received by the convocation, and
voted to be the infallible standard of orthodoxy. All the delicate points of
justification, faith, freewill, good works, and grace, are there defined, with
a leaning toward the opinion of the reformers: The sacraments, which a few
years before were only allowed to be three, are now increased to the number of
seven, conformable to the sentiments of the catholics. The King's caprice is
discernible through the whole; and the book is in reality to be regarded as his
composition. For Henry, while he made his opinion a rule for the nation, would
tie his own hands by no canon or authority, not even by any which he himself
had formerly established.

THE people had occasion soon after to see a farther instance of the King's
inconstancy. He was not long satisfied with his Institution of a Christian Man:
He ordered a new book to be composed, called, the Erudition of a Christian Man;
and without asking the assent of the convocation, he published, by his own
authority, and that of the Parliament, this new model of orthodoxy. It differs
from the institution Collier, vol. ii. p. 190.
; but the King was no less positive in his new creed than he had been in the
old; and he required the belief of the nation to veer about at his signal. In
both these books, he was particularly careful to inculcate the doctrine of
passive obedience; and he was no less careful to retain the nation in the
practice.

WHILE the King was spreading his own books among the people, he seems to have
been extremely perplexed, as well as the clergy, what course to take with the
scriptures. A review had been made by the ecclesiastical synod of the new
translation of the Bible; and Gardener had proposed, that, instead of employing
English expressions throughout, several Latin words should still be preserved,
because they contained, as he pretended, such peculiar energy and significance,
that they had no correspondent terms in the vulgar tongue Burnet, vol. i. p.
315.
. Among these were eclesia, paenitentia, pontifex, contritus, holocausta,
sacramentum, elementa, ceremonia, musterium, presbyter, sacrificium, humilitas,
satisfactio, peccatum, gratia, hostia, charitas, etc. But as this mixture would
have appeared extremely barbarous, and was plainly calculated for no other
purpose than to retain the people in their ancient ignorance, the proposal was
rejected. The knowledge of the people, however, at least their disputative
turn, seemed to be an inconvenience still more dangerous; and the King and
Parliament Which met on the 22d of January, 1543.
, soon after the publication of the scriptures, retracted the concession, which
they had formerly made; and prohibited all but gentlemen and merchants to
peruse them 33 Hen. VIII. c. 1.
. Even that liberty was not granted, without an apparent hesitation, and a
dread of the consequences: These persons were allowed to read, so it be done
quietly and with good order. And the preamble to the act sets forth, "that many
seditious and ignorant persons had abused the liberty granted them for reading
the Bible, and that great diversity of opinions, animosities, tumults, and
schisms had been occasioned by perverting the sense of the scriptures." It
seemed very difficult to reconcile the King's model for uniformity, with the
permission of free enquiry.

THE mass book also passed under the King's cognizance; and little alteration
was as yet made in it: Some doubtful or fictitious saints only were struck out;
and the name of the pope was erazed. This latter precaution was likewise used
with regard to every new book, that was printed, or even old book that was
sold. The word, Pope, was carefully omitted or blotted out Parliamentary
History, vol. iii. p. 113.
; as if that precaution could abolish the term from the language, or as if such
a persecution of it did not rather imprint it more strongly in the memory of
the people.

THE King took care about this time to clear the churches of another abuse,
which had crept into them. Plays, interludes, and farces were there often acted
in derision of the former superstitions; and the reverence of the multitude for
their ancient principles and modes of worship, was thereby gradually effaced
Burnet, vol. i. p. 318.
. We do not hear, that the catholics attempted to retaliate by employing this
powerful engine against their adversaries, or endeavored by like arts to
expose that fanatical spirit, by which, it appears, the reformers were often
actuated. Perhaps the people were not disposed to relish a jest on that side:
Perhaps the greater simplicity and the more spiritual abstract worship of the
protestants, gave less hold to ridicule, which is commonly founded on sensible
representations. It was, therefore, a very agreeable concession, which Henry
made the catholic party, to suppress entirely these religious comedies.

THUS Henry labored incessantly, by arguments, creeds, and penal statutes, to
bring his subjects to an uniformity in their religious sentiments: But as he
entered, himself, with the greatest earnestness, into all these scholastic
reasonings, he encouraged the people, by his example, to apply themselves to
the study of theology; and it was in vain afterward to expect, however present
fear might restrain their tongues or pens, that they would cordially agree in
any set of tenets or opinions prescribed to them.

CHAP. VII.
War with Scotland. -- Victory at Solway. -- Death of James the Fifth. --
Treaty with Scotland. -- New rupture. -- Rupture with France. -- A Parliament.
-- Affairs of Scotland. -- A Parliament. -- Campaign in France. -- A
Parliament. -- Peace with France and Scotland. -- Persecutions. -- Execution of
the Earl of Surrey. -- Attainder of the Duke of Norfolk. -- Death of the King.
-- His character. -- His laws.

War with Scotland.
HENRY, being determined to avenge himself of the King of Scots for flighting
the advances, which he made for his friendship, would gladly have obtained a
supply from the Parliament, to enable him to prosecute that enterprise; but as
he did not think it prudent to discover his intentions, the Parliament,
conformable to their frugal maxims, would understand no hints; and the King was
disappointed in his expectations. He continued, however, to make preparations
for war; and so soon as he thought himself in a condition to invade Scotland,
he published a manifesto, by which he endeavored to justify his hostilities.
He complained of James's disappointing him in the promised interview; which was
the real ground of the quarrel Buchanan, lib. 14. Drummond in James the fifth.
: But in order to give a more specious coloring to the enterprise, he
mentioned other injuries; that his nephew had given protection to some English
rebels and fugitives, and had detained some territory, which, Henry pretended,
belonged to England. He even revived the old claim of the dependence of the
crown of Scotland, and he summoned James to do homage to him as his liege lord
and superior. He employed the duke of Norfolk, whom he called the scourage of
the Scots, to command in the war; and though James sent the bishop of Aberdeen,
and Sir James Learmont of Darsay, to appease his uncle, he would hearken to no
terms of accommodation. While Norfolk was assembling his army at Newcastle, Sir
Robert Bows, attended with Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Ralph Evers, Sir Brian
Latoun, and others, made an incursion into Scotland, and advanced toward
Jedburgh, with an intention of pillaging and destroying that town. The earl of
Angus, and George Douglas, his brother, who had been so many years banished
their country, and had subsisted by Henry's bounty, joined the English army in
this incursion; and the forces, commanded by Bows, exceeded four thousand men.
James had not been negligent in his preparations for defense, and had posted a
considerable body, under the command of the earl of Huntley, for the protection
of the borders. Lord Hume, at the head of his clients, was hastening to join
Huntley, when he met with the English army; and a battle immediately ensued.
24th August.
While they were engaged, the forces under Huntley began to appear; and the
English, afraid of being overpowered and surrounded, took to flight, and were
pursued by the enemy. Evers, Latoun, and some other persons of distinction,
were taken prisoners. A few only of small note fell in this skirmish Buchanan,
lib. 14.
.

THE duke of Norfolk, mean while, began to move from his camp at Newcastle; and
being attended by the earls of Shrewsbury, Derby, Cumberland, Surrey, Hertford,
Rutland, with many others of the nobility, he advanced to the borders. His army
amounted to above twenty thousand men; and it required the utmost efforts of
Scotland to resist such formidable preparations. James had assembled his whole
military force at Fala and Sautrey, and was ready to advance so soon as he
should be informed of Norfolk's invading his kingdom. The English passed the
Tweed at Berwic, and advanced along the banks of the river as far as Kelso; but
hearing that James had gathered together near thirty thousand men, they
repassed the river at that village, and retreated into their own country
Buchanan, lib. 14.
. The King of Scots, inflamed with a desire of military glory, and of revenge
on his invaders, gave the signal for pursuing them, and carrying the war into
England. He was surprised to find, that his nobility, who were generally
disaffected on account of the preference, which he had given the clergy,
opposed this resolution, and refused to attend him in his projected enterprise.
Enraged at this defection, he reproached them with cowardice, and threatened
vengeance; but still resolved, with the forces which adhered to him, to make an
impression on the enemy's country. He sent ten thousand men to the western
borders, who entered England at Solway firth; and he himself followed them at a
small distance, ready to join them upon occasion. Disgusted, however, with the
refractory disposition of his nobles, he sent a messenger to the army,
depriving lord Maxwel, their general, of his commission, and conferring the
command on Oliver Sinclair, a private gentleman, who was his favorite. The
army were extremely displeased with this alteration, and were ready to disband;
24 November. Victory at Solway.
when a small body of English appeared, not exceeding 500 men, under the
command of Dacres and Musgrave. A panic seized the Scotch, who immediately took
to flight, and were pursued by the enemy. Few were killed in this rout; for it
was no action; but a great many were taken prisoners, and some of the principal
nobility. Among these were the earls of Cassilis and Glencairn; the lords
Maxwel, Fleming, Sommerville, Oliphant, Gray, who were all sent to London, and
given in custody to different noblemen.

THE King of Scots, hearing of this disaster, was confounded to the last
degree; and being naturally of a melancholy disposition, as well as endowed
with a high spirit, he lost all command of his temper on this dismal occasion.
Rage against his nobility, who, he believed, had betrayed him; shame for a
defeat by such unequal numbers; regret of the past, fear of the future; all
these passions so wrought upon him, that he would admit of no consolation, but
abandoned himself wholly to despair. His body was wasted by sympathy with his
anxious mind; and even his life began to be thought in danger. He had no child
living; and hearing that his Queen was safely delivered, he asked whether she
had brought him a male or female? Being told, the latter; he turned about in
his bed: "The crown came with a woman," said he, "and it will go with one: Many
miseries await this poor kingdom: Henry will make it his own either by force of
arms or by marriage." 14th of December.
Death of James the fifth.
A few days after, he expired, in the flower of his age; a prince of
considerable virtues and talents, well fitted, by his vigilance and personal
courage, for repressing those disorders, to which his kingdom, during that age,
was so much exposed. He executed justice with the greatest impartiality and
rigor; but as he supported the commonalty and the church against the rapine of
the nobility, he escaped not the hatred of that order. The protestants also,
whom he repressed, have endeavored to throw many stains on his memory; but
have not been able to fix any considerable imputation on him The persecutions,
exercised during James's reign, are not to be ascribed to his bigotry, a vice
of which he seems to have been as free as Francis the first or the emperor
Charles, both of whom, as well as James, showed, in different periods of their
lives, even an inclination to the new doctrines. The extremities to which all
these princes were carried, proceeded entirely from the situation of affairs,
during that age, which rendered it impossible for them to act with greater
temper or moderation, after they had embraced the resolution of supporting the
ancient establishments. So violent was the propensity of the times toward
innovation, that a toleration of the new preachers was equivalent to a formed
design of changing the national religion. And even the greatest friends to
liberty of conscience have admitted, that though a sect, which has already
diffused itself, has a just claim to indulgence, yet may it often be consistent
with equity as well as found policy, to repress by severity the first
beginnings of schism and new systems of theology.
.

Stowe, p. 584. Herbert, Burnet, Buchanan.
. He called together the Scotch nobles, who were his prisoners; and after
reproaching them, in severe terms, for their breach of treaty, as he pretended,
he began to soften his tone, and proposed to them this expedient, by which, he
hoped, those disorders, so prejudicial to both states, would for the future be
prevented. He offered to bestow on them their liberty without ransom; and only
required of them engagements to favor the marriage of the Prince of Wales with
their young mistress. They were easily prevailed on to give their assent to a
proposal, which seemed so natural, and so advantageous to both kingdoms; and
being conducted to Newcastle, they delivered to the duke of Norfolk, hostages
for their return, in case the intended nuptials were not completed: And they
thence proceeded to Scotland, where they found affairs in some confusion.

THE pope, finding his authority in Scotland exposed to danger from the
spreading of the new opinions, had bestowed on Beaton, the primate, the dignity
of cardinal; and that prelate had been long regarded as prime minister to
James, and as the head of that party, which defended the ancient privileges and
properties of the ecclesiastics. Upon the death of his master, this man,
apprehensive of the consequences both to his party and himself, endeavored to
keep possession of the power; and for that purpose, he is accused of executing
a deed which required a high degree of temerity. He forged, it is said, a will
for the King, appointing himself, and three noblemen, regents of the kingdom
during the minority of the infant Princess Sadler's Letters, p. 161. Spotswood,
p. 71. Buchanan, lib. 15.
: At least, for historians are not well agreed in the circumstances of the
fact, he had read to James a paper of that import, to which that monarch,
during the delirium which preceded his death, had given an imperfect assent and
approbation John Knox, History of the reformation.
. By virtue of this will, Beaton had put himself in possession of the
government; and having joined his interests with those of the Queen dowager, he
obtained the consent of the convention of states, and excluded the pretensions
of the earl of Arran.

JAMES earl of Arran, of the name of Hamilton, was next heir to the crown by
his grandmother, daughter to James the third; and on that account seemed best
entitled to possess that high office, into which the cardinal had intruded
himself. The prospect also of his succession after a Princess, who was in such
tender infancy, procured him many partisans; and though his character contained
little spirit, activity, or ambition, a propensity, which he had discovered for
the new opinions, had attached to him all the (...) of these (...) By means of
all these adherents, joined to (...) of his family, he ha^ been able to make
opposition to the cardi^^l's administration; and the (...) of Beaton's forgery,
with the accession of the noblemen, who had been prisoners in England, assisted
too by some money, sent from London, was able to turn the balance in his
favor. The earl of Angus, and his brother, having taken the present
opportunity of returning into their own country, opposed the cardinal with all
the force of that powerful family; and the majority of the convention had now
embraced opposite interests to those which formerly prevailed. Arran was
declared governor; the cardinal was committed to custody under the care of lord
Seton; and a negotiation was commenced with Sir Ralph Sadler, the English
ambassador, for the marriage of the infant Queen with the Prince of Wales.
Treaty with Scotland.
The following conditions were quickly agreed on; that the Queen should remain
in Scotland till she was ten years of age; that she should then be sent to
England to be educated; that three Scotch nobles should immediately be
delivered as hostages to Henry; and that the kingdom, notwithstanding its union
with England, should still preserve its laws and privileges Sir Ralph Sadler's
Letters.
. By means of these equitable conditions, the war between the nations, which
had threatened Scotland with such dismal calamities, seemed to be fully
composed, and to be changed into perpetual concord and unanimity.

BUT the cardinal-primate, having prevailed on Seton to restore him to his
liberty, was able, by his intrigues, to confound all these measures, which
appeared to be so well concerted. He assembled the most considerable
ecclesiastics; and having represented to them the imminent danger, to which
their revenues and privileges were exposed, he persuaded them to collect
privately from the clergy a large sum of money, by which, if entrusted to his
management, he promised to overturn the schemes of their enemies Buchanan, lib.
15.
. Besides the partisans, whom he acquired by pecuniary motives, he rouzed up
the zeal of those, who were attached to the catholic worship; and he
represented the union with England as the sure forerunner of ruin to the church
and the ancient religion. The national antipathy of the Scotch against the
English nation, was also an infallible engine, by which the cardinal wrought
upon the people; and though the terror of Henry's arms, and their inability to
make resistance, had procured a temporary assent to the alliance and marriage
proposed, the settled habits of the nation produced an extreme aversion to
those measures. The English ambassador and his train received many insults from
persons whom the cardinal had incited to commit those indignities, in hopes of
bringing on a rupture. But Sadler very prudently dissembled the matter, and
waited patiently till the day appointed for the delivery of the hostages. He
then demanded of the regent the performance of that important article; but
received for answer, that his authority was very precarious, that the nation
had now taken a different impression, and that it was not in his power to
compel any of the nobility to deliver themselves as hostages to the English.
Sadler, foreseeing the consequence of this refusal, sent a summons to all those
who had been prisoners in England, and required them to fulfill the promise
which they had given of returning into custody. None of them showed so much
sentiment of honor, as to perform their engagements, except Gilbert Kennedy,
earl of Cassilis. Henry was so well pleased with the behavior of this
nobleman, that he not only received him graciously, but honored him with
presents, gave him his liberty, and sent him back to Scotland, with his two
brothers, whom he had left as hostages Buchanan, lib. XV.
.

New rupture.
THIS behavior of the Scotch nobles, though it reflected dishonor on the
nation, was not unacceptable to the cardinal, who foresaw, that all these
persons would now be deeply interested to maintain their enmity and opposition
to the English. And as a war was soon expected with that kingdom, he found it
necessary immediately to apply to France, and to crave the assistance of that
ancient ally, during the present distresses of the Scotch nation. Though Francis
was fully sensible of his interest in supporting Scotland, a demand of aid
could not have been made on him at a more unseasonable juncture. His
pretensions on the Milanese, and his resentment against Charles, had engaged
him in a war with that potentate; and having made very great, though fruit'ess
efforts during the preceding campaign, he was the more disabled at present from
defending his own dominions, much more from granting any succor to the Scotch.
Matthew Stuart, earl of Lenox, a young nobleman of a great family, was at that
time in the French court; and Francis, being informed, that he was engaged in
ancient and hereditary enmity with the Hamiltons, who had murdered his father,
sent him over to his native country, as a support to the cardinal and the Queen
mother: And he promised, that a supply of money, and, if necessary, even
military succors, should soon be dispatched after him. Arran, the governor,
seeing all these preparations against him, assembled his friends, and made an
attempt to get the person of the infant Queen into his custody; but being
repulsed, he was obliged to come to an accommodation with his enemies, and to
entrust that precious charge to four neutral persons, the heads of potent
families, the Grahams, Areskines, Lindseys, and Levistons. The arrival of
Lenox, in the midst of these transactions, served to render the victory of the
French party over the English still more undisputable Buchanan, lib. XV.
Drummond.
.

Rupture with France.
THE opposition which Henry met with in Scotland from the French intrigues,
excited his resentment, and farther confirmed the resolution which he had
before taken, of breaking with France, and of uniting his arms with those of
the emperor. He had other grounds of complaint against the French King; which,
though they were not of great importance, yet being recent, were able to
overballance those great injuries which he had formerly received from Charles.
He pretended, that Francis had engaged to imitate his example in separating
himself entirely from the sea of Rome, and that he had broke his promise in
that particular. He was dissatisfied, that James, his nephew, had been allowed
to marry, first Magdalene of France, then a princess of the house of Guise; and
he considered these alliances as pledges which Francis gave of his intentions
to support the Scotch against the power of England Pere Daniel.
. He had been informed of some railleries, which the French King had thrown out
against his conduct with regard to his wives. He was disgusted, that Francis,
after so many obligations which he owed him, had sacrificed him to the emperor;
and, in the confidence of friendship, had rashly revealed his secrets to that
subtle and interested monarch. And he complained, that regular payments were
never made of the sums due to him by France, and of the pension which had been
promised. Impelled by all these motives, he alienated himself from his ancient
friend and confederate, and formed a league with the emperor, who very
earnestly courted his alliance. This league, besides stipulations for mutual
defense, contained a plan for invading France; and the two monarchs agreed to
enter Francis's dominions with an army, each of twentyfive thousand men; and to
require that prince to pay Henry all the sums which he owed him, and to consign
Boulogne, Montreuil, Terouenne, and Ardres, as a security for the regular
payment of his pension for the future: In case these conditions were rejected,
the confederate princes agreed, to challenge, for Henry, the crown of France,
and the dutchies of Normandy, Aquitaine, and Guienne; for Charles, the duchy
of Burgundy, and some other territories Rymer, XIV. p. 768. XV. 2.
. That they might have a pretense for enforcing these claims, they sent a
message to Francis, requiring him to renounce his alliance with Sultan Solomon,
and to make reparation for all the prejudice which Christendom had suffered
from that unnatural confederacy. Upon the French King's refusal, war was
declared against him by the confederates. It may be proper to observe, that the
partisans of France objected to Charles his alliance with the heretical King of
England, as no less odious than that which Francis had contracted with Solomon:
And they observed, that this league was a breach of that solemn promise which
he had given to Clement the seventh, never to make peace or alliance with
England.

22 January.
A Parliament.
WHILE the treaty with the emperor was negociating, the King summoned a new
session of Parliament, in order to obtain supplies for his projected war with
France. The Parliament granted him a subsidy to be paid in three years: It was
levied in a peculiar manner; but exceeded not three shillings in the pound upon
any individual They who were worth in goods twenty shillings and upwards to
five pounds, paid four pence of every pound; from five pounds to ten pounds,
eight pence; from ten pounds to twenty pounds, sixteen pence; from twenty and
upwards, two shillings. Lands, fees, and annuities, paid eight pence in the
pound from twenty shillings to five pounds; from five pounds to ten pounds,
sixteen pence; from ten pounds to twenty pounds, two shillings; from twenty
pounds and upwards, three shillings.
. The convocation gave the King six shillings in the pound, to be levied in
three years. Greater sums were always, even during the establishment of the
catholic religion, exacted from the clergy than the laity: Which made the
emperor Charles say, when Henry dissolved the monasteries, and sold their
revenues, or bestowed them on his nobility and courtiers, that he had killed
the hen which brought him the golden eggs Collier, vol. II. p. 176.
.

THE Parliament also facilitated the execution of the former law, by which the
King's proclamations were made equal to statutes: They appointed, that any nine
counselors should form a legal court for punishing all disobedience to
proclamations. The total abolition of juries in criminal causes, as well as of
all Parliaments, seemed, if the King had so pleased, the necessary consequence
of this enormous law. He might issue proclamations, for the execution of any
penal statutes, and afterward try the criminals, not for breach of the law,
but for disobedience to his proclamation. It is remarkable, that the lord
Mountjoy entered a protest against this statute; and it is equally remarkable,
that that protest is the only one which was entered against any public bill
during this whole reign Burnet, p. 322.
.

WE have taken notice, in the end of the former chapter, of some laws regarding
religion, which the Parliament passed this session, in order to gratify the
King's humor. It was farther enacted 34 and 35 Hen. VIII. c. 1
, that every spiritual person, who preached or taught contrary to the doctrine
contained in the King's book, the Erudition of a christian man, or contrary to
any doctrine which he shall henceforth promulgate, was to be admitted on the
first conviction to renounce his errors; on the second, he was required to
carry a faggot; which if he refused to do, or fell into a third offense, he was
to be burnt. But the laity, for the third offense, were only to forfeit their
goods and chattels, and to be liable to perpetual Imprisonment* Indictments
must be laid within a year after the offense, and the prisoner was allowed ^o
bring witnesses for his p^^gation. These penalties were lighter than those
formerly imposed on a denial of transubstantiation* It was, however, subjoined
in this statute, that the act of the six articles was still in force. But in
order to make the King more entirely master of his people, it was enacted, that
he might hereafter, at his pleasure, change this act, or any provision in it.
By this clause, both parties were retained in subjection* so far as regarded
religion, the King was invested, in the fullest manner, with the sole
legislative authority in his kingdom; and all his subjects were, under the
severest penalties, expressly bound to receive implicitly, whatever doctrine he
should please to recommend to them.

12th July.
THE reformers began to entertain hopes, that this exorbitant power would be
employed in their favor. The King married Catherine Par, widow to Nevil lord
Latimer; a woman of virtue, and somewhat inclined to the new doctrine. By this
marriage, Henry made good what had formerly been foretold in jest, that he
would be obliged to espouse a widow. The King's league with the emperor, seemed
to be a circumstance no less favorable to the catholic party; and thus matters
remained still nearly balanced between the factions.

THE advantages gained by this powerful confederacy between Henry and Charles,
were very inconsiderable, during the present year. The campaign was opened with
a victory, gained by the duke of Cleves, Francis's ally, over the forces of the
emperor Memoires du Bellay, lib. X.
: Francis, in person, took the field early; and made himself master, without
resistance, of the whole duchy of Luxembourg: He afterward took Landrecy, and
added some fortifications to it. Charles, having at last assembled a powerful
army, appeared in the Low Countries; and after taking almost every fortress in
the duchy of Cleves, he reduced the duke to submit to the terms which he was
pleased to prescribe to him. Being then joined by a body of six thousand
English, he sat down before Landrecy, and covered the siege with an army of
above forty thousand men. Francis advanced at the head of an army not much
inferior; as if he intended to give the emperor battle, or oblige him to
abandon the siege: But while these two rival monarchs were facing each other,
and all the world stood in expectation of some great event; the French found
means to throw succors into Landrecy, and having thus effected their purpose,
they skilfully made a retreat. Charles, finding the season far advanced,
despaired of success in his enterprise, and found it necessary to raise the
siege.

Affairs of Scotland.
THE vanity of Henry was flattered, by the figure which he made in the great
transactions on the continent: But the interests of his kingdom were much more
deeply concerned in the event of affairs in Scotland. Arran, the governor, was
of so indolent and unambitious a character, that had he not been stimulated by
his friends and dependants, he never had aspired to any share in the
administration; and when he found himself overpowered by the party of the Queen
dowager, the cardinal, and the earl of Lenox, he was glad to accept of any
terms of accommodation, however dishonorable. He even gave them a sure pledge
of his sincerity, by renouncing the principles of the reformers, and
reconciling himself to the Romish communion in the Franciscan church at
Stirling. By this weakness and levity he lost his credit with the whole nation,
and rendered the protestants, who were hitherto the chief support of his power,
his most mortal enemies. The cardinal acquired the entire ascendant in the
kingdom: The Queen dowager put implicit confidence in him: The governor was
obliged to yield to him in every pretension: Lenox alone was become an obstacle
to his measures, and reduced him to some difficulty.

THE inveterate enmity which had taken place between the families of Lenox and
Arran, made the interests of these two noblemen entirely incompatible; and as
the cardinal and the French party, in order to engage Lenox the more in their
cause, had flattered him with the hopes of succeeding to the crown after their
infant sovereign, this rivalship had tended still farther to rouse the
animosity of the Hamiltons. Lenox too had been encouraged to aspire to the
marriage of the Queen dowager, which would have given him some pretensions to
the regency; and as he was become assuming, on account of the services which he
had rendered the party, the cardinal found, that, since he must choose between
the friendship of Lenox and Arran, the latter nobleman, who was more easily
governed, and who was invested with present authority, was in every respect
preferable. In order to remove the former, after the easiest and least
obnoxious manner, he wrote to Francis, with whom he had entire credit, by means
of the duke of Guise, father to the Queen dowager; and after praising Lenox for
his past services, he represented the present difficulties and obstructions,
which he occasioned in the administration, and desired that he might be
recalled to France, where he enjoyed great credit and large possessions. But
the impatience of Lenox to attain his purposes, allowed not this political
artifice leisure to operate. Finding that he was not likely to succeed in his
pretensions to the Queen dowager, and that Arran prevailed in every contest, he
retired to Dunbarton, the governor of which was entirely in his interests; he
entered into a secret negotiation with the English court; and he summoned his
clients and par^izans to attend him. All those who were inclined to the
protestant religion, or were on any account discontented with the cardinal's
administration, now regarded Lenox as the head of their party, and they readily
made him a tender of their services. In a little time, he had collected an army
of ten thousand men, and he threatened his enemies with immediate destruction.
The cardinal had no equal force to oppose to him; but as he was a prudent man,
he foresaw that Lenox could not long subsist so great an army, and he
endeavored to protract time, by opening a negotiation with him. He seduced his
followers, by various artifices; he engaged the Douglasses in his interests; he
represented to the whole nation the danger of civil wars and commotions. And
Lenox, finding himself engaged in an unequal contest, was at last obliged to
lay down his arms, and to accept of terms of accommodation with the governor
and the cardinal. Present peace was restored; but no confidence took place
between the parties. Lenox, fortifying his castles, and putting himself in a
posture of defense, waited the succors of the English, from whose assistance
alone he expected to obtain the superiority over his enemies.



AN act was passed, that the King's usual style should be "King of England,
France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, and on earth the supreme head of
the church of England and Ireland." It seemed a palpable inconsistency, to
retain the title of defender of the faith, which the sea of Rome had conferred
on him for maintaining its cause against Luther; and yet subjoin his
ecclesiastical supremacy, in opposition to the claims of that see.

AN act was also passed, for the remission of a loan of money, which the King
had lately raised. It will easily be believed, that, after the former act of
this kind, the loan was not entirely voluntary 35 Hen. VIII. c. 12.
. But there was a peculiar circumstance attending the present statute, which
none but Henry would have thought of: That those who had already got payment,
either in whole or in part, should refund the sums to the exchequer.

THE oaths which Henry established for the security of his ecclesiastical
model, were not more reasonable than his other measures. All his subjects of
any distinction had already been obliged to renounce the pope's supremacy; but
as the clauses which they swore to, had not been esteemed entirely
satisfactory, another oath was imposed, and it was added, that all those who
had taken the former oaths, should be understood to have taken the new one 35
Hen. VIII. c. 1.
. A strange supposition! to represent men as bound by an oath which they had
never consented to take.

THE most commendable act to which the Parliament gave their sanction, was that
by which they mitigated the law of the six articles, and ordained, that no
person should be put to his trial upon any accusation concerning any of the
offenses comprised in that sanguinary statute, except on the oath of twelve
persons before commissioners authorized for that purpose; and that no person
should be arrested or committed to ward for any such offense before he was
indicted. Any preacher, accused of speaking in his sermon contrary to these
articles, must be indicted within forty days.

THE King always experienced the limits of his exorbitant authority whenever he
demanded subsidies, however moderate, from the Parliament; and, therefore, not
to hazard a refusal, he made no mention this session of a supply: But as his
wars both with France and Scotland, as well as his usual prodigality, had
involved him in great expense, he had recourse to other methods of filling his
treasury: Notwithstanding the former abolition of his debts, he yet required
new loans from his subjects: And he enhanced gold from forty-five shillings to
forty-eight an ounce; and silver from three shillings and nine pence to four
shillings. His pretense for this innovation, was to prevent the money from
being exported; as if that expedient could any way serve the purpose. He even
coined some base money, and ordered it to be current by his proclamation. He
named commissioners for levying a b^nevolence, and he extorted about seventy
thousand pounds by that expedient. Read, a^derman of London Herbert. Stowe, p.
588. Baker, p. 292.
, a man somewhat advanced in years, having refused to contribute his share, or
not coming up to the expectations of the commissioners, was enrolled as a foot
soldier in the Scottish wars, and was there taken prisoner. Roach, who had been
equally refractory, was thrown into prison, and obtained not his liberty but by
paying a large composition Goodwin's Annals. Stowe, p. 588.
. These powers of the prerogative, (which at that time passed for unquestioned)
of the King's compelling any man to serve in any office, and of imprisoning any
man during pleasure, not to mention the practice of extorting loans, rendered
the sovereign, in a manner, absolute master of the person and property of every
individual.

EARLY this year the King sent a fleet and army to invade Scotland. The fleet
consisted of near two hundred vessels, and carried on board ten thousand men.
Dudley lord Lisle commanded the sea forces; the earl of Hertford the land. The
troops were disembarked near Leith; and after dissipating a small body which
opposed them, they took that town without resistance, and then marched to
Edinburgh. The gates were soon beat down (for little or no resistance was
made); and the English first pillaged, and then set fire to the city. The
regent and cardinal were not prepared to oppose so great a force, and they fled
to Stirling. 18th May.
Hertford marched eastward; and being joined by a new body under Evers, warden
of the east marches, he laid waste the whole country, burned and destroyed
Hadington and Dunbar, and then retired into England; having lost only forty men
in the whole expedition. The earl of Arran collected some forces; but finding
that the English were already departed, he turned them against Lenox, who was
justly suspected of a correspondence with the enemy. That nobleman, after
making some resistance, was obliged to fly into England; where Henry settled a
pension on him, and even gave him his niece, the lady Margaret Douglas, in
marriage. In return, Lenox stipulated conditions, by which, had he been able to
execute them, he must have reduced his country to a total servitude Rymer, XV.
23, 29.
.

HENRY'S policy was blamed in this sudden and violent incursion; by which he
inflamed the passion of the Scotch, without subduing their spirit; and it was
commonly said, that he did too much, if he intended to solicit an alliance,
and too little, if he meant a conquest Herbert. Burnet.
. But the reason of his withdrawing the (...) to carry on his projected
enterprise against France, where he intended to employ the whole force of his
kingdom. He had (...) plan with the emperor, which threatened the total ruin of
that monarchy, and (...) necessary consequence, have involved the subjection of
England. These two princes had agreed to invade France with forces amounting to
above a hundred thousand men: Henry engaged to set out from Calais; Charles
from the Low Countries: They were to enter on no siege, but leaving all the
frontier towns behind them, to march directly to Paris, where they were to join
their forces, and thence to proceed to the entire conquest of the kingdom.
Francis could not oppose to these formidable preparations, much above forty
thousand men.

14th July. Campaign in France.
HENRY, having appointed the Queen regent during his absence, passed over to
Calais with thirty thousand men, accompanied with the dukes of Norfolk and
Suffolk, Fitzalan earl of Arundel, Vere earl of Oxford, the earl of Surrey,
Paulet lord St. John, lord Ferrers of Chartley, lord Mountjoy, lord Gray of
Wilton, Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Francis Bryan, and the most flourishing nobility
and gentry of his kingdom. The English army was soon joined by the count de
Buren, admiral of Flanders, with ten thousand foot, and four thousand horse;
and the whole composed an army, which nothing on that frontier was able to
resist. The chief force of the French army was drawn to the side of Champagne,
in order to oppose the imperialists.

THE emperor, with an army of near sixty thousand men, had taken the field much
earlier than Henry; and not to lose time, while he waited for the march of his
confederate, he sat down before Luxembourg, which he took: He thence proceeded
to Commercy on the Meuse, which was surrendered to him: Ligny met with the same
fate: He next laid siege to St. Disier on the Marne, which, though a weak place,
made a brave resistance, under the count of Sancerre the governor, and the
siege was protracted beyond expectation.

THE emperor was employed before this town at the time the English forces were
assembled in Picardy. Henry, either tempted by the defenseless condition of the
French frontiers, or thinking that the emperor had first broke engagements by
forming sieges, or, perhaps, foreseeing the dangerous consequences of
destroying entirely the French power, instead of marching forward to Paris, sat
down before Montreuil and Boulog^e. The duke of Norfolk commanded the army
before Montreuil: The King himself that before Boulogne. Vervin was governor of
Boulogne, and under him Philip Corse, a brave old soldier, who encouraged the
garrison to defend themselves to the last extremity against the English. 1^th
September.
He was killed during the course of the siege, and the town was immediately
surrendered to Henry by the cowardice of Vervin; who was afterward beheaded
for this dishonorable capitulation.

DURING the course of this siege, Charles had taken St. Disier; and finding the
season much advanced, he began to hearken to a treaty of peace with France,
since all his schemes for subduing that kingdom were likely to prove abortive.
In order to have a pretense for deserting his ally, he sent a messenger to the
English camp, requiring Henry immediately to fulfill his engagements, and to
meet him with his army before Paris. Henry replied, that he was too far engaged
in the siege of Boulogne to raise it with honor, and that the emperor himself
had first broke the concert by forming sieges. 18th September.
This answer served Charles as a sufficient reason for concluding a peace with
Francis at Crepy, where no mention was made of the English. He stipulated to
give Flanders as a dowry to his daughter, whom he agreed to marry to the duke
of Orleans, Francis's second son; and Francis, in return, withdrew his troops
from Piemont and Savoy, and renounced all claim to Milan, Naples, and other
territories in Italy. This peace, so advantageous to Francis, was procured
partly by the decisive victory obtained in the beginning of the campaign by the
count of Anguyen over the imperialists at Cerisolles in Piemont, partly by the
emperor's great desire to turn his arms against the protestant princes in
Germany. Charles ordered his troops to separate from the English in Picardy;
30th September.
and Henry, finding himself obliged to raise the siege of Montreuil, returned
into England. This campaign served, to the populace, as matter of great
triumph; but all men of sense concluded, that the King had, as in all his
former military enterprises, made, at an infinite charge, an acquisition which
was of no manner of consequence.

THE war with Scotland, meanwhile, was conducted feebly, and with various
success. Sir Ralph Evers, now lord Evers, and Sir Bryan Latoun, made an inroad
into that kingdom; and having laid waste the counties of Tiviotdale and the
Merse, they proceeded to the abbey of Coldingham, which they took possession
of, and fortified. The regent assembled an army of eight thousand men, in order
to dislodge them from this post; but he had no sooner opened his batteries
before the place, than a sudden panic seized him, and he fled to Dunbar. He
complained of the mutinies of his army, and pretended to be afraid lest they
should deliver him into the hands of the English: But his own unwarlike spirit
was generally believed to have been the motive of this dishonorable retreat.
The Scotch army, upon the departure of their general, immediately fell into
confusion; and had not Angus, with a few of his retainers, brought off the
cannon, and protected their rear, the English might have gained great
advantages over them. Evers, elated with this success, boasted to Henry, that
he had conquered all Scotland to the Forth; and he claimed a reward for this
important service. The duke of Norfolk, who knew with what difficulty such
acquisitions would be maintained against a warlike people, advised the King to
grant him, as his reward, the conquests of which he so highly boasted. 17th of
February.
The English, whose past successes had taught them too much to despise the
enemy, thought, when they saw the Scotch horses led off the field, that the
whole army was retiring; and they hastened to attack them. The Scotch received
them in good order; and being favored by the advantage of the ground, as well
as by the surprise of the English, who expected no resistance, they soon put
them to flight, and pursued them with a considerable flaughter. Evers and
Latoun were both killed, and above a thousand men were made prisoners. In order
to support the Scotch in this war, Francis, some time after, sent over a body
of auxiliaries, to the number of three thousand five hundred men, under the
command of Montgomery, lord of Lorges Buchanan, lib. XV. Drummond.
. Reinforced by these succors, the regent assembled an army of fifteen
thousand men at Hadington, and marched thence to ravage the east borders of
England. They laid all waste wherever they came; and having met with no
considerable resistance, they retired into their own country, and dispersed
themselves. The earl of Hertford, in revenge, committed ravages on the middle
and west marches; and the war on both sides was signalized rather by the ills
inflicted on the enemy, than by any considerable advantage gained by either
party.

THE war likewise between France and England was not distinguished this year by
any memorable events. Francis had equipped a fleet of above two hundred fail,
besides galleys; and having embarked some land forces on board, he sent them to
make a descent in England Beleair. Memoires du Bellay.
. They failed to the Isle of Wight, where they found the English fleet lying at
anchor in St. Helens. It consisted not of above an hundred fail; and the
admiral thought it most advisable to remain in that road, in hopes of drawing
the French into the narrow passages and rocks, which were unknown to them. The
two fleets cannonaded one another for two days; and except the sinking of the
Mary Rose, one of the largest ships of the English fleet, the damage on both
sides was inconsiderable. The French landed troops in the Isle of Wight, and
committed ravages; but being repulsed by the militia of the country, they
retired to their ships, which soon after set sail for France. They were again
driven by the wind on the coast of England, where they met with the English
fleet; and a new cannonading ensued, which proved no more decisive than the
foregoing. It was indeed scarce possible, that a fleet at that time could,
without boarding, gain any considerable advantage over the enemy. The cannon
were commonly so ill served, that a French writer of memoirs De Langey.
observes, as a circumstance some what singular, that each of these numerous
fleets in a two hours engagement, fired full three hundred shot. One large ship
in our time could, without difficulty, do as much.

FRANCIS'S chief intention, in equipping so great a fleet, was to prevent the
English from throwing succors into Boulogne, which he intended to besiege; and
for that purpose, he ordered a fort to be built, by which he proposed to block
up the harbor. After a considerable loss of money and time, the fort was found
so ill constructed, that he was obliged to abandon it; and though he had brought
together, on that frontier, an army of near forty thousand men, he was not able
to effect any considerable enterprise. He broke into the territory of Oye, an
extent of country which lies near Calais, and which served commonly to supply
the garrison with provisions; and he laid it entirely waste by fire and sword.
Several skirmishes ensued between the French and English, in one of which the
duke of Aumale received a remarkable wound. A lance was run into his head
between his eye and nose; and notwithstanding that the lance broke and the head
of it remained in the wound, he was not dismounted by so violent a shock, and
the head of the lance being extracted by a skilful surgeon, he afterward
recovered, and rendered himself extremely famous by the name of the duke of
Guise. Henry, in order to defend his dominions in France, had levied fourteen
thousand Germans; who, having marched to Fleurines in the bishopric of Liege,
found they could advance no farther. The Emperor would not allow them a passage
through his dominions: They received intelligence of a superior army on the
side of France ready to intercept them: Idleness and want of pay soon bred a
mutiny among them: And having seized the English commissaries as a security for
arrears, they retreated into their own country. There seems to have been some
want of foresight and contrivance in this expensive armament.

23 November.
A Parliament.
THE great expense of these two wars, maintained by Henry, obliged him to
summon a new Parliament. The commons granted him a subsidy, payable in two
years, of two shillings a pound on land Those who possessed goods or money,
above five pound and below ten, were to pay eight pence a pound: Those above
ten pound, a shilling.
: The spirituality voted him six shillings a pound. But the Parliament,
apprehensive lest more demands should be made upon them, thought to save
themselves by a very extraordinary liberality of other people's property; and
by one vote they bestowed on the King the whole revenues of the universities,
as well as of the chauntries, free chapels A chauntry was a little church,
chapel, or particular altar in some cathedral church, etc. endowed with lands
or other revenues for maintenance of one or more priests, daily to say mass or
perform divine service, for the use of the founders, or such others as they
appointed: Free chapels were independent on any church, and endowed for much
the same purpose as the former. Jacob's Law (...)
, and hospitals. Henry was pleased with this concession, as it increased his
power; but he had no intention of despoiling learning of all her endowments;
and he soon took care to inform the universities, that he meant not to touch
their revenues. Thus these ancient and celebrated establishments owed their
subsistence to the generosity of the King, not to the protection of this
servile and prostitute Parliament.

THE prostitute spirit of the Parliament appeared farther in the preamble of a
statute 37 Hen. VIII. c. 17.
; where they recognize the King to have always been by the word of God supreme
head of the church of England, and acknowledge, that archbishops, bishops, and
other ecclesiastical persons, have no manner of jurisdiction but by his royal
mandate: To him alone, and such persons as he shall appoint, full authority and
power is given from above to hear and determine all manner of causes
ecclesiastical, and to correct all manner of heresies, errors, vices and sins
whatsoever. No mention is here made of the concurrence of a convocation, nor
even of a Parliament. His proclamations are acknowleged to have not only the
force of a law, but the authority of a revelation; and by his royal power he
may regulate the actions of men, and even direct their inward sentiments and
opinions.

24 December.
THE King made in person a speech to the Parliament on proroguing them; where,
after thanking them for their loving attachment to him, which, he said,
equalled what was ever paid by their ancestors to any King of England, he
complained of their dissensions, disputes and animosities in religion. He told
them, that the several pulpits were become a kind of batteries against each
other; and that one preacher called another heretic and anabaptist, which was
retaliated by the opprobious terms of papist and hypocrite: That he had
permitted his people the use of the scriptures, not in order to furnish them
materials for dispute and railing, but that he might enable them to inform
their consciences and instruct their children and families: That it grieved his
heart to find how that precious jewel was prostituted, by being introduced into
the conversation of every alehouse and tavern, and employed as a pretense for
decrying the spiritual and legal pastors: And that he was sorry to observe,
that the word of God, while it was the object of so much anxious speculation,
had very little influence on their practice; and that though an imaginary
knowledge so much abounded, charity was daily going to decay Hall, fol 261.
Herbert, p. 534.
. The King gave good advice; but his own example, by encouraging speculation
and dispute, was ill qualified to promote that peaceable submission of opinion,
which he recommended.

7th of June. Peace with France and Scotland.
The chief conditions were, that Henry should retain Boulogne during eight
years, or till the former debt due by Francis should be paid. This debt was
settled at two millions of livres, besides a claim of 500,000 livres, which was
afterward to be adjusted. Francis took care to comprehend Scotland in the
treaty. Thus all that Henry obtained by a war, which cost him above one million
three hundred and forty thousand pounds sterling Herbert, Stowe.
, was a bad security for a debt, which was not a third of the value.

THE King, being now freed from all foreign wars, had leisure to give his
attention to domestic affairs; and particularly to the establishment of
uniformity of opinion, on which he was so intent. Though he allowed an English
translation of the Bible, he had hitherto been very careful to keep the mass in
Latin; but he was at last prevailed with to permit, that the Litany, a
considerable part of the public worship, should be celebrated in the vulgar
tongue; and by this innovation, he excited anew the hopes of the reformers, who
had been somewhat discouraged by the severity of the statute of the six
articles. One petition of the new Litany was a prayer to save us from the
tyranny of the bishop of Rome, and from all his detestable enormities. Cranmer
was employing his authority to engage Henry to farther innovations, and he took
advantage of Gardiner's absence, who was employed in an embassy to the emperor;
but Gardener, having wrote to the King, that, if he carried his opposition
against the catholic religion to greater extremities, Charles threatened to
break off all commerce with him, the success of Cranmer's projects was for the
time retarded. Cranmer lost this year the most sincere and most powerful
friend, whom he possessed at court; Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk: The Queen
dowager of France, spouse to Suffolk, had died some years before. This nobleman
is one instance, that Henry was not altogether incapable of a cordial and
steady friendship; and Suffolk seems to have been entirely worthy of that
favor, which, from his earliest youth, he had enjoyed with him. The King was
sitting in council when informed of Suffolk's death; and he took that occasion
both to express his own sorrow for the loss, and to celebrate the merits of the
deceased. He declared, that, during the whole course of their correspondence,
he had not made any attempt to injure an adversary, and had never whispered a
word to the disadvantage of any one. "Is there any of you, my lords, who can
say as much?" When the King subjoined these words, he looked round in all their
faces, and saw that confusion, which the consciousness of secret guilt threw
upon them Coke's Inst. cap. 99.
.

CRANMER himself, when bereaved of this support, was the more exposed to those
cabals of the courtiers, which the opposition of party and religion, joined to
the usual motives of interest, rendered so eager among Henry's ministers and
counselors. The catholics took advantage of the King's passion for orthodoxy;
and they represented to him, that, if his laudable zeal for enforcing the truth
met with no greater success, it was owing altogether to the primate, whose
example and encouragement were, in reality, the secret supports of heresy.
Henry, seeing the point to which they tended, feigned a compliance, and desired
the council to make enquiry into Cranmer's conduct; promising that, if he was
found guilty, he should send him to the Tower, and bring him to condign
punishment. All the world now gave the primate for lost; and his old friends,
from mercenary views, as well as the opposite party, from animosity, began to
show him marks of neglect and disregard. He was obliged to stand several hours
among the lacqueys at the door of the council chamger, before he could be
admitted; and when he was at last called in, he was told, that they had
determined to send him to the Tower. Cranmer said, that he appealed to the King
himself; and finding his appeal disregarded, he produced a ring, which Henry
had given him as a pledge of favor and protection. The council were
confounded; and when they came before the King, he reproved them in the
severest terms, and told them, that he was well acquainted with Cranmer's
merit, as well as with their malignity and envy: But he was determined to crush
all their cabals, and to teach them, by the severest discipline, since gentle
methods were vain, a more dutiful concurrence in promoting his service.
Norfolk, who was Cranmer's capital enemy, apologized for their conduct, by
saying, that their only intention was to set the primate's innocence in a full
light by bringing him to an open trial: And Henry obliged them all to embrace
him, as a sign of their cordial reconcilement. The mild temper of Cranmer
rendered this reconcilement more sincere on his part, than is usual in such
forced compliances Burnet, vol. i. p. (...) Antiq. Brit. in vita Cranm.
.

Persecutions.
BUT though Henry's partiality to Cranmer rendered fruitless all accusations
against him, his pride and peevishness, irritated by his declining state of
health, carried him to punish with fresh severity all others who presumed to
entertain a different opinion from himself, particularly in the capital point
of the real presence. Anne Ascue, a young woman of merit as well as beauty
Dale, Speed, 780.
, who had great connexions with the chief ladies at court, and with the Queen
herself, was accused of dogmati^ing on that delicate article; and Henry,
instead of having indulgence to the weakness of her sex and age, was but the
more provoked, that a woman should dare to oppose his theological sentiments.
She was prevailed on by Bonner's menaces to make a seeming recantation; but she
qualified it with some reserves, which did not satisfy that zealous prelate.
She was thrown into prison, and there employed herself in composing prayers and
discourses, by which she fortified her resolution to endure the utmost
extremity rather than relinquish her religious principles. She even wrote to
the King, and told him, that as to the Lord's Supper, she believed as much as
Christ himself had said of it, and as much of his divine doctrine as the
catholic church had required: But while she could not be brought to acknowledge
an assent to the King's explications, this declaration availed her nothing, and
was rather regarded as a fresh insult. The chancellor, Wriothesely, who had
succeeded Audley, and who was much attached to the catholic party, was sent to
examine her with regard to her patrons at court, and the great ladies who were
in correspondence with her: But she maintained a very laudible fidelity to her
friends, and would confess nothing. She was put to the torture in the most
cruel manner, and continued still resolute in preserving secrecy. Some authors
Fox, vol. ii. p. 578. Speed, p. 780. Baker, p. 299. But Burnet questions the
truth of this circumstance: Fox, however, transcribes her own paper, where she
relates it. I must add, in justice to the King, that he disapproved of
Wriothesely's conduct, and commended the lieutenant.
add a very extraordinary circumstance: That the chancellor, who stood by,
ordered the lieutenant of the Tower to stretch the rack farther; but the
lieutenant refused compliance with that cruelty: The chancellor menaced him;
but met with a new refusal: Upon which that magistrate, who was otherwise a
person of merit, but intoxicated with religious zeal, put his own hand to the
rack, and drew it so violently that he almost tore her body asunder. Her
constancy still surpassed the barbarity of her persecutors, and they found all
their efforts to be baffled. She was then condemned to be burned alive; and
being so dislocated by the rack, that she could not stand, she was carried to
the stake in a chair. Together with her, were brought Nicholas Belenian, a
priest, John Lassels of the King's family, and John Adams a tailor, who had
been condemned for the same crime to the same punishment. They were all tied to
the stake; and in that dreadful situation, the chancellor sent to inform them,
that their pardon was ready drawn and signed, and should instantly be given
them, if they would merit it by a recantation. They only regarded this offer as
a new ornament to their crown of martyrdom; and they saw with tranquillity the
executioner kindle the flames which consumed them. Wriothesely did not
consider, that this public and noted situation interested their honor the more
to maintain a steady perseverance.

BUT though the secrecy and fidelity of Anne Ascue saved the Queen from this
peril, she soon after fell into a new danger, from which she very narrowly
escaped. There was an ulcer broke out in the King's leg, which, joined to his
extreme corpulency and his bad habit of body, began both to threaten his life,
and to render him, even more than usual, peevish and passionate. The Queen,
during this time, attended him with the most tender and dutiful care, and
endeavored, by every soothing art and compliance, to allay those gusts of
humor, to which he was become so subject. His favorite topic of conversation
was theology; and Catherine, whose good sense made her capable of discoursing
on any subject, was frequently engaged into the argument; and being secretly
inclined to the principles of the reformers, she unwarily discovered too much
of her mind on these occasions. Henry, highly provoked that she should presume
to differ from him, made complaints of her obstinacy to Gardener, who gladly
laid hold of the opportunity to inflame the quarrel. He praised the King's
anxious care of preserving the orthodoxy of his subjects; and represented, that
the more elevated the person was who was chastised, and the more near to his
person, the greater terror would the example strike into every one, and the
more glorious would the sacrifice appear to all posterity. The chancellor,
being consulted, was engaged by religious zeal to second these topics; and
Henry, hurried by his own impetuous temper, and encouraged by his counselors,
went so far as to order articles of impeachment to be drawn up against his
consort. Wriothesely executed his commands; and soon after brought the paper to
him to be signed: For as it was high treason to throw slander upon the Queen,
he might otherwise have been questioned for his temerity. In going home, he
chanced to drop this important paper from his pocket; and as some person of the
Queen's party found it, it was immediately carried to her. She was sensible of
the extreme danger to which she was exposed; but did not despair of being able,
by her prudence and address, still to elude the efforts of her enemies. She
paid her usual visit to the King, and found him in a more serene disposition
than she had reason to expect. He entered on the subject which was so familiar
to him, and he seemed to challenge her to an argument in divinity. She gently
declined the conversation, and observed, that such profound speculations were
ill suited to the natural imbecility of her sex. Women, she said, by their
first creation, were made subject to men: The male was created after the image
of God; the female after the image of the male: It belonged to the husband to
choose principles for his wife; the wife's duty was, in all cases, to adopt
implicitly the sentiments of her husband: And as to herself, it was doubly her
duty, being blessed with a husband, who was qualified, by his judgment and
learning, not only to choose principles for his own family, but for the most
wise and knowing of every nation. "Not so! by St. Mary," replied the King, "you
are now become a doctor, Kate; and better fitted to give than receive
instructions." She meekly replied, that she was sensible how little she was
entitled to these praises; that though she usually declined not any conversation,
however sublime, when proposed by his majesty, she well knew, that her
conceptions could serve to no other purpose than to give him a little momentary
amusement; that she found the conversation apt to languish when not revived by
some opposition, and had ventured sometimes to feign a contrariety of
sentiments, in order to give him the pleasure of refuting her; and that she
also proposed, by this innocent artifice, to engage him into topics, whence,
she had observed, by her frequent experience, that she reaped profit and
instruction. "And is it so, sweetheart?" replied the King, "then are we
perfect friends again." He embraced her with great affection, and sent her away
with assurances of his protection and kindness. Her enemies, who knew nothing
of this turn, prepared next day to convey her to the Tower, pursuant to the
King's warrant. Henry and Catherine were conversing amicably in the garden,
when the chancellor appeared with forty of the pursuivants. The King spoke to
him at some distance from her; and seemed to expostulate with him in the
severest manner: She even overheard the terms of knave, fool, and beast, which
he very liberally bestowed upon that magistrate; and then ordered him to depart
his presence. She afterward interposed to mitigate his anger: He said to her,
"Poor soul! you know not how little entitled this man is to your good offices."
From thenceforth, the Queen, having narrowly escaped so great a danger, was
careful not to offend Henry's humor by any contradiction; and Gardener, whose
malice had endeavored to widen the breach, could never afterward recover his
favor and good opinion Burnet, vol. i. p. 344. Herbert, p. 560. Speed, p 780.
Fox's Acts and Monuments, vol. ii. p. 58.
.

BUT Henry's tyrannical disposition, soured by ill health, burst out soon after
to the destruction of a man, who possessed a much superior rank to Gardener.
The duke of Norfolk and his father, during this whole reign, and even a great
part of the foregoing, had been regarded as the greatest subjects in the
kingdom, and had rendered very considerable services to the crown. The duke
himself had in his youth distinguished himself by naval enterprises: He had
much contributed to the victory over the Scotch at Flouden: He had suppressed a
dangerous rebellion in the North: And he had always done his part with honor
in all the expeditions against France. Fortune seemed to conspire with his own
industry, in raising him to the highest elevation. By the favors heaped on him
from the crown, he had acquired an immense estate: The King had successively
been married to two of his nieces; and the King's son, the duke of Richmond,
had married his daughter: Besides his descent from the ancient family of the
Moubrays, by which he was allied to the throne, he had espoused a daughter of
the duke of Buckingham, who was descended by a female from Edward the third:
And as he was believed still to adhere secretly to the ancient religion, he was
regarded, abroad and at home, as the head of the catholic party. But all these
circumstances, in proportion as they exalted the duke, provoked the jealousy of
Henry; and he soresaw danger, during his son's minority, both to the public
tranquillity, and to the new ecclesiastical system, from the attempts of so
potent a subject. But nothing tended more to expose Norfolk to the King's
vengeance, than the prejudices, which Henry had entertained against the earl of
Surrey, son to that nobleman.

SURREY was a young man of the most promising hopes, and had distinguished
himself by every accomplishment, which became a scholar, a courtier, and a
soldier. He excelled in all the military exercises, which were then in request:
He encouraged the fine arts by his patronage and example: He had made some
successful attempts in poetry; and being smit with the romantic gallantry of
that age, he celebrated his mistress's praise by his pen and his lance, in
every masque and tournament. His spirit and ambition were equal to his talents
and his quality; and he did not always regulate his conduct by that caution and
reserve, which his situation required. He had been left governor of Boulogne,
when that town was taken by Henry; but though his personal bravery was
unquestioned, he had been unfortunate in some rencounters with the French. The
King, somewhat displeased with his conduct, had sent over Hertford to command
in his place; and Surrey was so imprudent as to drop some menacing expressions
against the ministers, on account of this affront, which was put upon him. And
as he had refused to marry Hertford's daughter, and even waved every proposal
of marriage, which were made him; Henry imagined, that he had entertained views
of espousing the lady Mary; and he was instantly determined to repress, by the
most severe expedients, so dangerous an ambition.

ACTUATED by all these motives, and perhaps too influenced by that old disgust,
with which the ill conduct of Catherine Howard had inspired him against all her
family, he gave private orders to arrest Norfolk and Surrey; and they were on
the same day confined to the Tower. 12th of December.
Surrey being a commoner, his trial was the more expeditious; and as to proofs,
neither parliaments nor juries seem ever to have given the least attention to
them in any cause of the crown, during this whole reign. Execution of the earl
of Surr^y.
He was accused, that he had entertained in his family some Italians who were
suspected to be spies; a servant of his had paid a visit to cardinal Pole in
Italy, whence he was suspected of entertaining a correspondence with that
obnoxious prelate; he had quartered the arms of Edward the Confessor on his
scutcheon, which made him be suspected of aspiring to the crown, though both he
and his ancestors had openly, during the course of many years, maintained that
practice; and the heralds had even justified it by their authority. These were
the crimes, for which a jury, notwithstanding his eloquent and spirited
defense, condemned this nobleman for high treason; and their sentence was soon
after executed upon him.

Attainder of the duke of Norfolk.
THE innocence of the duke of Norfolk was still, if possible, more apparent
than that of his son; as his services to the crown had been much greater. His
duchess, with whom he lived on bad terms, had been so base as to carry
intelligence to his enemies of all she knew against him: Elizabeth Holland, a
mistress of his, had been equally subservient to the designs of the court: Yet
with all these advantages his accusers discovered no greater crime, than that
he had once said, that the King was sickly, and could not hold out long, and
the kingdom was likely to fall into disorders, through the diversity of religious
opinions. He wrote a m st pathetic letter to the King, pleading his past
services, and protesting his innocence: Soon after he embraced a more proper
expedient for appeasing Henry, by making a submission and confession, such as
his enemies required: But nothing could mollify the unrelenting temper of the
King. 14th January.
He assembled the Parliament, as the surest and most expeditious instrument of
his tyranny; and the house of peers, without examining the prisoner, without
trial or evidence, passed a bill of attainder against him, and sent it down to
the commons. Cranmer, though engaged for many years in an opposite party to
Norfolk, and though he had received many and great injuries from him, would have
no hand in so unjust a prosecution, and retired to his seat at Croydon Burnet,
vol. i. p. 348. For.
. The King was now approaching fast toward his end; and* fearing lest Norfolk
should escape him, he sent a message to the commons, by which he desired them
to hasten the bill, under pretense, that Norfolk enjoyed the dignity of earl
marshal, and it was necessary to appoint another, who might officiate at the
ensuing ceremony of installing his son, prince of Wales. The obsequious commons
obeyed his directions, though founded on so frivolous a pretense; and the King,
having affixed the royal assent to the bill by commissioners, issued orders for
the execution of Norfolk on the morning of the twenty ninth of January. But
news being carried to the Tower, that the King himself had expired that night,
the lieutenant deferred the execution of the warrant, and it was not thought
advisable by the council, to begin a new reign by the death of the greatest
nobleman in the kingdom, who had been condemned by a sentence so unjust and
tyrannical.

THE King's health had been long in a very declining condition; but for several
days all those near him plainly saw his death approaching. He was become so
froward, that no one durst inform him of his condition; and as some persons,
during this reign, had been punished as traitors for foretelling the King's
death Lanquet's Epitome of chronicles in the year 1541.
, every one was afraid, left, in the transports of his fury, he might, on this
pretense, inflict punishment on the author of such friendly intelligence. At
last, Sir Anthony Denny ventured to disclose to him the fatal secret, and
exhorted him to prepare for the fate which was awaiting him. He expressed his
resignation; and desired that Cranmer might be sent for: But before that
prelate arrived, he was speechless, though he still seemed to retain his senses.
Cranmer desired him to give some sign of his dying in the faith of Christ:
Death of the King.
He squeezed his hand, and immediately expired, after a reign of* thirty-seven
years and nine months; and in the fifty-sixth year of his age.

THE King had made his will near a month before his decease; where he confirmed
the destination of Parliament, in leaving the crown first to prince Edward,
then to the lady Mary, next to the lady Elizabeth: The two princesses he
obliged, under the penalty of forfeiting their title to the crown, not to marry
without the consent of the council, which he appointed for the government of
his minor son. After his own children, he settled the succession on Frances
Brandon, marchioness of Dorset, eldest daughter to his sister, the French
Queen; then on Eleonor, countess of Cumberland, the second daughter. In passing
over the posterity of the Queen of Scots, his eldest sister, he made use of the
power obtained from Parliament; but as he subjoined, that after the failure of
the French Queen's posterity, the crown should descend to the next lawful heir,
it afterward became a question, whether these words could be applied to the
Scottish line. It was thought, that these princes were not the next heirs after
the house of Suffolk, but before that house, and that Henry, by expressing
himself in this manner, meant entirely to exclude them. The late injuries which
he had received from the Scotch, had irritated him extremely against that
nation; and he maintained to the last the character of violence and caprice, by
which his life had been so much distinguished. Another circumstance of his will
may suggest the same reflection with regard to the strange contrarieties of his
temper and conduct: He left money for masses to be said for delivering his soul
from purgatory; and though he destroyed all those institutions, established by
his ancestors, and others, for the benefit of their souls, and had even left
the doctrine of purgatory doubtful in all the articles of faith which he
published during his latter years, he was yet determined, when matters came to
the last, to take care, at least, of his own future repose, and to adhere to
the safer side of the question See his will in Fuller, Heylin, and Rymer, p.
110. There is no reasonable ground to suspect its authenticity.
.

His character.
IT is difficult to give a just summary of this prince's qualities: He was so
different from himself in different parts of his reign, that, as is well
remarked by lord Herbert, his history is his best character and description.
The absolute, uncontrouled authority which he maintained at home, and the
regard which he acquired among foreign nations, are circumstances which entitle
him to the appellation of a great prince; while his tyranny, and cruelty, seem
to exclude him from the character of a good one. He possessed, indeed, great
vigor of mind, which qualified him for exercising dominion over men; courage,
intrepidity, vigilance, inflexibility: And though these qualities lay not always
under the guidance of a regular and folid judgment, they were accompanied with
good parts, and an extensive capacity; and every one dreaded a contest with a
man who was known never to yield, or to forgive, and who, in every controversy,
was determined, either to ruin himself or his antagonist. A catalogue of his
vices would comprehend many of the worst qualities incident to human nature:
Violence, cruelty, profusion, rapacity, injustice, obstinacy, arrogance,
bigotry, presumption, caprice: But neither was he subject to all these vices in
the most extreme degree, nor was he, at intervals, altogether devoid of
virtues: He was sincere, open, gallant, liberal, and capable at least of a
temporary friendship and attachment. In this respect he was unfortunate, that
the incidents of his times served to display his faults in their full light:
The treatment which he met with from the court of Rome, provoked him to
violence; the danger of a revolt from his superstitious subjects, seemed to
require the most extreme severity. But it must, at the same time, be
acknowledged, that his situation tended to throw an additional luster on what
was great and magnanimous in his character: The emulation between the emperor
and the French King, rendered his alliance, notwithstanding his impolitic
conduct, of great importance in Europe: The extensive powers of his
prerogative, and the submissive, not to say slavish, disposition of his
Parliament, made it the more easy for him to assume and maintain that entire
dominion by which his reign is so much distinguished in the English history.

IT may seem a little extraordinary, that notwithstanding his cruelty, his
extortion, his violence, his arbitrary administration, this prince not only
acquired the regard of his subjects; but never was the object of their hatred:
He seems even in some degree to have possessed, to the last, their love and
affection Strype, vol I. p. 389.
. His exterior qualities were advantageous, and fit to captivate the multitude:
His magnificence and personal bravery rendered him illustrious in vulgar eyes:
And it may be said, with truth, that the English in that age, were so
thoroughly subdued, that, like eastern slaves, they were inclined to admire
even those acts of violence and tyranny, which were exercised over themselves,
and at their own expense.

WITH regard to foreign states, Henry appears long to have supported an
intercourse of friendship with Francis, more sincere and disinterested than
usually takes place between neighboring princes. Their common jealousy of the
emperor Charles, and some resemblance in their characters, (though the comparison
is extremely to the advantage of the French monarch) served as the cement of
their mutual amity. Francis is said to have been affected with the King's
death, and to have expressed much regret for the loss. His own health began to
decline: He foretold, that he would not long survive his friend Le Thou.
: And he died in about two months after him.

THERE were ten Parliaments summoned by Henry the eighth, and twentythree
sessions held. The whole time in which these Parliaments sat during this long
reign, exceeded not three years and a half. It amounted not to a year during
the first twenty years. The innovations in religion obliged him afterward to
call these assemblies more frequently: But though these were the most important
transactions that ever fell under the cognizance of Parliament, their devoted
attachment to Henry's will, joined to their earnest desire of returning soon to
their country seats, produced a very quick dispatch of the bills, and made the
sessions of short duration. All the King's caprices were* indeed, blindly
complied with, and no regard was paid to the safety or liberty of the subject.
Besides the violent prosecution of whatever he was pleased to call heresy, the
laws of treason were multiplied beyond all former precedent. Even words to the
disparagement of the King, Queen, or royal issue, were subjected to that
penalty; and so little care was taken in framing these rigorous statutes, that
they contain obvious contradictions; insomuch, that, had they been strictly
executed, every man, without exception, must have fallen under the penalty of
treason. By one statute 28 Hen. VIII. c. 7.
, for instance, it was declared treason to assert the validity of the King's
marriage, either with Catherine of Arragon, or Anne Bo'eyn: By another 34, 35
Hen. VIII. c 1.
, it was treason to say any thing to the disparagement or slander of the
princesses, Mary and Elizabeth; and to call them spurious would, no doubt, be
construed to their slander. Nor would even a profound silence with regard to
these delicate points, be able to save a person from such penalties. For by the
former statute, whoever refused to answer upon oath to any point contained in
that act, was subjected to the pains of treason. The King, therefore, needed
only to propose to any one a question with regard to the legality of either of
his first marriages: If the person was silent, he was a traitor by law: If he
answered, either in the negative or in the affirmative, he was no less a
traitor. So monstrous were the inconsistencies, which arose from the furious
passions of the King, and the slavish obedience of his Parliaments. It is hard
to say, whether these contradictions were owing to Henry's precipitancy, or to
a formed design of tyranny.

His laws.
IT may not be improper to recapitulate whatever is memorable in the statutes
of this reign, whether with regard to police or commerce: Nothing can better
show the genius of the age than such a review of the laws. The abolition of the
ancient religion contributed much to the regular execution of justice. While
the catholic superstition subsisted, there was no possibility of punishing any
crimes in the clergy: The church would not allow the magistrate to try the
offenses of her members, and she could not herself inflict any civil penalties
upon them. But Henry restrained these pernicious exemptions: The privilege of
clergy was abolished for the crimes of petty treason, murder, and felony, to
all under the degree of a subdeacon 23 Hen. VIII. c. 1.
. But the former superstition not only protected crimes in the clergy: It
exempted also the laity from punishment, by affording them shelter in the
churches and sanctuaries. The Parliament restrained these abuses. It was first
declared, that no fanctuaries were allowed in cases of high treason 26 Hen.
VIII. c. 13.
; next, in those of murder, felony, rapes, burglary, and petty-treason 32 Hen.
VIII. c. 12.
: And it limited them in other particulars 22 Hen. VIII. c. 14.
. The only expedient employed to support the military spirit during this age,
was the reviving and extending some old laws, enacted for the encouragement of
archery, on which the defense of the kingdom was supposed very much to depend.
Every man was ordered to have a bow 3 Hen. VIII. c. 3.
: Buts were ordered to be erected in every parish Ibid.
: And every bowyer was ordered, for each bow of yew which he made, to make two
of elm or which, for the service of the common people Ibid.
. The use of cross-bows and hand-guns was also prohibited 3 Hen. VIII. c. 13.
. What rendered the English bowmen more formidable was, that they carried
halberts with them, by which they were enabled, upon occasion, to engage in
close fight with the enemy Herbert.
. Frequent musters or arrays were also made of the people, even during time of
peace; and all men of substance were obliged to have a complete suit of armor
or harness, as it was called Hall, fol. 234. Stowe, p. 515. Hollingshed, p. 947.
. The martial spirit of the English, during that age, rendered this precaution,
it was thought, sufficient for the defense of the nation; and as the King had
then an absolute power of commanding the service of all his subjects, he could
presently, in case of danger, appoint new officers, and levy regiments, and
collect an army as numerous as he pleased. Where no faction or division
prevailed among the people, there was no foreign power that ever dared to think
of invading England. There is a saying of Francis the first, which shows the
estimation in which the nation was held in Europe. That magnanimous prince
boasted, that, notwithstanding the combination of Charles and Henry against
him, in the year 1524, he would be able to defend himself. Spain, says he, has
no money; the Low Countries have no soldiers: And as to England, my frontier is
strong on that side P. Daniel.
. The city of London alone could ^uster fifteen thousand men Hall, fol. 235.
Hollingshed, p. 547. Stowe, p. 547.
. Discipline, however, was an advantage wanting to these troops; though the
garrison of Calais was a nursery of officers; and Tournay first Hall, fol. 68.
, Boulougne afterward, served to increase the number, Every one, who served
abroad, was allowed to alienate his lands without paying any fees 14 and 15
Hen. VIII. c. 15.
. A general permission was granted to dispose of land by will 34 and 35 Hen.
VIII. c. 5.
. The Parliament were so little jealous of their privileges, (which indeed were
scarce worth preserving) that there is an instance of one Strode, who, because
he introduced into the lower house some bill regarding tin, was very severely
treated by the Stannery courts of Cornwall: Heavy fines were imposed on him; and
upon his refusal to pay, he was thrown into a dungeon, loaded with irons, and
used in such a manner as brought his life in danger: Yet all the notice which
the Parliament took of this enormity, even in such an inferior court, was to
enact, that no man could be questioned afterward for his conduct in Parliament
4 Hen. VIII. c. 8.
. This prohibition, however, must only be extended to the inferior courts: For
as to the King and privy council, and star chamber, they were scarce bound by
any law. There is a bill of tonnage and poundage, which shows what uncertain
ideas the Parliament had formed both of their own privileges and of the rights
of the sovereign 6 Hen. VIII. c. 14.
. This duty had been voted to every King since Edward the fourth, during the
term of his own life: Yet Henry had already been allowed to levy it six years
without any law; and though there had been four Parliaments assembled, no
attention had been given either to grant it to him regularly, or restrain him
from levying it. At last, they resolved to give him that supply; but even in
this concession, they show themselves plainly at a loss to determine whether
they grant it, or whether he has a right of himself to levy it. They say, that
the imposition was made to endure during the natural life of the late King, and
no longer: They yet blame the merchants who had not paid to the present King
that duty: They observe, that the law for tonnage and poundage was expired; yet
make no scruple to call that imposition the King's due: They affirm, that he
had sustained great and manifold losses by those who had defrauded him of this
duty: And to provide a remedy, they vote him that supply during his life, and
no longer. It is remarkable, that notwithstanding this last clause, all his
successors, for more than a century, continued in the like irregular practice:
If a practice may deserve that epithet, which all the world acquiesced in, and
which gave no offense. But when Charles the first attempted to continue in the
same course, which had now received the sanction of many generations, so much
were the opinions of men altered, that a furious tempest was excited by it, and
historians, partial or ignorant, still represent that measure as a most violent
and unprecedented enormity in that unhappy prince.

THE foreign commerce of England, during this age, was mostly confined to the
Netherlands. The inhabitants of the Low Countries bought the English
commodities, and distributed them into the other parts of Europe. Hence the
mutual dependence of these countries on each other; and the great loss
sustained by both, in case of a rupture. During all the variations of politics,
the sovereigns always avoided the coming to this extremity; and though the King
bore a much greater friendship to Francis, the propensity of the nation always
lay toward the emperor.

IN 1528, hostilities commenced between England and the Low Countries; but were
soon stopped by mutual agreement. While the Flemish were not allowed to purchase
cloth in England, the English merchants could not buy it of the cloathiers, and
the cloathiers were obliged to dismiss their workmen, who began to be
tumultuous for want of bread. The cardinal, to appease them, sent for the
merchants, and ordered them to buy cloth as usual: They told him, that they
could not dispose of it as usual; and notwithstanding all his menaces, he could
get no other answer from them Hall, ^olio 174.
. An agreement was at last made to continue the commerce between the states,
even during war.

THE foreign artificers much surpassed the English in dexterity, industry, and
frugality; and hence the violent animosity, which the latter, on many
occasions, expressed against any of the former who were settled in England.
They had the assurance to complain, that all their customers went to foreign
tradesmen; and in the year 1517, being moved by the ^editious sermons of one
Dr. Bele, and the intrigues of Lincoln, a broker, they raised an insurrection.
The apprentices, and others of the poorer sort, in London, began by breaking up
the prisons, where some persons were confined for insulting foreigners. They
next proceeded to the house of Meutas, a Frenchman, much hated by them; where
they committed great disorders; killed some of his servants, and plundered his
goods. The mayor could not appease them; nor Sir Thomas Moore, late under
sheriff, though extremely respected in the city. They also threatened cardinal
Wolsey with some insult; and he thought it necessary to fortify his house, and
put himself on his guard. Tired at last with these disorders, they dispersed
themselves; and the earls of Shrewsbury and Surrey seized some of them. A
proclamation was issued, that women should not meet together to babble and
talk, and that all men should keep their wives in their houses. Next day the
duke of Norfolk came into the city, at the head of thirteen hundred armed men,
and made enquiry into the tumult. Be^e and Lincoln, and several others, were
sent to the Power, and condemned for treason. Lincoln, and thirteen more were
executed. The other persons, to the number of four hundred, were brought before
the King with ropes about their necks, fell on their knees, and cried for
mercy. Henry knew at that time to pardon; he dismissed them all without further
punishment Stowe, 505. Hollingshed, 840.
.

SO great was the number of foreign artizans in the city, that at least fifteen
thousand Flemish alone were at one time obliged to leave it, by an order from
the council, when Henry became jealous of their favor for Queen Catherine Le
Grand, vol. III. p. 232.
. Henry himself confesses, in an edict of the star chamber, printed among the
statutes, that the foreigners starved the natives; and obliged them from
idleness to have recourse to theft, murder, and other enormities 21 Hen. VIII.
. He also asserts, that the vast multitudes of the foreigners raised the price
of grain and bread Ibid.
. And to prevent the increase of the evil, all foreign artificers were
prohibited to have above two foreigners in their house, either journeymen or
apprentices. A like jealoufy arose against the foreign merchants; and to comply
with it, a law was enacted obliging all denizons to pay the duties imposed upon
aliens 22 Hen. VIII. c. 8.
. The Parliament had done better to have encouraged foreign merchants and
artizans to come over to England; which might have excited the emulation of the
natives, and improved their skill. The prisoners in the kingdom, for debts and
crimes, are asserted, in an act of parliament, to be sixty thousand persons and
above 3 Hen. VIII. c. 15.
.

THERE is a remarkable clause in a statute passed near the beginning of this
reign 3 Hen. VIII. c. 8.
, by which we might be induced to believe, that England was extremely decayed
from the flourishing condition which it had attained in former times. It had
been enacted in the reign of Edward the second, that no magistrate in town or
borough, who by his office ought to keep assize, should, during the continuance
of his magistracy, fell either in wholesale or retail, any wine or victuals.
This law seemed very equitable, in order to prevent fraud or byeends in fixing
the assize: Yet the law is repealed in this reign. The reason assigned is, that
"since the making of that statute and ordinance, many and the most part of all
the cities, boroughs, and towns corporate, within the realm of England, are
fallen in ruin and decay, and are not inhabited by merchants, and men of such
substance as at the time of making that statute: For at this day, the dwellers
and inhabitants of the same cities and boroughs are commonly bakers, vintners,
fishmongers, and other victualers, and there remain few others to bear the
offices." Men have such a propensity to exalt past times beyond the present,
that it seems dangerous to credit this reasoning of the Parliament, without
further evidence to support it. So different are the views in which the same
object appears, that some may be inclined to draw an opposite inference from
this fact. A more regular police was established in the reign of Henry the
eighth, and a stricter administration of justice; and advantage which induced
the men of property to leave the provincial towns, and to retire into the
country. Cardinal Wolsey, in a speech to the Parliament, represented it as a
proof of the increase of riches, that the customs had increased beyond what
they were formerly Hall, folio 110.
.

BUT if there was really a decay of commerce and industry, and population in
England, the statutes of this reign, except by abolishing monasteries, and
retrenching holidays, a circumstance of considerable moment, were not in other
respects well calculated to revive them. The fixing the wages of artificers was
attempted 6 Hen. VIII. c. 3.
: Luxury in apparel was prohibited, by repeated statutes 1 Hen. VIII. c. 14. 6
Hen. VIII. c. 1. 7 Hen. VIII. c. 7.
; and probably without success. The chancellor and other ministers were
empowered to fix the price of poultry, cheese, and butter 25 Hen. VIII. c. 2.
. A statute was even passed to fix the price of beef, pork, mutton, and veal 24
Hen. VIII. c. 3.
. Beef and pork were ordered to be sold at a halfpenny a pound: Mutton and veal
at a halfpenny half a farthing. The preamble of the statute says, that these
four species of butcher's meat were the food of the poorer sort. This act was
afterward repealed 33 Hen. VIII. c. 11.
.

THE practice of depopulating the country, by abandoning tillage, and throwing
the lands into pasturage, still continued Strype, vol. I. p. 392.
; as appears by the new laws which were enacted against that practice. The King
was entitled to half the rents of the land, where any farm houses were allowed
to go to decay 6 Hen. VIII. c. 5. 7 Hen. VIII. c. 1.
. The unskilful husbandry was probably the cause why the proprietors found no
profit in tillage. The number of sheep allowed to be kept in one flock, was
restrained to two thousand 25 Hen. VIII. c. 13.
. Sometimes, says the statute, one proprietor or farmer would keep a flock of
twenty-four thousand. It is remarkable, that the Parliament ascribes the
increasing price of sheep and mutton, to this increase of sheep: Because, say
they, the commodity being got into few hands, the price of it is raised at
pleasure 25 Hen. VIII. c. 13.
. It is probable, that the effect proceeded from the daily increase of money:
For it is impossible, that such a commodity could be monopolized. Interest was
fixed during this reign at ten per cent 37 Hen. VIII. c 9.
.

SOME laws were made with regard to beggars and vagabonds 22 Hen. VIII. c. 12.
22 Hen. VIII. c. 5.
; one of the circumstances in government, which humanity would most powerfully
recommend to a benevolent legislator; which seems, at first fight, the most
easily adjusted; and which is yet the most difficult to settle in such a
manner, as to attain the end without destroying industry. The convents formerly
were a support to the poor; but at the same time*tended to encourage idleness
and beggary.

HENRY, as he possessed himself some talents for letters, was an encourager of
them in others. He founded Trinity college in Cambridge, and gave it very ample
endowments. Wolsey founded Christ Church in Oxford, and intended to call it
Cardinal college: But upon his fall, which happened before he had entirely
finished his scheme, the King seized all the revenues; and this violence, above
all the other misfortunes of that great minister, is said to have given him the
greatest anxiety and concern Strype, vol. I. p. 117.
. But Henry afterward restored the revenues of the college, and only changed
the name. The cardinal founded in Oxford the first chair for teaching Greek;
and this novelty rent that university into the most violent factions, which
frequently came to blows. The whole students divided themselves into parties,
which bore the names of Greeks and Trojans, and sometimes fought with as great
animosity as was formerly exercised by those hostile nations. The rise of the
Greek language in Oxford, excited the emulation of Cambridge Wood's hist. and
ant. Oxon. lib. I. p. 245.
. Wolsey intended to have enriched the library of his college at Oxford, with
copies of all the manuscripts that were in the Vatican Ibid. 249.
. The countenance given to letters by this King and his ministers, contributed
to render learning fashionable in England; and Erasmus speaks with great
satisfaction of the general regard paid by the nobility and gentry of that
kingdom to men of knowledge Epist. ad Banisium Also epist. p. 368.
. It is needless to be particular in mentioning the writers of this reign, or
of the preceding. There is no man in that age, who had the least pretension to
be ranked among our classics. Sir Thomas More, though he wrote in Latin, seems to
come the nearest to that character.

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, UNDER THE HOUSE of TUDOR.
EDWARD VI.
CHAP. I.
State of the regency. -- Innovations in the regency. -- Somerset protector. --
Reformation completed. -- Gardiner's opposition. -- Foreign affairs. --
Progress of the reformation in Scotland. -- Assassination of cardinal Beaton.
-- Conduct of the war with Scotland. -- Battle of Pinkey. -- A Parliament. --
Farther progress of the reformation. -- Affairs of Scotland. -- Young Queen of
Scots sent into France. -- Cabals of lord Seymour. -- Dudly earl of Warwick. --
A Parliament. -- Attainder of lord Seymour. -- His execution. -- Ecclesiastical
affairs.

State of the regency.
THE late King, by the regulations, which he imposed on the government of his
infant son, as well as by the limitations of the succession, had projected to
reign even after his decease; and he imagined, that his ministers, who had
always been so obsequious to him during his lifetime, would never afterward
depart from the plan, which he had traced out to them. He fixed the majority of
the Prince at the completion of his eighteenth year; and as Edward was at
present only a few months past nine, he appointed sixteen executors; to whom,
during the minority, he entrusted the government of the King and kingdom. Their
names were, Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury; lord Wriothesley, chancellor;
lord St. John, great master; lord Russel, privy seal; the earl of Hertford,
chamberlain; viscount Lisle, admiral; Tonstal, bishop of Durham; Sir Anthony
Brown, master of horse; Sir William Paget, secretary of state; Sir Edward
North, chancellor of the court of augmentations; Sir Edward Montague, chief
justice of the common pleas; judge Bromley, Sir Anthony Denny, and Sir William
Herbert, chief gentlemen of the privy chamber; Sir Edward Wotton, treasurer of
Calais; Dr. Wotton, dean of Canterbury. To these sixteen executors, with whom
was entrusted the whole regal authority, were added twelve counselors, who
possessed no immediate power, and could only assist with their advice, when any
affair was laid before them. The council was composed of the earls of Arundel
and Essex; Sir Thomas Cheyney, treasurer of the household; Sir John Gage,
comptroller; Sir Anthony Wingfield, vice chamberlain; Sir William Petre,
secretary of state; Sir Richard Rich, Sir John Baker, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir
Thomas Seymour, Sir Richard Southwel, and Sir Edmund Peckham Strype's Memor.
vol. ii. p. 457.
. The usual caprice of Henry appears somewhat in this nomination; while he
appointed several persons of inferior station among his executors, and gave
only the place of counselor to a person of such high rank as the earl of
Arundel, and to Sir Thomas Seymour, the King's uncle.

Innovations in the regency.
BUT the first act of the executors and counselors was to depart from the
destination of the late King in a material article. No sooner were they met,
than it was suggested, that the government would lose its dignity, for want of
some head, who might represent the royal majesty, who might receive addresses
from foreign ambassadors, to whom dispatches from English ministers abroad
might be carried, and whose name might be employed in all orders and
proclamations: And as the King's will seemed to contain a defect in this
particular, it was concluded necessary to supply it, by choosing a protector;
who, though he should possess all the exterior symbols of royal dignity, should
yet be bound, in every exercise of power, to follow the opinion of the
executors Burnet, vol. ii. p. 5.
. This proposal was very disagreeable to chancellor Wriothesely. That
magistrate, a man of an active spirit and high ambition, found himself, by his
office, entitled to the first rank in the regency after the primate; and as he
knew, that that prelate had no talent nor inclination for state affairs, he
hoped, that the direction of public business would of course devolve in a great
measure upon himself. He opposed, therefore, this proposal of choosing a
protector; and represented that innovation as an infringement of the King's
will, which, being corroborated by act of parliament, ought in every thing to
be a law to them, and could not be altered but by the same authority, which had
established it. The executors and counselors were mostly courtiers, who had
been raised by Henry's favor, not men of high birth or great dependances; and
as they had been sufficiently accustomed to submission during the reign of the
late monarch, and had no pretensions to govern the nation by their own
authority, they acquiesced the more willingly in a proposal, which seemed
calculated for preserving public peace and tranquillity. Somerset protector.
It being therefore agreed to name a protector, the choice fell of course on
the earl of Hartford, who, as he was the King's maternal uncle, was strongly
interested in his safety; and having no pretensions to inherit the crown, could
never have any separate interest, which might engage him to endanger Edward's
person or his authority Heylin, Hist. Ref. Edw. VI.
. The public were informed by proclamation of this change in the
administration; and dispatches were sent to all foreign courts to give them
intimation of it. All those possessed of any office resigned their former
commissions, and took out new ones in the name of the young King. The bishops
themselves were constrained to make a like submission. Care was taken to insert
in their new commissions, that they held their office during pleasure Collier,
vol. ii. p. 218. Burnet, vol. ii. p. 6. Strype's Mem. of Cranm. p. 141.
: And it is there expressly affirmed, that all manner of authority and
jurisdiction, as well ecclesiast call as civil, is originally derived from the
crown Strype's Memor. of Cranm. p. 141.
.

THE executors showed, in their next measure, a more submissive deference to
Henry's will; because many of them found their own account in it. The late King
had intended, before his death, to make a new creation of nobility, in order to
supply the place of those who had fallen by former attainders, or the failure
of issue; and that he might enable the persons to support their new dignity, he
had resolved either to bestow estates on them, or advance them to higher
offices. He had even gone so far as to inform them of this resolution; and in
his will, he charged his executors to make good all his promises Fuller,
Heylin, and Rymer.
. That they might ascertain his intentions in the most authentic manner, Sir
William Paget, Sir Anthony Denny, and Sir William Herbert, with whom Henry had
always conversed in a familiar manner, were called before the board of regency;
and having given evidence of what they knew concerning the King's promises,
their testimony was relied on, and the executors proceeded to the fulfilling
these engagements. Hartford was created duke of Somerset, marschal and lord
treasurer; 17th of February.
Wriothesely, earl of Southampton; the earl of Essex, marquess of Northampton;
viscount Lisle, earl of Warwick; Sir Thomas Seymour, lord Seymour of Sudley,
and admiral: Sir Richard Rich, Sir William Willoughby, Sir Edward Sheffield,
accepted the title of baron Stow's Annals, p. 594.
: Several, to whom the same dignity was offered, refused it; because the other
part of the King's promise, the bestowing estates on these new noblemen, was
deferred till a more convenient opportunity. Some of them, however,
particularly Somerset the protector, were, in the mean time, endowed with
spiritual preferments, deanories and prebendaries. For among many other
invasions of ecclesiastical privileges and properties, this irregular practice,
of bestowing spiritual benefices on laymen, began now to prevail.

THE earl of Southampton had always been engaged in an opposite party to
Somerset; and it was not likely that factions, which had secretly prevailed,
even during the arbitrary reign of Henry, should be suppressed in the weak
administration, which usually attends a minority. The former nobleman, that he
might have the greater leisure for attending to state affairs, had, of himself
and from his own authority, put the great seal in commission, and had empowered
four lawyers, Southwel, Tregonel, Oliver, and Bellasis, to execute in his
absence the office of chancellor. This measure seems very exceptionable; and
the more so, that two of the commissioners being canonists, the lawyers
suspected, that, by this nomination, the chancellor had intended to discredit
the common law. Complaints were made to the council; who, influenced by the
protector, gladly laid hold of this opportunity to depress Southampton. They
consulted the judges with regard to so unusual a case, and received for answer,
that the commission was illegal, and that the chancellor, by his presumption in
granting it, had justly forfeited the seals, and was even liable to punishment.
The council summoned him to appear before them; and though he maintained, that he
held his office by the late King's will, founded on an act of parliament, and
could not lose it without a trial before the Parliament; that if the
commission, which he had granted, was found illegal, it might be declared null
and void, and all the ill consequences of it be easily remedied; and that the
depriving him of the seals for an error of this nature, was a precedent by
which any other innovation might be authorized; the council, notwithstanding
all these topics of defense, declared that he had forfeited his office; that a
fine should be imposed upon him; and that he should be confined to his own
house during pleasure Hollingshed, p. 979.
.

THOUGH the removal of Southampton increased the protector's authority, and
tended to suppress factions in the regency; yet was not Somerset contented with
this advantage: His ambition carried him to seek still farther acquisitions.
Under pretense, that the vote of the executors, choosing him protector, was not
a sufficient foundation for his authority, he procured a patent from the young
King, by which he entirely overturned the will of Harry the eighth, produced a
total revolution in the government, and may seem even to have subverted all the
laws of the kingdom. 12 March.
He named himself protector with full regal power, and appointed a council,
consisting of all the former counselors, and all the executors except
Southampton: He reserved a power of naming any other counselors at pleasure:
And he was bound to consult with such only as he thought proper. The protector
and his council were likewise empowered to act at discretion, and to execute
whatever they thought serviceable to the government, without incurring any
penalty or forfeiture from any law, statute, proclamation, or ordinance
whatsoever Burnet, vol. ii. Records, No. 6.
. Even had this patent been less exorbitant in its concessions, and had it been
drawn by directions from the executors appointed by Henry, its legality might
justly be questioned; since it seems essential to a trust of this nature to be
exercised by the persons entrusted, nor can it be delegated to others: But as
the patent, by its very tenor, where the executors are not so much as
mentioned, appears to have been surreptitiously obtained from a minor King, the
protectorship of Somerset was a plain usurpation, which it is impossible by any
arguments to justify. The connivance, however, of the executors, and their
present acquiescence in the new establishment, made it be universally submitted
to; and as the young King discovered an extreme attachment to his uncle, who
was also in the main a man of moderation and probity, no objections were made
to his power and title. All men of sense, likewise, as they saw the nation
divided by the religious zeal of the opposite sects, thought it the more
necessary to entrust the government to one person, who might check the
exorbitancies of party, and ensure the public tranquillity. And though some
clauses of the patent seemed to imply a formal subversion of all liberty or
limited government, so little jealousy was then usually entertained on that
head, that no exception was ever taken at bare claims or pretensions of this
nature, advanced by any person, possessed of sovereign power. The actual
exercise alone of arbitrary administration, and that in many and great and
flagrant and unpopular instances, was able sometimes to give some umbrage to
the nation.

Reformation completed.
THE extensive authority and imperious character of Henry, had retained the
partisans of both religions in subjection; but upon his decease, the hopes of
the protestants and the fears of the catholics began to revive, and the zeal of
these parties produced every where disputes and animosities, the usual preludes
of more fatal divisions. The protector had long been regarded as the secret
partizan of the reformers; and being now freed from restraint, he scrupled not
to express his intention of correcting all the abuses of the ancient religion,
and of adopting still more of the protestant innovations. He took care, that
all the persons, to whom he entrusted the King's education, should be attached
to the same principles* and as the young Prince discovered a zeal for every
kind of literature, especially the theological, far beyond his tender years,
all men foresaw, in the course of his reign, the total abolition of the
catholic faith; and they early began to declare themselves in favor of those
tenets, which were likely to become in the end entirely prevalent. After
Southampton's fall, few members of the council seemed to retain any attachment
to the Romish communion; and most of the counselors appeared even sanguine in
forwarding the progress of the reformation. The riches which most of them had
acquired from the spoils of the clergy, induced them to widen the breach
between England and Rome; and by establishing a contrariety of speculative
tenets, as well as of discipline and worship, to render a coalition with the
mother church altogether impracticable Goodwin's Annals, Heylin.
. Their rapacity also, the chief source of their reforming spirit, was excited
by the prospect of pillaging the secular, as they had already done the regular
clergy; and they knew, that, while any share of the old principles remained, or
any regard to the ecclesiastics, they never could hope to succeed in their
pretensions.

THE numerous and burdensome superstitions, with which the Romish church was
loaded, had thrown many of the reformers, by the spirit of opposition, into an
enthusiastic strain of devotion; and all rites, ceremonies, pomp, order, and
exterior observances were zealously abolished by them, as hindrances of their
spiritual contemplation, and obstructions to their immediate converse with
heaven. Many circumstances concurred to inflame this daring spirit; the novelty
itself of their doctrines, the triumph of making proselytes, the furious
persecutions to which they were exposed, their animosity against the ancient
tenets and practices, and the necessity of procuring the concurrence of the
laity, by depressing the hierarchy, and by tendering to them the plunder of the
ecclesiastics. Wherever the reformation prevailed over the opposition of civil
authority, this genius of religion appeared in its full extent, and was
attended with consequences, which, though less durable, were, for some time, no
less dangerous than those which were connected with the ancient superstition.
But as the magistrate took the lead in England, the transition was more
gradual; much of the ancient religion was still preserved; and a reasonable
degree of subordination was retained in discipline, as well as some pomp,
order, and ceremony in public worship.

THE protector, in his schemes for advancing the reformation, had always
recourse to the councils of Cranmer, who, being a man of moderation and
prudence, was averse to all violent changes, and was determined to bring over
the people, by insensible innovations, to that system of doctrine and
discipline, which he esteemed the most pure and perfect. He probably also
foresaw, that a system, which carefully avoided the extremes of reformation,
was likely to be most lasting; and that a devotion, merely spiritual, was
fitted only for the first fervours of a new sect, and upon the relaxation of
these naturally gave place to the inroads of superstition. He seems therefore
to have intended the establishment of a hierarchy, which, being suited to a
great and settled government, might stand as a perpetual barrier against Rome,
and might retain the reverence of the people, even after their enthusiastic
zeal was diminished or entirely evaporated.

Gardiner's opposition.
THE person, who opposed, with greatest authority, any farther advances toward
reformation, was Gardener, bishop of Winchester; who, though he had not obtained
a place in the counsel of regency, on account of some late disgusts, which he
had given to Henry, was entitled, by his age, experience, and capacity, to the
highest trust and confidence of his party. This prelate continued still to
magnify the great wisdom and learning of the late King, which were generally
and sincerely admired by the nation; and he insisted on the prudence of
persevering, at least till the young King's majority, in the ecclesiastical
model, established by that great monarch. He defended the use of images, which
were now very openly attacked by the protestants; and he represented them as
serviceable in maintaining a sense of religion among the illiterate multitude
Fox, vol. ii. p. 712.
. He even deigned to write an apology for holy water, which bishop Ridley had
decried in a sermon; and he maintained, that, by the power of the Almighty, it
might be rendered an instrument of doing good; as much as the shadow of St.
Peter, the hem of our Savior's garment, or the spittle and clay laid upon the
eyes of the blind Fox, vol. ii. p. 724.
. Above all, he insisted, that the laws ought to be observed, that the
constitution ought to be preserved inviolate, and that it was dangerous to
follow the will of the sovereign, in opposition to an act of parliament
Collier, vol. ii. p. 228. Fox, vol. ii.
.

BUT though there remained at that time in England an idea of laws and a
constitution, sufficient at least to furnish a topic of argument to such as
were discontented with the present exercise of authority; this plea could
scarcely, in the present case, be maintained with any plausibility by Gardener.
An act of parliament had invested the crown with a legislative power; and royal
proclamations, even during a minority, were armed with the force and authority
of laws. The protector, finding himself supported by this statute, was
determined to employ his influence in favor of the reformers; and having
suspended, during the interval, the authority of the bishops, he appointed a
general visitation to be made in all the dioceses of England Mem. Cranm. p.
146, 147, etc.
. The visitors consisted of a mixture of clergy and laity, and had six circuits
assigned them. The chief purpose of their instructions was, besides correcting
immoralities and irregularities in the clergy, to abolish the ancient
superstitions, and to bring the discipline and worship somewhat nearer the
practice of the reformed churches. The moderation of Somerset and Cranmer is
apparent in the conduct of this delicate affair. The visitors were enjoined to
retain for the present all images which had not been abused to idolatry; and to
instruct the people not to despise such ceremonies as were not yet abrogated,
but only to beware of some particular superstitions, such as the sprinkling
their beds with holy water, the ringing of bells, or using of blessed candles,
in order to drive away the devil Burnet, vol. ii. p. 28.
.

BUT nothing required more the correcting hand of authority, than the abuse of
preaching, which was now generally employed, throughout England, in defending
the ancient practices and superstitions. The court of augmentations, in order
to ease the King of the annuities paid to monks, had commonly placed them in
the vacant churches; and these men were led by interest, as well as
inclination, to support those principles, which had been invented for the
profit of the clergy. Orders therefore were given to restrain the topics of
their sermons: Twelve homilies were published, which they were enjoined to read
to the people: And all of them were prohibited, without express permission, to
preach any where but in their parish churches. The design of this injunction
was to throw a restraint on the catholic divines; while the protestant, by the
grant of particular licenses, should be allowed unbounded liberty.

BONNER made some opposition to these measures; but soon after retracted and
acquiesced. Gardener was more high-spirited and more steady. He represented the
peril of perpetual innovations, and the necessity of adhering to some system.
"'It Is a dangerous thing," said he, "to use too much freedom, in researches of
this kind. If you cut the old canal, the water is apt to run further than you
have a mind to. If you indulge the humor of novelty, you cannot put a stop to
people's demands, nor govern their indiscretions at pleasure. For my part,"
said he, on another occasion, "my sole concern is to manage the third and last
act of my life with decency, and to make a handsome exit off the stage.
Provided this point is secured, I am not sollicitous about the rest. I am
already by nature condemned to death: No man can give me a pardon from this
sentence; nor so much as procure me a reprieve. To speak my mind, and to act as
my conscience directs, are two branches of liberty, which I can never part
with. Sincerity in speech, and integrity in action, are entertaining qualities:
They will stick by a man, when every thing else takes its leave; and I must not
resign them upon any consideration. The best on it is, if I do not throw them
away myself, no man can force them from me: But if I give them up, then am I
ruined by myself, and deserve to lose all my preferments Collier, vol. II. p.
228. ex MS. Col. C. C. Cantab. Bibliothica Brittanica, article Gardener.
. This opposition of Gardener drew on him the indignation of the council; and
he was sent to the Fleet, where he was used with some harshness and severity.

ONE of the chief objections, urged by Gardener against the new homilies, was
that they defined with the most metaphysical precision the doctrine of grace,
and of justification by faith; points, he thought, which it was superfluous for
any man to know exactly, and which certainly exceeded much the comprehension of
the vulgar. A famous martyrologist calls Gardener, on account of this opinion,
"an insensible ass, and one that had no feeling of God's spirit in the matter
of justification Fox, vol. II.
." The meanest protestant imagined at that time, that he had a full
comprehension of all those mysterious doctrines, and he heartily despised the
most learned and knowing person of the ancient religion. It is indeed certain,
that the reformers were very fortunate in their doctrine of justification, and
might venture to promise on its success, in opposition to all the ceremonies,
shows, and superstitions of popery. By exalting Christ and his sufferings, and
renouncing all claim to independent merit in ourselves, it was calculated to
become popular, and coincided with those principles of panegyric and of
self-abasement, which generally have place in religion.

TONSTAL, bishop of Durham, having, as well as Gardener, made some opposition
to the new regulations, was dismissed the council board; but no farther
severity was, for the present, exercised against him. He was a man of perfect
moderation, and of the most unexceptionable character in the kingdom.

Foreign affairs.
THE same religious zeal which engaged Somerset to promote the reformation at
home, led him to carry his attention to foreign countries; where the interests
of the protestants were now exposed to the most imminent danger. The Roman
pontiff, with much reluctance and after long delays, had at last summoned a
general council, which was assembled at Trent, and was employed in correcting
the abuses of the church, and in ascertaining her doctrines. The emperor, who
desired to repress the power of the court of Rome, as well as gain over the
protestants, promoted the former object of the council; the pope, who found his
own greatness so deeply interested, desired rather to employ them in the
latter. He gave instructions to his legates, who presided in the council, to
protract the debates, and to engage the theologians in altercations, and
arguments, and disputes concerning the nice points of faith, canvassed before
them: A policy, which was so easy to be executed, that the legates found it
rather necessary to interpose, in order to appease the animosity of the
divines, and bring them at last to some decision Father Paul, lib. 2.
. The more difficult task for the legates was to moderate or divert the zeal of
the council for reformation, and to repress the ambition of the prelates, who
desired to exalt the episcopal authority on the ruins of the sovereign pontiff.
Finding this humor become intractable, the legates, under pretense that the
plague had broke out at Trent, transferred of a sudden the council to Bologna,
where, they hoped, it would be more under the direction of his holiness.

THE emperor, no less than the pope, had learned to make religion subservient
to his ambition and policy. He was resolved to employ the imputation of heresy
as a pretense for subduing the protestant princes, and oppressing the liberties
of Germany; but found it requisite to cover his intentions under a deep
artifice, and to prevent the combination of his adversaries. He separated the
Palatine and the elector of Brandenburgh from the protestant confederacy: He
took arms against the elector of Saxony, and the landgrave of Hesse: By the
fortune of war he made the former prisoner: He employed treachery and
prevarication against the latter, and detained him captive, by breaking a
safe conduct which he had granted him. He seemed to have reached the summit of
his ambition; and the German princes, who were astonished with his success,
were farther discouraged by the intelligence, which they had received, of the
death first of Henry the eighth, then of Francis the first, their usual
resources in every calamity Sleidan.
.

HENRY the second, who succeeded to the crown of France, was a prince of vigor
and ability; but less prompt in his resolutions than Francis, and less enflamed
with rivalship and animosity against the emperor, Charles. Though he sent
ambassadors to the princes of the Smalcaldic League, and promised them his
protection, he was unwilling, in the commencement of his reign, to hurry into a
war against so great a power as that of the emperor, and he thought that the
alliance of these princes was a sure resource, which he could at any time lay
hold of Pere Daniel.
. He was much governed by the duke of Guise and the cardinal of Lorraine,
brothers to the Queen dowager of Scotland, and he hearkened to their counsel,
in choosing rather to give immediate assistance to that ancient ally, which,
even before the death of Henry the eighth, had loudly claimed the protection of
the French monarchy.

Progress of the Reformation in Scotland.
THE hatred between the two factions, the partisans of the ancient and those of
the new religion, became every day more violent in Scotland; and the
resolution, which the cardinal primate had taken to employ the most rigorous
punishments against the reformers, brought matters to a quick decision. There
was one Wishart, a gentleman by birth, who employed himself with great zeal in
preaching against the ancient superstitions, and began to give alarm to the
clergy, who were justly terrified with the danger of some fatal revolution in
religion. This man was much celebrated for the purity of his morals, and for
his extensive learning: But these praises cannot be much depended on; because,
we know, that, among the reformers, severity of manners stood in place of many
virtues; and the age was in general so ignorant, that most of the priests in
Scotland imagined the New Testament to be a composition of Luther's, and
asserted that the Old alone was the word of God Spotswood, p. 75. The same
author, p. 92, tells us a story, which confirms this character of the popish
clergy in Scotland. It became a great dispute in the university of St. Andrews,
whether the pater should be said to God or the saints. The friars, who knew in
general that the reformers neglected the saints, were determined to maintain
their honor with great obstinacy, but they knew not upon what topics to found
their doctrine. Some held that the pater was said to God formaliter, and to
saints materialiter; others, to God principaliter, and to saints minus
principaliter; others would have it ultimate and non ultimate: But the majority
seemed to hold, that the pater was said to God capiendo stricte, and to saints
capiendo large. A simple fellow, who served the sub-prior, thinking there was
some great matter in hand, that made the doctors hold so many conferences
together, asked him one day what the matter was; the sub-prior answering, Tom,
that was the fellow's name, we cannot agree to whom the paternoster should be
said. He suddenly replied, To whom, Sir, should it be said, but unto God? Then
said the sub-prior, what shall we do with the saints? He answered, Give them
Aves and Creeds enough in the devil's name; for that may suffice them. The answer
going abroad, many said, that he had given a wiser decision than all the
doctors had done with all their distinctions.
. But however the case may have been with regard to those estimable qualities
ascribed to Wishart, he was strongly possessed with a desire of innovation; and
he enjoyed those talents, which qualified him for becoming a popular preacher,
and for seizing the attention and affections of the multitude. The magistrates
of Dundee, where he exercised his mission, were alarmed with his progress; and
being unable or unwilling to treat him with rigor, they contented themselves
with denying him the liberty of preaching, and with dismissing him the bounds
of their jurisdiction. Wishart, moved with indignation, that they had dared to
reject the word of God, menaced them, in imitation of the ancient prophets,
with some imminent calamity; and he withdrew to the west country, where he
daily increased the number of his proselytes. Meanwhile, a plague broke out in
Dundee; and all men exclaimed, that the town had drawn down the vengeance of
Heaven by banishing the pious preacher, and that the pestilence would never
cease till they had made him atonement for their offense against him. No
sooner did Wishart hear of this change in their disposition, than he returned
to them, and made them a new tender of his doctrine: But lest he should spread
the contagion by bringing multitudes together, he erected his pulpit on the top
of a gate: The infected stood within; the others without. And the preacher
failed not* in such a situation, to take advantage of the immediate terrors of
the people, and to enforce his evangelical mission Knox's Hist. of Ref. p. 44.
Spotswood.
.

THE assiduity and success of Wishart became an object of attention to cardinal
Beaton; and he resolved, by the punishment of so celebrated a preacher, to
strike a terror into all other innovators. He engaged the earl of Bothwel to
arrest him in his retirement; and to deliver him into his hands, contrary to a
promise given by Bothwel to that unhappy man: And being possessed of his prey,
he conducted him to St. Andrew's where, after a trial, he condemned him to the
flames for heresy. Arran, the regent, was very irresolute in his temper; and
the cardinal, though he had gained him to his party, found, that he would not
concur in the condemnation and execution of Wishart. He was therefore
determined, without the assistance of the secular arm, to bring that heretic to
punishment; and he himself beheld from his windows the dismal spectacle*
Wishart suffered with the usual patience; but could not forbear remarking the
triumph of his insulting enemy. He foretold, that in a few days he would in the
very same place lie as low, as now he was exalted aloft, in opposition to true
piety and religion Spotswood, Buchanan.
.

THIS prophesy was probably the immediate cause of the event which it foretold*
Assassination of cardinal Beaton.
The disciples of this martyr, enraged at the cruel execution, formed a
conspiracy against the cardinal; and having associated to them Norman Lesly,
who was disgusted on account of some private quarrel, they conducted their
enterprise with great secrecy and success. Early in the morning they entered
the cardinal's palace, which he had strongly fortified; and though they were
not above sixteen persons, they thrust out an hundred tradesmen and fifty
servants, whom they seized separately, before any suspicion arose of their
intentions; and having shut the gates, they proceeded very deliberately to
execute their purpose on the cardinal. That prelate had been alarmed with the
noise which he heard in the castle; and had barricadoe'd the door of his
chamber: But finding that they had brought fire in order to force their way,
and having obtained, as is believed, a promise of life, he opened the door; and
reminding them, that he was a priest, be conjured them to spare him. Two of the
assassins rushed upon him with drawn swords; but a third, James Melvil, more
calm and more considerate in villainy, stopped their carreer, and reminded them,
that this sacrifice was the work and judgment of God, and ought to be executed
with the utmost reflection and gravity. Then turning the point of his sword
toward Beaton, he called to him, "Repent thee, thou wicked cardinal, of all
thy sins and iniquities, but especially of the murder of Wishart, that
instrument of God for the conversion of these lands: It is his death, which now
cries vengeance upon thee: We are sent by God to inflict the deserved
punishment. For here, before the Almighty, I protest, that it is neither hatred
of thy person, nor love of thy riches, nor fear of thy power, which moves me to
seek thy death: But only because thou have been, and still remainest, an
obstinate enemy to Christ Jesus, and his holy gospel." Having spoke these
words, without giving him leisure to finish that repentance, to which he
exhorted him, he thrust him through the body; and the cardinal fell dead at his
feet The famous Scotch reformer, John Knox, calls James Melvil, p. 65, a man
most gentle and most modest. It is very horrid, but at the same time somewhat
amazing, to consider the joy and alacrity and pleasure, which that historian
discovers in his narration of this assassination: And it is remarkable that in
the first edition of his work, these words were printed on the margin of the
page, The godly Fact and Words of James M^lvil. But the following editors
retrenched them. Knox himself had no hand in the murder of Beaton; but he
afterward joined the assassins, and assi^led them in holding out the castle.
See Keith's Hist. of the Ref. of Scotland, p. 13.
. This murder was executed on the 28th of May 1546. The assassins being
reinforced by their friends to the number of an hundred and forty persons,
prepared themselves for the defense of the castle, and sent a messenger to
London, craving assistance from Henry. That prince, though Scotland was
comprehended in his peace with France, would not reject this opportunity of
disturbing the government of that kingdom; and he agreed to take them under his
protection.

IT was the peculiar misfortune of Scotland, that five short reigns had been
successively followed by as many long minorities; and the execution of justice,
which the prince was beginning to introduce, had been continually interrupted
by the cabals, factions, and animosities of the great. But besides these
inveterate and ancient evils, a new source of disorder had arisen, the disputes
and contentions of theology, which were sufficient to disturb the most settled
government; and the death of the cardinal, who was possessed of ability and
vigor, seemed much to weaken the hands of the administration. But the Queen
dowager was a woman of uncommon talents and virtues; and she did as much to
support the government, and supply the weakness of Arran, the governor, as
could be expected in her situation. A stipulation was made with the garrison of
St. Andrews, that they should surrender the castle upon receiving a pardon,
together with an absolution from the pope; and that they should never
afterward be called in question for Beaton's assassination. Meanwhile, till
the pope's absolution should arrive, she applied to France for succors; and
Henry sent her some galleys, with a train of artillery, commanded by Strozzi,
prior of Capua. Before the siege of St. Andrews was opened, the absolution was
sent to the garrison, and they were required to surrender; but because the
pope, among other exaggerations of the cardinal's murder, had said, that he
pardoned an unpardonable crime, the garrison, fearing that this expression was
employed in order to ensnare them, refused to open their gates Knox, p. 75.
Spotswood, Buchanan.
. They were, however, soon obliged to depart from their obstinacy: A great
breach was made in the walls: The plague broke out among them: And seeing no
hopes of succor from England, they surrendered to the French upon conditions,
which were not very scrupulously observed to them.

Conduct of the war with Scotland.
THE protector of England, so soon as the government was brought to some
composure, made preparations for the attack of Scotland; and he was determined
to execute, if possible, that project, of uniting the two kingdoms by marriage,
on which the late King had been so intent, and which he had recommended with
his dying breath to his executors. He raised an army of 18000 men, and equipped
a fleet of sixty sail, one half of which were ships of war, the other loaded
with provisions and ammunition. He gave the command of the fleet to lord
Clinton: He himself marched at the head of the army, attended by the earl of
Warwic. These hostile measures were covered with a pretense of revenging some
depredations committed by the borderers; but besides, that the protector
revived the ancient claim of the superiority of the English crown over that of
Scotland, he refused to enter into negotiation on any other conditions than the
marriage of the young Queen with Edward.

THE protector published a manifesto, in which he enforced all the arguments
for that measure. He said, that nature seemed originally to have intended this
island for one empire; and having cut it off from all communication with
foreign states, and guarded it by the ocean, she had pointed out to the
inhabitants the road to happiness and security: That the education and customs
of the people concurred with nature; and by giving them the same language, and
laws, and manners, had invited them to a thorough union and coalition: That
fortune had at last removed all obstacles, and had prepared an expedient, by
which they might become one people, without leaving any place for that jealousy
either of honor or of interest, to which rival nations are naturally so much
exposed: That the crown of Scotland had devolved to a female; that of England
to a male; and happily the two sovereigns, as of a rank, so were they also of
an age, the most suitable to each other: That the hostile disposition, which
prevailed between the nations, and which arose from past injuries, would soon
be extinguished, after a long and secure peace had established confidence
between them: That the memory of former miseries, which at present enflamed
their mutual animosity, would then serve only to make them cherish, with more
passion, a state of happiness and tranquillity, so long unknown to their
ancestors: That when hostilities had ceased between the kingdoms, the Scotch
nobility, who were at present obliged to remain perpetually in a warlike
posture, would learn to cultivate the arts of peace, and would soften their
minds to a love of domestic order and obedience: That as this situation was
desirable to both kingdoms, so particularly to Scotland, which had been exposed
to the greatest miseries from intestine and foreign wars, and saw herself every
moment in danger of losing her independency, by the efforts of a richer and
more powerful people: That though England had claims of superiority, she was
willing to resign every pretension for the sake of future peace, and desired an
union, which would be the more secure, as it would be concluded on terms
entirely equal: And that besides all these motives, positive engagements had
been taken for the completing this alliance, and the honor and good faith of
the nation were pledged to fulfill what her interest and safety so loudly
demanded Sir John Hayward in Kenneth, p. 279. Heylin, p. 42.
.

SOMERSET soon found, that these remonstrances would have no influence; and
that the Queen dowager's attachments to France and to the catholic religion
would render ineffectual all negotiations for the intended marriage. He found
himself therefore obliged to try the force of arms, and to constrain the Scotch
by necessity to submit to a measure, for which they seemed to have entertained
the most incurable aversion. 2d September.
He passed the borders at Berwic, and advanced toward Edinburgh, without
meeting any resistance for some days, except from some small castles, which
were constrained to surrender at discretion. The protector intended to have
punished the governor and garrison of one of those castles for their temerity
in resisting such unequal force: But they eluded his anger by asking only a few
hours respite till they should prepare themselves for death; after which they
found his ears more open to their applications for mercy Hayward, Patten.
.

THE governor of Scotland had summoned together the whole force of the kingdom;
and his army, double the number of the English, had taken post on very
advantageous ground, guarded by the banks of the Eske, about four miles from
Edinburgh. The English came within sight of them at Faside; and after a
skirmish between the horse, where the Scotch were worsted, and lord Hume
dangerously wounded, Somerset prepared himself for a more decisive action. But
having taken a view of the Scotch camp with the earl of Warwic, he found it
difficult to make any attempt upon it with a probability of success. He wrote
therefore another letter to Arran; and offered to retire out of the kingdom, as
well as to repair all damages which he had committed, provided that the Scotch
would stipulate not to contract the Queen to any foreign prince, but to keep
her at home, till she reached the age of choosing a husband for herself. Such
moderate terms were rejected by the Scotch merely on account of their
moderation; and begot an opinion, that the protector must either be reduced to
great distress or be influenced by fear, that he was now contented to abate so
much of his former pretensions. Actuated also by their priests, who had come to
the camp in great numbers, they believed, that the English were detestable
heretics, abhorred of God, and exposed to divine vengeance; and that no success
could ever crown their arms. They were confirmed in this fond conceit, when
they saw the protector change his ground, and move toward the sea; nor did
they any longer doubt that he intended to embark his army, and make his escape
on board the ships, which at that very time moved into the bay, opposite to him
Hollingshed, p. 985.
. Determined therefore to cut off his retreat, they quitted their camp; 10th
September.
and passing the river Eske, advanced into the plain. They were divided into
three bodies: Angus commanded the vanguard; Arran the main body; Huntley the
rear: Their cavalry consisted only of light horse, which were placed on their
left flank, strengthened by some Irish archers, whom Argyle had brought over
for this service.

The battle of Pinkey.
SOMERSET was pleased when he saw this movement of the Scotch army; and as the
English had usually been superior in pitched battles, he conceived great hopes
of success. He arranged his van on his left, farthest from the sea; and ordered
them to remain on the high grounds on which he placed them, till the enemy
should approach: He placed his main battle and his rear toward the right; and
beyond the van he posted lord Gray at the head of the men at arms, and ordered
him to take the Scotch van in slank, but not till they should be engaged in
close fight with the van of the English.

WHILE the Scotch were advancing on the plain, they were galled with the
artillery from the English ships: The master of Graham was killed: The Irish
archers were thrown into disorder: and even the other troops began to stagger:
When the lord Gray, perceiving their situation, neglected his orders, left his
ground, and at the head of his heavy-armed horse made an attack on the Scotch
infantry, in hopes of gaining all the honor of the victory. On advancing, he
found a slough and ditch in his way; and behind were ranged the Scotch infantry
armed with spears, and the field, on which they stood, was fallow ground,
broken with ridges, which lay cross their front, and disordered the movements
of the English cavalry. From all these accidents, the shock of this body of
horse was feeble and irregular; and as they were received on the points of the
Scottish spears, which were longer than the lances of the English horsemen,
they were in a moment pierced, overthrown, and discomfited. Gray himself was
dangerously wounded: Lord Edward Seymour, son to the protector, lost his horse:
The standard was near being taken: And had the Scotch possessed any good body
of cavalry, who might have pursued the advantage, the whole English army had
been exposed to great danger Patten, Hollingshed, p. 986.
.

THE protector meanwhile, assisted by Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir Ralph Vane,
employed himself with diligence and success, in rallying the cavalry. Warwic
showed great presence of mind in maintaining the ranks of the foot, on which
the horse had recoiled: He made Sir Peter Meutas advance, captain of the foot
hackbutters, and Sir Peter Gamboa, captain of some Italian and Spanish
hackbutters, on horseback; and ordered them to ply the Scotch infantry with
their shot. They marched to the slough, and discharged their pieces full in the
face of the enemy: The ships galled them from the flank: The artillery, planted
on a height, infested them from the front: The English archers poured in a
shower of arrows upon them: And the vanguard, descending from the hill,
advanced, leisurely and orderly, toward them. Dismayed with all these
circumstances, the Scotch van began to retreat: The retreat soon changed into a
flight; which was begun by the Irish archers. The panic of the van communicated
itself to the main body, and passing thence to the rear, rendered the whole
field a scene of confusion, terror, flight and consternation. The English army
perceived from the heights the condition of the Scotch, and began the pursuit
with loud shouts and acclamations, which added still more to the dismay of the
vanquished. The horse in particular, eager to revenge the affront, which they
had received in the beginning of the day, committed the most bloody execution
on the flying enemy; and from the field of battle to Edinburgh, for the space
of five miles, the whole ground was strowed with dead bodies. The priests above
all, and the monks received no quarter; and the English made sport of
slaughtering men, who, from their extreme zeal and animosity, had engaged in an
enterprise so ill suited to their profession. Few victories have been more
decisive, or gained with smaller loss to the conquerors. There fell not two
hundred of the English; and according to the most moderate computation, there
perished above ten thousand of the Scotch. About fifteen hundred were taken
prisoners. This action was called the Battle of Pinkey, from a nobleman's seat
of that name in the neighborhood.

THE Queen dowager and Arran fled to Stirling, and were scarce able to collect
such a body of forces as could check the incursions of small parties of the
English. About the same time, the earl of Lenox and lord Wharton entered the
West Marches, at the head of five thousand men, and after taking and plundering
Annan, they spread devastation over all the neighboring counties Hollingshed,
p. 992.
. Had Somerset prosecuted his advantage, he might have imposed what terms he
pleased on the Scotch nation: But he was impatient to return to England, where
he heard, some counselors, and even his own brother, the admiral, were
carrying on cabals against his authority. Having taken the castles of Hume,
Dunglass, Eymouth, Fastcastle, Roxborough, and some other small places; and
having received the submission of some counties on the borders, he retired out
of Scotland. The fleet, besides destroying all the ships along the coast, took
Broughty in the Firth of Tay, and having fortified it, they left there a
garrison. Arran desired leave to send commissioners in order to treat of a
peace; and Somerset, having appointed Berwic for the place of meeting, left
Warwic with full powers to negociate: But no commissioners from Scotland ever
appeared. The overture of the Scotch was an artifice, to gain time, till
succors should arrive from France.

4 November.
THE protector, on his arrival in England, summoned a Parliament: And being
somewhat elated with his success against the Scotch, he procured a patent,
appointing him to sit on the throne, upon a stool or bench at the right hand of
the King, and to enjoy the same honors and privileges which had usually been
possessed by any princes of the blood, or uncles of the Kings of England. In
this patent, the King dispensed with the statute of precedence, enacted during
the former reign Rymer, vol. XV. p. 164.
. A Parliament.
But if Somerset gave offense by assuming too much state, he deserves the
highest praise on account of the laws passed this session, by which the rigor
of former statutes was much mitigated, and some security given to the freedom
of the constitution. All laws were repealed which extended the crime of treason
beyond the statute of the twenty eighth of Edward the third 1 Edw. VI. c. 12.
; all laws enacted during the late reign, extending the crime of felony; all
the former laws against Lollardies or heresy, together with the statute of the
six articles. None were to be accused of words but within a month after they
were spoken. By these repeals several of the most rigorous laws that ever were
passed in England, were annulled, and some dawnings, both of civil and
religious liberty, began to appear to the people. Heresy, however, was still a
capital crime by the common law, and was subjected to the penalty of burning.
There only remained no precise standard by which that crime could be defined or
determined: A circumstance which might either be advantageous or hurtful to
public security, according to the disposition of the judges.

A REPEAL also passed of that law, the destruction of all laws, by which the
King's proclamation was made of equal force with a statute 1 Edw. VI. c. ^.
. That other law was likewise mitigated, by which the King was empowered to
annul all laws passed before the four and twentieth year of his age: He could
prevent their future execution; but could not recall any past effects, which
had ensued from them Ibid.
.

SOME statutes too were passed which were of the utmost importance, because
they promoted the principles and practices of the reformers, though they may not,
all of them, appear to be attended with any material consequences to civil
society. The cup was restored to the laity; private masses were abolished; the
King was empowered to create bishops by letters patent, without any sham
election of the chapter; the bishops were ordered to issue their writs, and
hold their courts in the King's name Ibid.
; vagabonds were adjudged to be slaves for two years, and to be marked with a
red-hot iron 1 Edw. VI. (...).
; an act commonly supposed to be levelled against the strolling priests and
friars.

THE chantries and free chapels had been given by act of parliament to the
late King; and he had appointed commissioners to take possession of the
revenues; but as they had not proceeded far in the execution of their office,
it was found necessary to make a renewal of the grant. The preamble to the
statute promises, that these funds should be employed to good and godly uses,
in erecting grammar schools, in farther augmenting the universities, and in
making better provision for the poor and needy 1 Edw. VI. (...).
. But the rapacious courtiers had already devoured the prey in their
imaginations; and it was not long before it was shared out among them.

IT was also enacted, that all who denied the King's supremacy, or asserted the
pope's, should, for the first offense, forfeit their goods and chattels, and
suffer imprisonment during pleasure; for the second offense, should incur the
pain of praemunire; and for the third offense be attainted of treason. But if
any, after the first of March next, endeavored, by writing, printing, or any
overt act or deed, to deprive the King of his estate or titles, particularly of
his supremacy, or to confer them on any other, he was to be adjudged guilty of
treason. If any of the heirs of the crown should usurp upon another, or
endeavor to break the order of succession, it was declared treason in them,
their aiders and abetters. These were the most considerable acts passed during
this session. The members discovered a very passive disposition with regard to
religion: Some few appeared zealous for the reformation: Others harbored
secretly a strong inclination to the catholic faith: But the greatest part
appeared willing to take any impression which they should receive from
interest, authority, or the reigning fashion Heylin. p 48.
.

THE convocation met at the same time with the Parliament; and as it appeared,
that their debates were at first cramped by the rigor of the statute of the
six articles, the King granted them a dispensation from that law, before it was
repealed by Parliament Antiq. Britan. p. 339.
. The lower house of convocation applied to have liberty of sitting with the
commons in Parliament; or if this privilege was refused them, which they
claimed as their ancient right, they desired that no law regarding religion,
might pass in Parliament without their consent and approbation. But the
principles which now prevailed, were more advantageous to the civil than the
ecclesiastical power; and though there is reason to think, that the lower clergy
sent, during some time, representatives to the house of commons See Atterbury's
Rights, etc. of an English convocation, p. 73.
; yet that practice had been abolished for above two centuries; and the present
juncture was very little favorable for attempting to revive it.

Farther progress of the reformation.
Orders were issued by council, that candles should no longer be carried about
on Candlemas-day, ashes on Ash Wednesday, palms on Palm Sunday Burnet, vol.
II. p. 59. Collier, vol. II. p. 241. Heylin, p. 55.
. These were ancient religious practices, now denominated superstitions; though
it is very fortunate for mankind, when superstition happens to take a direction
so innocent and inoffensive. The severe disposition which naturally attends all
reformers, prompted likewise the council to abolish some gay and showy
ceremonies, which belonged to the ancient religion Burnet, vol. II.
.

AN order was also issued by the council for the removal of all images from the
churches: An innovation which was much desired by all the reformers, and which
alone, with regard to the populace, amounted almost to a total change of the
established religion Burnet, vol. II. p. 60. Collier, vol. II. p. 241. (...) p
^^.
. An attempt had been made to separate the use of images from their abuse, the
reverence from the worship of them; but the execution of this design was found,
upon trial, very difficult, if not wholly impracticable.

AS private masses were abolished by law, it became necessary to frame a new
communion-office; and the council went so far, in the preface which they had
prefixed to this work, as to leave the practice of auricular confession wholly
indifferent Burnet, vol I^.
. This was a prelude to the entire abolition of that invention, one of the most
powerful engines that ever was contrived for degrading the laity, and giving
their spiritual guides an entire ascendant over them. And it may justly be
said, that though the priest's absolution, which attends confession, serves
somewhat to ease weak minds from the immediate agonies of superstitious terror,
it operates only by strongly enforcing superstition itself, and thereby
preparing the mind for a more violent relapse into the same disorders.

THE people were at that time extremely distracted, by the opposite opinions of
their preachers; and as they were totally incapable to judge of the reasons
advanced on either side, and naturally regarded every thing which they heard at
church, as of equal authority, a great confusion and fluctuation resulted from
this uncertainty. The council first endeavored to remedy that inconvenience,
by laying some restraints on preaching; but finding this expedient ineffectual,
they imposed a total silence on the preachers, and thus put an end at once to
all the polemics of the pulpit Fuller, Heylin, Burnet.
. By the nature of things, this restraint could only be temporary. For in
proportion as the ceremonies of public worship, its shows and exterior
observances, were retrenched by the reformers, the people were inclined to
contract a stronger attachment to sermons, whence alone they received any
occupation or amusement. The ancient religion, by giving its votaries something
to do, freed them from the trouble of knowing: Sermons were only delivered in
the principal churches, and at some particular fasts and festivals: And the
practice of haranguing the populace, which, if abused, is so powerful an
incitement to faction and sedition, had much less scope and influence during
those ages.

Affair of Scotland.
THE greater progress was made toward a reformation in England, the further
did the protector find himself from all prospect of completing the union with
Scotland; and the Queen-dowager, as well as the clergy, became the more averse
to all alliance with a nation which had departed so far from all ancient
principles. Somerset, having taken the town of Haddington, had ordered it to be
strongly garrisoned and fortified, by lord Gray: He also erected some
sortifications at Lauder: And he hoped, that these two places, together with
Broughty and some smaller for^resses, which were in the hands of the English,
would serve as a curb to Scotland; and would give him access into the heart of
the country.

ARRAN, being disappointed in some attempts on Broughty, relied chiefly on the
suceours expected from France, for the recovery of these places; and they
arrived at last in the Firth, to the number of six thousand men; one half of
whom were Germans. They were commanded by Desse, and under him by Andelot,
Strozzi, Meilleraye, count Rhingrave. The Scotch were at that time so sunk by
their misfortunes, that five hundred English horse were able to ravage the
whole country without resistance; and make inroads to the gates of the capital
Beague, hist. of the Campagnes, 1548 and 1549, p. 6.
: But on the appearance of the French succors, they collected more courage;
and having joined Desse with a considerable reinforcement, they laid siege to
Haddington Hollingshed, p. 993.
. This was an undertaking for which they were themselves totally unfit; being
only practiced in a kind of desultory war, where they served without pay, and
with a few weeks provisions, which they brought along with them. Even with the
assistance of the French, they placed their chief hopes of success in starving
the garrison; and after some vain attempts to take the place by a regular
^iege, the blockade of Haddington was formed. The garrison were repulsed with
loss in several sallies which they made upon the besiegers.

THE hostile attempts which the late King and the protector had made against
Scotland, not being steedy, regular, nor pushed to the last extremity, had
served only to irritate the nation, and to inspire them with the strongest
aversion to that confederacy which was courted in so violent a manner. Even
those who were inclined to the English alliance, were displeased to have it
imposed on them by force of arms; and the earl of Huntley in particular, said
pleasantly, that he disliked not the match, but he hated the manner of wooing
Heylin, p. 46. Patten.
. The Queendowager, finding these sentiments to prevail, called a Parliament,
in an abbey near Haddington; and it was there proposed, that the young Queen,
for her greater security, should be sent to France, and be committed to the
protection of that ancient ally. Some objected, that this measure was
desperate, allowed no resource in case of miscarriage, exposed the Scotch to be
subjected by foreigners, involved them in perpetual war with England, and left
them no expedient by which they could conciliate the friendship of that
powerful nation. It was answered, on the other hand, that the Queen's presence
was the very cause of war with England; that that nation would desist when they
found that their views of forcing a marriage had become altogether
impracticable; and that Henry, being engaged by so high a mark of confidence,
would take their sovereign under his guardianship, and use his utmost efforts
to defend the kingdom. These arguments were aided by French gold, which was
plentifully distributed among the nobles. The governor had a pension conferred
on him of twelve thousand livres a year, received the title of duke of
Chatelrault, and obtained for his son the command of an hundred men at arms
Burnet, vol. II. p. 83. Buchan. lib. XV. Keith, p. 55. Thuanus, lib. V. c. 15.
. And as all the clergy dreaded the consequences of the English alliance, they
seconded this measure with all the zeal and industry which either principles or
interest could inspire. Young Queen of Scots sent into France.
It was accordingly determined to send the Queen to France; and what was
understood to be the necessary consequence, to marry her to the dauphin.
Villegaignon, commander of four French galleys lying in the Firth of Forth, set
sail as if he intended to return home; but when he reached the open sea, he
turned northwards, passed by the Orkneys, and came in on the west coast at
Dunbarton: A very extraordinary voyage for ships of that fabric Thuanus, lib.
V. c. 15.
. The young Queen was there committed to him; and being attended with the lords
Areskine and Livingstone, she put to sea, and after meeting with some
tempe^tuous weather, arrived safely at Breast, whence she was conducted to
Paris, and soon after she was betrothed to the dauphin.

SOMERSET, pressed by many difficulties at home, and despairing of success in
his enterprise against Scotland, was desirous of composing the differences with
that kingdom, and he offered the Scotch a ten years truce; but as they insisted
on his restoring all the places which he had taken, the proposal came to
nothing. The Scotch took the fortresses of Hume and Fast-castle, by surprise,
and put the garrison to the sword: They repulsed, with loss, the English, who,
under the command of lord Seymour, made a descent, first in Fife, and then at
Montrose: In the former action, James Stuart, natural brother to the Queen,
acquired great honor; in the second action, Areskine of Dun. An attempt was
made by Sir Robert Bows and Sir Thomas Palmer, at the head of a considerable
body, to throw relief into Haddington; but these troops falling into an
ambuscade, were almost wholly cut in pieces Stowe, p. 595. Hollingshed, p. 994.
. And though a small body of two hundred men escaped all the vigilance of the
French, and arrived safely in Haddington, with some ammunition and provisions,
the garrison was reduced to such difficulties, that the protector found it
necessary to provide more effectually for their relief. He raised an army of
eighteen thousand men, and adding three thousand Germans, who, on the
dissolution of the protestant alliance, had offered their service to England,
he gave the command of the whole to the earl of Shrewsbury Hayward, p. 201.
. D'Esse raised the siege on the approach of the English; and with great
difficulty made good his retreat to Edinburgh, where he posted himself
advantageously. Shrewsbury, who had lost the opportunity of attacking him on
his march, durst not give him battle in his present situation; and contenting
himself with the advantage already gained of supplying Haddington, he retired
into England.

DURING the abode of the French troops many complaints had arisen between them
and the Scotch; and a small accident Beaague, p. 68. Knox, p. 81.
having excited a tumult in Edinburgh, the provost and his son were
unfortunately killed by the French soldiers. This event increased the animosity
between the two nations: But D'Esse, in order to make atonement for that act of
violence, led his troops hastily to Haddington, and in the nightime attempted
to surprise the town. He found the garrison unprepared to resist him; and had
already entered the outer court: But a French deserter firing a cannon, which
pointed toward the gates, the shot fell among the thickest of the enemy, and
made such havoc as threw the whole into confusion, and enabled the English to
repulse them. It is pretended, that no less than a hundred persons fell by this
single shot.

THE French general was a man of ability and experience; but as he had not the
good fortune to be acceptable to the Scotch nation, it was thought proper to
recall him, and to send over De Thermes in his place. D'Esse, before his
departure, fortified Leith, which, from a small village, soon became a
considerable town, by the concourse of inhabitants, who found there a security,
which they could no where else enjoy in Scotland. He also attacked an English
garrison in Inch-keith, an island opposite to that harbor, and made them
prisoners. After these exploits, he resigned his command to De Thermes, who
brought over with him Monluc, bishop of Valence, a man celebrated for wisdom
and capacity. This prelate was named chancellor of the kingdom; and it was
probably intended, by his means, to inspire the nation with some greater
attachment to the principles of law and equity: But the Scotch, impatient of
restraint, and jealous of a foreigner, expressed such discontent, that it was
thought more prudent soon after to recall him Burnet, vol. II. p. 8^. Thuanus,
lib. V. ^. 15.
.

THOUGH the protection of France was of great consequence to the Scotch, in
supporting them against the invasions of England, they reaped still more
benefit from the distractions and divisions which had crept into the councils
of that latter kingdom. Even the two brothers, the protector and admiral, not
contented with the high stations which they severally enjoyed, and the great
eminence to which they had risen, had entertained the most violent jealousy of
each other's authority; Cabals of lord Seymour.
and they divided the whole court and kingdom, by their opposite cabals and
pretensions. Lord Seymour was a man of insatiable ambition, arrogant, assuming,
implacable; and though esteemed of superior capacity to the protector, he
possessed not to the same degree the confidence and regard of the people. By
his flattery and address, he had so insinuated himself into the good graces of
the Queendowager, that, forgetting her usual prudence and decency, she married
him immediately upon the decease of the late King: Insomuch, that, had she soon
proved pregnant, it might have been doubtful to which husband the child
belonged. The credit and riches of this alliance supported the ambition of the
admiral; but gave umbrage to the duchess of Somerset, who, uneasy that the
younger brother's wife should have the precedence, employed all her interest
with her husband, which was too great, first to create, and then to widen a
breach between the two brothers Hayward, p. 301. ^eylin, p. 72. Camden.
Thuanus, lib. VI. ^. 5. Haynes, p. 69.
.

THE first symptoms of this misunderstanding appeared when the protector
commanded the army in Scotland. The secretary, Paget, a man entirely devoted to
Somerset, remarked, that Seymour was forming separate intrigues among the
counselors; was corrupting, by presents, the King's servants; and even
endeavoring, by improper indulgencies and liberalities, to captivate the
affections of the young monarch. Paget represented to him the danger of this
conduct; desired him to reflect on the numerous enemies whom the sudden
elevation of their family had created; and warned him that any dissension
between him and the protector, would be greedily laid hold of, to draw on the
ruin of both. Finding his remonstrances ineffectual, he conveyed intelligence
of the danger to Somerset, and engaged him to leave the enterprise against
Scotland unfinished, in order to guard against the attempts of his domestic
enemies. In the ensuing Parliament, the admiral's projects appeared still more
hazardous to public tranquillity; and as he had acquired many partisans and
retainers, he made a direct attack upon his brother's authority. He represented
to his friends, that formerly, during a minority, the office of protector of
the kingdom had been kept separate from that of governor of the king's person;
and that the present union of these two important trusts, conserred on Somerset
an authority which could not safely be lodged in any subject Haynes, p. 8^, 90.
. He even prevailed on the young King, to write a letter to the Parliament,
desiring that Seymour might be appointed his governor; and he had formed a
party in the two houses, by which he hoped to have effected his purpose. The
design was discovered before its execution; and some common friends were sent
to remonstrate with him, but had so little influence, that he threw out many
menacing expressions, and rashly threatened, that, if he was thwarted in his
attempt, he would make this Parliament the blackest that ever was in England
Haynes, p. 75.
. The council sent for him, to answer for his conduct; but he refused to
attend: They then began to threaten in their turn, and informed him, that the
King's letter, instead of availing him any thing to the execution of his
purpose, would be imputed to him as a criminal enterprise, and be construed a
design to disturb the government, by forming a separate interest with a child
and minor. They even let fall some menaces of sending him to the Tower for his
temerity; and the admiral finding himself prevented in his design, was obliged
to submit, and to desire a reconcilement with his brother.

THE mild and moderate temper of Somerset made him willing to forget these
enterprises of the admiral; but the ambition of that turbulent spirit could not
be so easily appeased. His spouse, the Queen-dowager, died in childbed; but so
far from regarding this event as a check to his aspiring views, he founded on
it the scheme of a more extraordinary elevation. He made his addresses to the
lady Elizabeth, then in the sixteenth year of her age; and that princess, whom
even the hurry of business, and the pursuits of ambition, could not, in her
more advanced years, disengage entirely from the tender passions, seems to have
listened to the insinuations of a man who possessed every talent proper to
captivate the affections of the fair ^bid. 95, 96, 107, 108.
. But as Henry the eighth had excluded his daughters from all hopes of
succession, if they married without the consent of his executors, which Seymour
could never hope to obtain; it was concluded, that he proposed to effectuate
his purpose by expedients still more rash and more criminal. All the other
measures of the admiral tended to confirm this suspicion. He continued to
attack, by presents, the fidelity of all those who had more immediate access to
the King's person: He endeavored to seduce that young prince into his
interest: He found means of holding a private correspondence with him: He
publicly decried his brother's administration; and asserted, that by enlisting
Germans, and other foreigners, he intended to form a mercenary army, which
endangered the King's aughority, and the liberty of the people: By promises and
persuasion he brought over to his party many of the principal nobility; and had
distributed his interest all over England: He neglected not even the most
popular persons of inferior rank; and had computed, that he could, on occasion,
command the service of ten thousand men, among his servants, tenants, and
retainers Haynes, p. 105, 106.
: He had already provided arms for their use; and having engaged in his
interests Sir John Sharington, a very corrupt man, master of the mint at
Bristol, he flattered himself that money would not be wanting. Somerset was
well informed of all these alarming circumstances, and endeavored by the most
friendly expedients, by entreaty, reason, and even by heaping new favors upon
him, to make him depart from his precipitant councils: But finding all his
endeavors ineffectual, he began to think of more severe remedies. The earl of
Warwic was an ill instrument between the brothers; and had formed the design,
by inflaming the quarrel, to raise his own fortune on both their ruins.

Dudley, earl of Warwic.
DUDLEY, earl of Warwic, was the son of that Dudley, minister to Henry the
seventh, who having, by rapine, extortion, and perversion of law, incurred the
hatred of the public, had been sacrificed to popular animosity, in the
beginning of the subsequent reign. The late King, sensible of the iniquity, at
least illegality of the sentence, had afterward restored young Dudley's blood
by act of parliament; and finding him endowed with ability, industry, and
enterprise, he had entrusted him with many important commands, and had ever
found him successful in all his undertakings. He raised him to the dignity of
viscount Lisle, conferred on him the office of admiral, and gave him by his
will a place among his executors. Dudley made still farther progress during the
minority; and having obtained the title of earl of Warwic, and undermined the
credit of Southampton, he bore the first rank among the protector's
counselors. The victory, gained at Pinkey, was much ascribed to his courage
and conduct; and he was universally regarded as a man equally endowed with the
talents of peace and war. But all these virtues were obscured by still greater
vices; an exorbitant ambition, an insatiable avarice, a neglect of decency, a
contempt of justice: And as he found, that lord Seymour, whose ability and
enterprise he chiefly dreaded, was involving himself in ruin, by his rash
councils, he was determined to push him to the precipice; and thereby remove
the chief obstacle to his own projected greatness.

WHEN Somerset found that the public peace was exposed by his brother's
seditious, if not rebellious, schemes, he was the more easily persuaded, by
Warwic, to employ the extent of royal authority against him; and after
depriving him of the office of admiral, he signed a warrant for committing him
to the Tower. Some of his accomplices were also taken into custody; and three
privy counselors, being sent to examine them, made a report, that they had met
with very full and important discoveries. Yet still the protector suspended the
blow, and showed a reluctance to ruin his brother. He offered to depart from
the prosecution, if Seymour would promise him a cordial reconcilement; and
relinquishing all ambitious hopes, be contented with a private life, and retire
into the country. But as Seymour made no other answer to these friendly offers
than menaces and defiances, he ordered a charge to be drawn up against him,
consisting of thirty-three articles Burnet, vol. II. Coll. 31. 2 and 3 Edw. VI.
c. 18.
; and the whole to be laid before the privy council. It is pretended, that
every particular was so incontestibly proved, both by witnesses and his own
handwriting, that there was no room for doubt; yet did the council think
proper to go in a body to the Tower, in order more fully to examine the
prisoner. He was not daunted by the appearance; but boldly demanded a fair
trial; required to be confronted with the witnesses; desired that the charge
might be left with him, in order to be considered; and refused to answer any
interrogatories, by which he might ensnare himself.

IT is apparent, that notwithstanding what is pretended, there must have been
some deficiency in the evidence against Seymour, when such demands, founded on
the plainest principles of law and equity, were absolutely rejected. We shall
indeed conclude, if we carefully examine the charge, that many of the articles
were general, and scarce capable of any proof; many of them, if true,
susceptible of a more favorable interpretation; and that, though on the whole,
Seymour appears to have been a very dangerous subject, yet he had not advanced
far in those treasonable projects imputed to him. The chief part of his guilt
seems to have consisted in some unwarrantable practices in the admiralty, by
which pirates were protected, and illegal impositions laid upon the merchants.

BUT the administration had, at that time, an easy instrument of vengeance, to
wit, the Parliament; and needed not give themselves any concern with regard
either to the guilt of the persons whom they prosecuted, or the evidence which
could be produced against them. A Parliament.
4 November.
A session of Parliament being held, it was proposed to proceed against Seymour
by bill of attainder; and much persuasion being employed to engage the young
King to consent to it, a considerable weight was put on his approbation.
Attainder of lord Seymour.
These narratives were received for undoubted evidence; and though the prisoner
had formerly engaged many friends and partisans among the nobility, no one had
either the courage or equity to move, that he might be heard in his own
defense, that the testimony against him should be delivered in a legal manner,
and that he should be confronted with the witnesses. A little more scruple was
made in the house of commons: There were even some members who objected against
the whole method of proceeding by bills of attainder, passed in absence; and
required, that a formal trial should be given to every man before his
condemnation. 20th March.
His execution.
But upon receiving a message from the King, requiring them to proceed, and
offering that the same narratives should be laid before them which had
satisfied the peers, they were easily prevailed on to acquiesce 2 and ^ Edw.
VI. c. 1^.
. The bill passed in a very full house. Near four hundred voted for it; and not
above nine or ten against it (...) vol II. p. (...)
. The sentence was soon after executed, and the prisoner was beheaded on
Towerhill. The warrant was signed by Somerset, who was exposed to much blame,
on account of the violence of these proceedings. The attempts of the admiral
seemed chiefly to be levelled against his brother's usurped authority; and though
his ambitious, enterprizing character, encouraged by a marriage with the lady
Elizabeth, might have proved dangerous to public tranquillity, the prudence of
foreseeing dangers at such a distance, was esteemed too great, and the remedy
was plainly illegal. It could only be said, that this bill of attainder was
somewhat more tolerable than the preceding ones, to which the nation had been
accustomed. For here, at least, some shadow of evidence was produced.

Ecclesiastical affairs.
ALL the other considerable business transacted this session, besides the
attainder of lord Seymour, regarded ecclesiastical matters; which were now the
chief concern of the nation. A committee of bishops and divines had been
appointed by the council, to frame a liturgy for the service of the church; and
they had executed the work committed to them. They proceeded with great
moderation in this delicate undertaking: They retained as much of the ancient
mass as the principles of the reformers would permit: They indulged nothing to
the spirit of contradiction, which so naturally takes place in all great
innovations: And they ^lattered themselves, that they had framed a service, in
which every denomination of Christians might, without scruple, concur. The mass
had been always celebrated in Latin; a practice which might have been esteemed
absurd, had it not been found useful to the clergy, by impressing the people
with an idea of some mysterious unknown virtue in those rites, and by checking
all their pretensions to be familiarly acquainted with their religion. But as
the reformers pretended in some few particulars to encourage private judgment
in the ^^ity, the translation of the liturgy, as well as of the scriptures,
into the vulgar tongue, seemed more conformable to the genius of their sect;
and this innovation, with the retrenchment of prayers to saints, and of some
superstitious ceremonies, was the chief difference between the old mass and the
new liturgy. The Parliament established this form of worship in all the
churches, and ordered an uniformity to be observed in all the rites and
ceremonies 2 and 3 Edw. VI. cap. 1.
.

THERE was another very material act, which passed this session. The former
canons had established the celibacy of the clergy; and though this practice be
usually ascribed to the policy of the court of Rome, who thought, that the
ecclesiastics would be more devoted to their spiritual head, and less dependant
on the civil magistrate, when freed from the powerful ties of wives and
children; yet was this institution much forwarded by the principles of
superstition inherent in human nature. These principles had rendered the
panegyrics of an inviolate chastity so frequent among the ancient fathers, long
before the establishment of celibacy. And even the English parliament, though
they framed a law, permitting the marriages of priests, yet confess, in the
preamble, "that it were better for priests and the ministers of the church to
live chaste and without marriage, and it were much to be wished they would of
themselves abstain." The inconveniences, which had arisen from compelling
chastity and prohibiting marriage, are the reason assigned for indulging a
liberty in this particular 2 and 3 Edw. VI. cap. 21.
. The ideas of penance also were so much retained in other particulars, that
an act of parliament passed, prohibiting the use of flesh, during Lent and the
other times of abstinence 2 and 3 Edw. VI. cap. 19. Another act, passed this
session, takes notice in the preamble, that the city of York, formerly well
inhabited, was now much decayed: Insomuch that many of the cures could not
afford a competent maintenance to the incumbents. To remedy this inconvenience,
the magistrates were empowered to unite as many parish^^ as they thought
proper. An ecclesiastical historian, Collier, vol. ii. p. 230, thinks, that
this decay of York is chiefly to be ascribed to the dissolution of monasteries,
by which the revenues fell into the hands of persons who lived at a distance.

A very grievous tax was imposed this session upon the whole stock and monied
interest of the kingdom, and even upon its industry. It was a shilling in the
pound yearly, during three years, on every person worth ten pounds or upwards:
The double on aliens and denizons. These last, if above twelve years of age,
and if worth less than twenty shillings, were to pay eight pence yearly. Every
wether was to pay two pence yearly; every ewe three pence. The woolen
manufacturers were to pay eight pence a pound on the value of all the cloth
they made. These exorbitant taxes on money are a proof, that few people lived
on the money lent out at interest: For this tax amounts to the half of the
yearly income of all money-holders, during three years, estimating their
interest at the rate allowed by law; and was too grievous to be born, if many
persons had been affected by it. It is remarkable, that no tax at all was laid
upon land this session. The profits of merchandise were commonly so high, that
it was supposed it could bear this imposition. The most absurd part of the law
seems to be the tax upon the woolen manufacture. See 2 and 3 Edw. VI. cap. 36.
The subsequent Parliament repealed the tax on sheep and woolen cloth. 3 and 4
Edw. VI. cap. 23. But they continued the other tax a year longer. Ibid.

The clergy taxed themselves at six shillings in the pound to be paid in three
years. This taxation was ratified in Parliament, which had been the common
practice since the reformation, as if the clergy had no legislative power, even
over themselves. See 2 and 3 Edw. VI. cap. 35.


.

THE principal tenets and practices of the catholic religion were now
abolished, and the reformation, such as we enjoy it at present, was almost
entirely completed in England. But the doctrine of the real presence, though
tacitly condemned by the new communion-service and by the prohibition of many
ancient rites, still retained some hold of the minds of men; and it was the
last doctrine of popery, which was wholly abandoned by the people Burnet, vol.
II. cap. 104.
. The extreme attachment of the late King to that tenet might be some ground
for this obstinacy; but the chief cause was really the extreme absurdity of the
principle itself, and the profound veneration, which of course it impressed on
the understanding. The priests likewise were much inclined to favor an
opinion, which attributed to them so miraculous a power; and the people, who
believed that they participated of the very body and blood of their Savior,
were loath to renounce so extraordinary, and as they imagined, so salutary a
privilege. The general attachment to this dogma was so violent, that the
Lutherans, notwithstanding their separation from Rome, had thought proper,
under another name, still to retain it: And the catholic preachers, in England,
when restrained in every other particular, could not forbear, on every
occasion, from inculcating that tenet. Bonner, for this offense among others,
had been tried by the council, had been deprived of his see, and had been
committed to custody. Gardener also, who had recovered his liberty, appeared
anew refractory to the authority, which established the late innovations; and
he seemed willing to countenance that opinion, much favored by all the English
catholics, that the King was indeed supreme head of the church, but not the
council, during a minority. Having declined giving full satisfaction on this
head, he was sent to the Tower, and threatened with farther effects of the
council's displeasure.

THESE severities, being exercised against men, possessed of office and
authority, seemed a necessary policy, in order to enforce an uniformity in
public worship and discipline: But there were other instances of persecution,
which were derived from no other origin than the bigotry of theologians; a
malady, which seems almost incurable. Though the protestant divines had ventured
to renounce opinions, deemed certain during so many centuries, they regarded,
in their turn, the new system as so certain, that they could bear no
contradiction with regard to it; and they were ready to burn in the same
flames, from which they themselves had so narrowly escaped, every one who had
the assurance to oppose them. A commission by act of council was granted to the
primate and some others, to examine and search after all anabaptists, heretics,
or contemners of the book of common prayer (...) III. Rymer, tom. XV. p. 181.
. They were enjoined to reclaim them, if possible; to impose penance on them;
and to give them absolution: Or if they were obstinate, to excommunicate and
imprison them, and to deliver them over to the secular arm: And in the
execution of this charge, the commissioners were not bound to observe the
ordinary methods of trial; the forms of law were dispensed with, and if any
statutes happened to interfere with the powers in the commission, they were
overruled and abrogated by the council. Some tradesmen in London were brought
before these commissioners, and were accused of maintaining, among other
opinions, that a man regenerate could not sin, and that though the outward man
might offend, the inward was incapable of all guilt. They were prevailed on to
abjure and were dismissed. But there was a woman accused of heretical pravity,
called Joan Bocher, or Joan of Kent, who was so extremely obstinate, that the
commissioners could gain nothing upon her. Her doctrine was, "that Christ was
not truly incarnate of the virgin, whose flesh, being the outward man, was
sinfully begotten and born in sin; and consequently, he could take none of it:
But the word, by the consent of the inward man of the virgin, was made flesh
Burnet, vol. II. coll. ^^. Strype's (...).
." This opinion, it would seem, is not orthodox; and there was a necessity for
delivering the woman to the flames for maintaining it. But the young King, though
in such tender years, had more sense than all his counselors and preceptors;
and he long refused to sign the warrant for her execution. Cranmer was employed
to persuade him to compliance; and he said, that there was a great difference
between errors in other points of divinity, and those which were directly
contradictory to the Apostles creed: Th^se latter were impieties against God,
which the prince, being God's deputy, ought to repress; in like manner, as the
King's deputies were bound to punish offenses against the King's person.
Edward, overcome by importunity more than reason, at last submitted, though with
tears in his eyes; and he told Cranmer, that, if any wrong was done, the guilt
should lie entirely on his head. The primate, after making a new effort to
reclaim the woman from her errors, and finding her obstinate against all his
arguments, at last committed her to the flames. Some time after, a Dutchman,
called Van Paris, accused of the heresy which has received the name of
Arianism, was condemned to the same punishment. He suffered with so much
satisfaction, that he hugged and caressed the faggots, which were consuming
him; a species of frenzy of which there is more than one instance among the
martyrs of this age Burnet, vol. II. p. 112. Strype's Mem. Cranm. p. 181.
.

THESE rigorous methods of proceeding soon brought the whole nation to a
conformity with the new doctrine and the new liturgy. The lady Mary alone
continued to adhere to the mass, and refused to admit the established modes of
worship. When pressed and menaced on this head, she applied to the emperor;
who, using his interest with Sir Philip Hobbey, the English ambassador,
procured her a temporary connivance from the council Heylin, p. 1^^.
.

CHAP. II.
Discontents of the people. -- Insurrections. -- Conduct of the war with
Scotland -- with France. -- Factions in the council. -- Conspiracy against
Somerset. -- Somerset resigns the protectorship. -- A Parliament. -- Peace with
France and Scotland. -- Boulogne surrendered. -- Persecution of Gardener. --
Warwic created duke of Northumberland. -- His ambition. -- Trial of Somerset.
-- His execution. -- A Parliament. -- A new Parliament. -- Succession changed.
-- The King's sickness -- and death.

Discontents of the people.
THERE is no abuse so great, in civil society, as not to be attended with a
great variety of beneficial consequences; and in the beginnings of reformation,
the loss of these advantages is always felt very sensibly, while the benefit,
resulting from the change, is the slow effect of time, and is seldom perceived
by the bulk of a nation. Scarce any institution can be imagined less
favorable, in the main, to the interests of mankind than that of monks and
friars; yet was it followed by many good effects, which, having ceased by the
suppression of monasteries, were very much regreted by the people of England.
The monks, residing always in their convents, in the heart of their estates,
spent their money in the provinces and among their tenants, afforded a ready
market for commodities, were a sure resource to the poor and indigent; and
though their hospitality and charity gave but too much encouragement to
idleness, and prevented the increase of public riches, yet did it provide to
many a remedy against the extreme pressures of want and necessity. It is also
observable, that, as the friars were limited by the rules of their institution,
to a certain train of life, they had not equal motives for avarice with other
men; and they were acknowledged to have been in England, as they still are in
Roman catholic countries, the best and most indulgent landlords. The abbots and
priors were allowed to give leases at an under-value, and to receive, in
return, a large present from the tenant; in the same manner as is still
practiced by the bishops and colleges. But when the abbey-lands were
distributed among the great nobility and courtiers, they fell under a different
management: The rents of farms were raised, while the tenants found not the
same facility in disposing of the produce; the money was spent in the capital;
and the farmers, living at a distance, were exposed to all the oppressions of
their new masters, or to the still greater rapacity of the stewards.

THESE complaints of the common people were at that time heightened by other
causes. The arts of manufacture were much more advanced in other European
countries than in England; and even in England these arts had made greater
progress than the knowledge of agriculture; a profession, which of all
mechanical employments, requires the most reflection and experience. A great
demand arose for wool both abroad and at home: Pasturage was found more
profitable than unskilful tillage: Whole estates were laid waste by enclosures:
The tenants, regarded as a useless burden, were expelled their habitations:
Even the cottagers, deprived of the commons, on which they fed their cattle,
were reduced to misery: And a great decay of people, as well as diminution of
the former plenty, was remarked in the kingdom Strype, vol. II. Repository Q.
. This grievance was now of an old date; and Sir Thomas More, alluding to it,
observes in his Utopia, that a sheep had become in England a more rapacious
animal than a lion or wolf, and devoured whole villages, cities, and provinces.

THE general increase also of gold and silver in Europe, after the discovery of
the West Indies, had a tendency to inflame these complaints. The growing
demand, in the more commercial countries, had heightened every where the price
of commodities, which could easily be transported thither; but in England, the
labor of men, who could not so easily change their habitation, still remained
nearly at the ancient rates; and the poor people complained that they could no
longer gain a subsistence by their industry. It was by an addition alone of
toil and application they were enabled to provide a maintenance; and though this
increase of industry was at last the effect of the present situation, and an
effect very beneficial to society, yet was it difficult for the people to shake
off their former habits of indolence; and nothing but necessity could compel
them to that exertion of their faculties.

IT must also be remarked, that the profusion of Henry the eighth, had reduced
him, notwithstanding his rapacity, to such difficulties, that he had been
obliged to remedy a present necessity, by the pernicious expedient of debasing
the coin; and the wars, in which the protector had been involved, had induced
him to carry still farther the same abuse. The usual consequences ensued: The
good coin was hoarded or exported; base metal was coined at home or imported
from abroad in great abudance; the common people, who received their wages in
it, could not purchase commodities at the usual rates; an universal diffidence
and stagnation of commerce took place; and loud complaints were heard in every
part of England.

THE protector, who loved popularity, and compassionated the condition of the
people, encouraged these complaints by his endeavors to remedy them. He
appointed a commission for making enquiry concerning enclosures; and issued a
proclamation, ordering all late enclosures to be laid open by a day assigned.
The populace, meeting with such countenance from the government, began to rise
in several places, and to commit disorders; but were quieted by remonstrances
and persuasion. In order to give them greater satisfaction, Somerset appointed
new commissioners, whom he sent every where, with an unlimited power to hear
and determine all causes about enclosures, highways, and cottages Burnet, vol.
II. p. 115. Strype, vol. II. p. 171.
. As the object of this commission was very disagreeable to the gentry and
nobility, they called the commission arbitrary and illegal; and the common
people, fearing it would be eluded, and being impatient for immediate redress,
could no longer contain their sury, but sought for a remedy by force of arms.
Insurrections.
The rising began at once in several parts of England, as if an universal
conspiracy had been formed by the commonalty. The insurgents in Wiltshire were
dispersed by Sir William Herbert: Those in the neighboring counties, Oxford
and Gloucester, by lord Gray of Wilton. Many of the rioters were killed in the
field: Others were executed by martial law. The commotions in Hampshire,
Sussex, Kent, and other counties, were quieted by gentler methods; but the
disorders in Devonshire and Norfolk threatened the most fatal consequences.

THE commonalty in Devonshire began with the usual pretense of enclosures and
of oppressions from the gentry; but the parish priest of Sampford-Courtenay,
had the address to give their discontents a direction toward religion; and the
delicacy of this subject, in the present emergence, made the insurrection
immediately appear dangerous. In other counties, the gentry had kept closely
united with the government; but here many of them took part with the populace;
among others, Humphrey Arundel, governor of St. Michael's Mount. The rioters
were brought to the form of a regular army, and amounted to the number of
10,000 men. Lord Russel had been sent against them at the head of a small
force; but finding himself too weak to encounter them in the field, he kept at
a distance, and began to treat and negotiate with them; in hopes of eluding
their fury by delay, and of dispersing them by the difficulty of their
subsisting together. Their demands were, that the mass should be restored, half
of the abbey-lands resumed, the law of the six articles executed, holy water
and holy bread respected, and all other particular grievances redressed
Hayward, p. 292. Hollingshed, p. 1003. Fox, vol. II. p. 666. Mem. Cranm. p. 186.
. The council, to whom Russel transmitted these demands, sent a haughty answer;
exhorted the rebels to disperse; and promised them pardon upon their immediate
submission. Enraged at this disappointment, they marched to Exeter; carrying
before them crosses, banners, holy water, candlesticks, and other implements of
the ancient superstition; together with the host, which they covered with a
canopy Heylin, p. 76.
. The inhabitants of Exeter shut their gates; and the insurgents, as they had
no cannon, endeavored to take the place, first by scalade, then by mining, but
were repulsed in all their attempts. Russel meanwhile lay at Honiton, till
reinforced by Sir William Herbert, and lord Gray, with some German horse, and
some Italian arquebusiers under Battista Spinola. He then resolved to attempt
the relief of Exeter, which was now reduced to extremities. He attacked the
rebels, drove them from all their posts, committed great slaughter upon them
both in the action and pursuit Stow's Annals, p. 597. Hayward, p. 295.
, and took many prisoners. Arundel and the other leaders were sent to London,
tried and executed. Many of the inferior sort were put to death by martial law
Hayward, p. 295, 296.
: The vicar of St. Thomas, one of the principal incendiaries, was hanged on the
top of his own tower, arrayed in his popish weeds, with his beads at his girdle
Heylin, p. 76. Hollingshed, p. 1026.
.

THE insurrection in Norfolk rose still to a greater height, and was attended
with greater violences. The populace were at first excited, as in other places,
by the complaints against enclosures; but finding their numbers amount to
twenty thousand men, they grew insolent on their force, and proceeded to more
exorbitant pretensions. They required the suppression of the gentry, the
placing new counselors about the King, and the re-establishment of the ancient
rites. One Ket, a tanner, had assumed the government of them; and he exercised
his authority with the utmost insolence and outrage. Having taken possession of
Moushold-Hill near Norwich, he erected his tribunal under an old oak, thence
called the oak of reformation; and summoning the gentry to appear before him,
he gave such decrees as might be expected from his character and situation. The
marquis of Northampton was first ordered against him; but met with a repulse,
in an action, where lord Sheffield was killed Stowe, p. 597. Hollingshed,
1030-31. Strype, Vol. II. p. 1^^.
. The protector affected popularity, and cared not to appear in person against
the insurgents: He therefore sent next the earl of Warwic at the head of 6000
men, levied for the wars against Scotland; and he thereby afforded his mortal
enemy an opportunity of augmenting his reputation and character. Warwic, having
tried some skirmishes with the rebels, at last made a general attack upon them,
and put them to flight. Two thousand of them fell in the fight and pursuit: Ket
was hanged at Norwich castle; nine of his followers on the boughs of the oak of
reformation; and the insurrection was entirely suppressed. Some rebels in
Yorkshire, hearing of the fate of their companions, accepted the offers of
pardon, and threw down their arms. A general indemnity was soon after published
by the protector Hayward, p. 297, 298, 299.
.

Conduct of the war with Scotland.
BUT though the insurrections were thus quickly suppressed in England, and no
traces of them seemed to remain, they were attended with very bad consequences
with regard to the foreign interests of the nation. The forces of the earl of
Warwic, which might have made a great impression on Scotland, were diverted
from that enterprise; and De Thermes had leizure to reduce that country to some
settlement and composure. He took the fortress of Broughty, and put the
garrison to the sword. He straitened the English at Haddington; and though lord
Dacres found means to throw relief into the place, and to reinforce the
garrison, it was found very expensive, and even impracticable to keep
possession of that fortress. The whole country in the neighborhood was laid
waste by the inroads both of the Scotch and English, and could afford no supply
to the garrison: The place lay above thirty miles from the borders; so that a
regular army was necessary to escort thither any provisions: And as the plague
had broke out among the troops, they perished daily, and were reduced to a
state of great weakness. For these reasons, orders were given to dismantle
Haddington, and to convoy the artillery and garrison to Berwic; and the earl of
Rutland, now created warden of the east marches, executed the orders.

With France.
THE King of France also took advantage of the distractions of the English, in
order to recover Boulogne, and that territory, which Henry the eighth had
conquered from France. Under other pretenses, he assembled an army; and ^^lling
suddenly upon the Boullonois, took the castles of Sellacque, Blackness, and
Ambleteuse, though well supplied with garrisons, ammunition, and provisions
Thuanus, lib. vi c. 6.
. He attempted to surprise Boulenberg, and was repulsed; but the garrison, not
thinking the place tenable after the loss of the other fortresses, destroyed
the works, and retired to Boulogne. The rains, which fell in great abundance
during the autumn, and a pestilential distemper, which broke out in the French
camp, deprived Henry of all hopes of success against Boulogne itself; and he
retired to Paris Hayward, p. 300.
. He left the command of the army to Gaspar de Coligny, lord of Chatillon, so
famous afterward under the name of admiral Coligny; and he gave him orders to
form the siege early in the spring. The active disposition of this general
engaged him to make during the winter several attempts against the place; but
they proved all unsuccessful.

STROZZI, who commanded the French fleet and galleys, endeavored to make a
descent on Jersey; but meeting there with an English fleet, an action ensued,
which seems not to have been decisive, since the historians of the two nations
differ so widely in their accounts of the event Le Thou, King Edward's Journal,
Stow, p. 597.
.

AS soon as the French war broke out, the protector endeavored to fortify
himself with the alliance of the emperor; and he sent over secretary Paget to
Brussels, where Charles then resided, in order to assist Sir Philip Hobby, the
ordinary ambassador, in this negotiation. But that prince had formed a design
of extending his dominions by acting the part of champion to the catholic
religion; and though extremely desirous of fortifying himself by the English
alliance against France, his capital enemy, he thought it unsuitable to his
other pretensions to enter into strict confederacy with a nation, which had
broke off all connexions with the church of Rome. He therefore declined all
advances of friendship from England; and eluded the applications of the
ambassadors. An exact account is preserved of this negotiation in a letter of
Hobby; and it is remarkable, that the emperor, in a conversation with the
English ministers, asserted, that the prerogatives of a King of England were
more extensive than those of a King of France Burnet, vol. II. p. 132, 175.
. Burnet, who preserves this letter, subjoins, as a parallel instance, that one
objection which the Scotch made to marrying their Queen with Edward, was that
all their privileges would be swallowed up by the great prerogative of the
Kings of England Id. p. 133.
.

SOMERSET, finding no assistance from the emperor, was inclined to conclude a
peace with France and Scotland; and besides that he was not in a condition to
maintain such ruinous wars, he thought, that there no longer remained any
object of hostilities. The Scotch had sent away their Queen; and could not, if
ever so much inclined, complete the marriage contracted with Edward: And as
Henry the eighth had stipulated to restore Boulogne in 1554, it seemed a matter
of small consequence to anticipate a few years, the term of the treaty. But
when he proposed these reasons to the council, he met with strong opposition
from his enemies, who, seeing him unable to support the war, were determined,
for that very reason, to oppose all proposals for a pacification. The factions
ran very high in the court of England; and matters were drawing to an issue,
fatal to the authority of the protector.

Factions in the council.
AFTER Somerset obtained the patent, investing him with regal authority, he no
longer paid any attention to the opinion of the other counselors; and being
elated with his high dignity, as well as with his victory at Pinkey, he
thought, that every one ought, in every thing, to yield to his sentiments. All
those who were not entirely devoted to him, were sure to be neglected; whoever
opposed his will received marks of anger or contempt Strype, vol* II. p. 181.
; and while he showed a resolution to govern every thing, his capacity appeared
not, in any respect, proportioned to his ambition. Warwic, more subtle and
artificial, covered more exorbitant views under fairer appearances; and having
associated himself with Southampton, who had been readmitted into the council,
he formed a strong party, who were determined to free themselves from the
slavery, imposed on them by the protector.

THE malecontent counselors found the disposition of the nation very
favorable to their designs. The nobility and gentry were in general displeased
with the preference, which Somerset seemed to have given the people; and as
they ascribed all the insults to which they had been lately exposed, to his
procrastination, and to the encouragement given the multitude, so they
apprehended a renewal of the same disorders from his present affectation of
popularity. He had erected a court of requests in his own house for the relief
of the people ^b. p. 183.
, and he interposed with the judges in their behalf; a measure which might be
denominated illegal, if any exertion of prerogative, at that time, could with
certainty deserve that appellation. And this attempt, which was a stretch of
power, seemed the more unpolitic, that it disgusted the nobility, the surest
support of monarchical authority.

BUT though Somerset courted the people, the interest, which he had formed with
them, was in no degree answerable to his expectations. The catholic party, who
retained influence with the multitude, were his declared enemies; and took
advantage of every opportunity to decry his conduct. The attainder and
execution of his brother bore an odious aspect: The introduction of foreign
troops into the kingdom, was represented in very invidious colors: The great
estate which he had suddenly acquired, at the expense of the church and of the
crown, rendered him obnoxious: And the palace which he was building in the
Strand, served, by its magnificence, and still more by other circumstances
which attended it, to expose him to the censures of the public. The parish
church of St. Mary, with three bishops houses, were pulled down, to furnish
ground and materials for this structure: Not contented with that sacrilege, an
attempt was made to demolish St. Margaret's, Westminster, and to employ the
stones to the same purpose; but the parishioners rose in a tumult, and chaced
away the protector's tradesmen. He then laid his hands on a chapel in St.
Paul's Churchyard, with a cloister, and charnel-house belonging to it; and
these edifices, together with a church of St. John of Jerusalem, were made use
of to raise his palace. To render the matter more odious to the people, the
tombs, and other monuments of the dead were defaced; and the bones carried
away, and buried in unconsecrated ground Heylin, p. 72, 73. Stowe's Survey of
London. Hayward, p. 30^.
.

6th October.
Conspiracy against Somerset.
ALL these imprudences were remarked by Somerset's enemies, who resolved to
take advantage of them. The lord St. John, president of the council, the earls
of Warwic, Southampton, and Arundel, with five counselors more, met at
Ely-house; and assuming to themselves the whole power of the council, began to
act independent of the protector, whom they represented as the author of every
public grievance and misfortune. They wrote letters to the chief nobility and
gentry in England, informing them of the present measures, and requiring their
assistance: They sent for the mayor and aldermen of London, and enjoined them
to obey their orders, without regard to any contrary orders which they should
receive from the duke of Somerset. They laid the same injunctions on the
lieutenant of the tower, who expressed his resolution to comply with them. Next
day, Rich, lord chancellor, the marquis of Northampton, the earl of Shrewsbury,
Sir Thomas Cheney, Sir John Gage, Sir Ralph Sadler, and the lord chief justice
Montague, joined the malecontent counselors; and every thing bore a bad aspect
for the protector's authority. Secretary Petre, whom he had sent to treat with
the council, chose rather to remain with them; and the common council of the
city, being applied to, declared with one voice their approbation of the new
measures, and their resolution of supporting them Stowe, p. ^97, ^98.
Hollinshed, 10^7.
.

THE protector had no sooner heard of the defection of the counselors, than he
removed the King from Hampton Court, where he then resided, to the castle of
Windsor; and, arming his friends and servants, seemed resolute to defend
himself against all his enemies. But finding, that no man of rank, except
Cranmer and Paget, adhered to him, that the people did not rise at his summons,
that the City and Tower had declared against him, that even his best friends
and confidents had deserted him, he lost all hopes of success, and began to
apply to his enemies for pardon and forgiveness. No sooner was this despondency
known, than lord Russel, Sir John Baker, speaker of the house of commons, and
three counselors more, who had hitherto remained neuters, joined Warwic's
party, whom every body now regarded as masters. The council informed the
public, by proclamation, of their actions and intentions; they wrote to the
princesses Mary and Elizabeth, to the same purpose; they made addresses to the
King, in which, after the humblest protestations of duty and obedience, they
informed him, that they were the council appointed by his father, for the
government of the kingdom during his minority; that they had chosen the duke of
Somerset protector, with the express condition that he should guide himself by
their advice and direction; that he had usurped the whole authority to himself,
and had neglected, and even in every thing opposed, their advice; that he had
proceeded to that height of presumption, as to levy forces against them, and
place these forces about his majesty's person: They therefore begged, that they
might be admitted to his royal presence, that he would be pleased to restore
them to his confidence, and that Somerset's servants might be dismissed.
Somerset resigns the protectorship.
Their request was complied with: Somerset capitulated only for gentle
treatment, which was promised him. He was, however, sent to the Tower Stowe, p.
600.
, with some of his friends and partisans, among whom was Cecil, who was
afterward so much distinguished. Articles of charge were exhibited against him
Burnet, vol. II. book i. coll. 46. Hayward, p. 308. Stowe, p. 601. Hollingshed,
p. 1059.
; of which the chief, at least the best founded, is his usurpation of the
government, and his taking into his own hands the whole administration of
affairs. The clause of his patent, which invested him with absolute power,
unlimited by any law, was never objected to him; plainly, because, according to
the sentiments of those times, that power was, in some degree, involved in the
very idea of regal authority.

THE catholics were extremely elevated with this revolution; and as they had
ascribed all the late innovations to Somerset's councils, they hoped, that his
fall would prepare the way for the return of the ancient religion. But Warwic,
who now bore chief sway in the council, was entirely indifferent with regard to
all these points of controversy; and finding, that the principles of the
reformation had sunk deeper into the young prince's mind than to be easily
eradicated, he was determined to comply with his inclinations, and not to
hazard his new acquired power by any hazardous councils. He took care very
early to express his intentions of supporting the reformation; and he threw
such discouragements on Southampton, who stood at the head of the Romanists,
and whom he considered as a dangerous rival, that the high-spirited nobleman
retired from the council, and soon after died of vexation and disappointment.
The other counselors, who had concurred in bringing about the revolution,
received their reward, by promotions and new honors. Russel was created earl
of Bedford: The marquis of Northampton obtained the office of great
chamberlain; and lord Wentworth, besides the office of chamberlain of the
household, got two large manors, Stepney and Hackney, which were torn from the sea of London Heylin, p. 85. Rymer, tom. XV. p. 226.
. A council of regency was formed, not that which Henry's will had appointed
for the government of the kingdom, and which, being founded on an act of
parliament, was the only lawful one; but composed chiefly of members who had
formerly been appointed by Somerset, and who derived their seats from an
authority which was now declared usurped and illegal. But such niceties were,
during that age, little understood, and still less regarded, in England.

4 November.
A Parliament.
A SESSION of Parliament was held; and as it was the usual maxim of that
assembly to acquiesce in every administration which was established, the
council dreaded no opposition from that quarter, and had reason rather to look
for a 23 December.
corroboration of their authority. Somerset had been prevailed with to confess,
on his knees, before the council, all the articles of charge against him; and
he imputed these misdemeanors to his own rashness, folly, and indiscretion, not
to any malignity of his intention Heylin, p. 84. Heyward, p. 3^9. Sto^e, p. 603.
. He even subscribed this confession; and the paper was given in to the
Parliament, who, after sending a committee to examine him, and hear him
acknowledge it to be authentic, passed a vote, by which they deprived him of all
his offices, and fined him in two thousand pounds a year of land. Lord St. John
was created treasurer in his place, and Warwic earl marshal. The prosecution
against him was carried no farther. His fine was remitted by the King: He
recovered his liberty: And Warwic, thinking that he was now sufficiently
humbled, and that his authority was much lessen^d by his late tame and abject
behavior, readmitted him into the council, and even agreed to an alliance
between their families, by the marriage of his son, lord Dudley, with the lady
Jane Seymour, daughter to Somerset Heyward, p. 3^9.
.

DURING this session a severe act was passed against riots ^ and 4 Edw. VI. c.
5.
; that if any, to the number of twelve persons, should meet together for any
matter of state, and being required by any lawful magistrate, should not
disperse themselves, it should be treason; and if any broke hedges, or
violently pulled up pales about enclosures, without lawful authority, it should
be felony: Any attempt to kill a privy counselor, was subjected to the same
penalty. The bishops had made an application, complaining, that they were
deprived of all their power, by the encroachments of the civil courts, and the
present suspension of the canon law; that they could summon no offenders before
them, punish no vice, nor exert the discipline of the church: From which
diminution of their authority, they pretended, immorality had every where
received great encouragement and increase. The design of some was, to revive
the penitentiary rules of the primitive church: But others thought, that such
an authority committed to the bishops, would prove more oppressive than
con^ession, penance, and all the clerical inventions of the ancient
superstition. The Parliament, for the present, contented themselves with
empowering the King to appoint thirty-two commissioners to frame a body of
canon laws, which were to be valid though never ratified by Parliament. Such
implicit trust did they repose in the crown, though all their liberties and
properties might be affected by these canons Ibid. cap. 2.
. The King died before the canons received the royal sanction. Sir John
Sharington, whose crimes and malversations had appeared so egregious at the
condemnation of lord Seymour, obtained a reversal of his attainder Ibid. c. 13.
. This man sought favor with the most zealous of the reformers; and bishop
Latimer asserted, that though formerly he was a most notorious knave, he was now
so penitent, that he had become a very honest man.

Peace with France and Sco^land.
exhausted exchequer, seemed dangerous to a divided nation, and were now
acknowleged not to have any object, which even the greatest and most
uninterrupted success could attain. The project of peace which Somerset
entertained, had served them as a pretense of clamor against his
administration; yet after sending Sir Thomas Cheney to the emperor, and making
again a fruitless effort to engage him in the protection of Boulog^e, they
found themselves obliged to listen to the advances which Henry made them, by
means of Guidotti, a Florentine merchant. The earl of Bedford, Sir John Mason,
Paget, and Petre, were sent over to Boulogne, with full powers to negociate.
The French King absolutely refused to pay the two millions of crowns which his
predecessor had acknowleged to be due to the crown of England, as arrears of
pensions; and said, that he never would consent to render himself tributary to
any prince: But he offered a sum for the immediate Boulogne surrendered.
restitution of Boulogne; and four hundred thousand crowns were at last agreed
on, one half to be paid immediately, the other in August following. 24 March.
Six hostages were given for the performance of this article. Scotland was
comprehended in the treaty: The English stipulated to restore Lauder and
Dunglas, and to demolish the fortresses of Roxburgh and Eymouth Burnet* vol.
II. p. 148. Heyward, 310, 311, 112. Rymer, vol. XV. p. 211.
. No sooner was peace concluded with France, than a project was entertained of
a close union with that kingdom; and Henry very willingly embraced a proposal
so suitable both to his interest and inclination. An agreement, sometime after,
was formed for a marriage between Edward and Elizabeth, a daughter of France;
and all the articles were, after a little negotiation, fully settled Heyward,
p. 318. Heylin, p. 104. Rymer, tom. XV. p. 293.
: But this project never took effect.

THE intention of marrying the King to a daughter of Henry, who was a violent
persecutor of the protestants, was no wise acceptable to that party in England:
But, in all other respects, the council was very steady in promoting the
reformation, and in enforcing the laws against the Romanists. Many of the
prelates were still addicted to that communion; and though they made some
compliances, in order to save their bishoprics, they retarded, as much as they
safely could, the execution of the new laws, and gave countenance to such as
were negligent or refractory. A resolution was therefore taken to seek
pretenses for depriving them; and the execution of this intention was the more
easy, that they had all of them been obliged to take commissions, in which it
was declared, that they held their sees only during the King's pleasure. It was
thought proper to Prosecution of Gardener.
begin with Gardener, in order to strike a terror into the rest. The method of
proceeding against him was extremely violent, and had scarce any color of law
or justice. It had been prescribed him, to inculcate in a sermon, the duty of
obedience to a King even during his minority; and because he had neglected this
topic, he had been thrown into prison, and had been there detained during two
years, without being accused of any crime, except disobedience to this
arbitrary command. The duke of Somerset, secretary Petre, and some others of
the council, were now sent, in order to try his temper, and endeavor to find
some ground for depriving him: He professed to them his intention of conforming
to the government, of supporting the King's laws, and of officiating by the new
liturgy. This was not the disposition which they expected or desired Heylin, p.
90.
: A new deputation was therefore sent, who carried him several articles to
subscribe. He was to acknowledge his former misbehaviour, and confess the
justice of his confinement: He was likewise to own, that the King was supreme
head of the church; that the power of making and dispensing with holidays, was
part of the prerogative; that the common prayer book was a godly and
commendable form; that the King was a complete sovereign in his minority; that
the act of the six articles was justly repealed; and that the King had full
authority to correct and reform what was amiss in ecclesiastical discipline,
government, or doctrine. The bishop was willing to put his hand to all the
articles except the first: He maintained his conduct to have been inoffensive;
and declared, that he would not own himself guilty of faults which he had never
committed Collier, vol. II. p. 305. from the council books. Heylin, p. 99.
.

THE council, finding that he had gone such lengths, were determined to prevent
his full compliance, by multiplying the difficulties upon him, and sending him
new articles to subscribe. A list was selected of such points as they thought
would be most hard of digestion; and not content with these, they insisted
still on his submission, and an acknowlegement of past errors. To make this
subscription more mortifying, they required a promise, that he would recommend
and publish all these articles from the pulpit: But Gardener, who saw, that
they intended either to ruin or dishonor him, or perhaps both, was determined
not to gratify his enemies by any farther compliances: He still insisted on his
innocence; desired a fair trial; and refused to subscribe more articles, till
he should recover his liberty. For this pretended offense his bishopric was put
under sequestration for three months; and as he then appeared no more compliant
than at first, a commission was appointed to try, or, more properly speaking,
to condemn him. (...) vol. II. p. 734, and seq. Burnet, Heylin, Collier.
.

GARDENER, as well as the other prelates, had agreed to hold his office during
the King's pleasure: But the council, unwilling to make use of a concession
which had been so illegally and arbitrarily exacted, chose rather to employ
some forms of justice; a resolution, which led them to commit still greater
iniquities and severities. But the violence of the reformers did not stop
there. Day, bishop of Chichester, Heathe of Worcester, and Voisey of Exeter,
were deprived of their bishoprics, under pretense of disobedience. Even Kitchen
of Landaff, Capon of Salisbury, and Sampson of Coventry, though they had complied
in every thing, yet not being supposed cordial or hearty in their obedience,
were obliged to seek protection, by sacrificing the most considerable revenues
of their see, to the rapacious courtiers Goodwin de praesul. Angl. Heylin, p.
100.
.

THESE plunderers of the church neglected not even smaller profits. An order
was issued by council, for purging the library of Westminster of all missals,
legends, and other superstitious volumes, and delivering their garniture to Sir
Anthony Aucher Collier, vol. II. p. 307. from the council books.
. Many of these books were plaited with gold and silver, and curiously
embossed; and this finery was probably the superstition that destroyed them.
Great havoc was likewise made on the libraries of Oxford. Books and manuscripts
were destroyed without distinction: The volumes of divinity suffered for their
rich binding: Those of literature were condemned as useless: Those of geometry
and astronomy were supposed to contain nothing but necromancy Wood* Hist. and
Antiq* Oxon. lib. 1. p. 271, 272.
. The university had not power to oppose these barbarous violences: They were
in danger of losing their own revenues; and expected every moment to be
swallowed up by the earl of Warwic and his associates.

THOUGH every thing yielded to the authority of the council, the lady Mary could
never be brought to compliance; and she still continued to adhere to the mass,
and to reject the new liturgy. Her behavior was, during some time, connived
at; but, at last, her two chaplains, Mallet and Berkeley, were thrown into
prison Strype, vol. II* p. 249.
; and the princess was remonstrated with for her disobedience. The council
wrote her a letter, where they endeavored to make her change her sentiments,
and to persuade her, that her religious faith was very ill grounded. They asked
her, what warrant there was in scripture for prayers in an unknown tongue, the
use of images, or offering up the sacrament for the dead; and they desired her
to peruse St. Austin, and the other ancient doctors, who would convince her of
the errors of the Romish superstition, and prove that it was founded merely on
false miracles and lying stories Fox, vol. II* Collier, Burnet.
. The lady Mary remained obstinate against all this advice, and protested
herself willing to endure death rather than relinquish her religion: She only
feared, she said, that she was not worthy to suffer in so holy a cause: And as
for protestant books, she thanked God, that, as she never had, so she hoped
never to read any of them. Dreading farther violence, she endeavored to make
her escape to her kinsman Charles; but her design was discovered and prevented
Heyward, p. 315.
. The emperor remonstrated in her behalf, and even threatened hostilities, if
liberty of conscience was refused her: But though the council, sensible that the
kingdom was in no condition to support, with honor, such a war, was desirous
to comply; they found great difficulty to overcome the scruples of the young
King. He had been educated in such a violent abhorrence of the mass, and other
popish rites, which he regarded as impious and idolatrous, that he should
participate, he thought, in the sin, if he allowed its commission: And when at
last the imp^rtunity of Cranmer, Ridley, and Poinet, prevailed somewhat over
his opposition, he burst into tears, lamenting his sister's obstinacy, and
bewailing his own fate, that he must suffer her to continue in such an
abominable mode of worship.

THE great object, at this time, of antipathy among the protestant sects, was
popery, or, more properly speaking, the papists. These they regarded as the
common enemy, who threatened every moment to overwhelm the evangelical faith,
and destroy its partisans by fire and sword: They had not as yet had leisure to
attend to the other minute divisions among themselves, which afterward became
the object of such furious quarrels and animosities, and threw the whole
kingdom into confusion. Several Lutheran divines, who had reputation in those
days, Bucer, Peter Martyr, and others, were engaged to take shelter in England,
from the persecutions which the emperor exercised in Germany; and they received
protection and encouragement. John A-lasco, a nobleman, uncle to the King of
Poland Fox, vol. III. p. 40.
, being expelled his country by the rigours of the catholics, settled, during
some time, at Embden in East-Friezland, where he became preacher to a
congregation of the reformed. Foreseeing the persecutions which ensued, he
removed to England, and brought his congregation along with him. The council,
who regarded them as industrious, useful people, and desired to invite over
others of the same character, not only gave them Augustine friars church for
the exercise of their religion, but granted them a charter, by which they were
erected into a corporation, consisting of a super-intendant and four assisting
ministers. This ecclesiastical establishment was quite independent of the
church of England, and differed from it in some rites and ceremonies Mem.
Cranm. p. (...).
.

THESE differences among the protestants were matter of triumph to the
catholics, who insisted, that the moment men departed from the authority of the
church, they lost all criterion of truth and falsehood in matters of religion,
and must be carried away by every wind of doctrine. The continual variations of
every sect of protestants, afforded them the same topic of reasoning. The book
of common prayer suffered in England a new revisal, and some rites and
ceremonies, which had given offense, were omitted Mem. Cranm. p. 289.
. The speculative doctrines, or the metaphysics of the religion, were also
fixed in forty two articles. These articles were intended to obviate further
divisions and variations; and the framing them had been postponed till the
establishment of the liturgy, which was regarded as a more material object to
the people. The eternity of hell torments is assorted in the articles; and care
is also taken to inculcate, not only that no heathen, however virtuous, can
escape an endless state of the most exquisite misery, but also that every one
who presumes to maintain, that any pagan can possibly be saved, is himself
exposed to the penalty of eternal perdition Article xviii.
.

THE theological zeal of the council, though seemingly fervent, went not so far
as to make them neglect their own temporal concerns, which seem to have been
ever uppermost in their thoughts: They even found leisure to attend to the
public interest; nay, to the commerce of the nation, which was, at that time,
very little the object of general study or attention. The trade of England had
anciently been carried on altogether by foreigners, chiefly the inhabitants of
the Hanse-towns, or Easterlings, as they were called; and in order to encourage
these merchants to settle in England, they had been erected into a corporation
by Henry the third, had obtained a patent, were endowed with privileges, and
were exempted from several heavy duties paid by aliens. So ignorant were the
English of commerce, that this company, commonly denominated the merchants of
the Steel-yard, engrossed almost the who'e foreign trade of the kingdom; and as
they naturally employed the shipping of their own country, the navigation of
England was also in a very languishing condition. It was therefore thought
proper by the council to find pretenses for annulling the privileges of this
corporation, privileges which put them nearly on an equal footing with
Englishmen in the duties which they paid; and as such patents were, during that
are granted by the absolute power of the King, men were the less surprised to
(...) them recalled by the same authority. Several remonstrances were made
against this innovation, by Lubec, Hamburgh, and other Hanse towns; but the
council persevered in their resolution, and the good effects of it became soon
visible to the nation. The English, by their very situation as na^ives, had
advantages above foreigners in the purchase of cloth, wool, and other
commodities; though these advantages had not been sufficient to rouse their
industry, or engage them to become rivals to this opulent company: But when
aliens duty was also imposed upon all foreigners indiscriminately, the English
were tempted to enter into commerce, and a spirit of industry began to appear
in the kingdom Heyward, p. 326. Heylin, p. 108. Strype's Memorials, vol. II. p.
295.
.

ABOUT the same time a treaty was made with Gustavus Ericson, King of Sweden,
by which it was stipulated, that if he sent bullion into England, he might
carry away English commodities without paying custom, that he should carry
bullion to no other prince, that if he sent ozimus, steel, copper, etc. he
should pay custom for English commodities as an Englishman, and that if he sent
other merchandise, he should have free intercourse, paying custom as a stranger
Heylin. p. 1^^.
. The bullion sent over by Sweden set the mint to work: Good specie was coined:
And much of the base metal, formerly issued, was recalled: A circumstance which
tended extremely to the encouragement of commerce.

Warwic created duke of Northumberland.
BUT all these schemes for the improvement of industry were like to prove
abortive, by the fear of domestic convulsions, arising from the exorbitant
ambition of Warwic. That nobleman, not contented with the station which he had
attained, carried farther his pretensions, and had gained to himself partisans
who were disposed to second him in every enterprise. The last earl of
Northumberland died without issue; and as Sir Thomas Piercy, his brother, had
been attainted on account of the share which he had in the Yorkshire
insurrection during the late reign, the title was at present extinct, and the
estate was vested in the crown. Warwic now procured to himself a grant of those
ample possessions, which lay chiefly in the North, the most warlike part of the
kingdom; and he was dignified with the title of duke of Northumberland. His
friend, Paulet, lord St. John, the treasurer, was created first earl of
Wiltshire, then marquess of Winchester; Sir William Herbert was made earl of
Pembroke.

His ambition.
BUT the ambition of Northumberland made him regard all increase of possessions
and titles, either to himself or partisans, as steps only to further
acquisitions. Finding that Somerset, though degraded from his dignity, and even
lessened in the public opinion by his spiritless conduct, still enjoyed a
considerable share of popularity, he was determined to ruin a man whom he
regarded as the chief obstacle to the attainment of his hopes. The alliance
which had been formed between the families had produced no cordial union, and
only enabled Northumberland to compass with more certainty the destruction of
his rival. He secretly gained many of the friends and servants of that unhappy
nobleman: He sometimes terrified him by the appearance of danger: Sometimes
provoked him by ill usage. The unguarded Somerset often broke out into menacing
expressions against Northumberland: At other times, he formed rash projects,
which he immediately abandoned: His treacherous confidents carried to his enemy
every passionate word which dropped from him: They revealed the schemes, which
they themselves had first suggested Heylin, p. 112.
: And Northumberland, thinking that the proper season was now come, began to
act in an open manner against him.

16th October.
IN one night, the duke of Somerset, the lord Gray, David and John Seymour,
Hammond and Neudigate, two of the duke's servants, Sir Ralph Vane and Sir
Thomas Palmer were arrested and committed to custody. Next day, the duchess of
Somerset, with her favorites, Crane and his wife, Sir Miles Partridge, Sir
Michael Stanhope, Bannister, and others were thrown into prison. Sir Thomas
Palmer, who had all along acted the part of a spy upon Somerset, accused him of
having formed a design to raise an insurrection in the north, to attack the
gens d'armes on a muster-day, to secure the Tower, and to excite a rebellion in
London: But what was the only probable accusation, he asserted, that Somerset
had once laid a project for murdering Northumberland, Northampton, and Pembroke
at a banquet, which was to be given them by lord Paget. Crane and his wife
confirmed Palmer's testimony with regard to this last design; and it appears
that some rash scheme of that nature had been mentioned; though no regular
conspiracy had been formed, nor means prepared for its execution. Hammond
confessed, that the duke had armed men to guard him one night in his house at
Greenwich.

Trial of Somerset.
SOMERSET was brought to his trial before the marquis of Winchester, who acted
as high steward. Twenty-seven peers sat as the jury, among whom were
Northumberland, Pembroke, and Northampton, whom decency should have hindered
from acting as judges in the trial of a man, who appeared to be their capital
enemy. Somerset was accused of high treason on account of the projected
insurrections, and of felony in forming a design to murder privy counselors.

WE have a very imperfect account of all state trials during that age, which is
a sensible defect in our history: But it appears, that some more regularity was
observed in the management of this prosecution than had been usually employed
in like cases. The witnesses were at least examined by the privy council; and
though they were neither produced in court, nor confronted with the 1st December.
prisoner (circumstances required by the strict principles of equity) their
depositions were given in to the jury. The proof seems to have been very lame
with regard to the treasonable part of the charge; and Somerset's defense was
so satisfactory, that the peers gave verdict in his favor: The intention alone
of assaulting the privy counselors was supported by any tolerable evidence;
and the jury brought him in guilty of felony. The prisoner himself confessed,
that he had mentioned the design of murdering Northumberland and the other
lords; but had not formed any resolution on that head: And when he received
sentence, he asked pardon of those peers for the designs which he had hearkened
to against them. The people, by whom Somerset was beloved, hearing the first
part of his sentence, by which he was absolved from treason, expressed their
joy by loud acclamations: But their satisfaction was suddenly damped, on
finding that he was condemned to death for felony Hayward, p. 320, 321, 322.
Stowe, p. 60^. Hollingshed, p. 1* 67.
.

His execution.
on Tower Hill, amidst great crowds of spectators, who bore him such sincere
kindness, that they entertained, to the last moment, the fond hopes of his
pardon Hayward, p. 324, 325.
. 22d January.
Many of them rushed in to dip their handkerchiefs in his blood, which they long
preserved as a precious relict; and some of them soon after, when
Northumberland met with a like doom, upbraided him with this cruelty, and
displayed to him these symbols of his crime. Somerset indeed, though many actions
of his life were very exceptionable, seems, in general, to have merited a
better fate; and the faults, which he committed, were owing to weakness, not to
any bad intentions. His virtues were better calculated for private than for
public life; and by his want of penetration and firmness, he was ill-fitted to
extricate himself from those cabals and violences to which that age was so much
addicted. Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir Michael Stanhope, Sir Miles Partridge, and
Sir Ralph Vane, all of them Somerset's friends, were brought to their trial,
condemned and executed: Great injustice seems to have been used in their
prosecution. Lord Paget, chancellor of the duchy, was, on some pretense, tried
in the Star Chamber, and condemned in a fine of 6000 pounds, with the loss of
his office. To mortify him the more, he was degraded from the order of the
garter; as unworthy, on account of his mean birth, to share that honor Stowe,
p. ^08.
. Lord Rich, chancellor, was also compelled to resign his office, on the
discovery of some friendship, which he had shown to Somerset.

THE day after the execution of Somerset, a session of Parliament was held, 23d
January. A Parliament.
where farther advances were made for the establishment of the reformation. The
new liturgy was authorized; and penalties were enacted against all such as
absented themselves from public worship 5 and 6 Edw. VI. ^. 1.
. To use the mass had already been prohibited under very severe penalties; so
that the reformers, it appears, whatever scope they had given to their own
private judgment, in disputing the tenets of the ancient religion, were
resolved not to allow the same privilege to others; and the practice, nay the
very doctrine of toleration, was, at that time, equally unknown to all sects
and parties. To dissent from the religion of the magistrate was universally
conceived to be as criminal as to question his title, or rebel against his
authority.

A LAW was enacted against usury; that is, against taking any interest for
money Ib ^ 20.
. This act was the effect of ancient superstitions; but being found extremely
iniquitous in itself, as well as prejudicial to commerce, it was afterward
repealed in the twelfth of Elizabeth. The common rate of interest,
notwithstanding the law, was at that time 14 per cent Hayward, p. 318.
.

A BILL was introduced by the ministry into the house of lords, renewing those
rigorous statutes of treasons, which had been abrogated in the beginning of
this reign; and though the peers, by their high station, stood most exposed to
these tempests of state, yet had they so little regard to public authority, or
even to their own true interests, that they passed the bill with only one
dissenting voice Paliamentary Hist. vol. III p. 258. Burnet, vol. II. p. 1^0.
. But the commons rejected it, and prepared a new bill, that passed into a law,
by which it was enacted, that whoever should call the King or any of his heirs,
named in the statute of the 35th of the last reign, heretic, schismatic,
tyrant, infidel, or usurper of the crown, should forfeit, for the first
offense, their goods and chattels, and be imprisoned during pleasure; for the
second, should be in a praemunire; for the third, should be attainted of
treason. But if any should unadvisedly advance such a slander in writing,
printing, painting, carving or graving, he was, for the first offense, to be
held a traitor 5 and 6 Edw. VI. cap. 2.
. It may be worthy of notice, that the King and his next heir, the lady Mary,
were professedly of different religions; and religions, which threw on each
other the imputation of heresy, schism, idolatry, profaneness, blasphemy,
wickedness, and all the opprobrious epithets, that religious zeal has invented.
It was almost impossible, therefore, for the people, if they spoke on these
subjects at all, not to fall into the crime, so severely punished by this
statute; and the jealousy of the commons for liberty, though it led them to
dissent from the lords, appears not to have been very active, vigilant or
clear-sighted.

THE commons annexed to this bill a clause which was of much more importance
than the bill itself, that no one should be convicted of any kind of treason,
unless the crime was proved by the oaths of two witnesses, who were confronted
with the prisoner. The lords scrupled to pass this clause; though required by the
most obvious principles of equity, and though their own interest was fully as
much concerned as that of the commons. But the members of that house trusted
for protection to their present personal interest and power, and neglected the
noblest and most permanent security, that of the laws.

A BILL was introduced into the house of peers for making a provision for the
poor; but the commons, not choosing that a money-bill should begin in the
upperhouse, framed a new bill to the same purpose. By this bill, the
churchwardens were empowered to collect charitable contributions for the poor,
and if any refused to contribute, or dissuaded others from that charity, the
bishop of the diocese was empowered to proceed against them. Such a large
discretionary power, entrusted to the prelates, seems as proper an object of
jealousy as the authority assumed by the peers 5 and 6 Edw. ^I. cap. 3.
.

THERE was another occasion in which the Parliament reposed an unusual
confidence in the bishops. They empowered them to proceed against such as
neglected the Sundays and holydays Ib. cap. 3.
. But these were unguarded concessions granted to the church: The general
humor of the times led men to bereave the ecclesiastics of all their power,
and even to pillage them of all their property: Many clergymen were obliged for
a subsistence to turn carpenters or tailors, and some kept alehouses Burnet,
vol. II. p. (...).
. The bishops themselves were generally reduced to poverty, and held both their
revenues and spiritual office by a very precarious and uncertain tenure.

TONSTAL, bishop of Durham, was one of the most eminent prelates of that age,
still less for the dignity of his see, than for his own personal merit, his
learning, moderation, humanity, and benesicence. He had opposed, by his vote
and authority, all the innovations in religion; but so soon as they were
enacted, he had always submitted, and had paid conformity to each system of
religion, which was established. The known probity of his mind had made this
compliance be ascribed, not to an interested or time serving spirit, but to a
sense of duty, which led him to think that all private opinions ought to be
sacrificed to the great concerns of public peace and tranquillity. That general
regard which was paid his character, had preserved him from any severe
treatment during the protectorship of Somerset; but when Northumberland gained
the ascendant, he was thrown into prison; and as that rapacious nobleman had
formed a design of appropriating the revenues of the sea of Durham, and of
forming to himself a principality in the northern counties, he was resolved, in
order to effectuate his purpose, to deprive Tonstal of his bishopric. A bill of
attainder, therefore, under pretense of misprision of treason, was introduced
into the house of peers against that prelate; and it passed with the opposition
only of lord Stourt^n, a zealous catholic, and of Cranmer, who always bore a
cordial and sincere friendship to the bishop of Durham. But when the bill was
sent down to the commons, they required that witnesses should be examined, that
Tonstal should be allowed to defend himself, and that he should be confronted
with his accusers: And when these demands were refused, they rejected the bill.

THIS equity, so unusual in the Parliament during that age, was ascribed by
Northumberland and his partisans, not to any regard for liberty and justice,
but to the prevalence of Somerset's faction in a house of commons, which, being
chosen during the administration of that nobleman, had been almost entirely
filled with his creatures. They were confirmed in this opinion, when they
sound, that a bill confirming the attainder of Somerset and his accomplices was
also rejected by the commons, though it had passed the upper house. A resolution
was 15th April.
therefore taken to dissolve the Parliament, which had sat during this whole
reign; and soon after to summon a new one.

A new Parliament.
NORTHUMBERLAND, in order to ensure to himself a house of commons entirely
obsequious to his will, ventured on an expedient which could not have been
practiced, or even thought of, in an age, when there was any idea or
comprehension of liberty. He engaged the King to write circular letters to all
the sheriffs, in which he enjoined them to inform the freeholders and voters,
that they were required to choose men of knowledge and experience for their
representatives. After this general exhortation, the King continued in these
words. "And yet, nevertheless, our pleasure is, that where our privy council,
or any of them shall, in our behalf, recommend, within their jurisdiction, men
of learning and wisdom; in such cases, their directions shall be regarded and
followed, as tending to the same end which we desire, that is, to have this
assembly composed of the pers ns in our realm the best sitted to give advice
and good council Strype's Eccles. Memorials, vol. II. p. 391.
." Several letters were sent from the King, recommending members to particular
counties, Sir Richard Cotton for Hampshire; Sir William Fitzwilliams and Sir
Henry Neville for Berkshire; Sir William Drury and Sir Henry Benningfield for
Suffolk, etc. But though some counties only received this species of conge
d'elire from the King; the recommendations from the privy council and the
counselors, we may fairly presume, would extend to the greatest part, if not
to the whole, of the kingdom.

IT is remarkable, that this attempt was made during the reign of a minor King,
when the royal authority is usually weakest; that it was patiently submitted
to; and that it gave so little umbrage as scarce to be taken notice of by any
historian. The painful and laborious collector above cited, who never omits the
most trivial matters, is the only person, that has thought this memorable
letter worthy of being transmitted to posterity.

1st March.
sentence of lay commissioners, appointed to try him, the sea of Durham was by
act of Parliament divided into two bishoprics, which had certain portions of
the revenue assigned them. The regalities of the sea, which included the
jurisdiction of a count palatine, were given by the King to Northumberland; and
it was not to be doubted but that nobleman had also proposed to make rich
plunder of the revenue, as was then the usual practice of the courtiers,
whenever a bishopric fell vacant.

THE commons gave the ministry another mark of attachment, which was at that
time the most sincere, the most cordial, and the most difficult to be obtained:
They granted a supply of two subsidies and two fifteenths. To render this
present the more acceptable, they voted a preamble, containing a long
accusation of Somerset, "for involving the King in wars, wasting his treasure,
engaging him in much debt, embasing the coin, and giving occasion for a most
terrible rebellion 7 Edw. VI. ^^p. 1^.
."

THE debts of the crown were at this time very considerable. The King had
received from France 400,000 crowns on delivering Boulogne; he had reaped
profits from the sale of some chantry lands; the churches had been despoiled of
all their plate and rich ornaments, which, by a decree of council, without any
pretense of law or equity, had been converted to the King's use Heylin, p. (...)
: Yet such had been the rapacity of the courtiers, that the crown was indebted
about 300,000 pounds Strype's Eccles. Mem. vol. II. p. ^14.
; and great depredations were, at the same time, made of the royal demesnes.
The young prince showed, among other virtues, a disposition to frugality,
which, had he lived, would soon have retrieved these losses: But as his health
was declining very fast, the present emptiness of the exchequer was a sensible
obstacle to the execution of those projects, which the ambition of
Northumberland had founded on the prospect of Edward's approaching end.

Succession changed.
THAT nobleman represented to the prince, whom youth and an infirm state of
health made susceptible of every impression, that his two sisters, Mary and
Elizabeth, had both been declared illegitimate by act of Parliament, and though
Henry by his will had restored them to a place in the succession, the nation
would never bear to see the throne of England filled by a bastard: That they
were only the King's sisters by the half-blood; and even if they were
legitimate, could not enjoy the crown as his heirs and successors: That the
Queen of Scots stood excluded by the king's will; and being an alien, lost all
right of inheriting by the law; not to mention, that, as she was betrothed to
the dauphin, she would, by her succession, render England, as she had already
done Scotland, a province to France: That the certain consequence of his sister
Mary's succession, or that of the Queen of Scots, was the abolition of the
protestant religion, the repeal of those laws enacted in favor of the
reformation, and the re-establishment of the usurpations and idolatry of the
church of Rome: That fortunately for England, the same order of succession,
which justice required, was also the most conformable to public interest; and
there was not on any side any just ground for doubt or deliberation: That when
these three princesses were excluded by such solid reasons, the succession
devolved to the marchioness of Dorset, eldest daughter to the French Queen and
the duke of Suffolk: That the next heir of the marchioness was the lady Jane
Gray, a lady of the most amiable virtue, accomplished by the best education,
both for literature and for religion; and every way worthy of a throne: And
that even, if her title by blood should be doubtful, which there was no just
reason to pretend, the King was possessed of the same power, which his father
enjoyed; and might leave her the crown by letters patent. These reasonings made
impression on the young prince; and above all, his zealous affection for the
protestant religion made him apprehend the consequences, if so bigoted a
catholic as his sister Mary should succeed to the throne. And though he bore a
tender affection to the lady Elizabeth, who was liable to no such objection,
means were found to persuade him, that he could not exclude the one sister, on
account of illegitimacy, without also giving an exclusion to the other.

NORTHUMBERLAND, finding that his arguments were likely to operate on the King,
began to prepare the other parts of that political fabric, which he intended to
raise. Two sons of the duke of Suffolk by a second venture having died, this
season, of the sweating sickness, that title was extinct; and Northumberland
engaged the King to bestow it on the marquis of Dorset. By means of this favor
and of others, which he conferred upon him, he persuaded the new duke of
Suffolk and the duchess, to give their daughter, the lady Jane, in marriage to
his fourth son, the lord Guilford Dudley. In order to fortify himself by
farther alliances, he negotiated a marriage between the lady Catherine Gray,
second daughter to Suffolk, and lord Herbert, eldest son to the earl of
Pembroke. He also married his own daughter to lord Hastings, eldest son to the
earl of Huntingdon Heylin, p. 109. Stowe, 609.
. These marriages were solemnized with great pomp and festivity; and the
people, who hated Northumberland, could not forbear expressing their
indignation at seeing these public demonstrations of joy, during the
languishing state of the young prince's health.

EDWARD had been seized in the foregoing year, first with the measles, then
with the small pox; but having perfectly recovered both these distempers, the
nation entertained hopes, that they would only serve to confirm his health; and
he had afterward made a progress through some parts of the kingdom. It was
suspected, that he had there overheated himself in exercises: He was seized
with a cough, The King's sicknets.
which proved obstinate, and gave way neither to regimen nor medicines: Several
fatal symptoms of a consumption appeared; and though it was hoped, that, as the
season of the year advanced, his youth and temperance might get the better of
the malady, men saw with great concern his bloom and vigor insensibly decay.
The general attachment to the young prince, joined to the hatred borne the
Dudleys, made it be remarked, that Edward had every moment declined in health,
from the time that lord Robert Dudley had been put about him, in the quality of
gentleman of the bedchamber.

THE languishing state of Edward's health made Northumberland the more intent
on the execution of his project. He removed all, except his own emissaries,
from about the King: He himself attended him with the greatest assiduity: He
pretended the most anxious concern for his health and welfare: And by all these
artifices, he prevailed on him to give his final consent to the settlement
projected. Sir Edward Montague, chief justice of the Common Pleas, Sir John
Baker and Sir Thomas Bromley, two judges, with the attorney and solicitor
general were sent for to the council; where, after the minutes of the intended
deed were ^^ad to them, the King required them to d^^^ them up in the form of
letters patent. They hesitated in obeying this order; and desired time to
consider of it. The more they reflected, the greater dang^^ they sound in
compliance. The settlement of the crown by Henry the eighth had been made in
consequence of an art of Parliament; and by another act, passed in the
beginning of this reign, it was declared treason in any of the heirs, their
aiders or abettors, to attempt on the right of another, or change the order of
succession. The judges pleaded these reasons before the council. They urged,
that such a patent as was intended would be entirely invalid; that it would
subject, not only the judges who drew it, but every counselor who signed it,
to the pains of treason; and that the only proper expedient, both to give force
to the new settlement, and free its partisans from danger, was to summon a
Parliament, and obtain the consent and sanction of that assembly. The King
said, that he intended afterward to follow that method, and would call a
Parliament, in which he proposed to have his settlement ratified; but in the
mean time, he required the judges, on their allegiance, to draw the patent in
the form required. The council told the judges, that their refusal would
subject them all to the pains of treason. Northumberland gave to Montague the
appellation of traitor; and said that he would fight in his shirt with any man
in so just a quarrel as that of the lady Jane's succession. The judges were
reduced to great difficulties between the dangers of the law, and those arising
from the violence of present power and authority Fuller, book VIII. p. 2.
.

THE arguments were canvassed in several different meetings between the council
and the judges; and no solution could be found of the present difficulties. At
last, Montague proposed an expedient, which satisfied both his brethren and the
counselors. He desired, that a special commission should be passed by the King
and council, requiring the judges to draw a patent for the new settlement of
the crown; and that a pardon should immediately after be granted them for any
offense which they might have committed by their compliance. When the patent
was drawn and brought to the bishop of Ely, chancellor, in order to pass the
great seal, that prelate required, that all the judges should sign it. Gosnald
at first refused; and it was with much difficulty, that he was prevailed on, by
the violent menaces of Northumberland, to comply; but the constancy of Sir
James Hales, who, though a zealous protestant, preferred justice on this occasion
to the prejudices of his party, could not be shaken by any expedient. The
chancellor next required, for his greater security, that all the privy
counselors should set their hands to the patent: The intrigues of
Northumberland or the fears of his violence 21st June.
were so prevalent, that the counselors complied with this demand. Cranmer
alone hesitated during some time, but yielded at last to the earnest and
pathetic entreaties of the King C^anm. Mem. p. (...).
. Cecil, at that time secretary of state, pretended afterward that he only
signed as a witness to the King's subscription. And thus, by the King's letters
patent, the two princesses, Mary and Elizabeth, were set aside; and the crown
was settled on the heirs of the duchess of Suffolk: For the duchess herself
was content to be postponed to her daughters.

AFTER this settlement was made, with so many inauspicious circumstances,
Edward declined visibly every day in his health; and small hopes were
entertained of his recovery. To make the matter worse, his physicians were
dismissed by Northumberland's advice and by an order of council; and he was put
into the hands of an ignorant woman, who undertook, in a little time, to
restore him to his former state of health. After the use of her medicines, all
the bad symptoms increased to the most violent degree: He felt a difficulty of
speech and breathing; his pulse failed, his legs swelled, his color became
livid; and many And death* 6th July.
other symptoms appeared of his approaching end. He expired at Greenwich in the
sixteenth year of his age, and the seventh of his reign.

ALL the English historians dwell with pleasure on the excellencies of this
young prince; whom the flattering promises of hope, joined to many real
virtues, had made an object of the most tender affections of the public. He
possessed mildness of disposition, application to study and business, a
capacity to learn and judge, and an attachment to equity and justice. He seems
only to have contracted from his education and from the age in which he lived,
too much of a narrow prepossession in matters of religion, which made him
incline somewhat to bigotry and persecution: But as the bigotry of protestants,
less governed by priests, lies under more restraints than that of catholics,
the effects of this malignant quality were the less to be apprehended, if a
longer life had been granted to young Edward.

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, UNDER THE HOUSE of TUDOR.
MARY.
CHAP. I.
Lady Jane Gray proclaimed Queen. -- Deserted by the people. -- The Queen
proclaimed and acknowledged. -- Northumberland executed. Catholic religion
restored. -- A Parliament. -- Deliberations with regard to the Queen's
marriage. -- Queen's marriage with Philip. -- Wyat's insurrection. --
Suppressed. -- Execution of lady Jane Gray. -- A Parliament. -- Philip's
arrival in England.

THE title of the princess Mary to the crown, after the decease of her brother,
was not liable to any considerable difficulty; and the objections started by
the lady Jane's partisans, were new and unheard of by the nation. Though all the
protestants, and even many of the catholics, believed the marriage of Henry the
eighth with Catherine of Arragon to be unlawful and invalid; yet as it had been
contracted by the parties without any criminal intention, had been avowed by
their parents, recognized by the nation, and seemed sounded on those principles
of law and religion, which then prevailed, very few imagined, that their issue
ought on that account to be regarded as illegitimate. A declaration to that
purpose had indeed been extorted from the Parliament by the usual violence and
caprice of Henry; but as that monarch had afterward been induced to restore
his daughter to the right of succession, her title was now become as legal and
parliamentary as it was ever esteemed just and natural. The public had been
long familiarized to these sentiments: During all the reign of Edward, the
princess was considered as his lawful successor: And though the protestants
dreaded the effects of her prejudices, the extreme hatred, universally
entertained against the Dudleys Sleidan* lib. 25.
, who, men foresaw, would, under the name of Jane, be the real sovereigns, was
more than sufficient to counterballance, even with that party, the attachment
to religion. This last attempt, to violate the order of succession, had
displayed Northumberland's ambition and injustice in a full light; and when the
people reflected on the long train of fraud, iniquity and cruelty, by which
that project had been conducted; that the lives of the two Seymours, as well as
the title of the princesses, had been sacrificed to it; they were moved by
indignation to exert themselves in opposition to such criminal enterprises. The
general veneration also, paid to the memory of Henry the eighth, prompted the
nation to defend the rights of his posterity; and the miseries of the ancient
civil wars were not so entirely forgotten, that men were willing, by a
departure from the lawful heir, to incur the danger of the like bloodshed and
confusion.

NORTHUMBERLAND, sensible of the opposition he must expect, had carefully
concealed the destination made by the King; and in order to bring the two
princesses into his power, he had had the precaution to engage the council,
before Edward's death, to write to them in that prince's name, desiring their
attendance, under pretext, that his infirm state of health required the
assistance of their counsel and the consolation of their company Heylin, p. 154.
. Edward expired before their arrival; but Northumberland, in order to make the
princesses fall into the share, kept the King's death still secret; and the
lady Mary had already reached Hoddesden, within half a day's journey of the
court. Happily, the earl of Arundel sent her private intelligence, both of her
brother's death and of the conspiracy formed against her Burnet, vol. II. p.
233.
: She immediately made haste to retire; and arrived by quick journeys, first at
Kenning-hall in Norfolk, then at Framlingham in Suffolk; where she proposed to
embark and retire to Flanders, in case she should find it impossible to defend
her right of succession. She wrote letters to the nobility and most
considerable gentry in every county of England; commanding them to assist her
in the defense of her crown and person. And she dispatched a message to the
council; by which she notified to them, that her brother's death was no longer
a secret to her, promised them pardon for past offenses, and required them
immediately to give orders for proclaiming her title in London Fox, vol. III.
p. 14.
.

NORTHUMBERLAND found that farther dissimulation was vain: He went to
Sion-house Thuanus, lib. xiii. c. 2.
, accompanied with the duke of Suffolk, the earl of Pembroke, and others of the
nobility; and he approached the lady Jane, who resided there, with all the
respect usually paid to the sovereign. Jane was, in a great measure, Lady Jane
Gray proclaimed Queen.
ignorant of all these transactions; and it was with equal grief and surprise,
that she received intelligence of them Godwin in Kennet, p. 329. Heylin, p.
149. Burnet, vol. II. p. 234.
. She was a lady of the most amiable person, the most engaging disposition, the
most accomplished parts; and being of an equal age with the late King, she had
received all her education with him, and seemed even to possess a greater
facility in acquiring every part of manly and polite literature. She had
attained a knowledge of the Roman and Greek languages, beside modern tongues;
had passed most of her time in an application to learning; and expressed a
great indifference for other occupations and amusements usual with her sex and
station. Roger Ascham, tutor to the lady Elizabeth, having at one time paid her
a visit, found her employed in the reading of Plato, while the rest of the
family were engaged in a party of hunting in the park; and upon his admiring
the singularity of her choice, she told him, that she received more pleasure
from that author than the others could reap from all their sport and gaity. Her
heart, full of this passion for literature and the elegant arts, and of
tenderness toward her husband, who was deserving of her affection, had never
opened itself to the flattering allurements of ambition; and the information of
her advancement to the throne was by no means agreeable to her. She even
refused to accept the present; pleaded the preferable right of the two
princesses; expressed her dread of the consequences attending an enterprise so
dangerous, not to say so criminal; and desired to remain in that private
station in which she was born. Overcome at last with the entreaties, rather
than reasons, of her father and father-in-law, and above all of her husband,
she submitted to their will, and was prevailed on to relinquish her own
judgment. It was then usual for the Kings of England, after their accession, to
pass the first days in the Tower; and Northumberland immediately conveyed
thither the new sovereign Heylin, p. 159.
. All the counselors were oblig^d to attend her to that fortress; and by this
means became, in some measure, prisoners in the hands of Northumberland, whose
will they were necessitated to obey. Orders were given by the council, to
proclaim Jane throughout the kingdom; but these orders were executed only in
London, and the neighborhood. No applause ensued: The people heard the
proclamation with silence and concern: Some even expressed their scorn and
contempt: And one Pot, a vintner's prentice, was severely punished for this
offense Ibid. p. 160.
. The protestant teachers themselves, who were employed to convince the people
of Jane's title, found their eloquence fruitless Godwin, p. 330. Heylin, p.
162. Burnet, vol. II. p. 236, 238.
; and Ridley, bishop of London, who preached a sermon to that purpose, wrought
no effect upon his audience Stowe, p. 611. Hollingshed, p. 1087. S^^ype's Mem.
vol. III. p. 3.
.

THE people of Suffolk, meanwhile, paid their attendance on Mary. As they were
much attached to the reformed communion, they could not forbear, amidst their
tenders of duty, to express their apprehension for the protestant religion; but
when she assured them, that she never meant to change the laws of Edward Fox,
vol. III. p. 15. Baker, p. 31^. Speed, p. 816.
, they enlisted themselves in her cause with zeal and affection. The nobility
and gentry flocked to her daily, and brought her reinforcement. The earls of
Bath and Suffex, the eldest sons of lord Wharton and lord Mordaunt, Sir William
Drury, Sir Henry Benningfield, Henry Jerningham, persons whose interests lay in
the neighborhood, appeared at the head of their tenants and retainers Heylin,
p. 160. Burnet, vol. II. p. 2^7.
. Sir Edward Hastings, brother of the earl of Huntingdon, having received a
commission from the council to make levies for the lady Jane in
Buckinghamshire, carried over his troops, which amounted to four thousand men,
and joined Queen Mary. Even a fleet, which had been sent by Northumberland to
lie off the coast of Suffolk, being forced into Yarmouth by a storm, were
engaged to declare for that princess.

NORTHUMBERLAND, who had hitherto been blinded by ambition, saw at last the
danger gather round him, and knew not to what hand to turn himself. He had
levied forces, which were assembled at London; but dreading the cabals of the
courtiers and counselors, whose compliance, he knew, had been entirely the
result of fear or artifice, he was resolved to keep near the person of the lady
Jane, and send Suffolk to command the army. But the counselors, who wished to
remove him Godwin, p. 330. Heylin, p. 159. Burnet, vol. II. p. 239. Fox, vol.
III. p. 15.
, working on the filial tenderness of Jane, magnified to her the danger to
which her father would be exposed, and represented, that Northumberland, who
had gained reputation by suppressing formerly a rebellion in those parts, was
much more proper to command in that enterprise. The Duke himself, who knew the
slender capacity of Suffolk, began to think, that none but himself was able to
encounter the present danger; and he agreed to take on him the command of the
troops. The counselors attended on him at his departure with the highest
protestations of attachment, and none more than Arundel, his mortal enemy
Heylin, p. 1^1. Baker, p. 315. Hollingshed, p. 1086.
. As he went along, he remarked the disaffection of the people, which foreboded
a fatal issue to his ambitious hopes. "Many," said he to lord Gray, who
attended him, "come out to look at us, but I find not one who cries, God speed
you Speed, p. 816.
."

THE duke had no sooner reached St. Edmond's-bury, than he found his army,
which never exceeded six thousand men, too weak to encounter the Queen's
Godwin, p. 3^1.
, which amounted to double the number. He wrote to the council, desiring them
to send him a reinforcement; and the counselors immediately laid hold of this
pretense to free themselves from their confinement. They left the Tower, as if
Lady Jane deserted by the people.
they meant to execute Northumberland's commands; but being assembled in
Baynard's-castle, a house belonging to Pembroke, they deliberated concerning
the method of shaking off his usurped tyranny. Arundel began the conference, by
representing the injustice and cruelty of Northumberland, the exorbitancy of
his ambition, the criminal enterprise which he had projected, and the guilt in
which he had involved the whole council; and he asserted, that the only method
of making atonement for their past offense, was by a prompt return to the duty
which they owed their lawful sovereign Ibid. p. 331, 332. Thuanus, lib. xiii.
. This motion was seconded by Pembroke, who, clapping his hand to his sword,
swore he was ready to fight any man who expressed himself of a contrary
sentiment. The mayor and aldermen of London were immediately sent for, who
discovered great alacrity in obeying the orders they received to proclaim Mary.
The people expressed their approbation by shouts of applause. Even Suffolk, who
commanded in the Tower, finding resistance vain, opened the gates, and declared
for the Queen. The lady Jane, after wearing the vain pageantry of a crown
during ten days, returned to a private life with much more satisfaction than
she felt when the royalty was tendered to her Godwin, p. 332. Thuan. lib. xiii.
c. 2.
: And the messengers who were sent to Northumberland, with orders to lay down
his arms, found that he had despaired of success, was deserted by all his
followers, and had already proclaimed the Queen, with exterior ma^ks of joy and
satisfaction Stowe, p. 612.
. The Queen proclaimed and acknowleged.
The people every where, on the Queen's approach to London, gave sensible
expressions of their loyalty and attachment. And the lady Elizabeth met her at
the head of a thousand horse, which that princess had levied, in order to
support their joint title against the usurper Burnet, vol. II. p. 240. Heylin,
p. 19. Stowe, p. 613.
.

THE Queen gave orders for taking into custody the duke of Northumberland, who
fell on his knees to the earl of Ar^ndel that arrested him, and abjectly begged
his life Burnet, vol. II. p. 239. Stowe, p. 612. Baker, p. 315. Hollingshed, p.
1088.
. At the same time were committed, the earl of Warwic, his eldest son, Ambrose
and Henry Dudley, two of his younger sons, Sir Andrew Dudley his brother, the
marquess of Northampton, the earl of Huntingdon, Sir Thomas Palmer, and Sir
John Gates. The Queen afterward confined the duke of Suffolk, the lady Jane
Gray, and lord Guilford Dudley. But Mary was desirous, in the beginning of her
reign, to acquire popularity by the appearance of clemency; and because the
counselors pleaded constraint, as an excuse for their treason, she extended
her pardon to most of them. Suffolk himself recovered his liberty; and he owed
this indulgence, in a great measure, to the contempt entertained of his
capacity. But the guilt of Northumberland was too great, as well as his
ambition and courage too dangerous, to permit him to entertain any reasonable
hopes of life. When brought to his trial, he only desired permission to ask two
questions of the peers who were appointed to sit on his jury; whether a man
could be guilty of treason who obeyed orders given him by the council under the
great seal? and whether those who were involved in the same guilt with himself,
could act as his judges? Being told, that the great seal of an usurper was no
authority, and that persons who lay not under any sentence of attainder, were
still innocent in the eye of the law, and might be admitted on any jury Burnet,
vol. II. p. 243. Heylin, p. 18. Baker, p. 316. Hollingshed, p. 1089.
; he acquiesced, and pleaded guilty. At his execution, he made profession of
the catholic religion, and told the people, that they never would enjoy
tranquillity 22 August. Northumberland executed.
till they returned to the faith of their ancestors: Whether that such were his
real sentiments, which he had formerly concealed, from interest and ambition,
or that he hoped, by this declaration, to render the Queen more favorable to
his family Heylin, p. 19. Burnet, vol. III. p. 243. Stowe, p. 614.
. Sir Thomas Palmer, and Sir John Gates, suffered with him; and this was all
the blood spilt on account of so dangerous and criminal an enterprise against
the rights of the sovereign. Sentence was pronounced against the lady Jane and
lord Guilford; but without any present intention of putting it in execution.
The youth and innocence of the persons, neither of whom had reached their
seventeenth year, pleaded sufficiently in their favor.

WHEN Mary first arrived in the Tower, the duke of Norfolk, who had been
detained prisoner during all the last reign; Courtney, son to the marquess of
Exeter, who, without being charged with any crime, had been subjected to the
same punishment ever since his father's attainder; Gardener, Tonstal, and
Bonner, who had been confined for their adherence to the catholic cause,
appeared before her, and implored her clemency and protection Heylin, p. 20.
Stowe, p. 61^ Holingshed, p. 1088.
. They were all of them restored to their liberty, and immediately admitted to
her confidence and favor* Norfolk's attainder, notwithstanding that it had
passed in Parliament, was represented as null and invalid; because, among other
informalities, no special matter had been alleged against him, except wearing a
coat of arms, which he and his ancestors, without giving any offense, had
always made use of in the face of the court and of the whole nation. Courtney
received the title of earl of Devonshire; and though educated in such close
confinement, that he was altogether unacquainted with the world, he soon
acquired all the accomplishments of a courtier and a gentleman, and made a
considerable figure during the few years which he lived after he recovered his
liberty. Besides performing all those popular acts, which, though they only
regarded individuals, were very acceptable to the nation, the Queen endeavored
to ingratiate herself with the public, by granting a general pardon, though with
some exceptions, and by remitting the subsidy voted to her brother in the last
Parliament Stowe, p. ^16.
.

THE joy arising from the succession of the lawful heir, and from the gracious
demeanor of the sovereign, hindered not the people from being agitated with
great anxiety concerning the state of religion; and as the bulk of the nation
inclined to the protestant communion, apprehensions were generally entertained
of the principles and prejudices of the new Queen. The legitimacy of Mary's
birth had appeared to be somewhat connected with the papal authority; and as
that princess was educated with her mother, she had imbibed the strongest
attachment to the catholic communion, and the highest aversion to those new
tenets, whence, she believed, all the misfortunes of her family had originally
sprung. The discouragements which she lay under from her father, though at last
they brought her to comply with his will, tended still more to increase her
disgust to the reformers; and the vexations which the protector and the council
gave her, during Edward's reign, had no other effect than to confirm her
farther in her prejudices. Naturally of a four and obstinate temper, and
irritated by contradictions and mis^ortunes, she possessed all the qualities
fitted to compose a bigot; and her extreme ignorance rendered her utterly
incapable of doubt in her own belief, or of indulgence to the opinions of
others. The nation, therefore, had great reason to dread, not only the
abolition, but the persecution of the established religion from the zeal of
Mary; and it was not long before she discovered her intentions.

Catholic religion (...)
GARDENER, Bonner, Tonstal, Day, Heath, Vesey, were reins^ated in their ^ees,
either by a direct act of power, or, what is nearly the same, by the sentence
of commissioners, who were appointed to review their process and condemnation.
Though the bishopric of Durham had been dissolved by authority of Parliament, the
Queen erected it anew by letters-patent, and replaced Tonstal in his regalities
as well as in his revenue. Under pretense of discouraging controversy, she
silenced, by her prerogative, all the preachers throughout England, except such
as should obtain a particular license Heylin, p. 23. Fox, vol. III. p. 16.
Strype's Mem. vol. III. p. 26.
; and it was easy to forsee that none but the catholics would be favored with
this privilege. Holgate, archbishop of York, Coverdale, bishop of Exeter,
Audley of London, and Hooper of Gloucester, were thrown into prison; whither old
Latimer also was sent soon after Godwin, p. 336.
. The zealous bishops and priests were encouraged in their forwardness to
revive the mass, though contrary to the present laws. Judge Hales, who had
discovered such constancy in defending the Queen's title, lost all his merit by
an opposition to those illegal practices; and being committed to custody, was
treated with such severity, that he fell into frenzy, and killed himself
Burnet, vol. II. p. 247. Fox, vol. III. p. 15, 19. Baker, p. 31^.
. The men of Suffolk were brow-beaten, when they presumed to plead the promise
which the Queen, when they inlisted themselves in her service, had given them,
of maintaining the reformed religion: One, in particular, was set in the
pillory, because he had been too peremptory in recalling to her memory the
engagements which she had taken on that occasion. And though the Queen still
promised, in a public declaration before the council, to tolerate those who
differed from her Burnet, vol II. p. 215.
, men foresaw, that this engagement, like the former, would prove but a feeble
security, when set in opposition to religious prejudices.

THE merits of Cranmer toward the Queen, during the reign of Henry, had been
considerable; and he had successfully employed his good offices in mitigating
the severe prejudices which that monarch had entertained against her Ibid. p.
240, 241. Heylin, p. 25. Godwin, p. 33^.
. But the active part which he bore in promoting her mother's divorce, as well
as in conducting the reformation, had made him the object of her hatred; and
though Gardener had been equally forward in soliciting and defending the
divorce, he had afterward made sufficient atonement by his sufferings in
de^ence of the catholic cause. The primate, therefore, had reason to expect
little favor during the present reign; but it was by his own indiscreet zeal,
that he brought on himself the first violence and persecution. A report being
spread, that Cranmer, in order to make his court to the Queen, had promised to
officiate in the Latin service, the archbishop, to wipe off this aspersion,
drew up a manifesto in his own defense. Among other expressions, he there said,
that as the devil was a ly^r from the beginning, and the father of lies, so he
had at this time stirred up his servants to persecute Christ and his true
religion: That that infernal spirit now endeavored to restore the Latin
satisfactory masses, a thing of his own invention and device; and in order to
effectuate his purpose, had falsely made use of Cranmer's name and authority:
And that the mass is not only without foundation, either in the scriptures or
the practice of the primitive church, but likewise discovers a plain
contradiction to antiquity and the inspired writings, and is besides replete
with many horrid blasphemies Fox, vol. III. p. 94. Heylin, p. 2^. Godwin, p.
3^6. Burnet, vol. II. Coll. No 8. Cranm. Mem. p. 3^5. Thuanus, lib. xiii. c. 2.
. On the publication of this inflammatory paper, Cranmer was thrown into
prison, and was tried for the part which he had acted, in concurring with the
lady Jane, and opposing the Queen's accession. Sentence of high treason was
pronounced against him; and though his guilt was shared with the whole privy
council, and was even less than that of most of the others, this sentence,
however severe, must be allowed entirely legal. The execution of it, however,
did not follow; and Cranmer was reserved for a more cruel punishment.

PETER Martyr, seeing a persecution gathering against the reformers, desired
leave to withdraw Heylin, p. 26. Godwin, p. 336. Cranm. Mem. p. 317.
; and while some zealous catholics moved for his commitment, Gardener both
pleaded, that he had come over by an invitation from the government, and
generously furnished him with supplies for his journey: But as bigoted zeal
still increased, his wife's body, which had been interred at Oxford, was
afterward dug up by public order, and buried in a dunghill Heylin, p. 2^.
. The bones of Bucer and Fagius, two foreign reformers, were about the same
time committed to the flames at Cambridge Saunders de Schism. Angli^.
. John A-lasco was first silenced, and then ordered to depart the kingdom with
his congregation. The greater part of the foreign protestants followed him; and
the nation thereby lost many useful hands for arts and manufactures. Several
English protestants also took shelter in foreign parts, and every thing bore a
dismal aspect for the reformation.

DURING this revolution of the court, no protection was expected by the
protestants 5 October.
from the Parliament, which was summoned to assemble. A zealous reformer Beale.
But Fox, who lived at the time, and is very minute in his narratives, says
nothing of the matter. See vol. III. p. 16.
A Parliament.
pretends, that great violence and iniquity were used in the elections; but
besides that the authority of this writer is inconsiderable, that practice, as
the necessities of government seldom required it, had not hitherto been often
employed in England. There still remained such numbers devoted, by opinion or
affection, to many principles of the ancient religion, that the authority of
the crown was able to give such candidates the prevalence in most elections;
and all those who scrupled compliance with the court religion, rather declined
taking a seat in the house, which, while it rendered them obnoxious to the
Queen, could afterward afford them no protection against the violence of
prerogative. It soon appeared, therefore, that a majority of the commons would
be obsequious to Mary's designs; and as the peers were mostly attached to the
court, from interest or expectation, little opposition was expected from that
quarter.

IN opening the Parliament, the court showed a very signal contempt of the
laws, by celebrating, before the two houses, a mass of the Holy Ghost, in the
Latin tongue, attended with all the ancient rites and ceremonies, though
abolished by act of parliament Fox, vol. III. p. 19.
. Tailor, bishop of Lincoln, having refused to kneel at this service, was very
severely handled, and was violently thrust out of the house Burnet, vol. II. p.
252.
. The Queen, however, still retained the title of supreme head of the church of
England; and it was generally pretended, that the intention of the court was
only to restore religion to the same condition in which it had been left by
Henry; but that the other abuses of popery, which were chiefly grievous to the
nation, would never be revived.

THE first bill passed by the Parliament, was of a very popular nature, and
abolished every species of treason which was not contained in the statute of
Edward the third, and every species of felony which did not subsist before the
first of Henry the eighth Mariae, sess. 1. c. 1. By this repeal, though it was in
general popular, the clause of 5 and 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. was lost, which required
the confronting two witnesses, in order to prove any treason.
. The Parliament next declared the Queen to be legitimate, ratified the
marriage of Henry with Catherine of Arragon, and annulled the divorce
pronounced by Cranmer Mariae, sess. 2. c. 1.
, whom they greatly blamed on that account. No mention, however, is made of the
pope's authority, as any ground of the marriage. The statutes of King Edward
with regard to religion, were repealed by one vote 1 Mariae, sess. 2. c. 12.
; and thereby the national religion was replaced on the same footing on which
it stood at the death of Henry. The attainder of the duke of Norfolk was
reversed; and this act of justice was much more reasonable than the declaring
that attainder invalid, without farther authority. Most of the clauses of the
riot act, passed in the late reign, were revived: A step which eluded, in a
great measure, the popular statute enacted at the first meeting of the
Parliament.

NOTWITHSTANDING the compliance of the two houses with the Queen's will, they
had still a reserve in certain articles; and her choice of a husband was, in
particular, of such importance to national interest, that they were determined
not to submit tamely, in that respect, to her will and inclination. There were
three marriages Thuan. lib. ii. c. 3.
, concerning which it was supposed that Mary deliberated after her accession to
the crown. The first person proposed to her, was Courtney, earl of Devonshire,
who, being an Englishman, nearly allied to the crown, could not fail to be
acceptable to the nation; and as he was of an engaging person and address, he
had gained visibly on the Queen's affections, and hints were dropped him of her
favorable dispositions toward him Godwin, p. 339.
. But that nobleman neglected these overtures; and seemed rather to attach
himself to the lady Elizabeth, whose youth, and agreeable conversation, he
preferred to all the power and grandeur of her sister. This choice occasioned a
great coldness of Mary toward Devonshire; and made her break out in a declared
animosity against Elizabeth. The ancient quarrel between their mothers had sunk
deep into the malignant heart of the Queen; and after the declaration made by
Parliament in favor of Catherine's marriage, she wanted not a pretense for
representing the birth of her sister as illegitimate. The attachment of
Elizabeth to the reformed religion offended Mary's bigotry; and as the young
princess had made some difficulty of disguising her sentiments, very violent
menaces had been employed to bring her to compliance. But when the Queen found
that Elizabeth had obstructed her views in a point, which, perhaps, touched her
still more nearly, her resentment, excited by pride, knew no longer any bounds;
and the princess was visibly exposed to the greatest danger Heylin, p. 31.
Bu^net, vol II. p. 255.
.

CARDINAL Pole, who had never taken any but deacon's orders, was another party
proposed to the Queen; and there appeared many reasons to induce her to make
choice of this prelate. The high character of Pole for virtue and generosity;
the great regard paid him by the catholic church, of which he had nearly
reached the highest dignity on the death of Paul the third Father Paul, book
iii.
; the Queen's affection for the countess of Salisbury, his mother, who had once
been her governess; the violent animosity to which he had been exposed on
account of his attachment to the Romish communion; all these considerations had
a powerful influence on Mary. But the cardinal was now in the decline of life;
and having contracted habits of study and retirement, he was represented as
unqualified for the bustle of a court, and the hurry of business Heylin, p. 31.
. The Queen, therefore, dropped all views of that alliance: But as she
entertained a great regard for Pole's wisdom and virtue, she still proposed to
reap the benefit of his advice in the administration of her government. She
secretly entered into a negotiation with Commendone, an agent of cardinal
Dandino, legate at Brussels; she sent assurances to the pope, then Julius the
third, of her earnest desire to reconcile herself and her kingdoms to the holy
see; and she desired that Pole might be appointed legate for the performance of
that pious office Burnet, vol. II. p. 258.
.

THESE two marriages being rejected, the Queen cast her eye toward the
emperor's family, from which her mother was descended, and which, during her
greatest distresses, had always afforded her countenance and protection.
Charles the fifth, who a few years before was almost absolute master of
Germany, had exercised his power in such an arbitrary manner, that he gave
extreme disgust to the nation, who apprehended the total extinction of their
liberties and privileges from the encroachments of that monarch Thuanus, lib.
iv. c. 17.
. Religion had served him as a pretense for his usurpations; and from the same
principle he met with that opposition which overthrew his grandeur, and dashed
all his ambitious hopes. Maurice, elector of Saxony, enraged that the landgrave
of Hesse, who, by his advice, and on his assurances, had put himself into the
emperor's hands, should be unjustly detained prisoner, formed a secret
conspiracy among the protestant princes; and covering his intentions with the
most artificial disguises, he suddenly marched his forces against Charles, and
narrowly missed becoming master of his person. The protestants flew to arms in
every quarter; and their insurrection, aided by an invasion from France,
reduced the emperor to such extremity, that he was obliged to submit to
articles of peace, which ensured the independency of Germany. To retrieve his
honor, he made an attack on France; and laying siege to Metz, with an army of
an hundred thousand men, he conducted the enterprise in person, and seemed
determined, at all hazards, to succeed in an undertaking which had attracted
the attention of all Europe. But the duke of Guise, who defended M^tz, with a
garrison composed of the bravest nobility of France, exerted such vigilance,
conduct, and valor, that the siege was protracted to the depth of winter; and
the emperor found it dangerous to persevere any longer. He retired with the
remains of his army, into the Low Countries, much dejected with that reverse of
fortune which, in his declining years, had so fatally overtaken him.

NO so^ner did Charles hear of the death of Edward, and the accession of his
kinswoman, Mary, to the crown of England, than he formed the scheme of
acquiring that kingdom to his family; and he hoped, by this incident, to
compensate all the losses which he had suffered in Germany. His son, Philip,
who was a widower, had but one son by his former marriage; and though he was only
twenty-seven years of age, eleven years younger than the Queen, this objection,
it was thought, might easily be overlooked, and there was no reason to despair
of her having still a numerous issue. The emperor, therefore, immediately sent
over an agent to signify his intentions to Mary, who, pleased with the support
of so powerful an alliance, and glad to unite herself more closely with her
mother's family, to which she was ever strongly attached, readily embraced the
proposal. Norfolk, Arundel, and Paget, gave their advice for the match: And
Gardener, who was become prime minister, and who had been promoted to the
office of chancellor, finding how Mary's inclinations lay, seconded the project
of the Spanish alliance; and represented, both to her and the emperor, the
necessity of stopping all farther innovations in religion, till the completion
of the marriage. He observed, that the Parliament, amidst all their
compliances, had discovered evident symptoms of jealousy, and seemed at present
determined, to grant no further concessions in favor of the catholic religion:
That though they might make a sacrifice to their sovereign of some speculative
principles, which they did not well comprehend, or of some rites, which seemed
not of any immediate importance, they had imbibed such strong prejudices
against the pretended usurpations and exactions of the court of Rome, that they
would with great difficulty be again brought to submit to its authority: That
the danger of making a resumption of the abbey lands, would alarm the nobility
and gentry, and induce them to encourage the prepossessions which were but too
general among the people, against the doctrine and worship of the catholic
church: That much pains had been taken to prejudice the nation against the
Spanish alliance; and if that point was urged, at the same time with further
changes in religion, it would hazard a general revolt and insurrection: That
the marriage, being once completed, would give authority to the Queen's
measures, and enable her afterward to forward that pious work, in which she
was engaged: And that it was even necessary previously to reconcile the people
to the marriage, by rendering the conditions extremely favorable to the
English, and such as would seem to ensure to them their independency, and the
entire possession of their ancient laws and privileges Burnet, vol. II. p. 2^^
.

THE emperor, well acquainted with the prudence and experience of Gardener,
assented to all these reasons; and he endeavored to temper the zeal of Mary,
by representing the necessity of proceeding gradually in the great work of
converting the nation. Hearing that cardinal Pole, more sincere in his
religious opinions, and less guided by the maxims of civil policy, after having
sent opposite advice to the Queen, had set out on his journey to England, where
he was to exercise his legantine commission; he thought proper to stop him at
Dillinghen, a town on the Danube; and he afterward obtained Mary's consent for
this detention. The negotiation for the marriage meanwhile proceeded apace;
and Mary's intentions to espouse Philip became generally known to the nation.
The commons, who hoped that they had gained the Queen by the concessions which
they had already made, were alarmed to hear, that she was resolved to contract
a 6th of December.
foreign alliance; and they sent a committee to remonstrate against that
dangerous measure. To prevent farther applications of the same kind, she
thought proper to dissolve them.

A CONVOCATION had been summoned at the same time with the Parliament; and the
majority here also appeared to be of the court religion. An offer was very
frankly made by the Romanists, to dispute concerning the points controverted
between the two communions; and as transubstantiation was the article which, of
all others, they esteemed the clearest, and founded on the most irresistible
argument, they chose to try their strength by defending it. The protestants
pushed the dispute as far as the clamor and noise of their antagonists would
permit; and they fondly imagined, that they had obtained some advantage, when,
in the course of the debate, they obliged the catholics to avow, that,
according to their doctrine, Christ had, in his last supper, held himself in
his hand, and had swallowed and eat himself Collier, vol. II. p. 356. Fox, vol.
III. p. 22.
. This triumph, however, was confined only to their own party: The Romanists
maintained, that their champions had clearly the better of the day; that their
adversaries were blind and obstinate heretics; that nothing but the most
extreme depravity of heart could induce men to dispute such self-evident
principles; and that the severest punishments were due to their perverse
wickedness. So pleased were they with their superiority in this favorite point,
that they soon after renewed the dispute at Oxford; and to show, that they
feared no force of learning or capacity, where reason was so evidently on their
side, they sent thither Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, under a guard, to try
whether these renowned controversialists could find any appearance of argument
to defend their baffled principles Mem. of Cranm. p. 334. Heylin, p. 50.
. The issue of the debate was very different from what it appeared to be a few
years before, in a famous conference held at the same place during the reign of
Edward.

the catholics, countenanced by the government, were still more openly put in
execution: The mass was every where re-established; and marriage was declared
to be incompatible with any spiritual office. It has been asserted by some
writers, that three fourths of the clergy* were, at this time, deprived of
their livings; though other historians, more accurate Harm^r, p. 1^8.
, have esteemed the number of sufferers far short of this proportion. Could any
principles of law, justice or reason be attended to, where superstition
predominates; the priests would never have been expelled for their past
marriages, which at that time were permitted by the laws of the kingdom. A
visitation was appointed, in order to restore more perfectly the mass and the
ancient rites. Among other articles the commissioners were enjoined to forbid
the oath of supremacy to be taken by the clergy on their receiving any benefice
Collier, vol. II. p 36^. Fox, vol. III. p. ^8. Heylin, p. (...) lib 25.
. It is to be observed, that this oath had been established by the laws of
Henry the eighth, which were still in force.

THIS violent and sudden change of religion inspired the protestants with great
discontent; and even affected indifferent spectators with concern, by the
hardships, to which so many individuals were on that account exposed. But the
Queen's marriage with Philip.
Spanish match was a point of more general concern, and diffused universal
apprehensions for the liberty and independance of the nation. To obviate all
clamor, the articles of marriage were drawn as favorable as possible for the
interest and security, and even grandeur of England. It was agreed, that though
Philip should have the title of King, the administration should be entirely in
the Queen; that no foreigner should be capable of enjoying any office in the
kingdom; that no innovation should be made in the English laws, customs and
privileges; that Philip should not carry the Queen abroad without her consent,
nor any of her children without the consent of the nobility; that sixty
thousand pounds a year should be settled on her as her jointure; that the male
issue of this marriage should inherit, together with England, both Burgundy and
the Low Countries; and that, if Don Carlos, Philip's son by his former
marriage, should die and his line be extinct, the Queen's issue, whether male
or female, should inherit Spain, Sicily, Milan, and all the other dominions of
Philip Rymer, XV. p. 377.
. Such was the treaty of 1^th January.
marriage signed by count Egmont, and four other ambassadors sent over to
England by the emperor.

THESE articles, when published, gave no satisfaction to the nation: It was
universally said, that the emperor, in order to g^t possession of England,
would verbally agree to any terms; and the greater advantage there appeared in
the conditions which he granted, the more certainly might it be concluded, that
he had no serious intention of observing them: That the usual fraud and
ambition of that monarch might assure the nation of such a conduct; and his son
Philip, while he inherited these vices from his father, added to them tyranny,
sullenness, pride, and barbarity, more dangerous vices of his own: That England
would become a province, and a province to a kingdom which usually exercised
the most violent authority over all her dependant dominions: That the
Netherlands, Milan, Sicily, Naples groaned under the burden of Spanish
tyranny; and throughout all the new conquests in America there had been
displayed scenes of unrelenting cruelty, hitherto unknown in the history of
mankind: That the inquisition was a tribunal invented by that tyrannical
nation; and would infallibly, with all their other laws and institutions, be
introduced into England: And that the divided sentiments of the people with
regard to religion would subject multitudes to this iniquitous tribunal, and
would reduce the whole nation to the most abject servitude Heylin, p. 32.
Burnet, vol. II. p. 268. Godwin, p. 339.
.

THESE complaints, being diffused through the whole people, prepared the nation
for a rebellion; and had any foreign power given them encouragement, or any
great man appeared to head them; the consequences might have proved fatal to
the Queen's authority. But the King of France, though engaged in hostilities with
the emperor, refused to concur in any proposal for an insurrection; lest he
should afford Mary a pretense for declaring war against him. And the more
prudent part of the nobility thought, that, as the evils of the Spanish
alliance were only dreaded at a distance, matters were not yet fully prepared
for a general revolt. Some persons, however, more turbulent than the rest,
believed, that it would be safer to prevent than to redress grievances; and
they framed a conspiracy to rise Wiat's insurrection.
in arms, and declare against the Queen's marriage with Philip. Sir Thomas Wiat
proposed to raise Kent, Sir Peter Carew, Devonshire; and they engaged the duke
of Suffolk, by the hopes of recovering the crown for the lady Jane, to attempt
raising the midland counties Heylin, p. 33. Godwin, p. 340.
. Carew's impatience or apprehensions engaged him to break the concert, and to
rise in arms before the day appointed: He was soon suppressed by the earl of
Bedford, and obliged to fly into France. On this intelligence, Suffolk,
dreading an arrest, suddenly left the town, with his brothers, the lord Thomas,
and lord Leonard Gray; and endeavored to raise the people in the counties of
Warwic and Leicester; where his interest lay: But he was so closely followed by
the earl of Huntingdon, at the head of 300 horse, that he was obliged to
disperse his retainers, and being discovered in his retreat, he was led
prisoner to London Fox, vol. III. p. 30.
. Wiat was at first more successful in his attempt; and having published a
declaration at Maidstone in Kent, against the Queen's evil counselors and
against the Spanish match, without any mention of religion, the people began to
gather under his standard. The duke of Norfolk with Sir Henry Jernegan was sent
against him, at the head of the guards and some other troops, reinforced with
500 Londoners commanded by Bret: And he came within sight of the rebels at
Rochester, where they had fixed their head quarters. Sir George Harper here
pretended to desert from them; but having secretly gained Bret, these two
persons so wrought on the Londoners, that that whole body deserted to Wiat, and
declared that they would not contribute to enslave their native country.
Norfolk, dreading the contagion of this example, immediately retreated with his
troops and took shelter in London Heylin, p. 33. Godwin, p. 341. Stowe, p. 619.
(...) p. 3^^. Holingshed, p. 1094.
.

AFTER this proof of the dispositions of the people, especially of the
Londoners, who were mostly protestants, Wiat was encouraged to proceed; and he
led his forces to Southwark, where he required of the Queen, that she should
put the Tower into his hands, should deliver four counselors as hostages, and
in order to ensure the liberty of the nation, immediately marry an Englishman.
Finding that the bridge was secured against him, and that the city was
overawed, he marched up to Kingston, where he passed the river with 4000 men;
and returning toward London, hoped to encourage his partisans, who had engaged
to declare for him. He had imprudently wasted so much time at Southwark, and in
his march from Kingston, that the critical season, on which all popular
commotions depend, was entirely lost; and though he entered Westminster without
resistance, his followers, finding that no person of note joined him,
insensibly sell off, and he was at last seized near Temple Bar by Sir Maurice
Berkley Fox, vol. III. p. 31. Heylin, p. ^1. Burnet, vol. II. p. (...) p. ^21.
. Above seventy persons suffered for this rebellion: Four hundred were 6th
February.
conducted before the Queen with ropes about their necks; and falling on their
Insurrection suppressed.
knees, received a pardon, and were dismissed. Wiat was condemned and executed;
and as it had been reported, that, at his examination, he had accused the lady
Elizabeth and the earl of Devonshire, he took care on the scaffold, before the
whole people, fully to acquit them of having any share in the rebellion.

THE lady Elizabeth had been, during some time, treated with great harshness by
her sister; and many studies instances of discouragement and disrespect had
been practiced against her. She was ordered to take place at court after the
countess of L^nox and the duchess of Suffolk, as if she were not legitimate,
of the royal blood: Her friends were discountenanced on every occasion: And
while her virtues, which were now become very eminent, drew to her the
attendance of all the young nobility, and rendered her the favorite of the
nation, the malevolence of the Queen still discovered itself every day by fresh
symptoms, and obliged the princess to retire into the country. Mary seized the
opportunity of this rebellion; and hoping to involve her sister in some
appearance of guilt, sent for her under a strong guard, committed her to the
Tower, and ordered her to be very strictly examined by the council. But the
public declaration made by Wiat rendered it impracticable to employ against her
any false evidence, which might have offered; and the princess made so good a
defense, that the Queen found herself under a necessity of dismissing her
Godwin, p. 343. Burnet, vol. II. p. 273. Fox, vol. III. p. 99, 105. Strype's
Mem. vol. III. p. 85.
. In order to send her out of the kingdom, a marriage was proposed to her with
the duke of Savoy; and when she declined giving her consent, she was committed
to custody, under a very strong guard, at Wodestoke. The earl of Devonshire,
though equally innocent, was confined in Fortheringay castle.

BUT this rebellion proved still more fatal to the lady Jane Gray, as well as
to her husband: The duke of Suffolk's guilt was imputed to her; and though the
insurgents and malcontents seemed chiefly to rest their hopes on the lady
Elizabeth and the earl of Devonshire, the Queen, incapable of generosity or
clemency, was determined to remove every person, from whom the least danger
could be apprehended. Warning was given the lady Jane to prepare for death; a
doom which she had long expected, and which the innocence of her life, as well
as the misfortunes to which she had been exposed, rendered no unwelcome news to
her. The Queen's bigoted zeal, under color of tender mercy to the prisoner's
soul, induced her to send divines, who molested her with perpetual disputation;
and even a reprieve of three days was granted her, in hopes that she would be
persuaded, during that time, to pay, by a timely conversion, some regard to her
eternal welfare. The lady Jane had presence of mind, in those melancholy
circumstances, not only to desend her religion by all the topics then in use,
but also to write a letter to her sister Fox, vol. III. p. 35. Heylin, p. 166.
in the Greek language; in which, besides sending her a copy of the scriptures
in that tongue, she exhorted her to maintain, in every 12th February
fortune, a like steady perseverance. On the day of her execution, her husband,
the lord Guilford, desired permission to see her; but she refused her consent,
and sent him word, that the tenderness of their parting would overcome the
fortitude of both, and would too much unbend their minds from that constancy,
which their approaching end required of them: Their separation, she said, would
be only for a moment; and they would soon rejoin each other in a scene, where
their affections would be for ever united, and where death, disappointment, and
misfortunes could no longer have access to them, or disturb their eternal
felicity Heylin, p. 167. Baker, p. 319.
.

IT had been intended to execute the lady Jane and lord Guilford together on
the same scaffold at Tower Hill; but the council, dreading the compassion of
the people for their youth, beauty, innocence, and noble birth, changed their
orders, and gave directions that she should be beheaded within the verge of the
Tower. Execution of lady Jane Gray.
She saw her husband led to execution; and having given him from the window some
token of her remembrance, she waited with tranquillity till her own appointed
hour should bring her to a like fate. She even sav^ his headless body carried
back in a cart; and found herself more confirmed by the reports, which she
heard of the constancy of his end, than shaken by so tender and melancholy a
spectacle. Sir John Gage, constable of the Tower, when he led her to execution,
desired her to bestow on him some small present, which he might keep as a
perpetual memorial of her: She gave him her table book, where she had just
wrote three sentences on seeing her husband's dead body; one in Greek, another
in Latin, a third in English Heylin, p. 167.
. The purport of them was, that human justice was against his body, but the
divine mercy would be favorable to his soul; and that if her fault deserved
punishment, her youth at least, and her imprudence were worthy of excuse; and
that God and posterity, she trusted, would show her favor. On the scaffold,
she made a speech to the bye-standers, where the mildness of her disposition
led her to take the blame entirely on herself, without uttering one complaint
against the severity, with which she had been treated. She said, that her
offense was not the having laid her hand upon the crown, but the not rejecting
it with sufficient constancy: That she had less erred through ambition than through
reverence to her parents, whom she had been taught to respect and obey: That
she willingly received death, as the only satisfaction which she could now make
to the injured state; and though her infringement of the laws had been
constrained, she would show, by her voluntary submission to their sentence,
that she was desirous to atone for that disobedience, into which too much
silial piety had betrayed her: That she had justly deserved this punishment for
being made the instrument, though the unwilling instrument, of the ambition of
others: And that the story of her life, she hoped, might at least be useful, by
proving that innocence excuses not great misdeeds, if they tend any way to the
destruction of the commonwealth. After uttering these words, she caused herself
to be disrobed by her women; and with a steady serene countenance submitted
herself to the executioner Heylin, p. 167. Fox. vol. III. p. 36, 37.
Holingshed, p. 1099.
.

THE duke of Suffolk was tried, condemned, and executed soon after; and would
have met with more compassion, had not his temerity been the cause of his
daughter's untimely death. The lord Thomas Gray lost his life for the same
crime. Sir Nicholas Throcmorton was tried in Guildhall; but there appearing no
satisfactory evidence against him, he was able, by making an admirable defense,
to obtain a verdict of the jury in his favor. The Queen was so enraged at this
disappointment, that, instead of releasing him as the law required, she
recommitted him to the Tower, and kept him in close confinement during some
years. But her resentment stopped not here: The jury, being summoned before the
council, were all of them sent to prison, and afterward fined, some of them a
thousand pounds, others two thousand a-piece Fox, vol. III. p. 99. Stowe, p.
624. Baker, p. 320. Hollingshed, p. 1104, 1121. Strype, vol. III. p. 120.
. This illegal violence proved fatal to several, among others to Sir John
Throcmorton, brother to Sir Nicholas, who was condemned on no better evidence
than had been formerly rejected. The Queen filled the Tower and all the prisons
with nobility and gentry, whom their interest with the people, rather than any
appearance of guilt, had made the objects of her suspicion. And finding, that
she was become extremely odious to the nation, she was resolved to disable them
from resistance, by ordering general musters, and directing the commissioners
to seize their arms, and lay them up in forts and castles.

THOUGH the government labored under so general an odium, the Queen's authority
had received such an increase from the suppression of Wiat's rebellion, that
the ministry hoped to find a very compliant disposition in the new Parliament,
which was summoned to assemble. The emperor also, in order to facilitate the A
Parliament. 5th April.
same end, had borrowed no less a sum than 400,000 pounds which he had sent over
to England, to be distributed in bribes and pensions among the members: A
pernicious practice, of which there had not hitherto been any instance in
England. And not to give the public any alarm with regard to the church lands,
the Queen, notwithstanding her bigotry, resumed her legal title of supreme head
of the church, which she had dropped three months before. Gardener, the
chancellor, opened the session by a speech; in which he asserted the Queen's
hereditary title to the crown; maintained her right to choose a husband for
herself; he observed how proper an use she had made of that right, by
preferring an old ally, descended from the house of Burgundy; and remarked the
failure of Henry the eighth's posterity, of whom there now remained none but
the Queen and the lady Elizabeth. He added, that, in order to obviate the
inconveniences, conveniences, which might arise from different pretenders, it
was necessary to invest the Queen, by law, with a power of disposing of the
crown, and of appointing her successor: A power, he said, which was not to be
regarded as a new thing in England, since it had formerly been conferred on
Henry the eighth Carte, vol. III. p. 310, from Ambass. de (...).
.

THE Parliament were much disposed to gratify the Queen in all her desires; but
when the liberty, independency, and very being of the nation were brought into
such visible danger, they could not by any means be brought to compliance. They
knew both the inveterate hatred which she bore the lady Elizabeth, and her
devoted attachment to the house of Austria: They were acquainted with her
extreme bigotry, which would lead her to postpone all considerations of justice
or national interest to the establishment of the catholic religion: They
remarked, that Gardener had carefully avoided, in his speech, the giving to
Elizabeth the appellation of the Queen's sister; and they thence concluded,
that a design was formed of excluding her as illegitimate: They expected, that
Mary, if invested with such a power as she required, would make a will in her
husband's favor, and thereby render England for ever a province of the Spanish
monarchy: And they were the more alarmed with these projects, when they heard,
that Philip's descent from the house of Lancaster was carefully insisted on,
and that he was publicly represented as the true and only heir by right of
inheritance.

THE Parliament, therefore, aware of their danger, were determined to keep at a
distance from the precipice, which lay before them. They could not avoid
ratifying the articles of marriage 1 Mar. P^^l. 2. cap. ^.
, which were drawn very favorable for England; but they declined passing any
such law as the chancellor pointed out to them: They would not so much as
declare it treason to imagine or attempt the death of the Queen's husband,
while she was alive; and a bill introduced for that purpose was laid aside
after the first reading. The more effectually to cut off Philip's hopes of
exerting any authority in England, they passed a law, where they declared,
"that her majesty as their only Queen, should solely and as a sole Queen, enjoy
the crown and sovereignty of her realms, with all the preeminences, dignities,
and rights thereto belonging, in as large and ample a manner after her marriage
as before, without any title or claim accruing to the prince of Spain, either
as tenant by courtesy of the realm, or by any other means Ib. cap. ^.
."

A LAW passed in this Parliament for re-er^cting the bishopric of Durham, which
had been dissolved by the last Parliament of Edward Ib. cap. ^.
. The Queen had already, by an exertion of her absolute power, put Tonstal in
possession of that see: But though it was usual at that time for the crown to
assume authority which might seem entirely legislative, it was always esteemed
more safe and satisfactory to procure the sanction of Parliament. Bills were
introduced for suppressing erroneous opinions contained in books, and for
reviving the law of the six articles, together with those against the Lollards,
against heresy and erroneous preaching: But none of these laws could pass the
two houses. A proof, that the Parliament had reserves even in their concessions
with regard to religion; about which they seem to have been less scrupulous.
The Queen, therefore, finding that they 5th May.
would not serve all her purposes, finished the session by dissolving them.

MARY'S thoughts were now entirely employed about receiving Don Philip, whose
arrival she hourly expected. This princess, who had lived so many years in a
very reserved and private manner, without any prospect or hopes of a husband,
was so smit with affection for her young spouse, whom she had never seen, that
she waited with the utmost impatience for the completion of the marriage; and
every obstacle was to her a source of anxiety and discontent Strype, vol. III.
p. 125.
. She complained of Philip's delays as affected; and she could not conceal her
vexation, that, though she brought him a kingdom for a dowry, he treated her with
such neglect, that he had never yet favored her with a single letter. Her
fondness was but the more increased by this supercilious treatment; and when
she found that her subjects had entertained the greatest aversion for the
event, to which she directed her fondest wishes, she made the whole English
nation the object of her resentment. A squadron, under the command of lord
Effingham, had been fitted out to convoy Philip from Spain, where he then
resided; but the admiral informing her, that the discontents ran very high
among the seamen, and that it was not safe for Philip to entrust himself into
their hands, she gave orders to dismiss them. She then dreaded, that the French
fleet, being masters of the sea, might intercept her husband; and every rumor
of danger, every blast of wind, threw her into panics and convulsions. Her
health, and even her understanding, were visibly impaired by this extreme
impatience; and she was struck with a new apprehension, left her person,
impaired by time, and blasted by sickness, should render her less acceptable to
her future spouse. Her glass discovered to her how hagard she was become, and
when she remarked the decay of her person, she knew not whether she ought more
to desire or apprehend the arrival of Philip.

AT last came the moment so impatiently expected; and news were brought the
Queen of Philip's arrival at Southampton (...), vol III. p. 99. Heylin, p. 39.
Burnet, vol. III. p. 3^^. Godwin, (...) Sir William Monson, p. ^^^, that the
admiral of England (...) at the (...) was on board; ^^cause they had not
lowered their top^ail, as (...) in the (...). A very (...) and very (...)
. A few days after, they were married in Westminster; and having made a pompous
entry into London, where 19th July.
Philip displayed his wealth with great ostentation, she carried him to Windsor,
Philip's arrival in England.
the palace in which they afterward resided. The prince's behavior was ill
calculated to cure the prejudices, which the English nation had entertained
against him. He was distant and reserved in his address; took no notice of the
salutes even of the most considerable noblemen; and so entrenched himself in
forms and ceremonies, that he was in a manner inaccessible (...) p ^^0.
: But this circumstance rendered him the more acceptable to the Queen, who
desired to have no company but her husband's, and who was impatient when she
met with any interruption to her fondness. The shortest absence gave her
vexation; and when he showed civilities to any other woman, she could not
conceal her jealousy and resentment.

THE Queen soon found, that Philip's ruling passion was ambition; and that the
only method of gratifying him and securing his affections was to render him
master of England. The interest and liberty of her people were considerations
of small moment, in comparison of her obtaining this favorite point. She
summoned a new Parliament, in hopes of finding them entirely compliant; and
that she might acquire the greater authority over them, she imitated the
precedent of the former reign, and wrote circular letters directing a proper
choice of members Mem. of (...).
. The zeal of the catholics, the influence of Spanish gold, the 12th November.
powers of prerogative, the discouragement of the gentry, particularly of the
protestants; all these causes, seconding the intrigues of Gardener, had
procured her a house of commons which was, in a great measure, to her
satisfaction; and it was thought, from the disposition of the nation, that she
might now safely omit, in her summons of the Parliament, the title of supreme
bead of the church* though inseparably annexed by law to the crown of England
Burnet, vol. II p. ^^^. Strype, vol. III p. ^^^.
. Cardinal Pole was arrived in Flanders, invested with legantine power from the
pope: In order to prepare the way for his arrival in England, the Parliament
passed an act, reversing his attainder, and restoring his blood; and the Queen
dispensing with the old statute of provisors, granted him permission to act a*
legate. The cardinal came over to London; and after being introduced to the
King and Queen, he invited the Parliament to reconcile themselves and the
kingdom to the apostolic see, from which they had been so long and so unhappily
separated. This message was taken in good part; and both houses voted an
address to Philip and Mary, acknowleging that they had been guilty of a most
horrible defection from the true church; professing a sincere repentance for
their past transgressions; declaring their resolution to repeal all laws
enacted in prejudice of the church of Rome; and praying their majesty's, that
since they were happily uninfected with that criminal schism, they would
intercede with the holy father for their absolution and forgiveness Fox, vol.
III. p. iii. Heylin, p. 42. Burnet, vol. II. p. 293. Godwin, p. 247.
. Their request was easily granted. The legate, in name of his holiness, gave
the Parliament and kingdom absolution, freed them from all censures, and
received them again into the bosom of the church. The pope, then Julius the
third, being informed of these transactions, said, that it was an unexampled
instance of his selicity, to receive thanks from the English, for allowing them
to do what he ought to give them thanks for performing Father Paul, lib. iv.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING the extreme zeal of those times, for and against popery, the
object always uppermost with the nobility and gentry, was the care of their
money and estates; and they were not brought to make these concessions in
favor of Rome, till they had received repeated assurances, from the pope as
well as the Queen, that the plunder which they had made of the ecclesiastics,
should never be enquired into; and that the abbey and church lands should
remain with the present possessors Heylin, p. 41.
. But not trusting altogether to these promises, the Parliament took care, in
the law itself 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 3.
, by which they repealed the former statutes enacted against the pope's
authority, to insert a clause, in which, besides bestowing validity on all
marriages celebrated during the schism, and fixing the right of incumbents to
their benefices, they gave security to the possessors of church lands, and
freed them from all danger of ecclesiastical censures. The convocation also, in
order to remove all apprehensions on that head, were induced to present a
petition to the same purpose Heylin, p. 4^. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c 3. Strype,
vol. III. p. 159.
; and the legate, in his master's name, ratified all these transactions. It now
appeared, that, notwithstanding the efforts of the Queen and King, the power of
the papacy was effectually suppressed, and invincible barriers fixed against
its re-establishment. For though the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastics was, for
the present, restored, their property, on which their power much depended, was
irrecoverably lost, and no hopes remained of recovering it. Even these
arbitrary, powerful, and bigoted princes, while the transactions were yet
recent, could not regain to the church her possessions so lately lost; and no
expedients were left the clergy for enriching themselves, but those which they
had at first practiced, and which had required ages of ignorance, barbarism,
and superstition to operate their effect on mankind The pope at first gave
cardinal Pole powers to transact only with regard to the past fruit^ of the
church lands; but being admonished of the danger attending any attempt toward
a resumption of the lands, he enlarged the cardinal's power, and granted him
authority to (...) the future possession of the church land^ to the present
proprietors. There was only one (...) in the cardinal's powers that has given
occasion for some specula^ion. An exception was made of (...) think important
enough to merit the being communicated to the holy (...). Pu^ Pole (...) the
(...) of the whole church lands; and his commision had given him full pow^^ to
(...) Harl^yan Mis^ellany, vol. VII. p. ^64, ^66. It is true, some councils
have (...) the power of the pope to alienate any church (...) and (...) to
(...) either adhere to or recede from this (...).
.

THE Parliament having secured their own possessions, were more indifferent
with regard to religion, or even the lives of their fellow citizens; and they
revived the old sanguinary laws against heretics 1 and (...) and M^r. c 6.
, which had been rejected in the former Parliament. They also enacted several
laws against seditious words and rumors (...)
; and they made it treason to imagine or attempt the death of Philip, during
his marriage with the Queen (...)
. Each Parliament hitherto had been induced to go a step farther than their
predecessors; but none of them had entirely lost all regard to national
interests. Their hatred against the Spaniards, as well as their suspicion of
Philip's pretensions, still prevailed; and though the Queen attempted to get her
husband declared presumptive heir of the crown, and to have the administration
put into his hands; she failed in all her hopes, and could not so much as
procure the Parliament's consent to his coronation Godwin, (...). Baker, p. ^^^.
. All attempts likewise to procure subsidies from the commons, in order to
support the emperor in his war against France, proved fruitless; and the usual
animosity and jealousy of the English against that kingdom, seemed to have
given place, for the present, to like passions against Spain. Philip, sensible
of the prepossessions entertained against him, endeavored to acquire
popularity, by procuring the release of several prisoners of distinction; the
lord Henry Dudley, Sir George Harper, Sir Nicholas Throcmorton, Sir Edmond
Warner, Sir William St. Lo, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Harrington, Tremaine, who had
been consined from the suspicions or resentment of the court Heylin, p. 39.
Burnet, vol. II. p. 287. Stowe, p. 626.
. But nothing was more agreeable to the nation than his protection of the lady
Elizabeth, from the spite and malice of the Queen, and the restoring her to her
liberty. This measure was not the effect of any generosity in Philip, a
sentiment of which he was wholly incapable; but of a refined policy, which made
him foresee, that, if that princess were put to death, the next lawful heir was
the Queen of Scots, whose succession would for ever annex England to the crown
of France. The earl of Devonshire also reaped some benefit from the affected
popularity of Philip, and recovered his liberty: But that nobleman finding
himself exposed to suspicion, begged permission to travel Heylin, p. 40.
Godw^^, p. ^^9.
; and he soon after died in Padua, from poison, as is pretended, given him by
the imperialists. He was the eleventh and last earl of Devonshire of that noble
family, allied to the royal family of France.

THE Queen's extreme desire of having issue, had made her fondly give credit to
any appearance of her pregnancy; and when the legate was introduced to her, she
fancied, that she felt the embryo stir in her womb. Her flatterers compared
this motion of the infant to that of John the Baptist, who leaped in his
mother's belly at the salutation of the virgin Burnet, vol. II. p. 292. Godwin,
p. 3^8.
. Dispatches were immediately sent to inform foreign courts of this event:
Orders were issued to give public thanks: Great rejoicings were made: The
family of the young prince was already settled Heylin, p. 46.
; for the catholics held themselves assured that the child was to be a male:
And Bonner, bishop of London, made public prayers be said, that Heaven would
please to render him beautiful, vigorous, and witty. But the nation remained
still somewhat incredulous; and men were persuaded, that the Queen labored
under infirmities, which rendered her incapable of having children. Her infant
proved only the commencement of a dropsy, which the disordered state of her
health had brought upon her. The belief, however, of her pregnancy was still
maintained with all possible care; and was one artifice, by which Philip
endeavored to support his authority in the kingdom. 16 January.
obtain no further concessions, came unexpectedly to Westminster Hall, and
dissolved them.

THERE happened a remarkable assair this session, which must not be passed over
in silence. Several members of the lower house, dissatisfied with the measures
of the Parliament, but finding themselves unable to prevent them, made a
secession, in order to show their disapprobation, and refused any longer to
attend the house Coke's Institutes, part iv. p. 1^. Strype's M^mor. vol III. p.
165.
. For this instance of contumacy they were indicted in the King'sbench after
the dissolution of the Parliament: Six of them submitted to the mercy of the
court, and paid their fines: The rest traversed; and the Queen died before the
affair was brought to an issue. Judging of the matter by the subsequent
pretensions of the house of commons, and, indeed, by the true principles of a
free government, this attempt of the Queen's ministers must be regarded as a
breach of privilege; but i^ gave little umbrage at that time, and was never
called in question by any future house of commons which sat during this reign.

CHAP. II.
Reasons for and against Toleration. -- Persecutions. -- A Parliament. -- The
Queen's extortions. -- The emperor resigns his crown. -- Execution of Cranmer.
-- War with France. -- Battle of St. Quintin. -- Calais taken by the French. --
Affairs of Scotland. -- Marriage of the Dauphin and the Queen of Scots. -- A
Parliament. -- Death of the Queen.

THE success which Gardener, from his cautious and prudent conduct, had met
with in governing the Parliament, and engaging them both to approve of the
Spanish alliance, and the re-establishment of the ancient religion, two points,
to which, it was believed, they bore an extreme aversion, had so raised his
character for wisdom and policy, that his opinion was received as an oracle in
the Queen's councils; and his authority, as it was always great in his own
party, no longer suffered any opposition or control. Cardinal Pole himself,
though more beloved on account of his virtue and candor, and though superior in
birth and station, had not equal weight in public deliberations; and while his
learning, piety, and humanity were extremely respected, he was represented more
as a good man than a great minister. A very important question was frequently
debated, before the Queen and council, by these two ecclesiastics; whether the
laws lately revived against heretics should be put in execution, or should only
be employed to restrain, by terror, the bold attempts of these zealots. Pole
was very sincere in his religious principles; and though his moderation had made
him be suspected at Rome of a tendency toward Lutheranism; he was seriously
persuaded of the catholic doctrines, and thought that no consideration of human
policy ought ever to come in competition with such important interests.
Gardener, on the contrary, had always made his religion subservient to his
schemes of safety or advancement; and by his unlimited complaisance to Henry,
he had shown, that had he not been pushed to extremity under the late minority,
he was sufficiently disposed to make a sacrifice of his principles to the
established theology. This was the well-known character of these two great
counselors; yet such is the prevalence of temper above system, that the
benevolent disposition of Pole led him to advise a toleration of the heretical
tenets which he highly blamed; while the severe manners of Gardener inclined
him to support, by persecution, that religion which, at the bottom, he regarded
with great indifference (...) p 17.
. This circumstance of public conduct was of the highest importance; and from
being the object of deliberation in the council, it soon became the subject of
discourse throughout the nation. We shall represent, in a few words, the topics
by which each side supported, or might have supported, their scheme of policy;
and shall display the opposite reasons which have been employed, with regard to
an argument that ever has been, and ever will be so much canvassed.

Reasons for and against toleration.
THE practice of persecution, said the defenders of Pole's opinion, is the
scandal of all religion; and the theological animosity, so fierce and violent,
far from being an argument of men's conviction in their opposite tenets, is a
certain proof, that they have never reached any serious persuasion with regard
to these remote and sublime subjects. Even those who are the most impatient of
contradiction in other controversies, are mild and moderate in comparison of
polemical divines; and wherever a man's knowledge and experience give him a
perfect assurance of his own opinion, he regards with contempt, rather than
anger, the opposition and mistakes of others. But while men zealously maintain
what they neither clearly comprehend, nor entirely believe, they are shaken in
their imagined says, by the opposite persuasion, or even doubts of other men;
and vent on their antagonists that impatience which is the natural result of so
disagreeable a state of the understanding. They then embrace easily any
pretense for representing oppon^^ts as impious and profane; and if they can
also find a color for co^necting this violence with the interests of civil
government, they can no longer be restrained from giving uncont^ouled scope to
vengeance and resentment. But surely never enterprise was more unfortunate than
that of founding per^ecution upon policy, or endeavoring, for the sake of
peace, to settle an entire uni^ormity of opinion, in questions which, of all
others, are least subjected to the criterion of human reason. The universal and
uncontradicted prevalence of one opinion in religious subjects, can only be
owing at first to the stupid ignorance and barbarism of the people, who never
indulge themselves in any speculation or enquiry; and there is no other
expedient for maintaining that uniformity, so fondly ^ought after, but by
banishing for ever all curiosity and all improvement in science and
cultivation. It may not, indeed, appear difficult to ch^ck, by a steady
severity, the first beginnings of controversy; but besides that this policy
exposes for ever the people to all the abject terrors of superstition, and the
magistrate to the endless encroachments of ecc^esiastics, it also renders men
so delicate, that they can never endure to hear of opposition; and they will
sometime pay dearly for that false tranquillity in which they have been so long
indulged. As healthful bodies are ruined by too nice a regimen, and are thereby
rendered incapable of bearing the unavoidable incidents of human life; a people
who never were allowed to imagine, that their principles could be contested,
^ly out into the most outrageous violence when any event (and such events are
common) produces a faction among their clergy, and gives rise to any difference
in tenet or opinion. But whatever may be said in favor of suppressing, by
persecution, the first beginnings of here^y, no solid argument can be alleged
for extending severity toward multitudes, or endeavoring, by capital
punishments, to extirpate an opinion, which has diffused itself through men of
every rank and station. Besides the extreme barbarity of such an attempt, it
proves commonly ineffectual to the purpose intended; and serves only to make
men more obstinate in their persuasion, and to increase the number of their
proselytes. The melancholy with which the ^ear of death, torture, and
persecution inspires the sectaries, is the proper disposition for fostering
religious zeal: The pr spect of eternal reward^, when brought near, overpowers
the dread of temporal punishment: The glory of martyrdom stimulates all the
more furious zealots, especially the leaders and preachers* Where a violent
animosity is excited by oppression, men pass naturally from hating the persons
of their tyrants, to a more violent abhorrence of their doctrine* And the
spectat^rs, moved with pity toward the supposed martyrs, are naturally ^educed
to embrace those principles which can inspire men with a constancy that appears
almost supernatural. Open the door to toleration, the mutual hatred relaxes
among the sectaries; their attachment to their particular religion decays* the
common occupations and pleasures of life succeed to the a^rimony of
disputation; and the ^ame man, who, in other circumstances, would have braved
slames and tortures, is engaged to change his religion from the smallest
prospect of favor and advancement, or even from the frivolous hopes of
becom^^g more ^ashionable in his principles. If any exception can be admitted
to this maxim of toleration, it will only be where a theology altogether new,
no way connected with the ancient religion of the state, is imported from
foreign countries, and may easily, at one blow, be eradicated, without leaving
the seeds of future innovations. But as this instance would involve some
apology for the ancient pagan persecutions, or for the extirpation of
Christianity in China and Japan; it ought surely, on account of this detested
consequence, to be rather buried in eternal silence and oblivion.

THOUGH these arguments appear entirely satisfactory, yet such is the subtilty of
human wit, that Gardener, and the other enemies to toleration, were not reduced
to silence, and they still found topics on which to support the controversy.
The doctrine, said they, of liberty of conscience is founded on the most
flagrant impiety, and supposes such an indifference among all religions, such
an obscurity in theological doctrines, as to render the church and magistrate
incapable of distinguishing, with certainty, the dictates of Heaven from the
mere fictions of human imagination. If the Divinity reveals principles to
mankind, he will surely give a criterion by which they may be ascertained; and
a prince, who knowingly allows these principles to be perverted, or
adulterated, is infinitely more criminal than if he gave permission for the
vending of poison, under the shape of bread, to all his subjects. Persecution
may, indeed, seem better calculated to make hypocrites than converts; but
experience teaches us, that the habits of hypocrisy often turn into reality;
and the children at least, ignorant of their parents dissimulation, may happily
be educated in more orthodox tenets. It is absurd, in opposition to
considerations of such unspeakable importance, to plead the temporal and
frivolous interests of civil society; and if matters be thoroughly examined,
even that topic will not appear so certain and universal in favor of
toleration as by some i^ is represented. Where sects arise, whose fundamental
principle on all sides, is to execr^te, and abhor, and damn, and extirpate each
other; what choice has the magistrate left but to take party, and by rendering
one sect entirely prevalent, restore, at least for a time, the public
tranquillity? The political body, being here s^^^ly, must not be treated as if
it were in a state of found health; and an affected neutrality in the prince,
or even a cool preference, may serve only to encourag^ the hopes of all the
sects, and keep alive their animosity. The protestants, far from tol^rating the
religion of their ancestors, regard it as an impi^^^ and detestable idolatry;
and during the late minority, when they were entirely mast^^^, enac^^^ very
severe, though not capital, punishments against all exercise of the catholic
worship, and even against such as barely abstained from their profane rites and
sacraments. Nor are instances wanting of their endeavors to (...) an imagined
orthodoxy by the most rigorous executions: Calvin has burned Servetus at
Geneva: Cranmer brought Arians and Anabaptists to the stake: And if persecution
of any kind is to be admitted, the most bloody and violent will surely be
allowed the most justifiable, as the most effectual. Imprisonments, fines,
confiscations, whippings, serve only to irritate the sects, without disabling
them from resistance: But the stake, the wheel, or the gibbet, must soon
terminate in the extirpation or banishment of all the heretics, who are
inclined to give disturbance, and in the entire silence and submission of the
rest.

THE arguments of Gardener being more agreeable to the cruel bigotry of Mary
and Philip, were better received; and though Pole pleaded, as is affirmed Burnet,
vol. II. Heylin, p. 47. It is not likely, however, that Charles gave any such
advice: For he himself was at this very time proceeding with great violence in
persecuting the reformed in Flanders. Bentivoglio, part i. lib. 1.
, the advice of the emperor, who recommended it to his daughter-in-law, not to
practice violence against the protestants, and desired her to consider his own
example, who, after endeavoring through his whole life to extirpate heresy, had,
in the end, reaped nothing but confusion and disappointment, the scheme of
toleration was entirely rejected. It was determined to let loose the laws in
their full rigor against the reformed religion; and England was soon filled
with scenes of horror, which have ever since rendered the catholic religion the
object of general detestation, and which prove, that no human depravity can
equal revenge and cruelty, covered with the mantle of religion.

Violent persecution in England.
THE persecutors began with Rogers, who was prebendary of St. Paul's, and a man
eminent in his party for virtue as well as for learning. Gardiner's plan was
first to attack men of that character, whom, he hoped, terror would bend to
submission, and whose example, either of punishment or recantation, would
naturally have influence on the multitude: But he found a perseverance and
courage in Rogers, which it may seem strange to find in human nature, and of
which all ages, and all sects, do notwithstanding furnish many examples.
Rogers, beside the care of his own preservation, lay under other very powerful
temptations to compliance: He had a wife, whom he tenderly loved, and ten
children; yet such was his serenity after his condemnation, that the jailors,
it is said, waked him from a sound sleep, when the hour of his execution
approached. He had desired to see his wise before he died; but Gardener told
him, that he was a priest; he could not possibly have a wife: Thus joining
insult to cruelty. Rogers was burnt in Smithfield Fox, vol. III. p. 119.
Burnet, vol. II. p. 302.
.

HOOPER, bishop of Gloucester, had been tried at the same time with Rogers; but
was sent to his own diocese to be executed. This circumstance was contrived to
strike a greater terror into his flock; but it was a source of satisfaction to
Hooper, who rejoiced in giving testimony, by his death, to that doctrine which
he had formerly taught them. When he was tied to the stake, a stool was set
before him, and the Queen's pardon laid upon it, which it was still in his
power to accept by his recantation: But he ordered it to be removed; and
cheerfully prepared himself for that dreadful punishment to which he was
condemned. He suffered it in its full severity: The wind, which was vehement,
blew the flame of the reeds from his body: The faggots were green, and did not
kindle easily: All his lower parts were consumed before his vitals were
attacked: One of his hands dropped off: With the other he continued to beat his
breast: He was heard to pray and exhort the people, till his tongue, swollen with
the violence of the agony, could no longer permit him utterance. He was three
quarters of an hour in torture, which he bore with inflexible constancy Fox,
vol. III. p. 145, etc. Burnet, vol. II. p. 302. Heylin, p. 48, 49. Godwin, p.
349.
.

SANDERS was burned at Coventry: A pardon was also offered him; but he rejected
it, and embraced the stake, saying, "Welcome the cross of Christ; welcome
everlasting life." Tailor, parson of Hadley, was consumed by flames in that
place, amidst his ancient friends and parishioners. When tied to the stake, he
repeated a psalm in English: One of his guards struck him on the mouth, and bid
him speak Latin: Another, in a rage, gave him a blow on the head with his
halbert, which happily put an end to his*torments.

THERE was one Philpot, archdeacon of Winchester, possessed of such zeal for
orthodoxy, that having been engaged in a dispute with an Arian, he spit in his
adversary's face, to show the great detestation which he had entertained
against that heresy. He afterward wrote a treatise to justify this unmannerly
expression of zeal; and he said, that he was led to it, in order to relieve the
sorrow conceived from such horrid blasphemy, and to signify how unworthy such a
miscreant was of being admitted into the company of any christian Strype, vol.
III. p. 261. and Coll. No 58.
. Philpot was a protestant; and falling now into the hands of people as zealous
as himself, but more powerful, he was condemned to the flames, and suffered at
Smithfield.

THE article upon which almost all the protestants were condemned, was, their
refusal to acknowledge the real presence. Gardener, who had vainly expected,
that a few examples would strike a terror into the reformers, finding the work
daily multiply upon him, devolved the invidious office on others, chiefly on
Bonner, a man of profligate manners, and of a brutal character, who seemed to
rejoice in the torments of the unhappy sufferers Heylin, p. 47, 48.
. He sometimes whipped the prisoners soners with his own hands, till he was
tired with the violence of the exercise: He tore out the beard of a weaver, who
refused to relinquish his religion; and that he might give him a specimen of
burning, he held his hand to the candle, till the sinews and veins snrunk and
burst Fox, vol. III. p. 187.
.

IT is needless to be particular in enumerating all the horrid cruelties
practiced in England during the course of three years that these persecutions
lasted: The savage barbarity on the one hand, and the patient constancy on the
other, are so similar in all these martyrdoms, that the narration, very little
agreeable in itself, would never be relieved by any variety. Human nature
appears not, on any occasion, so detestable, and at the same time so absurd, as
in these religious persecutions, which sink men below infernal spirits in
wickedness, and below the beasts in folly. A few instances only may be worth
preserving, in order, if possible, to warn zealous bigots, for ever to avoid
such odious and such fruitless barbarity.

FERRAR, bishop of St. David's, was burned in his own diocese; and his appeal
to cardinal Pole was not attended to Ibid. p. 216.
. Ridley, bishop of London, and Latimer, formerly bishop of Worcester, two
prelates celebrated for learning and virtue, perished together in the same
flames at Oxford, and supported each other's constancy by their mutual
exhortations. Latimer, when tied to the stake, called to his companion, "Be of
good comfort, brother, we shall this day kindle such a torch in England, as, I
trust in God, shall never be extinguished." The executioners had been so
merciful (for that clemency may more naturally be ascribed to them than to the
religious zealots) as to tie bags of gunpowder about these prelates, in order
to put a speedy period to their tortures: The explosion immediately killed
Latimer, who was in an extreme old age: Ridley continued alive during some time
in the midst of the flames Burnet, vol. II. p. 318. Heylin, p. 52.
.

ONE Hunter, a young man of nineteen, an apprentice, having been seduced by a
priest into a dispute, had unwarily denied the real presence. Sensible of his
danger, he immediately concealed himself; and Bonner laying hold of his father,
threatened him with the greatest seve^^ties, if he did not produce the young
man to stand his trial. Hunter, hearing the vexations to which his father was
exposed, voluntarily delivered himself to Bonner, and was condemned to the
flames by that barbarous prelate.

THOMAS Hawks, when conducted to the stake, agreed with his friends, that if
he found the torture tolerable, he would make them a signal to that purpose in
the midst of the flames. His zeal for the cause in which he suffered, so
supported him, that he stretched out his arms, the signal agreed on; and in
that posture he expired Fox, vol. III. p. 265.
. This example, with many others of like constancy, encouraged multitudes, not
only to suffer, but even to aspire to martyrdom.

THE tender sex itself, as they have commonly a greater propensity to religion,
produced many instances of the most inflexible courage in supporting the
profession of it, against all the fury of the persecutors. One execution in
particular was attended with circumstances which, even at that time, excited
astonishment, by reason of their unusual barbarity. A woman in Guernsey, being
near the time of her labor when brought to the stake, was thrown into such
agitation by the torture, that her belly burst, and she was delivered in the
midst of the flames. One of the guards immediately snatched the infant from the
fire, and attempted to save it: But a magistrate who stood by, ordered it to be
thrown back; being determined, he said, that nothing should survive which
sprung from such an obstinate and heretical parent Ibid. p. 747. Heylin, p 57.
Burnet, vol. II. p. 337.
.

THE persons condemned to these punishments were not convicted for teaching, or
dogmatizing, contrary to the established religion: They were seized merely on
suspicion; and articles being offered them to subscribe, they were immediately,
upon their refusal, condemned to the flames Ibid. p. 306.
. Those instances of barbarity, so unusual in the nation, excited horror; the
constancy of the martyrs was the object of admiration; and as men have a
principle of equity engraven in their minds, which even false religion is not
able totally to obliterate, they were shocked to see persons of probity, of
honor, of pious dispositions, exposed to punishments more severe than were
inflicted on the greatest ruffians, for crimes subversive of civil society. To
exterminate the whole protestant party, was known to be impossible; and nothing
could appear more iniquitous, than to subject to torture, the most
conscientious and courageous among them; and allow the cowards and hypocrites
to escape. Each martyrdom, therefore, was equivalent to a hundred sermons
against popery; and men either avoided such horrid spectacles, or returned from
them full of a violent, though secret, indignation against the persecutors.
Repeated orders were sent from the council, to quicken the diligence of the
magistrates in searching after heretics; and, in some places, the gentry were
obliged to countenance, by their presence, these barbarous executions. The
violences tended only to render the Spanish government daily more odious; and
Philip, sensible of the hatred which he incurred, endeavored to remove the
reproach from himself by a very gross artifice: He ordered his con^essor to
deliver in his presence a sermon in favor of toleration: a doctrine somewhat
extraordinary in a Spanish friar Heylin, p. 56.
. But the court, finding that Bonner, however shameless and savage, would not
bear alone the whole infamy, soon threw off the mask; and the unrelenting
temper of the Queen, as well as of the King, appeared without control. A bold
step was even taken toward the introduction of the inquisition into England.
As the bishops' courts, though extremely arbitrary, and not bound by any ordinary
forms of law, appeared not to be invested with sufficient power, a commission
was appointed by authority of the Queen's prerogative, more effectually to
extirpate heresy. Twenty-one persons were named; but any three were armed with
the powers of the whole. The commission runs in these terms; "That since many
false rumors were published among the subjects, and many heretical opinions
were also spread among them, therefore they were to enquire into those, either
by presentiments by witnesses, or any other political way they could devise, and
to search after all heresies; the bringers in, the sellers, the readers of all
heretical books: They were to examine and punish all misbehaviours or
negligences, in any church or chapel; and to try all priests that did not
preach the sacrament of the altar; all persons that did not hear mass, or come
to their parish church to service, that would not go in processions, or did not
take holy bread or holy water: And if they found any that did obstinately
persist in such heresies, they were to put them into the hands of their
ordinaries, to be punished according to the spiritual laws: Giving the
commissioners full power to proceed, as their discretions and consciences
should direct them, and to use all such means as they would invent for the
searching of the premises; empowering them also to call before them such
witnesses as they pleased, and to force them to make oath of such things as
might discover what they sought after Burnet, vol. II. Coll. 32.
." Some civil powers were also given the commissioners to punish vagabonds and
quarrelsome persons.

TO bring the methods of proceeding in England nearer the practice of the
inquisition, letters were written to the lord North, and others, enjoining
them, "To put to the torture such obstinate persons as would not confess, and
there to order them at their discretion Burnet, vol III. p. 243.
." Secret spies also, and informers, were employed, according to the practice
of that iniquitous tribunal. Instructions were given to the justices of peace,
"That they should call secretly before them one or two honest persons within
their limits, or more, at their disoretion, and command them by oath, or
otherwise, that they shall secretly learn and search out such persons as shall
evil-behave themselves in church, or idly, or shall d^spise openly by words,
the King's or Queen's proceedings, or go about to make any commotion, or tell
any seditious tales or news. And also, that the same persons so to be
appointed, shall declare to the same justices of peace, the ill behavior of
lewd disordered persons, whether it shall be for using unlawful games, and such
other light behavior of such suspected persons: And that the same information
shall be given secretly to the justices; and the same justices shall call such
accused persons before them, and examine them, without declaring by whom they
were accused. And that the same justices shall, upon their examination, punish
the offenders, according as their offenses shall appear, upon the accusement
and examination, by their dis^retion, either by open punishment or by good
abearing Burnet, vol. III. p. 246, 247.
." In some respects, this tyrannical edict even exceeded the oppression of the
inquisition; by introducing into every part of government, the same iniquities
which that tribunal practices only for the extirpation of heresy, and which
are, in some measure, necessary, wherever that end is earnestly pursued.

BUT the court had devised a more expeditious and summary method of suppressing
heresy than even the inquisition itself. They issued a proclamation against
books of heresy, treason, and sedition; and declared, "That whosoever had any
of these books, and did not presently burn them, without reading them, or
showing them to any other person, should be esteemed rebels; and without any
farther delay, be executed by martial law Burnet, vol. II. p. 363. Heylin, p.
79.
." From the state of the English government, during that period, it is not so
much the illegality of these proceedings, as their violence and their
pernicious tendency, which ought to be the object of our censure.

WE have thrown together almost the whole transactions against heretics, though
carried on during a course of three years; that we may be obliged, as little as
possible, to return to such shocking violences and barbarities. It is computed,
that in that time two hundred and seventy-seven persons suffered by fire;
besides those punished by imprisonment, fines, and con^iscations. Among those
who suffered by fire, were five bishops, twenty-one clergymen, eight lay
gentlemen, eighty-four tradesmen, one hundred husbandmen, servants, and
laborers, fifty-five women, and four children. This persevering cruelty
appears astonishing; yet is it much inferior to what has been practiced in
other countries. A great author Father Paul, lib* 5.
computes, that in the Low Countries alone, from the time that the edict of
Charles the fifth was promulgated against the reformers, there had been fifty
thousand persons hanged, beheaded, buried alive, or burnt, on account of
religion; and that in France the number had also been considerable. Yet in both
countries, as the same author subjoins, the progress of the new opinions,
instead of being checked, was rather forwarded by these persecutions.

THE burning of heretics was a very natural method of reconciling the kingdom
to the church of Rome, and little solicitation was requisite to engage the
pope to receive the strayed flock, from which he reaped such profit: Yet was
there a solemn embassy sent to Rome, consisting of Sir Anthony Brown, created
viscount Montacute, the bishop of Ely, and Sir Edward Carne; in order to carry
the submission of England, and beg to be readmitted into the bosom of the
catholic church Heylin, p. 45.
. Paul the fourth, after a short interval, now filled the papal chair; the most
haughty pontiff, that during several ages had been elevated to that dignity. He
was offended, that Mary still retained among her titles, that of Queen of
Ireland; and he affirmed that it belonged to him alone, as he saw proper,
either to erect new kingdoms or abolish the old: But to avoid all dispute with
the new converts, he thought proper to erect Ireland into a kingdom, and then
admitted the title, as if it had been his own concession. This was an usual
artifice of the popes to give allowance to what they could not prevent Heylin,
p. 45. Father Paul, lib. 5.
, and then pretend, that persons, while they exercised their own power, were
only acting by authority from the papacy. And though Paul had at first intended
to oblige Mary formally to recede from this title, before he would bestow it
upon her; he found it wiser to proceed in a more political, and less haughty
manner Father Paul, lib 5
.

THE other point of discussion between the pope and the English ambassadors was
not so easily terminated. Paul insisted, that the property and possessions of
the church should be restored even to the uttermost farthing: That whatever
belonged to God, could never by any law be converted to profane uses, and every
person who detained such possessions was in a state of eternal damnation: That
he would willingly, in consideration of the humble submissions of England, make
them a present of these ecclesiastical revenues; but such a concession exceeded
his power, and the people might be certain that so great a profanation of holy
things would be a perpetual anathema upon them, and would blast all their
future felicity: That if they would truly show their filial piety, they must
restore all the privileges and emoluments of the Roman church, and Peter's
pence among the rest; nor could they expect, that that apostle would open to
them the gates of Paradise, while they detained from them his possessions on
earth Father Paul, lib. 5. Heylin, p. 45.
. These earnest remonstrances being transmitted to England, though they had
little influence on the nation, operated powerfully on the Queen; and she was
determined, in order to ease her conscience, to restore all the church lands
which were still in the possession of the crown; and the more to express her
zeal, she erected anew some convents and monasteries, notwithstanding the low
condition of the public revenues. When this measure was debated in council,
some members objected, that if such a considerable part of the revenue was
dismembered, the dignity of the crown would fall to decay: But the Queen
replied, that she preferred the salvation of her soul to ten such kingdoms as
England Heylin, p. 53, 65. Hollingshed, p. 1127. Speed, p. 826.
. These imprudent measures would not probably have taken place so easily, had
it not been for the death of Gardener, which happened about this time: The
seals were given to Heathe, archbishop of York; that an ecclesiastic might
still be possessed of that high office, and be better enabled by his authority
to forward the persecutions against the reformed.

THESE persecutions were now become extremely odious to the nation; and the
21st October. A Parliament.
effects of the public discontents appeared in the new Parliament, which was
summoned to meet at Westminster Burnet, vol. II. p. 32^.
. A bill was passed 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. cap. 4.
restoring to the church the tenths and first fruits, and all the impropriations
which remained in the hands of the crown; but though this matter directly
concerned none but the Queen herself, great opposition was made to the bill in
the house of commons. An application being made for a subsidy during two years,
and for two fifteenths, the latter was refused by the commons; and many members
said, that while the crown was thus despoiling itself of its revenues, there
was no end of bestowing riches upon it. The Parliament rejected a bill for
obliging the exiles to return under certain penalties, and another for
incapacitating such as were remiss in the prosecution of heresy from being
justices of peace. The Queen finding 9th December.
the intractable humor of the commons, thought proper to dissolve the
Parliament.

THE spirit of opposition, which began to prevail in Parliament, was likely to
be the more vexatious to Mary, as she was otherwise in very bad humor on
account of her husband's absence, who, tired of her importunate love and
jealousy, and finding his authority extremely limited in England, had laid hold
of the first opportunity to leave her, and had gone over last summer to the
emperor in Flanders. The indifference and neglect of her husband, added to the
disappointment in her imagined pregnancy, threw her into a deep melancholy; and
she gave vent to her spleen by enforcing daily the persecutions against the
protestants, and even by expressions of rage against all her subjects, by whom
she knew herself to be hated, and whose opposition, in refusing an entire
compliance with Philip, was the cause, she believed, why he had alienated his
affections from her, and afforded her so little of his company. The less return
her love met with, the more it increased; and she passed most of her time in
solitude, where she gave vent to her passion, either in tears, or in writing
fond epistles to Philip, who seldom returned her any answer, and scarce deigned
to counterfeit any sentiment of love or even of gratitude toward her. The
chief part of government, to The Queen's extortions.
which she attended, was the extorting money from her people, in order to
satisfy his demands; and as the Parliament had granted her but a small supply,
she had recourse to expedients the most violent and most irregular. She levied
a loan of 60,000 pounds upon a thousand persons, of whose compliance, either on
account of their riches or their affections to her, she held herself best
assured: But that sum not sufficing, she exacted a general loan of an hundred
pounds apiece on every one who possessed twenty pounds a year. This grievous
imposition lay very heavy on the gentry, who were obliged, many of them, to
retrench their expenses, and dismiss their servants, in order to enable them to
comply with her commands: And as these servants, accustomed to idleness, and
having no means of subsistence, betook themselves very commonly to theft and
robbery, the Queen published a proclamation, by which she obliged their former
masters to take them back to their service. She levied 60,000 marks from 7000
yeomen, who had not contributed to the former loan; and she exacted 36,000
pounds more from the merchants. In order to engage some Londoners to comply the
more willingly with her multiplied extortions, she passed an edict,
prohibiting, for four months, the exporting any English cloths or kerseys for
Flande^s; an expedient which procured a good market for such as had already
sent any quantity of cloth thither. Her rapaciousness engaged her to give
endless disturbance and interruption to commerce. The English company settled
in Antwerp having refused her a loan of 40,000 pounds, she dissembled her
r^sentment, ^ill she found, that they had bought and shipped great quantities
of cloth for A^twerp fair, which was approac^ing: She then laid an embargo on
the ships, and obliged the merchants to grant her a loan of the 40,000 pounds
at (...) demanded, to engage for the payment of 20,000 pounds more at a limited
time, and to submit to an arbitrary imposition of twenty shillings on each
^^^ce. So^e time after, she was informed, that the Italian (...) had shi^ped
above (...) pieces of cloth for the ^evant, for which they w^^^ to pay a ^^own
(...) the usual imposition: She struck a b^rgain with the merch^nt adventur^^
in London; prohibited entirely the foreigners to make any exportation; and
received, from the English merchants, in consideration of this iniquity, the
sum of 50,000 pounds, and an imposition of four crowns on each piece of cloth
which they should export. She attempted to borrow great fums abroad; but her
credit ran so low, that, though she offered 14 per cent* to the city of Antwerp
for a loan of 30,000 pounds, she could not obtain it, till she constrained the
city of London to be surety for her Godwin, p. 359. Cowper's Chronicle. Burnet,
vol. II. p. 359. Carte, p. 330, 333, 337, 341* Strype's Memor. vol. III. p.
428, 558. Annals, vol. I. p. 15.
. All these violent expedients were employed while she herself was in profound
peace with all the world, and had visibly no other occasion for money but to
supply the demands of a husband, who attended only to his own convenience, and
showed himself entirely indifferent about her interests.

PHILIP was now become master of all the wealth of the Indies, and of the
richest and most extensive dominions in Europe, by the voluntary resignation of
The emperor resigns his crown.
the emperor, Charles the fifth, who, though still in the vigor of his age, had
taken a disgust to the world, and was determined to seek, in the tranquillity
of retreat, for that happiness, which he had in vain pursued, amidst the
tumults of war, 25th October.
and the restless projects of ambition. He summoned the states of the Low
Countries; and seating himself on the throne for the last time, explained to
his subjects the reasons of his resignation, absolved them from all oaths of
allegiance, and devolving his authority on Philip, told him, that his paternal
tenderness made him weep, when he reflected on the burden which he imposed
upon him Thuan. lib. XVI. c. 20.
. He inculcated to him the great and only duty of a prince, the study of his
people's happiness; and represented how much preferable it was to govern, by
affection rather than fear, the nations subjected to his dominion. The cool
reflections of age now discovered to him the emptiness of his former pursuits;
and he found, that the vain schemes of extending his empire had been the source
of endless opposition and disappointment, had kept himself, his neighbors, and
his subjects in perpetual inquietude, and had frustrated the sole end of
government, the felicity of the nations committed to his care; an object which
meets with no opposition, and which, if steddily pursued, can alone convey a
lasting and solid satisfaction.

When he arrived at Burgos, he found, by the thinness of his court, and the
negligent attendance of the Spanish grandees, that he was no longer emperor;
and though this observation might convince him still more of the vanity of the
world, and make him more heartily despise what he had renounced, he sighed to
find that all the former adulation and obeisance had been paid to his fortune,
not to his person. With better reason, was he struck with the ingratitude of
his son Philip, who allowed him to wait a long time for the payment of the
small pension which he had reserved; and this disappointment in his domestic
enjoyments gave him a very sensible concern. He pursued however his resolution
with inflexible constancy; and shutting himself up in his retreat, he exerted
such selfcommand, that he restrained even his curiosity from any enquiry
concerning the transactions of the world, which he had entirely abandoned. The
fencing against the pains and infirmities under which he labored, occupied a
great part of his time; and during the intervals, he employed his leisure
either in examining the controversies of theology, with which his age had been
so much agitated, and which he had hitherto considered only in a political
light, or in imitating the works of renowned artists, particularly in
mechanics, of which he had always been a great admirer and encourager. He is
said to have here discovered a propensity to the new doctrines; and to have
frequently dropped hints of this unexpected alteration in his sentiments.
Having amused himself with the construction of clocks and watches, he thence
remarked how impracticable the object was, in which he had so much employed
himself during his grandeur; and how impossible that he, who never could frame
two machines that would go exactly alike, could ever be able to make all
mankind concur in the same belief and opinion. He survived his retreat two
years.

THE emperor Charles had very early, in the beginning of his reign, found the
difficulty of governing such distant dominions; and he had made his brother
Ferdinand be elected King of the Romans; with a view of his succeeding to the
imperial dignity, as well as to his German dominions. But having afterward
enlarged his views, and formed plans of aggrandizing his family, he regreted,
that he must dismember such considerable states; and he endeavored to engage
Ferdinand, by the most tempting offers, and most earnest solicitations, to
yield up his pretensions in favor of Philip. Finding his attempts fruitless,
he had resigned the imperial crown with his other dignities; and Ferdinand,
according to common form, applied to the pope for his coronation. The arrogant
pontiff refused the demand; and pretended, that, though, on the death of an
emperor, he was obliged to crown the prince elected, yet in the case of a
resignation, the right devolved to the holy see, and it belonged to the pope
alone to appoint an emperor. The conduct of Paul was in every thing conformable
to these lofty pretensions. He thundered always in the ears of all ambassadors,
that he stood in no need of the assistance of any prince, that he was above all
pote tates of the earth, that he would not accustom monarchs to pretend to a
familiarity or equality with him, that it belonged to him to alter and regulate
kingdoms, that he was successor of those who had deposed kings and emperors,
and that, rather than submit to any thing below his dignity, he would set fire
to the four corners of the world. He went so far, that at table, in the
presence of many persons, and even openly, in a public consistory, he said,
that he would not admit any Kings for his companions; they were all his
subjects, and he would hold them under these feet: So saying, he stamped the
ground with his old and infirm limbs: For he was now past fourscore years of
age Father Paul, lib. 5.
.

THE world could not forbear making a comparison between Charles the fifth, a
prince, who, though educated amidst wars and intrigues of state, had prevented
the decline of age, and had descended from the throne, in order to set apart an
interval for thought and reflection, and a priest, who in the extremity of old
age exulted in his dominion, and from restless ambition and revenge was
throwing all nations into combustion. Paul had entertained the most inveterate
animosity against the house of Austria; and though a truce of five years had been
concluded between France and Spain, he excited Henry by his solicitations to
break it, and promised to assist him in recovering Naples and the dominions to
which he laid claim in Italy; a project which had ever proved fatal to his
predecessors. He himself engaged in hostilities with the duke of Alva, viceroy
of Naples; and the duke of Guise being sent with forces to support him, the
renewal of war between the two crowns seemed almost inevitable. Philip, though
less warlike than his father, was no less ambitious; and he trusted, that by
the intrigues of the cabinet, where, he believed, his caution and secrecy and
prudence gave him the superiority, he should be able to subdue all his enemies,
and extend his authority and dominion. For this reason, as well as from the
desire of settling his new empire, he was desirous to maintain peace with
France; but when he found, that, without sacrificing his honor, it was
impossible for him to overlook the hostile attempts of Henry, he prepared for
war with great industry. In order to give himself the more advantage, he was
desirous to embark England in the quarrel; and though the Queen was of herself
extremely averse to that design, he hoped, that the devoted fondness, which,
notwithstanding repeated instances of his indifference, she still bore him,
would effectually second his applications. Had the matter indeed depended
solely on her, she was incapable of resisting her husband's commands; but she
had little weight with her council, still less with her people; and her
government, which was every day becoming more odious, seemed unable to support
itself even during the most profound tranquillity, much more if a war was
kindled with France, and what seemed an inevitable consequence, with Scotland,
supported by that powerful kingdom.

AN act of barbarity was this year exercised in England, which, added to many
other instances of the same kind, tended to render the government extremely
unpopular. Cranmer had long been detained a prisoner; but the Queen was now
Execution of Cranmer.
determined to bring him to punishment; and in order the more fully to satiate
her vengeance, she resolved to punish him for heresy, rather than for treason.
He was cited by the pope to stand his trial at Rome; and though he was known to
be kept in close custody at Oxford, he was, upon his not appearing, condemned
as contumacious. Bonner, bishop of London, and Thirleby of Ely, were sent down
to Oxford to degrade him; and the former executed that melancholy ceremony with
all the joy and exultation, which suited his savage nature Mem. of Cranm p.
(...).
. The revenge of the Queen, not satisfied with the eternal damnation of
Cranmer, which she believed inevitable, and with the execution of that dreadful
sentence to which he was condemned, prompted her also to seek the ruin of his
honor, and the infamy of his name. Persons were employed to attack him, not in
the way of disputation, against which he was sufficiently armed; but by
flattery, insinuation and address; by representing the dignities to which his
character still entitled him, if he would merit them by a recantation; by
giving hopes of long enjoying those powerful friends, whom his beneficent
disposition had attached to him during the course of his prosperity Heylin, p
^^. M^^ p (...).
. Overcome by the fond love of life, terrified by the prospect of those
tortures which awaited him; he allowed, in an unguarded hour, the sentiments of
nature to prevail over his resolution, and he agreed to sign a paper, in which
he acknowledged the doctrines of the papal supremacy and of the real presence.
The court, equally persidious and cruel, were determined, that this recantation
should avail him nothing; and they sent orders, that he should be required to
acknowledge his errors in church before the whole people, and that he should
thence be immediately led to execution. Cranmer, whether, that he had received
a secret intimation of their design, or had repented ^^st March.
of his weakness, surprised the audience by a contrary declaration. He said,
that he was well apprized of the obedience which he owed his sovereign and the
laws, but this duty extended no farther than to submit patiently to their
commands, and to bear without resistance whatever hardships they should impose
upon him: That a superior duty, the duly which he owed his Maker, obliged him
to speak truth on all occasions, and not to relinquish, by a base denial, the
holy doctrine which the supreme being had revealed to mankind: That there was
one miscarriage in his life, of which, above all others, he severely repented;
the insincere declaration of faith to which he had the weakness to consent, and
which the fear of death alone had extorted from him: That he took this
opportunity of attoning for his error, by a sincere and open recantation; and
was willing to seal with his blood that doctrine which he firmly believed to be
communicated from heaven: And that as his hand had erred by betraying his
heart, it should first be punished, by a severe but just doom, and should first
pay the forfeit of its offenses. He was thence led to the stake amidst the
insults of the catholics; and having now summoned up all the force of his mind,
he bore their scorn as well as the torture of his punishment with singular
fortitude. He stretched out his hand, and without betraying, either by his
countenance or motions, the least sign of weakness or even of feeling, he held
it in the flames till it was entirely consumed. His thoughts seemed entirely
occupied with reflections on his former fault; and he called aloud several
times, This hand has offended. Satisfied with that atonement, he then
discovered a serenity in his countenance; and when the fire attacked his body,
he seemed to be wholly insensible of his outward sufferings, and by the force
of hope and resolution to have collected his mind altogether within itself, and
to repel the fury of the flames. It is pretended, that, after his body was
consumed, his heart was found entire and untouched among the ashes; an event,
which, as it was the emblem of his constancy, was fondly believed by the
zealous protestants. He was undoubtedly a man of merit; possessed of learning
and capacity; and adorned with candor, sincerity and beneficence, and all
those virtues, which were fitted to render him useful and amiable in society.
His moral qualities procured him universal respect; and the courage of his
martyrdom, though he fell short of the rigid inflexibility observed in many, made
him the hero of the protestant party Burnet, vol. II. p. 331, 332, etc. Godwin,
p. 352.
.

AFTER Cranmer's death, cardinal Pole, who had now taken priest's orders, was
installed in the sea of Canterbury; and was thus by this office, as well as his
commission of legate, placed at the head of the church of England. But though he
was averse to all the sanguinary methods of converting heretics, and esteemed
the reformation of the clergy the more effectual, as the more laudable
expedient for that purpose Burnet, vol. II. 324, 325.
; he found his authority too weak to oppose the barbarous and bigoted
disposition of the Queen and of her counselors. He himself, he knew, had been
suspected of Lutheranism; and as Paul, the reigning pope, was a furious
persecutor and his personal enemy, he was prompted, by the modesty of his
disposition, to reserve his credit for other occasions, in which he had a
greater probability of success Heylin, p. 68, 69. Burnet, vol. II. p. 327.
.

Heylin, p. 72. Burnet, vol II. p 351. Sir James Melvil's Memoirs.
; and a confession being extorted from them, that they had been encouraged by
Henry in that attempt, the Queen's importunity prevailed; and it was determined
to make this act of hostility, with others of a like secret and doubtful
nature, the ground of the quarrel. War War with France.
was accordingly declared against France; and preparations were every where made
for attacking that kingdom.

THE revenue of England at that time little exceeded 300,000 pounds Rosse,
Successi d'Inglulte^ra.
. Any considerable supplies could scarce be expected from Parliament,
considering the present disposition of the nation; and as the war would
sensibly diminish the branch of the customs, the finances, it was foreseen,
would fall short even of the ordinary charges of the government; much more,
prove unequal to the vast expenses of war. But though the Queen owed great
arrears to all her servants, besides the loans extorted from her subjects;
these considerations had no influence on her, and she continued to levy money
in the same arbitrary and violent manner, which she had formerly practiced. She
obliged the city of London to supply her with 60,000 pounds on her husband's
entry; she levied before the legal time the second year's subsidy voted by
Parliament; she issued anew many privy seals, by which she procured loans from
her people; and having equiped a fleet, which she could not victual by reason
of the dearness of provisions, she seized all the corn she could find in
Suffolk and Norfolk, without paying any price to the owners. By all these
expedients, assisted by the power of pressing, she levied an army of ten
thousand men, which she sent over to the Low Countries, under the command of
the earl of Pembroke. Meanwhile, in order to prevent any disturbance at home,
many of the most considerable gentry were thrown into the Tower; and lest they
should be known, the Spanish practice was followed: They were either carried
thither in the nightime, or were hoodwinked and muffled by the guards who
conducted them Strype's Eccles. Memorials, vol. III. p. 3^^.
.

THE King of Spain had assembled together an army, which, after the junction of
the English, amounted to above sixty thousand strong, commanded by Philibert,
duke of Savoy, one of the greatest captains of the age. The constable,
Montmorency, who commanded the French army, had not half the number to oppose
him. The duke of Savoy, after menacing Mariembourg and Rocroy, sat down
suddenly before St. Quintin; and as the place was weak, and ill provided of a
garrison, he expected in a few days to become master of it. But the admiral
Coligny, governor of the province, thinking his honor interested to save so
important a fortress, threw himself into St. Quintin, with some troops of
French and Scotch gensdarmes; and by his exhortation and example animated the
soldiers to a vigorous defense. He dispatched a messenger to his uncle, the
constable, desiring a supply of men; and that general approached the place with
his 10th August.
whole army, in order to facilitate the entry of these succors. But the duke of
Savoy falling on the reinforcement, committed such slaughter upon them, that
Battle of St. Quintin.
not above five hundred men got into the place. He next made an attack on the
French army, and put them to a total rout, killing four thousand men, and
dispersing the rest. In this unfortunate action many of the chief nobility of
France were either slain or taken prisoners: Among the latter was the old
constable himself, who fighting valiantly, and resolute to die rather than
survive his defeat, was surrounded by the enemy, and thus fell alive into their
hands. The whole kingdom of France was thrown into consternation. Paris was
attempted to be fortified in a hurry: And had the Spaniards presently marched
thither, it could not fail to have fallen into their hands. But Philip was very
little enterprizing in his character; and he was determined first to take St.
Quintin, in order to secure a communication with his own dominions. A very
little time, it was expected, would finish this enterprise; but the bravery of
Coligny still prolonged the siege seventeen days, which proved the safety of
France. Some troops were levied and assembled. Couriers were sent to call the
duke of Guise and his army from Italy: And the French having recovered from
their first alarm, put themselves in a posture of defense. Philip, after taking
Ham and Castelet, found the season so far advanced, that he could attempt no
farther enterprise, and he broke up his camp and retired to winter quarters.

BUT the vigilant activity of Guise, not satisfied with securing the frontiers,
prompted him, in the depth of winter, to attempt an enterprise which France,
during her greatest successes, had always regarded as impossible, and had never
thought of undertaking. Calais was, in that age, esteemed an impregnable
fortress; and as it was known to be the favorite of the English nation, by
whom it could easily be succored, the recovery of that place by France, was
considered as totally desperate. But Coligny had remarked, that, as the town of
Calais was surrounded with marshes, which, during the winter, were impassable,
except Calais taken by the French.
over a dyke guarded by two castles, St. Agatha and Newnam bridge, the English
were of late accustomed, on account of the lowness of their finances, to
dismiss a great part of the garrison at the end of autumn, and to recall them
in the spring, at which time alone they judged their attendance necessary. On
this circumstance he had founded his design of making a sudden attack on the
place; he had caused it to be secretly surveyed by some engineers; and a plan
of the whole enterprise being found among his papers, it served, though he
himself was made prisoner on the taking of St. Quintin, to suggest the project
of that undertaking, and to direct the conduct of the duke of Guise.

could not obtain such favorable conditions, and were obliged to surrender
themselves prisoners.

THE duke of Guise, now holding the place blockaded by sea and land, thought
himself secure of succeeding in his enterprise; but in order to prevent all
accidents, he delayed not a moment the attack of the place. He pointed his
batteries toward the castle, where he made a large breach; and having ordered
Andelot, Coligny's brother, to drain the fossee, he commanded an assault, which
succeeded, and the French made a lodgment in the castle. On the night following
Wentworth attempted to recover this post; but having lost two hundred men in a
furious attack which he made upon it Thuan, lib. xx. c. 2.
, he found his garrison so weak, that he was obliged to capitulate. Ham, and
Guisnes fell soon after; and thus the duke of Guise, in eight days, during the
depth of winter, recovered this important place, that had cost Edward the third
a siege of eleven months, at the head of a numerous army, which had that very
campaign been victorious in the battle of Cressy. The English had held it above
two hundred years; and as it gave them, whenever they pleased, an entry into
France, it was regarded as the most important possession belonging to the
crown. The joy of the French was extreme, as well as the glory acquired by the
duke of Guise, who, at the time that all Europe imagined France to be sunk by
the unfortunate battle of St. Quintin, had, in opposition to the English, and
their allies the Spaniards, acquired possession of a place which no former King
of France, even during the distractions of the civil wars between the houses of
York and Lancaster, had ever ventured to attempt. The English, on the other
hand, bereaved of this valuable fortress, murmured loudly against the
imprudence of the Queen and her council; who, after engaging in a fruitless
war, for the sake of foreign interests, had thus exposed the nation to so
severe a disgrace. A treasury exhausted by expenses, and burdened with debts;
a people divided and dejected; a sovereign negligent of her people's welfare;
were circumstances which, notwithstanding the fair offers made by Philip, gave
them small hopes of recovering Calais. And as the Scotch, instigated by French
councils, began to move on the borders, they were now necessitated rather to
look to their defense at home, than to think of foreign conquests.

Affairs of Scotland.
AFTER the peace, which, in consequence of King Edward's treaty with Henry,
took place between Scotland and England, the Queen-dowager, under pretense of
visiting her daughter and her relations, made a journey to France, and she
carried along with her the earls of Huntley, Sutherland, Marischal, and many of
the principal nobility. Her secret design was to take measures for engaging the
earl of Arran to resign to her the government of the kingdom; and as her
brothers, the duke of Guise, the cardinal of Lorraine, and the duke d'Aumale,
had uncontrouled authority in the court of France, she easily persuaded Henry,
and by his means the Scotch nobles, to enter into her measures. Having also
gained over Carnegy of Kinnaird, Panter, bishop of Ross, and Gavin Hamilton,
commendator of Kilwinning, three creatures of the governor's, she persuaded
him, by their means, to consent to this resignation B^channan, lib ^iv. K^^h.
p. 56. Spotswood, p. 92.
; and when every thing was thus prepared for her purpose, she took her journey
to Scotland, and passed through England in her way thither. Edward received her
with great respect and civility; though he could not forbear attempting a renewal
of the old treaty for his marriage with her daughter: A marriage, he said, so
happily calculated for the tranquillity, interest, and security of both
kingdoms, and the only means of ensuring a durable peace between them. For his
part, he added, he never could entertain a cordial amity for any other husband
whom she should choose; nor was it easy for him to forgive a man, who, at the
same time that he disappointed so natural an alliance, had bereaved him of a
bride, to whom his affections, from his earliest infancy, had been entirely
engaged. The Queen eluded these applications, by telling him, that if any
measures had been taken disagreeable to him, they were entirely owing to the
imprudence of the duke of Somerset, who, instead of employing courtesy,
caresses, and gentle offices, the proper means of gaining a young princess, had
had recourse to arms and violence, and had constrained the Scotch nobility to
send their sovereign into France, in order to interest that kingdom in
protecting their liberty and independance (...) p. (...).
.

WHEN the Queen-dowager arrived in Scotland, she found the governor very
unwilling to fulfill his engagements; and it was not till after many delays that
he could be persuaded to resign his authority. But finding that the majority of
the young princess was approaching, and that the Queen-dowager had gained the
affections of all the principal nobility, he thought it more prudent to submit;
and having stipulated, that he should be declared next heir to the crown, and
should be fre^d from giving any account of his past administration, he placed
her in possession of the power; and she thenceforth assumed the name of regent
(...) April 1554.
. It was an usual saying of this princess, that provided she could render her
friends happy, and could ensure to herself a good reputation, she was entirely
indifferent what besel her; and though this sentiment is greatly censured by the
zealous reformers (...) p. 8^.
, as being founded wholly on secular motives, it dis^overs a mind well
calculated for the administration of kingdoms. D'Oisel, a Frenchman, celebrated
for capacity, had attended her as ambass^dor from Henry, but in reality to
assist her with his counsels in so delicate an undertaking as the government of
Scotland; and this man had formed a scheme for laying a general tax on the
kingdom, in order to support a standing military force, which might at once
repulse the inroads of foreign enemies, and check the turbulence of the Scotch
nobility. But though some of the courtiers were gained over to this project, it
gave great and general discontent to the nation; and the Queen-regent, after
ingenuously confessing, that it would prove pernicious to the kingdom, had the
prudence to desist from it, and to trust entirely for her security to the
goodwill and affections of her subjects Keith, p. 70. Buchan. lib. xvi.
.

THIS laudable purpose seemed to be the chief object of her administration; yet
was she sometimes drawn from it by her connections with France, and by the
influence which her brothers had acquired over her. When Mary declared war
against that kingdom, Henry required the Queen-regent to take part in the
quarrel; and she summoned a convention of states at Newbottle, and requested
them to concur in a declaration of war against England. The Scotch nobles, who
were as jealous of French as the English were of Spanish influence, refused
their assent; and the Queen was obliged to have recourse to artifice, in order
to effectuate her purpose. She ordered d'Oisel to begin some fortifications at
Eymouth, a place which had been dismantled by the last treaty with Edward; and
when the garrison of Berwic, as she foresaw, made an inroad to prevent the
undertaking, she effectually employed this pretense to inflame the Scotch
nation, and to engage them in hostilities against England Buchan. lib. xvi.
Thuan. lib. xix. c. 7.
. The enterprise, however, of the Scotch proceeded no farther than some inroads
on the borders; and when d'Oisel, of himself, conducted artillery and troops to
besiege the castle of Work, he was recalled, and very sharply rebuked by the
council Knox, p. 93.
.

Marriage of the dauphin and the Queen of Scots.
IN order to connect Scotland more closely with France, and to increase the
influence of the latter kingdom, it was thought proper by Henry to complete the
marriage between the young Queen and the dauphin; and a deputation was sent by
the Scotch Parliament, to assist at this ceremony, and to settle the terms of
the contract. This deputation consisted of the archbishop of Glasgow, the
bishops of Ross and the Orkneys, the earls of Rothes, and Cassilis, the lords
Fleming and Seton, James Stuart, prior of St. Andrews, natural brother to the
Queen, and Erskine of Dun. The principal conditions recommended to these
commissioners, was to obtain a solemn engagement from the Queen and dauphin,
that they would preserve the laws and privileges of Scotland, and to procure a
renewal of the French King's promise, to support, in case of the Queen's death,
the succession of the earl of Arran, now created duke of Chatolraut. Both these
conditions were easily obtained; but the court of France took a very perfidious
step, directly contrary to these stipulations: They secretly engaged the young
Queen to sign three papers; by one of which she made over the kingdom of
Scotland in gift to the King of France, in case of her decease without
children; by another she mortgaged it to him for a million of crowns of gold,
or such greater sum as he should have expended for her maintenance and support;
and by a third she declared, that whatever deed she had been obliged, or should
hereafter be obliged to perform, relative to the succession of the crown, it
should be entirely invalid, and that her real sense and intention was contained
in the first paper. The marriage was solemnized 24 April.
at Paris: The commissioners, in the name of the states of Scotland, swore
allegiance to the Queen, and, during the continuance of the marriage, to the
King-dauphin, so he was called: And every thing seemed to proceed with great
unanimity and concord. But the commissioners being required to deliver up the
crown, and other ensigns of royalty, made answer, that they had received no
authority for that purpose; and they soon after set out on their journey for
Scotland. It is remarkable, that before they embarked, four of the
commissioners died, within a few days of each other; and a violent, though absurd
suspicion prevailed, that they had been poisoned by orders from the family of
Guise, on account of this refusal Buchan. lib. xvi. Keith, p. 75. Spotswood, p.
95.
. It was not considered, that that accident, however rare, might have happened
by the course of nature; and that the present season, though not attended with
any pestilential disorder, was, to a singular degree, unhealthy all over Europe.

THE close alliance between France and Scotland threatened very nearly the
repose and security of England; and it was foreseen, that, though the factions
and disorders which might naturally be expected in the Scotch government during
the absence of their sovereign, made its power less formidable, that kingdom
would at least afford to the French a means of invading England. The Queen,
therefore, found it 20th January*
necessary to summon a Parliament, and to demand of them some supplies to her
exhausted A Parliament.
exchequer. As such an emergency usually gives great advantage to the people,
and as the Parliaments, during this reign, had shown, that, where the liberty
and independency of the kingdom were menaced with imminent danger, they were
not entirely overawed by the court; we shall naturally expect, that the late
arbitrary methods of extorting money should, at least, be censured, and,
perhaps, some remedy be for the future provided against them. But such an
exorbitant prerogative was at this time acknowleged to belong to the crown,
that, though men might complain of its present abuses, all attempts to retrench
it would have been regarded as the most criminal enterprise; and as that
prerogative involved a large discretionary power, any parliamentary enquiry
into its exercise, would have passed for insolent and presumptuous. The
commons, therefore, without making any reflections on the past, voted, besides
a fifteenth, a subsidy of four shillings in the pound on land, and two
shillings and eight pence on goods. The clergy granted eight shillings in the
pound, payable in four years by equal portions.

THE Parliament also passed an act, confirming all the sales and grants of
crown lands, which were either made already by the Queen, or should be made
during the seven ensuing years. It was easy to foresee, that, in the Queen's
present disposition and situation, this power would be followed by a great
alienation of the crown lands; and nothing could be more contrary to the
principles of good government, than a prince armed with very extensive
authority, and yet reduced to beggary. This act met with opposition in the
house of commons. One Copley expressed his fears lest the Queen, under color
of the power there granted, might alienate the crown from the lawful heir: But
his words were thought irreverent to her majesty: He was committed to the
custody of the sergeant at arms; and though he expressed sorrow for his offense,
he was not released till the Queen was applied to for his forgiveness.

THE English nation, during this whole reign, were in continual apprehensions
with regard not only to the succession, but the life of the lady Elizabeth. The
violent hatred which the Queen bore her, broke out on every occasion; and it
required all the authority of Philip, as well as her own great prudence, to
prevent the fatal effects of it. The princess retired into the country; and
knowing that she was surrounded with spies, she past her time wholly in reading
and study, intermeddled in no business, and saw very little company. While she
remained in this situation, which was for the present very melancholy, but
which prepared her mind for those great actions by which her life was
afterward so much distinguished; proposals of marriage were made her by the
Swedish ambassador, in his master's name. As her first question was, whether
the Queen had been informed of this proposal; the ambassador told her, that his
master thought, as he was a gentleman, it was his duty first to make his
addresses to herself; and having obtained her consent, he would next, as a
King, apply to her sister. But the princess would allow him to proceed no
further; and the Queen, after thanking her for this instance of duty, desired
to know how she stood affected to the Swedish proposal. Elizabeth, though exposed
to many present dangers and mortifications, had the magnanimity to reserve
herself to better fortune; and she covered her refusal with professions of a
passionate attachment to a single life, which, she said, she infinitely
preferred before any other Burnet, vol. II. Collect. No 37.
. The princess showed like prudence in concealing her sentiments of religion,
in complying with the present modes of worship, and in eluding all questions
with regard to that delicate subject The common net at that time, says Sir
Richard Baker, for catching of protestants, was the real presence; and this net
was used to catch the lady Elizabeth: For being asked one time what she thought
of the words of Christ, This is my body, whether she thought it the true body
of Christ that was in the sacrament; it is said, that, after some pausing, she
thus answered: Christ was the word that spoke it;
He took the bread and brake it;
And what the word did make it,
That I believe and take it.
Which, though it may seem but a slight expression, yet has it more solidness
than at first sight appears; at least it served her turn at that time, to
escape the net, which by direct answer she could not have done. Baker's
Chronicle, p. 320.


.

THE money granted by Parliament, enabled the Queen to fit out a fleet of a
hundred and forty sail, which, being joined by thirty Flemish ships, and
carrying six thousand land forces on board, was sent to make an attempt on the
coast of Brittany. The fleet was commanded by lord Clinton; the land forces by
the earls of Huntingdon and Rutland. But the equipment of the fleet and army
was so dilatory, that the French got intelligence of the design, and were
prepared to receive them. The English found Breast too well guarded to make an
attempt on that place; but landing at Conquet, they plundered and burnt the
town with some adjoining villages, and were proceeding to commit greater
disorders, when Kersimon, a Breton gentleman, at the head of some militia, fell
upon them, put them to rout, and drove them to their ships with considerable
loss. But a small squadron of ten English ships, had an opportunity of amply
revenging this disgrace upon the French. The Marshall de Thermes, governor of
Calais, had made an irruption into Flanders, with an army of fourteen thousand
men; and having forced a passage over the river Aa, had taken Dunkirk, and Berg
St. Winoc, and had advanced as far as Newport. But count Egmont coming suddenly
upon him, with superior forces, he was obliged to retire; and being overtaken
by the Spaniards near Gravelines, he chose very skilfully his ground for the
engagement. He fortified his left wing with all the precautions possible; and
posted his right along the river Aa, which, he reasonably thought, gave him a
full security from that quarter. But the English ships, which were accidentally
on the coast, being drawn by the noise of the firing, sailed up the river, and
flanking the French, did such execution by their artillery, that they put them
to flight; and the Spaniards gained a complete victory Holingshed* p. 1150.
.

MEANWHILE the principal army of France, under the duke of Guise, and that of
Spain, under the duke of Savoy, approached very near each other on the
frontiers of Picardy; and as the two Kings had come into their respective
camps, attended by the flower of their nobility, men expected that some great
and important event would follow, from the emulation of these warlike nations.
But Philip, though actuated by the ambition, possessed not the enterprise, of a
conqueror; and he was willing, notwithstanding the superiority of his numbers,
and the two great victories which he had gained at St. Quintin and Gravelines,
to put a period to the war by a treaty. Negociations were entered into for that
purpose; and as the terms offered by the two monarchs were somewhat wide of
each other, the armies were put into winter quarters, till the princes could
come to better agreement. Among other conditions, Henry demanded the
restitution of Navarre to its lawful owner; Philip that of Calais and its
territory to England: But in the midst of these negociations and debates, news
arrived of the death of Queen Mary; and Philip, no longer connected with
England, began to relax in his instances on that capital article. This was the
only circumstance which could have made the death of that princess a loss to
the kingdom.

MARY had been long in a very declining state of health; and having mistaken
her dropsy for a pregnancy, she had made use of an improper regimen, and her
malady daily augmented. Every reflection now tormented her: The consciousness
of being hated by her subjects, the prospect of Elizabeth's succession,
apprehensions of the danger to which the catholic religion stood exposed,
dejection for the loss of Calais The loss of Calais so much affected her, that
she said to her attendant^, that when she was dead, they would find Calais at
her heart.
, concern for the ill state of her affairs, and, above all, anxiety for the
absence of her husband, who, she knew, intended soon to depart for Spain, and
to settle there during the rest of his life: All these melancholy circumstances
preyed upon her mind, and threw her into a lingering fever, of Death of the
Queen.
which she died, after a short and unfortunate reign of five years, four months,
17 November.
and eleven days.

IT is not necessary to employ many words in drawing the character of this
princess. She possessed few qualities, either estimable or amiable; and her
person was as little engaging as her behavior and address. Obstinacy, bigotry,
violence, cruelty, malignity, revenge, tyranny; every circumstance of her
character took a tincture from her bad temper and narrow understanding. And
amidst that complication of vices, which entered into her composition, we shall
scarce find any virtue but sincerity; a quality, which she seems to have
maintained throughout her whole life; except in the beginning of her reign,
when the necessity of her affairs obliged her to make some promises to the
protestants, which she certainly never intended to perform. But in these cases
a weak bigoted woman, under the government of priests, easily finds casuistry
sufficient to justify to herself the violation of an engagement. She appears
also, as well as her father, to have been susceptible of some attachments of
friendship; and that without the caprice and inconstancy which were so
remarkable in the conduct of that monarch. To which we may add, that, in many
circumstances of her life, she gave indications of resolution and vigor of
mind; a quality, which seems to have been inherent in her family.

CARDINAL Pole had been long in a declining state of health from an intermiting
fever; and he died the same day with the Queen, about sixteen hours after her.
The benign character of this prelate, the modesty and humanity of his
deportment, made him be universally beloved; insomuch that in a nation, where
the most furious persecution was carried on, and the most violent religious
factions prevailed, entire justice, even by most of the reformers, has been
done to his merit. The haughty pontiff, Paul the fourth, had entertained some
prejudices against him; and when England declared war against Henry, the ally
of that pope, he seized the opportunity of revenge, and revoking Pole's
legantine commission, appointed in his room cardinal Peyto, an observantine
friar and confessor to the Queen. But Mary would never permit the new legate to
exercise his power; and Paul was afterward obliged to restore cardinal Pole to
his authority.

THERE occur few general remarks, besides what have been taken notice of in the
course of our narration, with regard to the general state of the kingdom during
this reign. The naval power of England was then so inconsiderable, that
fourteen thousand pounds being ordered to be applied to the fleet by the
treasurer and admiral, both for repairing and victualling it, they computed,
that, when that money was expended, ten thousand pounds a year would afterward
answer a^^ necessary charges Burnet, vol. III. p. ^^9.
. The arbitrary proceedings of the Queen, abovementioned, j^ined to many
monopolies granted by this princess, as well as by her father, (...) very much
the growth of trade; and so much the more, that all other princes in Europe
either were not permitted or did not find it necessary to act in so tyranni^al
a manner. Acts of Parliament, both in the last reign and in the beginning of
the present, had laid the same impositions on the merchants of the s^^ll yard
as on other aliens: Yet the Queen, immediately after her marriage, comp^ied
with the solicitations of the emperor, and, by her prerogative, suspended
these acts of Parliament Rymer, vol. XV. p. 364.
. No body in that age pretended to question this exercise of the prerogative.
The historians are entirely silent with regard to it; and it is only by the
collection of public papers that it is handed down to us.

AN absurd law had been made in the preceding reign, by which every one was
prohibited from making cloth unless he had served an apprenticeship for seven
years. This law was repealed in the first year of the Queen's reign; and this
plain reason given, that it had occasioned the decay of the woolen manufactory,
and had ruined several towns 1 Mar. Parl. 2. cap. 7.
. It is strange that Edward's law should have been revived during the reign of
Elizabeth; and still more strange, that it should still subsist.

A PASSAGE to Archangel, by the north of Nova Zembla, had been discovered by
the English during the last reign; and a beneficial trade with Muscovy had been
established. A solemn embassy was sent by the Czar to Queen Mary. The
ambassadors were shipwrecked on the coast of Scotland; but being hospitably
entertained there, they proceeded on their journey, and were received at London
with great pomp and solemnity Hollingshed, p. 732. Heylin, p. 71.
. This seems to have been the first intercourse, which that empire had with any
of the western potentates of Europe.

A LAW was passed in this reign 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. cap. 2.
, by which the number of horses, arms, and furniture, was established, which
each person, according to the extent of his property, should be provided of for
the defense of the kingdom. A man of a thousand pounds a year, for instance,
was obliged to maintain at his own charges six horses fit for demi-lances, of
which three at least to be furnished with sufficient harnesses, steel saddles,
and weapons proper for the demi-lances; and ten light horses fit for light
horsemen, with furniture and weapons requisite for them: He was also obliged to
have forty corslets furnished; fifty almain rivets, or instead of them, forty
coats of plate, corslets or brigandines furnished; forty pikes, thirty long
bows, thirty sheafs of arrows, thirty steel caps or skulls, twenty black bills
or halberts, twenty haquebuts, and twenty morions or sallets. We may remark,
that a man of a thousand merks of stock was rated equal to one of two hundred
pounds a year: A proof that few or none at that time lived on their stock in
money, and that great profits were made by the merchants in the course of their
trade. There is no class above a thousand pounds a year.


