LETTERS FROM BARBARY, FRANCE, SPAIN, PORTUGAL, etc.

BY AN ENGLISH OFFICER.

Il s'agit de fair penser, et non de fair lire. MONTESQUIEU. IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.

MDCCLXXXVIII.

TO THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES THE PRINCE OF WALES, AND DUKE OF YORK, THE FOLLOWING
LETTERS, IN WHICH THE AUTHOR ATTEMPTS TO TREAT OF SUBJECTS OF THE HIGHEST
IMPORTANCE TO PRINCES, ARE, WITH GREAT HUMILITY, DEDICATED,

BY THEIR MOST FAITHFUL AND DEVOTED SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
THE Author does not mean, by a Preface, to make fashionable unmeaning
apologies for intruding his thoughts on the Public. If there is any obligation
on either side, the world is certainly as much obliged to him for his Book as
he can be to them for reading it. Authors surely deserve, at least, thanks as
well as criticism from their country for their labors. But thanks and
compliments are here out of the question. The common cant of personal
politeness is not a-propos in this case. Though he feels himself highly
honored and obliged by many respectable individuals; the Public is not an
individual, to be wheedled like a child, or soothed like a tyrant; but should
certainly be treated with truth and sincerity, which deal not in compliments,
and seldom require apologies.

Though it can little concern the world to know whether this correspondence was
originally intended for publication, the Writer thinks proper to mention that,
having resided abroad, at different periods of life, and in situations that
gave him occasion to see more of Spain, and some other countries, than has
usually fallen to the lot of travelers, he was thence led to observe and
reflect, perhaps with a more continued attention than ordinary, on the people,
their arts, police, character, and above all, on the state of society, and the
great art of government, on which depend so much of the progress, civilization,
and happiness of mankind. Some of his remarks having been communicated to
friends and relations, they have thought the following worth preserving by
publication.

In such a correspondence, great inequalities, and want of strict connection,
must be expected: regularity and system were not intended. The Author has
digressed to a variety of subjects, as the different views in traveling
brought them before him, and has indulged in reflections which seemed then of
importance. Some of them may still appear new, others perhaps interesting to
many, and even the most singular may be acceptable to some readers; for, it is
imagined that, by following only his own ideas and opinions, he is the more
likely to be original, and different from other letter-writters of the same
kind. He only pretends to give a few hints or sketches of what might be said on
the various subjects and nations here mentioned, nor does he always presume to
decide on contested or probable opinions. Much more might doubtless be observed
in another journey to the same countries. In many subjects, all our attempts
toward truth and knowledge can form, at best, perhaps only a perpetual and
indeterminate approximation.

Without attempting to improve much upon the careless style and freedom of
private letters, he has here endeavored somewhat to correct and arrange them,
and to make some additions from recollection, and other information. To any
uncommon degrees of elegance he forms no pretensions, and aims only at being
understood. Some degree of negligence indeed as to style, or at least fine
style, he confesses may be rather intentional, from a love of brevity and
simplicity, and from a disinclination to join in the growing affectation of the
age, the real improvement of which he is more solicitous to promote, than he is
ambitious of its praise; and wishes to see a greater importance and attention
given to useful knowledge, than to any tumid or pedantic manner of writing,
which he thinks neither suitable to the character of the nation, nor of their
language. In writing to different people, from the same country, the same
subjects must frequently recur, which he has here endeavored to avoid.

But, after all, if a few repetitions, or rather returns of the same ideas,
though in different terms and points of view, or if any inaccuracies of
language, and tendency to foreign idioms, should still remain, it is hoped his
greater attention to the matter than the manner will be admitted as sufficient
apology.

These journies were undertaken, some on business, others from pleasure and
curiosity. The first, to Barbary, was an embassy from General Cornwallis,
governor of Gibraltar, to the Emperor of Moroco, on various public business, in
which the Author had the pleasure of succeeding to the satisfaction of all
parties.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
LETTER I. ARRIVAL at Tetuan, and at La Rache. Of the Moors. Of the Prince
Muley Ali Acid PAGE 1 LETTER II. Differences between European and African
Manners. Population. Arts. Industry. Their Inferiority PAGE 12 LETTER III.
Uncomfortable Situation at Mequinez PAGE 20 LETTER IV. Of the Emperors, the
Prince, and the Modes of Living, of Traveling, etc. PAGE 23 LETTER V. The
Dowars. Domestic Employments, and Manners. Oppression and Insecurity PAGE 27
LETTER VI. An Audience of the Emperor. His Family, his Court. Injustice,
Government, etc. PAGE 36 LETTER VII. Disappointed in the Hopes of Admission.
Royal Caprices, Indolence, Unhappiness, Avarice. Despotism. PAGE 44 LETTER
VIII. Of the Emperor. The Inhabitants of the Plains and the Mountains, and
ancient Arabian Race. Importance of national Intercourse PAGE 52 LETTER IX.
Difficulties of any Change or Progress here. Negligence, etc. PAGE 58 LETTER X.
Of the Prince, and Emperor. Peculiarities PAGE 63 LETTER XI. More Anecdotes of
the Emperor. Bad Accommodations, and State of the Arts PAGE 68 LETTER XII. Of
political Innovations. Foreign Travel. Lawgivers. Emperor PAGE 77 LETTER XIII.
The Improbability of Improvements. The Spaniard in favor. Our bad Policy PAGE
82 LETTER XIV. Geographical and physical Ideas. Cultivation. Life. Diseases.
Destruction. Conjectures in Natural History PAGE 86 LETTER XV. Sketches of the
Population, Revenues, and Force of the Country. Its Conquests or Colonization,
and Women PAGE 95 LETTER XVI. Of the rude and civilized State. Of Education.
Comparative Remarks PAGE 111 LETTER XVII. A political Reverie PAGE 118 LETTER
XVIII. Political Opinions and Advice PAGE 151 LETTER XIX. Of the Emperor, his
Character, Government, Policy, and their Effects. Of the Moors, and of national
Characters. Of Justice, Government, and State of Society PAGE 156 LETTER XX. Of
some Customs, Arts, Audiences. Muley Idris. Religion. Colonies. Blacks. Sea
Ports. Money and Measures. Conclusion PAGE 171
FRANCE.
LETTER I. Of first Impressions and Objects of Travel. Men and Things.
Governments. Truths of Importance. Reading insufficient. Of the French PAGE 191
LETTER II. Of Prepossessions. French Regulations. Their Industry, Character,
Separations. Size and Forms of Government. Uniformity. Tyranny PAGE 203 LETTER
III. Of Agriculture. The People. Their Decline, and Importance PAGE 212 LETTER
IV. Of Government. French Impediment to Improvement. Their Lands, Cattle,
Farming. Of Flanders PAGE 219 LETTER V. Of Travelers. Society. Two Classes. Of
Paris, and the Learned PAGE 230 LETTER VI. French Character, and national Taste
PAGE 238 LETTER VII. Fine Arts PAGE 247 LETTER VIII. Commerce. Manufactures.
Reflections PAGE 255 LETTER IX. Artists. Nationalities. Theaters. Reflections.
Language PAGE 262 LETTER X. Of Traveling. Observations on arbitrary Power,
etc. PAGE 269 LETTER XI. Of Studies and active Pursuits. The French and
English, their Governments PAGE 277 LETTER XII. French Pre-eminence, Arts,
Trades, Intercourse PAGE 285 LETTER XIII. French Conversation and Societies,
Language, and Singing PAGE 293 LETTER XIV. Of the Revival of Taste and Science,
and Decline PAGE 300 LETTER XV. On Women PAGE 307 LETTER XVI. The same Subject
continued PAGE 318 LETTER XVII. The same Subject continued PAGE 326 LETTER
XVIII. Education PAGE 335 LETTER XIX. Of Language. Of the French, its
Influence. Of Musical Language PAGE 346 LETTER XX. Of speaking Languages. Of
Style PAGE 356 LETTER XXI. On Music PAGE 369 LETTER XXII. Paris. France.
Poetry, French and Italian. Of Writing PAGE 429 LETTER XXIII. The French a
great Nation. General Reflections PAGE 438 LETTER XXIV. Travelers. French
Peculiarities; their Civility, Etourderie, Urbanity, Philosophy, Imposing,
Public Spirit PAGE 446 LETTER XXV. On our Changes in Taste, etc. Of the French
Military PAGE 456 LETTER XXVI. The Schools, Military, etc. Of the monastic
Orders and Superstition PAGE 465 LETTER XXVII. National Emulation, and American
War PAGE 478 LETTER XXVIII. Memorandums of different Journies PAGE 485
LETTERS FROM BARBARY, TO FRIENDS AT GIBRALTAR.
LETTER I. Arrival at Tetuan, and at La Rache. -- Of the Moors. -- Of the
Prince Muley Ali Acid.
La Rache, Nov. 1771.
OF this little African journey, or embassy, which we have undertaken, and at
length begun, I do not mean to trouble you with very circumstantial accounts --
nor with descriptions, itineraries, or journals, nor perhaps with any thing in
the usual style of Travels: a few detached observations on the people, with
such reflections as I may think worth your notice, will probably be the chief
amount of what you have to expect: et tout a ma facon, retaining always the
liberty to stop at any place I please, and digress to any subject that may come
near my way, or seem connected with it: -- but all as time and occasion may
chance to suit: the natural uncertainty of all human hopes seems to increase as
we advance upon this dreary continent: you must take the little I can give, and
be thankful. If we could restrain the minuteness of modern trifling curiosity,
and go straight to what is useful, how much labor might be saved, and how much
farther might we go!

You heard of our arrival at last, after all the opposition of weather and
Genoese seamanship: but those were only the beginning of our labors: -- the
difficulties, noise, wranglings, and time lost, in getting to Tetuan, after
landing within a mile of it, and in getting the smallest thing done in this
country, are not to be equalled even in Spain, nor in any other place you may
be acquainted with. Tetuan is considered as the best town in these dominions,
but to us it appeared a very wretched place. A dreary silence, poverty,
indolence, and dirt, were to us the striking features of their first and most
populous city. Its inhabitants are, however, their best looking people, being
probably a mixed race from Spain, Arabs, and natives. Upon the banks of that
little river which passes near the town, there is some tolerable cultivation,
and some little gardens; but all of them jealously concealed, and curiously
shut up, almost as much as their houses in town, where there is not a window
nor an opening to be seen.

Among so many new objects, one hardly knows which to mention; for to mention
all is impossible. The total want of society, and almost of conversation among
themselves, seems to us equally dismal and surprising. People bred in such
countries are totally ignorant of the social principle which we suppose natural
to man. Though yoked by nature to each other, and brought to live together in
towns for mutual convenience, yet are they unacquainted with the pleasures of
society, and incapable of enjoying them: their very houses and gardens look
like prisons to shut themselves up in, and to exclude every eye, and almost the
light of the sun, and seem, as it were, to turn away from each other. When by
chance two or three people are seen sitting together, which is seldom, and
commonly upon their heels on the dirty ground against a wall, it is all in
silence: we seldom see them converse, I think, except when angry. Such are
Eastern manners, and the effects of oppression! Men, while oppressed, are not
communicative; and they must probably be at their ease before they can be
sociable and humane.

The French say, qu'il faut aimer quelque chose toujours, but I think these
people love nothing. A sullen indolence and indifference seem to exclude every
passion and principle of activity; and we do not yet see where the labor can
be, in this country, sufficient to maintain its inhabitants. The Moorish
character may be somewhat changed and degenerated since the times they
flourished in Spain. The iron hand of tyranny has helped to render them still
more selfish and malevolent; and what is worse for society, helpless and
indolent beings. Such are the subjects that despotism must ever expect to form!
Yet we are told they love money to excess. Human nature is full of
inconsistencies. This love of money seems to be a plant that will grow any
where, and thrive best where it seems to have the least nourishment.

But to go on with our journey. After wrangling for three days with a stupid
and brutish governor of Tetuan (who is a shoemaker and a private soldier)
concerning horses and mules, though he had the Emperor's orders to furnish us;
then nearly three days journey, chequered with various disputes and accidents,
now of small importance, through a variable country, with some fine woody
hills, we arrived at this place.

We were carried directly to the Prince, saluted with great guns, and attended
by a rabble of what they call soldiers. The Prince's impatience to see us, his
eager manner of receiving and surveying us with an apparent pleasure and
openness of countenance, gave some hopes of a natural curiosity and warmth of
heart; but we have already had time to be undeceived; for momentary exertions
soon give way to habitual sloth or luxury. Such is too often the unhappy fate
of high birth, and is here perhaps inevitable.

Our presents were likewise produced. My celestial globe attracted most of his
attention, and I was in hopes he understood something of it, having read and
heard of their being formerly addicted to astronomy and mathematics; but was
soon undeceived by his questions and observations, though artfully contrived to
concea^ his ignorance; but ignorance can seldom be concealed. He said, that he
had once a master who knew much more than al^ the Christians.

We were sent for next day, and conducted out of town, where stood seven
mortars, of three different, but unknown, dimensions. Throwing shells is of
late the great passion of this royal family. He said he had heard of the great
skill of us Christians, and of mine in particular, in artillery, and desired we
would throw a few shells. A barrel of Dutch powder stood ready opened, and we
were desired to fire at a pole that stood at some distance. We endeavored to
remonstrate on the necessity of knowing that distance, the dimensions, weights;
to have the instruments which we had brought on purpose, and to show his
Highness their use: but all in vain. We were desired to fire, and to make
haste. My intention was to be politely obstinate, but I suffered myself to be
persuaded on political considerations, which I have since found to be wrong,
and that my first ideas were the best. We contrived, however, to walk to the
pole, to see how near his Highness had thrown a shell. We privately counted our
paces, and guessed the dimensions of the pieces by the help of our fingers, and
the powder by sight, feeling, etc.; and though the weights, powder, dimensions,
were all so imperfectly known, we chanced to come pretty near the mark, which
surprised, but did not please him; and I have since found, that nobody must
pretend to fire so well as the Prince.

We continue to be sent for frequently, and treated variably, just as the fits
of royal caprice chance to operate. Sometimes with compliments, and at others
with neglect, or worse; sometimes with their greatest honors, viz. having some
bad powder fired in our faces by what they call their troops, chiefly horse;
and sometimes by being turned out of court, head and shoulders, in the most
rude and violent manner.

Their troops, if they now deserve that name, might be made tolerable light
horse, under good officers; and the breed of horses, now rather small, but of a
good race, might easily be improved in this country.

Their arms, though not uniform, they say, are mostly made in the country,
which I do not believe, as there is no appearance of art, materials, or even
tools, sufficient for that purpose.

But, lest I should forget; I cannot help mentioning my amazement, that you
should so long continue to employ only Genoese, and other foreign seamen, for
the navigation of your garrison, whom you are breeding up for your enemies,
when you could be so easily and better served by your own. Half your present
number, if English vessels and seamen, would serve you better. Some say that
the English could not live where these do, but I think it is not true. Hundreds
round many of your coasts would be glad of the employ. That the English would
be saucier, as some fancy, I likewise doubt.

I dare say some of our friends will envy me the happiness and knowledge to be
acquired by this improving journey and embassy, by so intimate an acquaintance
with this polished and enlightened nation, and with such accomplished princes.
I have enquired, and find some reason to believe, that my royal pupil
understands something of addition, but that multiplication and division are
beyond his reach or application; and it is thought he can read his own
language. But he has strong notions, which he cannot conceal, of conquering,
some time or other, all, or at least half the Christians. You may from thence
form some notion of his education, judgment, and ideas. I do not yet foresee
how I shall come off with this part of my embassy. You may easily perceive that
I shall not be able to teach them much.

What this Emperor means, is not always easy to guess; but at present it is not
very difficult. The quantity of military stores, of cannon, mortars, howitzers,
shells (all mostly Dutch, and hence not much to be depended on), which he is
collecting, is almost incredible, after seeing his country so poor, ignorant,
and miserable. But there is a total want of all the other small stores
necessary to an artillery of any service; and indeed of numerous other things,
and trades proportioned to these. I see no reason why you should scruple to
help them out, as far as they can be helped, which is not far; and you need be
under no fear of improving them too much. They, or at least you, ought to know
that it is impossible.

LETTER. II. Differences between European and African Manners. -- Population.
-- Arts. -- Industry. -- Their Inferiority.
THE vast difference in every thing on passing those straits, is, perhaps,
greater than in any equal distance on our globe, and must so strike an
European, that he knows not where to begin to give any account of men or things
here.

We are astonished at the total difference in manners, customs, habits,
opinions, dress, food, arts, tools, etc. at the different and opposite ways of
doing almost every thing; as if the people on these opposite shores meant in
every thing to show their aversion to each other. But I shall not attempt
descriptions, which are almost always inadequate. What I may think practicable
to give, you may probably get, if I have time.

Something extraordinary must have driven these poor people into towns, to live
in a most shockingly filthy manner, for they are horrid stinking places; and it
is rather surprising that the plague, or some other disorders, do not visit
them oftener.

If their towns, Morocco, Mequinez, Fez, Tetuan, so far asunder, were cut out
into villages, and spread over the face of the country, they might be of some
service; but now, can only be of use to the destructive endeavors of
despotism, and help the Emperor to impoverish and depopulate the country a
little faster.

This country, as far as we have gone, is well varied in hill and vale, and
tolerably wooded, though not so well watered, and a little too mountainous; it
is capable of every kind of cultivation, and of fences, planting, roads, all
which it is now almost without. It seems peopled to about one-fifth of what it
might easily be made to maintain, and the labor of the present inhabitants is
not probably above one-fourth of what it might be with more skill and industry;
so that it is capable of 4x5=20 times its present wealth, strength, and
importance, by encouraging agriculture only.

These people (especially those of the plains, for the mountaineers are more
industrious) are at present but little beyond the shepherd state of society;
their flocks constitute their chief wealth; attending these is always a lazy
profession, and unfavourable to population. The arts and trades necessary for
such a state are all here, though in a kind of perpetual infancy; not in a
state of progression, as in Europe, but the same for, I suppose, these thousand
years past. The plough, the mill, the loom, their lesser tools and methods of
working, are for ever the same -- simple, trifling, slow, and imperfect, in the
true Eastern style -- no proper division of labor. They have the same awkward
and unskilful methods of loading their cattle and carrying their burdens that
were probably used by Mahomet himself, and even by Abraham. The same
necessaries and ways of life, and kinds of luxury, for ever.

We see Eastern manners here, without going to the East. Every idea of change
or improvement is excluded by their law, and by ignorance of their wants.
Through the avarice of this emperor, indeed, they may acquire new wants and
luxuries, and diminish their national strength and security by means of
commerce. An open communication with European nations may, in time, bring them
acquainted with our wants, our goods, conveniences, and luxuries, as they were
while in Spain, when they even went beyond their neighbors in arts and luxury.
When a nation comes to have seaports, ships, magazines, foreign merchants,
peace and commerce admitted, and hence property and fixed habitations, these
habits must extend by degrees into the country. The removal is not then so easy
from an approaching enemy. They necessarily become more connected and attached
to their property and improved habitations, and dependent on foreign arts and
nations. Had they continued attached to the original spirit of their
constitution, to their poverty and itinerant state, with all their enmity and
abhorrence of Christians, they would have remained either independent and
invincible, or not worth the conquest.

It is, to us, truly amazing, that all those stupid Eastern governments,
founded in despotism and on principles of unchangeableness, of stability in
ignorance, should have succeeded so generally in fixing mankind to a state of
barbarism, or so little above it, for ever; in spite of the natural
dispositions of men to improve and to better their condition; in spite of that
progress which we suppose equally natural to the species and to the individual,
notwithstanding the obvious utility of intercourse and industry to all, by an
exchange of productions and knowledge.

You know that the same code, the Koran and its comments, called the law,
includes their religion, laws, manners, customs; and that the mode of eating
their dinners, or washing their hands, is as sacredly fixed as that of
worshipping their God, and more so than the practice of any virtue, and seem to
be considered by all as more essential. This blending of law and religion
together may be the best way to form a lasting government and people. This
religious veneration for certain modes and actions, must doubtless tend to
perpetuate them, and keep the people for ever the same; and their code may have
more influence on their minds and manners, than ours upon us.

In modern times, perhaps ever since the days of ancient Rome, pray have not
our education and religious establishments had too great a tendency to inspire
us with inveterate prejudices against our fellow creatures, for differing with
us in certain opinions? You know the inveteracy of your neighbors on that side
against heresy and Mahometism. Here the detestation and abhorrence of all other
sects is strong beyond conception, and we should think scarcely to be humanised
by all the powerful influence of arts and civilization.

However, we know that one great and liberal mind can often create, and lead
many others; and that these people have had great Princes, who could take
liberties with their customs, and could contrive to interpret their law with
great latitude; and that it is possible to improve them, almost in spite of
themselves. We know that some of their Princes of Cordova and Granada found
means to admit the arts and improvements of every kind, many of which were
then, and are now again, supposed to be against their law; and if those
kingdoms had fortunately continued to subsist in Europe, the means, and perhaps
the only means, would thereby have remained open, of softening, and gradually
reconciling, in some degree, the inveteracy of those two violent and opposing
persuasions of Christianity and Mahometism. There were, at last, frequent
intermarriages even between the Spanish and Mahomedan princes. They might, from
vicinity, arts, and intercourse, have been led into mutual forbearance and
concessions, which, by degrees, might have produced a more comprehensive system
of toleration than the world is now likely soon to enjoy; and this again might,
in time, have mitigated and humanised the more rigorous and inimical opinions
and political animosities of all nations, and have brought them nearer to
reason and each other: means every way preferable to the barbarous inveterate
wars, and mutual destruction, which these two sects at least, now seem doomed,
with small intermissions, long to carry on against one another.

LETTER III. Uncomfortable Situation at Mequinez.
Mequinez, Jan. 1772.
I AM here seven days, six of them in bed, rather ill, where I now write with
difficulty, in the cell of a half-ruined convent, the best lodging to be
procured here. One day with the Emperor, which made me worse. As my cold fit
came on, which he perceived, he ordered a fire to be made for me in the open
field, where we were attending to some of his experiments. This I did not know
at the time; but on seeing a large pile of brush-wood set on fire, and asking
the reason, I was told it was for me, and that the Emperor had ordered it on
seeing me shivering with cold. It seems they could not explain to him the
nature of my disorder, nor did he know that fevers are often attended with cold
fits.

You know I was sent in a hurry, but ill provided for this campaigning sort of
life. A camp equipage of some sort is here the most necessary and principal
comfort of a man's life, especially when so great a part of it must be passed
in following this ambling court, whose design, if they have any, seems to be to
let nobody rest. Indeed, in this country, it is better living in camp, with
almost any sort of conveniences, than in their towns and houses.

We have already seen a good deal of this miserable country, viz. the plains,
which are in general little cultivated, and still less inhabited, and only by a
few tent villages, very thinly scattered, which are generally moved at
different seasons, according to the pasture. Our next camp is to be among the
mountains, where I expect more pleasure.

You know I have already staid beyond the time at first intended, and that they
seldom keep their word. I mention this, chiefly to caution the General against
their applications for my longer stay.

A certain uncouth, inordinate, wild caprice, a want of common civility and
humanity, even in the royal family, and which will probably increase as our
return approaches; and the now small probability of success in the chief
objects, all contribute to render this business as disagreeable as it well can
be. I intended to give you some more observations, but I am cold and fatigued,
as, in order to have light, a hole must be opened which admits the wind from
the snowy mountains just in view. Such is the construction of houses here.
Glass is almost unknown.

LETTER IV. Of the Emperors, the Prince, and the Modes of Living, of
Traveling, etc.
Mequinez.
I TAKE this opportunity, by C. B., who now leaves me alone in this dismal
court, employed in the agreeable office of dancing attendance from morn to
night, and generally without any dinner, on these Princes of Barbary, or
Barbarian Princes; call them which you please.

I intended to give you some particulars of our journey hither; but now, when
past, they appear of less importance. A journey through a naked, brown, flat
country, hardly a tree or a bush, or any inhabitants, to be seen, can afford
but little scope for observation.

Our setting off, the first morning, seemed cheerful, with about 500 active
horse, wild and irregular, scampering and firing powder at each other. By this
play, however, the Prince killed one young man, but nobody stopped even to
assist or take him up.

We encamped every night, but sadly distressed for provisions, and indeed might
have starved but for the goodness of the Dutch Consul, who was with the camp.
This was the more grievous, because at setting out they would not permit us to
provide ourselves, insisting on the Prince's doing it for us. However, one
night, we were awaked by some fellows thrusting into our tent some large wooden
dishes, smoking full of stewed cuscus Granulated paste, of the same kind as
that of vermicelli.
, meat, and onions, as a present from the Prince.

Our awkward and tedious method of passing rivers, generally by swimming,
deserves not much particular notice. It appears that one man who can swim well,
can conduct a great number of horses, by tying them together, if the stream is
not very rapid. They make little floats to carry the baggage, etc. of any thing
they can find, of skins blown up, tied together, and covered with brushwood;
but sometimes they can find nothing, for the rivers in those plains do not
produce grass, or any tree or verdant plant, even on their banks.

The Prince frequently asked me, as we rode along, if we had such fine country
for riding. He meant so open and naked. Many great men are, perhaps, too
subject to such ideas -- from a William the Conqueror, or a King of Persia,
down to a Polish Lord or feudal Baron; and they consider their having room to
ride or hunt, as of more importance than the producing food for us all, and can
even lay waste populous countries on purpose.

The visible terror of all who approached the Prince, seems to give him
pleasure; but would certainly give pain to a humane mind.

I am wearied here with having nothing to do, having tired out my poor
interpreters, and then a Jew, whom I had persuaded to walk with me about the
country, and about these half-ruined mud walls and dirty fields, called palaces
and gardens. Nobody chooses to walk here, and I may perhaps tire of persisting
in being singular, and may learn to be as habitually idle as any of them;
though I cannot learn to sit bare-legged on the ground upon my heels, with my
back against a wall, which seems the only amusement here of our courtiers, and
of the crowds who attend.

LETTER V. The Dowars. -- Domestic Employments, and Manners. -- Oppression and
Insecurity.
THE few black and dirty tent villages (dowars), the only habitations in these
extensive and naked plains, were at first objects of great curiosity, but soon
after of disgust, being shockingly nasty and disagreeable, especially in hot
weather. They prefer this roving way of life (governed in small and domestic
matters by their own shieks) to any fixed habitation, where they would be still
more tyrannised over by a Bashaw, and more subject to plunder and all sorts of
oppression.

The first we saw of these dowars happened to be cleaner than ordinary, lately
pitched on a declivity, though usually in the plains, for the convenience of
water, and a little cultivation. The inhabitants and we were striking objects
to each other. Their dress and appearance, the screaming and noise of the naked
children and dogs that followed and surrounded us; the wild, anxious, and
expressive countenances of some of the young females, formed all together a
curious scene. We were not, on the whole, ill used; and we understand, that
Christians are not now so rudely treated among them as they used to be, by the
children throwing stones, accompanied with curses. They now only sometimes give
us abusive language, repeating certain phrases of the Koran.

I think it not necessary to tell you much of their occupations in this way of
life. They are nearly the same as y^ find in Scripture in the times of Abraham
and Jacob, and that still subsist in some parts of Asia, the domestic
employment of the women being still that of weaving, grinding the corn,
cookery, etc. Some of their dishes are savoury, often dressed in the steam of
the pot, which is generally here of copper, but not often tinned. Here, as in
Spain, the primitive method of treading out the corn by cattle is still
practiced, instead of threshing. In Europe, the flail has been long in use.
Perhaps you may now improve upon that, as well as the other machines of
husbandry.

In their towns, where the necessary arts and trades are practiced, their
tools, and methods of working, might be described; but I do not see the utility
of those matters to us; their ways of weaving, boring, plaining, cutting,
baking, tanning, etc. being all different from ours, but much inferior. Their
leather is not now so good as formerly, and I believe you already prepare
better of the same kind in England.

You know they use no knives, forks, spoons, chairs, nor tables; those being
forbid by their religion. Mahomet, like Lycurgus and most of the Eastern
lawgivers, meant to exclude luxury at the expense of every art and comfort of
life, and thus render mankind for ever stationary. This we should think
impossible, and not in the nature of man, were it not for the example of China.
But we know that even their religion is not sufficient for that purpose, where
the soil is good, and the government tolerable: despotism must join, and her
attendant poverty, effectually to prevent the improvements and the progress of
the arts and luxury natural to man.

The camels are very useful here, and proper for the long journies through the
dry African deserts. How provident is the Great Author of Nature! They can live
a week without water. In some parts the inhabitants live entirely on their
milk, with a few dates, and wear only their skins.

We can easily conceive this country to have been once rich and fruitful, as we
learn from its imperfect history, and from that of the Romans. It might easily
be made to produce food and raiment, etc. in great abundance, by means of a
just government. But insecurity and oppression have so long prevailed, as to
banish all settled plans of providing; and in these fine corn countries, they
have often suffered frequent scarcity. I believe it is only since some grain
has been permitted to be exported, and by the Emperor's laying up some store of
it himself, that those frequent famines have been prevented.

But there seems to be very little work going on, even in their towns. Sitting,
smokeing, and prayers, employ a great deal of their time. Few things seem to
rouse them to any voluntary exertions, except their hatred to Christians, which
does not yet appear to be so much abated as you suppose, only in some of their
seaports. They still teach many of their children, in towns, to read and
write, and exercise their memories by parts of the Koran. Their methods seem to
be simple and direct, and they might easily be carried farther. We know that
some of them were once studious and learned. I think one sees in some of their
youth, still a certain open warmth and frank honesty of heart; but I believe
that gradually declines with years into a sullen indifference about well-doing,
and produces many other vices. Despotism soon gets the better of nature.

With such a government, there can be nothing fixed or certain; and of all its
uncertainties, that of the succession to the crown is the worst and most
destructive. It is here neither hereditary nor elective as yet, being generally
seized by usurpation through bloodshed. A civil war commonly attends every
succession at least. We, who have the happiness to live in long and
well-established societies, cannot be so sensible of the great time and number
of circumstances required to establish rules of succession, or indeed any rule
or fixed regulation.

These cherifs, or descendants of Mahomet, have a prodigious advantage in that
very circumstance, if they knew how to make a proper use of it. There are a
number of them still dispersed in this, and probably in other Mahomedan
countries. The present reigning family here is of that race. If it were
possible to make them travel, and give them any proper education, they might
introduce any improvement, or establish any constitution of government they
pleased. But, on the contrary, these successors of Muley Ishmael have already
nearly destroyed all the good he did, or had begun to do, which was
considerable, amidst his mischievous cruelties. He had ideas of colonies even
more than of conquests, and brought great numbers from the south to people his
country and recruit his armies. But these have already mostly disappeared, the
country is again desolate, and the army neglected.

But it can hardly be necessary, nowadays, to point out the numberless evils
and fatal consequences of despotism. If some European nations go on declining
in that direction, it can hardly be from want of information of its pernicious
effects, but with their eyes open; not from ignorance, but weakness, or from
want of order or constitution. But, alas! I fear mankind are not to be written
into virtue or resolution. Perhaps little more can now be done in that way,
than to put them frequently in mind of their danger. They might be more
sensible of it, if they were to come and see their brethren here. And I am
sorry to observe it is not now so much the fashion as formerly, for our
travelers to advance beyond the limits of Europe.

From reading some parts of their history, I believe we rank these people too
high in the scale of society. We fancy some vestiges of their former greatness
and learning must still appear, forgetting the necessary velocity of fall in a
declining empire, and how soon it leaves our ideas behind. But degeneracy will,
perhaps, always differ from the savage state, and will be weaker, and more
abject; and when once sunk and reduced, there seems no possibility of getting
them up again, but by conquering and colonising their country. It is
astonishing how little even the wisest and most improved nations learn from
each other, and how long they are in learning that little; and the ruder
nations still less. The higher states of improvement cannot, indeed, impart
much of their knowledge to the lower. Our luxuries and improvements suit them
not. In order to arrive at these, they must pass through certain steps of a
progress, and must learn to want, and be gradually roused to exertions and
industry.

LETTER VI. An Audience of the Emperor. -- His Family, his Court, Injustice,
Government, etc.
YOU must take the few detached observations that I think proper to give you,
as they chance to occur, and excuse the want of order and connection.

Some circumstances of our first audience may be worth mentioning. His M -- was
seated cross-legged, on a very plain sort of platform of rough deal boards,
such as are used in your soldiers barracks, covered only with an ordinary piece
of carpet. He affects simplicity and discourages luxury. On the attendants
attempting to take off my shoes, as usual, on going into his presence, I made
some resistance; which he perceived, though at some distance, and with great
readiness saved the dispute, and settled the matter, by saying, Let him alone,
-- these Christians are subject to catch cold without shoes.

The chief subject of conversation in this interview, was the great superiority
of the Moors over the Christians in every essential quality, -- addressing
himself to those about him. He soon introduced likewise his knowing how to
raise a perpendicular, which he scratched on a board with a carpenter's
compasses. This, which comprehends the chief part of his mathematical
knowledge, he learned from a sea captain, once his prisoner; and he generally
exhibits it to Christians at their first audience. Then some conversation about
artillery, war, and fortification, he likewise artfully managed, so as to pass
for very learned with his own people, and to conceal from us his deficiencies,
which I was, for once, courtier enough to perceive, and to favor -- et je
crois qu'il m'en sut bon gre. Before we parted, he called me "Malem guibir," a
great master -- One of the greatest among the Christians. He added, You hear
what he says of me.

His friends, or at least his favorites, are mostly chosen, I believe, not
from any solid or useful qualities, but chiefly from caprice, though not so
much as formerly; nor does he change so often, nor can there be any great
choice of men among his subjects. Hitherto, I find the Jew secretary the man of
most knowledge and best conversation of any about his court. He is doubtless
obliged sometimes to consider well, and appoint people who can do the business
he wants. The greatest despot is limited in the choice of his men and measures
by fear, custom, religion, etc.; and he must often study to choose with as much
precaution and propriety as the most limited monarch. Without the assistance
and the numerous advantages of established forms, the whole must depend on his
own temporary arts and address, and must create him an immensity of labor
impossible to be executed.

Now in the habit of being constantly seen here, I appear to belong to this
palace; and I have often the honor of being as familiarly shoved about by our
black courtiers, as any of the rest of the rabble who form the ring around his
M --. His levee is in the open air, only he on horseback, and I think he
generally chooses the dirtiest part of the field. There the poor obsequious
crowd keep frequently kneeling and kissing the dirty ground, and bawling out
his praises, as he speaks. In that posture, with their posteriors cocked
upwards, they do not look like human beings, and make a most contemptible
figure. Our black courtiers, who may be considered as the lords in waiting,
attend with whips and rods, which they use very freely to arrange, or keep
people in or out of their places; to assemble or drive us away, on the approach
of his M --, or of the Princes, according to the royal orders, or caprice of
the moment.

So far from making any progress in either of the objects of business for which
I came, they both seem now entirely forgotten, and cannot be revived. I have
pleaded over and over all the reasons for dispatch and departure, on the few
occasions that have offered. What they mean by keeping me, and especially in
this place, is not easy to guess; but there is no appearance of my getting
away, until you fall on some more effectual method, or assist me to go on with
mine.

The chief employments of this strange mock royal family seem to be, quarrels
among themselves, traveling about the kingdom, and extorting money from every
body who has any. We have already seen some cruel instances of this mode of
robbing by authority, on both Jews and natives. Even Messrs. A. and B. the only
English merchants in the country, were the other day seized in the brutish
manner of this court, and carried to confinement, by order of a prince, to
extort money from them. This he chose to do, while I am here; and it is not the
only instance of his choosing to show me in what contempt he now holds the
English nation.

In those cases of extortion, the whole process is comprised in two words,
somewhat like those we use to dogs, viz. Seize 'em; and the person to be
arrested is presently grappled by a set of clumsy fellows, and almost squeezed
to death in the operation of being carried to prison, though he make no
resistance.

The spirit of despotism is to let the people have no rest, and this Emperor
has added, that they shall have no money. In order to maintain authority in
such governments, it is perhaps necessary to let them frequently feel the power
that is over them; for they might forget it, and fancy themselves free, if they
could sleep a few nights in quiet. It requires the perpetual exertions of the
master to keep the slave awake, and frequent acts of cruelty to maintain
respect. What a loss and waste of powers on all sides! And, after all, the
active principles of human nature can hardly be kept alive by such means. The
greatest ambition and activity in the chief, the hopes of plunder, the
regulations and employments he is obliged to contrive and to superintend, so as
to keep his subjects from the extremes of sleep, or of mischief, may sometimes
produce temporary exertions, but never a provident and habitual industry.
Nothing can supply the place of natural liberty and security. Power may command
labor, but not genius or abilities. M. Ishmael used to think it necessary to
cut off innocent people's heads, as he rode along, on purpose to strike terror.

There is now much less cruelty here; but then there is more avarice, which
seems full as destructive. The boys and mob begin to leave off insulting
strangers. Commerce is invited hither, by long peace, though she does not yet
seem willing to come; and I doubt much if the country, though a fine soil, can
improve or be recovered under such a prince and government, though so much
better than any they have had for a long time past.

There must be a great resemblance between the rude nations of all ages and
countries. These seem to be very nearly the same sort of princes and people
that Xenophon met with in the East, and about Byzantium; and are very like to
nations on different and opposite sides of the globe, who are near to the same
degree of civilization. As we improve, we depart from that resemblance; and
there is probably some difference between nations who are rising, and those
that decline, though near the same degrees of ignorance.

LETTER VII. Disappointed in the Hopes of Dismission. -- Royal Caprices,
Indolence, Unhappiness Avarice. -- Despotism.
IN hopes of being able to acquaint yo^ of my departure, I have deferred
writing. The Emperor promised me I should go in four days, holding up his four
fingers but it is now above twenty since then.

Your General's letters, and those to Tetuan, all came hither. After waiting a
week, I found they were still in the translator's hands, and would not be
mentioned, nor explained, till his M -- should ask for them; which may never
happen. I find several such letters are thus sunk, or pretended to be lost, or
forgotten; and sometimes by the artifice of our Jew secretary of state, Mr.
Sombel. -- A-propos, he complains grievously of our neglecting him of late. The
French and Spaniards pay him well, though he is obliged to share with his
master.

This court is equal to any other whatever in artifice or cunning, and his M --
as great an adept in the arts of dissimulation; and, though it is generally so
coarse, so ^ill covered, as to deceive hardly any body, yet all are forced to
pretend to be deceived.

The effects of your letters being all against us, I have since tried all
methods to get one of my own presented and explained to his M --; and at length
persuaded Sombel (with some promises) to stand in the way, with it in his hand,
as the Emperor rode past, in hopes of his asking concerning it, which sometimes
succeeds, by watching his humor. It succeeded in this case. It was hastily
explained. He ordered an answer as he rode off, granting me the prisoners,
Captain Hayes and his people, and almost all that I wanted; and I was
congratulated by the whole court on being almost as good as dispatched, as it
was thought. We went home rejoicing, and ordered a better supper than ordinar^
I have had the maintaining of these po^ people for some time, and have found
very difficult, and often impossible, to g^ their very small allowance from the
Jew who generally have all the prisoners a^ ambassadors quartered on them,
besid^ many other heavy taxes, forced loans, and But, alas! the vanity of human
hopes! -- ours were all blasted in a few days. Captain H. and most of the
prisoners we^ taken from me, and sent to work wi^ other slaves, and myself
told, that I shou^ be dispatched when the Emperor would (...) at leisure.

Though he is remarkably wavering an^ irresolute, yet this sudden change is
owing I believe, to other causes: -- either to so^ of your last letters, or to
some of your Je^ friends in your own garrison, who make merit here of informing
him of all (...) wishes to know concerning you.

He has learned that he is soon to ha^ another ambassador from you, and he wi^
of course, keep these prisoners for a fresh bargain; and they will probably
cost you dear. Why you do not choose to have them for little or nothing, viz.
for my services here, is to me, as yet, incomprehensible.

I find that this poor Emperor suffers much from low spirits and bad humor,
and doses away most of his time in sullen indolence; or with his tailors, Jews,
or carpenters, overseeing the mending of doors and windows, and old rooms, with
old boards, etc. while he has the business of thousands on his hands, careless
about the numbers who are waiting and suffering from his neglect; like too many
other great men, who undertake more than they are able or willing to execute.
Fearful and jealous even of his own creatures and sons; timidly cautious of
delegating the smallest degree of power, he has adopted the weak and
impracticable system of doing every act of authority himself, dictating in the
minutiae of every man's office throughout the kingdom; and endeavoring to
render every one, to whom he is forced to trust some authority, as contemptible
as possible, by which he often defeats his own views. They become his enemies:
-- he can have no friends. As he cannot be every where, he is perpetually
sending for his alcaids, and other magistrates of towns and districts. Those he
seems to wish to be considered only as a kind of messengers, whom he sends to
fleece the people, and bring all to him.

If any man, by chance or artifice, escape these fleecers, and is suspected of
having money, he is sent for by the Emperor, imprisoned, and tortured, till he
discovers it; which he does only by degrees, a little at a time. It is
surprising to see how much some of them will bear before they discover. Some
have been known to die under the tortures, rather than disclose their hidden
treasures.

A blind and rapacious avarice seems here the universal and only ruling
passion. However strange, this passion for money appears to prevail most where
there is the least security, and the fewest pleasures to be purchased. Most of
those wretches, on being released, kiss the ground, bless his M --, and return
to get more money, knowing they may again be treated in the same way.

Those who discover the largest treasures, have the best chance of being
employed in this honorable magistracy, to serve as his M -- 's blood-suckers,
where they may most probably be again tortured and robbed, du part le roy.

His M -- 's talents and information in this business, of extortion and robbery
are truly astonishing, especially in a monarch, and one of a character so
indolent, capricious and etourdi, as he appears to be. -- His undertaking the
business that should be divided among hundreds, and yet to which he does not
give one-twentieth part of his time, is all according to the blind nature of
despotism, which believes itself capable of every thing, and is, in fact,
capable of nothing that is right or systematic.

This listless and uneasy languor that devours him, is likewise perhaps one of
the necessary consequences of his unlimited power. Nor does this power increase
his security, and certainly not his happiness, but the contrary; for we find
the history of this, and of all such empires, to be full of sudden and bloody
revolutions; and the fate of human nature is happily such, that we must
participate largely of the happiness or misery we confer. Such are the
disappointments with which nature seems inevitably to punish this insatiable
passion, the love of power. We must be astonished to find it so seldom inclined
to cure itself, or to learn from experience; and equally surprised to find
society existing so long under its uncontrolled influence and caprices. Indeed
this can hardly be called a state of society, but rather of warfare.

Fear is perhaps the most efficacious of the human passions; but, to govern us
by that alone, is injurious to our nature, and must curtail or destroy our best
powers. The love of power, of riches, in short the human passions, ought all to
be either regulated, or repressed; such is the intent and tendency of society.
Let legislatures then endeavor to cultivate the benevolent passions in our
nature -- the selfish will always be strong enough. Success in this, will be
the best criterion of government. But certain human passions and defects, here
and elsewhere, have got perhaps too far ahead ever to be overtaken by any
remedy: -- already, over far the greatest part of the world, tyranny and
superstition, with ignorance their offspring, seem to have joined in a league
against the happiness of the human race, and they may long succeed in the
object of their alliance. Their empire, once established, seems almost for ever
to exclude the hopes of relief. None of the bloody revolutions of despotism
prove to be any remedy; only the exchange of one tyrant for another.

LETTER VIII. Of the Emperor. -- The Inhabitants of the Plains and the
Mountains, and ancient Arabian Race. -- Importance of National Intercourse.
IN the few conversations we have had, I have sometimes attempted to turn the
attention of his M -- to objects of utility: but in vain. Greatness spoils men
for conversation, as well as for many other things. Accustomed to take the lead
in every thing, they cannot follow when it becomes necessary. They gradually
become so sore and fastidious, that they can hardly admit any subject into
discourse, but what they introduce themselves. Besides, his habitual and
unnecessary cunning, jealousy, and vanity; his ignorant and timid interpreters,
render it almost impossible to explain any thing, or to talk common sense to
him for any time. He seldom converses with much attention on any subject,
except where money is some way concerned.

Fear and avarice, which are nearly connected, are his ruling passions, and may
generally serve as a key to his actions and designs. By these, you may both
understand and govern him.

But with all this, he is a just, good, and humane character, for this country.
With all the habits of tyranny, and of a bad education, he, nevertheless, does
not, like many of his predecessors, wantonly trangress the natural rules of
justice, only where his pecuniary interest is concerned, which is, to be sure,
much too often for the good of his country, or of his people. He knows the
country well, and most individuals who are at all above the common slave. He
would make a good lieutenant de police -- and admit of no robbers but himself.
And, indeed, were it not for his own constant attention, his rapacity and
injustice would be imitated throughout his dominions.

I do not find that he, like his predecessors, practices the horrid custom of
selling the power to torture and plunder any one suspected of being rich. He
now reserves that power for himself, and seldom neglects long to use it, though
sometimes with unusual lenity, he accepts a composition as a purchase of his
forbearance. And the generality of those robberies he executes on some pretext
of right or justice. Happily even tyrants must often sacrifice, at least
appearances, at the shrine of justice. You must excuse haste, and hence my
returning often to the same subject.

One sees the character of a people only by glimpses now and then, and which
you must take as occasions chance to shine. These people, as troops, with all
their indolence, have great fire at times, a momentary kind of courage, rage,
or enthusiasm: -- et alors (a Frenchman told me) ils se font tuer d' ^ssez
bonne grace. They are temperate, and even abstemious; often penetrating and
sagacious; but then they carry it too far, to cunning, duplicity, deceit. They
have great pride and hauteur; but not that which restrains them from meanness
and fraud.

The Moors of the plains, and the Brebers, and other classes of the mountains,
are obviously different races of people. The many revolutions which these
northern parts of Africa have undergone, may have repeatedly destroyed all the
traces and character of the original inhabitants; but these would perhaps again
appear, if left to themselves: in short, the general indigenous inhabitant of
all this continent was probably the negro; and the nature of the country may be
such, if left to itself, as to turn the present different races all to negroes
again in the course of time. But as the mountains here, as elsewhere, have not
been so much overrun by enemies as the plains, it is among those first we must
look for the oldest inhabitants. They are obviously a different race from those
of the plains: -- they are generally thin, light, active, and rather fair; and
those of the towns and plains, fatter, heavier, and more of a copper colored
and mixed breed.

I suspect there are but few of the ancient Arabian race now remaining in
Africa, or they are much degenerated. I have heard there are still some few
distinct tribes or families of them in some of the internal parts behind the
Algerine dominions; a more moral and elegant, a proud, but still a pastoral
people. Here, poverty and oppression have long since cancelled almost every
distinction of character, as well as of rank. The dread and anxiety of
perpetual danger hanging over their heads, may be said to suspend all
character, and stifle what they would have been under other circumstances. They
are sagacious, yet ignorant; rapacious, yet indolent; sometimes active, though
not strong, with a rooted and habitual enmity toward all other nations, in
proportion, as usual, to their own ignorance and superstition; but the Jews and
Christians have long been the most immediate objects of their hatred and
contempt.

Vices happily counteract each other in this world. Avarice begins to make them
more tolerant here, at least in their seaport towns. The frequent presents and
the commerce of the Christians have in some measure fixed their regard and
attention; and their hopes of making something of us, procures us some
temporary civilities.

On mutual control and assistance, on action and counteraction, depends the
whole system of nature, physical and moral. It is certainly right that there be
a constant intercourse between different countries and climates. All attempts
to exclude each other, have proved destructive to nations. The finest countries
seem to require the most frequent supplies of people, either as colonists or
conquerors. And the world seems to be divided for men, as for cattle, into
breeding and fattening countries; and the latter must be frequently supplied
from the former. The finest plains and climates serve at once to fatten, spoil,
and enervate their inhabitants, and to invite others from the distant mountains
to conquest or colonization.

I am in doubt about some of their customs, ceremonies, dress, etc. if worth
mentioning. The Highland played, and the Moorish hayk, are perhaps the same as
the Roman ioga, and they probably had it from other older nations.

LETTER IX. Difficulties of any Change or Progress here. -- Negligence, etc.
IT is almost impossible for any person or nation, were they ever so willing,
to be of the service you mention, to this Prince, or to his country. Your good
general need not fear our opening their eyes too much; they are determined, and
use means quite sufficient to keep them shut.

The reign of ignorance possesses in itself the most powerful principles of
self-preservation, and is perhaps the most durable of all empires. Here no man,
except the Prince, can ever be of consequence enough to introduce any change or
improvement; and all changes are against their customs, law, or religion, which
they do not distinguish, and which likewise prohibits the reigning family from
going to sea, so that they can hardly ever travel or acquire knowledge.

From the necessary connection of the arts, were they to attempt any one
branch, it must stop at a certain point of the progress for want of others. For
example, they may learn to throw shells tolerably well, with much practice; but
they cannot get at the theory, nor half the trades and learning necessary
toward forming and supporting an artillery. So that shells, from being, even
with us, perhaps the least effectual, and certainly the most expensive, of all
the machines of war, become, in their hands, almost useless and of no effect.
And if they think to take any place by such bombarding as theirs must be, they
will find themselves egregiously disappointed, or it must be very badly
defended. Any other art, as fortification, legislation, manufacture, etc. would
share the same fate here, with artillery, if attempted.

Any scruples or difficulties in us, of teaching them up to the point of which
they are capable, would be vain and futile. We might as well attempt to keep
them from the sun or air, as from the knowledge and progress to which
necessity, and their situation, will naturally carry them. It is no^ by their
ignorance that they can be kep^ dependent upon us. But it has been from our
neglecting to watch this Emperor's views the changes of times and
circumstances, tha^ has lost us his friendship and his dependenc^ on us; while
the Dutch, Genoese, Danes Turks, and even Spaniards, now make (...) merit of
assisting him in all he wants.

I am pleased to perceive, that you begi^ to see the affairs of this country in
a ne^ light. I hope such knowledge will exten^ to other countries, and to
higher offices The number of disagreeable circumstances and the patience
required in this court an^ country for Europeans, are far beyond wha^ you can
there conceive; and how so man of us come hither, is beyond my conception to
account for.

All methods of getting away havin^ failed, I am now in actual treaty about
bribe to get a letter delivered, to solicit that favor. And all I ask, besides
the prisoners, is to let me go; and as he stills insists on my asking
something, I have mentioned a horse; being the usual present here, and such as
I can accept.

Many others are here in a similar situation, if that could be any consolation.
Some waiting for months, and years; some having come in full expectation of
promised payments, or favors, and are at length reduced to the necessity of
including them all in that one, of being permitted to go. Such are the methods,
it is suspected, that he purposely adopts, of paying the services even of
strangers and Europeans. You may consider how well he is likely to be served.

As the messenger goes only tomorrow, I sit down again to fill up your paper.
Today entirely at the palace, as usual, starving with hunger and cold, for we
have a little frost; but without seeing his M --, though sent for by his
orders: but we have waited, and lounged, and received several of his
contradictory messages, as usual too; and have been witnesses of more to
others. These things used at first to teaze, but now help to amuse me. But the
best message of all (if not contradicted tomorrow) was the last, viz. that I
shall have the Tetuan Christians, of which he makes a prodigious favor, and
that I shall go in a few days.

LETTER X. Of the Prince, and Emperor. -- Peculiarities.
WE have explained your letters to the Prince. That part which condemns the
consul, gave him great pleasure, and good humor. He laughed heartily as he sat
employed in taking to pieces, and spoiling a very good London-made clock, a new
Spanish present, which was probably brought there that I might see and judge of
their friendship with Spain. I took the opportunity of asking for the seamen,
and he readily promised me his interest; then mounted and rode to his father,
within a few doors, and the clock may have escaped for the present.

We have, today, had some dinner at the palace, an extraordinary thing in
these times, viz. some almonds and raisins, and, with difficulty, some water.

Our hopes consist in the letters having the same effect on the father as on
the son, which I doubt. With him, hardly any one here has personally any other
than that short-lived influence which his present passions or necessities
sometimes give to those who happen to be near him at the time. I believe he is
too fearful and cautious to have a friend, or any one with whom he may
regularly consult. Though at once both artful and assuming, and taking the
credit of every measure as his own, though borrowed, he carefully avoids the
appearance of being at a loss, or in any doubt. Yet he is not unfrequently seen
to be greatly perplexed; and is then very solicitous for the opinions of those
who chance to be near him, though these are generally dictated by fear,
ignorance, or self-interest. Much of his conduct, and of his public measures,
favor of such a source. This son is, however, today in favor; which was not
the case last week.

Their actions and opinions are full of uncertainty, paradox, change,
contradiction, and caprice. But the wild, flighty, variable humor, and true
Barbarian character, is much stronger and more conspicuous in the sons than in
the father; for he affects wisdom, and sets up for the great headpiece of his
family and race: and by means of a little caution, discretion, cunning, and
often indeed good sense, he passes here for a Solomon, for profound and deeply
learned, but not for brave. The Barbarian idea of courage is inseparable from
that of cruelty; and he is humane to a degree almost unknown in his family or
in this government; and though his humanity is not quite what we should dignify
by that name, nor so powerful as to withstand his avarice when they come in
competition, yet it often appears in public, and is the means of saving many
lives. He wishes to treat smaller crimes with less severity than has been
customary here, and for this he is unpopular, and held in some degree of secret
contempt by his more savage sons, and by the remains of the army, who say,
There should be a stream of blood always flowing from the throne, in order to
govern this country properly. And as one of the instances of his weakness, this
monarch has been known to be cruel, against his nature, in order to support
this character of bravery, and to gain the opinion of such people as these. You
know that, par devoir, he is the only executioner in his kingdom; and dexterity
in cutting off heads, is among the first of royal accomplishments here, and is
frequently the subject of common conversation among the people. And with such a
people as these now are, it is perhaps the best method of preserving that
necessary terror and respect to himself and the laws.

All his resolutions, however extravagant, are supposed to be the immediate
inspirations of God. He judges and administers justice in a very hasty and
summary way, at his levee. His sentences, being sudden inspirations, often
before the cause is half heard -- hands, heads, are cut off; the whole process
and execution, often the work only of a few minutes. But to his great honor,
there are much fewer executions than formerly, as in Muley Ishmael's time,
though it is matter of regret to many of his soldiers and subjects.

It is probably from the East, that we too had once got the absurd and terrific
idea of kings being God's vicegerents here on earth; an idea which our European
princes do not seem, in these days, so fond of propagating; as, fortunately for
society, it has become more necessary and useful to be beloved, than to be
feared, by their subjects.

LETTER XI. More Anecdotes of the Emperor. -- Bad Accommodations, and State of
the Arts.
THIS Emperor is rather in his element at these levees, or audiences. Cunning
and sensible, he is no bad courtier, though a coarse one, and says some artful
and well-studied things, which often have the effects he intends by them; and
though we are not all deceived, all are obliged to praise his wisdom, and
pretend to admire and believe -- as is not unusual, I believe, at other courts.

He has there lately declared, that he means to make war on the Dutch, if their
embassy (that is, their presents) does not soon appear; and it is said, that
nothing under ten thousand ducats will answer the purpose, or prevent the war.
In short, though not paid annually, it is a tribute; and we are all tributary
to him.

He says, he will grant no corn to the Christians this year till late in May.
The Christians are quite out of favor of late. He hardly now sees any of those
with whom he used to be quite intimate.

The cry of war with any Christian power is always popular here; and he deals
out, at his levees, a little hopes of it now and then, for popularity, and
other various purposes.

You see the promises of the tenth are forgotten again, as usual, here. One of
the Tetuan Christians is taken from me, because Sombel has had a hint of some
hopes of a ransom, which he must share with his master. The next that seems to
require being asked for, is our Vice Consul of Mogodore.

I write most of this on my knee, a la Morisco. We pitch our tent in our room,
and the tent being none of the best, you know, keeps out only part of the rain
which comes through the roof of the house. I cannot manage here to keep my feet
dry for a whole day, nor to get rid of a second cold, though not so feverish as
the first. We have changed from the convent, but for the worse, if possible. It
is hard to say which are the most uncomfortable kind of animals for landlords
and companions, Spanish friars, Moors, or Jews.

We shall be tolerably good Moors in time, as to indolence and sobriety; and
shall have again to learn to drink wine, though not bad water. Slavery itself
would probably require only a certain time to reconcile and debase the mind.

The pride of polished times is, perhaps, too apt to consider the affairs of
barbarous nations as unworthy of notice, and barren of instruction. But I think
a mind that is warm in the pursuits and investigation of human nature, will
find her interesting in every shape. Though I must confess, I am too often out
of humor with these people, when teazed and fatigued with many disagreeable
circumstances. I believe few are ever inclined to repeat their visitation, but
such as are obliged to it. Yet when the troubles are over, and diminished by
distance and time, and only the agreeable recollections remain, as usual with
most journies, I may then perhaps experience a change of sentiment, and may
have no material objections to repeat this journey hither in the manner you
mention.

Man is probably worth considering in every state and condition of society; and
among people, though so far behind us, some arts and works may be observed that
at least seem worthy our attention, as objects of curiosity, if not of utility.
But useful hints may be picked up in almost any country, especially by military
men, who should know the simple and ready ways of doing every thing.

The ingenuity, as well as the stupidity of these people, while both differ so
widely from our own, become objects of curiosity to us. They will frequently
perform great things with very small means; and, with the most trifling and
simple tools, will execute works where we should require a complicated
apparatus. They can erect great and extensive buildings without stone, brick,
or mortar, and with scarcely any timber, viz. of dirt and mud, by means of
wooden cases or frames, removable when the fabric is dry. But you see there
some of the taby walls, for which they were formerly so famous; and they had
then very strong mixtures for mortar and plaster -- arts which are now almost
lost here.

But they will make a water-mill out of timber that we should think
insufficient for a stool. They will form a sort of bridge over a river with
spart or bass ropes stretched across it, without any purchase but the main
force of a number of hands; and though it drags in the water, it will carry
some people and baggage, while the rest swim the horses.

And they make floats that carry over baggage, in a country where there is
neither stick, stone, nor bush, with no other material but the skins of animals
blown up with the mouth. The women weave tolerable coarse cloth without any
loom, merely with pieces of reed.

But, as you may readily suppose, those works are all slowly and badly
executed. They are now ignorant of all the first principles of philosophy and
mathematics, and incapable of retaining such knowledge in the country, even if
it were introduced. The few middling or bad methods they possess, are derived
to them from undiscoverable antiquity, and are fixed by law and custom, beyond
the power of improvement. Custom, which they respect as law, would of itself be
sufficient to keep them as they are, without the help of despotism and the
depopulation it produces.

Their towns are generally built of this dirt and taby, upon the very quarries
of freestone. Five hundred horse require a whole day to pass a small river. It
is singular, though not very delicate, to see the women working the paste for
the cuscus Al cuscus, is a granulated paste, the same as that of vermicelli.
, on the ground between their legs.

It is impossible to persuade them that our improvements can be of any use to
them; and, prejudices apart, they are not perhaps always wrong in those
opinions. The arts, the police of populous and polished nations, are not fit
for hords of shepherds. They do not want to be taught to do things in less time
or space, with fewer hands, or less force, while they have time, space, and
hands enough. Neither men nor women will have occasion for our fine things,
while the former are tyrants and the latter slaves.

But some of your own learned men dispute, and some deny, the advantages of
science and civilization. The most absurd opinions will find partisans.
Doubtless, the two extremes of ignorance and refinement have each their vices
and their virtues, their forts and foibles. What we gain in one way, we must
often lose in others; such is the fate -- the law of our nature. The progress
of certain vicious weaknesses may keep pace with that of knowledge; and the
same causes, wealth and leisure, may contribute, at once, to the increase of
vice, luxury, and science. The middle ranks of men may, in some cases, improve,
while the two extremes of high and low, may both incline toward corruption and
depravity. Yet, on the whole, we must believe, that man may live happier in a
civilized and well-regulated community, than in a state of anarchy and rapine;
and that the benefits of arts and improvements must be at least sufficient to
reward that continual and laborious pursuit which we see always attending their
progress.

In the decision of such questions, I believe it will be safer to attend to the
opinions of those who have acted certain different parts and duties among men,
than to such as only speculate over them at hom^ by means of books. But indeed
it probably requires the joint efforts of bot^ theory and practice, to advance
the great science of government only a few steps farther, with security. Hence
the extrem^ rarity of that valuable being -- a great lawgiver, -- not a lawyer.
These two characters have seldom been joined.

LETTER XII. Of political Innovations. -- Foreign Travel. -- Lawgivers. --
Emperor.
IN an inquisitive and improving age, we must expect every possible variety of
opinion to be advanced and supported. In the course of this progress and
variety, the increase of human knowledge and inquiry may often lead rather to
doubt than to presumption. The wisest and oldest nations will know the most,
and will therefore, perhaps, be most aware of innovations, and thence may be
oftener too cautious, than in the other extreme of rash and inconsiderate;
which last is more the characteristic of this Barbarian state of society. Your
superior science and wisdom will have a tendency to produce more caution than
enterprise. You know too well the danger of all extremes in any measures or
principles; the impossibility of any rule being without exceptions; the power
of custom or habit, which is properly calle^ second nature, and which it is
therefore seldom prudent or practicable to change; s^ that the very wisdom of
experience may lead toward the extreme of circumspectio^ and timidity. An old
soldier is often too cautious; and, were it not for some of thos^ bold
innovators in politics, who, with more spirit than knowledge, can carry whol^
nations on to new experiments, society would probably stand still, or go
backwards*

I believe I was led into these reflection^ by something about these Moors, and
their government; and by reading accidentally one of your over-wise and learned
authors who preaches against foreign travel, an^ thence against our learning
any thing from other nations.

Now I am inclined to believe that it is only by mutual intercourse that
nations improve, and that even our idlest and weakes^ ramblers generally bring
home more good than evil from their travels; that they mostly either retain, or
afterward on reflection acquire from thence, a something of utility, and more
certainly a something of the agreeable, that serves to distinguish them from
the common herd. Nay, without travel, I think we have seldom seen any man
become very great in things of the first importance; and still less, any one
become universally great. I have no idea of a man being fit for a legislator or
a senator, without having traveled. And as to that first and most important
character before mentioned, a great lawgiver, perhaps we cannot expect to see
one again, while there is so little chance of the different excellencies of the
human character being joined in one; -- not till the great philosopher, the
soldier, traveller, statesman, scholar, historian, poet, musician, etc. can
again be found together and joined to the best heart. This was always a rare
being among men; but now, with the minute separation of arts and professions --
with our partial, tedious, inactive, unanimated, unfeeling kind of education,
the production of such men is become quite improbable. There has not been
perhaps above three or four really great lawgivers in two thousand years: -- a
Lycurgus, a Solon, a Numa, and a Penn.

When we see the different kinds of vices prevailing in such varied degrees in
the different countries we visit, and the gradual change of national
characters, can we doubt the influence of education, of government, of manners?
Or can we believe human nature or mankind to be always the same in all ages and
nations? as some of our overlearned and wise would have us believe, as a very
great and sage discovery.

I believe we must travel, were it only to unlearn the errors and nonsense that
some of our books, and our bookish masters, may have taught us in our youth.

But we must not conclude a letter without mentioning our friend the Emperor.
He seems still at times to repent of some of his harsh treatment of our Consul.
He has shown some displeasure toward the Moor and the Jew, who were his
instruments in that business; and they may probably yet receive some political
and corporeal chastisement on that account, if those measures should ever be
properly resented by our court; which he fears may yet be the case, in spite of
all the comfort and encouragement you give him.

You must always expect him to go as far as ever he can with any chance of
impunity; but he is, nevertheless, easily frightened. The French have lately
silenced him by a spirited answer to one of his insolent messages. I think we
make less use of our natural advantages than almost any other nation. Is not
this from a want of sufficient knowledge of the character and secrets of other
courts and nations? Are your ministers men who have traveled and resided in
other countries?

But the rain, which seems to last for ever, continues to wet our paper, and
every thing. All things here, as well as the houses, are in a more imperfect,
insufficient, or ruined state, than you can ever there conceive without seeing.

LETTER XIII. The Improbability of Improvements. -- The Spaniard in favor. --
Our bad Policy.
EVERY thing here wears a neglected, unfinished, and desolate appearance. The
country seems only of late to have emerged a little from ruins, and now to be
returning fast thither again. The footsteps of oppression are strongly marked
throughout.

And there is no improving a country like this. Nothing can be done but by the
Prince; and you see how improbable it is that any thing like a lawgiver, -- a
Peter the Great, -- can ever be produced here -- on auroit beau precher. What
could move a Prince who feels nothing for his people, his fame, or his
posterity, and who dreads the riches and population of his own country? How set
about to reform a barbarous exclusive religion, and mitigate their abhorrence
of Christians, which has been implanted as necessary to their existence, and to
their conquests; and now, perhaps, too deeply rooted in their habits and
customs, ever to be moved? The task of reforming or restoring such a people,
seems too great for any man. It would not be forming a new nation, but mending
an old one, which is here probably by far the most difficult of the two. He
would have to undo, or reform himself, his court, the people, the government,
and then to make up the whole anew from worse than nothing. Against the most
inveterate prejudices, vices, idleness, ignorance, -- the labor seems beyond
the power of man.

Nothing above the rank of a workman can yet live, or be of any use here; and
Hodge the mason may be of far greater service than a Duke de Riperda, or a
Marquis de Viale.

Some acquaintance with the rude nations should be kept up among the civilized,
though it will be more difficult to acquire than that of their polished
neighbors, which may be tolerably procured without moving from home, by the
help of books, society, commerce, travelers, resemblance; -- all of which fail
us here. Information we find so rare and difficult to procure, even of the next
town. As to the Europeans settled in such countries, it is melancholy to see
how soon their notions are confined and assimilated to the place, and how few
ideas they have beyond their own business.

But ere I forget the news of the day. -- This Emperor liberally gave to the
Spanish Consul, the last audience, without ransom, eleven Spaniards his
prisoners, whom he had bought of the Risiens. It is only with Carlos, as he
calls the King of Spain, that he is now on a truly attached and friendly
footing. There is a change for you! What must this footing have cost Carlos?
You should spare nothing to know the particulars; for from some of these much
may always be drawn of future plans and intentions: the general plan or meaning
is easily seen. At the same time he said he had given orders to his southern
Bashaw to tell the Mountaineers to kill all the English who may be cast in, or
come there, for the future. Fortunately they will not obey him, nor his Bashaw,
especially while they have hopes of getting any thing for them at Santa Cruz,
or Mogadore.

I am glad you now see the importance of keeping up a constant and
perspicacious style of information and attention to the plans, views, powers,
probabilities, etc. of your neighbors; I wish that kind of knowledge could be
extended to others of our public men; but I fear we shall always be somewhat
deficient in these, and our inadequate ideas of other countries but too often
appear in our public measures. By means of Gibraltar and your fleet, you may
always be of the first consequence here, and might manage this and some other
countries as you please.

LETTER XIV. Georgraphical and physical Ideas. -- Cultivation. -- Life. --
Diseases. -- Destruction. -- Conjectures in Natural History.
I HAVE now seen more of this country, toward the mountains behind it. A poor
population, thin crops, and a want of skill, exertion, and industry, are too
conspicuous throughout the whole. In some parts toward the skirts of the
mountains (which is in most countries the best soil), and in some tracts of
their plains, the land in tillage is rather extensive, in proportion to the few
miserable inhabitants so thinly scattered over it. But they have little or no
other labor; no fences, manures, fodder, gardens, houses, trees, nor roads, to
mind, so that they will plow, or rather scratch, up a good deal of land with
their trifling little plough, which is often without iron.

The plains run to sand in many places, and the best parts are generally but of
a light and thin soil, which may be in a great measure owing to the want of
cultivation and vegetation, and likewise to the want of water; a want that is
but too general, I believe, throughout this great continent of Africa; and
hence it must ever be but thinly peopled. From our knowledge of its coasts, and
the few rivers, it is plain there must be much of its internal extent entirely
without rivers, and therefore not habitable in those climates.

To form a general geographic idea of this kingdom, conceive a long slip of low
country along this coast, from the Straits down to about 28 N. lat. where Atlas
shoulders on the ocean. A branch of those mountains running northward behind
this plain to Cape Spartel, helps to bound and cut it off from the rest of the
continent. The few rivers (as you see in the map) that traverse this slip of
country, do not improve it much, except in some places where they overflow. Not
supplied by lesser streams, as elsewhere, in their course from the mountains to
the sea, this light land drinks up all the rain; they seldom produce any
verdure even on their banks. Not a plant or shrub, nothing verdant to be seen,
not so much as to mark the margin or course of the river; so that we may almost
tumble into it, before we discover where it is.

There is something very dismal in these extensive brown flats, with almost as
good a horizon as at sea, and without any green object within the distant view.
The land seems to produce scarcely any thing but what is sown; and where any
thing grows spontaneously, it is small of its kind. Though a fine climate,
several of the Spanish forest trees are here only like shrubs. Both vegetable
and animal life are in a weakly and unimproved state. One sees very little sign
of animal strength or vigor, except in the horse, and that is but seldom, for
this Emperor has sadly neglected and discouraged the breed of them. The camel,
though large, is but a weakly, sheepish, and sluggish animal, and carries but a
small load in proportion to his size. The fierce lions and tigers are in the
mountains, which, I suspect, are here at least the fittest habitations for man
too.

The diseases most common here are agues, dropsies, itch, and other cutaneous
disorders, often to a violent or leprous degree. Pray are not these the effects
of poor blood, and of poor and nasty living?

But some of their land produces good grain, though their mode of husbandry
gives but poor thin crops. Their being able lately to export some of it, is not
so much a proof of their industry, as of a want of population to eat it.
However, this exportation might be of service to the country, if the Emperor
could let it alone, or manage it with common sense; both of which are quite
improbable.

Toward the skirts of the mountains, which there form green hills, though many
of them too sandy like the plains, we find more flocks, and some good land,
and, I think, a better sort of people, and several kinds of good cattle, which
it might be worth while to export, and to try by cross breeds in other
countries. May not this peace and communication with Spain in time produce some
good effects to both these countries at least? They want much to improve their
breed of cattle in Spain.

There are different races of Mountaineers between this kingdom and Algiers,
who acknowledge neither state, and I believe are almost independent. Some of
them are called Brebers, and hence is supposed to come the name of Berberia.
Those seem to be the oldest inhabitants, most like to the Mauritanians of the
Romans, and it is said some of them still call all Europeans or strangers by a
name that sounds like Romi. This Emperor goes often against some of them,
perhaps partly by way of exercising his troops; which would be a very good
plan, if he had skill, exertion, and steadiness equal to it. But he makes no
conquests, and only raises by force some accidental contributions. In those
expeditions he has likewise a view to destruction, both in the countries
through which he marches, and those he goes against. To impoverish, to depress
the efforts, and destroy the effects of industry, is one of the grand secret
objects of this species of government. His rabble of an army, and its
followers, by the circuit they usually take on these occasions, most
effectually perform the different offices of destruction, and may be said to
eat up the country. These Mountaineers were probably the kind of inhabitants
found here at the time of the Arabian or Mahomedan conquests. They seem more
industrious, though a smaller race of people than those of the tent villages in
the plains. They have fixed habitations, huts, and some little gardens.

This now straight low coast may formerly have been in a more concave, or
indented and uneven line, and may have been filled up thus to a right line, by
time and the sea: now without bays, head^ands, or harbors, all the rivers
forming ^ars at their entrances. There is only one good bay, Woladia, which
might be made a good harbor, if you would help him to do it, which I think you
ought, without scruple or fear.

Mogadore might likewise, perhaps, be improved, by assisting the islands with
piers and jettees, etc. if it could be deepened by the help of the little
river, or other means.

There are few hard bodies to be found; no marble, or ores, till we go back to
the mountains. Most of the stone on the coast seems like newly hardened, or
just cohesing sand, like that behind Gibraltar rock. Near Mequinez and Fez, the
harder bodies begin to appear: their strata approach the surface, and, I
suppose, form the great body of mountains that appear here in the distant view.

Some quarries of an indifferent kind of marble have been much worked near
Mequinez, and last by Muley Ishmael, with his numerous Christian slaves, for
his extensive and useless buildings here. Many of his half-made columns still
lie about the quarries.

In the back parts of these plains, on approaching the hills, we passed by
large tracts where the upper stratum consisted of what we call plum-pudding
stone, often with earth or sand beneath. Must not this have come from the
mountains? and do not all these things indicate these plains to be new country?
But I mean to trouble you with very few of my conjectures in natural his^ory;
and the particulars would require more study, and a longer residence on
pur^ose. Only let me observe, that I am in^lined to think the land of this
globe is in^reasing, and that the sea adds more to ^ome coasts than it takes
away from others, ^y operating on the bottom, and throwing ^t up. And all the
earth that is above water, was raised by these two powers, viz. (...). By
volcanoes and earthquakes breaking ^he upper strata of the globe, and throwing
^p some parts above water; and then, (...). The sea gradually throwing up
materials, taken from the bottom as well as from other sides, or shores,
against such volcanic projections as points or centres of formation or
accumulation. I do not think the strata appear too much broken for this
supposition, as some observe.

LETTER XV. Sketches of the Population, Revenues, and Force of the Country. --
Its Conquest or Colonization, -- and Women.
THERE are, I believe, some accounts of this country already published; but as
I have hardly seen any of them, I must run the risk of repeating what may have
been written before; especially in descending to particulars, in which I do
not, however, profess to deal much.

The size of this kingdom, as far as the royal authority is known to reach, may
be estimated at about fifty thousand square miles (England contains, I believe,
forty-nine thousand); taking its length to the river Suz, or about Teradaunt,
as nearly five hundred, and its mean breadth about one hundred.

The number of inhabitants it is difficult, or impossible, to know with any
precision; though they might know it nearly by means of some taxes, and the
Bashaws. But as they have very imperfect notions of large numbers, all
information, where these are concerned, must be very uncertain.

At Tetuan and Mequinez we found situations from whence we could count the
number of houses, pretty nearly, in the length and breadth, or of two crossing
diameters. We found Tetuan contain about 1500 houses.

People. If 10 persons per house, 15,000 Mequinez, somewhat less, but when the
court is there, may be supposed 15,000 Fez, nearly two of Tetuan, 30,000
Morocco, more than Mequinez, 20,000 All the other towns by information, 40,000
Total inhabitants of the towns 120,000

By the best accounts of the most populous provinces, and comparing them with
the others, we cannot make the whole population of this kingdom amount to much
above two million.

Of his revenue we can likewise only make some oblique inquiries and guesses,
through the clouds of mystery and ignorance.

The duties of South Ports, last year, viz. of Santa Cruz, Mogodore, and Safee,
about Hard dollars. 200,000 North Ports, nearly the same (though much increased
since open to Spain), 200,000 Bashaw of Duquela's country, nearly one-fourth of
the whole kingdom, brought 120,000 x 4, or near 500,000 900,000

By the addition of presents, confiscations, robberies, his annual revenue may
sometimes amount to nearly one million hard dollars, or two hundred thousand
pounds.

But, excepting the Duquela provinces, the rest is, I believe, uncertain. He
therefore wishes always to farm his ports; but I wonder he gets any body to
take them, for it is obvious he means after all to fleece the farmer.

His navy now consists of about twenty vessels, the largest of twenty guns. You
might, and perhaps should, help him to double that force, since he likes it. He
cannot hurt you much; but he may be made a proper checque on your enemies. And
the efforts to be a naval and commercial power, might help to improve his
country -- if any thing could; and the improvement of this part of the world is
certainly for your good.

His land-force is quite uncertain. Every man is supposed to be a soldier, and
always ready; though far from being the case. Indeed every man here seems as
fit as any other for any or every thing; each serves indiscriminately as horse,
foot, sailor, artillerist, officer, or private. As officers, he seems to
appoint and reduce them from mere caprice, and not by any fixed mode, or merit;
as if to show his power, and jealously avoid any fixed rule of conduct. Indeed,
no command seems to give its possessor any rank or permanent authority. All are
equally slaves to his caprices.

We may judge of his force and discipline by this late siege of Masaghan. He
could not, after all his efforts, assemble above 50,000 men, taking it from the
best reports; but all reports magnify here. They came straggling in for many
days during the first of the siege; and before the end of it, two months and a
half, they were reducd to one-fourth or one-fifth of their greatest number, all
stealing away when tired. Indeed they cannot, in any great numbers, stay long
in a place, the country and methods of providing being inadequate; but this
being by the sea, he got supplied for his money, though with some difficulty
and great expense. He had an enemy to contend with who hardly attempted to
interrupt any of his clumsy operations either by sea or land.

Their wants are few, and from the few arts necessary to supply those wants
more hands can be spared than with us. Half the able-bodied might perhaps take
the field for a little time; whereas with us, I believe, one-eighth would be
found too many to be spared from the arts and trades that are wanted in our
state of society: but in theirs, the women, the aged, and the children, might
nearly do the necessary work in this climate during most part of the year. Such
a state, like some of the ancient republics, if it could be wisely governed and
disciplined, might have great advantages, in national strength, over more
polished and luxurious nations.

It is a great pity that the European powers are giving up or losing the places
they held on this African coast, instead of gaining more, as I think they
ought. Those places were a kind of military schools rather better than none;
they produced some additional motives to military and national exertions; they
served as some asylum, or hope for the escape of slaves and prisoners; and in
this and several other ways were a kind of check on these barbarians. The
Portuguese, in their more flourishing days, very properly considered them in
this light, and as a footing toward the formation of future colonies here; in
which it is to be hoped some European nation will yet again succeed as well as
the Romans.

It is, perhaps, in the principles of the present art of war, that ten thousand
men, trained on purpose under a good general, might beat as many as could be
brought into the field of such troops as these, provided they had first some
experience in this kind of war; for without great precaution, our inexperience
of barbarous armies and methods of war might expose us to some dangers at
first, and to misfortunes that might prove decisive. Though our superior
science, patience, and discipline, when skilfully employed, ought to give us
great advantages over such a rabble, yet the general who attacks or invades any
of these Barbary states ought to be very much on his guard at first, or his
troops may be surprised. Astonished at their unusual modes of attack; at the
great agility of their horse in retreating, breaking, returning; at their
horrid shrieks and yells, of which we can have no idea, as our lungs are
incapable of such exertions from want of habit, we should be apt to give way,
which would be decisive.

No modern nation has yet found the secret of making either war or peace with
them to any advantage proportioned to the difference of science and discipline.
It is amazing, I believe even to themselves, to see the nations of Europe, with
all their superiorities, become so submissive and tributary to them. We seem to
keep each other in countenance, and share the disgrace amongst us.

If Russia ever succeeds in her enterprises, and can get once fairly into the
Mediterranean, she may show us how to treat these piratical states; for she has
the only troops sufficiently acquainted with such enemies, and she will
probably be wise enough to keep up that knowledge by frequent wars. Any other
power who may have occasion to attack them would perhaps do well to borrow a
Russian general and some other of their officers.

To be conquered by a civilized and generous nation would be a happy event for
these poor Africans. They have latterly been saved from it -- we can hardly
tell how, or why, when we consider the enterprising spirit of modern Europe. It
has probably been owing to our exhausting wars with each other, and to those
apparently greater objects of the Western and Eastern worlds, in search of
gold. But it may justly be doubted, if those objects be greater? These northern
parts of Africa are capable of all sorts of useful productions, of more value
than gold, and nearer home.

It is not improbable that France may be approaching to a state of population
and enterprise that may make such colonization and conquest occur and become
necessary to her, or at least to join in such a scheme, if it should once
become the fashion. And if her government can ever be steady enough, in any
system; or if she should ever recover her constitution, which some of their
speculative men think possible, and which I do not think probable; she would
then be too powerful, and give law to Europe. Egypt ought, perhaps, to be the
first country in Africa to be conquered and colonised from Europe, on account
of its singular situation. Surrounded by deserts, it would be easily defended
against all its neighbors. Wealthy, scientific, and disciplined nations, are
not in these days to be conquered by crowds of barbarians: the modern expensive
sciences of fortification, and war in general, form their security. Then the
rest of the northern African coast might be gradually subdued and civilized by
small colonies and good government. But it would require some of our Penns and
Franklins to establish, or improve upon the English constitution here: only
they must be warriors; that would be indispensable in this situation, and is
generally so in every great character. Neither the government nor character of
the French will answer for colonization. I believe the legislator for these
countries should be born in England, or in English America; and yet he must
likewise be well acquainted with the European, the Asiatic, and African
nations, of which his subjects would here consist; and he must be a great
soldier -- ignorant of nothing. These and other requisites seem to me
indispensable in the character of a great lawgiver, and must render it the
rarest character upon earth.

Portugal, in the times of her spirit, wisdom, and glory, during the reigns of
her John's and Emanuels, attempted conquest and colonization here too; and with
great success, considering the times and circumstances. By a little more
wisdom, steadiness, and discipline; -- with less jealousy, and more assistance
from Ferdinand of Aragon, she might have fixed a colony in this country. Now,
it is perhaps only to be accomplished by the united force of different states,
as it has been prevented by their mutual jealousies.

Perpetual war is probably the true spirit of Mahomedism; and when they cease
to be conquerors, they are nothing, their government being unfit for the arts
of peace. It is only war, or some such powerful motive of necessity, that can
induce them to move with any order or exertion. So that, whenever the European
nations can agree about the measures and consequences, they may probably do
what they please with both the European and African Mussulmans. Perhaps it may
be brought about without France, or at least without her taking the lead in
those conquests. When Austria and Russia can agree, and can satisfy France and
Prussia, and get fairly to the Mediterranean, then Greece, and others, both new
and old countries, may flourish, those seas may regain their former importance,
and these fertile African coasts become again the granaries of the world. There
is no apparent revolution arising in the horizon of future probability, of more
importance to this part of the world, and to the improvement of mankind, in
that of their commerce, population, arts, and industry. The practicability and
utility of such measures may be perceived from the history of Carthage, of
Rome, and of Portugal. These countries have always received colonies, and have
been improved by them; it is of consequence, that they should come from the
most improved nations. Mahomedan conquest from Asia having spread itself along
this fine African coast, and its being left there so long to degenerate, and
then to infest and plague the rest of the world, is a great shame to polished
Europe. But she must probably, in time, recover and assert her natural
superiority here too, as the Mahomedan power of itself declines. If we had been
better and more liberal politicians, we might have hastened those events, by
giving Minorca to Russia, and thereby, perhaps, more effectually securing to
ourselves a share of the beneficial consequences.

When governments shall have learned to act on great and liberal principles,
and shall have taught mankind to tolerate and enrich each other, Mahomedans may
make better subjects when subordinate than when in power. Those who were left
in Spain and Portugal were, and would probably have continued, very good
subjects, if those governments had known how to treat them* Here the natives,
the people in general might be brought to join against their present rulers,
notwithstanding their religion.

These political speculations I think of importance, and you must have them as
they occur. This state of barbarism (as we may affect to style it), and their
wilful ignoranc^ of our arts and fancied improvements, may not be so improper
for poor and mountainous countries, in some parts of the world; but it is
surely a pity, that such rich and improveable plains, so near to us, should
remain in a condition so depopulated, and in such poor cultivation, lost, as it
were^ to mankind. The Romans thought so of these countries, and acted from that
principle.

You know the women are jealously guarded, and are seldom seen here, except
some of the lowest, the domestic, and aged; but all of them are then covered up
to the eyes with woollen, and over the face some dirty rag marked and sullied
with the breath, and only the eyes to be seen in ghastly stare. They are
generally inclined to be fat and short, and have an odd, and to us a most
ungraceful, appearance; round, shapeless woollen bundles, moving along;
certainly neither very cleanly nor desirable, at least according to our taste.

Where women are thus considered only as domestic slaves, and marriage as a
kind of purchase, they can have no weight or influence in society, which
therefore can hardly be polished or improved. By this exclusion of the sex,
there will not remain sufficient motives, means, nor uses for introducing the
agreeable arts; and we know that the agreeable and the useful arts are mutually
connected and must assist and produce each other.

Nations halt or stop at different stages of civilization. In the East, society
has been stopped and fixed always at too early a stage of its progress, viz.
during the periods while women were yet considered as a kind of private
property, or plunder: and so it threatens long to remain over a great part of
the earth -- an eternal disgrace to human nature.

LETTER XVI. Of the rude and civilized State. -- Of Education. -- Comparative
Remarks.
SEVERAL other things would be necessary, so as to make the most of a journey
into this country, and render it somewhat more agreeable both to you and me:
such as being better provided for traveling and encamping; a friend or two for
conversation, and to promote reflection, with the habits and leisure for
writing; a longer residence to examine the different parts, if worth the time
and trouble, of which, at times, I have my doubts. However, such countries
might produce as many new and original observations as the more refined and
improved nations, though these furnish but melancholy pictures of human nature.

If such was the simplicity and happiness of the Golden Age, dio ce ne liberi:
though our disapprobation or disgust may be little more than a confession that
their vices and errors are different from ours, and that the inhabitant of
polished Europe, with his present numerous wants, must shudder at the idea of
returning to the naked and forlorn state of barbarian society. But in this,
they may probably be even with us; and and on each side of those straits, the
mutual dislike and contempt may be equally strong. But it is not so much the
want of luxuries, as of virtue and freedom, which always grow up together, that
would here disgust the liberal mind. Where no man is looked upon, nor expected
to be honest, friendly, or generous, it is in vain to look for such virtues.
Those cannot so easily be produced, even by the best institutions, and cannot
be expected to arise spontaneously without culture or encouragement, and still
less where there is neither use, motive, nor demand for them.

When we look to Europe, and consider your superior motives and opportunities
to virtue, activity, and knowledge, we should expect your people to be better
and wiser, and farther before these, than they really are. More vices and
errors seem to grow up with science and civilization, than have yet been well
accounted for.

In Europe, the wisest among you seem to look up to laws more than to the form
of your government or legislatures, for every thing, and consider the impartial
execution of those laws, as the most perfect state of freedom and happiness. It
may be so with your present moral powers and character. But laws alone seem
insufficient to make men what they ought to be, unless they tend more
effectually than yours to improve your manners, morals, and education -- your
good discipline, habits, and industry. But some of your rulers, and over-wise
men, think that the people ought to be kept in ignorance and poverty, in order
to make them work. If your governments and state of society cannot add some
other better motives or means to produce labor and virtue, it is a confession
of great debility or ineptitude, or worse. I must ever think those principles
and opinions to be wrong and erroneous, proceeding from the fearful indolence
and ignorance of tyranny. In the most industrious, and hence the most happy
countries that I have seen, the people were the farthest removed from ignorance
and poverty. I should beware of giving men of such opinions much influence in
any system of education, legislation, or police, if I did not know the small
effects our speculative and doubtful opinions have on our conduct, except a few
of the honest Quixots or enthusiasts, characters likewise very necessary in
society.

I should be for your bestowing more honor and respect on those who educate
your children; and should endeavor to throw that business into the hands of
genius* -- of men of the first-rate character and abilities, who would prefer
the pleasure of forming real and useful men, according to truth and nature, to
the unnatural toil o^ marring or modelling them into particular sects of spoilt
or artificial beings.

Those monkish fraternities called universities, are too ancient in their
institution, modes, and methods. No human establishment can last so long
without more frequent reforms, and even total renovations. Though they have
been forced to follow, in some degree, the changes of times, the old leven
still too plainly appears. Originally established solely for educating
churchmen, they seem now as if intended to render learning of difficult,
instead of easy acquisition, and to keep useful knowledge out of sight. But I
think they will be forced to improve still farther, both in matter and method;
and the necessity of a more manly and direct education, must in time appear, --
one of more general and more useful knowledge, habits, and abilities.

Here, there is no hope of amelioration of any kind. They are past all the
periods of improvement: to become stationary, is the utmost that can be
expected of them. No traces of their former learning appear. Of the library at
Fez, we can learn nothing, but that no such thing exists now there: and even
the emperor himself seems jealous of letting us enquire farther. Yet we may see
that these people are naturally studious, and rather grave and persevering; so
that they might perhaps be made to learn again, if they had sufficient
encouragement by good government, liberty, and security. In the seaports, we
have seen them play chess, but not in the inland parts; they are there probably
too miserable even for that degree of ease, or descanso.

You see I am still interested about you Europeans, though I had begun to feel
as if almost an African myself. But many things now conspire to turn the mind,
like the needle, perpetually to the north; and we look toward home with a
longing eye, in some compound ratio of the distance and time of absence. It is
interesting to observe the effects of approaching home on some of our party,
who have been many years absent in slavery, poverty, and distress.

Hardly any thing in this country can now fix our attention. I suppose we must
now first get to that side, before we can attend to this. In the mind's eye, we
see fair Europe all green and beautiful, and this all black and brown: the one
advancing, and the other standing still, to be left still farther out of sight.
Hope and imagination go on to gild the distant and future prospect of your
improvements, and can see in your increasing motives to activity and research,
the treasuring up a stock of useful knowledge for the benefit of posterity and
of mankind; while these naked and forlorn regions are long likely to remain the
same; and each generation of men, like those of other animals, go on like the
last, without an idea of change or improvement in the species or individual, or
in any of the useful or agreeable arts of life.

Such are my romantic dreams among the now naked skirts of Atlas, where once
flourished a populous and cultivated Roman colony. They serve to amuse in this
now worse than solitude.

LETTER XVII. A political Reverie.
AS I do not at present intend to trouble you much more about business or
travels from hence, I send you another of my waking dreams or reveries,
suggested by our present situation among these poor Barbarians.

You know I have formerly imagined, with others, that we might improve these
people. Indulging in that idea, I have supposed myself a leader of a rude
nation, formed of the shepherds of some plains, no matter where, and the
hunters of neighboring mountains; fancying that some advantages might be made
to accrue from mixing those two different stages of society, by retaining some
of the best parts of each, in order to carry them on to the next stage of
cultivators.

I had at length prevailed on them to remain attached for some time to a fine
country, consisting of plains, rivers, mountains, and to consider it as their
home during the best parts of the year, though they could not all at other
seasons entirely give up their habitual occupations of hunting, and sometimes
going to war with their neighbors. I had got them to attempt, with some
success, the raising of corn and pulse, with the management and saving of some
grass, and other indigenous plants, for themselves and their cattle; and had
gradually brought them to see the uses of some fences and divisions of the
land; and then, by degrees, to feel the advantages of having houses, and little
gardens for raising more food for themselves: and from those first rude ideas
of fixed property, we were going on forming fixed villages, and had marked out
some districts of land to each.

I appointed a certain number of the most intelligent and leading men to meet
me, having long meditated, and prepared them for, a free and confidential
conference. The following were the heads or meaning of some things I
endeavored to explain to them:

"Friends and companions,

"After all our various successes and labors in war and in peace, and our
confidential conversations, you are now, I believe, still more confirmed in the
truth of what I have generally foretold, and of my real intentions for the
general good; you have therefore submitted to my command and advice, as well as
from an opinion of my superior skill and conduct; I wish now to confirm you
still farther in your late wise resolutions to improve, showing you an evident
increase of your happiness with that of your industry; for these always go
together. Some of you are now accustomed to consider those great objects of
population, discipline, form of government, national greatness, which likewise
depend on each other. Let us keep those objects in view, and go straight
forward, guided by the maxims we have so often considered. Most of all depends
on your form of government or constitution, which we must go on gradually to
improve; dividing the business and authority, for which the people have been
accustomed to look only to me, yet more distinctly and methodically among you
all, while I retain only those parts that are absolutely necessary for union,
for expedition, force, and in short for the good of the whole.

"We have, you see, at length succeeded in persuading many of our people to
cultivate the earth; and they already perceive it may be made to produce much
more for food and clothing than their practice of hunting, or of negligently
attending their poor and wandering flocks. You begin to see some of the
precautions necessary to our success in this settled way of life. Our keenest
hunters have now their seasons of labor, which were formerly those of
idleness; their flocks multiply, and all subsist through the different seasons.

"In the few nations you know, and in others whose history you will now learn,
you will see that their dangers, difficulties, and want of success, have
generally proceeded from their not changing their mode of government, laws, and
manners, so as to keep pace with their change of situation. These things have
seldom been carried on together, but have left each other behind. The same
motives and principles of necessity, of mutual assistance, that brought men
first to live and act together, and the few laws that could unite and regulate
them in the woods and in the field of war, have proved inadequate to the
regulation of towns and villages, when property, riches, arts, pleasures, and
inequalities, came to increase.

"We must go on endeavoring, by degrees, to get the people to continue
submissive to the authority, or at least to follow the advice, of the chiefs
and elders of the villages, in peace as well as in war, by giving them the
election of those in a proper form and rotation; carefully securing the
obedience of those chiefs or elders, by giving them an interest and a share in
the national government. The institutions, the care and management of these
smaller divisions of the people, are of the first importance. On that
foundation must be built the whole fabric of your government and of your
success.

"Let us then form a few simple and plain laws and regulations, call together
those heads of villages, when properly elected, and propose these things to
their approbation; habituate them thus to think and speak on public affairs;
and let them at least seem to choose how they will be governed.

"Let us then determine who shall think for the whole and advise, who shall
approve, and in short the form of your legislature, and of whom it shall
consist, so as to include the interest of all as near as may be. We shall then
regulate our conduct as legislators in making laws, distinguishing the fixed
and permanent from the temporary and experimental, and then decide who shall
judge and apply them, and who shall put them in execution; for these must be
distinct offices. Various difficulties will here doubtless arise, which you
must wait to determine by patience and experience; but if we can keep the chief
objects constantly in view, go directly to them, and not suffer ourselves to be
embarrassed by needless distinctions and refinements, w^ shall make a greater
progress, and avoid many errors, troubles, and difficulties, into which other
nations have fallen. You know one another, and will readily enough fix on the
fittest persons for each office when once we have assigned and distinguished
the duties of each.

The method of one or two persons representing a whole district annually in ou^
legislature, you will find to be convenient full of beneficial consequences,
and a sourc^ of great improvements. Whether all should have a voice in choosing
those representative according to their property, or each have one vote, and
then property give additional votes, you will determine by experiment, leaving
this and every subject open to improvement. It is doubtless just to consult all
in what concerns all; but as that will become daily more impracticable, it will
be nearly the same in all, and even better in some, cases, by means of
representation, which is one of the happiest discoveries that ever was adopted,
but which is not yet well understood anywhere. By this, and every other means,
we must keep up the lower and industrious classes of the people in all their
due weight and importance in the state; for they are always too apt to let
themselves fall into dependence, and thence into neglect, contempt, and
oppression; and then they have recourse to violence and destruction, in order
to redress themselves -- but they know not how. They cannot take their own
part, as they form a body which cannot move without doing mischief. They must
act only by their representatives.

"If this degree of order and regularity can once be accomplished, the nation
may then go on in a continual progress, and each generation improve upon the
experience of the former; though they must never expect to arrive at
perfection. A nation is a strong and coarse machine, and must not be too nice,
nor embarrass itself with too many laws and regulations to remedy little evils
which are inherent in human nature. For example: after the experience of ages,
the wisest men of the wisest nations could not probably compose your
legislature so that the interest of all should always be considered, or where
that of some individuals or sets of people may not sometimes prevail beyond
their due share. Such evils as these, and many others, must be remedied as they
arise. Though the interest of the whole, and of each individual, is always to
be comparatively considered and estimated; though public measures and necessary
improvements will gradually require more thought, knowledge, and regulation;
yet you must carefully avoid making your laws and government too complicated,
but preserve the whole in that simple and plain state so as to be easily
understood by all. Simplicity is not to be sacrificed to trifling amendments. A
wheel too much will spoil any machine. While you make few laws, and trust each
other, you will exercise and strengthen the best parts of your nature, a
certain confidence and benevolence; and you will at least be longer in becoming
unworthy of that trust. By numerous laws and precautions to protect us against
our brethren, we nourish the selfish and malevolent dispositions, which are too
apt to grow up as arts and society advance.

"It requires some skill and reflection to hit the right medium in the
legislative institutions and executive government, so that the last may not be
too slow, nor the former too quick; neither over-cautious or litigious, on the
one hand; nor too variable, capricious, or precipitate, on the other: -- though
the first is probably the safest of the two extremes. The form we are about to
establish will, I think, nearly answer these conditions.

"I have often explained to you the numerous advantages of committing the
execution of your laws and regulations to one person only, -- a chief,
supported by the will or force of the whole, with full powers for the ready
execution of every law; but in the manner likewise prescribed by the
legislature, and under control sufficient to prevent his going beyond them.
Though that degree of control may not always be so easily found as imagined,
for it is difficult to give power enough to do good, and yet prevent that power
from doing harm sometimes; you will be shown the methods hitherto practiced for
that purpose, upon which you may improve.

"Your laws of succession and inheritance, and of transferring property, must
be well considered, and carefully preserved from becoming intricate and
complicated, to which they will be subject as you improve. In most cases of
doubt or dispute, an arbitration of neighbors properly chosen, will at once
serve to settle the case, and show you the best way of forming such bodies to
judge of your differences and offenses, to improve your police, arts,
regulations, etc.

"It is of great importance to fix in time the mode of succession and
inheritance, and especially the succession of your chiefs. The plainest and
easiest, you will probably find to be that by birth and primogeniture; and you
will have an equal chance of getting as good chiefs in this way as in any
other, especially if you take proper precautions in their education when young,
and have their duties marked out by fixed laws and forms when in years, and in
office.

"How much of your property must be taken for the use of the public, for the
good of the whole, you will be able in time to discover. It will vary with your
situation, character, and improvements: hence avoid granting too much, or for
too long a time. The honest and vigilant administration or expenditure of the
public money, is perhaps one of the most difficult tasks in society, and hence
highly meritorious: render it not more difficult by the want of order; diminish
the temptations and opportunities to fraud, by controls and rotation.

"You must travel, and learn from other nations, taking advantage of their
superior knowledge and experience. With some of those you will do well to keep
up a constant communication and friendship, but without catching their follies
and vices. You may learn as much by their errors, as by imitating their wiser
institutions; but you may learn some useful arts, the cultivation of more
plants of utility, the use of more tame animals, and of some other metals
besides your iron and copper. From the nations whence these come, you may get
others, and may learn other useful arts; but you must imitate them wit^ great
caution in their complicated system^ of laws, politics, learning, religion; in
their notions of good and evil, of virtues an^ vices. From their numerous,
perplexing and idle books on these subjects, your wis^ men may be able to
select some few goo^ things; from a hundred volumes may perhaps be extracted
one or two fit for you.

"You will probably find that those wis^ and polished nations in Europe have
gone the oftenest and farthest wrong in the things that concern them most, as
in their religious, and in much of their civil policy; and in their ideas and
regulations concerning women, and the connection of the sexes.

"In the first, they have too frequently permitted the fearful and
superstitious disposition of man to carry him too far, often into habits in
which he lost the original feelings and sentiments of nature and of society,
without gaining any new ones of sufficient, or of any beneficial influence on
his conduct. Fear, a constant sense of danger, and of the utility of mutual
assistance, having been observed as the most powerful motives to union, those
fears have been artificially kept alive after the dangers or original reasons
for them ceased to exist; so that by fear and ignorance men were easily made
and continued superstitious, and thereby more readily frightened out of their
money, and into subjection to other designing men. But this would have been no
great evil, if the people had been left to their choice in the kinds and
degrees of superstition; but when government came to be so ill advised as to
take a part in their quarrels, and to espouse and protect a particular sect,
and to force and bribe people into it, then all liberty of opinion was lost,
equity and justice were injured, and people thenceforward hated and persecuted
each other for mere difference of opinion, or for being born in a different
country.

"In our case, though we cannot at once relax all the original bonds of union
and good behavior, we may surely set them free from some of the most
oppressive superstitious fears, if not too late; and keep it in view gradually
to set them free from others, as we can apply to other principles in the mind,
of a more pleasant and more useful nature. The temporary regularity of a timid
subordination, is too trifling an advantage, if it is one; and after a certain
period is unnecessary, and perhaps injurious to human nature. This
superstitious disposition, you already see, may be so indulged and increased,
as to create imaginary dangers and invisible powers without end. Let us rather
try to stop or mitigate it, if not gone too far. Let us venture by degrees to
teach them nearly the naked truth, and gradually banish every superstitious
practice, and retain only the worship of the One great, but unknown, Spirit. I
have formerly thought myself obliged to make use of this superstitious
disposition, perhaps oftener than necessary, from want of opportunities, and
perhaps of abilities, to find better motives. Let us make amends by banishing
those selfish fears for better and more benevolent sentiments; for the seeds of
both are in us, and either may be cultivated.

"As to the intentions of the Great Spirit concerning ourselves and this
universe, you will be able to learn nothing from the polished Europeans or
Asiatics, that you can understand. Permit men individually to form what
opinions they please concerning these, and all things. The only care of
government is, to see that they tolerate, and do not torment nor injure each
other about opinions. You must therefore beware of their forming religious and
other permanent communities on partial or selfish principles, inimical to
others or to the whole, and becoming then too powerful to be controlled. The
most natural smaller communities, of which the great one, the nation, consists,
are those of families; and you will be cautious of the too great pre-eminence
even of any of those, and still more, of admitting of other more powerful
associations without proper regulations.

"Of the policy, internal and external, of the different European nations, of
which we have so often talked, you will be able to learn some things. Your wise
men will collect such parts as are applicable to you, from th^se nations that
have preserved some of their natural liberties, and who endeavor to obey only
the laws, and those of their own making: though none of them have been able to
accomplish or execute that plan. You will find that their laws are becoming too
numerous and complicated, and without attaining the object; inconsistent,
inadequate to the purposes intended, and most of them unfit for you. However,
you will see where they have failed, from which you may learn much, as well as
from their lesser laws of policy and regulation in towns and country.

Nations, and all separate bodies of men, are apt to be unjust and cruel to
each other. Try to preserve yourselves from this, as far as practicable, even
in spite of the injustice and provocation of your neighboring nations: mixing
much with them by marriage and commerce, you may then contribute to reform the
world, and incline them all to justice and to peace; but by being always
prepared for war -- I fear it is, at times, unavoidable.

"Perhaps your most powerful enemy is your own climate, -- too good, too
temperate, and furnishing too few difficulties to struggle with. The hardy
inhabitants of the colder regions have generally subdued those of the warmer
and more fruitful. You must therefore diligently keep up and improve your
warlike arts and exercises, though you should never go to war. Much may be done
in this, by making a proper use of your mountains and mountaineers, carefully
keeping them united -- making but one people with the rest in government, by
intermarriages -- employing them in your service -- sending the children of the
plains to be brought up and educated among them.

"We must continue to make our punishments milder and more certain. The sense
of shame is powerful. By timely management, even disgrace may at length be
almost sufficient to restrain your people, nearly as much as they can be
restrained; for we must always expect some vices and weaknesses: -- They are
unavoidable, and perhaps even necessary in the whole of human affairs.

"Parents, assisted by the wisest and best among you, will love and educate the
youth, or rather encourage and help them to educate themselves. Nourish and
exercise the habits and passions you know to be the most necessary. Gradually
induce them to think, to speak little and well; teach writing, numbers,
geometry, mechanics, to all, in the easiest and most direct manner; these you
will find applicable to many and essential uses. Then teach them the nature of
things, verbally and experimentally, in the shortest manner, always with a view
to utility, as well as to satisfy curiosity. In all these you will find the
experience and discoveries of the European nations of infinite use to you, and
from them your wise men who travel will extract and abridge many useful things.
Exercise and form the judgment of youth as early as practicable; in this you
will find numbers and geometry of great utility. Preserve the utmost freedom in
speaking and writing, and you will improve in both, and in every faculty,
science, and institution.

Nor must you neglect the early knowledge and practice of poetry and music.
These are the language of the heart, as words form that of the head or
understanding. You have long experienced the pleasure, the sentiments which
they inspire, and begin to perceive how greatly they may yet be improved and
heightened; indeed they may probably be applied to great moral purposes.

"Though you very wisely preserve your habits of war and discipline, as far as
practicable in peace, beware of going to war, or of conquering more territory;
for you have already sufficient, with cultivation, to maintain ten times your
present numbers. Perhaps you had better give up part of it, and come to live
nearer together, extending again by degrees as you increase. You would then
more effectually assist, enlighten, and improve each other.

"A perfect equality will now be more impracticable than ever. You must differ
in rank, estimation, and influence, according to your different degrees of
merit, abilities, industry, and riches; and then by birth. Only guard against
the two great and dangerous inequalities, which you will find sufficiently
difficult: -- it may be partly accomplished perhaps by limiting and dividing
inheritances; and by marking well the bounds of the powers you give. No one
must have power over another more than you may please by the laws to grant,
taking care that even that be always the least that will answer the purpose.
Some public festivals might perhaps be instituted to good effect, with certain
ceremonies, amusements, and exercises, that might serve, among other purposes,
to put you frequently in mind of your original and natural equality, in
imitation of some former wise nations. The inculcating, by a frequent revival,
this sense of original equality, is perhaps among the best effects of your
religion and religious festivals.

"The third, and I had almost said your most important care, will be to
regulate the connection between the sexes.

"On visiting other countries for information, you will find a great variety of
opinions, of laws and institutions on this matter; and will find the oldest and
wisest nations as if at a loss how to consider the sex, in what rank to place,
or how to employ them. You yourselves have perhaps been among those who are the
farthest wrong in this, and the wisest and most improved nations cannot serve
as example^ to set you right: perhaps the ultimate perfection of which society
is capable, awaits only the proper and relative employment of the two sexes.
You will therefore, as yet, be cautious of great changes or innovations, and
leave that connection as free as the public order can possibly admit;
permitting to all above a certain age, to form what engagements they please
with each other, before the magistrate, securing the execution of such
contracts, and supporting the weaker sex in those ideas of a natural equality
in rights with us, which you have now generously admitted; gradually
diminishing the former exorbitant authority and superiority of husbands, and
supporting the additional influence you have given to parents over their
children till the age of marriage.

"You will probably find from experience, that monogamy and marriages for life,
are more convenient and beneficial to the public and to your present system,
than polygamy and temporary engagements. It may perhaps be gradually introduced
by some encouragement proportioned to the object, better than by compulsory
laws.

"The safety and education of the offspring is what concerns the public most;
and you may for that purpose be forced, in your new situation, to lay some
additional restraints and duties on all the parties, on husbands, wives,
parents, children: only let these, and every other change, be introduced
gradually, and let them be no more than absolutely necessary to your views, and
not merely to indulge the selfish tyranny of man, which will be apt to increase
as he advances in arts and luxuries, without some timely precautions both in
restraints and exertions. Human beings will generally become tyrants when not
controlled. Laws, for example, made by men for the women, but without
consulting them, will generally be tyrannical. Be not afraid nor ashamed t^
give to the sex their natural and equal shar^ of influence in families, in
society, in the state. Let them continue to share in you labors and exercises,
and to be still manly and strong, and to be above all foolis^ shame, and other
weaknesses, when necessary. Teach them all you know. They will teach your
children in their turn, and will be found of great use in education, manners,
taste, arts. You already begin to find them more useful and agreeable as
companions, assistants, and counselors, than formerly as slaves and domestics.

"You have already some women whom you may consult on any subject; and by
confidential and proper treatment, you will soon render many more worthy of
being consulted. But beware of all extremes: avoid that of your neighbors, who
treat the sex like beasts of burden; and that of some European nations, who
promote an overweening delicacy and refinement that indulges in weak and wild
fancies without end, and spoils and debilitates both sexes. There they pretend
to love women for their follies and weaknesses, timidity and bad nerves,
over-modesty and reserve, all which are almost dignified into virtues; whereas
compassion is the most they can claim. Education will soon correct all their
defects in knowledge and understanding, and habit maintain them in strength,
courage, and freedom.

"We are not so much to follow, as to assist, or rather improve upon, nature.
Avarice, envy, and the other hurtful passions, are not to be cultivated because
they are natural. Neither the brutal force and tyranny of man, nor the natural
weakness and timidity of women, are to be indulged and increased because they
are found in human nature. In short, passions hurtful or inconvenient, are to
be repressed and modified by education and habit: such is the intent of
society. In visiting the great cities of Europe, and those of Asia, you will
see examples of those opposite extremes. On your wisdom will depend the chosing
some medium or different path. It will be our own faults if the women do not
keep up with us, and be found of signal use to us in almost every thing, except
perhaps in war; and even there, you are already in the habit of consulting
them: many of them have been known to counsel, and some even to command well.
But whenever you begin to spoil each other, and to refine so far as to abhor
masculine or learned women, like some in Europe, you will then probably soon
begin to shrink from your duty, civil and military, and fall a prey to some
other northern nation.

"In the history of nations, you will see how manners and opinions have changed
to opposite extremes. You may contemplate Spartan mothers exciting their sons
to war and glory; and some modern European mothers dreading to expose theirs --
even to the weather.

"The nation that shall first introduce women to their councils, their senates,
and seminaries of learning, will probably accelerate most the advances of human
nature in wisdom and happiness. You may safely give the sex the lead in every
thing that concerns your pleasures, and they will oeconomise and improve both
yours and their own, in a variety of ways which you know nothing of as yet. You
will soon perceive the importance of their taste and influence in every thing
ornamental; in all the arts which you will now see arise from wealth and
leisure; in every thing that can produce either sensual, or elegant and
refined, pleasures. If you dignify their character by a free and manly
education, and keep them to a near resemblance with yourselves, they in return
will temper and refine your minds and your manners, and without the danger of
rendering you, or your sons, too effeminate; so that you will meet halfway,
and, being more alike, and better acquainted than formerly, objects of
intercourse will multiply, and you will be fitter company for each other.

"The powers that are given us by nature, are certainly intended to be used and
improved: the proper ways and means so as to produce the greatest happiness,
are left to ourselves to discover and apply, for which the other sex is a
necessary party concerned, and our natural counselors and assistants. That
happiness must consist in the proper use and management of the powers of
labor, of thought, and of pleasure; but the application and success require
the joint efforts of both sexes.

"Continue to go every seventh day to your temples in those beautiful groves
among your mountains. There, under the direction of your bards, and of your
wise and good men and women, accompanied by your harps and flutes, rejoice and
sing praises to the Great Spirit. There perform your hymns and dances (over
which your chosen women preside by turns) to the memory of the great and good
of both sexes, whom you have so wisely chosen to commemorate.

"Let that be a day of happiness, and by such means try to banish every
contrary practice and idea. Indulge in every exercise and pleasure that your
directors shall pronounce to be innocent, and in the forms and manner that they
may choose to prescribe; and endeavor gradually to abolish every other
superstitious practice, and especially those of a horrid, dismal, or cruel
tendency. The Great Spirit and Governor of the Universe cannot delight in your
misery, but in your happiness.

"You will learn from other nations, and your own practice, to build more
beautiful temples, and to adorn them; and will learn more pleasing songs, and
improve your music: -- all within the bounds of elegant and sublime simplicity.
By the wisdom of your directors, whom you will implicitly obey, you will be
taught how to be cautious of indulging in the extremes either of ornaments or
of pleasures.

"The search of the best, or of truth, in every thing, is an eternal
approximation, but which can never terminate in this world; and the way to
farther improvement and discovery, must ever be left open. As you increase your
wants, and then come to supply them with more ease, and then to find time for
experiment, reflection, and speculation, you will begin to perceive the
importance of securing open and direct roads to truth and knowledge; and you
must therefore be watchful to prevent any set of people from shutting any of
them up on pretense of the enquiry being finished, and no more to be
discovered; or on any other pretext.

"I shall leave you some general directions, with some laws and regulations for
a future period; some short histories of nations that have erred and gone to
ruin; the methods of discovering useful knowledge by means of experiment and
mathematics, which you will find of great use. But other things must first be
attended to, viz. the smaller and domestic concerns. The lesser divisions of
villages and families must all be carefully attended to, and be properly placed
and employed; and then the larger and natural divisions of the country by
rivers, a certain number of which form the nation. In future times, your laws,
civil and criminal, must increase with your property and improvements; and then
will be the important time that will require all your skill and wisdom, and all
may prove insufficient, as has been hitherto the case with most nations. There
is a period between the rude and civilized state, in which nations generally
sow the seeds of their own destruction. I mean to collect all the directions
and remedies I can for you, against that period. The first and chief precaution
seems to be that of restraining the busy spirit of legislation and regulation
that will then arise, and that seems to seize all nations so soon as they can
write and reason a little. Let your laws increase very slowly. Bear long with
the evils, and beware of the remedies, till well assured of these being the
lesser evils. Depend mostly on education as long as you can.

"By these, and some other lessons to be explained, and others which I shall
leave behind me, this nation may escape many of the misfortunes that have
befallen others. The directions of one who has seen so much more of the road
you have to go than any of you, may certainly be made of service to the whole;
not so much in quickening your progress, as in directing it aright. That
progress must be slow, and requires a certain time; there are steps which you
cannot overleap; but I may help you to shorten the way, and point out the
objects to be kept in view for that purpose, either in your travels,
experiments, or other researches; or in your moral, learned, and poitical
institutions."

I told them a great many more particulars than I choose to trouble you with, or
can now remember. You may perceive it is incomplete as a system, and may think
it perhaps incoherent and impracticable. The chief doubt of its practicability
proceeds, perhaps, from its being too rational: but we must recollect that
neither reason nor women have yet had their full and proper influence in the
world; and till they come nearer to that point, we can only guess at their
power.

LETTER XVIII. Political Opinions and Advice.
I AM obliged to you for putting me in mind. I did intend to give you some more
memorandums of this country, moral and political; but as their importance seems
to diminish as our departure approaches, I fear many of them are forgotten.

This Emperor, though of an indolent disposition, like most of his countrymen,
is nevertheless of an anxious mind, a restless and perpetual negociator; and he
means never to let you rest, more than his own subjects: you must be always
expecting some embassy, message, or demand from him. When every thing else
seems to be settled, he will probably make some alteration on your duties, and
may double them at once, though you already think them too high. That will
occasion fresh negociations, embassies, presents; all of which seem to be as
the necessaries of life to him; and he will generally take care to create
motives and occasions for them.

In dealing with these people, there can hardly be any general rule of conduct.
They are generally both capricious and deceitful. We must follow them as well
as we can, and, like themselves, go on with temporary shifts, and take
occasional measures, as it were from hand to mouth. You have put up with
affronts enough to show that you do not mean to quarrel with him, so that you
must expect many more affronts and demands.

He has been more afraid of you than of any other power, which he will not
readily forgive. He will probably take every occasion to show that you are not
now his only friends, as heretofore; and he seems highly pleased at having
escaped out of that situation. He desired the interpreter to tell me the other
day, apropos to nothing, that the pride of the English is soon to be taken
down. We know the Bourbons have been telling him so, and will be attentive to
keep him up in that hope and idea. Indeed most nations are now vying with each
other for the highest place in his favor, and the chief object of all is, to
supplant us; and they will now easily succeed. We are all his tributaries. Such
is the disgraceful policy of the times with regard to these piratical states,
and which may last till some event shall happen to make us all ashamed of
ourselves. Nations are not ashamed to follow each other in the most disgraceful
politics, though so tardy in borrowing any useful art or practice.

Those late treaties of this Emperor with the other Christian powers were so
unpopular here, that it required a great deal of money, and all the arts of a
most artful and despotic prince, to make them go down with the people.

I believe we might, with more safety than any other nation, assist him to
improve his force and his country, if that were practicable. They would not
probably venture to attack us, and would then be better customers than they can
ever be while they remain poor, indolent, and uncivilized. But there are
likewise times when they should be checked: the remembrance of the last war we
had with them lasted a long time, and indeed is not yet quite worn out of their
memory: it has long helped to keep them in order, and to maintain among them a
certain respect and dread of the English navy.

These Moors, though confined in their knowledge, have often great natural
sagacity and penetration, and know a character at sight, full as well as any of
us. Aware of Barbarian cunning, we must be constantly on our guard, and be
ready to give up, in a moment, the most favorite and long-laboured plans or
objects of negotiation, disconcerted by their penetration, their artifice, or
barbarity.

As to their commerce, you may there know it nearly enough. You will see it can
be of no great importance to us, or to any other nation, except to your
garrison. They have had of late as far as thirty ships annually, mostly
English, loaded at their western ports. That trade might indeed soon be
doubled, and trebled, by a better kind of government, and more of your
assistance.

I have had two more conversations with the Prince, and had the good fortune to
fix his attention longer than I ever saw it fixed before, except to football,
or shooting at a mark. Some of his questions were curious for their sagacity,
and others for their simplicity and ignorance. He believes they are to set
about conquering Christendom after they have settled certain domestic affairs;
and he has no doubt of succeeding, when they can bring all their force to act.
I find that, notwithstanding their close friendship with Carlos, they mean soon
to attack some of his fortresses.

LETTER XIX. Of the Emperor, his Character, Government, Policy, and their
Effects. -- Of the Moors, and of national Characters. -- Of Justice,
Government, and State of Society.
THIS Emperor understands the Moors perfectly; but his genius or character is
not well calculated to make the most of theirs. His mode of government, his
perpetual rapacity, is more disgusting to them, and perhaps more hurtful to
population, and to the necessary improvements, than all the cruelty of his
predecessors. But that is exactly what he means: to impoverish and depopulate
the country is his object. Despotism cannot bear the prosperity of its
subjects, and seems to wish they all had but one neck, to be cut off at one
blow.

A cruel and unfeeling disposition, in both master and slave, is perhaps the
natural produce of this species of government. A much less degree of
uncertainty in the possession of property, or of the fruits of their labor,
would be sufficient to damp or repel all the activity and industry of men. The
subordinate members must follow the head; and all must be rapacious and
perfidious. Such, to many people, seems to be the character of the Moors, given
them by nature; but it is only the produce of their government. I believe they
did not merit this character during their best times in Spain.

This Emperor being more humane than most of his predecessors, and of a
different character, perhaps deserves to be considered with more attention. But
he means not, as many imagine, to encourage arts and industry, nor military
merit, nor any other merit. It is only his avarice that makes him agree to
these unconstitutional truces with the Christian powers, which, by opening the
ports for the sake of duties, has given an appearance of some commerce, but
which the same avarice will again soon check or destroy by oppression. He is
even afraid of any degree of merit or popularity in any of his subjects; and
when he professes to esteem and encourage it, he means only to deceive. He is
cunning and artful, probably both from natural character and from long habit;
perhaps originally from necessity. The degree of that necessity we cannot
easily judge of.

His plan of government, if a set of wretched shifts and rapacious oppression
deserve the name of plan, is generally simple, and has but one object in view;
but that he endeavors to conceal, and to render his proceedings complex and
crooked, without any apparent necessity, avoiding all appearance of rule or
method, perplexed and mystical without a cause, as if to keep up the habit, or
merely for the malicious pleasure of deceiving.

Though destruction is always the object, or the means employed by this kind of
government, this man's method of accomplishing it is different from those
formerly in use. The plan or object which he has always in view, is no other
than to draw the greatest part of the money of his dominions into his own
possession, which at once satisfies his passion, and impoverishes and weakens
the people, that he may govern them the easier. And he succeeds in it to an
amazing degree, considering the Moorish arts and avarice he has to deal with.

But after all these precautions, and the consequences of extreme internal
weakness and poverty, we find that such countries are not therefore much less
subject to violent and destructive revolutions. It is the vigilance of the
monarch, more than the debility of the people, which saves them from those
tumultuous rebellions, and pretenders to the throne, to which they have been
formerly so much accustomed. Their history is full of perpetual tumults,
massacres, and civil wars. There has hardly been a peaceable succession before
this, nor so long a peace as during this reign, which is certainly much to the
credit of his present Majesty, and ought to place his name very high in their
annals -- if they had any body to write them.

Desolation and misery, however, seem everywhere to increase, in spite of all
their peace and commerce. Whole suburbs and villages are gradually falling to
ruins. Large tracts of country, formerly occupied and cultivated by M.
Ishmael's black colonies, lie now in barren waste. And it appears, that the
country flourished more under that piratical and merciless tyrant, than it does
under the humane and commercial, but avaricious, Cidi Mahomet.

The people are probably right in wishing for war, as it makes them of some
consequence to their master; and such people may certainly gain more by piracy
than they do now by commerce or industry. Nay, they are probably incapable of
either, beyond a certain degree of what is barely necessary to existence. If a
country could possibly improve under such a government, we should have seen
here some signs of it before this, during this peaceable reign, now above a
dozen years. This monarch has never, since his accession, had any thing to
fear; yet he is said, by those who know him best, to pass his time in constant
fear and anxiety. The nature or turn of his policy and mode of government
proceeds from his character; and that you have seen formed in his youth, as
usual, by various circumstances. Long driven about the kingdom with his father,
by competitors and rebellion; exposed to continual dangers, treachery, and
alarms, he seems to have acquired an habitual horror of all these, and fancies
that his safety must consist in the misery and weakness of his people. He
endeavors to reconcile them to these unpopular measures of peace, by showing
them the guns, mortars, and batteries, which he gains from those Christians,
(poor fools!) and by which they themselves are all to be conquered some day or
other.

But every ship of war that appears on his coast he sees fraught with double
danger. In the destruction of any of these batteries, he fears the mask would
be removed, the people undeceived; and hence rebellion, dethroning, etc. and
more especially if the ships be English, whom he hates as he dreads. He is
observed to be very uneasy, and does not probably sleep well, during all the
time any of our ships are on his coast.

The Moors, it is true, are quick, fiery, and impatient, treacherous and cruel,
and require now to be governed with a rod of iron, which must be kept
constantly in their sight. When once they begin to rise, and can find a leader,
as in most despotic countries, they presently go to all the extremes of
desperate cruelty and desolation. Some very trifling matter is sufficient, at
times, to set them all up in armed confusion. This was indeed nearly the case
lately, from a short illness of his majesty: they already began to fancy he was
dead, and his death concealed; and he, on hearing that gunpowder had suddenly
risen to double its usual price, thought it necessary to show himself, though
still very ill.

A great part of the peculiar character of each people may proceed from climate
and particular physical causes, though it is difficult to estimate how much;
and we shall all continue to have different systems and opinions concerning
those things. We know, however, that laws, institutions, manners, and customs,
will in time prevail over those dispositions which we suppose given by nature;
and that the character of a nation, at distant periods, may be very different.

We likewise find a great resemblance among very distant nations, while in the
rude or early stages of society. But arts, civilization, and modes of
government, lead them often as it were in opposite directions, and presently
create striking differences between them. The Greeks, Phoenicians,
Carthaginians, and Arabs, have all been great nations, though of very different
characters, and yet were all probably formed from nearly the same kind of
original materials, from people very like these Moors. However, these African
nations seem generally to have preserved a certain sameness of character in
many points, through all periods of their history. They seem always to have
consisted of the same kind of quick and volatile, but weak and combustible,
materials. As troops, we shall find them still the same kind of fiery,
irregular, desultory light horse, as the Numidians and Mauritanians probably
were in the time of the Romans, if we make allowance for the coloring and
dignity of the Roman historians. They might, even now, soon be made capable of
powerful sudden attacks, but not of any great and continued efforts. They could
never probably be made to support any system of conduct long with sufficient
patience and firmness. Opposed to a steady disciplined army, their barbarian
impatience would soon appear, and give to a vigilant enemy decisive advantages.
Naturally sagacious, quick, and intelligent, they might soon be taught, to a
certain degree, how to make use of their natural advantages; but all would as
soon be neglected and forgotten again, if not kept up by constant discipline,
of which the Mahometans in general are probably incapable; -- thoughtless and
improvident, yet rapacious and avaricious: the inconsistencies of human nature
are every where numerous; in this state of society they are more remarkable,
and different from those of civilization. Though frightened into reason today,
tomorrow they forget their danger, and carelessly return to their former
habits, though assured they will fail of success. Here are no permanent ranks
of people or of families, nor difference of manners; all are equally good
company. Despotism brings all to a level, and that level is near the meanest of
the species. A government, where all the vices of human nature are the natural
produce, must create a resemblance of character throughout the individuals, and
between all such countries, however distant.

My guide, and protector on this journey, one of the emperor's friends, is now
employed in pressing horses for us, and in letting them free again, for
payment. His toil and industry have been amazing in this way, letting no
opportunity escape him of making a blankil=2 d. The Moorish avarice is far
beyond ours, and we should think they might therefore be made industrious,
though now of so opposite a character. After he has made what he can in this
way, then I must pay the hire at a very dear rate, which is also mostly his
profit; and there is no remedy but patience. Justice is so far from being ready
and easy here, that people choose to submit to the most violent outrages rather
than apply for it; and now it is only to be had at the capital, from his
majesty, and very uncertain even there. It should not surprise us to find the
people so bad; it is rather astonishing they are not worse. There is less
robbing on the roads during this reign than formerly, as this monarch will
admit of no robbers besides himself, unless he is well paid for the license,
which is yet done sometimes in particular cases, though not so much as usual.
On this principle the bashaw may pillage what he pleases, provided he carries
it all to his master, for sharing it with him is not sufficient. Indeed that
respectable magistrate generally takes care to purloin a little for himself,
though he knows it will be taken from him with severe punishment. In short, it
is here where the strong may oppress the weak -- the Moor may beat and rob the
poor Jew, who dares not complain for many reasons. All spoils become lawful
when a sufficient share goes to his majesty.

Were it possible for even a tenth part of the justice necessary in a great
kingdom to proceed from the throne, a rapacious rabble of the friends and
attendants of royalty surround and intercept it. In such a state there must
always be more than sufficient examples of impunity and injustice, to encourage
many attempts to do evil.

In the rude state, while property is yet insecure or undivided, certain crimes
and vices, as theft or robbery, are not considered in the same degree of
turpitude as among a settled and civilized people. Declining nations are
probably worse, weaker, and more vicious, than those that are rising, though
near the same state of ignorance. In the rising state, they may help one
another up; in the other, they pull each other down: so where there is the most
necessity for private virtues, for mutual assistance, there is the least to be
found. Friendship and fidelity are sometimes the produce of oppression, which
presses men as it were closer together for mutual assistance or defense; but
when that is once given up and despaired of, society is in a manner dissolved;
every virtue, humanity itself, is destroyed; distrust or malevolence breaks all
the usual bonds of union: accordingly we find here hardly any moral sense of
right and wrong. We find they all consider each other as perfectly perfidious.
-- All wish to oppress and rob in their turn. They consider their being
detected only as a misfortune.

You may well be surprised how society, in such a state, can exist for any
time, if it can be said to exist as a society; it may be considered rather as a
state of warfare. All tends here to produce a dismal kind of uncertainty which
hangs over life, and stifles in embryo almost every voluntary exertion, and
which brings all to a certain degree of meanness, of debility, dejection, or
vice -- to a state with which we are unacquainted, and which is therefore worth
our considering; but that degree is, I think, seldom so great as might be
expected: no principles or moral causes ever go so far in practice, nor have
all the influence which they seem, in speculation, calculated to produce. Some
distant hope of change, or of escaping unnoticed in the crowd, even the
thoughtless and inconsiderate nature of men, all help to carry them on, and
induce them to hoard up even what they know will be taken from them -- to take
wives and establish families; and to try, as they are hurried on through life,
like the flocks on their journey, to snatch a mouthful of ease or enjoyment as
they pass. Happily, many things tend to keep men nearer to an equality in
happiness than appearances indicate.

In some of the mountainous parts of this country, where this government does
not reach, the people seem better, more industrious, steady, and provident, in
their poor little way of life. They have fixed habitations, little cottages and
gardens, and in tolerable order; so that there must be some honesty, good
faith, and mutual assistance among them; and hence it is plain, that such a
government as this is worse than none.

A violent and tyrannic government is generally a weak one. It never has in
fact half the power it pretends to exercise. -- Moving by fits and starts, in
no settled walk or system; by turns all violence, or all lethargy; the parts of
the confused machine are not fitted nor ready to obey, so that all its efforts
show either a waste or a want of power, and its greatest exertions tend only to
destruction. The despot can destroy, but can seldom be obeyed, as he desires.
On seeing this emperor's orders often disputed at his very gates, it gives an
Englishman pleasure to recollect that our laws are better obeyed and executed
in our remotest dominions, than those of the tyrant in his own capital.

LETTER XX. Of some Customs, Arts, Audiences. -- Muley Idris. -- Religion. --
Colonies. -- Blacks. -- Sea Ports. -- Money and Measures. -- Conclusion.
YOU know I dread being tedious, and do not wish to deal much in particulars,
though I may sometimes be insensibly led into both. I am frequently in doubt if
the life and manners of such a people as this deserve much of our time and
attention, though full of great lessons for governments and princes. Many
things might, doubtless, be found to satisfy the historical curiosity of the
antiquarian, but I am looking only for things of utility, or what I may fancy
to be such. We might discover here arts, customs, superstitions, which might be
traced to Asia, and to the remotest antiquity: so we may, in various parts of
Europe. Such may be the custo^ of presents, their funerals, and respect for the
dead, their tools, ornaments, dress, recreations, ceremonies, domestic
employments Though the arts and manners of period^ which we have passed and
left behin^ may be more the objects of curiosity tha^ of utility; yet in the
lowest condition o^ human nature, we may stumble upon something unexpectedly
useful, and every stat^ may furnish matter for instructive reflection. We were
wishing the other day tha^ our English cooks were to learn here some of their
oeconomical and savoury methods of dressing some viands and vegetables, in the
steam of the pot; and that our country carpenters and other tradesmen might
learn some of their simple ways of working, and of executing great works with
so few tools and so little assistance. The most polished nations may find
something to learn from the most savage. In the mountains, and in the country,
men make their own shoes, furniture, and utensils, which in the towns is the
work of separate professions. Many seem to pass their time chiefly between
sitting, smoking, and sleeping, all of which they prolong much beyond what is
usual in Europe. How so many can be maintained in idleness, and by what labor,
of which so little is to be seen in the country, can only be accounted for from
their wants being few.

Sometimes they take fits of riding, which they perform in the other extreme of
rude exertion, using the poor horse with a roughness and violence fitter for a
wild beast that they wished to tame, with a bridle and spurs of a tremendous
and cruel construction, which presently make his mouth and sides run with
blood. These riding-sits which they sometimes take, seemingly a-propos to
nothing, they consider as a kind of war-exercise: the moment any of these
fellows gets upon a horse, he thinks of sighting, and begins to go through the
motions of it, brandishing and attacking in their way, so that you would think
him half mad. Individually they may be considered as tolerably good
light horse, or rather as materials pour en fair, if they could be brought to
any regularity and uniformity in their movements, in some of which they are
singly very dexterous: their methods of attack, with their crooked swords, the
variety and frequency of their charges, might be made to have great effect,
especially on troops unaccustomed to them. I believe General Seidlitz borrowed
many of his excellent ideas of cavalry from Turks and Tartars, such troops as
these. They have no idea of any regular drill or exercise. They sometimes fire
and throw darts at a mark -- generally at an earthen pot or a blown bladder,
very near, under fifty yards. But their boar-hunt is a fine manly diversion.
Their football, or pallone, as in Italy, is good exercise. Some jugglers and
storytellers, who exhibit sometimes to the crowd on a market day, form the sum
of their public diversions.

The best part of this government is the continuance of the old and warlike
practice of the prince or chief appearing frequently among his people on
horseback: it is now become a regular audience or levee two or three times a
week; a thing so unexpected in such a country. This custom serves to check so
many abuses, and to keep so many people in awe, that I suppose this kind of
government could not go on without it. Under a really great and wise prince it
might be made the means of doing much good; arts, industry, public virtue,
might thereby perhaps be considerably promoted, all in their own simple and
direct manner. If it were possible for uncontrolled power to be steady,
uniform, or consistent, in its proceedings; if these general orders of the
emperor, issued verbally at levees, proceeded from a wise and connected plan,
and were firmly carried into execution; they might in time have almost the
force of laws, and might extend much farther throughout the country, possessing
the great advantages of military orders, in promptitude and obedience; but,
alas! no human individual, and still less a succession of them, can probably
ever be found equal to such a situation as his. To do any good seems to require
all the wisdom of the most enlightened nation. -- How little can be done by an
ignorant despot is easy to imagine.

We do not hear of any one who is fit to succeed Muley Idris (the present
emperor's uncle, who is dying), or who can equal him in address, artifice,
extortion, or in the management of the public business here; so that the
emperor must now have upon his own shoulders the whole business of the nation,
which will not therefore be better nor more expeditiously done: he cannot
delegate power sufficient for any business; he has confidence in no man; his
trusting this uncle so much, seemed partly from early habits. His physician,
your poor Portuguese doctor, Don Juan, we hear will be in danger if this prince
dies; it seems it is not uncommon here to put a doctor to death for letting his
patient die -- if a prince or a great man.

Their money weights and measures you there know with their commerce. The ideas
of the wisest here on those subjects you may be sure are barbarously ignorant;
their history a perpetual variation; sometimes attempting to borrow European
ideas, but without even knowledge sufficient to understand or adopt them:
indeed to establish any thing lasting in these matters requires all the wisdom
and stability of the best government. But few or none of their customs can be
of much importance to us, where none have a tendency or lead to virtue, which
indeed would not only be useless but obnoxious here, and for which we cannot
find there is any term in their language.

The respect they pay to the memory of their saints might be well, were it for
any thing but folly, or rather an artful imbecility, by which those people
enjoy a kind of liberty of doing what they please, and seem to have great
influence: their folly, which is generally I believe affected, is considered as
a kind of inspiration; it runs in families -- but you know the particulars.
Were I writing to one at a distance, and less acquainted with this country, I
might be more circumstantial, but you are neither distant nor ignorant enough
to merit a particular account of any thing here.

You see something like religion; and priests seem fortunately always to obtain
some influence over men through all the stages of society, and more especially
in its earlier periods, for which indeed it seems more peculiarly adapted, as a
necessary supplement to the defects of law and order; and it must continue to
be always a good appendix to the code whenever it can be kept within bounds, or
reformed and curtailed of superfluous power when necessary. As the code of laws
and modes of education become more perfect, the necessity for a superstitious
and all-governing religion probably diminishes; and the authority of its
professors should be carefully regulated and restrained within bounds while it
is practicable, and before they gain a head of power not afterward to be
controlled. You know some other nations have not been so fortunate as ours in
this respect. Here their religion seems to have yet too much influence on their
manners, opinions, and conduct; it makes them hate all the rest of mankind, and
occupies too much of their time.

Religious sanctuaries here sometimes stop the hand of bloody and rapacious
tyranny, and tend to lessen the effects of private revenge, as it is usual for
people to take refuge there against their enemies, who are generally obliged to
respect them, and sometimes against the sovereign himself, though he does not
always respect them. The effects of them might be of some benefit, if they
could be made to protect the innocent and not the guilty, as is pretended; but
we know cases to the contrary, and it is notorious that the guilty have been
there protected as in Spain, and that the innocent have been given up to the
superior power of the despot, whenever his interest or his passions required it.

If one of these saints, by some fortunate chain of circumstances, were to turn
out to be a man of genius and information, he might do what he pleased with
such a people; he might improve, reform, and new-model, the whole nation and
its government. The improbability of such a one ever being produced here
banishes the idea of speculating upon it. But as we become interested in our
own speculations, we cannot help looking forward with a degree of pleasure, and
hope to some future period of conquest or colonization of this country again
from Europe; and yet upon reflection we may fear it is still far distant. We
have not yet, I fear, got near enough to the termination of the long period of
superstition and fanaticism, and we must probably wait for that of reason
before such events can be produced. Though the Mahomedan conquests and
establishment are not perhaps so firm and intimate here as generally imagined,
and might be rather easily overturned by certain operations from the north,
assisted by colonies from the south; but mankind, during this yet fanatical
Whatever we may think of ourselves and the north of Europe, Mahomedism and the
south of Europe certainly still deserve the epithet of fanatical.
age, are nowhere sufficiently qualified and prepared to mix well and
intermarry with the natives, nor the natives with them, not even in the
countries where they emigrate most to each other, though such mixture is
perhaps the only way to secure any conquest or establishment, and to improve
the human race. The difficulties generally proceed from their differing in
religious opinions. Were it not for the barbarous inveteracy of Mahomedism, we
might hope in time to see it wear down by the arts of peace, and give way to
the weight of its own absurdities. Its future history cannot yet well be
foreseen; it seems doubtful if it can ever again become sufficiently rational
and tolerant to admit of the necessary improvements in arts and government; or
if it must go in ignorance and barbarity, and at last decline by its own
corruption and inconsistencies, till supplanted by some new system of
fanaticism. There is no giving Mahomedans any ideas of liberty or good
government as yet, for they have no notion of sovereignty without despotic
power.

To secure and to civilize this country, I believe it must be done by military
colonies similar to those of the Romans: I wish you could search and find out
all the internal police, manners, and management, of those. Let us suppose such
colonization to happen in our time, or that we are going to set about it: such
suppositions will quicken your diligence. The man who does not frequently build
castles, plant colonies, and gain battles, in idea, will not probably ever do
any thing of the kind in reality. If I were to have any hand in their
formation, I should probably insist upon some which may appear to you
singularities -- I should imitate Penn, and have no state religion, but secure
a complete toleration and protection to all sects -- I should have more women,
and give them more to say and to do in such colonies than may correspond with
your ideas of military or even of civil life -- I should be for the sexes
living and acting almost perpetually together, both in public and private, as
the first requisite toward civilization, especially in this country; they
should neither eat, drink, dress, nor do almost any thing without the presence
and assistance of each other. I think, even with us, the sexes retiring so much
from one another seldom proceeds from any good motive, and has no good effects;
here, their separation is the great impediment to all the advances of the
species, and one of the many pernicious consequences of the subordination of
one sex to the other.

The importance of this great continent or peninsula of Africa is obvious, and
its being as yet so little known or improved is equally surprising; however,
many parts of it are known to be capable of every kind of produce, and may yet
again supply Europe, etc. with many things better than now by distant colonies.

The native and natural race of man throughout this great continent is probably
the black, of two kinds, the woolly-headed on one side of the peninsula, and
the longhaired on the other, except those of Atlas and the northern coast,
where they were probably always white in some degree; but these have been so
frequently mixed and colonized from Europe and Asia, that it is now become
impossible to distinguish the indigenous and the different exotics; however, in
and about Atlas are the countries I should like most to explore, if it were
possible; and I suspect it is not so impracticable, nor the inhabitants so wild
and barbarous, as generally reported and imagined. We might there discover many
objects of curiosity and of utility -- in those of nature and of antiquity --
in Roman and Carthaginian remains -- in the different languages and races of
people -- perhaps the Punic language. When this country was better peopled and
more productive, the communication between the northern and southern coasts,
and with some of the internal parts, was probably much greater than we yet know
or can trace. Carthage possibly drew much of her wealth and greatness from that
source. In Tunis, and the country around it, they say a spirit of commerce and
industry is still perceptible.

We do not here perceive any reality in the supposed inferiority of the black
race to the white, but often the contrary; some of the best officers, farmers,
workmen, of this empire, and I believe of several others, have been of that
race. All the different colors seem to be nearly of the same African
character, comprehending a variety of tempers and turns of mind as among
ourselves; there may be some shades of difference, physical, and hence moral,
sometimes perceptible in the humor and temper of mind between the blacks and
whites; the black may have rather more of that kind of volatile sensibility, or
irritability, which seems to attend the human character as it approaches the
sun -- warmer, yet weaker: their sentiments, though more ardent, seem to be
more transient than ours; and their faculties, as well as formation, may be
somewhat different, but not, I think, beyond the power of habit and education
to model and assimilate. They may have the advantage in some faculties, and the
whites in others, and I doubt not but great characters and a great nation might
be formed of these, as well as of other human beings; but the world wants yet
more knowledge and experience on this subject, and we should require much more
residence and more attention to determine any thing in it: this is certainly
one of the best countries for that purpose; here all the various races and
colors of men are nearly on the same footing of estimation, unless they happen
to be Jews or Christians, and they may be considered and compared in all the
different stations that this state of society affords, from the bashaw or
general down to the menial slave: in our islands and colonies we see the blacks
only in the state of slavery, which produces always a distinct and similar
character.

The seaports are the most essential parts of a country: they might have three
or four tolerably good here, by a little assistance given to nature, at Santa
Cruz, Mogodore, Woladia; and perhaps Tangier might still be made a pretty good
one, by clearing it, and rebuilding the mole, which might be carried much
farther out. If the Christian powers had continued to increase and improve
their garrisons and ports on this coast; they might by this time have served as
places of trade and friendly intercourse in times of peace, or of asylum, or as
military schools, in case of war: the people around would have liked them for
the same reasons that the people of all the southern coasts of Spain and
Portugal like to have the English at Gibraltar.

But this government can never probably be sufficiently settled to undertake or
finish any public works that require much time; hardly any of these emperors
have of late been able to finish even a house to live in. This one mounted the
throne with the rare advantage of having no competitor, being an only son; an
advantage which his successor, whoever he may be, will not likely enjoy: his
more savage sons may probably vie with each other for the succession, as usual,
and again drench the country in blood, and in all the horrors of a civil war.

Such are some of the observations and ideas that have occurred of the
condition of mankind, on examining and comparing the people of these and other
regions -- of their arts, ignorance, opinions, manners, characters, prejudices.
If some of them lead to conclusions different from received opinions, it is not
my fault; I do not purposely set up for being singular. If you find any thing
to correct or oppose, pray do it -- through the variety of contested opinions
lies the road to truth. Among other considerations that these may suggest to
you, I think there may be perceived, in traveling south from Dover to Morocco,
a curious line of the gradual progression of despotism -- a species of
government, of which it is to be feared some princes are apt to form too high
an opinion; it may be well to show them its constant and ever pernicious
effects. Such might be, among the great and beneficial objects of travel,
worthy of your young princes when of a certain age, and I must confess an
ardent ambition to be of the party, because I think I might be useful. As you
intend, in case of that event, to get out of the circle of European manners and
ideas, in order to take a more enlarged view of nature, of men, and things; in
the Mediterranean part of your tour, you might here, and at other places, give
them a cursory view of this species of government, which is full of instructive
lessons to all, but more especially to princes. A nearer inspection might serve
to increase their abhorrence of it. The temperate and virtuous Spartans could
read of drunkenness, as we do of despotism, but they chose to show it to their
children.

LETTERS FROM FRANCE, TO FRIENDS IN ENGLAND.
LETTER I. Of first Impressions and Objects of Travel. -- Men and Things. --
Governments. -- Truths of Importance. -- Reading insufficient. -- Of the French.
To Mr. C --. St. Omer, 1777.
WE are always ready enough to believe our own discoveries of importance, and
are easily persuaded that the result of our labors and experience may be of
service, at least to our friends. You are probably right in conceiving that I
require some encouragement. Your flattering request and remarks tend to raise
these of mine into some new consequence in my own eyes, and may induce me to
take more pains in future, and endeavor to retain for you some more of those
first impressions as a traveller, which, I agree with you, are not always the
worst, nor the least worth preserving.

Of the different countries I visit, I have neither time nor intention to
trouble you with much of the present fashionable style of minutiae in natural
history or antiquities, nor to give you an itinerary catalogue of all the
sights to be seen. Without some object or principle in view, the daily
accumulation of little facts and particulars tends only to increase the
perplexity and confusion, or to enlarge the hoards preparing for future and
uncertain theories, which may yet long continue to succeed each other, and to
perplex mankind before they arrive at the truths of importance. I like best the
theory or system which is formed on the spot, with the knowledge of the facts;
those framed in our closets are generally wrong. Of the two classes of objects
in this world, men and things, I think the latter occupies too much the
attention of travelers, to the neglect of the former, which is certainly the
most important.

We have only to look round us in a few different countries to see that on
government and legislation depends the greatest part of the happiness of
mankind; and yet these important objects seem now the least attended to by our
modern travelers; nay, they are in some danger of being entirely excluded,
under the now disgraceful name of politics, from our catalogue of subjects of
enquiry. The sages of antiquity -- an Herodotus, a Pythagoras, a Lycurgus --
thought otherwise; to observe the laws, constitutions, and manners, of other
countries, in order to improve their own, were then thought to be motives of
travel worthy of the wisest and greatest men.

In short, I am habitually inclined to consider man as always the first object
of attention, and other things in some proportion to their connection with him;
not that I intend to attempt any thing like a complete account of any nation or
people: A few short sketches and reflections on the men or things, as they may
chance to strike me where I travel or reside, I mean to continue; and with as
much caution as practicable against natural or habitual prejudices, I mean to
attempt at once to give you such truths as may seem to me of importance enough
for your notice and mine -- life being too short to form voluminous collections
of little facts, and wait for the conclusions of philosophers thereon. If I can
sometimes succeed in pointing out the right road or proper object to be pursued
in traveling, I shall not think my labor lost.

We need not fear that the subjects for observation are yet nearly exhausted:
you future travelers may comfort yourselves that much real information is yet
to be gathered even in the most beaten paths of your predecessors, and you may
know that nations have hardly begun to learn wisdom of each other, and that
none of them are yet sufficiently acquainted, mixed, and connected, to be much
benefited by their respective improvements; but as they mix and become more
intimately united, the better it will be for the whole; so that we are every
way encouraged and invited by nature to travel and mingle with each other, and
this is much better than reading about one another in books, from which I wish
you to beware of expecting too much; they may direct you to useful and real
knowledge, but can seldom supply its place; on them may be built a large and
necessary part of the structure of education, but not the whole, as some of our
learned I fear are too apt to imagine: to know, we must see at least: in many
things reading will give but imperfect ideas, and particularly in objects of
sight.

Of the French nation I shall give you only a few remarks en passant. Stationed
in the center of the civilized world, their character, history, and their
influence, are too generally known and felt to require much more illustration
-- they are as yet better known to you than you to them. Small as the distance
is that separates the two nations, in the first boat you may observe upon their
coast, may be seen the great difference between the two races of people, and
that difference appears, especially at first, to be much in favor of our
countrymen. The English sailors who navigate our vessels are strong, silent,
laborious, methodical; those on board the French vessels and boats are a poor,
weak, and ragged race, wrangling and bustling, rather than working, with great
noise but little skill, the effects not corresponding to their apparent
exertions. On examining the workmanship and materials of every thing about them
-- of their vessels, utensils, clothing -- we may already draw conclusions of
the inferior state of the useful arts and industry of France. Nor do we find
reason to change our opinion on going ashore -- whether we inspect the town or
country, the shops, houses, offices, the fields, fences, carriages, cattle, or
their different tradesmen at work, the English superiority is every where
manifest in all kinds of workmanship, and more particularly where strength is
required either in the work or workmen.

Generally bad mechanics, they can seldom make any thing strong without making
it clumsy, nor contrive any machine to answer different purposes without making
it too complicated. And it seems as if all the bad materials of Europe came to
the French market, as iron, timber, leather, tools, and various matters for
different trades and manufactures. Indeed the London market, I believe,
engrosses the best of the produce in many things throughout the commercial
world. You may see in our friend B.'s books the difference he makes in the
price of insurance between a French and an English ship.

I see neither truth nor wisdom in preaching the doctrine that one sometimes
hears maintained of late, by some young men, that their seamen are every way
equal to ours.

In some cases we may still think our prejudice not ill founded, of one
Englishman being equal to two Frenchmen. I already know several trades, in
which the work commonly done is at least in that proportion. I think they are
evidently a more feeble race, and do not probably exert the strength they have,
equal to our workmen. But they have far more vivacity, cheerfulness, and good
humor -- a restless activity, and may seldomer be inclined to idleness than
English workmen, though their labor is less productive. They seem not so much
engrossed by their work as in haste to have done. They generally employ more
hands than we do to the same kind of work. You know the example of three men to
fix a horse-shoe, which with us is done by one.

With these prepossessions, so readily suggested by first appearances, and
perhaps a little out of humor with some unexpected troubles and difficulties
in getting what we want, which is not uncommon here, we may require some time
to become sufficiently cool and impartial to perceive what is really good or
worthy of imitation. You may not, for example, at first attend to their
excellent police -- to their spacious and superior manner of building, though
badly finished -- to their polite and agreeable manner -- to their easy and
simple ways of contriving in some of the conveniences and common modes of life
-- and to the habits of economy which our children may learn. The small
expense and trouble attending their dress, societies, balls, theaters, we find
very comfortable and pleasant.

I think we can already perceive that, notwithstanding their poverty and
weakness, they may be a happier people than we. They fortunately think they
have every thing comme il faut, while we, sullenly wise and profound, are
discontented with much of our own, and with still more of theirs. We pretend to
find among them many things detestable, much below, and very little above,
mediocrity, except their own conceit of themselves, which, perhaps happily for
them, passes all ordinary bounds.

The distinguishable races of people, as if yet unmixed, to be met with in
neighboring countries, forms a curious subject of speculation. Each name,
clan, district, or family, especially if distant from any capital or commercial
intercourse, preserves a physical and moral character, distinct and visible. To
investigate the causes of these characteristic distinctions might be curious,
and perhaps useful. If we could with certainty decide on what it may depend,
different races of human beings might be bred for different purposes. Some
whole races seem born for the sword, and others for the pen, commerce,
politics. If we could take as much pains with the human race as we frequently
do with that of our horses, we might probably succeed as well. -- We might have
military colonies of mountaineers, and a particular breed of men for each
profession of importance.

As to bodily strength, I think the English make or figure is generally more
favorable to it than that of the French. The greater length of back or of the
body in the latter, I consider as a cause of weakness. I know not if our friend
J. Hunter, or any anatomist, has made comparative dissections of different
nations, or if the French have a vertebra more in the back than their
neighbors. This may appear jocular, but we know the reality and the effects of
this deficiency of strength, in their troops, on various occasions, as during a
long march or campaign. Perhaps that difference of bodily figure and
proportions may be ascribed to their method of swathing their children,
together with poorness of food. Not only the quantity, but likewise the
nutritive quality, of both animal and vegetable food are I believe generally
inferior, in a state of poor cultivation; and it does not then produce that
strength and vigor of body or mind necessary to exertion. Poverty, or want of
capital, likewise prevents their attempting improvements in agriculture. So
that weakness and inability, like many other evils, tend in various ways to
perpetuate themselves.

LETTER II. Of Prepossessions. -- French Regulations. -- Their Industry,
Character, Separations. -- Size and Forms of Government. -- Uniformity. --
Tyranny.
St. Omers.
NOtwithstanding what our very facetious travelers may write, I do not find
that many of us get so very soon into good humor with every thing we find,
good or bad, or so very readily leave all our old habits and prejudices at
home. We have been to Paris, Bourdeaux, etc. by one road, and returned hither
by another. As the countries we have passed through are pretty well known, I
shall only trouble you with a few general observations.

As we advance into France, we find ourselves interrupted and teazed with
multitudes of new orders and regulations; each town, each class, each province,
and in short every species of public business, we can presently perceive to be
overloaded with regulations, and with people to see them executed. There is not
only over-regulation, but perpetual differences in the manner. Every day's
journey produces some new variation. What is right here, is wrong a few leagues
hence; and we may be searched and subjected to fresh disputes and difficulties
almost every day we travel. But these, and such peculiarities, you probably
know from other travelers, and can dispense with my being more particular.

There seems to be in human nature a strong propensity to legislate, and to
multiply laws even in those situations where none of real consequence or
utility can be made or executed. Does the French government mean by this false
display of ineffectual law and regularity to deceive or to torment us and their
own subjects? Is it to magnify their public wisdom and policy? It strikes us
that many of these very regulations tend to impede the business they are
professedly established to promote.

With such shackles on internal communication, how can they ever become a
commercial people? and commerce appears now to be the universal object of
national ambition. And how they got to their present degree of industry (which
is above mediocrity), is not easily explained. Their singular character will
hardly account for it all. To be sure, that happy but unfeeling flow of spirits
which makes them easy under every species of adversity, even under slavery
itself, and which we are often at a loss whether to admire or despise, carries
them farther on, and produces more exertion under the worst kind of government
than any other people we know. They can exert themselves after repeated
disappointments to a very considerable degree, without any fresh encouragement
or security. They seem easily and willingly deceived by a show of law, of
forms, and tribunals, into a hope of security; and this actually produces many
of the effects of reality, whenever their government is wise enough to conceal
for any time the claw of its power -- not that I think now quite so highly of
their industry as I did at a distance. In that, as in several other things,
they have contrived to get a greater reputation than they deserve. By
increasing the difficulties to export their produce, and to communicate mutual
assistance between the provinces, their government has set bounds to their
natural activity. For those things which cannot be carried to market will
either cease to be made, or only that quantity will be produced which is
sufficient for a small consumption at home, and near it.

This tormenting separation of provinces, and difference of laws within the
same kingdom, seems to be established or continued on purpose to divide and
govern, and perhaps to impoverish, in the true spirit of despotism, which is
too apt to adopt such timid and insidious policy.

The French provinces were, you know, anciently so many independent states, now
consolidated into one great monarchy; but that junction still remaining so
incomplete leaves room for the above suspicions.

Most princes have now sufficient power, if they were willing and active
enough, to introduce an uniformity of good laws throughout their dominions; and
its not being done, indicates too plainly some sinister design or careless
indifference. -- Uncontrolled power is naturally subject to both.

The few attempts that have been made in France toward that uniformity I
believe you will find, by their history, have wanted both sincerity and
perseverance. Nor have they ever gone far enough in the laborious work of
reformation to know the difficulties of it, for these are always great and
numerous. Rome, even in the time of Caesar, was, you know, incapable of
liberty. Their ancient character, manners, and constitution, were together
irrecoverably lost; and this I suspect may be the case with France since the
loss of their constitution, and of all the habits and principles of their
freedom.

On the proper division of the world into nations of a proper and governable
size, probably depends much of the improvement of mankind. We have seen the too
small and the too large equally incapable of duration and of advancement -- the
one unwieldy, and the other too weak. The Roman empire became too extensive,
and had never probably, except at first, a form of government well suited to
its extent. The numerous unequal pieces into which it was afterward broken,
were too small and unsubstantial to last long. The various attempts that have
since been made to reunite some of them, have seldom as yet succeeded in
removing the ill effects of that division, which may yet produce much mischief
before men can discover and get into the right size, as well as the right
forms, of government. As to the form, I think they might learn more from
England than from all the rest of the world, if nations could again get into
the way of learning and borrowing laws and institutions from their neighbors,
like the ancient Greeks. Where any freedom of enquiry exists, they may go on by
degrees to learn; and as the people open their eyes and see their chains, they
may make various efforts for relief, but they are hardly any where, except chez
nous, as yet sufficiently informed to know even their object, and still less
the road to it.

The general ideas of law, justice, government, here, after all their fine
writings upon it, are yet too slavish, confused, or inadequate; and this will
probably appear in their future attempts to reform. Were they even to have
their etats generaux restored, with their present inadequate ideas of
representation and elections, heated with some wild impracticable American
ideas of liberty, they would probably run into some pernicious extreme, or
would perpetually disagree both in the system and the means. Ages of
experimental enquiry, and of liberty gradually acquired, are probably necessary
to know the right plan, and as much more to put it in execution.

Modern tyranny, though more gentle, is not perhaps much less oppressive than
the ancient, and probably more timid and indolent. Whatever may favor that
indolence, and facilitate the ruling and draining their subjects, will be
adopted by such a government, in preference to any thing that would make them
rich and happy, lest they should become insolent when ill treated.

Happily for mankind, arbitrary power often defeats its own purposes; and in
proportion as it deviates from honesty and simplicity, creates to itself
trouble and disappointment. By experience it sometimes discovers that these
animals, the people, must at least be fed as they work, and in proportion to
the useful exertions to be expected from them; and hence often arise a number
of overwise regulations for that purpose; but, though better than nothing, none
of these provisional regulations are equal to the simple one, of letting them
feed themselves from their own labor. For this end, protection and security
are sufficient. The less government interferes in the detail of domestic
economy of the subject, the better.

That of governing too much is perhaps one of the worst, and yet the most
common, faults of modern policy; and one of its worst effects, and which seems
to be the least noticed, is, that in the progress toward slavery the people
gradually lose their powers and exertions, and at length become so weak as to
look up to government for almost every thing, and even perhaps at last like
children to be fed.

Here government, or the king, is already supposed and expected to do every
thing that concerns the public or any part of it. Such things as with us are
done by townships or counties, by individuals or subscriptions, as roads,
canals, seaports, piers, storing up provisions, regulating prices; even
stage-coaches, it seems, cannot be tolerably established but by his majesty
becoming proprietor. In other countries trade supports the state; in this the
state must support trade: every trifling thing here requires the hand of
government.

LETTER III. Of Agriculture. -- The People. -- Their Decline, and Importance.
EXCEPT in the wine countries, we meet with little else but corn-husbandry; no
proportional number of cattle nor a grass farm to be seen, though these are
probably the life and soul of agriculture. In the proper number of animals to
labor, to manure, and to feed upon the land, probably consists the main spring
and force of agriculture, which improves with population; and thence may
proceed the greatest and best kind of national wealth, strength, and
prosperity, and which by such means may yet be carried to an extent hitherto
little known and less practiced, except perhaps in some parts of China, of the
low countries, and near some towns.

The few cattle they have throughout most parts of France are too generally but
miserable carrion. The horses, the oxen, the sheep, all seem of a poor
degenerate race, and all of the same kind -- no variety nor cross breeds of
them, as in England.

Animal life in general does not appear to be in a condition of much vigor or
energy throughout this kingdom, till we begin to leave it and ascend the
mountains by which it is bounded on either side -- the Alps or Pyrenees; or
till we enter the rich plains of Flanders, where we find more size and
strength, although becoming gross and heavy.

Their corn countries are mostly large, naked, melancholy plains, without
trees, fences or divisions, and thinly inhabited by a poor, weak, and sickly
race, too often in rags and wooden shoes: thus the laboring and most useful
part of the nation is considered and treated with rigor and contempt. The term
peuple, so far from conveying ideas of respect, greatness, benevolence, or
importance, seems here a term of reproach. The phrase majesty of the people,
borrowed from the ancients, and which you read in their authors, is
nevertheless unfelt and unknown, except among a few secluded philosophers.

Is it not to be apprehended that the English people may likewise in time lose
that respect and influence which they have been accustomed to assert, though
sometimes with insolence, unless it be more assiduously supported by wise
regulations? On their consequence being kept up, with all its inconveniences,
probably depends most of your national superiority. That superior spirit of
exertion, of industry, and enterprise, in which they go beyond any other people
I know, probably proceeds from a certain noble opinion of themselves, and of
their own importance. Perhaps nothing but the other two branches of the
legislature being obliged to court the people, could so long have preserved
their importance in the state.

But are there not certain degrees of corruption and debility, a gradual change
of manners, and hence of government, which necessarily attend a high state of
civilization, and which may sink them to a level with their neighbors, unless
some means can be found to counteract them? Different degrees of arts and
civilization may require different laws and regulations. The spirit of liberty
must be proportionate to times and circumstances. The same species of freedom
and licentiousness that might have been formerly necessary, and the few
regulations and restraints that were found to be sufficient, may not be so now.
And unless you arrange and regulate the people better, for both civil and
military purposes, and thereby secure their importance in the state with proper
subordination, they may, through anarchy, fall into the same kind of languid
impotence and contempt with most of the people throughout the rest of the
world; and the weight, the superiority of your nation will fall with them.

The mischievous anarchy of the democratic spirit might certainly be obviated
by wise regulations, and without losing its beneficial effects.

One would sometimes be tempted to believe even our government capable, at
times, of a certain sinister policy, of leaving the people in a state of
confusion, that they may, by their excesses, bring themselves and their cause
into disgrace; and that our different parties too often tacitly agree in that
neglect, or secretly impede the necessary remedies. Is this merely for the
chances furnished to the fishing in troubled waters? A miserable desperate
game! However, you stand a noble instance to show, with how little force and
coercion a people may be governed. Yet your wisest sovereigns have probably
made the most arrangements, and had always those essential points of defense
and police at once in view; but they did not, as here, so heavily over-burden
the people with superfluous and oppressive regulations. Such were your Alfreds
and Elizabeth's; and it is probably still to the prince you are to look up, for
the only effectual political remedies to the evils that threaten you. You can
never expect your people nor your parliaments to reform themselves. You should
try by education to form a Lycurgus (if it be possible for these modern and
civilized times to produce such a prince); I see no other remedy for you, if
you are in danger. But, for all your loud complaints and apparent confusion, it
may be doubted if any great reform be yet necessary in your government or
constitution, though neither are perfect. The evils are not yet probably come
to that height as to risk the possible evils of any considerable change; and
perhaps no great reform is practicable, without some violent shock or
necessity, some public danger or distress.

Be not so afraid of the exertions and interruptions of war. If it can be
managed with tolerable prudence and economy, it may produce more reform than a
long peace, which is too often but a gradual decay. War may force you to
regulate yourselves for defense; by which certain points of internal police may
be obtained, which might otherwise long remain neglected.

LETTER IV. Of Government. -- French Impediment to Improvement. -- Their Lands,
Cattle, Farming. -- Of Flanders.
THE circumstances of the times, and of this journey in particular, must, I
see, inevitably give a political turn to this correspondence; and as I cannot
have much new information to give you concerning this country, I may therefore
indulge in a variety of speculations as things occur to call them forth. The
poverty and oppression of the lower classes, the injurious division of
property, in this and many other countries, produce a variety of reflections on
the fate of man, on the management of society, etc.

Is there no kind of government yet discovered that can be established on
principles of gradual improvement, instead of going in a contrary direction? No
one that should keep pace with the advances of men in the other arts? For all,
or most of those that have hitherto been seen in the world, seem, by degrees,
to degenerate from the time of their first institution, or subsequent
revolutions, each of which seems to contain the seeds and necessity of others.

I wish to believe our government improving, but am often in doubt. In your
House of Commons there appears, in the operation of Mr. Grenville's Bill, a
small source of amendment; gradual, and therefore proper for a time of peace.
This may, at length, prepare the way for more important and salutary
reformation, provided you can preserve and profit by it, before more
mischievous defects overtake you. Seizing the opportunity of improving the mode
of election in your boroughs as they misbehave, may have some good effects on
the constitution; and it may restrain the daring spirit of corruption within
the bounds of decency, and make them at least pretend to honesty: the necessity
of concealing a crime must tend to impede and diminish it. If the wisdom and
virtue of the nation could once be collected in its councils, great and
beneficial measures might no doubt be adopted. The people selling their votes
shows that those votes are worth something, and the price may serve as an
estimate of their importance. But in such a system of corruption, how long they
can retain those votes to sell, and how soon they may be brought to sell the
right itself, are questions of importance.

But to proceed with our French journey. On looking over my journal, I find the
chief part of the traveling notes turn upon agriculture, -- on different
trades in towns and villages, -- price of labor; in all of which the striking
circumstance is, that government, on every occasion, and in every respect, too
much interferes.

Many letters might be written on each of these subjects, by those who love to
be particular and voluminous. But I deal in generals, and love brevity; and you
possess the useful arts in England to a more perfect degree; so that there is
little to be learned here, but from their faults.

You may partly know, from various authors, how the progress of agriculture,
and the other useful trades that are connected with it, have been obstructed
here by a variety of causes besides those of superfluous and oppressive
regulations: but to investigate those causes on the spot, may b^ the most
important lesson to be learned i^ this country. I think they may mostly b^
traced to the nature of their governmen^ and taxation, to their religion, laws,
manners, and character. The chief of these causes may be, Arbitrary power,
which probably must inevitably be often tyrannical and unjust; their bad
tenures, and want of long leases, few exceeding three six, or nine years; the
few proprietors o^ the land have been obviously the dictator^ of all the laws
concerning it, and their interest always preferred to that of the many who live
and labor on it: hence the poverty and want of farmers, the lands being
generally cultivated in metairies, or by hired laborers, who pay or receive a
certain proportion of the produce. Their taxes are injudicious and oppressive,
in the arbitrary manner of laying and of levying them; some on the apparent
stock of the tradesman, farmer, or labourer, and often laid by those who levy
it. Entails, particular privileges and exemptions in favor of the noblesse and
the church: temptations held out to their natural vanity, which prevent the
necessary accumulation of capitals by industry. All run to buy titles or
privileges as soon as they can; while these at once feed their vanity, and give
them more power and consideration than wealth and industry, they will probably
continue to prefer mediocrity, or even poverty and dependence, with a title, to
the condition of rich and comfortable tradesmen or merchants; and their
government goes on to encourage this disposition. Hence the poverty of the
lower classes, and the want of taste in the higher for an industrious or a
country life. Some think the church the best landlords; they may not be the
worst, and are perhaps too indulgent; but we have only to look at their lands,
and see that they do not improve beyond a certain, rather low, degree; while
those estates that have been secularised in other countries are improving
daily, and have doubled and trebled in value since they were taken from the
church.

I believe I mentioned to C -- their childish vanity, and perpetual desire of
society and amusement, which draws them together into towns, and helps greatly
to prevent their acquiring a taste for the country. May not we conclude that
this government does not know, or does not choose to apply, the true principles
of national prosperity? and yet the world is full of their writings on those
subjects.

The corn countries of France are mostly, I think, what we should call a light
soil, not much strong clay, or rich mould, nor what we should esteem a fine
country. Though there is, perhaps, less waste land than in England, I do not
think that their soil in general is so far superior to ours as some imagine;
but it would require much time and examination to determine such points with
any certainty. We must, however, except some parts of Normandy, Burgundy, and
generally the land on their great rivers, especially on the Loire, which is
beautifully wooded, a rich and productive soil, and well peopled. Indeed most
of their wine countries are rich and beautiful, though not in our style of
beauty.

The scarcity of cattle, of pasture land, and of the cultivation of artificial
grasses every where, sufficiently show their deficiency in husbandry;
unacquainted with the advantages of a change of crops, and of a sufficient
stock of cattle, of converting arable to pasture, and the reverse: I believe
that the same crops of eternal corn, with perpetual plowings, must not only
impoverish but pulverise the soil, increase its natural dry and light quality,
and render it unfit for grass or meadow, without more expense, labor and
skill, than the proprietors could furnish. The few whom I have seen attempting
to turn some lands to grass for English race horses, their present passion,
have not yet succeeded well, after several years experience and great expense.
I want your intelligent tradesmen to visit other countries; a traveling farmer
might be of more service to his country, than all your gentlemen of learning
and virtu who run through Europe Mr. Arthur Young's travels and knowledge may
b^ of great service to the public, especially if the most usef^ parts can be
afterward extracted and abridged, and the debit or sale extended, by
diminishing the size and the price of such books.
.

But I should perhaps have said something about Flanders before we proceed
farther; though so near, I think it is not so well known as it deserves Mr.
James Shaw has since remedied this defect, b^ publishing a very agreeable
account of Flanders.
. These two neighboring countries, France and Flanders form a curious
contrast; the first being remarkable for poverty and nastiness, and the other
for wealth and neatness, with other striking differences. I do not find the
decay of the Flemish towns, nor of their trade, to be so considerable as
generally believed. Those towns are yet noble, venerable, wealthy, and
industrious, and their country the best cultivated of any in Europe; all this,
with the freedom and happiness of the people and their government, render it
altogether more worthy our attention perhaps than France. We owe a particular
attention to that country from whence we had, probably, both the loom and the
plough, with other useful arts, and where agriculture is still kept up to
perhaps a more useful degree of perfection than even in England itself: they
may not have so great a proportion of fine parks, fine horses, and variety of
cattle as we have, but they have enough, and only for utility; and throughout
whole provinces, have neither fallow, common, nor waste land.

The spacious Schelde, and beautiful romantic Maise, you must see, and
particularly the latter, where you will find all the means and the materials of
riches and industry, woods, coals, mines, people: the trade and navigation of
both might be doubled and trebled, but for the selfish tyranny of the different
states through which they pass. If the seventeen provinces, according to the
first idea of their revolt from Spain, could be reunited under one good
government, it would be a noble country, and a respectable power. Charlemagne
chose his capital between the Maise and Rhine. But on approaching France, the
baneful influence of that government, the effects of French laws, and French
leases, soon begin to appear. Even in French Flanders, though the same kind of
soil with the Austrian, waste and fallow lands, weeds and negligence, begin to
be seen; and as we advance into France, many other sad changes for the worse we
are doomed to experience. We gradually lose the noble spacious farm houses,
with great barns like churches, in exchange for wretched half-ruined hovels; we
leave the comfortable neat Flemish dresses, for French rags, dirty woollen
night-caps, wooden shoes, and every mark of misery; in short, we have left
order and neatness in every thing behind us. The most grievous, at present,
seems to be the loss of those clean and ready Flanders maids, for these dirty
saucy menservants. This inconsistent prejudice in France, where the women have
so much influence, of employing men instead of women servants in almost every
department, is not easily accounted for, and to me is truly disgusting. From
the kitchen to every part and office about the house, you will, in many parts,
meet with no other servants but men, generally nasty impertinent fellows, and
my great aversion; though we see the women laboring in the fields, at the
roads, and performing the office of ostlers in the stables. The French being
considered by many as the nastiest people, for a civilized nation yet known,
may be greatly owing to this custom of domestic male servants.

LETTER V. Of Travelers. -- Society. -- Two Classes -- Of Paris, and the
Learned.
To Mr. A. J. Paris, 1777.
I FEAR you begin to expect too much from me, and depend too little on what you
have read and heard. I doubt there may be but little in France that is new to
you, and that can be communicated in this way, nor any very useful lesson to be
learned, until we discover some new defects, something to find fault with by
way of text: for from faults and defects, I believe, we are more willing to
learn, than from precept or imitation. There is often something very amusing,
and not ungrateful to the mind of man or woman, to hear a country well abused,
or see their foibles turned into ridicule. Among the various travelers one
meets with, I think the sulky and satirical are not among the least
entertaining or useful; and I believe, that as much is to be learned from the
blunt or bitter humor of some old English travelers, as from that eternal
affectation of pleasantry or complaisance which is now so much in fashion, and
which is probably as prolific a source of misrepresentation, as any other
humor or prejudice whatever. The conceived necessity of seeming always pleased
with every thing, however disagreeable or even detestable, must mislead and
bias our minds and our pens, as much as the other extreme, the ill humor of
those Anglois atrabilaires whom we have seen pesting and swearing at all they
met with out of their own country. I should think a little old fashioned
English sincerity and good sense to the full as becoming in our travelers, as
those constant attempts at trifling wit and pleasantry, or that perpetual grin
of politesse, which we are now so ready to borrow, and awkwardly imitate, from
these our agreeable neighbors.

I believe you remember the gentleman who returned to England immediately on
seeing a French kitchen; and my fellow-traveller, who had determined to pass
the rest of his days on the continent, on finding at Calais that he could not
have beefstakes well dressed, set off next day on his return; -- and our friend
S --, who left Spain directly when he found he could not have melted butter to
his veal, which had cost him so much pains and money to procure.

Within those extremes of natural bluntness and acquired affectation, there are
travelers of great variety of species and character; and to each of these,
objects will appear very different. The accounts honestly enough given by one,
may to another appear fallacious; so that we may all write on, and still find
subjects enough to employ our pens, as well from the variety of unexamined
matter, as from the different sight, character, or views of the travelers.

But to return. -- I believe I meant to say something about some of their
towns; but do not be alarmed, for I mean not to trouble you with descriptions,
because I think they never convey the ideas that are designed.

And first, generally, -- From a kind of childish dislike of being alone, which
they call love of society, the French live much in towns, so as to play at
cards, and have little taste for a country life, notwithstanding what they may
tell you to the contrary in their books. As still a worse symptom of their
taste, the people of best fortune get to live generally in the central and most
unwholesome parts of a town, leaving the out-skirts and fine situations to
poverty and nastiness. For the whole seems divided only into two classes, the
extremes of society, or the few rich, and the many very poor, with too few of
those middle ranks which form the best bonds of society, and the strength of
the nation. Most of this you may already know; -- only let me desire you will
trace the causes and numerous consequences of this injurious division of rank
and property, when you visit these countries, for it is of great consequence to
society; the remedy is difficult, and requires more wisdom than can even be
expected in an arbitrary government. In this you may trace, perhaps, the
inevitable decline of Europe. Such objects are worthy of you as a philosopher,
a soldier, and probably a future senator.

I need not trouble you much about this fine city, Paris; though superior to
London in some very material things, yet I think it inferior in many others.
Though superior in public walks, libraries, palaces; London has certainly the
advantage in the other essentials and comforts of life. I like their boulevards
prodigiously, -- a very extensive open walk, without going out of town, with
such variety of buildings and amusements; it inspires one with some ideas of
liberty, till by approaching the Bastile at the end of it, we are put in mind
where we are. But the streets of this town are shocking. You must either ride
over people, or be ridden over.

I cannot say I like the generality of these Parisians, nor can think them near
so amiable as they do themselves. Most of them who have not traveled, I fancy,
you would think intolerably conceited and ignorant, -- at once polite and
impertinent. Compliments do not constitute civility. Their atttention, so far
from civility, is often rudeness. We can too often discover that they meant no
kindness to us by their compliments, as we might at first imagine, but only to
show themselves off as superior to us. I do not mean by Parisian, any of their
people of the first fashion, for they are, in general, perfectly polite, easy,
and genteel, and perhaps more amiably so than our own.

You know there are many of the learned and wise here, as well as of the
agreeable; but the former are not yet so often to be found among the latter, as
you may fancy, from knowing, it is become the fashion for authors and men of
learning to be admitted into the first company more than formerly. However, we
are pleased to see some of the learned and philosophic of both sexes taking the
lead, even among people of the first rank and fortune; and if they go on, we
may see Plato's wish accomplished, and the world governed by philosophers. But
hitherto I doubt if authors be always the most improving or desirable company.
Some, engrossed and led away by books, are thereby less acquainted with, and
less sit for, the world. Others, absent, reserved, and austere, already
embarrassed with a reputation which is to be supported with great caution and
artifice; embroiled in the vanity and intrigues of the world, their works and
opinions already known, and operating like religious prejudices which can
seldom be touched, or must be supported right or wrong; their conversation is
not always so frank and intelligent, nor so edifying as might be expected from
their knowledge.

The young, if studious and unprejudiced, full of information and curiosity, as
yet eager after truth, and only in the progress toward reputation and
author-craft, are probably the best worth knowing, -- the most friendly and
communicative, particularly with strangers; but such men are not easily to be
met with, as they do not waste much of their time with the cards and nonsense
of common societies.

LETTER VI. French Character, and national Taste.
TO draw the French character with the justice and precision I could wish,
would require more penetration and labor than I can claim, or have leisure to
bestow. I mean to give you only a few of the striking features as I pass, and
to deal more in blemishes than in beauties.

When we travelers can be honest enough to give you things as they strike us
at sight, I fear that the faults will always stand first. The foibles and
defects of this people must make the first and strongest impression. I believe
there is no great danger of the two nations soon becoming very fond of each
other. The one values itself on the kinds of merit which are neither esteemed
nor wanted by the other. The French must despise the English solid sense, and
independent spirit, perhaps as much as we do their esprit, graces, agrements.
They must dislike our sullen, proud, awkward manner, as much as we do their
conceit, vanity, -- leur manieres avantageuses, l'envie de se fair valoir,
leur fatuite, etc. It requires some time to discover, through their politeness,
how much they dislike us.

Yet, if it were not for a war now and then, I should fear our assimilating too
much toward these our agreeable neighbors, and our meeting them more than
halfway. Though few of them will probably ever have good sense enough to be
much pleased with ours; many of us are apt to have good nature enough to like
both their manner and their manners, leur franchise, leur babil, and many other
less important agreeable nothings about them.

They may hate us, while we despise them, and contempt may be full as powerful
in its effects as hatred. Yet I believe, we shall generally find many more
English in France, than French in England. Perhaps some of us come here in
order to get rid of our ill-humour, or to vent it on them, like those who keep
an humble dependant to scold at. Although we may reciprocally improve by
intercourse, and it might be better for mankind were nations to mix more with
each other, yet one would wish each to retain their native character, -- that
national stamp which discriminates it from the rest. In order to this, it may
be well to dwell on the faults we would wish to avoid. I shall therefore go on,
as at first proposed, picking up a few of them en passant.

Though the national or prevailing character here, like that of other human
beings, is mixed, and made up of good, bad, and indifferent qualities; yet such
parts predominate, as make the composition of a Frenchman very distinguishable,
and different from any other: -- but to know him, you must live with him;
reading about him is insufficient. You will find, for example, qu'il ne se
suffit pas a lui meme, but lives by the breath and opinion of others more than
on his own.

He will sacrifice every other comfort of life to the ornament of his person.
The lodging of a very fine petit maitre here, is often too mean and dirty for a
taylor's journeyman with you.

In them, all is borrowed, postiche, and very little natural; ils veulent
toujours representer -- their life is a mere parade. Yet they only copy from
each other (tres moutoniers), while we are always flying off into singularity,
hunting after nature or reality, but perhaps with less success in our attempts
than they in theirs.

They seem ever changing, but are still the same. It is only we that really
change, with all our apparent steadiness and gravity.

The Frenchman, though sociably disposed, with all that enviable gaiete de
coeur, and affected goodness and consideration for others; yet as he is not in
the habit of doing any thing essential for the public, and but little for his
neighbor, and it is, perhaps, the lot of that kind of vivacity and flow of
spirits, to be capable of but little feeling or humanity; he is probably, on
the whole, therefore a more selfish being than the sulky Englishman. I think I
see here, instances of the selfish prevailing over the friendly qualities,
rather more than with us; -- the oeconomical, or parsimonious, over the
generous, -- the cruel and unfeeling over the humane, -- l'etourderie over
sentiment, -- a false taste, or gout postiche, over that of nature. Besides
particular instances, one sees it in generals, -- as in the severity, and
negligent composition of some laws, and in the mode of execution: -- in the
general preference given to liferents over any fixed future provision for
posterity, or relations. Perhaps we might infer some want of feeling or
humanity, from their want of taste for the simple beauty of nature and of
action; and we may perceive, in the different degrees of art, passion, or
music, that they feel nothing, till the expression is carried to an outrageous
and vulgar extreme, certainly beyond our line of beauty. But they like it, and
that is a short and sufficient answer to all our objections. It is needless to
dispute about taste. While they can relish only those degrees of violence and
expression, they may laugh at our criticisms.

The degree of expression in all the arts must be tempered to the tone of mind
of the spectators, more than to the true nature of the passion to be expressed.
In a state of ease and tranquillity, a refined audience will not readily admit
of the violence of real passion, nor of any of its distortions, beyond a
certain limit of the graceful and temperate. This limit may be extended, but
should never be broken, by previously warming up the mind by successive or
accumulating impressions. The French will never probably understand the natural
repose of true and graceful dignity.

Without the constant force of some foreign aid and intercourse, national
character and taste must perhaps generally revert into some confined tract or
circle. And when national pride, conceit, and ignorance are planted, they
readily spread, and tend, like other evils, to perpetuate themselves.

Though many of the French are now liberal, and willing enough to get rid of
the shackles of nationality in taste and character; yet, after a certain age,
it is perhaps more impracticable with them, than with those of any other
nation, to succeed. Some of them satirise and abuse their own nation, and
praise others; -- affect to extol the Italian school in painting and music; --
imitate English manners; and all the while remain mere Frenchmen. In order to
change or improve their taste, they would have to combat many inveterate
habits, of which they are not aware; and the causes of their peculiarities they
themselves are unfit to investigate. In short, they appear to us a different
species, une race apart; this they forget, or never perceive. Their authors
talk of man and woman, and fancy they speak generally of the whole race, and
know not that they speak only of French men and women; fancying all the world
like themselves; forgetting that French nature is not human nature, and that
few of their qualities are common to the species. Only a chosen few of them
seem to have any minds, the rest have only senses: nor can I yet find any one
term in their language to express what I here mean by mind. Even their senses
appear to us defective, or different from ours, as if two quick and too weak;
they can perceive only certain things and distances: though more lively, and
perhaps sensible of some things which escape us, yet I think we have many
perceptions which they overlook, or do not reach. Unfit for meditation, in the
exercise or agitation of the senses consist their chief happiness, and
particularly in that of the sight; they are all eyes, and can sacrifice real
comforts to please that sense. When that agitation ceases, ils s'endorent ou
s'ennuyent a la mort.

The numerous clergy and military form the life of society in France, and,
together with the ladies, assume the direction of every thing. The female
graces, and facility of expression, are as remarkable as their influence. I
think you will find vanity the universal, or ruling passion here.

LETTER VII. Fine Arts.
I HAVE seen their biennial exhibition of paintings, and wished to be more of a
connoisseur on your account. With my small degree of skill or taste, I am
inclined to believe they have hardly a painter, at present, above a second or
third rate, except one. However, I think I have seen some young students who
promise well, and may contribute to revive true taste, and the great style,
provided they travel in time: this is indispensable. Their present mode
inclines too much toward those fadaises of Dreuse, which, though often pretty
and nicely executed, are so far beneath that first and grand style of painting
which tends at once to forward that delightful art, and to elevate and improve
the mind, that we are at a loss where to rank these things, -- these pieces
from common life! -- and French life too! they may have some merit in their
way, though not equal to that of Hogarth's pieces of the same kind, nor of
equal spirit or moral tendency.

Let us by all means imitate nature; -- but there is surely a choice or
selection of objects, by which the true judgment of genius is distinguished,
and we must rank the elegant and sublime above the mean and affected. There is
an universal beauty and elegance, which is not of any particular country, but
to be culled from all nature, or conceived by a warm and elegant fancy, within
the power of nature, but beyond what she has been known to produce: she
furnishes hints as points upon which genius builds, and almost creates.

Their sculptors have succeeded, I think, better than their painters, and have
frequently come nearer to their masters the Italians and Greeks than any of us.
But a little French affectation often intrudes even into some of their first
rate compositions, and which, to me, always spoils the effects of the whole
piece.

I believe their modern art of dancing, and their theaters, have helped to
vitiate more than to improve their taste in the fine arts. I often fancy that I
see, in many of their best performances, some of their dancing or theatrical
ideas of grace, which, to me, is generally mere affectation, distortion, or
grimace. This is copying from a copy, and a bad copy, instead of going to the
original.

From this general censure on their artists, you know I except one, viz.
Vernet, who follows nature, and chooses well, and is, I think, classically
elegant in some things; -- but he studied in Italy, I am told, from a child.
Their merit, as already hinted, in the arts, has generally been nearly in
proportion to their assistance from Italy. The causes, or at least the means of
their great progress, during the time of Lewis XIV. arose chiefly from thence.
They were then liberal enough to show to whom they owed their excellence, -- to
imitate the Italian school, and encourage their artists. Since that period I do
not find they have improved, but on the contrary declined, as they returned to
their national conceit and contempt of strangers, fancying themselves superior
to the Italians, and to all the world, in every thing. There is scarce an
Italian artist now to be found in all France, while they are giving immense
prices for little Dutch and Flemish pictures; -- both bad symptoms. I believe
there has hardly ever been a great artist among those who never saw the
Mediterranean, nor Italy. An acquaintance with the nations that surround that
sea, I consider as a necessary part of education, and especially for artists. I
am inclined to believe that none of us can well arrive at the first degrees of
excellence in any thing, without leaving our own country early, and frequently
taking enlarged views of men, of nature, and of art. I doubt if the French have
any other way left to be great in any thing, but by leaving their country very
young, and staying away till they almost forget they are French, and till they
acquire other habits and ideas, and exercise their faculties and their organs
on other objects, and in a different manner from what can be done in their own
country. This, as it may appear singular, I must endeavor to explain some
other time.

You know the French have an academy at Rome, but their natural conceit has
likewise rendered it almost useless to them; for the regulations require the
students first to have gained prizes at home, and be completely fixed in their
national manner, before they go there: whenever they get there, their chief
object is gained; they seem to sit down almost satisfied with that trifling
distinction, and are not often much inclined to labor afterward for more fame.

All this, you will readily conceive, is speaking rather in a general and
indiscriminate manner, for which you will make some allowance, and recollect,
that the exact truth cannot always be expressed, and much less in few words.
They have now some promising young artists, who are aware of these national
defects and impediments; and others will probably arise and execute finer
ideas, and in a better manner than have lately appeared here; and will revive
that proper respect for Italy, and the remains of the ancients, which is always
the concomitant of real merit. They may emulate, without being confined to
their own great masters, for you know they have had very great ones. You will
begin to think that I am likewise becoming a connoisseur, like most of our
traveling countrymen, who seem so generally to be engrossed and infatuated by
the pursuits of virtu. -- I shall, however, pursue my reflections.

The fine arts are, doubtless, entitled to our admiration and esteem, and
considered, even abstractedly from the pleasure they afford, may tend more to
the benefit than the prejudice of mankind. But their good effects will depend
much on the objects about which they are employed. In this, some of the
ancients were wiser, or more fortunate, than we, in employing the painter and
sculptor to promote public virtue by the public commemoration of great men, and
great actions. And I should have more respect for those arts now, if they could
be made to unite in producing some more public good, of which I can still see
the possibility. But while we see them confined to a few great towns, and
there, among a few great families and churches, the only seats of elegance and
luxury, while misery reigns throughout the rest of the nation, these fine arts
become no very favorable symptoms of the advancement of human happiness, or of
the science of government.

Religion has latterly been the chief object in which the arts have been made
to join their aid with those great effects, which I could wish to extend to
more general utility. But in this progress, I fear we have lately lost, instead
of gaining ground. I cannot but lament that our religious reformers should have
thought it necessary to dismiss, at once, from our churches, painting,
sculpture, and music. May not we hope that some of our princes or bishops will
be able to recall them to their station by degrees, as useful knowledge and
elegant taste extend their influence? We ought not to despair of such a
revolution, when we know that even some of the Mahomedan princes contrived to
admit the arts, in spite of their religion, though it seems to have been
established on purpose to exclude them, to promote ignorance, and destroy the
mental powers.

LETTER VIII. Commerce. -- Manufactures. -- Reflections.
THE French, with all their industry, are not yet a commercial nation, though
their government appears at times to be smitten with some temporary fits of
supporting trade (perhaps because it is the fashion), and have even taken part
in the modern absurdity of commercial wars. They would not have much occasion
to depend on the precarious resources of foreign commerce, if they could make a
proper use of the advantages of their situation -- of the fertility and extent
of their country. But that again would require a degree of liberty and
security, and a kind of government of which they are perhaps now incapable.

Even if commerce should appear to become more necessary to them, in order to
contend with other maritime powers, if they are wise, they will consider well
before they attempt to sacrifice their military to their commercial character.
While the romantic sentiments of honor can produce certain effects and
exertions, it would be unwise to substitute the love of wealth, which might not
operate in the same manner.

Considering, however, the difficulties there must be, under such a government,
to attract or raise great capitals, and to employ them in any scheme of
commerce or manufacture, they have succeeded amazingly in some things of the
kind. You know their success in silks, and in some sorts of woollens, which
might succeed still better if less burdened with regulations. Their goblins is
an elegant manufactory. That company has a monopoly for dying certain colors.
This we should perhaps think oppressive but here it may have good effects. Like
the royal manufactories in some other poor nations, it may be the only means o^
retaining them in the country, and of supporting the quality and reputation of
the goods; operating somewhat in the way tha^ our statutes of apprenticeship
have been supposed to do: and I suspect there may be truth in that supposition,
and wisdom in the institution; for, in countries where apprenticeships are not
rendered necessary by law, I think the workmanship of every thing is inferior.
I wish you could persuade some of your dyers, and others who work in metals,
etc. to study chemistry, and could give a better education to your tradesmen,
and to the lower people in general.

The manufactory of looking-glass likewise, so well known here, is a noble and
profitable work, and well conducted. Eight hundred people are employed in one
building. You may attempt it in England, but cannot, I fear, succeed near so
well as here; for there will not be near the same demand. The superior luxury
and riches of this great country, -- the fashion and taste of the people for
that ornament, -- their having the start in the methods of working, and in the
markets of Europe, are causes quite sufficient for holding their great
superiority over all competitors in this branch.

The porcelaine fabrics, which many princes seem of late so fond of promoting,
can be of little service, I doubt, to a nation, -- only so far as they may be
the means of improving the public taste, and those we call earthen ware, which,
being of common use, are of far more importance. Though, in these last, they
are trying some of our late improvements at Rouen, as well as some of the
cotton velvets, I have no dread of their being able to rival our friends
Bentley and Wedgewood, nor the arts and methods so far before them, and long
established, at Manchester, and elsewhere.

When will nations be cured of the folly of attempting to supply themselves
with every thing by their own hands? How much better to take of each other
whatever is the most natural and convenient produce of each? This may open a
fertile source of intercourse, and of future benefits to mankind.

Though this is now become a very liberal nation, or rather produces many
liberal individuals, their reputation in this too is beyond the reality, as in
many other things. The reputation is acquired by means of many little arts, and
of their pretty little language.

Though doubtful if their government will ever be liberal enough to open their
ports with us on a fair and equitable footing; -- though their politics have
generally been too artful and cunning, and consisted mostly in little tricks,
and in outwitting even their friends -- a great fault, and too much imitated;
-- yet let us hope, that some liberal prince, or minister, may dare to lead
them right.

It is more from ill-humour than want of knowledge, that nations do not yet lay
their commerce more open to each other. Let us hope that some of them will soon
break the ice, and others may follow. As our friend Adam Smith's book comes to
be more generally read and known, I think his principles must prevail, and
contribute greatly to open the eyes of nations to see their own interest; and
it may, in that case, be of more service to the world than any book that has
appeared since Euclid.

The French would willingly persuade themselves, and the world, that their
country is improving very fast: but of that, I doubt even the possibility under
such a government. Their having advanced so far, under so much oppression, is
really wonderful; but I suspect they cannot go much farther. The fine arts --
the trifling arts, may yet advance a little; but I doubt the country, and the
people, must long remain nearly as they are, or go backwards.

A few philosophers in the capital may write very good books, and may fancy
they are improving their nation, and the world, at a great rate, and all the
while their names are scarcely known in the provinces, where it requires far
other efforts to banish oppression, civil and ecclesiastic, against the
interest of the more powerful supporters of established abuses.

Book-making is a very considerable trade in this country; and they are thereby
better known, and rather over-rated, in other countries. Europe pays them, in
this way, a considerable and voluntary tax for the pleasure and convenience of
their agreeable, and now almost universal language.

Thus, I am at length gradually brought back to the subject of your last, -- to
the province of fancy, taste, and literature; where, I grant you, something
must be frequently picked, to mix up with the dry materials of mere utility,
and to season, where possible, the bitter or insipid draughts of common or
laborious life. But the return is now too late, and must be referred to the
next.

LETTER IX. Artists. -- Nationalites. -- Theaters. -- Reflections. -- Language.
IT may presently be seen that the arts have been encouraged here more than
with us, and with more success at one period; though I think they have at
others gone farther wrong than ourselves. Although they have had very great
masters, and the names of Poussin, Le Brun, Le Sueur, Girardon, etc. will
always stand high in the lists of fame, yet the national taste has been but
little improved by them; and the general style of drawing, of ornament, of
architecture, is still almost as viciously national and capricious as before
the time of those great men. They have more great works to show than we have;
but, at the same time, more bad taste. The moderns in general have been
sinking, and are now far beneath the schools of those great masters: but I
think the French have sunk lower than any of us, and more than was to be
expected in so great and polished a nation.

There is now however some hope, I think, of the revival of true taste and
genius in the competition of those two great nations, France and England: but
we must all have recourse to Italy for that purpose; and must there labor yet
long, before it can be accomplished. In that progress, we shall probably
approach nearer to each other, and may agree better in taste and opinions;
though, in many things, each will most likely always retain its peculiarities.

There are some early habits more obstinately retained than others. Our taste,
for example, in cookery, in amusements, in dress, and ornaments, I think we
seldom change; and we are more firmly attached to particular dishes, plays,
actors, and singers, than to many things of greater importance. Though men and
nations seem born to differ wherever it is possible, yet where the general
principles are obvious, we must often be of the same opinion. We may agree with
these people about a problem or a picture, but we shall perhaps always prefer
roast beef and Shakespeare to soupe and Racine; while they, as constantly,
remain in the opposite taste, and prefer the latter.

Their music, and some of their theatrical amusements, are certainly full of
bad taste, as well as with us, though we differ widely. Truth is but one --
errors are infinite. In order to get into the right road that leads to
improvement, to truth, beauty, and nature, we must first be forced from our
national prejudices, by early and frequent travel, and must become intimately
conversant with the arts, taste, and people, of other countries. Even then, our
labor is only begun; much will afterward depend on the wisdom and
encouragement, and on particular institutions, at home, -- on education -- on
fashion.

You know the French have some good comedies; and their spirited and agreeable
manner is well suited to comic action. Indeed I consider them as the first
comedians in the world: but their tragic action and declamation, of which they
are so fond, I think wretched; consisting mostly of a kind of furious or
outrageous bombast, which I believe seldom fails to disgust strangers at first.
The Frenchified Greek and Roman characters, which they show on their stage, are
like nothing in nature; but appear to us a ridiculous sort of caricaturas,
blown up by a puerile or petulant kind of passion, unworthy even of the
children of those manly people. Though the French seem to like all sorts of
violence in action, declamation, etc. and prefer their wretched tragedies to
their excellent comedies; yet I do not think they feel much with the actors,
nor can be considered as fond of tragedy. They are always disposed to be
pleased, and seem to distribute their applause in proportion to the exertions
of the actors, though ever so extravagant: these are generally in extremes,
which are usually distorted and ugly; they are always ready to burst on every
trifling occasion of passion: so that they, as it were, at once overshoot the
mark, and leave behind all those natural gradations or transitions in the
passions or affections of the mind. In short, their players, toujours prets a
crever, seem to have very seldom any idea of a truly great and dignified
character; and but few of their poets have arrived to the sublime or natural,
on any subject, and still less in the operations of the human passions. The
great characters which they have attempted to delineate, from whatever country
they are announced, generally turn out to be mere Frenchmen.

The causes of those things, and of their appearance to us, may be various and
complicated: yet I cannot help attributing much of it to their language.
Wherever the great passions are concerned, the strange magic of this language
with me is such, as to turn the hero who uses it, into a fanfaron, and the
finest air, in singing; into a vulgar howl. But the most powerful, though
distant, source of all their egaremens in these various walks of fancy and
genius, is probably a false or defective taste for the beauties of nature, and
their want of inclination for a country life: this again may proceed from their
government, manners, and ways of living. Things are wonderfully connected in
this world. Perhaps till we see their farms and country-houses improve, we
cannot expect them to produce a natural poet, painter, or actor. There are
moral as well as natural qualities that exclude each other. These people, with
such wit and vivacity, must perhaps be proportionally deficient in judgment,
and must be oftener wrong than some of their cooler and sedater neighbors.
This to many appears to be actually the case. But their genius is again rather
restrained and shackled by some other circumstances -- by those already
mentioned; by the nature of their government -- by the formation of their
language, which, though a very fine one for some purposes, is confined, and
unfit for others, by being idiomatic and affected. But I may have occasion to
return to these subjects, where sounds ar^ concerned; and the size of the
paper, a^ usual, relieves you for the present. I sha^ however fill it up with
an observation^ think I have read or heard: -- that within certain limits or
paths of their own, the French have probably more variety an^ grace in their
writings than we, -- more an^ nicer shades and distinctions in expression and
manner: -- but I think they seldom o^ never arrive at the same force, in though
or expression. They have many pretty ways of insinuating what they mean; bu^
seldom any of our forcible and manly way of speaking out: and, when they
attemp^ it, ca devient de fanfaronades. -- It Is the swelling of the frog. The
language naturally made for graceful trifling, cannot, i^ should seem, attempt
the sublime or magnificent, without bordering on the ridiculous.

LETTER X. Of Traveling. -- Observations on arbitrary Power, etc.
PARTS of our journies have been rather too much hurried for me, and we had not
always opportunities to stop where I wished, in order to examine, or to reflect
or converse on what we saw. But I believe that is often the case with most
travelers: so that many wise reflections, that might thus have been produced,
must now be lost, and thou go uninstructed to thy grave, as the clown says.

I grant you that an Englishman may live tolerably well in France, and be well
enough amused, as many of us have experienced: yet I doubt if there be much
real and useful instruction to be acquired. In the useful arts, we are already
before them; and in the fine arts, though we have not done so much, we have not
gone so far wrong. Though these arts have not been so much cultivated and
encouraged among us, what we have produced is more within the bounds of
simplicity and nature; and we have not, like them, quite so much way to go back
in order to regain the right road.

With respect to what we may learn on any moral subjects, as of law,
government, or manners; their national character, their taste, their passions,
are so opposite to ours, that I often doubt the use or applicability to us of
such knowledge. Their life must seem at first to us unnatural, and they
themselves a species apart from the rest of human nature: yet there is so much
inconsistency in mankind, that these very people take the lead in almost every
thing, and are obsequiously followed by the rest of Europe. There may be
sufficient reasons for this, when we come to examine the matter. Somebody has
written a book called l'Europe Francoise. Some of the Asiatic people call us
Europeans all by the name of Franks, and consider us as one nation. We may
thank the French for bringing us all to that resemblance.

Various reflections will naturally occur to an Englishman, when he surveys,
even here, the consequences of arbitrary power: among the most striking of
which will be the poverty and oppression of the lower classes of society.

This government, since it got the better of the nobility and the Protestants,
overpowered all opposition, and destroyed all the traces of freedom, has
hitherto behaved wonderously well, considering its unlimited abilities to do
otherwise with impunity, and the natural effects of uncontrolled power on its
possessors. This may perhaps be attributed to the accidental influence of
polished manners, science, and civilization: but I would not promise or depend
much on the continuance of such moderation, nor on the duration of such casual
influence. We can already trace the footsteps of despotism here, and perceive
her careless and unfeeling indolence, with many unguarded strokes of her
natural pride and insolence, and can see that she must, soon or late, break
loose from such feeble restraints; and that philosophers, women, and public
opinion, will not always be a sufficient cheque even to her caprices. Though
this tyranny is not yet so bad as that of eastern despotism, it may terminate
somewhat in that way in due time: the people are already obviously impoverished
and oppressed. Effects must follow, and be proportioned to their causes. Of the
possessors of uncontrolled power, a great majority will probably always be
spoilt by it, in some degree, -- bodies of men still more than individuals. How
different the behavior of a Cyrus, or an Alexander, before and after the
possession of power? Even the Romans, when once triumphant, soon lost sight of
the wisdom, justice, temperance, and moderation, which had laid the foundation
of their empire.

The ancient European nations maintained, for a time, that free and independent
spirit, which had been their characteristic, as wandering tribes. But in that
state of society and knowledge, no system of precautions and control could be
foreseen or established, sufficient to secure their usual freedom against the
encroachments of tyranny, which must follow the influence of property, now
superadded to the military authority of their chiefs. The warlike forms and
order of the field, transplanted or continued to the fixed society, in time
produced the feudal system; a species of government which was soon found to be
incompatible with civil liberty, and which abolished all former ideas of
independence, and of the equal right in each man to whatever he might lawfully
possess, though ever so small; till society came gradually to be divided into
tyrants and slaves.

One of the necessary productions of that system, and perhaps the best, was
that barbarous species of perpetual war, which came afterward to be a little
softened and humanized by the romantic sentiments of chivalry. War exercises
and maintains some of the noble and manly exertions; and those who fight are
always good for something.

As men acquire freedom and security, they are known to improve in arts and
industry; in dexterity and division of labor: thence a greater number may be
maintained in idleness, and the powers and the happiness of the whole society
are considered as thereby increased. But such is the love of power, that
slavery would most probably have maintained its ground, though so obviously
against the interest of the whole, and particularly of the masters, had it not
been for certain accidents and changes in manners and ways of life. These
proceeded probably, at first, from that madness for the cruzades, which so
generally infected Europe, and of which the history is sufficiently known. The
necessary expenses attending those expeditions some increase of knowledge,
taste, arts and luxuries, brought from the East, produced considerable changes
at home; among which was the circulation of property, and the release of
numbers from a state of bondage.

The church, you know, likewise lent a helping hand to the abolition of
slavery, partly from religious, and partly from interested, motives. But
domestic freedom could be fully established only in those countries which have
entirely broken and thrown off the feodal claims. In the decline of that system
it was still doubted by many, whether the abolition of slavery would be of
advantage to the people in general? Though it has undoubtedly proved so in
England, and some other countries, the advantages may perhaps still be doubtful
where the absolute power of one master has succeeded to that of the many; and
were it not for the advances made in arts and civilization, it might yet be a
question, whether the despotism of one would not be worse than feodal anarchy,
where that one was not a very good man, and a firm and enlightened philosopher,
which we have reason to fear would seldom be the case if the ancient ignorance
still prevailed; such princes being even now rare, with all the advantages of
modern knowledge and education.

LETTER. XI. Of Studies and active Pursuits. -- The French and English, --
their Governments.
I MEANT to give you some travels, as well as reflections; but I think the
latter will encroach upon and fill up most of your paper. As there may be but
little that is new to you remaining for me to tell of these countries, and as I
am perhaps naturally more of a projector than a retailer of facts and
particulars, I shall probably go on frequently to indulge in various
speculations upon different subjects, as they may be called to mind by what I
see.

In my journal I find several things about French literature, of which I mean
to give you some extracts, as memory and occasions may answer.

In France, and indeed throughout Europe, all things seem in a perpetual change
or progress, which is governed by fashion. Even virtues, talents, change their
places and degrees of estimation in a short time. In one age, all for fighting;
another, all for study. Since we began to prefer idle to active pursuits, and
to take more credit for what we know and can talk of, than for what we can do,
we have fancied every thing was to be learned from reading books, when not too
idle even for that occupation.

One perceives these things more obviously here in France, though they probably
read less than you do. Some of their most sensible men, I think, place too much
dependence on books, and almost forget that reading can never entirely supply
the place of practical knowledge, though a very necessary assistance in order
to know or do any thing well. To acquire universal learning, they seem to think
one has only to consult their dictionaries -- the form into which they have
thrown every art and science, from cookery and hair-dressing, up to every
useful trade and species of philosophy: a manner of writing which may be of
great utility to mankind, if they are taught to take it only for what it is
worth, and not to depend on it too much. I wish such books to be reduced in
size and price; but they seem, on the contrary, growing bigger and dearer. They
might be made to serve as memoranda in all the arts, but cannot teach them.
Every thing that facilitates knowledge to the people, and tends to render each
art and science universally known, must be of service to mankind in general;
and their benefit and convenience is certainly at least of equal consequence
with that of those few who depend entirely on books for their knowledge, and
who are not generally of such importance to society. You have observed, chez
vous, some who, after the most laborious literary researches, were found to be
novices among the first people of practice with whom they had any thing to do,
till they began to discover how far behind real practice, books generally are
in most of the useful branches. They may be necessary in every kind, even of
practical knowledge, to a certain degree; but then you must know where to
doubt, and when to leave them.

When the importance of education shall be better understood, and men shall
have learnt to estimate things nearer to their real value, books may more
nearly keep pace with practice, and be of more use to it; and mankind may not
then be divided, as now, into two classes -- the few who read and depend too
much on books, and the many who do not read at all. Theory and practice may
then become better acquainted with each other, and some practical science
descend to the lower and most useful ranks of men.

In the French there is an apparent mutability, but at bottom a real sameness
of character, through all the known periods of their history. Although, in some
former times, they may have stood higher as to power, arts, science, taste, and
great men, there are certain peculiarities which form so inseparably a part of
their character, that I believe they must have been nearly the same sort of
people at all periods, whether as ancient Gauls, or Francks, or modern French.

But with us English, there is a real fund of mutability, so to speak, if we
are considered either individually or nationally. You know we are reputed as
changeable as our climate. We have been a very different sort of people at
different periods -- before and after the Reformation, for example. We have
taken a new character even since the Revolution, and differ much in our manners
and disposition since the time when Erasmus visited us; and in our temperament
there are perhaps yet the seeds of future revolutions.

In the French I see no sufficient causes of any great future change or
progress; and they are not now perhaps capable of procuring or executing any
species of government, very different from, or better than, what they at
present possess, and which is perhaps now so well adapted to their character,
to their habits of thinking, and ways of life, that a much better may not be
wished or expected.

There are doubtless many degrees of good, short of perfection, which is not to
be obtained in this world, though it is of vast consequence to keep it in
sight, as well as the right to the freedom of investigation. Since we see that
these people can be tolerably happy in their present condition, it may be said
that the ends of government are fully answered, as the best could do no more.
Yet, as English, we must still see deficiencies in this their present
condition. With all the advantages of a natural, cheerful, and happy temper,
together with the best government they can expect to enjoy, we must still doubt
if they ever can acquire that dignity of nature, and sense of security, which
can alone produce the efforts, the enterprise, the public spirit, and progress
of improvement, observable among a free people.

Their government must now, especially in its internal operations, probably
always partake of the national character, and of the defects incident to
unlimited power -- prudent and artful, rash and unsteady, enterprising or
indolent, by turns -- wisdom and folly, spirit and weakness, mixed, or
alternately taking the lead. But the unfeeling indolence and arrogance of
despotism must perhaps be expected at length to predominate.

With such a government, whose character and operations must at best depend so
much on fashion, or on the views and disposition of an accidental minister,
mistress, or favorite, and not upon a fixed constitution, measures must too
frequently change with men; and the completion of any thing great, that
requires much time, can hardly be expected.

This must be understood only of their internal or domestic government; for in
their foreign politics they have generally been steady, deep, and artful;
perhaps too artful, so as to create suspicions, and put nations on their guard,
and throw them into confederacies against their secret arts and growing power.

LETTER XII. French Pre-eminence, -- Arts, -- Trades, -- Intercourse.
IN every country there is probably something useful to be learnt; and to this,
which has been so long the leading nation in Europe, we all resort, on purpose
to learn almost every thing. I think they deserve that pre-eminence, in some
things; though they themselves are too apt to fancy that they do in all. They
may go on to deserve it still more, by means of the very advantages attending
that pre-eminence. Those advantages are many and important. The various and
valuable articles of commerce, the motives to industry and exertion of mind,
which the universality of their language and their fashions have procured them,
contribute much toward making them an industrious and almost commercial
people, in spite of their government, which is naturally rather careless and
oppressive. Though the concession of this pre-eminence gives them conceit, it
brings emulation along with it, and promotes a beneficial activity in the
provinces of taste and useful science. If the state could be forced into more
wisdom and benevolence, it might employ more effectual means toward their
preserving the lead in many more things of real importance to national
prosperity.

Even the article of books, which they write and print for all Europe, is no
inconsiderable means of both riches and of extensive influence, though the
Dutch have industriously drawn to themselves a share in this branch of trade.
The universal prevalence of French modes and manners likewise facilitates their
schemes in foreign politics, which I think they understand much better than
they do the principles of domestic prosperity. This, with an assiduous and
liberal attention to their ministers and consuls abroad, gives them an
ascendency in all the courts, and a powerful, though secret, influence, to the
opposite extremities, of Europe. You know they govern Spain, though you all
seem ignorant of the nature, history, and extent, of that connection: and I am
told that they have been even attentive, like the Jesuits, to the acquiring
some secret influence in the education of as many as they can of the young
princes in Europe; and that they hope, by such means, to guide the next Czar of
Russia, who is already much of a Frenchman.

If this reign continues steady to the principles in which it seems to begin,
they may long lead and manage the politics of Europe secretly in their own way,
and carry all before them. -- Nay, you yourselves may now be only acting in
obedience to some of the secret impulses given or promoted by this court. We
already see, and may learn, from Madame Pompadour, and others, that one of
their maxims will be, to persuade all Europe that they ought to be jealous of
the English, who must therefore be brought down: and they may now succeed. It
will probably long continue a great object with each nation to reduce the
other, even at the expense of reducing itself much more. How much better for
each to try to raise both! but especially for France, as she would, in that
progress, gain still a greater superiority. They might govern the world, if
they could keep steady to their principles and to their allies, and not grow
insolent by success. But perhaps that is not in human nature; and still less in
French nature. With success, a nation never knows where to stop. Greatness
knows not where nor how to set bounds to itself, but generally overshoots the
mark, and wears itself out. Prosperity not only spoils us, but creates us
enemies. Our late successes and superiority, in this century, cannot fail of
producing yet more combinations against us, probably before the next.

But, as I was going to observe, though we are probably before them in most of
the arts and trades, that are of the greatest use to mankind, yet there may be
much to be learned in this country. The arts and trades form a very extensive
and curiously connected system. Those of different countries, and even those of
the same country, have yet much to learn of each other. An intelligent artist
or tradesman will always find something to learn in so active and industrious a
nation as this; and I am pleased to see our manufacturers traveling here: --
our Bentleys, Coals, and others, from Birmingham, Manchester, etc.

The provinces of taste and utility are more intimately connected than the
world in general have formerly imagined; and happily, the useful arts are not
now beneath the attention of the scholar and the gentleman, while your
tradesmen are not all destitute of an useful and liberal education; though
there is yet great room for amendment in that way. As those classes approach
each other, the better it must be for the whole; for the different classes of
arts, sciences, and men, and for society in general. In most other countries,
the fine and liberal arts are, as yet, the mere appendages of luxury; they
stand alone and aloof from the other arts, their poor relatives, and are
therefore of little service to the nation.

The philosopher rejoices to see them descend among you to an acquaintance with
their humble brethren; and all, by mutual assistance, promoting each other's
interest, which then happily coincides with that of mankind. While you continue
to know this, you will yet more liberally promote and facilitate education in
general; the reception and encouragement of strangers of merit; the traveling
of proper students to other countries. Your different trades, companies,
manufacturers, should all zealously contribute to support, for example, such
institutions as your Royal Academy, with other more scientific schools, and
enable them to send youth abroad: you may thereby go on to improve and preserve
such a superiority in every thing you produce, founded on scientific and
mechanical knowledge, and good taste, as will force them into every country,
even in spite of the confined and selfish views of their most foolish and
tyrannical governments.

But if ever you come to be so conceited as to fancy you want no such foreign
assistance; that you can proudly stalk on alone, and still preserve your
superiority; it will be a certain symptom of decline. Shut up in your own
island, you will quickly barbarize into circumscribed nationalities; will sink
and follow the fate of all nations who have ever given up, or have been
deprived of, a sufficient intercourse with others. However, let not students of
taste stop long in France: -- let them get on to Italy at least, where some
gems will always be found among their rubbish, by those who can distinguish.
Nay, Italy is yet the country -- the capital of taste -- and the other nations
are only the distant provinces of that empire. Thither must all artists resort
to get rid of their provincial and vulgar manners. That people, though now so
despicable, if once united under a good government, I make no doubt would again
soon rule the world. Their talents, their language, would soon appear to be
capable of every thing, if these were once employed and exercised on objects
worthy of their exertions.

LETTER XIII. French Conversation and Societies, -- Language, -- and Singing.
I WAS forming for you catalogues of French authors, with some short remarks,
but I now learn that such things have been already so often done, that it must
be needless to fill up your letters with such intelligence. The French, you
know, have long and liberally encouraged all the arts and sciences, and have
generally presumed to take the lead in learning as well as in taste; and, what
has still more influence, it has lately become the fashion, among both sexes,
to philosophize, and form societies for that purpose. If this taste should
continue for a sufficient length of time, the French ladies may prove to be
very good philosophers themselves, and may help to make many others. They may
be the means of extending knowledge, and of producing such beneficial effects
as would here be impossible without their influence. Students may certainly
meet in France with more assistance, and more readily in Paris, than with us,
in conversation, in public libraries, and lectures.

Conversation is the fort of this people. From thence we may gather more
pleasure and improvement than any where else. They are so thoroughly agreeable
and communicative, and always ready to give you all they know: so that the
reading of a very few may serve the whole nation, and also benefit many of us
visitors. You may meet here with whole societies, genteel, agreeable, and
apparently well informed, where only one or two, or perhaps none of them, ever
read; not even on the subjects upon which their society is formed, and their
conversation chiefly turns. They pick up what they think sufficient
information, at second or third hand, among their friends. The knowledge of one
thus spreads through a great number; and hence their knack at talking so well
on subjects which they have never studied, and which they surprise us by
seeming to understand almost as well as many of those who have gone through all
the tedious forms of the schools.

It is difficult to gain admittance to the best company here, as well as every
where else. Nor in any country do the comfortable, little, sensible, and
familiar, societies easily admit of strangers; and still less of foreigners:
but where, by letters or friends, you are once received, you will find them
more communicative and agreeable than almost any where else. However, I think,
the most sensible and best informed among them have, like those among
ourselves, something reserved and retired, and even sometimes un peu
misanthrope. Shall we doubt if knowledge increases our happiness? We may, -- if
the knowledge of men's follies and wickedness is to keep us perpetually out of
humor with them.

Doubtless some of these observations must have often been made before, though
I have not seen them, having purposely rather avoided reading much on those
matters, that I may, without prejudice, see with my own eyes. Others have
occurred, on attending with a little more application than time and
opportunities had hitherto permitted me to give to their agreeable language, --
to its sounds and formation. With all its defects, it is certainly the language
of prose, as somebody has observed; and more especially of conversation. You
see it has already been, and may still be, of great service to mankind as a
general and convenient medium of communication; and now in possession of that
privilege, will probably keep it, were it only from the central situation of
this country; as several nations, in order to visit each other, must pass
through France. The French seem formed for social intercourse, and their
language made on purpose to indulge them in it.

Though their conversation is, in general, trivial, to a degree beyond what you
may conceive, yet the power of custom or habit, together with their agreeable
manner, their delicate pronunciation and phraseology, will soon render most of
it at least supportable, and much of it highly agreeable. As we become greater
adepts, and can express ourselves with ease, many new beauties and delicacies
of the language begin to appear, and to please us. We become better pleased
with ourselves; and that helps greatly to embellish every thing around us. And
among such a variety of people, a chosen few may always be found who are at
once learned, sensible, and agreeable.

Still I think, for some other purposes, this language is defective or limited.
Consisting much of fixed idioms and favorite expressions, though clear and
precise, with little variety of order or arrangement, in some researches it
may, like books in general, carry the mind a certain length, or in a certain
tract; but then it will tend to keep it there, and furnish but little
encouragement or assistance to go farther. For these, and other similar
reasons, -- from an affectation and refinement peculiar to this people, and
generally the fruits of civilization, -- from the composition of its sounds,
articulations, and accents, -- I think this language almost totally unfit for
poetry, and entirely unfit for music. But to see how insensible the natives are
to these defects of their own language, is vexatious and melancholy. One of the
heaviest taxes I have to pay for living among them is, being obliged to hear
them sing. For though their language is so totally unfit to be sung, and they
themselves, with that unfortunate manner of theirs, such horrid singers, yet,
from one end of the kingdom to the other, they are eternally attempting it. I
have more than once been obliged to change my habitation in order to get away
from some singing cobblers or servants. Our own manner of singing is not perhaps
a great deal better; but we are not so fond of teazing other people with our
performance.

Whenever we treat of sounds, I think terms are wanting, and must probably be
always deficient or inadequate in representing to the eye the objects of
hearing. The French way of singing may be called a bursting, and the English a
choking, manner: the first, an outrageous and vulgar expression of passion or
of bodily pain; the second is the expression of nothing, but a kind of false
and unfeeling notion of grace. Both have generally some kind of violence or
uneasiness in the manner and expression, which gives pain to the unaccustomed
hearer. The climate, the language, give generally to our northern female voices
a kind of harsh or defective tone; and to the men a hoarse or choking one. It
is only some of the bass voices, in either France or England, that I can bear
to hear with any pleasure. The voices to the north of the Alps and the
Pyrennees are all, I think, very distinguishable and defective.

LETTER XIV. On the Revival of Taste and Science, and Decline.
WE have reason to be both thankful and surprised that science and good taste
have recovered so much and so soon from the blows they have received at
different times, from various causes. They began to decline with the fall of
the Greek empire, and almost totally expired with that of the Romans, by the
irruptions of the rude northern nations. Their revival was long prevented by
that excess of wild devotion which cautioned and prejudiced the people against
the profane learning of the Gentiles, and banished almost all ideas of the
beautiful and sublime. Latterly, after a considerable restoration of taste and
science, by the Italians, and the riches of the church, our happy reformation
certainly reverted a little toward barbarism, by a puritanical enthusiasm; and
by excluding the fine arts from the temples, gave them a check which all your
riches of commerce and freedom have not yet been able to recover; nor probably
ever will, till you become liberal-minded enough to admit them again to that
sanctuary. Genius requires the attention of a whole public, and her works must
be judged by the world at large. The private wealth and private houses of rich
individuals, though a considerable assistance, can never, I fear, prove an
encouragement nor a theater sufficient to excite her greatest exertions, or to
inspire her sublimest enthusiasm. Though our church is now neither so rich nor
so powerful as formerly, yet she might still encourage the arts, and might
furnish the motives they probably want the most, viz. those proceeding from
honor, competition, liberality, public spirit, devotion.

Your Royal Academy, while directed by the good sense and good taste of a man
who forms an era in his country, doubtless has done, and may yet do, much
toward the revival of true taste: and it might yet do more, if half of those
works it has produced could be kept together, to form a lasting exhibition, --
a perpetual school, and a visible history of the progress of the arts; whereas
the effects of those works are almost lost by their dispersion and
disappearance after a short glance of the public eye. Greater and more
magnificent, more public as well as more permanent exhibitions and
encouragements, are necessary. Honor and fame are the great objects of genius,
more than pecuniary rewards, which, by a wise and liberal admixture of honors
and attentions, may be oeconomised and made just sufficient, for they may be
too great as well as too small; -- so far are riches alone from being competent
to the purposes in question. The advantages of the churches, and of a few
public galleries, contribute greatly to maintain a taste in the arts in some
countries, even in spite of the oppressions of poverty and despotism.

It may be time to take precautions likewise against another source of the
decline or corruption of taste. The love of ornament is progressive, and
insensibly steals upon us, with the progress of civilization and refinement, to
a vicious excess: and they who bring us back toward simplicity, before we
entirely lose the relish for it, surely deserve well of the public. I suspect
your having lately advanced too far in this career. Let us hope that your
gentlemen of taste and science, your president and some others of your first
artists, may succeed in correcting or recovering you from that distempered
taste which, I fear, was leading you fast toward a decline, through the usual
road of indulgence in perpetual change and novelty, long before you had reached
the summit of elegant simplicity and the true sublime. Your colifichet of a
thing for a public bank, certain houses, rooms, and cielings, gave but too many
indications of your going too fast and too far. Perhaps no ornamental
architecture higher than the Doric, or at most the Ionic, ought to appear to
the open air, in your climate, and more especially in great public buildings.
Of the fine arts, architecture is probably the first that does and should
improve, and has a tendency to give a tone and some limits to the rest. But
perhaps it cannot so soon advance to any great height in a brick country.

Besides, the taste of commerce and of suddenly acquired riches, is seldom
chaste. The possessors are in too great haste to enjoy every thing with a
coarse and untutored appetite; they must have butter to their pork, as the
Spaniards say. It is the rich bourgeoisie -- les parvenus, who lead us on to
those vicious excesses in ornamental taste, while the people of real fashion
and knowledge strive to keep us back within the bounds of good sense and
moderation. Let us therefore encourage the simple and sublime, while we have
yet some relish and some advocates for it. It is to be hoped that one who
should build like Jones Covent Garden church.
, or write like Swift, would still be liked.

You know I am a staunch advocate for visiting other countries, as a necessary
part of education. In short, I think all who can, should travel, and especially
your artists. Without this, the arts cannot be sustained among you, not even up
to their present degree of mediocrity. Without a constant communication with
other nations, your taste and your works of art will be apt to favor of your
separate and insular situation. You will get into narrow and limited paths of
your own, and become mere manierists, at best; and your productions will be
marked and vulgarized by something peculiar, like a provincial accent: or when
you venture out beyond such limits, you will probably be enticed into those of
Affectation. -- Pray beware of that bewitching jade: -- but I think few of the
moderns can entirely escape her. -- It seems as if she had taken up her
principal abode in this country.

Your travelers should not all be confined to certain fashionable tracts.
There are countries as yet not much explored, where even the works of art may
be worthy of some attention; and others where those of nature, of society and
manners, assume to us unknown, but never uninteresting, appearances. You should
sometimes get out of Europe, were it only to look back upon her at a distance,
and there consider, compare, and estimate, her arts, her superiority, her
sameness, from new and different points of view. Spain, the north and east of
Europe, may furnish many objects interesting to the artist and philosopher, and
not yet much known. And beyond those limits, among Moors, Turks, Tartars, and
other Asiatics, you may gain more various and enlarged conceptions of mankind;
and you may there easier guess at what the Greeks and Romans were: -- other
ideas of grace and manner may then occur which you could never have acquired in
Europe. Our notions of what is graceful are too apt to be confined and local,
-- either national, vulgar, affected, or fashionable: even that which is
reputed genteel in one country, will not be admitted to be so in another, and
is often, in fact, only some temporary or whimsical kind of affectation.

LETTER XV. On Women.
To Mrs. P --.
THE women of this country, their singular, and, I think, superior, character,
claim a great share of attention both from the natives and strangers; and tend
to furnish me with some perhaps new ideas and speculations on this and other
connected subjects. The natural ease and boldness of their manner and
deportment, the numberless graces of their address and conversation, their
familiarity and facility of access, their restless vivacity, their extensive
knowledge, the credit and weight of their opinions, are all very striking to a
stranger; and being generally enough known, I shall not dwell upon them. Our
ideas of their indelicacy being measured by a standard of our own, and taken
from the excessive nicety of our own petits maitres et petites maitresses,
other nations do not readily admit of nor understand. However, I think the two
nations may in many ways improve each other; and a female character, formed of
the best qualities of both, might be superior to either: our ladies might
perhaps be improved by the acquisition of some of their franchise and bolder
graces; and theirs, in their turn, by a little of our female naivete,
sensibility, and ingenuous simplicity.

You know I have long entertained some opinions concerning women, and the
female character in general, which may appear rather singular to some, though
not to you; and in which I am the more confirmed by what I have been led to
think and observe here. You and Twee have contributed largely to lead me into
these notions, and are therefore bound to correct and improve them Those two
valuable women, Mrs. Pilcher and Mrs. Commissioner Proby of Rochester, will
long, long be feelingly remembered and lamented by many as superior characters,
and singularly confidential friends to each other. Their exalted good sense,
their sentiments and ideas, went far beyond the age in which they lived, though
not a had nor an ignorant age. Had they been spared to us a little longer,
these Letters might have made a better appearance. Their friendship had this
singularity in it, that the discovery of the merits of each was owing to the
other. -- The truth of this, and the reality of their great sense and merit,
are become more evident since their death.
. I think then, that women have nowhere yet attained their proper place and
uses in society, -- not even here in polished Europe, -- though the example of
this leading nation shows us at least the possibility of it, and that we may
now be in a progress toward the right ideas on this point.

I have thought that the best remedies to those evils mentioned in my last, and
to many others, may be hoped for, from the admission of women to a better
education, and to more influence in the councils of taste and learning; and it
might perhaps be as well if they were not entirely excluded from any other
councils. Happily they seem of late to have gradually risen in consideration
and utility in this and some other countries, and it is hoped they may go on to
rise to that equality with men in natural rights, and in the use of their
talents, which seems intended by nature. The rank and consideration of the sex
must probably always follow the degrees of civilization. Yet, in the history of
nations, we see great variety in this; and we know from Sparta, that a wise
government might do much toward modeling their character, and directing their
education to the public good.

From such gradual improvement of the sex, and hence in the constitution of
society, consists the only hope I can see of a remedy to that growing
disposition to indulgence, affectation, and perpetual change, which attends on
civilization, arts, and taste, and which so soon entices us out of the paths of
good sense, that we are so long in finding, and which finally leads to ruin. In
Europe, to stop this progression, would not probably be either practicable or
advantageous: to retard or direct it aright, seems to be the object that we
should keep in view, and can only be attained by the assistance of the other
sex. Of the attempts of eastern legislators to arrest the natural progress and
improvement of the human species, the effects and success have not been such as
to be recommended or imitated in Europe. Were this a country of freedom, and
the female education to go on to be yet more liberal and manly, in addition to
their present numerous and agreeable acquirements, from the joint endeavors of
both sexes, I can conceive this might then be a pattern of good government,
and, as a central and leading nation, might really improve the rest of Europe.

The talents or abilities of the sexes are probably nearly equal, when equally
cultivated: or, if some mental constitutional differences exist, these are not
greater than between individuals of the same sex, and not beyond the power of
habit and education to assimilate and equalize.

Among the most perfect animals, the sexes seem to approach the nearest to
equality. In the human species it is difficult to determine which sex has the
advantage. In considering those small native differences, I am sometimes
inclined to give it in favor of the female character. If the men have some
important advantages in mental and bodily force, the female mind seems to
inherit others more numerous, and to be more universal. Formed, as it were, of
a finer paste, women seem to possess greater degrees of sensibility, -- quicker
and nicer perceptions. They are thereby admirably well constituted to be our
companions and assistants in almost every occupation; more tractable, easier
taught, and molded into habits, they possess from nature, or can sooner
acquire, the most essential habit of controlling and regulating self
indulgence. They can thus more easily stop the source of the most destructive
passions, and hence of the greatest evils in life: and, when once raised to all
the influence and knowledge of which they are capable, they may teach us to do
the same.

On temperance, or the management of indulgence, depend our best habits and
dispositions, -- the enjoyment of everything, -- the duration of good taste, of
life, of society itself.

Even now, if we were strictly to estimate the consolations the sex afford us,
the patience and other virtues they teach us, how much of our happiness, and
even of our wisdom, proceeds from them, we should perhaps be astonished, and
too proud or ashamed to state fairly the account. -- How much more might we not
expect from their talents and their virtues, if these were properly improved by
education! We may venture to predict that they will always answer and repay all
the endeavors and attentions we may choose to bestow on their education; and
will generally keep up to any opinion and expectations we may venture to
entertain of their character and abilities; and, in short, will always be
nearly what we choose them to be. I think I have observed, in several different
countries, that wherever the men and women live, and are most employed,
together, there results a similarity of character, -- the powers and exertions,
the good order, of the whole, are much increased. Such are the countries in the
northern mountains of Spain, among some of those in Switzerland, Germany, and,
remarkably so, here in France. The effects of a thorough subordination and
separation between the sexes, as in Asia, the character and condition of
society in such countries, are well enough known, it is hoped, to put us on our
guard against every thing that has a tendency toward such absurd and
pernicious tyranny, the natural enemy of social happiness, and of all the
elegant arts in life. From the constant intercourse and mutual inclinations of
the sexes, and their perpetual efforts to please, proceed all the fine arts and
elegant refinements, and most of our best habits. Women should perhaps take the
lead in these, as naturally the best judges of elegance of every kind, in men
and things, personal and intellectual.

Fine taste in Greece and Rome has been seen to decline through an excess of
ornament; and, in more modern times, we have seen her take nearly the same
route, through the concetti of Italy, and the cultos of Spain: and I suppose we
have no right to expect that the leading nations of the present age, France and
England, can avoid the downhill paths that seem marked out by nature for arts
and civilization. If possible to retard or avert this natural decline, or to
change its course, I think it must be done by the good education and joint
endeavors of both sexes.

Though a proper education has seldom but by accident fallen to the lot of
women, those accidental instances are in favor of the probability of success,
if more generally attempted. The pains bestowed on them are seldomer, I
believe, thrown away than on the other sex. As we open to them the sources of
science, and of the most manly virtues, we shall find they will plentifully
partake. Their more pliant character and understandings will be readily raised
and improved, and they will amply repay us with interest, as companions and
assistants, as mothers and tutors.

The union of acquired dignity with their natural softness, of the manly with
the benevolent virtues, would produce the most extensive and beneficial effects
on society: and accordingly I think we find the few accomplished learned and
manly female characters, that are known in history and in our own times, have
generally had all the success, and have produced the effects, here indicated;
and they have been the means of raising themselves, and mankind around them, to
their highest honors. Among the instances that may be taken from the times of
chivalry, -- from England, Russia, and from the catalogue of sovereigns in
general, -- the females certainly outshine the males, in proportion to their
numbers. And all know the influence and importance of great and wise women, in
families as in empires, from the mother of the Gracchi down to our present
queen.

When we become wise and liberal enough to elevate and improve, and
sufficiently consult, the sex, we may acquire from them every virtue and every
sentiment that leads most directly to happiness. They will teach us to control
our passions, to regulate and oeconomise our pleasures, and, instead of
promoting, they will set bounds to luxury and indulgence, and will stop the
decline of good taste with that of manners and morals.

LETTER XVI. The same Subject continued.
YOU may be sure I am pleased that you agree with some of the opinions hazarded
in my last. I shall go on to finish what I have to say on the subject, though
the digression should extend farther than I may yet foresee. I do not pretend
to build a new system, only to mend the old; nor to turn women into men, but to
make them yet more useful and agreeable to us. And I think the objections you
mention, and several others, would be easily answered. -- But I shall only
detain you by a few more remarks as they occur.

Though we should grant that our living so much with the women
indiscriminately, as the French do here, might not answer so well for us at
present; and though the company of the giddy and unthinking fair might, at
first, tend to enervate and induce to idleness, and neglect of more serious and
useful application; give them a liberal education, and suitable employ, and the
danger will cease. If some of them are now too gay and thoughtless, the best
remedy will be the endeavoring to make them less so, and not by running away
from them. While we preclude them from every occupation that gives
self-importance, from all management of the public, and even of their own
affairs, we have no right to complain of the consequences, of which a life and
character of idleness and dissipation may be among the least pernicious. To
attempt depriving them of their natural influence, would be futile, and a
beginning at the wrong end; rather qualify them to exert it to some good
purposes. If, by the addition of knowledge, reason, and dignity, they become
quite irresistible, so much the better then; -- they are nearly so now, without
all those qualifications. In short, since we have begun to raise the sex from
servitude, we must probably go on, till we bring them as near to an equality as
nature will permit. There is no medium in this. They cannot stop long where
they are. Every remaining mark of inferiority only so far debases their minds,
and sets them upon restoring that equality by secret and sinister arts, which
must participate too much of deceit. We must, doubtless, allow them every art
or artifice that tends to render them more amiable, et a far la ritrosa, where
nature seems to have made it necessary, -- but no more. While we render it
necessary in most of their conduct, we shall have to complain of their deceit
and duplicity.

Most of the present striking differences between the male and female
character, are more the effect of art than of nature; such is the power of
education, which ought to be employed in improving, and not in debasing nature;
and should not be used to widen that separation, but rather in bringing them
nearer together.

The female dress should have a nearer resemblance to that of men, -- and
especially when they ride, which they should also do like us. In England, their
present silly and perilous mode of riding is ascribed to Queen Elizabeth, --
but it is now surely high time to leave it off. I rejoice to see that some
women of fashion have sense and spirit enough to adopt, on that occasion, our
dress nearly, and our manner of riding entirely, and in most other countries,
to see it common with all ranks: and to see the female riding-dress approaching
gradually toward a resemblance to ours. They ought to wear drawers under their
present, or some more graceful, long dress; though not quite so long as the
present fashion: the sex would certainly gain by showing a little more of their
legs: -- there is a just medium between showing all and concealing all. Such
things, though apparently trifling, may have great influence on the female
character.

But the French must probably long lead the fashions in dress, and several
other things. How many follies, and how many improvements, does Europe owe to
this nation? Had it not been for the prevalence of their manners, Italian and
Spanish jealousy would probably have extended throughout Europe, so as to
exclude the sex almost entirely from society; whence arts and civilization
would gradually have disappeared, -- despotism -- barbarism would again have
reigned over the face of the earth. However, in this of prescribing our dress,
it is rather doubtful if they are entitled to the authority they have so long
assumed and exercised, with such a mixture of sense and levity, of good and
false taste. In their pursuit of variety, it is however rather surprising that
they have hardly ever stumbled upon any dress of good sense, -- on some Greek
or other graceful and convenient mode of clothing ourselves. We also owe to
them this violent and ridiculous difference of appearance between the sexes, as
if they were animals of a different species. The mode of dress I think of more
importance than generally believed: -- but I will not detain you with it.

Every thing that tends to produce an equality and resemblance between the
sexes, I think of consequence; and to me it is pleasant to see them approaching
toward it in this country; -- though one would rather wish the women to become
more manly, than the men more feminine, which is too often the case here.
Though we act the tyrants over the female part of society with more politeness
than in some former and ruder times, yet all the romantic nonsense of modern
gallantry and affected regard for the sex, the remains of chivalry, though
better than nothing, we know to be an insufficient restraint on man, and on his
real power and assumed superiority. I fear nothing but a legal and acknowledged
equality, and a liberal education, can secure to women their natural rights and
influence, nor give to society all the benefits of their powers and talents.

Many of those female weaknesses which we term delicacy, etc. and pretend to
admire, we secretly laugh at; -- or when our taste is so far vitiated as really
to like them, it is chiefly from their being symptoms of inferiority and
subordination, that sooths and feeds our pride and domineering spirit. In that
road we may go on to endless and unnatural refinements, if not controlled in
time; -- but for that purpose we want wise and manly women, who, for our sakes
and their own, must shame us out of such nonsensical weakness, and bring us
back to sense and nature. Beauty belongs more to strength than to weakness. --
Nay, force is necessary to beauty and graceful motion. The best statues of
Venus, and still more of Diana, are so well proportioned as to give ideas at
once of strength, agility, and of beauty. Strength of body and of mind are
perfectly compatible with softness and gentleness of manner.

Though it has been observed that mind is of no sex, yet there must doubtless
be always some obvious and radical distinctions between us in character and
occupation. I only plead for those distinctions being reduced to what is
absolutely necessary, and no more. The resemblance can never be complete, and
must ever be sufficiently limited by nature. The merits and effects of this way
of proceeding would depend more on the constant endeavors toward an
approximation than in the completion of it; as human happiness, in general,
consists more in action than in the acquisition of that rest and repose which
seems to be the only object of all our activity. -- Only remove the too great
diversity and separation of our occupations and education; let the tasks of
life be properly divided between us, and carried on by mutual assistance
wherever it is practicable, and they will be much better performed. Then the
great diversity in education will become not only less necessary, but still
more inconvenient and pernicious.

LETTER XVII. The same Subject continued.
I CAN readily obey you, and go on with the favorite subject of my last,
though the digression may appear tedious to some of your society. You, and
certain French ladies, led me into it, and others come just apropos to detain
me there. Some of them are certainly charming creatures! so lively! so
intelligent! et remplies d' esprit, de graces, et de science. We have just been
to see palaces, churches, and pictures, with Madame M --. Her conversation is
delightful, -- free and manly, yet with sufficient delicacy for me, though not
perhaps for all of you, with your cold English refinements. -- Her observations
showed great judgment, taste, and even genius. She has been criticizing their
philosophers, one by one, in a fine strain of graceful good humor and good
sense, and with a fund of science, as yet but too little known among our
English ladies. -- But she unluckily would favor us with some of her chosen
airs d' opera, -- et d' un gout et d' une maniere, -- a fair pity, -- enfin
nationale. -- What a pity they cannot have a better taste in music, -- but, I
fear, it is impossible with such a language as theirs.

Perhaps it is happy for this country that the women have acquired such
influence, take the lead, and govern in almost every thing: and hence it is
perhaps, that things go on so much better than could be expected with such an
arbitrary and unfeeling government. Though this is a corrupt and intriguing
kind of influence, and would be far better if established and avowed, yet even
now it is much better than none. They are probably the means of mitigating the
follies and natural severities of tyranny, and the cause of much good being
done which would otherwise be neglected; and, in conjunction with the
philosophers, they may come to guide and direct the public opinion, which must
always be respected by the most absolute governments, and is so here, to a
degree you might not expect.

Although, with us, the impediments to the elevation and proper employment of
women, are probably greater than in France, from certain differences in
opinions, manners, and ways of life, and as the sexes with you are not
occupied, nor live together so much as they do here; yet we too can boast of
many excellent female characters, and of several of those self-taught female
writers who have made a figure, and have probably done some good to mankind by
their writings. Our women are certainly formed by nature equal at least to any
others in several essential qualities, -- in beauty, in sentiment, -- with the
finest hearts and affections, -- warm and steady in their attachments. But we
cannot contradict the stranger, who finds them generally cold and reserved in
conversation. Their apparently insipid manner probably strikes foreigners, who
will require time and experience to discover that there can be any warmth of
soul under such cold appearances. However, an useful and manly education, built
upon such solid good qualities, would give them a prodigious superiority.

Private domestic education I think generally the best, especially for females.
If this should luckily ever prevail over that of boarding-schools, the defects
of the latter must surely become more and more conspicuous; for they will
probably grow worse as the expense of them increases. The world will surely
soon begin to see that the time and money bestowed, -- the false and useless
ideas, -- the habits of idleness, indifference, or extravagance, all too
generally acquired in those seminaries, -- is paying much too dear for the
chance of a few very unimportant accomplishments, and in which so few make any
progress equal to what they probably would do at home. Though some of those
schools are well conducted by excellent and valuable women, yet such places can
never sufficiently resemble families, which are the foundation of society, and
the materials of which it is formed; and in them all the duties and habits of
life should be acquired.

Mothers, though frequently with us, as yet, but moderately accomplished, might
nevertheless instruct their children and themselves, at the same time, by a
very little foreign assistance. In this way we might produce more superior
female characters, and more mothers properly qualified for this duty; and we
should thereby, in my opinion, improve the world very fast.

Nor can I conceive with some, that we should have less, but certainly more,
conjugal happiness in the world, by an increase of female wisdom and knowledge,
-- by means of more numerous and more important objects of mutual intercourse
and employ. I have known examples that confirm me in this opinion; nor can I
relinquish it on account of one or two studious females, who have been perhaps
too much engrossed by some favorite branch of study, and who might seem to
neglect themselves and their families in other things.

It is generally admitted that there are many more employments and professions
well adapted to the talents and temperament of women than they have yet
exercised among you, and which they might probably fill with at least as much
credit and propriety as men: -- but in all, I would have both sexes to join in
some degree, and each to lend the helping hand of relief, whenever it is
possible. Women might be of great use in all the learned and sedentary
professions: these, in my opinion, might then be carried to greater perfection,
and with much less confinement to the studious, if both sexes were properly
qualified to assist and relieve each other. There is not a more unnatural being
than a man whose life is totally engrossed by what we moderns call learning.
The confinement and exclusive attention to books will generally destroy or
impair his natural vigor and activity, till he becomes a weak, unhealthy, and
a very helpless creature.

Women we have seen, in some countries, uniting their exertions with those of
their husbands and relations, even in laborious employments; and I am glad to
find that of late it has become more customary in your manufacturing counties.

Proceeding on this principle, I think that the children of both sexes should
be educated together and alike, as far as propriety and manners would admit,
which would be far enough for every good purpose, if it were once the custom.
But we are now prejudiced and accustomed to a separate and totally different
education, as if we were beings of a different species, without connection or
intercourse, and each sex is to be prepared for employments or professions in
which the other is not even supposed to judge, and therefore cannot assist. In
families where brothers and sisters are brought up a good deal together, it has
been observed that both are the better for it; and the most manly of the
sisters, who keep up the nearest to the brothers in their laborious exercises
or employments, are generally every way the superior characters.

Men who are subject to the mean jealousy or fear of female learning or
accomplishments, instead of making use of them, are certainly not the fittest
to dictate in this matter. Nor do we find those who pretend to be so highly
disgusted with learned or masculine women, to be the most manly or learned of
men. That little jealousy or dislike we may rather consider as an indication of
some meanness, false delicacy, or other deficiency of character or education.
We had much better improve and make use of their talents, and we should then
find them of infinite use to us in many subjects. When we act the legal
tyrants, and frame laws, regulations, and opinions, that concern both sexes, we
ought certainly to consult the other, especially when they become capable and
worthy of being consulted.

We English, I fear, were the farthest spoiled, and were becoming quite
singular, in these feminine ideas of delicacy; we were growing really
ridiculous, till some ladies of rank and good sense, I am happy to see, are
bringing again into fashion to be manly and unaffected. Some of your little
snarling authors, too, pretended to join the cry, and to dictate their little
national prejudices for the government of the female world: but I hope your
ladies will have courage enough to go on to be as manly or learned as they
please; they will have the men of sense, and the laugh, on their side, against
the fribbles and triflers, who are, to be sure, as yet by far too numerous
among you, and who are not yet ashamed to miscall your manly and resolute women
by the opprobrious names of masculine creatures, horse godmothers, etc.

While in this disposition, which you may think too French and too favorable
to the female part of the species, I am inclined to believe it highly probable
that the greatest perfection of which society is capable, may depend greatly on
this approximating equality of the sexes, -- on our accumulated talents and
joint endeavors being applied to most of the studies and occupations in life,
and thereby all the powers of both being brought into use.

All the countries I have seen have helped to confirm me in these opinions, --
those where men and women are the most separated, as well as those where they
live most together; and I think the advances and civilization of the species
may every where be measured by the degrees of general intimacy and intercourse
of the sexes.

LETTER XVIII. Education.
THOSE ideas of women, into which I have been led by you, and the manly
agreeable females of this country, have induced me to think and inquire about
education, which also appears to me here, I think, in some new points of view.
The school education in France is seldom, I fancy, preferable to our own, and
often worse, though that of the world may be better with them. Their seminaries
and colleges are still so over-loaded with superstitious ceremonies, as to
impede the progress in useful knowledge, and to terrify reason out of her way.
However, society and conversation afterward make some amends for those early
errors and deficiencies; and though this occasions a loss, at least of time, it
serves to show the advantages of educating more by converse and practice than
by books, and the probability of success, if we were to apply the minds of
youth rather more to practical and useful objects, than to books and
speculative systems. This was the manner of the ancients, and we may regret
that it is not yet more practiced among us.

Your national predilection in favor of too frequent a separation of the
sexes, even in their earliest instructions, with other similar ideas of false
delicacy, I begin here to consider as the produce and the bane of mistaken
civilization, and as impediments to a right education of both sexes. Unless
some wise legislature, or some female good sense, come in time to your
assistance, I fear you may go still farther into the errors and extremes of a
refinement which knows no bounds, and which has a tendency to increase that
separation of the sexes, perhaps at length to an Asiatic degree. If these ideas
should extend, the consequences would be ruinous to Europe. Among the least
pernicious of them would probably be that of bestowing a still greater
proportion of pains on what is called the minds of youth, to the utter neglect
of many graceful and manly exercises, useful and ornamental abilities, which
used to be acquired with a view to please each other. Their heads would then be
more unmercifully stuffed with theories and speculations, without practice or
application to any thing useful; and their hearts, or moral part, would then be
left to chance, and to the company of their own sex, with full liberty to make
very great savages of one another.

In your higher ranks, I fear it is often from not having been taught any
useful knowledge in their youth, that we have seen so many country gentlemen,
and others, neglect the studies of their early years, because they furnish
neither amusement nor utility in the common affairs o^ their lives. And among
your lower classes it is still a greater shame and pity to fin^ education so
defective, and your police i^ many things so wretched; and to see, i^ nations
and governments, so far inferio^ to yours, the miserable inhabitants appearing
so much more polished, civilized, and conversible, than your freeborn
Englishmen.

In your happy government, where no one is confined to the rank in which he was
born, a free scope is given to the genius and industry of all, to better their
condition, and proportionally to rise in importance; you, therefore, owe to
each, an education equal at least to his intended rank and condition, and
perhaps to that of the next above him: for numbers among you are daily rising,
by their wealth, into stations and offices in life for which they are found to
be totally unprepared and unfit, and are thereby worse than lost to the
community. This may be a cause of more people appearing to be misplaced, chez
vous, in office or dignity, than in countries where merit is not so professedly
attended to. Occasions may arise with people in office so very improperly
placed, as to be the ruin of the nation. If it is meant to keep the people
ignorant from policy, I am pretty sure it is false policy, and tout calcul
fait, you will find that the want of education is a loss of power, and a great
hindrance to the advances of a nation in all the arts, besides the injury done
to morals, manners, and civilization. We have never found the Scotch to be
worse, but certainly better qualified for most things, for having so generally
received some education in their youth: their common people are therefore more
temperate, frugal, and better behaved, -- confessedly of a moral character
superior to the people of the southern and richer provinces. This is well known
both in the land and sea service.

By good education, I mean virtuous habits and useful knowledge, at least that
is the best general definition that I can think of at present. No rank in
society should remain without some share of these, such as is suited to their
condition. Why should not even the lowest ranks learn writing, and some of the
uses of numbers, and many of them some geometry and mechanics in a practical
way? By the labor of learning these, -- by the very act of going regularly to
school, together with some proper and practical moral instruction there; we
know that excellent effects may be produced, and that the important habits of
regularity and application, obedience and economy, may in this way be given to
the people, in short, a moral character superior to that of your present lower
classes.

There are not probably any where so many liberal and public-spirited gentlemen
as in your island; and yet I fear, throughout the country, the supply is not
equal to the demand; and in most public departments, there is too obvious a
want of useful and scientific knowledge, as well as among your tradesmen and
country squires, which is indeed becoming almost proverbial, now that you are,
it is hoped, ceasing to deserve the imputation.

The vulgarity and ignorance which we have too often seen a great deal too high
in office -- I am ashamed to think how high; in short, the deficiencies in our
education, I fear are yet such as may long keep the nation down, far beneath
its natural place and estimation in the scale of Europe and of the world. When
foreigners see these things, they are astonished at our superiority,
unacquainted with the powers of our constitution: that constitution not having
yet produced a better education for all ranks, I cannot well account for. If we
had more men of science, we should be more ashamed to show to those of our
neighboring nations the manifest ignorance and neglect to be seen around our
extensive and important coasts.

I think I have observed, that the kind of knowledge in which the people, and
even the gentlemen throughout England, are the most deficient, is the
mathematical, -- still more than in either the natural or moral kinds: many of
them seem to acquire some tolerable notions of agriculture, of law and
government, of commerce; but in most of the subjects where mathematics are
concerned; as, canals, roads, rivers, seaports, embankings, piers, harbors,
mines, buildings, weights, measures, mills, machines, manufactories,
pneumatics, hydraulics, in examinations, etc. in these you may often see
country justices, and country gentlemen, deceived or led into absurdities by
the most illiterate tradesman, over whom, a small tincture of mathematical
knowledge at school or college might have given them a decided superiority, a
beneficial control and direction. If our good fortune should ever bring a man
of science to be a minister, with sufficient powers, he will probably show us
our ignorance in his improvements; he will find means to oblige various
establishments and corporate bodies to do their duty at least, and establish
others if necessary; and will make them consult and employ men of science when
obviously requisite: such as your Trinity House, -- commissioners of sewers, --
those for draining Lincolnshire, -- the corporations of London, and of most of
the seaports and maritime counties.

In the general spirit of improvement, that of education must surely follow in
time. More useful knowledge, we may hope, will in future be taught at your
universities, as these have already begun, and will, in some measure, be as it
were forced to go on, and conform to the advances of the times, and teach what
is most wanted in society, in spite of the fixedness, indolence, and monkery of
their institution. Since they have condescended to study our laws, may not we
hope that a knowledge of commerce and manufactures, of experimental philosophy
and chemistry, may be gradually introduced there? the mathematical and
mechanical sciences directed toward practice and utility; together with some
taste and practice in the fine arts It is with pleasure we observe, that since,
and even before, the above was written, our universities have adopted many of
these improvements, especially Cambridge; and it is hoped they will go on
improving: there is no stationary degree of perfection for any thing in this
world. A few more of such superiors as we have lately seen, and a little more
application in our young men of fashion, would soon make our universities, and
our nation, by far the first in the world; and would show us, that something
solid, modern, and useful, may yet be built upon the old foundations. It is,
however, to be wished that new establishments for universal learning were
oftener attempted: new discoveries, a natural emulation, would be of service to
the whole.
? And let us hope, that your day schools, perhaps the most important of all,
will be improved and increased; and your boarding schools discouraged and
diminished, perhaps by some heavy tax, or other means. Those literary and
reading societies likewise, in your country towns, may inspire some learned
ambition, some desire of knowledge, and do much good. Then your women might be
of signal service in the day schools, and in almost every branch of early
education. Nor can I see any objection to those females who show strong
symptoms of genius, and clearness of understanding, being permitted to go on in
useful learning; and some of them might, at length, teach the sciences, give
popular lectures, and even fill a professor's chair with as much success,
grace, and propriety, as any of us, as has been already practiced in Italy. You
would soon see an increasing demand for female tutors in families, if such
could once be found sufficiently qualified. These may be considered as some
preliminary reflections, till I can examine farther into the merits of
education in this country.

LETTER XIX. Of Language. -- Of the French, -- its Influence. -- Of Musical
Language.
I LIKE the idea which you mention, of some late writers judging of the
civilization of a people by their language, and from a vocabulary of its terms
determining their advances in arts and knowledge. I have thought we could
likewise judge of their taste by similar means, and from the choice and
composition of the sounds in which they have chosen to express themselves, we
might guess at their talents, and their taste in general, and more particularly
in language, in music, and in all the objects of hearing; for these are all
curiously, though often almost imperceptibly, linked to each other, and form
but one connected chain of kindred powers and perceptions.

From this I am inclined to think, that they must have had a fine taste, a just
sensibility, or tatto fino e forte, who framed the Italian language; and those
who formed the French, a very bad one -- a kind of false delicacy which led
them to prefer such combinations of sounds and articulations, as are contrary
to the real principles and mechanical means of full and fine expression, and as
tend to form such positions and habits of the organs as contract and debilitate
them, instead of assisting and fortifying their exertions. The organs of
speaking and of hearing, being connected by nature, are, I think, both spoiled
by the French language: from this habitual false standard proceeds a depraved
taste, which prevents their judging rightly of eloquence, poetry, music, and of
all those species of beauties, and in short, of all the objects of these two
faculties at least: accordingly, I think we actually find that the French
people are the most deficient of any nation we know, in learning to speak other
languages; and we may therefore presume that they cannot properly judge of
their beauties or defects. Thus, in one leading error or defect, we often
discover the fertile source of many more: and, besides the natural connection
of the powers and objects of taste, the arts, we know, cannot well advance but
abreast, if you will excuse a military term: so that it is difficult to
conceive, how those who have gone originally wrong in several of them, can be
great in any: and if we take into the account, a deficiency of perception in
some of the finer and simple beauties of nature, the source of all the rest;
and if we thence deduce their passion for the artificial kinds, -- for things
where the labor and the artist appear, -- for glass, gilding, glitter, -- for
violent and superfluous coloring and carving; we must allow them merit for not
going farther wrong: and we cannot help regretting, that they have so much to
overcome before they can begin to make a right progress. We know, however, that
some of this nation have overcome almost all of those difficulties and
impediments, which must doubtless have cost them great pains, trouble, and
travel: I have known several who have bestowed great labor on the
pronunciation and speaking of other languages, and with less success than you
can well imagine.

You will readily conceive, that in speaking of national character, one means
only that which is most commonly to be met with in that nation, and which is
always subject to numerous exceptions. We are, perhaps, too ready to reason on
general ideas, and lay down principles in almost every subject, and thence go
often wrong by rule. We all know, as you observe, that there have been many men
and women also of this country, who have shown the most elegant and classical
taste in many things, and some who have excelled in almost all the arts, -- if
we except those in which, from being insensibly incapacitated by their native
language, they are infallibly destined to labor in vain; and this deficiency
reaches farther than you may at first conceive; -- so far as to surprise you
when you come to examine it.

In many ways the French show great vivacity and quickness of parts, and
sometimes even shining abilities, although their style of performance in all
the arts may be faulty: their amateurs in music, for example, are generally
greater performers than ours, though their style and manner of playing is yet
more vicious: their violent and sudden jerks and transitions, -- those extremes
of forte and piano which are no longer musical sounds, the one being only a
whisper, and the other a noise; -- their inattention to tone, and hence the
general badness of their instruments, and still more their voices; -- their
rising and sinking so far, and so suddenly, from all the fury of passion to the
silence of death or stupidity: these are certainly not within the line of
beauty. Our taste and execution tend toward the other extreme of the tame,
heavy, and insipid. Of the two extremes, I should perhaps prefer their fire and
spirit, with all its vicious violence, to our sleepy though sentimental
languor, could they but keep their violence within any bounds: but it seems in
this case, as if it were easier for us to add than for them to take away, and
better to fall short than overshoot the mark. By attending more to the
Italians, our performers, though less numerous and less powerful, certainly do
improve in taste, while they continue in the same wild extreme; and when you
are not deficient in spirit and expression, you are probably now getting before
them in the chief requisites of instrumental performance, though still inferior
in force and execution; nor are you yet so far superior to them in singing as
you seem to fancy; and I think you are not sufficiently sensible of your
numerous vocal deficiencies, nor of many other attendant national vulgarisms;
and consequently, you are not in the way to get rid of them.

In most opinions, except perhaps our own, both the French and we are certainly
wretched singers, and below criticism: let us then attend to the Italians. If
we might venture to criticize their productions, we might observe that even
they sometimes go a little astray: from a fertile fancy, and love of novelty,
amidst their endeavors to please all parties and all nations, we may expect to
find them, at times, transgressing their own maxims, and sacrificing a
principle to an accessory, -- real beauty to trifling ornament; and in
compliance to the times, preferring the caprices of execution to the essentials
of expression; running into a style which a Roman audience will call troppo
trito et ornato. And till some other Metastasio appear, their little poetasters
may often be wrong in their musical language, and may not always distinguish
between what should be said and what should be sung, -- between the words fit
for aria, and those for recitativo; though these, with their affections of the
mind, are as different as smoke and flame; and the change from one to the other
somewhat resembling that transition of nature, as far as such different objects
can resemble. The attempts of the French to run these gradually into each
other, like several of their refined absurdities, only serves to show their
want of musical feeling and judgment.

Gracing recitative appears absurd, and yet in the first operas, it seems, it
was still more ornamented, and had frequent formal closes: that style seems to
be returning. But we may trust the Italians to their own feelings, which will
not probably suffer them to wander far, nor long, from truth and nature: and we
must leave the French to go wrong their own way, which they will most likely
always do.

This of musical language is a subject that would require some farther critical
attention, if that attention could be of any service to it. Since the time of
the Greeks, I think it has been attended to only by the Italians, and by them
rather felt than understood; it may cease to be so, like many other things,
when we come to analyze it. As the age of strong passions and great actions is
antecedent to that of reason and scientific researches, the greatest things are
performed before we know well how, or can trace the rules or motives; and when
we come to examine too closely into the causes of our pleasure, I fear it often
vanishes in the investigation. Music was probably more felt when less
scientific and refined. We have been very long in discovering that we have no
musical language except the Italian, and that is only partly musical: hence the
world is not yet cured of the vulgar notion, that any words may be sung, if
they are only made to rhyme: whereas, it is certainly first the passion or
sentiment expressed, and not the rhyme nor cadence, that renders serious words
fit to be sung; then the construction and arrangement of the sounds and
articulations of those words, become next of consequence in musical language. I
fear it is hardly possible to produce the proper and powerful voice of passion
or sentiment upon any of that numerous class of English words ending with a
dead dumb consonant. We could as easily run full speed against a wall.

It may be chiefly owing to this formation of our language, and to the
difficulty of producing and exercising the voice in singing it, that we have
had so few good voices, so little vocal expression, and so defective a taste,
or feeling, of music in general: and now that we begin to be a little improved
by the Italians, our judgment is still variable and unsure; in deliberating
whether we should follow them or not, we are left behind, and often keep
admiring as new what is out of date, and far surpassed in other countries. In
like manner, the defects of voice, taste, and manner, so conspicuous in this
nation, might be deduced from their language, though in a different way, as its
musical deficiencies are different. But I wish not to tire you with
disquisitions which, without such minutiae, you may probably think too long
before I have done. For the language and the music of this country, you see,
are leading me into a multitude of general reflections on these two subjects:
from them I shall go on to pick out what may appear to me the most new and
important, instead of the usual traveling particulars concerning a country
already so well known.

LETTER XX. Of speaking Languages. -- Of Style.
THOUGH sensible of the singularity of some of these opinions, on the French,
on languages, on music, and doubtful of my own judgment, yet, on the maturest
deliberation, I do not find that I can abate much even of the most singular: we
may be too cautious, and thereby destroy all energy of thought, and I am
perhaps too apt to doubt from anxiety not to misrepresent; but owing to that
very anxiety some degree of misrepresentation is perhaps unavoidable: from a
solicitude to give a striking likeness, we cannot always avoid overcharging
some of the features.

I have here been laboring hard to speak the French comme il faut, afraid that
some prejudice or dislike might arise in me from a want of sufficient practice
and intercourse, which I believe may often happen: we find the people of most
countries become more agreeable to us as we grow into their friendship and
acquaintance. But I doubt being ever able now to pronounce and speak the French
with the current volubility of a native, unless it be on some chosen and
premeditated subjects. I have had the satisfaction of being taken for an
Italian in Italy, and for a Spaniard in Spain (a very rare thing for a
stranger), but I suppose I may never be able to pass here for more than a Swiss.

The speaking languages well depends not quite so much, I think, on a
particular turn or genius for it, as many suppose, but more on early pains and
habits; and in adults, on additional labor and study, and on observing
narrowly, both by the eye and the ear, the motion, manner, and posture of the
mouths of the natives: much will likewise depend on the nature of our own
original language, as before observed, on the position and strength it may
previously have given to certain organs: so that we find some nations learn
languages much easier than others, -- as the Irish, Scotch, Moors, etc. -- the
French and English the worst of all. The French are certainly the most confined
and capricious of us all in their alphabetical habits and ideas, in their
notions of orthography, and I believe in every thing where sounds are
concerned: you know, in geography, they have totally spoiled the names of
places, que no les conociera la madre que les pario: for these and many other
reasons, it is much to be lamented that their language should take the lead in
Europe.

I think I can perceive some powerful effects of language on the physiognomy,
and can thence trace one of the causes of nationality of face: this might be a
curious speculation to pursue; but I know not how it could be well expressed in
writing. You must not yet tire of these digressive and desultory lectures,
which you get so often instead of travels; I shall perhaps return again and
again to the same subjects, as they may, in passing through different
countries, be forced on the mind: this of language and sounds seems to run into
a string of reflections which might be stretched to any length, especially if
we extend it so as to take in music.

I think I understand and like your observations on Blair and on style, but I
apprehend that, in communicating our ideas, we shall discover between us some
differences in taste, as usual with those who venture to think for themselves.
Accustomed to read for information more than for pleasure, I have attended
little to style or manner, and have therefore, perhaps, inadequate ideas of its
beauties and importance: certainly to handle the tools, and feel the
difficulties of an art, must enable us to judge better of the merits of the
performance, provided we are always aware of the error of estimating the
difficulties of execution too highly; an error to which professors have been
supposed sometimes subject. Some observations, however, have occurred to me on
attending to yours; you will tell me if you think them just: our opinions may
be of more service to each other for the very reason that they differ.

If we English should be led into a taste for too much ornament in writing or
speaking, I think we should have less excuse for ourselves than some other
nations. Our plain, rational, and monosyllabic tongue, seems to me, neither
made for music, nor for those flowery and sonorous beauties which, in some
other languages, charm and run away with us by the ear. Our language, clear,
distinct, and precise, speaks only to the understanding; it cares not much
about the beauties of sound, nor waits to attend to them. In attempting a
lengthened latinity of phrase, or a constant rounding of periods with measured
sets of sonorous terms, in soaring to magnificence and amplification, we
presently get into the regions of affectation, where we are quite out of our
element, and make a very awkward figure. In the short nervous style, where
powerful brevity prevails, I conceive that both the beauties and expression of
our language consist: content with the few graces that lie in its way, and not
deigning to look aside for the flowery paths that lead round, by tedious and
uncertain ways, to the object already in view, it goes beyond most other
languages in force and rapidity; reaches its object sooner, and strikes it more
forcibly. If, in aiming at brevity, we sometimes appear abrupt and obscure, it
is more excusable than the other extreme of the flowery, declamatory, or
diffuse.

Every language has its particular turn or genius. I know not if any one has
remarked these, or the following particulars, of ours: in the pronunciation, it
seems to incline to a certain distinct pausing precision, by its strong and
frequent articulations, as if attending only to perspicuity or demonstration;
and without a particular attention to a choice of words, mostly of foreign
extraction, it does not run currently, or with facility, through the mouth: but
when that attention is discovered, it strikes with an idea of affectation,
against every species of which I think we have, after a certain degree of
cultivation, a natural dislike more than any other nation I know. Whereas, in
the Spanish and Italian languages, the voice dwells with pleasure on most of
their sounds, and the tongue rebounds upon every articulation with a rapidity
and elasticity which exercises and strengthens its powers: but of this,
unfortunately, very few of our English or French mouths can ever be sensible,
as both our languages and our organs have been over-refined, contracted, and
debilitated, -- probably from the silly affectation of people with bad ears,
and false taste, trying to speak pretty. I must think that most of our flowery
writers and speakers will offend the nice and natural ear much more by their
affectation, than they can ever please it by all the beauties they can thus
exhibit: while our plain and simple brevity, -- our wit and humor, -- our
simple and truly sublime, which rises by stealth into sentiment independent of
the wings of sound, and where more is meant than meets the ear; these will
always be justly admired: as we rise into the florid, we soon become
ridiculous; sacrificing sense to sound in a waste of ineffectual ornaments.

You ought to be the Spartans of Europe, -- the patterns of a manly and laconic
style of eloquence; and if you would but tant soit peu, support that character,
the surrounding nations are rather inclined to grant it you: you would then
stand high and alone; but if you mistake your object, and take the contrary
road, through a flowery verbosity, you will find all the higher places
occupied; you will be outdone in those walks by many, who will look down upon
you as weak competitors, and laugh at the unnatural efforts of such awkward
imitators.

The expression of our language necessarily depends more on emphasis than on
accent, of which last we have now no rule or idea that can be measured or
applied, and of which we therefore wisely make a very moderate and arbitrary
use; and the emphasis, when carried to a vulgar extreme, offends the ear, and
swallows up the unemphatic parts. Much of Garrick's merit as a speaker,
consisted in properly moderating and concealing it, as the best French players
do with that barbarous invention of rhyme; he turned emphasis into sound. From
this might likewise, perhaps, be deduced much of our false taste in singing,
and thence generally in music; for English singing is as much too emphatic as
the speaking. By carrying this violent degree of emphasis into song, we support
the false idea, of music or singing being an exaggerated kind of speech or
poetry; and those emphatic parts of our songs, and still more of our boisterous
and bellowing choruses, often cover and conceal all the rest, and come to our
ears, not in the shape of sounds, but as blows sufficient to split our heads.

Our pronunciation has been so over-refined by false delicacy and affectation,
that we have probably now lost much of the relish for that brief and expressive
energy which is the fort of our language. We have banished the powerful
guttural sounds which, in the Spanish, and some other languages, seem to double
the force and extent of the organs of speech: the nations of most taste and
feeling have retained those sounds; as the Arabians, the Spanish, the Scotch,
Tuscans, etc.: a third species of articulation, and the most expressive, is
thus added to the other two: those three species are the labial, the palatal,
and the guttural. The r seems likewise to be in some danger of losing its force
and powers in the overrefined and minced mode of speaking, of fashion and
affectation.

I am glad to see you affect and approve of brevity and simplicity; I think
them essential in your poetry and the true sublime, and indispensable in our
language. Study and acquire a facility of style and composition by all means,
but not the art of spinning out a little matter into a long story, or a great
book; that is beneath the dignity of a language whose force consists in its
good sense and precision: your words should be all weight and substance, --
full measure pressed together, and running over, in a redundancy of sense, but
not of sound: examples enough might be found to prove this doctrine. In your
favorite Gibbon, I think you will find his best phrases are the brief and
laconic, -- those that are most like Tacitus; but I suspect that the long and
labored periods, of which he is probably the proudest, will least stand the
test of time and good taste. The most powerful parts of Lord Chatham's
eloquence were those compressed into the very essence of brevity; when he said,
I rejoice that America resists, what a previous march and energy of thought was
there expressed! We can astonish by the short and forcible ways of hitting our
object, but not by overwhelming it in a torrent of words, unless it be by the
suddenness and velocity, more than by the quantity, of that torrent; but even
there, beware of false fire and false torrents. I know of but few, besides your
Dean Swift, who have had taste enough to despise those tinsel beauties of
conceit and affectation in our language.

Let us not be led too far out of our way neither by the false glare of those
fanciful fellows the poets: -- but I can excuse you young men being a little
caught, at first, by the tinsel of our flourishers and versifiers; it is a fire
that will cool by time and a maturer refinement. I think we have hardly had a
poet, since Shakespeare and Milton, of a mind sufficiently universal; nor a
speaker of real taste, except Garrick, to show us how much we should attend to
sense, and how much to sound: I believe, we shall seldom find any of those
three sacrificing the former to the latter. We must not look for the force nor
for the few beauties of our language, in the sickly fancy of modern refinement,
that culls the few soft and affected phrases, and shrinks from the old, rough,
manly, and most powerful terms, -- nor in the fashionable conversation, or
mincing jargon of the day, among the people who are reputed genteel. I think I
have known some country, or pastoral, people, who have a better taste in
poetry, music, and song, than those of great towns; there, I think the
vulgarities are insupportable; whereas those of the country have often
something of the rural or antiquated, that renders the most ignorant agreeable.
In great towns, the lower classes have either no taste, or worse than none; and
the higher refine without feeling. Your cockneys, I believe, contribute largely
toward spoiling both your language and your taste.

LETTER XXI. On Music.
To Mrs. P --.
I AM now going to take your advice, and try to recollect such of my
observations on music as may have a chance of being new or singular, and in the
order they may occur to a memory which you know to be none of the best. The
vast variety of sounds, their formation, qualities, and effects, seem not to
have been yet sufficiently attended to, perhaps because not of sufficient
importance. But you see I know not well how, or where, to begin, without
appearing too general and systematic; and I do not mean to write a formal
treatise: we men are ever attempting to generalize ideas too much, and
embroiling with scientific ratiocination the simplest things. Some Frenchman
observes, "que trop de raisonnement etouffe le sentiment; il faudroit le
laisser a ceux qui ne sont des hommes que par la tete." You ladies could give
us very good lessons in these matters; with a little more education, many of
you would render learning more agreeable and less pedantic, and would be
sufficiently compressed and laconic in your reasoning, with all the advantages
of a finer taste and a truer sensibility, a juster sense of simplicity,
affectation, and of all the human qualities, you might be still of more service
to us.

But I meant to say something more of the sounds, or component parts of
language: I think they have not yet been well arranged, nor understood; I doubt
that which was understood by the Greeks is now mostly lost to us. Some of the
Italian grammarians and musicians, as a Buomattei, Martini, Tartini, etc. have
made another beginning on these subjects of sounds, language, music; and the
Italians are most likely to succeed in pursuing them.

Alphabetical writing was doubtless a wonderful and important discovery. Its
greatest merit, I think, was that of distinguishing sounds from articulations,
a degree of perfection to which the eastern languages have not yet arrived; and
that defect may be, with those nations, one of the chief causes of their
limited progress in many other things. You know they have no vowels, except
some that have the a, but always joined to some articulation: their attempts to
supply that defect by points, give them but very imperfect and indistinct ideas
of vocal and articulate sounds, and of their important distinction. But even
languages the most alphabetical, if the expression may be allowed, could not
probably transmit, by writing, a complete idea of their own sounds and
pronunciation from any one age or people to another. Sounds are to us infinite
and variable, and we cannot transmit by one sense the ideas and objects of
another. We shall be convinced of this, when we recollect the innumerable
qualities of tone in human voices, so as to enable us to distinguish all our
acquaintances, though the number should amount to many hundreds, or perhaps
thousands. With attention, we might discover a different quality of tone in
every instrument; for all these there never can be a sufficient number of
adequate terms in in any written language: and when that variety comes to be
compounded with a like variety of articulation, it becomes infinite to us. The
varieties only upon the seven notes in music, varied only as to pitch and
modulation throughout the audible scale, combined with those of time, are not
yet probably half exhausted by the constant labor of so many ages. So that the
idea of Mr. Steel, and others, of representing to the eye the tune and time
only of the sounds in any language, will probably ever prove inadequate to the
end proposed, even without attempting the kinds and qualities of tones and
articulations, which would render it infinite and quite impossible.

The division of the sounds of language into accent, quantity, emphasis, has
plainly proved insufficient to mark or measure those ideas intelligibly. Some
mode of dividing all sounds, comprehending those of language, into tune, time,
tone, and articulation, seems possible: and some of them might be expressed on
an instrument, but not the whole. Emphasis seems incapable of being measured or
transmitted. Noise and sound seem to belong to different genera. So that there
appears to be a real distinction between noise, sound, and music; and though
these three distinct genera decline, or shade off into each other, yet they
cannot well be confounded by a just or musical ear; but it seems to me, that in
France and England they often confound them all.

The complete generic difference between some sounds and music, as between
singing and speaking, has certainly been overlooked: these two species of voci
should be expressed by different terms: words, when sung, should be called by
some other name. It seems doubtful if speaking in the modern languages can
belong even to the class of sounds, much less to that of music. The idea and
expression of musical beauties in language, is now merely figurative: we might
almost as properly call them white or black, as musical. The moment any noise
becomes a sound, or a sound becomes musical, it is transformed in its nature,
and into a different class, and should no longer retain the same name: and if
we had terms enough, none of those technically used for one class would apply
to another. Nothing shows more clearly the insufficiency of language, than
different subjects borrowing so many terms from each other: it may be the
source of some figures and beauties of speech, but not of precision or of
scientific improvement. I only pretend to give hints: terms and arrangements
seem yet wanting in these subjects. The Italians should here investigate, and
we should follow them.

In order to understand this generic difference between musical sounds and all
others, we must attend to the mind, when musically employed or disposed by
music itself: in that disposition or affection, the chief circumstance to be
noticed seems to be the power given to the mind, by means of music, at once to
dwell on the object of its passion, and to express that passion with ease and
pleasure by means of this new medium: whereas, by words, or common language,
the mind seems disposed to vent or get rid of its feelings; or the rapid
succession of ideas leaves not time for the deep impression of any one in
particular; hence the great passions feel a kind of contempt for mere words,
and often prefer silence or action; the mind prefers music (if the passion is
not too outrageous), in order to indulge in expressions at once sufficiently
pleasant and durable. Words, producing their effects by successive and
reiterated impressions, but which are only transient, and, as it were, remove
each other, the result cannot be so much an accumulation of the whole, as when
music is employed to bind all those instants together, and, by forming them all
into one continued whole, produce effects proportioned to the prolonged
duration of the favorite sentiment.

Between the least and greatest expression in music, -- between simple
recitation and the best expressions of extreme distress, of sorrow, rage, or
despair, -- the degrees are numerous, and seem to me far greater than between
any one kind of language and another: yet this musical affection seems likewise
disposed to smooth and equalize, as well as to continue the different
sentiments expressed, and to bring the most violent passion down to a tone or
temperament more pleasant and supportable; and seems, at the same time, to
dignify or elevate lesser objects and sentiments up toward the same tone, so
as to assimilate the whole of the sentiments and expression, and render them
more temperate and elegant, though not less powerful: hence music has always
been considered as proper to soften or tame the rugged and hurtful passions, --
to temper and civilize the mind; and hence it cannot probably admit of the
violent oratorial or theatrical modes of action and expression: sobbing, and
tears, may perhaps be admissible in some kinds of declamation, but not in
serious singing; and the absurdity of the French in attempting it, is very
obvious to every body but themselves.

The meaning and limits of musical expressions not being very clear, distinct,
or well defined, but shaded off, and running, as it were, out of sight, leave
the fancy just what it wishes, the power of shaping them to its own affections;
so that the music and the imagination go on, mutually assisting each other
wonderously well, till lost in the clouds of sublimity of their own creating.
From these premises follow several consequences, more than I shall trouble you
with.

From this equanimity and desire of continuance in the musical affection, we
may deduce the dislike of violent change in the melody or modulation, in the
time or movement, beyond a certain degree; these must correspond to the new
equanimity of the passions, and now slower transitions of the mind. This is
seldom sufficiently observed even by masters of great name; I think they are
often either under or over the limits in modulation -- length, variety, change;
and they thus too plainly discover that they do not always themselves feel what
they seem to express.

From hence, and from what follows, may be deduced the reasons of our language
being unfit for music, and of its injuring our musical abilities, and impeding
the progress of the art. The number of ideas, and accuracy of the meaning, the
wit, and habitual good sense, of the English language, are all unfit to be
sung, especially when compressed into few words; so that your best poetry is
the least singable; and there is no setting two of your excellent verses to
music, without transgressing some of the above rules of nature: likewise, its
sounds and articulations not being arranged for singing, the expression
consisting mostly in the force of shortness, more like the strength of a blow
than the power of sound, your poetry must be spoiled by being sung, and your
forcible emphasis must lose its powers, when turned into lengthened and
enfeebled sound, with the powers of which you are not sufficiently acquainted
nor exercised, nor probably ever can be, while impeded by an antimusical
language, that cannot with propriety be sung. That angular kind of stiffness in
French and English song, of which almost all their compositions partake, is
thus probably owing to the languages.

The qualities of tone, which seem infinite, have great power in carrying
various affections directly to the heart: indeed, the quality of tone seems to
be the most essential part of the whole musical machinery that affects us, and
yet it seems the least attended to by the French and English. Certain tones,
and musical sentences, seem to be the original expressions of nature, and
cannot be analyzed or explained; and they might, perhaps, be made to supply
still better the defects in the languages of convention.

Hence also, one air or piece should never be made to express more than one
sentiment: there is a necessary unity of idea throughout the same movement, and
to break it is as great an offense against the taste or affection on the one
hand, as the want of genius sufficient to fill up the limits of variety, which
the mind in that state allows, is on the other. The favorite object or
sentiment of a passion is of such importance in the musical piece, that
different movements may be applied to express it, or dwell on it: but different
sentiments being sung to the same music is generally absurd and incongruous.
The old mode of ballads, or poems, where the words are the main object, and
every verse is sung to the same tune, is poetry and not music; quite another
species, as well as that of recitative, and of many comic expressions which
depend on the jingle or rythmical motion of the time.

Some of the ballad kind of music, I can conceive, might, even in modern
language, be successfully applied to greater poetic works, which, accompanied
by a large harp or lute, might be sung or recited in some kind of half-measured
heroic air, or recitative, as was probably done by the ancients, and attempted
by some modern harpers or minstrels in various countries; and of which the
present old Spanish romance may be some remains or imitation. A great master of
his instrument, and of his subject, I can likewise conceive, might even make
words and music both extemporary, and produce powerful effects from the warmth
and greatness of his feelings, as we have seen successfully attempted in Spain
and Italy. The modern serious Italian is a species differing from all these,
and not at all connected with the words, with the rhyme, or the cadence of
poetry: it is not the words, but the passion, which is here set to music. The
relationship between music and verse, which we are still foolishly insisting on
being sister arts, is here quite worn out: our music is now insulated and
governed by laws of her own, and no longer grows out of our language. In the
comic or lively, the music may express the measure or jingle of the verse,
though not very closely, and she ought even there to take liberties of her own:
but in the serious she moves with too much passion and dignity to follow the
measure of verse, or any measures but her own; and the words or voci are
obviously secondary. So that there seems to be growing up a specific difference
between song and aria; in the first, the words being the main object, and the
tune or music secondary; and in the aria, the contrary.

Words, when sung, as already observed, should be called by some other name (as
voci musicale or cantabile), as they are then transformed into another class,
with qualities entirely different, though not easy to define: they are
converted from conventional signs of ideas, to be a part of the most original
expressions of nature and of passion, and affect us no longer as words, but as
part of the music, -- a part that helps to direct the mind toward the object
or meaning of the melody, but not too direct and precisely; they may help to
give vent to the passion, but not to explain or define it; that, when
necessary, is the office of recitative, as well as that of carrying on the
action or story. We shall very seldom find Metastasio guilty of the absurdity
of singing events, or a story, in the labored melody of aria, which must be
reserved for the language of passion or sentiment.

The musical philosopher would soon perceive the necessity of some musical
language being constructed on purpose, if the Italian were not already made to
his hand; its voci are tolerably constructed both as to force and beauty -- the
sounds and articulations of the right kind, and so combinable as to favor both
the forcible and the beautiful modes of musical expression, and to maintain
that continued and flowing desire which keeps moving unbroken within certain
limits or lines of beauty; not in sharp angles, or cut into pieces, like the
music of most other nations. Their words, or voci, do not, like ours, stop the
musical voice, but help to bring it forth, and produce that fullness and length
of sound, supported on strong and well placed articulations, which, like steps,
bear up, and carry on the voice, make it rebound, and keep the mind, as it
were, suspended or floating in that kind of pleasure which forms the chief part
of what I call the musical affection. But I believe it is impossible to explain
these things in words, and I do not expect to be well understood, nor is it
perhaps very necessary that I should attempt it; our friend Dr. Burney will
make these things plainer to you, and I flatter myself he will generally be
found of my opinion; my not being of his would make me doubt or retract.

In music there are probably some certain principles of beauty in which almost
all nations would agree, if we could, in society, preserve our native feelings
to judge of them: but those feelings, altered and weakened by civilization, are
perhaps no longer equal to the task; our feelings subside even while we write
about them, and as we attempt to define, they evaporate. We know they are
subject to the powers of habit, or second nature, for we see different nations
love very different sorts of music, and I have seen some who love none. We may
now be so far beneath the feelings and enthusiasm of former times, as to have
hardly enough remaining to judge of theirs, or to form theories and
speculations on these subjects: and in these writing and civilized ages, theory
seems to be our fort, and our greatest pleasure, and if we miss that, we shall
have little else remaining. Such appears to be the progress of society: in some
of its earlier stages, with higher sentiments and powers of exertion, men do
great things for their more enlightened posterity to write and talk about; and
these two different employments suit the two different periods and characters:
the pleasure of the one consisting in action, and of the other in knowledge. By
the time we have settled a good theory of music, and of musical sentiment (if
ever we do), perhaps the musical age will be over, if it is not over already.
The critics came after Homer, who made poetry and rules all at once. Genius and
judgment, when joined, seem but one sentiment; and the first feeling or
judgment of real genius is perhaps more infallible than that of the most
laborious reasoning.

The heroic, poetic, and musical ages, probably come together, or in
succession, producing each other, and before that of higher civilization, which
dispels the others. The people of Paris and of London have, I think, the worst
taste in music of any people in Europe.

We have learned from our masters the Italians, that the first merit of any
music consists much in its near resemblance to that of the human voice: but
hardly any of us, besides the Italians, have any voices worth imitating, except
the little we sometimes learn from them: they are readily admitted not only to
the second, but to the first place, by all those nations who have shown the
best taste, and have produced the best music: it was reserved for the French,
and some of the English (neither of whom have shown much good taste, nor good
music), to dispute the superiority with the Italians: but it is the ass in the
lion's skin; they stand alone, and only themselves could ever think of
comparing their heavy and vulgar compositions with the elegant and powerful
productions of that refined people. Who ever heard of a grand French opera out
of France, or a Handel's oratorio out of England The Germans having lately
tried some of their countryman Handel's oratorial pieces, will not, I believe,
be a sufficient recommendation to the rest of the world, nor ever be the means
of carrying them into Italy.
?

After the Italians, the Spaniards, perhaps the next in music, have kept up the
best national taste for some time; and are likewise next to them in singing,
which they do naturally and delicately, and which is perhaps chiefly owing
likewise to their language: but they too, admirers of the Italian style, will
probably adopt it so heartily as to lose their own, which is perhaps the
national music most to be regretted in the general loss. All who are acquainted
with the seguidilla and zarzuela, would gladly hope, that their singular,
ingenious, and expressive delicacy might preserve them from the general ruin
which, from Italy, now threatens the music of all other nations.

Instrumental music advances, I think, apace, while that of song, the source of
all, stands still, or, what is worse, runs wild. Though the best parts of
instrumental music may be those that are said to sing, and their first and most
indispensable merit is their near imitation of the human voice, yet each
instrument has a peculiar style of execution, and kind of music of its own; and
the performers in those paths produce many beauties foreign to song, though
necessarily mixed with it: besides, a natural desire for variety and novelty, a
necessary relief for song itself, all require that instrumental music must not
always be singing; as it cannot raise the musical affection in the mind so
easily, nor to so high a pitch, as song, it must have recourse to the variety
of execution, of movement, modulation, melody, in order to command and surprise
the attention. But let us pray that this kind of music may pass only for what
it is worth: voices imitating instruments is certainly a false taste, and let
us hope that the world en reviendra.

I confess I love to see genius take liberties within certain wide bounds, and
transgress now and then some established rules; several of which become so
tiresome in the dull routine of constant use, especially in the hands of the
French and English, where there is so little real musical genius and variety.
Music has, at times, been shackled with various pedantic rules, which have been
afterward broken and removed by some of those original and friendly geniuses
that now and then arise to set us free again: these Frenchmen want to shackle
it still more, and insist on the composer and singer attending to the accent
and quantity of their prosaic and antimusical language. The French had their
present style of music from Italy by means of Lully and Rameau, and the English
by Handel; but they both now absurdly attempt to refuse following their masters
the Italians, when they deserve it more; and they are left behind, to stand
alone, and render their defects in musical taste the more conspicuous. There
can be no one exclusive style of beauty in music; variety becomes necessary to
those who can relish all its beauties: each kind has its degree of merit;
ignorance and bad taste discover themselves by misplacing those degrees, and by
preferring mediocrity to excellence, or the worst to the best.

But, in short, music is an affair of sentiment, and the only question is, Do
you like it? Still more of the rules and habits of modern composition will
probably be considered, one day, as pedantic nonsense. And let us hope the
times may return, when great masters, with warm and cultivated minds, will
compose, from their own feelings, more than by any of the mechanical rules of
their art. A Sacchini, Boccherini, Haydn, and some others, have shown them the
way nor have they gone so far as to give cause to despair going beyond them, as
has been supposed of Newton or Raphael: the be^ music furnishes the most hints
for imitation, and the most original ideas, in others if those great geniuses
cannot be surpasse^ in their own walks, new paths may b^ discovered by that
very enthusiasm wit^ which they inspire us: so that the most musical nations
and ages must be the least stationary, the most prolific and changeable in
their taste and productions: it is only the common people who for ever can
relish only the same tunes and songs; and nothing shows more strongly, in a
nation, the want of musical progress, or of the true feelings and knowledge in
the art, than the vulgarity of annually repeating, and dwelling eternally on,
the same pieces of music, and more especially if those pieces are such as no
nation can like but themselves.

We have had a Purcel, and the Scotch have shown some musical sentiment by
their songs, or national melodies: but then some think it was more generally
taught at our common schools, and country choirs were well filled, and vied
with each other in taste and performance. A continuance of these excellent
customs might have produced a succession of Purcels, which, indeed, is
absolutely necessary to the progress of the art: such a progression might, by
this time, have worn away many difficulties and impediments: but our language,
and our voices, though both might be improved, will long, I fear, keep our
national taste below mediocrity, and doomed to follow the Italians at a great
distance. However, by liberally encouraging them as they deserve, the art may
flourish with you, even more than in any other capital in Europe: but where it
has ceased being taught at common schools, where that muse is not born and
bred, and does not proceed spontaneously from the genius and manners of the
people, nor grow out of their language, she may be invited over and nursed up
as the slave of luxury, and may administer some feeble pleasures to the
exhausted feelings of the great; but her native vigor and abilities will not
appear in such countries, nor can much of the natural influence of her art be
thus forced downwards, beginning, as it were, at the wrong end.

Hence the musical judgment, or sensibility of your audience, will probably be
always somewhat low and defective, and the encoring of Roast Beef, or of some
little popular rondo, or vulgar ballad, will long continue to show the extent
of their taste and knowledge: they seem to judge of song and melody by some
standard of the lowest vulgarity, taken from the alehouse or Vauxhall, or at
best from some old-fashioned instrumental execution, or sometimes from their
heavy drawling church style. And even among your most improved and cultivated
ears, how few are yet found capable of feeling the merits of the true Italian
song, tone, and melody? And of your fingers, still fewer I fear will ever be
able to express those, or deliver the voci of that elegant language in song, or
any thing like the nature and character of its cantabile expressions.

In their mode of singing and expressing the Italian, it is presently
perceptible that they are at best only mimicking, like parrots, the expressions
of another, and that they are neither thinking, nor feeling, in that language,
nor know any thing of the passion they are singing about, and are only trying
to recollect the lessons of the master. And even the talent of mimicking,
instead of feeling those expressions, cannot, I believe, be well acquired
without going to Italy while young.

A very different taste and degree of skill and judgment are observable in the
people or audience at Rome, and even a little difference and improvement
already at Edinburgh.

As to your English and French operas, or your comedies hashed up with songs, I
have gradually brought myself to feel them almost all insupportable, and to
think them incompatible with the principles and effects of modern music. Both
languages are totally unfit for recitative, and thereby exclude all successful
attempts at serious opera: the other, or comic kind, is not often much better:
the transition from speech to song, and still more from song to speech, is too
violent even in joke or fun, and is not long to be borne by any but French or
English ears. If the author were a good musician, he might contrive, with
cautious art, like Shakespeare, to introduce, without offense, some singing; but
then it should always terminate the scene, and with an exit.

All music might be divided into popular and learned, though they are generally
mixed, and neither species is found pure, or by itself: the taste, even of the
lowest people, by slow degrees, may be perceived to advance a little into the
learned. It might be curious to trace the gradual progress of our taste, or
desire for variety and new ideas, by long practice, from the most simple to the
most varied melody, up through all the varieties of discord, complication,
contrivance. This progress is absolutely necessary and natural in music,
whatever it may be in the other arts: though it may require to be confined in
its progress within certain wide rules or limits; yet there is in music no
stationary point of perfection where it ought to stop, as in the other arts. I
believe it may be because music is more natural to us, and through habit, soon
becomes a kind of extemporary expression, or pleasurable effusion of the mind,
which is not subject to, nor worth the labor of being tied up by, many rules
and regulations, nor of being stopped at any supposed point of excellence.

Those vulgar, social, or sentimental songs, and the manner of singing them, in
France and England, without any accompaniment of other voice or instrument, may
be considered as the lowest species of music, -- if in that defective shape
they can at all be classed as music. Since the discovery and use of harmony,
these must appear to musicians as very defective, and all of them to require
some accompaniment. We might as well insist upon going into company barefooted
so long after shoes and stockings have been invented, as attempt to support
that kind of singing, as music, so long after the system of harmony has been
established I speak of music as such. -- The tunes of our dances, and even of
many of our songs, can scarcely as yet be called music, unless when properly
accompanied. We shall begin to perceive distinctions arising in these subjects,
for which no names nor language are yet provided.
: but all the other higher classes of harmonic composition are made for the
scientific and skilful in the art, and are certainly beyond the taste and
comprehension of those who are not musicians: so that we cannot easily conceive
how those two sets of people, the learned and unlearned in harmony, can now
possibly associate musically; or why so many of the latter, of the uninitiated,
come to disturb certain select musical parties with their company, to hear what
they cannot understand, nor half relish, and where they can neither speak nor
move without being wrong, and bringing secret distress on the musical members,
and some degree of contempt upon themselves. Music is unlike the other arts in
this, that there is no learning to judge without learning to perform; though
the art seems natural and easy to every one who has an ear, yet the judgment of
the unlearned is seldom, if ever, worth attending to. They ought at least to be
silent, and never speak on the subject.

To have a good musical audience they must all be musicians; but this cannot
yet be expected, till the sol fa, as we hope, be again commonly learned at
school, and the guitara, or lute, as generally understood and used in company
as a pack of cards; the former talent being much easier acquired, will
certainly afford more pleasure than the latter. This degree of musical taste
and talents might have been, and may yet be expected to arise among us, as a
natural consequence of the modern improvements, and facility in harmony and
methods of teaching, with the increasing abundance of fine music. Such is
already pretty nearly the state of music in some parts of Spain and Portugal:
most of the people there sing, play, and understand music, and with very little
more teaching than such as is used in learning to walk, speak, or read. It is
to be hoped, in the next generation, there will be more musicians, and that
they will do something toward bringing the art into more general use.

I think those single naked table songs are very properly wearing out of
fashion, and will, I hope, remain so, till people learn to accompany
themselves; so that little or no music will then remain for the unlearned, and
people will be forced to become really musical, by learning the art, for all
the reasons of self-defence and social pleasure.

I fear that native defects in some of the northern characters and languages,
must have retarded the natural progress of music among them: nothing but some
such circumstance, together with the great number of the ignorant keeping one
another in countenance, could produce, or excuse the negligence, we might
almost say, the stupidity of so many remaining unacquainted with so simple a
thing as our sol, fa, or system of music, the source of so much pleasure. We
are told, that in Russia music has long begun to make some of its natural
progress among the people: and if their musicians can travel to Italy, and the
Italian masters resort to them, another musical nation may, in time, be added
to the present few.

I can never allow any merit to loudness, except in military music, but hardly
any, except the Turks, have understood this rightly: there is a certain limit
to the difference or proportion between the piano and forte, which only the
Italians understand, and which the French perpetually trangress.

I doubt our national taste does not of late improve, even with all the pains
and expenses of our rich and great: with the music of all the world before us,
I think we often choose the worst: between the French and the antiquated ideas,
I fear our ears are spoiled, and that we are even in danger of going back
instead of forward, and of being left behind other nations, at the distance of
perhaps a century, in the natural progression of musical taste. You will
readily perceive the musical defects of our nation, and by too many symptoms:
without the true musical soul, we refine without feeling. I think this is
perceptible, even in our first-rate musical parties, -- in our having so often
only professors to perform: by bringing a public concert into a private room,
where the professed musicians direct, and the amateurs take no part, proceeding
from the indolence and pride of luxury, and overrating the merits of execution
from a want of feeling for the expressive; the party, and the music, become
thereby much less interesting, and accordingly it will, in time, be heard with
a cold and fashionable indifference, even though the merits of the performance
should increase. Besides, professors seldom make the best choice: to shine in
execution is too often their object; they have not always the taste, nor the
liberty, to prefer fine music to fine playing, and will not, in that way,
contribute to improve the general taste, while there are so few of those
feeling philosophic amateurs to direct, and who take a part. I fear we shall,
in time, have almost nothing but that unfeeling kind of instrumental difficult
music, solos and solo concertos, which, though sometimes meritorious in its
way, in the hands of a Giardini or a Fischer, will yet retard instead of
promoting the study and improvement of various angelic kinds which, I fancy,
may yet be produced, -- kinds wherein the speaking melodies, the heavenly
harmony, and heartfelt tones, prevail with accumulating effects, in the form
of quartettos, quintettos, or concertantes. Since Giardini is leaving us, I
think we are already losing that little taste for tone which we had acquired
from him; and I fear the taste for instrumental difficulties will likewise
infect that of singing, and take place of the truly vocal and divine, before it
is brought near to perfection.

There is yet much to be done in music beyond, or as it were out of, human
nature, and many things to be expressed besides the human feelings and
passions. In attending to some of the first-rate Italian singers, who have
judgment to support a certain simple dignity, I think we have directly some
idea or inclination to place the character out of human nature, above its
ordinary weaknesses and defects, and not subject to any unmanly, querulous, or
violent expression; and the singers who give into those expressions, or imitate
too far the instrumental tricks of execution, become vulgar or ridiculous like
the French, or descend into the character of mere instrumental performers.
There is an elegant sublime simplicity of idea attainable in all the fine arts,
which can only be explained and understood in the compositions and performance
of great masters. The idea of a divinity, for instance, formed and executed by
a Praxiteles, a M. Angelo, or a Raphael, will show us, at once, what it should
be, much better than can be done by words; and it will be found very different
from that of a modern French or Dutch artist, though the latter might be much
higher finished. May not we hope that this great and good taste in music, at
least, will continue so far to prevail in Italy as to keep itself alive, and
form now and then a Senesino, or a Manzoli, to preserve in the world a sense of
the true sublime and simple style of singing?

As to composers, though, from a scarcity, even in Italy, of first-rate
masters, the fiddlers may seem sometimes to step into their place, yet we may
hope that now and then a Sacchini, and even a succession of such men, will
probably be produced there, to polish and continue the chain of musical
progression. Is it not to Germany we owe this scrambling fiddling taste for
execution, which threatens to infect all our music? I only wish to moderate,
not to banish it. If those ingenious German composers were to study simplicity
a little more, and make music within the powers of the amateurs to perform,
would it not promote and extend the art much more than by producing so much
that can only be executed by professors? The Italians are often astonished to
hear them, the French, and us, play so well, and yet sing so ill, and to see us
always soliciting every body to sing where there is nobody that can sing fit to
be heard. I think all the voices to the north of the Alps and the Pyrennees are
distinguishable, and most of them defective, except some bass voices.

The ingenious modern way of writing or noting of music, which has contributed
so much to its progress and complication, has perhaps likewise destroyed much
of its fire and effects: such is the fate of every thing human; there is no
good without its attendant evil. When we come to be so scientific and
artificial as to write and study music upon paper, the noble enthusiasm of
simple heroic tunes is probably gone: we calmly calculate and compare the
beauties and contrivances of harmony, without much feeling, or dwelling on the
melody or song on the sentiments, the great passions, or events it expresses,
or was wont to express: so that our pleasure does not keep pace with the
merits, or at least ingenuity, of the compositions produced, but seems to go in
a contrary direction; and our passion or love of music, the most essential,
seems to cool and diminish as the variety and quantity of musical productions
increase.

In the progress of refinement, we gradually forget that music was probably
intended as an extemporary effusion of the mind, as well as a source of
studious and refined pleasure; but the latter, you see, gradually swallows up
the former. There are certain occasions when the music or the song should, at
least, appear to be the immediate effusion of the fancy or passion, and the
production of the moment. In China, it is always supposed that a musician sings
and plays spontaneously, and it is a disgrace to want a book. Even now, in our
most labored compositions for the theater, the actor or singer would produce
much less effect if that small degree of deception were dropped and he were to
read his part, instead of getting it by heart. Hence greater and more various
effects might probably be produced, by assisting the deception, and sometimes
placing the whole apparatus of the orchestra out of sight, and moving them to
different distances, as we have seen partially attempted, and generally with
considerable success.

We tramontani are certainly too stationary in our taste and invention, and
forget that music is a progressive art, naturally subject to perpetual progress
and variation; and more especially since we have begun to complicate and refine
it, we must let it go on; and where fancy and genius abound, the best things of
last year must cease to be the best of this, -- as in Italy and Spain: but I
think in France and England, they keep teazing and tiring every person of any
musical feelings with the same things to eternity.

Indeed we meet yet with some extemporary performers of song in the countries
most musically disposed, as in Italy, Spain, Wales, Scotland; and of
instrumental, even in England. If your organists would travel, and get rid of
their national old vulgar church style, their voluntaries might be worth
hearing. I can fancy, at times, great things in the rapturous poetic effusions
of an ancient bard, singing in the style of a Homer or Ossian, to his harp,
partly extemporary, or on some known subject, embellished by the warmth of
momentary fancy: but since music has lost her simple and sublime, with her
poetic origin and ardent admirers, and thence, perhaps, her best extemporary
powers, her bards and minstrels are no more; she often becomes weak and sickly,
cold and languid, though very ingenious and refined; and her greatest
excellencies, her real and transcendent merits, are beyond the feelings and
comprehension of those who are not musicians. I sometimes imagine, if music
were again to be taught at the common schools, we might perhaps rekindle some
sparks of the warm and ready genius for composition, make every body
performers, and double the pleasures of the world. It seems to be still so
taught in Germany; hence the musical superiority of the Germans; and hence they
may go on, keep nearer to the Italians, and leave the rest of the world behind:
but their style of music, as far as it may be called their own, is not perhaps
yet fit for imitation, nor to take a lead: it seems peculiar to themselves, and
had better be left and admired in their own hands: it seems to me too much
broken and affected, not sufficiently simple and natural; pieced and patched
out with very pretty materials, but which seldom join well, so as to form a
good and entire whole: it seems a pretty and a peculiar species, but not a
comprehensive class or genus: it is the minute and rich Arabesque, but not the
grand and simple Grecian architecture.

All ranks and professions are interested, and all should join in promoting
good taste in all the arts, and should assist, or contribute toward the
forming some fund for sending young people abroad, and in establishing good
schools at home, some for music, under Italian masters, like those at Naples I
have since learned, that a musical school was planned by Dr. Burney, and
established under his direction, and Giardini's, at the Foundling Hospital,
some ten or twelve years ago, but was overthrown in less than a month, by
fanatics who pretended it would corrupt the morals of the children. The late
increase of an ignorant and vulgar style of fanaticism, the growing weight of
its influence in matters of public importance, are but melancholy symptoms of
our progress in education, or in legislation.
. There should be public employments for the greatest proficients, -- for those
who had got beyond every nationality of style and manner, and had gained
certain prizes at Rome. No master of music, for example, should be admitted as
candidate for certain posts, till he had composed, at least, one Italian opera
to stand the test of a Roman audience. Half the musical expenses of your rich
and great, bestowed in this way, would have double the effect on the national
taste and genius.

We have divided the liberal, in imitation of the useful arts, perhaps too
much: some of the ancients had better ideas of those things, and of their
mutual connection: with them, music and dancing comprehended more objects,
which they perceived to be mutually dependent: we have separated those into
more parts, and may thereby have advanced some of them farther: but those parts
have now almost forgot each other; they go on singly, and are scarcely now
parts of the same whole: their uses and connection may together be forgot. A
very good violinist, for instance, is now often but an indifferent judge of
song, and the professor on one instrument does not often understand the music
of another: the moral uses of music likewise, its natural influence on the
passions, manners, and on the other arts, may gradually disappear.

Had it not been for the Italians, music might have been left to degenerate in
the cold hands of cloistered superstition, and in those of itinerant fiddlers
and pipers; for, alas! the poor bards, who might have been formed into some
useful and elegant institutions, were barbarously crushed before music, taste,
and letters, could be said to revive: colleges of such men might have been
established, so as to preserve and improve all the connected arts, and would
have linked former with present and with future times: or if Italy had
recovered her liberty and importance with that glimpse of taste and knowledge
in the fifteenth century, and had understood the art of government as well as
some of the others, all the arts, in her hands, might have gone on to improve
each other without interruption, and might, from thence, have spread and
fructified much more throughout Europe: but then Italy would perhaps have
conquered the world again: however, the danger, the possibility of that
progress is now probably past, and not likely soon to return. We cannot expect,
that those things can ever be taken up again with the vigor of youth, by old
and worn-out nations, reduced by oppression, superstition, and indolence.

Till some nation arise, beginning from the usual rude state, governed in the
true old paternal and patriotic spirit, -- the poet, philosopher, magistrate,
and musician, frequently united in the same person, -- till then, we cannot
perhaps expect to see revived the great character and enlarged features of
music, and the other arts, -- nor a sufficient plenty of warm, poetic, musical,
and heroic, minds, -- nor the true spirit of society and government, of
education and happiness, on principles sufficiently simple and perfect. Since
most of the European nations have so long passed those periods, this kind of
retrospect and romantic speculation may be thought vain and fruitless; but if
we do not sometimes look back on the line we have passed, we cannot so well
judge of that before us. However, the present delightful, though refined and
complicated art of music, will probably be preserved by the Italians, even
beyond the other arts, supported by their beautiful language.

Since all words are not fit to be sung, nor are they much more so for being in
verse, the composer, now the only judge who must determine these things, should
sometimes be the poet likewise; like Scarlatti and some others: he should be a
man of liberal education, of extensive genius and knowledge, and a great
practical musician -- a first-rate character. We shall not, probably, till
then, get rid of the idea of poetic measure, jingle and rhyme, being always
necessary to aria; nor of other similar barbarisms proceeding from the too
great division of the arts, and their unacquaintance with each other.

It may be thought, by some, that we have already music enough, and that we may
have nearly exhausted the best musical ideas: on the contrary, I think much,
and perhaps the best, is yet to come. When we return from our erratic
excursions, and find and keep the true path, and study effects, the finest
things may yet be produced. I have sometimes fancied, that a great composer
could set a whole story or opera to serious music, without words; -- or could
begin, by fancying or creating the music, and finding the words afterward: we
see some of the ballets tolerably done in this way, and they would be still
better if not so full of French music and French dancing. Much silent,
expressive, but temperate, action, -- great variety of well accompanied
recitative, might all be oftener, and more successfully used than hitherto,
though we have already seen very fine scenes of that kind: when the nature and
effects of aria, contrasted with recitative, come to be understood; when the
different kinds of coro and semi-coro, intermixing, and alternating with single
voices, and with distant sounds, which may occasionally approach and retire;
when these and many other things come to be well studied and known, the
greatest effects may be expected; and then those scenes of distress, -- of
extreme sorrow, terror, horror, or despair, which we have seen so well
expressed by Sacchini and others, are, however, yet far from being exhausted:
they who do not see through these, a large field open for future effects and
improvements, are not made to feel or to advance the art. Some fine musical
scenes open to the mind such vast conceptions, that the art appears infinite.
Some other parts, as the duo -- those beautiful soliloquies and pathetic arias,
-- some solitary scenes of distress, have all been already so well executed,
that one can only attempt to conceive how they may be varied without loss.
Those scenes, with different degrees of contending affections, -- different
steps and bursts of passion, -- the sudden transition from recitative to aria,
from that again to another, and the contrary; many of these have been well felt
and understood, and highly worked up, -- but never, I believe, with much
success out of Italy; that sublime part, not even the first of the Germans
could ever fully feel, comprehend, or execute, unless it were such of them as
became Italians, like Hasse, Gluck, etc.

Yes, we must all submit to the Italians; they must yet dictate in this, and
all the other arts of taste: but, alas! it is melancholy to see those arts with
such threatening symptoms of decline in their native Italian soil, amidst so
many surrounding advantages, upon which their growth and cultivation have been
thought to depend: but many other things are necessary to their support,
besides those advantages: without some radical change in their governments, the
Italians will probably go on to decline in the arts, as in industry, virtue,
and public spirit. In order to be great in one thing, we must probably be great
in all, -- in arts and in arms: many things, nay, every thing is perhaps
necessary to raise a people to any great attempts; our pride, our ambition, and
interest, must all be flattered, and gradually fed with hopes and rewards, in
order to make us move and exert ourselves: where any thing material is wanting,
we are ready enough to find excuses for our neglect or indolence, and naturally
gravitate toward repose. To advance far in the arts, a nation must likewise be
of some political importance in the general scale, capable of national pride,
and equal to the pre-eminence of taking the lead in some things of importance:
there must be motives sufficient to attempt great establishments on grand and
comprehensive views, -- to stimulate and transport the minds of men not only to
the labor of imitation, but up to the pride and warmth of original invention.

The great effects and love of music in other times and countries, might be no
proof of its merit according to our standard. We see nations, who have only a
few poor simple tunes, become fonder of them than we of the choicest of all our
great variety. Luxury and plenty pall and blunt the appetite. The mountaineer
loves his miserable rocks and glens, probably, far more than the inhabitant of
the richer plains does his cultivated fields; and these different degrees of
passion and attachment will produce proportional differences on their minds;
the one warm and wild, the other cold and sedate: even in modern times, we know
that whole armies have been fired to enthusiastic degrees of exertion, by the
timely striking up of some favorite national air or song: it has been
practiced with Highlanders, Swiss, Russians. Pleasures are providentially more
equally distributed than they appear to be: they who have but few good things,
happily, seem to relish them in a kind of inverse ratio of their number.

But it was not music, as such, in our idea, it was poetry recited or sung, as
before observed, that so pleased and affected some of the Greeks; -- it was
some kind of musical declamation. In Italy, in their public speaking and
preaching, and in reciting of verse, they have still some such tune, which
indeed we do not at first much like; but it may have suffered great change, by
passing so long through the medium of monkish ignorance and bad taste: on the
revival of music, cloistered learning might take one road, and that of society
and the stage another; that this tune, our chaunts, the Spanish romance, and
the present Italian recitative, may all have proceeded from the same source,
though now so different. The ancient Greek modes, with their music, their
declamation, and poetry, all connected, I can conceive, might have prodigious
effects, and a permanent influence on their manners and character. When they
became a Roman province, they probably soon lost those elegant ideas and
amusements. Polybius, I believe, was among the last of their writers who saw,
and was sensible of all the possible influence of music; and it is vexatious to
think, that probably no one will ever see it again.

We must suppose the Greeks had some good music, they felt so true and refined,
so justly in every thing. It seems they had a method of notation, and with the
nicest ears and sensibility adverted to every thing in sounds and language: yet
we see all was insufficient to transmit their modes of pronunciation, of
speaking, reciting: we may wish they had possessed a notation more like ours,
to have transmitted to us more of their meaning.

We moderns have no musical language: the expression, taken from the ancients,
is now unintelligible to us: we have no language that sings, though we have
music that speaks or expresses the passions, in ways however of its own, quite
different from those of our elocution: the Italian being the best language for
singing, seems to have happened almost by accident, or partly, perhaps, from
some communication with the Greeks: the latter Romans had probably refined
their taste and pronunciation by the use of the Greek language; that taste,
with the acquired habits, powers, and posture of the organs, might have some
influence in the formation of the language, which came afterward to be
gradually produced from the Latin, and the other languages of their neighbors
and conquerors, viz. the present Italian; the singing did not probably grow up
with it, but was afterward taken up from the church. The Greeks, proceeding in
a contrary direction, had probably formed a species of music and song, built on
the accents and tones of their language, by which the degree of expression
might be greatly heightened, and without being totally changed, as is the case
with all our verbal expressions the moment we begin to sing any of them: none
of the tones or intervals of our music having any relation to those of
speaking, nor can the one ever recall the other to mind.

It is perhaps possible to note down common speech in Mr. Steele's way, but not
by our present diatonic scale; and when it is done and performed on an
instrument, it can give us no idea of any music or accompaniment. Mr. S.
complains of a preference being often given in song to a pretty musical idea,
though it run counter to every accentual property of the words: certainly, it
must be so with our music; though it ought not often to run counter, it must
take a different path of its own: this is not an abuse, but a necessary
consequence of the now innate difference between the musical and poetical
expressions, which have no relation to each other in tone, time, or rythmus,
but only in the sentiment. The nearest resemblance may be thought to consist in
the time; but in speaking the most measured prose or verse, you will find that
musical time is never the standard the mind refers to: and the fancied division
of musical bars in language, is too forced a conceit, and never can be applied:
and no sounds can be music to us, nor give us any idea of musical expression,
except those upon the scale which we have been accustomed to consider and to
feel as music.

A few more remarks on the taste and genius of our merry friends here, before
we quit them. With all their vivacity, and great abilities and passion for
music, I think it is allowed, that they succeed as badly as any of us, and
seldomer please any but themselves in their compositions or performance, -- but
more especially in the vocal: yet, I think, while they keep within the limits
of what may be called the lively or buffa species of music, where the time is
well marked, and its motion essential, they are less offensive; many of their
little airs, we all know, are rather pleasing to the most general or common
taste, and that some of them are rather more than popular, or vulgarly pretty
-- if they could sing them. But generally, in proportion as the French venture
beyond those limits (which they too frequently do), and attempt any serious
expression of the great passions, then they as gradually become ridiculous, and
presently get into the vulgar scream or howl, of extreme passion, or bodily
pain, which is quite intolerable to every body but themselves: generally in
extremes, they know but few of the numerous shades between, and where beauty
and elegance generally dwell. But in every thing lively or comic they certainly
excel; and their petite opera, in spite of their unfortunate language, voice,
and manner, generally goes off tolerably well, on account of their natural,
correct, and graceful action. Indeed, the wit and humor, the lively or comic,
of every nation, is mostly excellent in its way, and being rather local, is
what no foreigner can with propriety pretend to criticize; and theirs, with the
addition of the graces peculiar to themselves, becomes sometimes excellent. But
the serious being more universal, and belonging to humanity in general, all are
competent to decide on its merits or resemblance.

Though our musical taste in England may be equally deficient, yet from some
things that have been formerly produced among us, I can conceive a certain
degree of capability in our disposition and language, toward a kind of wild
romantic or melancholy song, which might be carried much farther, if we could
more frequently produce a Shakespeare to write, and a Purcel to compose and to
sing, or rather one to do all, and a succession of such men; but now, I
believe, the wisest thing for us would be to remain silent for a while, and let
the Italians sing to us, and travel to Italy while young, till we learn to sing
like them: indeed, theirs is probably the only language now fit to be sung, and
all nations, who have any taste, will learn and adopt it for that purpose, as
Spain and Portugal. Nor are these things of such small consequence as may at
first appear: if we have spoiled our mouths, our language, and our ears, by
false delicacy and affectation, these defects will extend to seemingly distant
objects: the sense employed in judging of these things can likewise judge of
others; and when it is spoiled, its errors and deficiencies will have
influence, not only on our music, but on all subjects where the ear and the
mouth are concerned, and perhaps on many others where the connection is less
obvious.

By accumulation, analogous sentiments assist and augment each other
prodigiously: they multiply and increase the impressions, in some duplicate or
higher proportion, much beyond the sum of all: if, for example, in music, to a
fine tone be added the chiarezza, vaghezza, and good modulation, and then a
good portamento, the effects will increase in some such progression; and,
conversely, a deficiency in any of these will proportionally affect the whole:
now, I fear, we are generally deficient in most of these, and sometimes in all.
This doctrine of accumulation is curious: it goes much farther, and takes in
the objects of different senses; numerous instances of which might be given,
but which I must leave your fancy to pursue.

Taste and her attendant graces are at length introduced, though late, into
your island, and are, doubtless, making some progress, though they spread
themselves but slowly over the face of your country, and find but little space
to dwell between the approaching extremes of vulgarity and affectation. Yet, I
think, you may, by your usual perseverance, succeed, and get beyond all the
other nations, except Italy, in most of the arts; you, philosophers, may go on
and discover on what their advancement depends, if you can escape the danger of
that national conceit which disdains foreign assistance: you may see the
insufficiency of wealth alone, and the power of other incentives, more suited
to the ambition and the caprices of genius; you may perhaps, in time, complete
the chain on which their advancement depends, but which the want of a link may
render useless.

The observation of your friend is sensible, and perhaps sometimes true, though
probably more ingenious than solid, viz. that musical people may not be so well
qualified to judge of the beauties of language as some others: and that,
accustomed to the richer sounds of music, they may not have much relish for the
more tame and rational beauties of speech. I have observed, that few of the
poets of these days have much taste for music, but I have known musicians who
had a taste for poetry: all this is from bestowing too much time and attention
on one thing, and remaining unacquainted with others, from a too great division
of the arts; and the musical ear, when turned to those objects, will be found,
at least, as capable of distinguishing as any other Since the above was
written, I have seen Rousseau's letter on music, and am pleased to find I have
mostly adopted his ideas: only I think he is still embarrassed, by considering
music or singing as a species of elocution or declamation, and in endeavoring
to subject it to some of the rule^ of speaking: whereas, I am still inclined to
consider the musical art now as totally different, and subject only to rules of
its own. Some other of his ideas are still rather too French, -- as his notions
of duo, -- his own compositions; but we must not expect him to get entirely
free from the shackles of the language and nation in which he was, in a manner,
born and bred.
.

LETTER XXII. Paris. -- France. -- Poetry, French and Italian. -- Of Writing.
To Mr. A. J --.
BEFORE you leave home, you will, of course, direct your reading to the objects
in view, and see your own country: without these it would, indeed, be hardly
worth while to go abroad and waste the time, which, in many other cases,
becomes doubtful if it might not be better spent at home: but if you mean, like
too many of our young travelers, to run away from your studies, or from
yourself, into all the French nonsense and etourderie of the fashionable and
foolish world, I have no advice to give, nor could you take it if I had: not
that I wish to curtail the few trappings and pleasures of life, and cut utility
to the quick; I only mean to relinquish advising, in matters of mere amusement,
to others better qualified, and to recommend mixing business with pleasure for
the advantage of both, and am totally against traveling without some tutor or
friend; it will require all the efforts and knowledge of both to extract the
essence of utility in traveling. We see too many idle and vicious young
Englishmen, running about the world alone, without either restraint or
assistance, both of which they stand so much in need of.

This same Paris you may find a very agreeable place, if you are well
recommended, and likewise very useful to your views of study, if you have
resolution enough not to be dissipated by its frivolous amusements; which is
not so difficult, I think, as in London; and you may be less subject to various
distractions and interruptions. This is more like a great country town, and not
the seat of the court, nor of commerce, and therefore, I conceive, more
agreeable. People here seem to have more leisure and inclination to converse,
-- to study, or philosophize with us; while in London, you all seem perpetually
absorbed in some anxious pursuit, -- in the hurry and fatigue of business.
Hence the agreeable arts of life are here more considered and improved, though
oftener mixed up with a trifling or bad taste. Many things that are treated with
neglect and contempt by your sulky matter-of-fact-men, become here of an
agreeable importance. And if their people of fashion, their artists, teachers,
modistes, etc. had but a little more true taste, travel, and knowledge of
nature, many of their trifles might probably grow into real consequence among
people of sense, throughout the rest of Europe, as well as here. If it should
become the fashion among them, again, to travel, and to encourage strangers of
merit, their superior vivacity and quickness of abilities would again appear,
and turn to account.

If you can steadily pursue your plan of studies here, in chemistry, anatomy,
philosophy, you may get more useful knowledge in two years, than in all the
five you have passed at college. I am only in doubt if some of the time might
not be better passed in some part of Germany, were it only for the habits of
steadiness and application which may be acquired there.

To this agreeable nation and language, the world is, and may yet be indebted
for many good things. Their manners and conversation, as well as situation, may
long continue to attract the strangers of every country, and form a beneficial
intimacy among us all -- a kind of standard and point of reunion for European
manners and society, which may have influence even on public measures and
opinions, may soften and humanize the unfeeling maxims of state policy, and
retard our falling, or driving each other, back into barbarism. We may, and
perhaps ought, now to go on and polish ourselves upon them, and may gain more
than we lose, by rubbing off some, though formerly valuable and distinguishing,
points of national character. As nations mix and become better members of this
European society, or republic, which seems now gradually to assimilate and
associate more intimately than formerly. We must all conform, in many things,
to what the majority may please to determine: so that it becomes daily more
necessary, that this central and leading nation be well studied and known,
especially by all those who may have any public part to act.

Although, in judging of taste and sentiment, we can, none of us, pretend to
absolute impartiality, and although I am, rather voluntarily, an imperfect
critic in poetic affairs; yet, you see we are not therefore deterred from
judging for ourselves, and I feel not the less decided, even in the most
singular opinions. You know, that I think they have hardly any poetry in
French, and, to my ear, their language is incapable of the true sublime.
Whatever good sense, or beautiful imagery, we may admire in their best poets,
those are produced independently of their language; nor can their sentiments
receive those embellishments which are conveyed by sound, till translated into
languages more capable of bestowing them. I have met with several of their
pieces, which, in their native tongue, are sensible and interesting, but, when
translated into Italian, become likewise beautiful, and hence more interesting.
I confess, however, a decided partiality, you know, for the Italian, which, to
me, appears the only modern language capable of expressing the poetic beauties,
by the help of sounds. Nor does this predilection proceed entirely from its
aptness for vocal music, as many of their first productions in poetry are not
the fittest to be sung: but this language seems now the only one possessed of
those beautiful combinations and arrangements of sounds that can charm the ear
as well as the understanding, and from the effects of accummulation, both these
powers are mutually increased. And yet these sounds are totally different from,
and independent on music. It would be difficult and tedious to explain here, in
what their effects and beauties consist. To be sensible of them, the best way
is to learn the language in the country.

I ought likewise to confess, that what pleases me most is that familiar and
natural simplicity we meet with in Petrarch, Dante, Boyardo, Ariosto, Boccacio,
etc. etc. with which I am so charmed, that after reading them, I cannot, for a
long time, relish any other style. A French bursting or drawling attempt at
sublimity would then make me sick.

Another, with different taste and habits, might think this all prejudice or
prepossession. Hence we are led to doubt the certainty of any standard or fixed
principles in taste. And this uncertainty must probably ever prevail in
practice, after all that has been written and taught about it, so long as
custom continues to be a kind of second nature. At least, in this manner, are
we obliged to settle the matter, as well as we can, in accounting for the great
diversity in taste, and of the opinions concerning it.

But although we can never bring all men to like and dislike the same things,
and in the same degree, and each of us will have his own scale or gradation of
beauties; yet we see some things are universally liked; and there are,
doubtless, some principles, or extended limits, where beauty ends and deformity
begins, and within which, men and nations may differ without being wrong.

Both we and the French have likewise had that simple naif manner of writing,
before mentioned, and abandoned it again, I think, too soon, before it was
perfected. They, soon after Montaigne, left, instead of imitating, his frank,
easy, and graceful manner, which I consider as the natural fort of their
language: they have, since, attempted, and gone through, several different
styles in writing, to some of which it is certainly not so well adapted. They
have written in the turgid and conceited, in the tedious and languid, manner.
The fashion seems now, the rapid, short, fiery style, of declaiming on every
subject, which I think answers pretty well in some cases, and suits the
language, when employed with judgment and simplicity, in which, however, they
are often deficient, and can seldom keep within the bounds of moderation.
Voltaire I consider as their great and best leader in this, and he has already
had, and may yet have, some successful followers. But you have, doubtless,
already good enough accounts of these things.

LETTER XXIII. The French a great Nation. -- General Reflections.
To Mr. A. J --.
IN considering the French, we are sometimes led to doubt or wonder, how a
nation, made up of such defects, under the most oppressive kind of government,
could ever be so great in so many ways. On examining the country, and seeing
how the people live, -- bread almost their only food, and not always good, nor
plenty: so small a share of the fruits of their own labor for themselves, and
that share not very secure: though often apparently contented and happy, we
must doubt the reality of that happiness: -- if really contented with poverty
and dependence -- with dirt and misery, we must expect but little vigor or
exertion from such a people. However we may be inclined, in speculation, to
magnify the influence of moral and physical defects, with which we are not much
acquainted, and to feel too great a contempt for whatever differs from us,
though only in appearance; we must recollect, that men are men, though in rags
and wooden shoes; and twenty millions of people so well situated, and
compressed as these are, and with so happy a disposition, if only left to
themselves, and protected from foreign injury, and from each other, even though
considerably oppressed by their government; must still be a great nation, as
the world goes; dans le pais des aveugles, les borgnes sont rois: and we know
that these people have the art to appear still greater than they really are,
and to acquire more than their due share of influence in the scale of Europe.
With half their present evils and impediments removed, they might perhaps be
too great for all the rest.

What a pity you English do not choose to be more amiable, that you might rival
them in every thing, and even in their own way. But, indeed, I think rudeness
is now the mode in both countries: the French took it up, probably from
fancying it was English, and we copy it from them. An affected cold stare of
indifference, or nonchalance, now meets you in all fashionable societies -- it
is alleged, by way of leaving you at your ease; very different from the
over-anxious, the troublesome attention and politeness of former times. Their
morning dress, which they call a l'Anglois, is perfectly slovenly, and often
nasty. The manners, in some provincial towns, where one meets yet with a little
old-fashioned civility and formality, de la vicille cour, I find far more
agreeable.

There are certain advantages, if we knew how to use them, that attend every
character and way of life. Even poverty has its advantages. This people, though
not equal to us in strength, resolution, perseverance, yet, in many situations,
would be able to exist, while we should starve. And this we shall find to be
the case, in some degree, on comparing ourselves with most of the other
inhabitants of Europe. Great things have sometimes been done by their armies.
In the hands of a master, an indifferent instrument becomes a good one. The
great man, who knows the fort and the foible of his nation, will do as much
with such indifferent tools as some others with the best.

Fortunately, mankind have generally some motives for exertion, and are
naturally so bent on getting forwards, that they can hardly be kept back by the
most powerful impediments, such as civil and religious tyranny, joined to
shackle them. Their natural wants and passions will not let them sit long
still. And here, their lively and agreeable manner, and perpetual appearance of
activity, all help to impose a little, and make them seem capable of more than
they really are. You know, that the world considers things in a slovenly way,
and how few are above the vulgar methods of judging of men and things, of
merit, of characters, by a few outward appearances, or by some accidental
success; leaving the few observers of men to look nearer, and estimate their
real value. You are a great nation, made up of great and solid materials, like
the buildings of the Romans. This is a great nation, but composed of lesser
materials, like the tabique walls of the Moors.

However, not only comparatively, but rather positively and intrinsically, we
must allow this nation a great deal of merit, of industry, and other virtues,
in spite of all their faults and weaknesses, -- of poverty and bad government.
But they, as well as other people, are fitter for some things than for others.
I should, for example, think them fitter for manufactures than for agriculture
or navigation. And it might be from some idea of this kind, that the great
Colbert seemed to promote manufactures and commerce, beyond what the nature of
the country has been thought to require, by other great men, as Sully, etc.
They are known to be far better for an attack than for defense, which you
should never forget. But I do not wish to give you remarks already well known.

It is not to prejudice you against this people, that I endeavor to sift out
their faults and defects. I wish to point out to you the less obvious, the
hidden flaws of things, which you may, one day, examine for yourself; and that
you may be led to look farther than the surface of appearances, which is
certainly full as necessary in this country as in any other.

We all see through different mediums. It is difficult, and perhaps impossible,
to give or acquire some sorts of knowledge, without prejudice. All knowledge,
that deserves the name, tends to system. Things, in order to be understood,
must be arranged: but our system once arranged, becomes itself the source of
prejudices, and when joined to those of habit and education, forms a stream
which few can leave or withstand. Do not previously, if you can help it, adopt
any system of mine, nor any other, that may lead you to prejudge the cause.
Read and arrange, but doubt of all till you see.

But human nature would not advance, and experience would be of little service
to mankind, if that of each individual were confined to his own use. And yet it
cannot often be taught, or applied to the use of others, so as to save them the
trouble of going over the same ground, though it may help to direct them in
their road.

In distinguishing what we should be taught, from that which we should teach
ourselves, we shall probably perceive, that in the early stages of society, men
are naturally in the first extreme, of trusting to themselves, and being taught
too little: and that we moderns are arrived at the second, of expecting too
much from instruction, leaving too little to nature and to our own researches.

I only meant to sketch you out a few of the most striking features of the
outline, to be filled up from your own future experience and observation. But
with all my zeal and sincerity, I may not succeed, even in the little I
attempt. I think we seldom can, in this way, give all the ideas we intend.

LETTER XXIV. Travelers. -- French Peculiarities; their Civility, Etourderie,
Urbanity, Philosophy, Imposing, Public Spirit.
To Mr. C. J --.
THE fort of this people consisting chiefly in appearances, and of a very
engaging kind, you will be more subject to over-rate their merits than their
defects, and the danger will be in your finding them too agreeable. Many of us,
who set out to visit Europe, at least, seem to be caught and attached here; and
when we reflect, and ask ourselves, how we come to spend so much of our time
and money among such trifling people as here abound, of both natives and
strangers? -- how, and wherefore, so many of us get together in these French
towns, as if merely to walk about and play cards? -- we are, perhaps, ashamed
to confess all the truth, and have recourse to various pretexts, to deceive
ourselves and our friends. At home, I think we hardly perceive so many idle
people in the whole country, as may here be found, of English only, assembled
in one French town. Our best travelers go farther. Our men of taste and
learning persevere, and get on to Italy at least. So that you will increase
your advantages the farther you go. Besides those of seeing things more worthy
your attention, you will meet with travelers more worth knowing than those who
stick fast here, taken with the frivolous pleasures of French societies, and
with the cringing obsequiousness of the miserable crowd.

I should be more satisfied if we always acquired, by these little French
trips, a greater esteem and love for our own country, as one would think we
naturally ought; but I fear many return with less, instead of more, aversion to
slavery and wooden shoes: nay, there are some who are not ashamed to profess a
preference for these poor tyrannized countries, insisting, that it is only such
that are fit for a gentleman to live in: but, indeed, that is generally after
their return, for, while here, I think we all agree, as usual, in abusing the
country where we live.

Nevertheless, I am still a warm advocate for traveling whenever it is
possible, and I fancy that something good always sticks, even to the idlest of
our ramblers; and that they may afterward be always readily distinguished from
the mere John Bull, fox-hunter, or country squire, by their conversation,
attention, or something in their manner.

Although we English generally assort and live too much together abroad, some
few of us, however, as stragglers from the main body, prefer the company of the
French; and they, on perceiving our desire to be acquainted, meet us more than
half way, in that prettiest frank and cheerful manner with which, indeed, they
do every thing. They are extremely and agreeably good, and spare no pains, nor
civility, to oblige us, while we take care not to put them to any expense, to
which they are not easily inclined: a disposition which I approve. Their spirit
of economy is, to me, delightful, and ought to make us ashamed of our
extravagance, instead of the contrary, which we too generally feel.

Certainly nothing can be more completely agreeable than some of their people
of fashion. The troublesome affectation of etourderie, in their young men, I
find the least bearable part of their society. A young Frenchman is like a
greyhound puppy, and teazes you without mercy or meaning. But the grace and
readiness of their manner and conversation makes one wish to forgive them a
thousand things. The French, in general, like the ladies, are never awkward,
except where strength is required -- Si manieres, as they so prettily express
it. It is vain, and mean, in your beaux, to attempt to copy these. In some men
of riper years, we meet with all the graces of youth, joined with that
urbanity, attention, and good sense, which all agree to admire, and wish to
imitate, as the confessed model of manner and conversation: and in all sorts of
good behavior, some of them may nearly deserve the place they assume of
dictators, and in fact, may stand next to the Spaniards, who, I think, are yet
universally the best-behaved people in Europe, and the only people, in any
given circumstances, whose behavior may be entirely depended on. I fear the
English begin to be less considered and sought after, in this country, than
formerly.

You already know the high esteem and respect due here to many of their
philosophers and men of letters, who have laid open science, and combated
error, even in the state, with a spirit that would do honor to the freest
nations: and that the ladies have regained, and have nobly joined much of their
natural influence, toward bringing philosophy and science into real and active
life: and though success, as to general and practical utility, is probably
limited nearly within the present circle, by the nature of their government and
religion; yet they have brought much useful and agreeable knowledge to light,
and have laid it ready to be taken up by the people whenever they may have
liberty and security enough to make it worth their while, and when their
government may consist of the wisdom and virtue that may then be found in such
a nation.

We ought not, perhaps, to be so rigid, as to condemn or despise their little
arts of deceiving themselves, and us, a little, into supposing that the useful
sciences are generally cultivated and applied throughout the country, because
they write and talk so well about them at Paris. Nay, we may admire that
address with which they prejudice us all in their favor, and persuade more
than half Europe to believe the French nation, in general, to be as clever and
informed as they appear in their books and conversation. And they, every where,
get some credit for most of those superiorities which they are ever so ready to
assume. We are easily caught by their pleasing conversation and writings, and
are not then disposed to examine too strictly into the validity of their
pretensions, or of the many excellent terms and expressions with which their
pretty little language abounds, as if made up on purpose to cover their want of
the realities.

From your knowledge of their character, and of their love of fashion, it is
natural enough that you, in England, should be taken in, and believe that the
whole nation may be influenced by a few philosophers in the capital, and that
they are leading each other on to the highest improvements; forgetting that the
poverty of the people alone, will long render any material improvement
impossible.

You might likewise think them like yourselves; each, in some degree,
interested about the public good: among you, any little event or opinion may
presently become the object of general attention, and its influence fly quickly
through your island, by means of your numerous papers, and affect the opinions,
and even the conduct, of many; forgetting all the while, that this is almost
peculiar to ourselves: despotic power tends to separate or insulate every
place, and almost every person, from the rest: nothing but fashion is
interesting enough here, to carry any thing through the whole nation. Any
effectual reform in their government or constitution is highly improbable: none
but the princes can ever have power enough to do it; and we know how unlikely
it is, from their education and national disposition, that any of them can ever
have the will, the knowledge, or character equal to it. Some of them may form a
thousand over-wise and farcical regulations, and without producing any good
effects: till they restore and improve the constitution, they cannot make the
people exert themselves near to their full force, nor oblige their superiors to
do them justice. And this is, perhaps, impossible, till the people have more
property and are well represented in the legislature, and we know their
inadequate ideas of representation. The people are -- nothing: the nobility,
army, and church, form the nation, and must always probably side with the
monarch. How is it possible to reform such a state?

I think, in general, a people show an indifference about public affairs,
nearly according to the degrees of oppression with which they are ruled. Its
being so much the case here, I consider as a more deadly political symptom than
any of yours, which, though more violent, are not so dangerous, nor incurable.
Your mobs, robberies, disorderly elections -- all those marks of licentiousness
more than of liberty, -- of the deficiencies in your police, and of your being
too little governed, are not, however, so irremediable as this tranquillity and
indifference, the sure mark of their being governed too much. Your temporary
follies, and perpetual party animosities, produce so much less mischief, than
such things any where else. In short, your symptoms are only those of rude
health, while theirs indicate a chronic and incurable disorder.

LETTER XXV. On our Changes in Taste, etc. -- Of the French Military.
To Mr. A. J --.
YOU need not fear my becoming a convert to French manners and opinions, or
that I shall deviate much from my first plan, which was, to deal more in
finding fault, than in finding out things worthy of praise or imitation. The
first I still think one of the great pleasures and advantages of traveling: it
maintains and increases our ideas of improvement and perfection; and these are
ideas of great importance in the world, though they should never be put in
practice. The second class, viz. of good things, such as are worthy of
imitation, become obvious enough, and will strike at sight, without being
pointed out, and are generally better known than the defects, which are the
proper objects of improvement.

But I have no objection to change, nor to tell you when I do; as I wish not to
conceal, but to show you every part of the history of my own mind, that I think
may be of any use to you; though we are very apt to be obstinate in support of
what we have once happened to advance, probably from a natural idea of the
importance of being consistent, -- but oftener, I fear, from a false pride.

I may, doubtless, be gradually reconciled, by habit, to many things which
revolted me at first; but, I doubt, I must always retain my first dislike of
others. I must still insist on finding fault, for example, with their taste in
most of the fine arts, -- in music, poetry, tragic action, drawing,
architecture, -- with their government and administration, -- with several
institutions, -- with their taxes, farming, several trades; and must ever
regret the poverty and oppression of their lower classes. Although so great a
difference of taste and sentiment be a kind of a social loss to myself, not to
relish or enjoy what I often see all around me enraptured with; yet I cannot
always feel with them, though I have made many, and some successful, endeavors
for that purpose.

You know their military character, and their passion for arms, which proceeds
chiefly, I believe, from a kind of vanity, and partly, perhaps, to revenge
their domestic slavery on their neighbors. They were among the first who
contributed to bring us all under the ruinous necessity of keeping up these
numerous standing armies, which will probably, in time, again destroy all good
government, and involve the world in tyranny and barbarism once more, unless
their increase be checked, and their constitution improved, by gradually
reverting to militias to supply them with men, and partly to supply their
places; and by restoring good legislation with military education, and thence
morals, manners, and good order. The French have, perhaps, occasion for greater
armies than some other nations, to do the same business, because a weaker race
of people, and more easily dissolved by fatigue. During an ordinary campaign,
they have often had one-third, or more, of their army in the hospitals.

By these standing armies, their government has obtained the double object, of
opposing their enemies abroad, and subduing the nation at home. And the
intention has succeeded. This nation appears now habitually fixed, by character
and inclination, in that submissive and impoverished system. Though formerly
more ferocious, turbulent, and factious, as during their civil wars, they are
now the most pliant and easy to govern of any people we know: so that they
would not now know what to do with their liberty, if they had it. And if such a
government could make the good of the people a primary object, they would ere
now, and might very safely, have reduced their peace establishment, at least to
half its present number, and have eased the subject of many heavy burdens and
regulations. But power is ever unfeeling; and the more absolute, the more
suspicious, careless, and inconsistent.

They are likewise perpetually changing their military systems and regulations,
but I think seldom gain by the change near so much as to make up for the
inevitable evils of changing. It is generally wiser to mend the old than to
make new, and even the most necessary changes should be gradual, if possible.
Concerning minutiae, which should generally be constant, they are often
innovating, and disputing with a degree of heat and animosity to which we are
strangers. Already the Count St. G --, after laboring most patriotically to
introduce his system, must probably see its original merits worn down by
opposition and intrigue, to a few alterations of the least importance: and the
Count himself, it seems, must soon give up even these, and the army, to some
other commanders and systems, perhaps more trifling and capricious. If the
cabals and the genius of the nation would permit them to retain what is good of
his regulations, -- if they could keep only the oeconomical parts, they might
gain more than by any other of their changes for a long time past. Their troops
were certainly getting into what is called very high order, and if well
commanded, they might soon be made capable of many things, though not of
fatigue and perseverance.

But it is in the ordnance, as we should call it, where the greatest changes,
and the bitterest controversies, have lately taken place between Mons. G --,
and his opponents, and which have divided the corpse royale into two inveterate
parties. Surely all the other nations together, could not have said and written
so much about short and long guns, and without deciding any thing.

I am tired with reading the numerous publications on this endless controversy,
and have given it up till some one shall collect the substance of it This has
since been done by a Captain Scheel.
. The experiments of either party are not calculated to discover the truth, but
to get the better of their opponents. The French are not naturally very fit to
carry on experiments. That task requires a more persevering, impartial, cool,
and philosophic turn of mind.

You know they have been lately very attentive to their navy, to which, in
consequence, I think it behooves us to be very attentive likewise, and to watch
all their operations. The history of what they have done, in this department,
since the time of Louis XIV. and of what they are now doing, would form a
curious collection, and like themselves, and indeed like most other human ideas
and institutions, -- a mixture of sense and nonsense.

In some chief points, they are as far in one extreme as you are in the other.
-- Their depending, as usual, more on theory than on practice, while we
continue in the contrary extreme, is all characteristic of the two nations.

The power and expenditure of the military part, are not sufficiently
controlled by the civil; and we know that the common, degrees of human
integrity, when uncontrolled, are not to be depended on: in such a case, some
abuses must creep in, and when once introduced, each will bring a crowd of
others. Their present marine system may not, therefore, be much more lasting
and incorruptible, than any of the former.

They place great dependence on certain sea maneuvers: but military novelties,
and their effects, must soon be over, before a vigilant enemy. In wars between
European powers, such art or artifice cannot give much durable advantage, nor
long overcome real strength. Happily, perhaps, for mankind, we are all now so
nearly on a footing, and communicate so freely, that any of the arts used in
war by one power, may be presently transmitted to the rest, and may be evaded
or counteracted, so that all is soon reduced again to the decision of actual
force, generalship, and the chances of war.

LETTER XXVI. The Schools, Military, etc. -- Of the Monastic Orders and
Superstition.
THE modes and places of education are, in every country, worthy of attention,
and as an officer, you will, of course, inquire and take notice of their
military schools here. I shall only observe, that you will probably find their
voluminous regulations, as usual, to be better on paper than in practice. They
plan much better than they execute, which is just the contrary, I believe, with
us. So that we might, in many ways, learn of each other. We can often borrow
their ideas, and improve upon them in the execution. We can sometimes execute
what they only talk of: with, perhaps, more judgment, and certainly better
workmen, we may get more from their books than from their practice: but we
should see both. I hope you will find, with me, that we have been estimating
their schools, and scholastic modes of education, a little too high. These
appear to me yet more faulty than our own, either from defect or redundancy.
They teach either nothing or too much. We are often surprised at the ignorance
of some very decent looking men; and the common people are taught nothing at
school but the superstitious ceremonies of religion. Even their best places of
education, though they may serve to model Frenchmen, are surely improper and
insufficient to form Englishmen. Men are here to be framed, modelled, and cut
to a pattern, and nothing left to nature: it is the bed of Procrustes, where
people are to be shortened or lengthened so as to fit it.

I fear we must allow that education, for many of the practical and important
offices in society, is yet very deficient among us: theory and practice are yet
far from being sufficiently acquainted. Our idle universities seem to fit
people for few, or no very useful purposes in life, except the church. Pride,
idleness, or useless knowledge, seem to be too frequently the chief
acquirements there: and most of our other schools, and especially
boarding-schools and academies about town, are mere expensive impositions. Our
military education has probably been the most defective: we have produced but
few officers fit to command armies; and those few have come from among the
chosen number who have had the military ambition and enthusiasm so strong as to
make them travel, inquire, and serve, wherever there was any thing to be
learned: a Cromwell, a Marlborough, a Wolf, etc. may be distinguished; but the
catalogue, if continued, would he too short for so long a space of time. Yet, I
think, the English character contains as many of the materials as any other,
for great generals or great politicians, for I consider these two characters as
similar, and indeed necessary to be joined in those leaders of mankind; -- nous
sommes de l'etoffe dout on en fait. But perhaps an island cannot produce them
in such plenty as a great continent: the want or demand for such, is probably
somewhat diminished likewise by the security of your insular situation; and by
the nature of your government, which, like your island, may be left a good deal
to itself, and like a good child, without doing itself any harm. This French
government cares not much about her own subjects, and seems only anxious to
govern the rest of the world, and hence may produce more of those called
politicians than you, as you are generally much engrossed by your internal
affairs, and are seldom, I think, well versed in foreign politics. Hence,
likewise, probably proceeds the misfortune of your not being always good judges
of those military and political men you may have, and your not knowing how and
where to employ them, according to their talents and characters. Many a Wolf,
and many a Marlborough, may have died in the lower ranks of our service. We
have not yet employed, nor made a proper use of, those few officers pointed out
and recommended to us by General Wolf and Prince Ferdinand I have heard that
Prince Ferdinand said, The English send me generals proper for commissaries,
and commissaries fit for generals. The present General Royd was then, it seems,
one of his commissaries. This anecdote is worth preserving, as it characterises
so well our national councils, the speaker, and the persons meant.
; they knew an officer by a kind of instinct. And as to politicians, you have
not, I fear, judged much better. You have sometimes fancied that great lawyers
must be great politicians, which I fear is not often the case; and I should not
have very great hopes of the cabinet that was led or governed by them. I mean
only to speak generally, and of such whose character is formed by the habits of
their profession, in which, I think, the nature and minutiae of the
investigation may produce a kind of microscopic vision, but does not tend to
give the habits and velocity of mind, nor to form an eye of sufficient field
and scope for a great politician: but we have known good officers from that
line, and there are, doubtless, among them men whose genius and abilities are
upon the largest scale, and who are beyond the vices and habits of their trade;
and some who are impelled by nature into that path, from other walks of life:
some of these are often the greatest, the leading characters in most
professions; and we shall find, that almost every branch of knowledge is
indebted to such interlopers for its principal inventions and improvements.

But I think it may fairly enough be doubted, whether an Alexander, a Caesar, a
Tamerlane, a Mahomet, a Frederic, a great warrior and legislator, in one, could
possibly be produced within the confines of a modern university, and of an
island: it probably requires more room, and more great objects of employ, for
such minds to expand, and to be gradually wrought up into the habits of
thinking and doing great things. Admitting the vulgar idea of some men being
born generals, poets, mechanics, etc. their formation is obviously progressive.
We know that the King of Prussia was not a general during his first campaign,
nor scarcely an engineer at the last: and if we knew as much of ancient heroes,
we should probably find the same progression.

Though this French nation and society may form a tolerable school for some of
our grown gentlemen and ladies, yet we certainly do not better ourselves by
sending our children to be educated in their country. Nay, I am sometimes quite
angry and unhappy about this late pernicious prejudice of English parents, in
favor of what they call a French education. The children commonly fall under
the care of nuns and friars, who are generally the most ignorant and vulgar
part of society; people inferior to our own servants and workmen, with more
superstition and less knowledge. It is only when parents, or some relation, can
accompany the children, that it can be worth while, or should be thought of.
The great object, even of the most diligent and best informed in those school
convents, is to convert the children to their own superstition. Their whole
conduct in the business is secretly directed to that object, which, indeed, is
one of the primary intentions of most of the monastic orders, and of their
schools; and saving of souls, by converting them to their faith, is, with them,
a first-rate merit, and an indispensable obligation.

I cannot help observing, en passant, that the English government would do
more, by effectually excluding these monastic people from their dominions, and
particularly from Ireland, than by all their laws against popery. And I
believe, the first government in Europe who shall have resolution to begin the
dissolution of those now burdensome and dangerous fraternities, may find it
easier than commonly imagined, and other nations will soon follow the example.
They are now only popular among a few ignorant devotees, chiefly of the lower
classes of people, and are much weakened since they lost their potent legion,
the Jesuits, who were, to be sure, the most powerful and dangerous, because the
most learned and useful. This abolition would be a popular measure, even in
some Catholic countries, especially if care was taken not to give jealousy to
the rest of the church; many of them would then probably secretly rejoice at
the measure.

In abolishing these monastic orders, and their too numerous convents, perhaps
a few of the most useful might be safely enough retained, especially as every
considerable change in society should be as gradual as possible. Humanity, and
the world in general, would agree to the preservation of that assiduous and
benevolent sisterhood, who leave their cloisters, and attend to the most
painful duties in life, the care of the sick.

Since religious wars and disputes have subsided, in England you seem to have
forgot the nature, the real state and spirit of religion in Europe. It is not
so much changed as you suppose; it is only that, being tired of the subject,
you have ceased to talk of it; and it is no longer in fashion: or you fancy
that all are become, like yourselves, more moderate, rational, tolerant: --
nothing like it: toleration is still, with all the bigoted Roman Catholics,
who are yet numerous, a reprobate, heretical, detested doctrine. The bloody
inquisitorial spirit only pretends to sleep, and lies ready watching, to be
roused by the first occasion that may give a fair prospect of success, -- by
any combination of designing and powerful hypocrites who may choose to make use
of it. So that religious wars, which you fancy have ceased for ever, are, on
the contrary, I think, just as probable as ever. The Protestants are only
saved, like the Turks in Europe, and some other lesser powers, by their real
strength, by a kind of balance or jealousy of interests, and difficulties about
dividing the spoils; but the conquest is steadily kept in view by the faithful,
and particularly by the monastic or regular orders: and though we may laugh at
their folly, I think it is not beyond a possibility, that a body so well united
in opinions and objects, may, by time and accidents, become sufficiently united
in interest, and may accumulate power enough to destroy all liberty of opinion,
and restore universal tyranny, ignorance, and barbarism, once ^ore. The two
parties have lately kept each other in awe, but the turn of the ^ale, and our
safety, can be insured only ^y more wars, or by the dissolution of most of
these legions of embodied and ^etermined enemies.

Something similar to your situation may ^e observed throughout Europe; the
people in higher ranks, who do not mix enough with the lower, even governments
and philosophers, are not generally acquainted with the nature and condition of
of the common people, and their supersti^ion. We are apt to fancy a liberality
and benevolence of sentiment to extend and become general, from the example of
ourselves, and a few gentlemen with whom only we converse, and of a few authors
who flatter and rock one another into those temperate and philosophic dreams:
but the gentlemen and philosophers are all together but a very small part of
mankind, dispersed in small and disunited parties, unconnected with each other,
and of little influence in society; and neither they, no^ their dreams of
improvement, are heede^ or known by the lower classes, the bulk of mankind, who
are kept at too great a distance from the upper, involved in their own manners
and opinions. In this course of civilization, there must probably always arise,
at least, two different species or characters of religion, -- a gentleman and a
plebeian religion. From this situation of things, as the distance widens
between the ranks, manners, and opinions, of men, I think the evil consequences
may increase. Hence proceeds not only a want of connection, but a growing
hatred and animosity, a kind of secret war, founded chiefly on superstition,
between the extremes of society; and we ought to be thankful we do not oftener
see the worst effects of this disposition break forth, from some accidental
sparks of mutual offense. To remedy these evils, is now far from an easy task,
since government has unwisely given up the religious direction of the minds of
men. In education and employment probably now consist the most efficacious
means of cure. The nation that shall the first establish a sufficient number of
proper day-schools for real and useful knowledge, discipline, and industry,
among the people, will bid the fairest for success, and may by that means form
the best subjects, -- the most tolerant, the most powerful, and the least
dangerous, as a nearer resemblance and connection would then take place between
all the different ranks in society.

LETTER XXVII. National Emulation, and American War.
To Mr. C --.
THAT constant emulation between the French and us, I think has lately been,
and is likely to be, of more service to them than to us, in some things. While
our young travelers learn of them little else besides their language, their
fashions and follies, they are imitating some of our useful arts, and may, in
time, vie with us in some trades of importance. Besides their attempts to
imitate our wares a^ Rouen, and other places; some coachmakers, and other
trades, at Paris, are trying to work like ours. They have lately I think, taken
from us our old politica^ conduct, and are becoming (at least the pretended)
protectors of freedom. Let us hope we may, in this too, learn ou^ own again
from them, and with more reality, at second hand.

I traveled with a Spaniard and a Frenchman, both coming to England to examine
our arts and manufactories, and both men of some practical and useful
knowledge. One circumstance among others, however, I observed, which might
prevent their increasing their stock of useful knowledge from ours, viz. a
strong prepossession in favor of every thing French. I soon perceived they
think that nation far before us in every thing. This prejudice in favor of
France is becoming very general, I see, throughout Europe; which of the two is
the first for industry, work, ingenuity, etc. have, for some time, been
subjects of rather general controversy, -- general, because it is difficult to
avoid taking a part between contending nations: but I think the English party
diminishes daily: l'Europe devient encore plus Francoise. However, we know it
will be long before such governments as those of France and Spain can attract
men with capitals, or enable others to raise them by manufactories; and we know
what difficulties they had to encounter in the few they have attempted. Perhaps
it would be wiser for them to depend more, as yet, on the produce of their
lands, and for that purpose to begin by changing their tenures, taxes, and
methods of farming, than attempt to force hands and capitals into new
employments, while others remain neglected that are of more national importance.

The Marquis de V --, who is a very sensible man, has told me, that he now
considers our fall as certain and inevitable, from our want of wisdom, and even
of common sense, about this resistance in America: first, in creating it, next,
in not overlooking it, and in our opposing it at last with so little political
and military skill: that he is sorry for it, on account of what his country
will lose, by the want of that rivalship and emulation between us, the source
of so much exertion, and of so much good to both nations; for he thinks we
shall fall too low, and not retain sufficient weight and importance to be their
competitors in any thing. Must Carthage then fall? May not we hope that she
will yet survive this wholesome check; and exist, and prosper, even without
colonies, those most expensive of all customers? May they not, in time, become
better customers, without the charge of governing them, when both sides shall
recover temper enough to pursue their mutual interest? Besides, I believe our
rivals here are fully as far gone in the decline as we.

I grant that it is far better for both, and perhaps for all the nations, that
France and England should exist together, as separate and nearly equal
kingdoms, though we should go on to hate, and make war on each other. Let us
hope the other nations would not fit quiet and see the one destroy or subdue
the other. Not that I think it impossible for a great majority of Europe to be
wrong, or too supine, or blind to the general interest: witness their not
forming a junction sufficient to oppose the Mahomedan inroads into Europe and
Africa, and their permitting the division of Poland.

This American dispute of ours seems warmly to occupy the attention of the
whole world, and in a manner which indicates the strongest prejudices against
us. They all consider America as already independent, and upon that supposition
are forming various and interested speculations. In case of universal tyranny
in Europe, which may possibly again be the case, in time, by a partition of it
among a few overgrown despots, and then perhaps soon again devoured by one;
North America, it is thought, in that case, may serve as an asylum for
persecuted liberty, which may, from thence, reverberate on its persecutors. But
that, as well as many other speculations, are certainly very distant and
doubtful, with a continent so lately, and as yet so thinly inhabited. Even if
they should become completely independent, there cannot probably be any settled
government there for a long time to come; and in their various struggles, there
is no foreseeing yet so far into what may be the result. If they continue
obliged to enter into our weak and corrupt systems of European politics, and to
depend on our divisions and alliances, their subjection, or mutual destruction,
will probably be the consequence; and yet without sufficient connection with
Europe, they must probably decline, or thrive much slower. Peopled from thence,
they must partake of its vices, in addition to their own plentiful stock. Some
of the European manners and institutions, which they have adopted, may not suit
with their situation, and may help to prevent their progress and their union.
Indeed the difficulties of reuniting such a lengthened country, and such
varying interests, may long be insurmountable, especially when the most
powerful motives of union, the government, or enmity of a mother country, shall
be wanting: if they are not wise enough to make use of the present motive of
union, a common enemy, while it lasts, and by means of the war, establish a
government sufficiently powerful, general, and uniform; a peace may separate
such ill-connected materials, and finally tear them to pieces.

But the worst part, for us, of this war will be, not the pecuniary loss and
expense, but the ill success and disgrace that will probably attend it; and
hence our sinking in the scale and in the opinion of Europe. The ideas you
mention of dividing our army to attack the country in different quarters, that
we may be beaten in detail, and especially if those armies leave their ports,
or their depots, so far as to shut up or endanger the communication behind
them, which we know to have always failed from Xenophon downwards: in short,
the whole original plan of subduing by force what is by that means rendered
unworthy the increased expense of keeping, are all ideas so thoroughly absurd,
ungenerous, tyrannical, or unmilitary, that they must entail disgrace on those
who can adopt them. But it is not probable that all your army or navy can adopt
them, or be hearty in the cause; nay, the contrary is sufficiently notorious;
and, indeed, nothing could save us from eternal disgrace but its being pretty
well known every where, except in England, that the majority and the best parts
of the nation are against such measures: if that majority does not soon
prevail, your constitution, and your America, will be together lost. Such are
some of the wild speculations that occur, among a variety of others which you
may have already heard on this subject.

LETTER XXVIII. Memorandums of different Journeys.
IT is no easy matter to choose among my notes, and to judge of what is worth
telling you; nor is it always easy to determine what can be told. In this great
and complicated art of alphabetical writing, re^dered so easy and familiar by
habit, we are not always aware of the limits of its powers. Your complaints of
my brevity and obscurity, in some things, may be well enough founded, and yet
not to be entirely remedied: we cannot by this great art transm^, perhaps,
above half our ideas, and these in^ompletely. I must conclude by giving you
still some more of my brevities, from the memorandum book.

Among the notes of this, and some other jornies, I find, for example, the
following. On approaching Paris, my Parisian companion was delighted, even with
the smell of it, which I thought very offensive.

Weighed my English pound avoidupois very exactly with Mons. Brisson, and found
it 8538 French grains.

I find I dislike this capital for sev^ral things, -- but all down the Seine is
beautiful. Paris unfit for the poor, who are ^ot sufficiently considered by any
rank of p^ple here, except by some of the clerg^ among whom there is a great
deal of me^, but too much of that kind of charity which promotes idleness. Is
this superstitious and ceremonious religion a necessary supplment to this kind
of government? Has not the church contributed to make the ci^l government
defective in order to crea^e work for herself?

The country from Paris to Orleans^ likewise rather naked and triste. Co^,
sand, freestone, light soil, few trees ^fences till you come to the forest of
Orleans, and even that consists mostly of small trees and brush-wood. The town
nasty, and infested with bugs. Some good houses, one good street, and a fine
bridge, with long, light, beautiful, elliptic arches. They are repairing their
Gothic cathedral here; they began professedly to preserve it in the same old
style, which is very good, but they cannot keep to their pattern; they are now
changing the taste and architecture. The French think they can improve every
thing. Even the simple and beautiful Greek vases they often load with ornament.

From Orleans, down the Loire, we begin to see better cattle, agriculture,
population, trees, houses, villages, in short, a rich and fine country: and
Blois rises nobly on the hills that overlook the river; -- as does Chanteloup,
farther down on the other side: Mons. de Choiseul has here been at great pains
and expense to lay out and manage some lands a l' Angloise; but it will prove
too expensive for this country. The chateau is too much in the French style for
us: these mansard clumsy roofs offend my eye all through France.

Tours -- in a fine well watered plain, surrounded by distant woody hills; the
whole very rich and fine.

Marquis de Voyers, (D' Argenson,) aux Olmes. -- A good house in a bottom, with
a high tower for view; how many finer situations for a house among the
surrounding hills? This great estate was probably bought with public money. I
believe most of the ministers, in this country, make fortunes. There is no
House of Commons in this nation to call for accounts. Here is a tolerable breed
of English race-horses; but bad grass lands, after much pains and expense, so
that they must probably fall off.

Chatlera^d -- inhabited almost entirely by smiths and cutlers. How easy to
employ these four or five hundred workmen to much better purpose, and to
produce at least twice the work? but there is very little public spirit in this
country, -- few capitals to be employed in manufactures, a want of machines, of
skill, of exertion: it must be long before this nation can rival you as
manufacturers: it might be better for you, I think, if they did, and were
equally rich and industrious with yourselves; they would then be better
customers than now: if nations were not oppressed and impeded by their foolish
governments, each of them would probably produce and manufacture what was most
natural and proper for their country and climate, and the one would supply what
was wanted by the other, to the greatest mutual benefit of all. May not we hope
to see governments open their eyes on this subject? during this investigating
and enlightened age, as people come to read A. Smith's book: but governments
are generally led or advised by the little peddling people in trade, who see
nothing beyond their own little nonsensical systems of monopoly, and are not
probably the best politicians in the state: indeed, it is yet hard to say where
to find better: the best remedy would be, for ministers to travel and take
great pains themselves, and consult most with those who have done the same, --
with those who have lived, and have been employed in different countries. If,
by chance, a minister reads and reasons himself into a good system, it is
probable he knows not the chief part, the way to carry it into execution: a few
general rules or principles are easily learned; in the exceptions to those
rules, and in the practice, consist the difficult lessons. Theory and practice
are no where sufficiently acquainted. Power is generally too proud to be
taught, and too ignorant to judge: it thinks it can do every thing, and amidst
other nonsense, vainly fancies it can trim and manage the balance of trade. If
governments would let trade alone, it would probably balance itself much better
than they can. If either nations, or individuals, have a mind to expend beyond
their income, I fear their governments cannot then prevent them, if they have
previously taken such bad care of their education, as to let them once acquire
those vicious habits.

Poitiers -- on a fine ridge of hills, with some good houses, but many ancient
and mean: in the country, much misery, and wooden shoes.

Angouleme -- likewise on a noble commanding situation, -- a fine extensive
view over a well-cultivated country toward the sea, rich in wines and
brandies. Iron works and cannon founderies, -- and a great waste of wood and
land from the want of coal. I should like to examine the strata of these
countries, to some depth, with some of our naturalists. There are fine quarries
of good stone, I think, all over France; and there are probably plenty of
metallic ores in the central parts.

Bourdeaux -- beaux, bucks. -- Luxury with commerce. Is not this like joining
parsimony and extravagance? Such are the inconsistencies of man: but mere
expense does not always produce taste or refinement: the luxury of commerce, I
doubt, is often attended with ignorance and bad taste: however, you will find
Mons. and Mad. Louis here much worth knowing: he is building them a very fine
theater, and means to publish a particular detail of the work: in great works
this should never be neglected. Mons. L -- thinks he has performed some things
rather new in the cutting, etc.

This Garonne is a fine river, and the means of a great trade. Seventy thousand
ton of wine, at least, annually exported; and the consumption of the place and
its environs, equal one hundred thousand, viz. fifty thousand, computed from
the duties raised on it, and as much, it is thought, escapes by fraud: a great
West India trade also; -- they say, equal to fifty million livres yearly. We
learn, that the French part only of Hispaniola produces as much as all our West
India islands together, and not by capitals from home, but by those gradually
raised there.

These magistrates of Bourdeaux propose to try a tax upon salt, for experiment,
meaning to discontinue it if found inconvenient, or not to answer: they must be
simpletons if they believe it will ever again be discontinued. Here is
Voltaire's Academie des moutons rouges; a nickname it may probably retain (see
Candide).

Such are not the places where science chooses to dwell: she is rarely found to
be very nearly allied to commerce, or the love of money; only in England, I
think there are some hopes of her becoming more nearly allied to trade, as your
education must surely, in time, be extended and improved, as its importance
must become evident to a rich and improving nation. Under such governments as
this, even riches produce but little public spirit: indeed, the public, in
these days, is nowhere considered as it ought to be; and here it is hardly
considered at all. We have just heard the opinion of some great lawyers and
magistrates against the public, in the disposal of some litigated public money,
which shows how little they consider the public good: to settle the dispute,
the money has been given to a convent: false and inadequate ideas of justice,
and of its importance, given to the people, are not the least of the evils
attending a bad government.

About Bourdeaux, I think, are the best farmers we had yet seen in France,
especially of their vineyards, which are well managed, as are all the other
parts of this wine business: it seems natural to this country, forming at once
a flourishing agriculture, a manufactory, population, and riches. Whoever
wishes to understand all the wine business, and its cultivation, should come to
this country: it is wonderful the Spaniards do not come here to learn those
branches, which might be made of such consequence to them.

Government, vainly fearing that too much land may be turned to wine, attempt
to make the farmers turn more to corn; better let them alone, for they are the
best judges in these matters: but power is very apt to be over-wise. This wine
farming is to be sure a kind of lottery, which tempts with great prizes, and is
subject to still greater losses, like mining, or like our hop-farming: but
still the best way, I believe, is to let the farmers alone, they will best
discover and pursue their own interest: but, alas! how few governments know how
to do this, and let their subjects alone? No one country can produce every
thing; the attempt would not tend to improve, but to impede or force nature,
who wisely seems to intend that men and nations should want, should supply and
assist each other. An entire independence on others, would be an impracticable
cynical solecism in human policy: it would stop the sources of prosperity, by
diminishing the motives to industry, and occasion a gradual decline: a system
nearly adopted by Spain, and afterward too much imitated by other nations.

Such, in this last letter you are to expect from France, are the remarks which
I have collected from my notes; those, with various names, numbers, and
abbreviations, help me to recall numerous other connected ideas and occurrences,
which would neither be easy to communicate, nor perhaps worth it, to any other
person: and it can hardly be worth writing much about those parts that we only
run through. Useful knowledge and reflections require time and attention, and
can only be produced by a residence.

But some of these epistles may furnish you with leading hints and marks to
steer by, as well as longer and more labored accounts: the most explicit ought
not to save you any necessary labor, nor could they, perhaps, lead you more
directly to your object, which is the point of importance. Could we learn to
estimate things according to their real value, and be content with what is
really useful; what time might be saved! and how much farther might we go! You
may, I hope, find leisure to enquire farther into particulars, into the real
state and causes of many more things in this country; and study their laws,
history, government, arts, manners, etc. on the spot: but do it with judgment
and selection, and to save time, -- bornez vous a l'utile and a l'applicable.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

