THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, UNDER THE HOUSE of TUDOR. Comprehending the REIGNS of
K. HENRY VII. K. HENRY VIII. K. EDWARD VI. Q. MARY, and Q. ELIZABETH.


By DAVID HUME, Esquire IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand. MDCCLIX.

CONTENTS Of the SECOND VOLUME.
ELIZABETH.
CHAP. I. Queen's popularity. -- Re-establishment of the protestant religion.
-- A Parliament. -- Peace with France. -- Disgust between the Queen and Mary
Queen of Scots. -- Scotch affairs. -- Reformation in Scotland. -- Civil wars in
Scotland. -- Interposal of the Queen in Scotch affairs. -- Settlement of
Scotland. -- French affairs. -- Arrival of Mary in Scotland. -- Bigotry of the
Scotch reformers. -- Wise government of Elizabeth. 403 CHAP. II. State of
Europe. -- Civil wars of France. -- Havre de Grace put in possession of the
English. -- A Parliament. -- Havre lost. -- Scotch affairs. -- The Queen of
Scots marries the earl of Darnley. -- Confederacy against the Protestants. --
Murder of Rizzio. -- A Parliament. -- Murder of Darnley. -- Queen of Scots
marries Bothwel. -- Insurrections in Scotland. -- Imprisonment of Mary. -- Mary
flies into England. -- Conferences at York and Hampton Court. 445 CHAP. III.
Character of the puritans. -- Duke of Norfolk's conspiracy -- Insurrection in
the north. -- Assassination of the earl of Murray. -- A Parliament. -- Civil
wars of France. -- Affairs of the Low Countries. -- New conspiracy of the duke
of Norfolk. -- Trial of Norfolk. -- His execution. -- Scot^h affairs. -- French
affairs. -- Massacre of Paris. -- French affairs. Civil wars of the Low
Countries. -- A Parliament. 550 CHAP. IV. Scotch affairs. -- Spanish affairs.
-- Sir Francis Drake. -- A Parliament. Negotiations of marriage with the duke
of Anjou. -- Scotch affairs. -- Letter of Queen Mary to Elizabeth. --
Conspiracies in England. -- A Parliament. -- The ecclesiastical commission. --
Affairs of the Low Countries. -- Hostilities with Spain. 558 CHAP. V. Zeal of
the Catholics. -- Babington's conspiracy. -- Mary assents to the conspiracy. --
The conspirators seized and executed. -- Resolution to try the Queen of Scots.
-- The commissioners prevail on her to submit to the trial. -- The trial. --
Sentence against Mary. -- Interposition of King James. -- Reasons for the
execution of Mary. -- The execution. -- Mary's character. -- The Queen's
affected sorrow. -- Drake destroys the Spanish fleet at Cadiz. -- Philip
projects the invasion of England. -- The invincible Armada. -- Preparations in
England. -- The Armada arrives in the Channel. -- Defeated. -- A Parliament. --
Expedition against Portugal. -- Scotch affairs. 592 CHAP. VI. French affairs.
-- Murder of the duke of Guise. -- Murder of Henry the third. -- Progress of
Henry the fourth. -- Naval enterprises against Spain. -- A Parliament. -- Henry
the fourth embraces the catholic religion. -- Scotch affairs. -- Naval
enterprises. -- A Parliament. -- Peace of ^ervins. -- The earl of Essex. 647
CHAP. VII. State of Ireland. -- Tyrone's rebellion. -- Essex sent over to
Ireland. -- His ill success. -- Returns to England. -- Is disgraced. -- His
intrigues. -- His insurrection. -- His trial and execution. -- French affairs.
-- M^untjoy's success in Ireland. -- Defeat of the Spaniards and Irish. -- A
Parliament. -- Tyrone's submission. -- Queen's sickness. -- And death. -- And
character. -- Government, manners, commerce, arts, and learning. 676
THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, UNDER THE HOUSE of TUDOR.
ELIZABETH.
CHAP. I.
Queen's popularity. -- Re-establishment of the protestant religion. -- A
Parliament. -- Peace with France. -- Disgust between the Queen and Mary Queen
of Scots. -- Scotch affairs. -- Reformation in Scotland. -- Civil wars in
Scotland. -- Interposal of the Queen in Scotch affairs. -- Settlement of
Scotland. -- French affairs. -- Arrival of Mary in Scotland. -- Bigotry of the
Scotch reformers. -- Wise government of Elizabeth.

Queen's popularity.
Yet so much were men displeased with the present conduct of affairs, and such
apprehensions were entertained of futurity, that the people, overlooking their
theological disputes, expressed a very general and unseigned joy that the
scepter had passed into the hands of Elizabeth. That princess had discovered
great prudence in her conduct during the reign of her sister; and as men were
sensible of the imminent danger to which she was every moment exposed, the
compassion toward her situation, and concern for her safety, had rendered her,
to an uncommon degree, the favorite of the nation. A Parliament had been
assembled a few days before Mary's death; and when Heathe, archbishop of York,
then chancellor, notified to them that event, scarce an interval of regret
appeared; and the two houses immediately resounded with the joyful acclamations
of "God save Queen Elizabeth: Long and happily may she reign." The people, less
actuated by faction, and less influenced by private views, expressed a joy
still more general and hearty on her proclamation; and the auspicious
commencement of this reign prognosticated that felicity and glory which, during
its whole course, so uniformly attended it P^^net, vol. II. p. 3^3.
.

ELIZABETH was at Hatfield when she heard of her sister's death; and after a
few days she proceeded thence to London, through crowds of people, who strove
with each other in giving her the strongest testimony of their affections. On
her entrance into the Tower, she could not forbear reflecting on the great
difference between her present fortune and that which a few years before had
attended her, when she was conducted to that place as a prisoner, and lay there
exposed to all the bigoted malignity of her enemies. She fell on her knees,
and expressed her thanks to heaven, for the deliverance which the Almighty had
granted her from her bloody persecutors; a deliverance, she said, no less
miraculous than that which Daniel had received from the den of lions. This act
of pious gratitude seems to have been the last circumstance in which she
remembered any past injuries and hardships. With a prudence and magnanimity
truly laudable, she buried all offenses in oblivion, and received with
asfability even those who had acted with the greatest virulence against her.
Sir Harry Bennifield himself, to whose custody she had been committed, and who
had treated her with uncommon severity, never felt, during the whole course of
her reign, any effects of her resentment Ibid. p. 374.
. Yet was not the gracious reception which she gave, prostitute and
undistinguishing. When the bishops came in a body to make their obeisance to
her, she expressed to all of them sentiments of regard; except to Bonner, from
whom she turned aside, as from a man polluted with blood, who was a just object
of horror to every heart susceptible of humanity Ibid. Heylin, p. 102.
.

AFTER employing a few days in ordering her domestic affairs, Elizabeth
notified to foreign courts, her sister's death, and her own accession to the
crown. She sent lord Cobham to the Low Countries, where Philip then resided;
and she took care to express to that monarch, her gratitude for the protection
which he had assorded her, and her desire of presevering in that friendship
which was so happily commenced between them. Philip, who had long foreseen this
event, and who still hoped, by means of Elizabeth, to obtain that dominion over
England, which he had failed of in espousing Mary, immediately dispatched
orders to the duke of Feria, his ambassador at London, to make proposals of
marriage to the Queen, and he offered to procure from Rome a dispensation for
that purpose. But Elizabeth soon came to the resolution of declining this
proposal. She saw that the nation had entertained an extreme aversion to the
Spanish alliance during her sister's reign; and that one great cause of the
popularity which she herself enjoyed, was the prospect of being freed, by her
means, from the danger of foreign subjection. She was sensible, that her
affinity with Philip, was exactly similar to that between her father and
Catherine of Arragon; and that her marrying that monarch was, in effect,
declaring herself illegitimate, and incapable of succeeding to the throne. And
though the power of the Spanish monarchy might still be sufficient, in opposition
to all pretenders, to support her title, her masculine spirit disdained such
precarious dominion, which, as it would depend solely on the power of another,
must be exercised according to his inclination ^amden in Kennet, p. 3^^.
Burnet, vol. II. p. ^^^.
. But while these views prevented her from entertaining any thoughts of a
marriage with Philip, she gave him a very obliging, though evasive, answer; and
he still retained such hopes of success, that he sent a messenger to Rome, with
orders to solicit the dispensation.

THE Queen too, on her sister's death, had wrote to Sir Edward Carne, the
English ambassador at Rome, to signify her accession to the pope; but the
precipitate nature of Paul broke through all the cautious measures concerted by
that young princess. He told Carne, that England was a sief of the holy see;
and it was a great temerity in her to have assumed, without his participation,
the title and authority of Queen: That Elizabeth, being illegitimate, could not
possibly in^^^it that kingdom; nor could he annul the sentence pronounced by
Clement the seventh, and Paul the third, with regard to Henry's marriage: That
were he to proceed with rigor, he would punish this criminal invasion of his
rights, by rejecting all her applications; but being willing to treat her with
paternal indulgence, he would still keep the door of grace open to her: And
that if she would renounce all pretensions to the throne, and submit entirely
to his will, she should experience the utmost lenity which was compatible with
the dignity of the apostolic see (...)
. When this answer was reported to Elizabeth, she was as^onished at the
character of that aged pontiff; and having recalled her a (...) ^^e continued
with more determined resolution to pursue those measures which the had already
secretly embraced.

THE Queen, not to alarm the partisans of the catholic religion, had retained
eleven of her sister's counselors; but in order to balance their authority,
she added eight more who were known to be affectionate to the protestant
communion: The marquis of Northampton, the earl of Bedford, Sir Thomas Parry,
Sir Edward Rogers, Sir Ambrose Cave, Sir Francis Knolles, Sir Nicholas Bacon,
whom she created lord keeper, and Sir William Cecil, secretary of state
Strype's Ann. vol. I. p ^.
. Re-establishment of the protestant religion.
With these counselors, particularly Cecil, she frequently deliberated
concerning the expediency of restoring the protestant religion, and the means
of executing that great enterprise. Cecil told her, that the greatest part of
the nation had, ever since her father's reign, inclined to the reformation; and
though her sister had constrained them to profess the ancient faith, the
cruelties exercised by her ministers, had still more alienated their affections
from it: That happily the interests of the sovereign concurred here with the
inclinations of the people; nor was her title to the crown compatible with the
authority of the Roman pontiff: That a sentence, so solemnly pronounced by two
popes against her mother's marriage, could not possibly be recalled, without
inflicting a mortal wound on the credit of the sea of Rome; and even if she was
allowed to retain the crown, it would only be on an uncertain and dependant
footing: That this motive counterballanced all dangers whatever; and these
dangers themselves, if narrowly viewed, would be found very little formidable:
That the curses and execrations of the Romish church, when not seconded by
military force, were, in the present age, more an object of ridicule than of
terror, and had now as little influence in this world as in the next: That though
the bigotry or ambition of Henry or Philip might incline them to execute a
sentence of excommunication against her, their interests were so incompatible,
that they never could concur in any plan of operations; and the enmity of the
one would always ensure to her the friendship of the other: That if they
encouraged the discontents of her catholic subjects, their dominions also
abounded with protestants, and it would be easy to retaliate that injury upon
them: That even such of the English as seemed at present zealously attached to
the catholic faith, would most of them embrace the religion of their new
sovereign; and the nation had of late been so accustomed to these revolutions,
that men had lost all idea of truth and falsehood in such subjects: That the
authority of Henry the eighth, so highly raised by many concurring
circumstances, first enured the people to this submissive deference; and it was
more easy for the succeeding princes to continue the nation in a train to which
it had been so long accustomed: And that it would be easy for her, by bestowing
on protestants all the commissions in civil offices and the militia, the church
and the universities, both to ensure her own authority, and to render her
religion entirely predominant Burnet, vol. II. p. 377. Camden, p. 370.
.

THE education of Elizabeth, as well as her interest, led her to favor the
reformation; and she remained not long in suspense with regard to the party,
which she should embrace: But though determined in her own mind, she resolved to
proceed by gradual and secure steps, and not to imitate the example of Mary, in
encouraging the bigots of her party to make immediately a violent invasion on
the established religion Burnet, vol. II. p. 378. Camden, p. 371
. She thought it requisite, however, to discover such symptoms of her
intentions, as might give encouragement to the protestants, so much depressed
by the late violent persecution. She immediately recalled all the exiles, and
gave liberty to the prisoners who were confined on account of religion. We are
told of a pleasantry of one Rainsford on this occasion, who said to the Queen,
that he had a petition to present her in behalf of other prisoners called
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John: She readily replied, that it behoved her first
to consult the prisoners themselves, and to learn of them whether they desired
that liberty, which he demanded for them Heylin, p. 103.
.

ELIZABETH also proceeded to exert, in favor of the reformers, some acts of
power, which were consistent with the extent of the royal prerogative during
that age. Finding, that the protestant teachers, irritated by persecution,
broke out in a furious attack of the ancient superstition, and that the
Romanists replied with no less zeal and acrimony, she published a proclamation,
by which she prohibited all preaching without a special license Heylin, p. 104.
Strype, vol. I. p. 41.
; and though she dispensed with this prohibition in favor of some preachers of
her own sect, she took care, that they should be the most calm and moderate of
the party. She also suspended the laws so far as to order a great part of the
service; the litany, the Lord's prayer, the creed, and the gospels; to be read
in English. And having first published injunctions, that all the churches
should conform themselves to the practice of her own chapel, she forbade the
host to be any more elevated in her presence; an innovation, which, however
frivolous it may appear, implied the most material consequences Camden, p. ^^^.
Heylin, p. 104. Strype, vol. I. p. 54. Stowe, p. 6^5.
.

THESE declarations of her intention, concurring with the preceding suspicions,
made the bishops foresee with certainty a revolution in religion. They
therefore refused to officiate at her coronation; and it (...) with some
difficulty, that the bishop of Carlisle was at last prevailed on to perform
that ceremony. When she was conducted through London, amidst the joyful
acclamations of her subjects, a boy, who personated truth, was let down from
one of the triumphal arches, and presented her with a copy of the Bible. She
received the book with the most gracious deportment, placed it next her bosom,
and declared, that, amidst all the costly testimonies which the city had that
day given of their attachment, this present was by far the most precious and
most acceptable (...) vol. II. p (...) vol. I. p. 9.
. Such were the innocent artifices, by which Elizabeth insinuated herself into
the affections of her subjects. Open in her address, gracious and affable in
all public appearances, she rejoiced in the concourse of her subjects, entered
into all their pleasures and amusements, and without departing from her
dignity, which she knew well how to preserve, she acquired a popularity beyond
what any of her predecessors or successors ever could attain. Her own sex
exulted to see a woman hold the reins of empire with such prudence and
fortitude: And while a young princess of twenty-five years (for that was her
age at her accession) who possessed all the graces and insinuation, though not
all the beauty of her sex, courted the affections of individuals by her
civilities, of the public by her services, her authority, though corroborated by
the strictest bands of law and religion, appeared to be derived entirely from
the choice and inclination of the people.

A Parliament.
and Elizabeth, though she threw out such hints as encouraged the protestants,
delayed the entire change of religion till the meeting of the Parliament, which
was summoned to assemble. The elections had gone entirely against the
catholics, who seem not indeed to have made any great struggle for the
superiority; and the houses met in a disposition of gratifying the Queen in
every particular, which she could desire of them. They began the session with
an unanimous declarati^n, "that Queen Elizabeth was, and ought to be, as well
by the word of God, as the common and statute laws of the realm, the lawful,
undoubted, and true heir to the crown, lawfully descended from the blood royal,
according to the order of succession, settled in the 35th of Henry VIII. (...).
" This act of recognition was undoubtedly dictated by the Queen herself and her
ministers; and she showed her magnanimity, as well as (...) in the terms, which
she employed on that occasion. She followed not (...) in (...) the validity of
her mother's marriage, or in expressly repealing the (...) formerly made
against her own legitimacy: She know, that this attempt must be att^^^ed with
reflection on her father's memory, as well as on the birth of her deceased
sister; and as all the world were sensible that Henry's divorce from Anne
Boleyn was merely the effect of his violence and caprice, she scorned to found
her title on any act of an assembly, which had too much prostituted its
authority by its former variable, servile and iniquitous decisions. Satisfied
therefore in the general opinion entertained with regard to this fact, which
appeared the more undoubted, the less anxiety she discovered in fortifying it
by votes and enquiries; she took possession of the throne, both as her
birthright, and as ensured to her by former acts of Parliament; and she never
appeared sollicitous to distinguish these titles Camden, p. 372. Heylin, p.
107, 108.
.

THE first bill which was brought into the Parliament with a view of trying
their disposition with regard to religion, was that for suppressing the
monasteries lately erected, and for restoring the tenths and first fruits to
the Queen. This point being gained without much difficulty, a bill was next
introduced, annexing the supremacy to the crown; and though the Queen was there
denominated governess, not head, of the church, it conveyed the same extensive
power, which had formerly been exercised by her father and brother. All the
bishops who were present in the upper house strenuously opposed this law; and
as they possessed more learning than the temporal peers, they triumphed in the
argument; but the majority of voices in that house, as well as among the
commons, were against them. By this act the crown, without the concurrence,
either of the Parliament or even of the convocation, was vested with the whole
spiritual power; might repress all heresies In determining heresy, the crown
was only limited (if that could be called a limitation) to such doctrines as
had been adjudged heresy, by the auth rity of the Scripture, by the first four
general (...) or by any general council, which followed the Scripture as their
rule, or to such other doctrines as should hereafter be denominated heresy by
the Parliament and convocation. 1 Eliz. cap 2.
, might establish or repeal all canons, might alter every point of discipline,
and might ordain or abolish any religious rite or ceremony 1 Eliz. cap. 1. This
last power was anew granted in the act of uniformity. 1 Eliz. cap. 2.
. In order to exercise this unlimited authority, the Queen, by a clause of the
act, was empowered to name commissioners, either laymen or clergymen, as she
should think proper; and on this clause was afterward founded the court of
ecclesiastical commission; which assumed very large discretionary, not to say
arbitrary powers, totally incompatible with any exact limitations in the
constitution. Their proceedings indeed were only consistent with absolute
monarchy; but were entirely suitable to the genius of the act on which they
were established; an act that at once gave the crown all the power, which had
formerly been claimed by the popes, but which even these usurping prelates had
never been able fully to exercise, without some concurrence of the clergy.

WHOEVER refused to take an oath, acknowledging the Queen's supremacy, was
incapacitated from holding any office; whoever denied the supremacy, or
attempted to deprive the Queen of that prerogative, forfeited, for the first
offense, all their goods and chattels, for the second were subjected to the
penalty of a praemunire; but the third offense was declared treason. These
punishments, however severe, were less rigorous than such as were formerly,
during the reigns of her father and brother, inflicted in like cases.

A LAW was passed, confirming all the statutes enacted in King Edward's time
with regard to religion ^ Eliz. cap. 2.
: The nomination of bishops was given to the crown without any election of the
chapters: The Queen was empowered, on the vacancy of any see, to seize all the
temporalities, and to bestow on the bishops-elect an equivalent in the
impropriations belonging to the crown. This pretended equivalent was commonly
very much inferior in value; and thus the Queen, amidst all her concern for
religion, followed the example of the preceding reformers, in committing
depredations on the ecclesiastical revenues.

THE bishops and all incumbents were prohibited from alienating their revenues,
and from letting leases longer than twenty-one years or three lives. This law
seemed to be intended for securing the property of the church; but as an
exception was left in favor of the crown, great abuses still prevailed. It was
usual for a courtier, during this reign, to make a transaction with a bishop or
incumbent; and to procure a sham alienation to the Queen, who afterward
transferred the lands to the person agreed on Strype, vol. I. p. 79.
. This method of pillaging the church was not remedied till the beginning of
James the first. The present depression of the clergy exposed them to all
injuries; and the laity never stopped till they had reduced the church to such
poverty, that her plunder was no longer a compensation for the odium incurred
by it.

A SOLEMN and public disputation was held during this session, in presence of
lord keeper Bacon, between the divines of the protestant and those of the
catholic party. The champions appointed to defend the religion of the
sovereign, were, as in former instances, entirely triumphant, and the popish
disputants, being pronounced refractory and obstinate, were even punished by
imprisonment Ibid. p. 95.
. Emboldened by this victory, the protestants ventured on the last and most
important step, and brought into Parliament a bill 1 Eliz. cap. 2.
for abolishing the mass, and re-establishing the liturgy of King Edward.
Penalties were enacted, as well against those who departed from this mode of
worship, as those who absented themselves from the church and the sacraments.
And thus in one session, without any violence, tumult, or clamor, was the
whole system of religion altered, on the very commencement of a reign, and by
the will of a young woman, whose title to the crown was by many esteemed liable
to great objections: An event, which, though it may appear surprising to men in
the present age, was every where expected on the first news of her accession.

THE commons also made a sacrifice to the Queen more difficult to obtain than
that of any articles of religion: They voted a subsidy of four shillings in the
pound on land, and two shillings and eight pence on goods, together with two
fifteenths The Parliament also granted the Queen the duties of tonnage and
poundage; but this concession was at that time regarded only as a matter of
form, and she had levied these duties before they were voted by the Parliament:
But there was another exertion of power, which she practiced, and which people,
in this age, from their ignorance of the ancient constitution, may be apt to
think a little extraordinary. Her sister, after the commencement of the war
with France, had, from her own authority, imposed four marks on each ton of
wine imported, and had increased the poundage a third on ail commodities. Queen
Elizabeth continued these impositions as long as she thought convenient. The
Parliament, who had so good an opportunity of restraining these arbitrary
taxes, when they voted the tonnage and poundage, thought proper not to make any
mention of them. They knew, that the sovereign, during that age, pretended to
have the sole regulation of foreign trade, and that their intermed lling with
that prerogative would have drawn on them the severest reproof, if not
chastisement. See Forbes vol. I. p. 132, 133. We know certainly from the
statutes and journals, that no such unpositions were granted by Parliament.
. The house in no instance departed from the most respectful deference and
complaisance toward the Queen. Even the importunate address, which they made
her on the conclusion of the session, to fix her choice of a husband, could
not, they supposed, be very disagreeable to one of her sex and age. The address
was couched in the most respectful expressions; yet met with a refusal from the
Queen. She told the speaker, that as the application from the house was
conceived in general terms, only recommending marriage, without pretending to
direct her choice of a husband, she could not take offense at the address, or
regard it as other than a new instance of their affectionate attachment toward
her: That any farther interposal on their part would have ill become either
them to make, as subjects, or her to hear as an independent princess: That even
while she was a private person, and exposed to much danger, she had always
declined that engagement, which she regarded as an encumbrance; much more, at
present would she persevere in that sentiment, when the charge of a great
kingdom was committed to her, and her life ought to be entirely dedicated to
promoting the interests of religion and the happiness of her subjects: That as
England was her husband, wedded to her by this pledge (and here she showed them
her singer with the same gold ring upon it, with which she had solemnly
betrothed herself to the kingdom at her inauguration) so all Englishmen were
her children; and while she was employed in the rearing or governing such a
family, she could not esteem herself barren, or her life useless and
unfruitful: That if she ever entertained thoughts of changing her condition,
the care of her subjects welfare would still be uppermost in her thoughts; but
should she live and die a virgin, she doubted not but the divine providence,
seconded by their counsels and her own measures, would be able to prevent all
dispute with regard to the succession, and secure them a sovereign, who,
perhaps better than her own issue, would imitate her example in loving and
cherishing her people: And that for her part, she desired that no higher
character, nor fairer remembrance of her should be transmitted to posterity,
than to have this inscription engraved on her tombstone, when she should pay
the last debt to nature; "Here lies Elizabeth, who lived and died a maiden
Queen Camden, p. 375. Sir Simon d'Ewes.
."

8th May.
AFTER the prorogation of the Parliament It is thought remarkable by Camden,
that though this session was the first of the reign, no person was attainted; but
on the contrary, some restored in blood by the Parliament. A good symptom of
the lenity, at least of the prudence of the Queen's government.
, the laws, enacted with regard to religion, were put in execution, and met
with no disturbance or opposition from any quarter. The liturgy was again
introduced in the vulgar tongue, and the oath of supremacy was tendered to the
clergy. The number of bishops had been reduced to fourteen by a very sickly
season, which preceded; and all of these, except the bishop of Landaffe, having
refused compliance, were degraded from their sees: But of the inferior clergy
throughout all England, where there are near 10,000 parishes, only eighty
parish rectors, fifty prebendaries, fifteen heads of colleges, twelve
archdeacons, and as many deans, sacrificed their livings to their religious
principles Camden, p. 376. Heylin, p. 115. Strype, vol. I. p. 7^. with some
small variations.
. Those in high ecclesiastical stations, who were exposed to the eyes of the
world, seem chiefly to have placed a point of honor in their perseverance; but
on the whole, the protestants, in the former change introduced by Mary, appear
to have been much more rigid and conscientious. Though the catholic religion,
adapting itself to the senses, and requiring observances, which enter into the
common train of life, does at present lay much faster hold of the mind than the
reformed, which, being chiefly spiritual, resembles more a system of
metaphysics; yet was the proportion of zeal, as well as of knowledge, during the
first ages after the reformation, much greater on the side of the protestants.
The catholics continued, ignorantly and supinely, in their ancient belief, or
rather their ancient practices: But the reformers, obliged to dispute on every
occasion, and enflamed to a degree of enthusiasm by novelty and persecution,
had strongly attached themselves to their tenets; and were ready to sacrifice
their fortunes and even their lives, in defense of their speculative and
abstract principles. The forms and ceremonies, still preserved in the English
liturgy, as they bore some resemblance to the ancient service, tended farther
to reconcile the catholics to the established religion; and as the Queen
permitted no other mode of worship, and at the same time struck out every thing
that could be offensive to them in the new liturgy Heylin, p. 111.
, even those addicted to the Romish communion made no scruple of attending the
established church. Had Elizabeth gratified her own inclinations, the exterior
appearance, which is the chief circumstance with the people, would have been
still more similar between the new and the ancient form of worship. As she
loved state and magnificence in every thing, she was somewhat addicted to the
pomp of the catholic religion; and it was merely in compliance with the
prejudices of her party, that she gave up either the images or the addresses to
the saints, or prayers for the dead Burnet, vol. II. p. 37^, 397. Camden, p. ^^^
. Some foreign princes interposed to procure the Romanists the privilege of
separate assemblies in particular cities, but the Queen would not comply with
their request; and represented the manifest danger of disturbing the national
peace by a toleration of different religions Camden, p. ^^8. Suype, vol. I. p.
150, 370.
.

Peace with France.
WHILE the Queen and Parliament were employed in settling the public religion,
the negotiations for a peace were still conducted, first at Cercamp, then at
Chateau-Cambresis, between the ministers of France, Spain, and England; and
Elizabeth, though equally prudent, was not so successful in this transaction.
Philip employed his utmost efforts to procure the restitution of Calais, both
as bound in honor to indemnify England, which, merely on his account, had been
drawn into the war, and as engaged in interest to remove France from his
frontiers in the Low Countries. So long as he entertained hopes of espousing
the Queen, he delayed concluding a peace with Henry; and even after the change
of religion in England deprived him of all such views, his ministers hinted a
proposal, which may be regarded as reasonable and honorable. After all his own
terms with France were settled, he seemed willing to continue the war, till she
should obtain satisfaction; provided she would stipulate to adhere to the
Spanish alliance, and continue hostilities against Henry, during the course of
six years Forbe^'s Full View, vol I. p. 59.
: But Elizabeth, after consulting with her ministers, very wisely rejected this
proposal. She was sensible of the low state of her finances; the great debts
contracted by her father, brother, and sister; the disorders introduced into
every part of the administration; the divisions by which her people were
agitated; and she was convinced that nothing but tranquillity during some years
could bring the kingdom again into a flourishing condition, or enable her to
act with dignity and vigor, in her transactions with foreign nations. Well
acquainted with the value which Henry put upon Calais, and the impossibility of
recovering it by treaty during the present emergency, she was willing rather to
suffer that loss, than submit to such a dependence on Spain, as she must expect
to fall into, if she continued pertinaciously in her present demand. She
ordered, therefore, her ambassadors, the lord Effingham, the bishop of Ely, and
Dr. Wotton, to conclude the negotiation, and to settle a peace with Henry, or
any reasonable terms. Henry offered to stipulate a marriage between the eldest
daughter of the dauphin, and the eldest son of Elizabeth; and to engage for the
restitution of Calais as the dowry of that princess Forbes, vol. I. p. 54.
; but as the Queen was sensible that this treaty would appear to the world a
palpable evasion, she insisted upon more equitable, at least, more plausible
conditions. It was at last agreed, that Henry should restore Calais at the
expiration of eight years; that in case of failure, he should pay five hundred
thousand crowns, and the Queen's title to Calais still remain; that he should
find the security of seven or eight foreign merchants, not natives of France,
for the payment of this sum; that he should deliver five hostages till that
security was provided; that if Elizabeth broke the peace with France or
Scotland during that interval, she should forfeit all title to Calais; but if
Henry made war on Elizabeth, he should be obliged immediately to restore that
fortress Ibid. p. 68. Rymer, tom XV. p. 505.
. Every person of penetration easily saw, that these stipulations were but a
colorable pretense for abandoning Calais; but they excused the Queen on
account of the necessity of her affairs, and they even extolled her prudence,
in submitting, without farther struggle, to that necessity. A peace with
Scotland was a necessary consequence of that with France.

PHILIP and Henry concluded hostilities with a mutual restitution of all places
taken during the course of the war; and Philip espoused the princess Elizabeth,
eldest daughter of France, formerly betrothed to his son Don Carlos. The duke
of Savoy married Margaret, Henry's sister, and obtained a restitution of all
his dominions of Savoy and Piedmont, except a few towns, retained by France.
And thus general tranquillity s^emed to be restored to Europe.

Disgust between the Queen, and Mary Queen of Scots.
BUT though a peace was signed and concluded between France and England, there
soon appeared a ground of quarrel, of the most serious nature, and which was
afterward attended with the most important consequences. The two marriages of
Henry the eighth, that with Catherine of Arragon, and that with Anne Boseyn,
were totally incompatible with each other, and it seemed impossible that both
of them could be regarded as valid and legal: But still the birth of Elizabeth
lay under some disadvantages, to which that of her sister, Mary, was not
exposed. Henry's first marriage had obtained the sanction of all the powers,
both civil and ecclesiastical, which were then acknowleged in England; and it
was natural, for protestants as well as Romanists, to allow, on account of the
sincere intention of the parties, that their issue ought to be regarded as
legitimate. But his divorce, and second marriage, had been concluded in direct
opposition to the sea of Rome; and though they had been ratified by the authority
both of the English Parliament and convocation, those who were strongly
attached to the catholic church, and who reasoned with great strictness, were
led to regard them as entirely invalid, and to deny altogether the Queen's
right of succession. The next heir of blood was the Queen of Scots, now married
to the dauphin; and the great power of that princess, joined to her plausible
title, rendered her a very formidable rival to Elizabeth. The King of France
had secretly been soliciting at Rome a bull of excommunication against the
Queen; and she had here been beholden to the good offices of Philip, who, from
interest more than either friendship or principle, had negociated in her
favor, and had successfully opposed the pretensions of Henry. But the court of
France was not discouraged with this repulse: The duke of Guise, and his
brothers, thinking, that it would much augment their credit, if their niece
should bring an accession of England, as she had already done of Scotland, to
the crown of France, engaged the King not to neglect the claim; and, by their
persuasion, he ordered his son and daughter-in-law to assume openly the arms as
well as title of England, and to quarter these arms on all their equipages,
furniture, and liveries. When the English ambassador complained of this injury,
he could obtain nothing but an evasive answer; that as the Queen of Scots was
descended from the blood royal of England, she was entitled, by the example of
many princes, to assume the arms of that kingdom. But besides that this
practice had never prevailed without permission being first obtained, and
without making a visible difference between the arms, Elizabeth plainly saw,
that this pretension had not been advanced during the reign of her sister Mary;
and that, therefore, the King of France intended, on the first opportunity, to
dispute her legitimacy, and her title to the crown. Alarmed with the danger,
she thenceforth conceived a strong jealousy against the Queen of Scots; and was
determined, as far as possible, to incapacitate Henry from the execution of his
project. The sudden death of that monarch, who was killed in a tournament at
Paris, while he was celebrating the espousals of his sister with the duke of
Savoy, altered not her views. Being informed, that his successor, Francis the
second, still continued to assume, without reserve, the title of King of
England, she began to consider him and his Queen as her most mortal enemies;
and the present situation of affairs in Scotland afforded her a favorable
opportunity, both of revenging the injury and of providing for her own safety.

Scotch affairs.
THE murder of the cardinal-primate at St. Andrews, had deprived the Scotch
catholics of a head whose severity, courage, and capacity had rendered him
extremely formidable to the innovators in religion; and the execution of the
laws against heresy began thenceforth to be much more remiss and gentle. The
Queen-regent governed the kingdom by prudent and moderate councils; and as she
was not disposed to sacrifice the civil interests of the state to the bigotry
or interests of priests, she esteemed it more expedient to temporize, and to
connive at the progress of a doctrine which she had not power entirely to
repress. When informed of the death of Edward, and the accession of Mary to the
crown of England, she entertained hopes, that the Scottish reformers, deprived
of the countenance which they received from that powerful kingdom, would lose
their ardour with their prospect of success, and would gradually return to the
faith of their ancestors. But the progress and revolutions of religion are
little governed by the usual maxims of civil policy; and the event much
disappointed the regent's expectations. Many of the English preachers,
terrified with the severity of Mary's government, took shelter in Scotland,
where they found more protection, and a milder administration; and while they
propagated their theological tenets, they filled that whole kingdom with a just
horror against the cruelties of the bigoted catholics, and showed their
disciples the fate which they must expect, if ever their adversaries should
attain an uncontrouled authority over them.

A HIERARCHY, moderate in its acquisitions of power and riches, may safely
grant a toleration to sectaries; and the more it abates the fervor of
innovators by lenity and liberty, the more securely will it possess those
advantages which the legal establishments bestow upon it. But where
superstition has raised a church to such an exorbitant height as that of Rome,
persecution is less the result of bigotry in the priests, than of a necessary
policy; and the rigor of law is the only method of repelling the attacks of
men, who, besides religious zeal, have so many other motives, derived both from
public and private interest, to engage them on the side of innovation. But though
such overgrown hierarchies may long support themselves by these violent
expedients, the time comes, when severities tend only to enrage the new
sectaries, and make them break through all bounds of reason and moderation. This
crisis was now visibly approaching in Scotland; and whoever considers merely
the transactions resulting from it, will be inclined to throw the blame equally
on both parties; whoever enlarges his view, and reflects on the situations,
will observe the necessary progress of human affairs, and the operation of
those principles which are inherent in human nature.

Reformation in Scotland.
SOME heads of the reformers in Scotland, such as the earl of Argyle, his son
lord Lorne, the earls of Morton, and Glencarne, Erskine of Dun, and others,
finding the danger to which they were exposed, and desirous to propagate their
principles, entered privately into a bond or association; and called themselves
the Congregation of the Lord, in contradistinction to the established church,
which they denominated the Congregation of Satan. The tenor of the bond was as
follows: "We, perceiving how Satan, in his members, the antichrists of our
time, do cruelly rage, seeking to overthrow and to destroy the gospel of Christ
and his congregation, ought, according to our bounden duty, to strive, in our
master's cause, even unto the death, being certain of the victory in him. We do
therefore promise, before the majesty of God and his congregation, that we, by
his grace, shall with all diligence continually apply our whole power,
substance, and our very lives, to maintain, set forward, and establish the most
blessed word of God and his congregation; and shall labor, by all possible
means, to have faithful ministers, truly and purely to minister Christ's gospel
and sacraments to his people: We shall maintain them, nourish them, and defend
them, the whole congregation of Christ, and every member thereof, by our whole
power, and at the hazard of our lives, against Satan, and all wicked power, who
may intend tyranny and trouble against the said congregation: Unto which holy
word and congregation we do join ourselves; and we forsake and renounce the
congregation of Satan, with all the superstitious abomination and idolatry
thereof; and moreover shall declare ourselves manifestly enemies thereto, by
this faithful promise before God, testified to this congregation by our
subscriptions. At Edinburgh, the third of December, 1557 Keith, p. 66. Knox, p.
101.
."

HAD the subscribers of this zealous league been contented only to demand a
toleration of the new opinions; however incompatible their pretensions might
have been with the policy of the church of Rome, they would have had the praise
of opposing tyrannical laws, enacted to support an establishment prejudicial to
civil society: But it is plain, that they carried their views much farther; and
their practice immediately discovered the spirit by which they were actuated.
Supported by the authority which, they thought, belonged to them as the
congregation of the Lord, they ordained, that prayers in the vulgar tongue The
reformers used at that time King Edward's liturgy in Scotland. For^es, p. 155.
should be used in all the parish churches of the kingdom; and that preaching,
and the interpretation of the scriptures should be practiced in private houses,
till God should move the prince to grant public preaching by faithful and true
ministers K^ith, p. 66. Knox, p. 101.
. Such bonds of association are always the forerunners of rebellion; and this
violent invasion of the established religion was the actual commencement of it.

BEFORE this league was publicly known or avowed, the clergy, alarmed with the
progress of the reformation, attempted to recover their lost authority, by a
violent exercise of power, which tended still farther to augment the zeal and
number of their enemies. Hamilton, the primate, seized Walter Mill, a priest of
an irreproachable life, who had embraced the new doctrines; and having tried
him at St. Andrews, condemned him to the flames for heresy. Such general
aversion was discovered to this barbarity, that it was some time before the
bishops could prevail on any one to act the part of a civil judge, and
pronounce the sentence upon him; and even after the time of his execution was
fixed, all the shops of St. Andrews being shut, no one would sell a rope to tie
him to the stake, and the primate himself was obliged to furnish this
implement. The man bore the torture with that courage which, though usual on
these occasions, always appears astonishing and supernatural to the multitude:
The people, to express their abhorrence against the cruelty of the priests,
raised a monument of stones on the place of his execution; and as fast as the
stones were removed by order of the clergy, they were again supplied from the
voluntary zeal of the populace Knox, p. 122.
. It is vain for men to oppose the severest punishments to the united
principles of religion and public applause; and this was the last barbarity of
the kind which the catholics had the power to exercise in Scotland.

SOME time after, the people discovered their sentiments in such a manner as
was sufficient to prognosticate to the priests, the fate which was awaiting
them. It was usual on the festival of St. Giles, the tutelar saint of
Edinburgh, to carry in procession the image of that saint; but the protestants,
in order to prevent the ceremony, found means, on the eve of the festival, to
purloin the statue from the church, and they please^ themselves with imagining
the astonishment and disappointment of his votaries. The clergy, however,
sramed hastily a new image, which, in derision, was called by the people young
St. Giles; and they carried it through the streets, attended with all the
ecclesiastics in the town and neighborhood. The multitude abstained from
violence so long as the Queenregent continued a spectator, but the moment she
retired, they invaded the idol, threw it in the dirt, and broke it in pieces.
The flight and terror of the priests and friars, who, it was remarked,
deserted, in his greatest distress, the object of their worship, was the source
of universal mockery and laughter.

ENCOURAGED by all these appearances, the congregation proceeded with alacrity
in openly soliciting subscriptions to their league; and the death of Mary of
England, with the accession of Elizabeth, which happened about this time,
contributed much to increase their hopes of final success in their undertaking.
They ventured to present a petition to the regent, craving a reformation of the
church, and of the wicked, scandalous, and detestable lives of the prelates and
ecclesiastics Knox, p. 121.
. They applied to the Parliament, by a petition, in which, after premising,
that they could not communicate with the damnable idolatry, and intolerable
abuses of the papistical church, they desired, that the laws against heretics
should be executed by the civil magistrate alone, and that the scripture should
be the sole rule for judging of heresy Ibid. p. 123.
. They even petitioned the convocation, and insisted that prayers should be
said in the vulgar tongue, and that bishops should be chosen with the consent
of the gentry of the diocese, and priests with the consent of the parishioners
Keith, p. 78, 81, 82.
. The regent prudently temporized between these parties; and as she aimed at
procuring a matrimonial crown for her son-inlaw, the dauphin, she was, on that
as well as other accounts, unwilling to come to extremities with either of them.

BUT after this concession was obtained, she received orders from France,
probably dictated by the haughty spirit of her brothers, to proceed with
violence against the reformers, and to restore the royal authority, by some
signal act of power Melvil's Memoirs, p. 24 Jebb, vol. II. p. 446.
. She made the most eminent of the protestant teachers be cited to appear
before the council at Stirling; but when their followers were marching thither
in great multitudes, in order to protect and countenance them, she entertained
apprehensions of an insurrection, and dissipated the people by a promise Knox,
p. 127. We shall suggest afterward some reasons to suspect, that, perhap^ no
(...) promise was given. Calumnies easily arise during times of faction, (...)
kind, when men think every (...) lawful for promoting their purpose (...) where
they enumerate all the articles of the regent^ (...) with the breach of (...)
It (...) probably nothing but (...) If the (...) have sometime* maintained,
that no faith wa^ (...) seem also to have thought, that no truth ought to be
rold of (...).
, that nothing should be done to the prejudice of the ministers. This promise
was violated; and a sentence passed, by which all the ministers were pronounced
rebels, on account count of their not appearing. A measure, so rash and ill
advised, enraged the people, and made them resolve to resist her authority by
force of arms, and to proceed to extremity against the clergy of the
established religion.

IN this critical time John Knox arrived from Geneva, where he had passed some
years in banishment, and where he had imbibed, from his commerce with Calvin,
the highest fanaticism of his sect, augmented by the natural ferocity of his
own character. 11th May.
He had been invited back to Scotland by the leaders of the reformation; and
mounting the pulpit at Perth, during the present ferment of men's minds, he
declaimed with his usual vehemence against the idolatry and other abominations
of the church of Rome, and incited his audience to exert their utmost zeal for
its subversion. A priest was so imprudent, after this sermon, as to open his
repository of images and relicts, and prepare himself to say mass. The
audience, who were wrought up to a disposition for any furious enterprise, were
as much enraged as if the spectacle had not been quite familiar to them: They
attacked the priest with fury, broke the images in pieces, tore the pictures,
overthrew the altars, scattered about the sacred vases; and lest no implement
of idolatrous worship, as they called it, entire or unbroken. They thence
proceeded with additional numbers, and augmented rage, to the monasteries of
the Gray and Black friars, which they pillaged in an instant: The Carthusians
underwent the same fate; and the populace, not content with robbing and
expelling the monks, vented their fury on the buildings, which had been the
recepticles of such abomination; and in a very little time nothing but the
walls of these stately edifices were left standing. The inhabitants of Couper
in Fife soon after imitated the example Spotswood, p. 121. Knox, p. 127.
.

Civil wars in Scotland.
THE Queen-regent, provoked at these violences, assembled an army, and prepared
to chastise the rebels. She had about two thousand French under her command,
with a few Scotch troops; and being assisted with such of the nobility as were
well affected to her, she pitched her camp within ten miles of Perth. Even the
earl of Argyle, and the lord James Stuart, prior of St. Andrew's, the Queen's
natural brother, though deeply engaged with the reformers, attended the regent in
this enterprise, either because they blamed the fury of the populace, or hoped
by their influence and authority to mediate some agreement between the parties.
The congregation, on the other hand, made preparations for defense; and being
joined by the earl of Glencarne from the West, and being countenanced by many
of the nobility and gentry, they appeared formidable from their numbers, as
well as the zeal by which they were animated. They sent an address to the
regent, where they plainly insinuated, that if they were pursued to extremity,
by the cruel beasts, the churchmen, they would have recourse to foreign powers
for assistance; and they subscribed themselves her faithful subjects in all
things not repugnant to God* assuming, at the same time, the name of the
faithful congregation of Christ Jesus Knox, p. 129.
. They applied to the nobility attending her, and maintained, that their past
violences were justified by the word of God, which commands the godly to
destroy idolatry, and all the monuments of it; that though all civil authority
was sacred, yet was there a great difference between the authority and the
persons who exercised it Ibid. p. 131.
; and that it ought to be considered, whether or not those abominations, called
by the pestilent papists, religion, and which they defend by fire and sword, be
the true religion of Christ Jesus. They remonstrated with such of the Queen's
army as had formerly embraced their party, and told them, "That as they were
already reputed traitors by God, they should likewise be excommunicated from
their society, and from the participation of the sacraments of the church,
which God by his mighty power had erected among them; whose ministers have the
same authority which Christ granted to his apostles in these words, Whose sins
ye shall forgive shall be forgiven, and whose sins ye shall retain shall be
retained Ibid. p 133.
." We may here see that these new saints were no less lofty in their
pretensions than the ancient hierarchy; and it was therefore no wonder they
were enraged against these latter as their rivals in dominion. They joined to
all these declarations an address to the established church; and they affixed
this title to it. "To the generation of antichrist, the pestilent prelates and
their shavelings A contemptu^^ term for a priest.
in Scotland, the congregation of Christ Jesus within the same says." The
tenor of the manifesto was agreeable to the title. They told the ecclesiastics,
"As ye by tyranny intend not only to destroy our bodies, but also by the same
to hold our souls in bondage of the devil, subject to idolatry; so shall we,
with all the force and power which God shall grant unto us, execute just
vengeance and punishment upon you: Yea, we shall begin that same war which God
commanded Israel to execute against the Canaanites; that is, contract of peace
shall never be made, till ye desist from your open idolatry, and cruel
persecution of God's children. And this, in the name of the eternal God, and of
his son, Christ Jesus, whose verity we profess, and gospel we have preached,
and holy sacraments rightly administered, we signify unto you, to be our
intent, so far as God will assist us to withstand your idolatry. Take this for
warning, and be not deceived Keith, p. 85, 86, 87. Knox, p. 134.
." With these outrageous symptoms commenced that cant, hypocrisy, and
fanaticism which long infested that kingdom; and which, though now mollified by
the lenity of the civil power, is still ready to break out on all occasions.

THE Queen regent, finding such obstinate zeal in the malcontents, was
contented to embrace the councils of Argyle and the prior of St. Andrew's, and
to form an accommodation with them. She was received into Perth, which
submitted to her, on promising an indemnity of past offenses, and engaging not
to leave any French garrison in the place. This capitulation, it is pretended,
was not exactly observed. Some of the inhabitants were molested on account of
the late violences; and some companies of Scotch soldiers, supposed to be in
French pay, were quartered in the town; which step, though taken under a very
plausible pretext, was regarded by the congregation as an infraction of the
treaty Knox, p. 139.
. It is asserted, that the regent, to justify these measures, declared, that
princes ought not to have their promises too strictly urged upon them; nor was
any faith to be kept with heretics: And that for her part, could she find as
good a color of reason, she would willingly bereave all these men of their
lives and fortunes Ibid. Spotswood, p. 123.
. But it is no way likely, that such expressions dropped from this prudent and
virtuous princess. On the contrary, it appears, that these violences were very
disagreeable to her; that she was in this particular overruled by the
authority of the French counselors placed about her; and that she often
thought, if the management of these affairs had been entrusted wholly to
herself, she could easily, without force, have accommodated all differences
Spotswood, p. 146. Melvil, p. 29. Knox, p. 225, 228. Lesly, lib. x. That there
was really no violation of the capitulation of Perth, appears from the
manifesto of the congregation in Knox, p. 184. where it is not so much as
pretended. The companies of Scotch soldiers were, probably, in Scotch pay,
since the congregation complains, that the country was oppressed with taxes to
maintain armies. Knox, p. 164, 165. And even if they had been in French pay, it
were no breach of the capitulation, since they were national troops, not French
Knox does not say, p. 139, that any of the inhabitants of Perth were tried or
punished for their past offenses; but only that they were oppressed with the
quartering of soldiers: And the congregation in their manifesto, say only that
many of them had fled for fear. This plain detection of the calumny with regard
to the breach of the capitulation of Perth, may make us suspect a like calumny
with regard to the promise pretended not to give sentence against the
ministers. The affair lay altogether between the regent and the lord of Dun;
and that gentleman, though a man of sense and character, might be willing to take
some general professions for promise. If the Queen, over awed by the power of
the congregation, gave such a promise, in order to have liberty to proceed to a
sentence; how could she expect to have power to (...) a sentence so (...)
obtained. And to what purpose could it serve?
.

THE congregation enflamed with their own zeal, and enraged with these
disappointments, remained not long in tranquillity. Even before they left
Perth, and while as yet they had no color to complain of any violation of
treaty, they had signed a new covenant, in which, besides their engagements to
mutual defense, they vowed in the name of God to employ their whole power in
destroying every thing that dishonored his holy name; and this covenant was
subscribed, among others, by Argyle and the prior of St. Andrew's Keith, p. 89.
Knox, p. 138.
. These two leaders now desired no better pretext for deserting the regent and
openly joining their associates, than the complaints, however doubtful, or
rather false, of her breach of promise. The congregation also, encouraged by
this accession of force, gave up themselves entirely to the furious zeal of
Knox, and renewed at Crail, Anstruther, and other places in Fife, like
depredations on the churches and monasteries with those formerly committed at
Perth and Couper. The regent, who marched against them with her army, finding
their power so much increased, was glad to conclude a truce for a few days, and
to pass over with her forces to the Lothians. The insurgents besieged and took
Perth; proceeded thence to Stirling, where they exercised their usual sury; and
finding nothing able to resist them, they bent their march to Edinburgh, the
inhabitants of which, as they had already anticipated the zeal of the
congregation against the churches and monasteries, gladly opened their gates to
them. The regent, with the few forces which remained with her, took shelter in
Dunbar, where she shut herself up, in expectation of a reinforcement from
France.

MEANWHILE, she employed her partisans in representing to the people the
dangerous consequences of this open rebellion; and she endeavored to convince
them, that the lord James, under pretense of religion, had formed the scheme of
wresting the scepter from the hands of the sovereign. By these considerations
many were engaged to desert the army of the congregation; but much more by the
want of pay or any means of subsistence; and the regent, observing the
insurgents to be much weakened, ventured to march to Edinburgh, with a design
to suppress them. On the interposal of the duke of Chatelraut, who still
adhered to her, she agreed to a capitulation, in which she granted them a
toleration of their religion, and they engaged to commit no farther
depredations on the churches. Soon after they evacuated the city of Edinburgh;
and before they left it, they proclaimed the articles of agreement; but they
took care to publish only the articles favorable to themselves, and they were
guilty of an imposture, in adding one to the number, viz. that idolatry shall
not again be erected in any place where it was at that time suppressed Knox, p.
153, 154, 155. This author pretends that this article was agreed to verbally,
but that the Queen's s^^bes omitted it in the treaty which was signed. This
(...) is very unlikely, or rather very absurd; and in the meantime it is
allowed, that the article is not in the treaty: Nor do the congregation in
their subsequent manifesto insist upon it. Knox, p. 184.
.

AN agreement concluded, while men's minds were in this disposition, could not
be durable; and both sides endeavored to strengthen themselves as much as
possible, against the ensuing rupture, which appeared inevitable. The regent
having got a reinforcement of 1000 men from France, began to fortify Leith; and
the congregation seduced the duke of Chatelraut to their party, who had long
appeared inclined to them, and who was at last determined by the arrival of his
son, the earl of Arran, from France, where he had escaped many dangers, from
the jealousy, as well as bigotry, of Henry and the duke of Guise. More French
troops soon after disembarked under the command of La Brosse, who was followed
by the bishop of Amiens and three doctors of the Sorbonne. These last were
supplied with store of syllogisms, authorities, citations, and scholastic
arguments, which they intended to oppose to the Scotch preachers, and which,
they justly presumed, would acquire force, and operate conviction on men's
minds, by the influence of the French arms and artillery Spotswood, p. 134.
Thuan. lib XXIV. c. 10.
.

THE constable Montmorency had always opposed the marriage of the Queen of
Scots with the dauphin, and had foretold, that, by forming such close
connexions with Scotland, the ancient league would be dissolved; and the
natives of that kingdom, jealous of a foreign yoke, would soon become, instead
of allies, attached by interest and inclination, the most inveterate enemies to
the French dominion. But though the event seemed now to have justified the
prudence of that aged minister, it is not improbable, considering the violence
of the councils, by which France was governed, that the insurrection was
esteemed a favorable event; as affording a pretense for sending over armies,
for entirely subduing the country, for attainting the rebels Forbes, vol. I. p.
139. Thuan. lib. XXIV. c. 13.
, and for preparing means thence to invade England, and support Mary's title to
the crown of that kingdom. The leaders of the congregation, well acquainted
with these views, were not insensible of their danger, and saw that their only
safety consisted in the vigor and success of their measures. They were
encouraged by the intelligence received of the sudden death of Henry the
second; and having passed an act from their own authority, depriving the Queen
dowager of the regency, and ordering all the French troops to evacuate the
kingdom, they collected forces to put their edict in execution against them.
They became masters again of Edinburgh; but found themselves unable to keep
long possession of that city. Their tumultuary armies, assembled in haste, and
supported by no pay, soon separated themselves upon the least disaster, or even
any delay of success; and were incapable of resisting such veteran troops as
the French, who were also seconded by some of the Scotch nobility, among whom
the earl of Bothwel distinguished himself. Hearing that the marquis of Elbeuf,
brother to the regent, was levying a new army against them in Germany, they
thought themselves excusable for applying, in this extremity, to the assistance
of England; and as the sympathy of religion, as well as regard to national
liberty, had now counterballanced the ancient animosity against that kingdom,
this measure was the result of inclination no less than of interest The Scotch
lords in their declaration say, "How far we have sought support of England,
(...) any other prince, and what just cause we had and have so to do, we shall
shortly (...) unto the world, to the praise of God's holy name, and to the
confusion of all those that (...) ^o doing: For this we fear not to cons^l,
that, as in this enterprise against the devil, (...) ido1atry and the
maintainers of the same, we chiefly and only seek God's glory to be notified
(...) to be punished, and virtue to be maintained; so where power (...) of
ourselves, we (...) it, wheresoever God shall offer the same." Knox, p. 176.
. Maitland of Ledington, therefore, and Robert Melvil, were secretly dispatched
by the Congregation to solicit succors from Elizabeth.

Interposal of the Queen in Scotch affairs.
THE wise council of Elizabeth deliberated not long in assenting to this
proposal, which concurred so well with their views and interests. Cecil in
particular represented to the Queen, that the union of the crowns of Scotland
and France, both of them the hereditary enemies of England, was ever regarded
as a very pernicious event; and her father, as well as protector Somerset, had
employed every expedient, both of war and negotiation, to prevent it: That the
claim, which Mary pretended to the crown, rendered the present situation of
England still more dangerous, and demanded, on the part of the Queen, the
greatest vigilance and precaution: That the capacity, ambition, and exorbitant
views of the family of Guise, who now entirely governed the French councils,
were sufficiently known, and they themselves made no secret of their design to
advance their niece to the throne of England: That deeming themselves secure of
success, they had already, very imprudently and prematurely, taken off the
mask; and Throcmorton, the English ambassador at Paris, sent over, by every
courier, incontestible proofs of their hostile intentions (...) vol. I. p. 134,
13^, 149, 150, 159, 165, 181, 194, 229, 23^, ^^5 *24^, 253.
: That they only waited till Scotland should be entirely subdued; and having
thus deprived the English of the advantage, resulting from their situation and
naval power, they prepared means for subverting the Queen's authority: That the
zealous catholics in England, discontented with the present government, and
satisfied with the legality of Mary's title, would bring them considerable
reinforcement, and would disturb every measure of defense against that
formidable power: That the only expedient for preventing these designs was to
seize the present opportunity, and take advantage of a like zeal in the
protestants of Scotland; nor could any doubt be entertained with regard to the
justice of a measure, founded on such evident necessity, and directed only to
the ends of self-preservation: That though a French war, attended with great
expense, seemed the necessary consequence of supporting the Scotch
malcontents, that power, if removed to the continent, could never be very
formidable; and a small disbursement at present would in the end be found the
greatest frugality: And that the domestic dissentions of France, which every
day augmented, together with the support of Philip, who, notwithstanding all
his bigotry and hypocrisy, would never permit the entire conquest of England,
were sufficient to secure the Queen against the dangerous ambition and
resentment of the house of Guise Forbes, vol. I. p. 387. Jebb, vol. I. p. 448.
Keith, append. 24.
.

ELIZABETH'S propensity to caution and economy were, though with some difficulty
Forbes, vol. I. p 454, 460.
, overcome by these powerful motives; and she prepared herself to support by
arms and money the declining affairs of the Congregation in Scotland. She
equiped a fleet, which consisted of thirteen ships of war; and giving the
command of it to Winter, she sent it to the Firth of Forth: She named the young
duke of Norfolk her lieutenant in the northern counties, and assembled at
Berwic an army of eight thousand men under the command of lord Gray, warden of
the east and middle marches. Though the court of France, sensible of the danger,
offered her to make immediate restitution of Calais, provided she would not
interpose in the affairs of Scotland; she resolutely told them, that she never
would put an inconsiderable fisher-town in competition with the safety of her
whole dominions Spotswood, p. 1^0.
; and she still continued her preparations. She concluded a treaty of mutual
defense with the congregation, which was to last during the marriage of the
Queen of Scots with Francis and a year after; and she promised never to desist
till the French had entirely evacuated Scotland Knox, p. 217. Haynes's State
Papers, vol. I, p 153. Rymer, tom. XV. p. 569.
. And having thus taken all proper measures for success, and received from the
Scotch six hostages for the performance of articles, she ordered her fleet and
army to begin their operations.

1^th January.
THE appearance of Elizabeth's fleet in the Firth very much disconcerted the
French army, who were at that time ravaging the county of Fise; and obliged
them to make a circuit by Stirling, in order to reach Leith, where they shut
themselves up, and prepared for defense. The English army, reinforced by 5000
Scotch Haynes, vol I. p. 256, 259.
, sat down before Leith; and after two skirmishes, in the former of which, the
English had the advantage, in the latter the French, they began to batter the
town; and though repulsed with considerable loss in a rash and ill conducted
assault, they reduced the garrison to great difficulties. Their distress was
augmented by two events; the dispersion by a storm of d'Elbeuf's fleet, which
carried a considerable army on board Ibid. p. 223.
, and the death of the Queen regent, who expired about this time in the castle
of Edinburgh; a woman endowed with all the capacity which shone forth in her
family, but possessed of much more virtue and moderation than appeared in the
conduct of the other branches of it. The French, who found it impossible to
subsist for want of provisions, and who saw that the English were continually
reinforced by new numbers, were obliged to capitulate. 5th July.
And the bishop of Valence and count Randan, plenipotentiaries from France,
signed a treaty at Edinburgh with Cecil and Dr. Wotton, whom Elizabeth had sent
to Edinburgh for that purpose. Settlement of Scotland.
It was there stipulated, that the French should, all of them, instantly
evacuate Scotland; that the King and Queen of France and Scotland should
thenceforth abstain from bearing the arms of England, or assuming the title of
that kingdom; that farther satisfaction for the injury already done in that
particular should be granted Elizabeth; and that commissioners should meet to
settle this point, or if they could not agree, that the King of Spain should be
arbiter between the crowns. Besides these stipulations, which regarded England,
some concessions were granted to the Scotch, which the plenipotentiaries, in
the name of the King and Queen of France and Scotland, promised in the treaty
with Elizabeth to observe; that an amnesty should be published for all past
offenses; that none but natives should be put into any office in Scotland; that
the states should name twenty-four persons, of whom the Queen of Scots should
choose seven, and the states five, and in the hands of these twelve should the
whole administration be placed during that Queen's absence; and that Mary
should neither make peace nor war without consent of the states Rymer, vol XV.
p. 593. Keith, p. 137. Spotswood, p. 147. Knox, p. 229.
. In order to hasten the execution of this important treaty Elizabeth sent
ships, by which the whole French forces were transported into their own country.

THUS all Europe saw, in the first transaction of this reign, the genius and
capacity of the Queen and her ministers. She discerned at a distance the
danger, which threatened her; and took instantly vigorous measures to prevent
it. Making all the possible advantages of her situation, she proceeded with
celerity to a decision; and was not diverted by any offers, negotiations, or
remonstrances of the French court. She stopped not till she had brought the
matter to a final issue; and had converted that very power, to which her
enemies trusted for her destruction, into her firmest support and security. By
exacting no improper conditions from the Scotch insurgents, even during their
greatest distress, she established an entire confidence with them; and having
cemented the union by all the ties of gratitude, interest and religion, she now
possessed an influence over them above what remained even with their native
sovereign. The regard which she acquired by this dextrous and spirited conduct,
gave her every where, abroad as well as at home, more authority than had
attended her sister, though supported by all the power of the Spanish monarchy
Forbes, vol. I. p. 354, 372. Jebb, vol. II. p. 452.
.

THE subsequent measures of the Scotch reformers tended still more to cement
their union with England. Being entirely masters of the kingdom, they made no
farther ceremony or scruple, in fully effecting their purpose. In the treaty of
Edinburgh it had been agreed, that a Parliament or convention should soon be
assembled; and the leaders of the Congregation, not waiting till the Queen of
Scots should ratify that treaty, thought themselves fully entitled, without the
sovereign's authority, immediately to summon a Parliament. The reformers
presented a petition to this assembly; where they are not contented with
desiring the establishment of their doctrine; they also apply for the
punishment of the catholics, whom they call vassals to the Roman harlot; and
they assert, that, amongst all the rabble of the clergy, such is their
expression, there is not one lawful minister; but that they are, all of them,
thieves and murderers; yea rebels and traitors to civil authority; and
therefore unworthy to be suffered in any reformed commonwealth Knox, p. 237,
238.
. The Parliament seem to have been actuated by the same spirit of rage and
persecution. After ratifying a confession of faith, agreeable to the new
doctrines, they passed a statute against the mass, and not only abolished it in
all the churches, but enacted, that whoever any where, either officiated in it
or was present at it, should be chastised, for the first offense, with
confiscation of goods, and corporal punishment, at the discretion of the
magistrate; for the second, with banishment; and for the third, with loss of
life Ibid. p. 254.
. A law was also voted for abolishing the papal jurisdiction in Scotland: The
presbyterian form of discipline was settled, leaving only at first some shadow
of authority to certain ecclesiastics, whom they called superintendants. The
prelates of the ancient faith appeared in order to complain of great injustice
committed on them by the invasion of their property, but the Parliament took no
notice of them; till at last, these ecclesiastics, tired with fruitless
attendance, departed the town. They were then cited to appear; and as no body
presented themselves, it was voted by the Parliament, that the ecclesiastics
were entirely satisfied, and found no reason of complaint.

SIR James Sandilands, prior of St. John, was sent over to France to obtain the
ratification of these acts; but was very ill received by the Queen, who
absolutely denied the validity of a Parliament, summoned without the royal
consent; and she refused her sanction to these statutes. But the protestants
gave themselves little concern about their Queen's refusal. They immediately
put the statutes in execution: They abolished the mass; they settled their
ministers; they committed every where furious devastations on the monasteries,
and even on the churches, which they thought to be profaned by idolatry; and
esteeming the property of the clergy lawful prey, they took possession, without
ceremony, of the far greater part of the ecclesiastical revenues. Their new
preachers, who had authority sufficient to incite them to war and insurrection,
could not restrain their rapacity; and fanaticism concurring with avarice, an
incurable blow was given to the papal authority in that country. The protestant
nobility and gentry, united by the consciousness of such unpardonable guilt,
alarmed for their new possessions, well acquainted with the imperious character
of the house of Guise, saw no safety for themselves but in the protection of
England; and they dispatched Morton, Glencarne, and Ledington to express their
sincere gratitude to the Queen for her past favors, and to represent to her
the necessity of continuing them.

French affairs.
ELIZABETH had equal reason to maintain an union with the Scotch protestants;
and soon found, that the house of Guise, notwithstanding their past
disappointments, had not laid aside the design of contesting her title, and
subverting her authority. Francis and Mary, whose councils were wholly directed
by them, refused to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh; and showed no disposition
to give her any satisfaction for that mortal injury and affront which they had
put upon her, (...) so openly assuming the title and arms of England. She was
sensible of the danger attending such pretensions; and it was with pleasure she
heard of the violent factions, which prevailed in the French government, and of
the opposition, which had arisen against the measures of the duke of Guile.
That ambitious prince, supported by his four brothers, the cardinal of
Lorraine, the duke of Aumale, the marquis of Elbeuf, and the grand prior, men
no less ambitions than himself, had engrossed all the authority of the crown;
and as he was possessed of every quality, which could command the esteem or
seduce the affections of men, there appeared no end of this acquisitions and
pretensions. The constable Montmorency, who had long balanced his credit, was
deprived of all power: The princes of the blood, the King of Navarre and his
brother the prince of Conde, were entirely excluded from offices and favor:
The Queen Mother herself, Catherine de Medicis, found her influence every day
declining. And as Francis, a young prince, infirm both in mind and body, was
wholly governed by his spouse, who knew no law but the pleasure of her uncles,
men despaired of ever obtaining freedom from the dominion of that aspiring
family. It was the contests of religion, which first inspired the French with
courage openly to oppose their exorbitant authority.

THE theological disputes, first started in the north of Germany, and next in
Switzerland, countries at that time wholly illiterate, had long ago penetrated
into France; and as they were assisted by the general discontents against the
court and church of Rome, and by the zealous spirit of the age, the proselytes
to the new religion were secretly increasing in every province. Henry the
second, in imitation of his father Francis, had opposed the progress of the
reformers; and though a prince addicted to pleasure and society, he was
transported by a vehemence, as well as bigotry, which had little place in his
predecessor's conduct. Rigorous punishments had been inflicted on the most
eminent of the protestant party; and a point of honor seemed to have arisen,
whether the one sect could exercise or the other suffer most barbarity. The
death of Henry put some stop to the persecutions; and the people, who had
admired the constancy of the new preachers, now heard with favor and
prepossession their arguments and doctrines. But the cardinal of Lorraine, as
well as his brother, who were possessed of the legal authority, thought it
their interest to support the established religion; and when they revived the
exercise of the penal statutes, they necessarily engaged the malecontent
princes and nobles in the protection of the new religion. The King of Navarre,
a man of mild dispositions, but of a weak character, and the prince of Conde,
who possessed many heroic qualities, having declared themselves in favor of
the protestants, that sect acquired new force from their countenance; and the
admiral de Coligni, with his brother Andelot, no longer scrupled to declare
themselves openly of their communion. The integrity of the admiral, who was
believed sincere in his prosession, and his high renown both for valor and
conduct, for the arts of peace as well as of war, gave credit to the resormers;
and after a frustrated attempt of the malcontents to seize the King's person
at Amboise, of which Elizabeth had probably some intelligence Forbes, vol. I.
p. 214. Throemorton, about this time, unwilling to entrust to letters the great
secrets committed to him, obtained leave, under some pretext, to come over to
London.
, every place was full of distraction, and matters hastened to an extremity
between the parties. But the house of Guise, though these factions had obliged
them to remit their efforts in Scotland, and had been one chief cause of
Elizabeth's success, were determined not to relinquish their authority in
France, or yield to the violence of their antagonists. 4 December.
They found an opportunity to seize the King of Navarre and the prince of
Conde; they threw the former into prison; they obtained a sentence of death
against the latter;

ELIZABETH was not dissatisfied to learn, that her avowed enemies had met with
so severe a check, and she was determined to make advantage of it against the
Queen of Scots, whom she still regarded as a dangerous rival. She saw herself
freed from the perils attending an union of Scotland with France; and was
pleased to find, that so powerful a prince as the French monarch was no longer
a pretender to her crown and kingdoms. But she considered, on the other hand,
that the English catholics, who were very numerous, and who were generally
prejudiced in favor of Mary's title, would now adhere to that princess with
more zealous attachment, when they saw, that her succession no longer
endangered the liberties of the kingdom, and was rather attended with the
advantages of producing an entire union with Scotland. She gave orders,
therefore, to her ambassador, Throcmorton, a very vigilant and able minister,
to renew his applications to the Queen of Scots, and to require her
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh. But though Mary had desisted, after her
husband's death, from bearing the arms and title of Queen of England, she still
declined gratifying Elizabeth in this momentous article; and hearkening too
much to the ambitious suggestions of her uncles, she refused to make any formal
renunciation of her pretensions.

MEANWHILE, the Queen Mother of France, who imputed to Mary all the
mortifications which she had met with during Francis's lifetime, took care to
retaliate on her by like injuries; and the Queen of Scots, who found her abode
in France disagreeable, began to think of returning into her native country.
Lord James, who had been sent in deputation from the states to invite her over,
seconded this intention; and she applied to Elizabeth, by D'Oisel, for liberty
to pass through England Goodall, vol. I. p. 175.
. But she received for answer, that till she had given satisfaction, by
ratifying the treaty of Edinburgh, she could expect no favor from a person
whom she had so much injured. This denial excited her resentment; and she made
no scruple of expressing her sentiments to Throcmorton, when he reiterated his
applications to gratify his mistress in a demand, which he represented as so
reasonable. Having cleared the room of all her attendants, she said to him,
"How weak I may prove, or how far a woman's frailty may transport me, I cannot
tell: However, I have no mind to have so many witnesses of my infirmity as your
mistress had at her audience of my ambassador, D'Oisel. There is nothing
disturbs me so much, as the having asked, with so much importunity, a favor
which it was of no consequence for me to obtain. I can, with God's leave,
return to my own country without her leave; as I came to France, in spite of
all the opposition of her brother, King Edward: Neither do I want friends, both
able and willing, to conduct me home, as they have brought me hither; though I
was desirous rather to make an experiment of her friendship than of the
assistance of any other person. I have often heard you say, that a good
correspondence between her and myself would conduce much to the security and
happiness of both our kingdoms: But were she well convinced of this truth, she
had hardly denied me so small a request. But, perhaps, she bears a better
inclination to my rebellious subjects than to me, their sovereign, her equal in
royal dignity, her near relation, and the undoubted heir of her kingdoms.
Besides her friendship, I ask nothing at her hands: I neither trouble her, nor
concern myself in the affairs of her kingdom: Not that I am ignorant, that
there are now in England a great many malcontents, who are no friends to the
present establishment. She is pleased to upbraid me as a person little
experienced in the world: I freely own it; but age will cure that defect.
However, I am old enough to acquit myself honestly and courteously to my
friends and relations, and to encourage no reports of her, which would
misbecome a Queen and her kinswoman. I would also say, by her leave, that I am
a Queen as well as she, and not altogether friendless: And, perhaps, I have as
great a soul too; so that methinks we should be upon a level in our treatment
of each other. As soon as I have consulted the states of my kingdom, I shall be
ready to give a reasonable answer; and I am the more intent on my journey, that
I may be able to make the quicker dispatch in this affair. But she, it seems,
intends to stop my journey; so that either she will not let me give her
satisfaction, or is resolved not to be satisfied; perhaps, on purpose to keep
up the disagreement betwixt us. She has often reproached me with my being
young; and I must be very young, indeed, and as ill advised, to treat of
matters of such great concern and importance, without the advice of my
Parliament. I have not been wanting in any friendly offices to her; but she
disbelieves or overlooks them. I could heartily wish, that I was as near allied
to her in affection as in blood: For that, indeed, would be a most valuable
alliance. Caballa, p 374. Spotswood, p. 177.
"

SUCH a spirited reply, notwithstanding the obliging terms interspersed in it,
was but ill fitted to conciliate friendship between these rival princesses, or
cure those mutual jealousies which had already taken place. Elizabeth equipped
a fleet, under pretense of pursuing pirates, but probably with an intention of
intercepting the Queen of Scots in her return homewards. 19th August.
Arrival of Mary in Scotland.
Mary embarked at Calais; and passing the English fleet in a fog, arrived
safely at Leith, attended by her three uncles, the duke of Aumale, the grand
prior, and the marquess of Elbeuf; together with the marquess of Damville, and
other French courtiers. This change of abode and situation was very little
agreeable to that princess. Besides the natural prepossessions in favor of a
country in which she had been educated from her earliest infancy, and where she
had borne so high a rank, she could not forbear regreting her departure from
among that people, so celebrated for their humane and sociable disposition, and
their respectful attachment to their sovereign, and reflecting on the disparity
of the scene which lay before her. It is said, that after she was embarked at
Calais, she kept her eyes fixed on the coast of France, and never turned them
from that beloved object, till darkness fell, and intercepted it from her view.
She then ordered a couch to be spread for her under the open air; and charged
the pilot, that, if in the morning the land was still in sight, he should awake
her, and afford her one parting view of that country in which all her
affections were centered. The weather proved very calm, so that the ship made
little way in the nightime: And Mary had once more an opportunity of seeing
the French coast. She sat up on her couch, and still looking toward the land,
often repeated these words. "Farewell, France, farewell; I shall never see thee
more Keith, p. 179. Jebb, vol. 11. p. 183.
." The first aspect, however, of things in Scotland, was more favorable, if
not to her pleasure and happiness, at least to her repose and security, than
she had reason to apprehend. No sooner did the French galleys appear off Leith,
than people of all ranks, who had long expected their arrival, flocked toward
the shore, with an earnest impatience to behold and receive their young
sovereign. Some were led by duty, some by interest, some by curiosity; and all
combined to express their attachment to her, and to insinuate themselves into
her confidence, during the commencement of her administration. She had now
reached the nineteenth year of her age; and the bloom of her youth, and amiable
beauty of her person, were farther recommended by the affability of her
address, the politeness of her manners, and the elegance of her genius. Well
accomplished in all the superficial, but engaging graces of a court, she
afforded, when better known, still more promising indications of her character;
and men prognosticated both humanity from her soft and obliging deportment, and
penetration from her taste in all the refined arts of music, eloquence, and
poetry Buchan. lib. xvii. c. 9. Spotswood, p. 178, 179. Keith, p. 180. Thuan.
lib. xxix. c. ^.
. And as the Scotch had long been deprived of the presence of their sovereign,
whom they once despaired ever more to behold among them, her arrival seemed to
give universal satisfaction; and nothing appeared about the court, but symptoms
of affection, joy, and festivity.

THE first measures which Mary embraced, confirmed all the prepossessions which
had been entertained in her favor. She followed the advice which she had
received in France from D'Oisel and the bishop of Amiens, as well as her
uncles; and gave her confidence entirely to the leaders of the reformed party,
who had greatest influence on the people, and who, she found, were alone able
to support her government. Her brother, lord James, whom she soon after created
earl of Murray, obtained the chief authority; and after him, Lidington,
secretary of state, a man of great sagacity, had a principal share in her
confidence. By the vigor of these men's measures she endeavored to restore
order and police into the country, divided by public factions and private
feuds; and that fierce and intractable people, unacquainted with laws and
obedience, seemed, for a time, to submit peaceably to her gentle and prudent
administration.

Bigotry of the Scotch reformers.
BUT there was one circumstance which blasted all these promising appearances,
and bereaved Mary of that general favor which her manners and conduct gave her
just reason to expect. She was still a papist; and though she published, soon
after her arrival, a proclamation, requiring every one to submit to the
established religion, the preachers, and their adherents, could neither be
reconciled to a person polluted with so great an abomination, nor lay aside
their jealousies of her future conduct. It was with great difficulty she could
obtain permission for mass in her own chapel; and had not the people
apprehended, that if she had here met with a refusal, she would instantly have
returned to France, the zealots never would have granted her even that small
indulgence. The cry was, "Shall that idol be suffered again to be erected
within the realm?" It was asserted in the pulpit, that one mass was more
terrible than ten thousand armed men landed to invade the kingdom Knox, p 287.
: Lord Lindesey, and the gentlemen of Fife, exclaimed, "That the idolater
should die the death;" such was their expression. One that carried tapers for
the ceremony of that worship, was attacked and insulted in the court of the
palace. And if the lord James, and some popular leaders, had not interposed,
the most dangerous uproar was justly apprehended, from the ungoverned fury of
the multitude Ibid. p 284, 285, 287. Spo^swood, p. 179.
. The usual prayers in the churches were to this purpose: That God would turn
her heart, which was obstinate against him and his truth; or if his holy will
be otherwise, that he would strengthen the hearts and hands of the elect,
stoutly to oppose the rage of all tyrants K^ith, p 17^.
. Nay, it was openly called in question, whether that princess, being an
idolater, was entitled to any authority, even in civil matters Ibid. p. 202.
.

THE helpless Queen was every moment exposed to contumely, which she bore with
benignity and patience. Soon after her arrival she dined in the castle of
Edinburgh; and it was there contrived, that a boy of six years should be let
down from the roof, and should present her with a bible, a psalter, and the
keys of the castle. Lest she should be at a loss to understand this insult on
her as a papist, the whole decorations expressed the burning of Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, and other punishments inflicted by God against idolatry Ibid. p.
189.
. The town council of Edinburgh had the assurance, from their own authority, to
issue forth a proclamation, banishing from their district, "all the wicked
rabble of antichrist the pope, such as priests, monks, friars, together with
adulterers and fornicators Ibid p. 1^^.
." And because the privy council suspended the magistrates for their insolence,
the passionate historians Kno^, p. 292. Buchan. ^^b. xvii c. 20. Haynes, vol.
1. p. ^^2.
of that age, have inferred, that the Queen was engaged, by a sympathy of
manners, to take adulterers and fornicators under her protection. It appears
probable, that the magistrates were afterward reinstated in their office, and
that their proclamation was confirmed Keith, p. 202.
.

BUT all the insolence of the people was nothing in comparison of that which
was exercised by the clergy and the preachers; and they took a pride in
vilifying, even to her face, this amiable princess. The assembly of the church
^ amed an address, in which, after telling her, that her mass was a bastard
service of God, the fountain of all impiety, and the source of every evil which
abounded in the realm; they discovered their expectations, that she would, ere
this time, have preferred truth to her own pre-conceived opinion, and have
renounced her religion, which, they assured her, was nothing but abomination
and vanity. They said, that the present abuses of government were so enormous,
that if a speedy remedy was not provided, God would not fail in his anger to
strike the head and the tail the disobedient prince and sinful people. They
required, that severe punishment should be inflicted on adulterers and
fornicators; and they concluded with demanding for themselves, some addition
both of power and property Knox, p. 311, 312.
.

THE ringleader in all these insults on majesty was John Knox, who possessed an
uncontrouled authority in the church, and even in the civil affairs of the
nation, and who triumphed in the contumelious usage of his sovereign. His usual
appellation for the Queen was Jezabel; and though she endeavored, by the most
gracious condescension, to win his favor, all her insinuations could gain
nothing on his obdurate heart. She promised him access to her whenever he
demanded it; and she even desired him, if he found her blameable in any thing,
to reprehend her freely in private, rather than vilify her in the pulpit before
all the people; but he plainly told her, that he had a public ministry
entrusted to him, that if she would come to church, she should there hear the
gospel of truth, and that it was not his business to apply to every individual,
nor had he leisure for that occupation Ibid. p. 310.
. The political principles of the man, which he communicated to his brethren,
were as full of sedition as his theological were of rage and bigotry. Though he
once condescended so far as to tell the Queen, that he would submit to her, in
the same manner that Paul did to Nero Ibid. p. 288.
; he remained not long in this dutiful strain. He said to her, that "Samuel
feared not to slay Agag, the sat and delicate King of Amalek, whom King Saul
had saved: Neither spared Elias Jezabel's false prophets, and Baal's priests,
though King Ahab was present. Phineas," added he, "was no magistrate; and yet
feared he not to strike Cosbie and Zimri in the very act of silthy fornication.
And so, madam, your grace may see, that others than chief magistrates may
lawfully inflict punishment on such crimes as are condemned by the law of God
Ibid. p. 326.
." Knox had formerly, during the reign of Mary of England, wrote a book against
female succession to the crown: The title of it is, The first blast of the
trumpet against the monstrous regimen of women. He was too proud either to
recant the tenets of this book, or even to apologize for them; and his conduct
showed, that he thought no more civility than loyalty was due to any of the
female sex.

THE whole life of Mary, from the demeanor of these men, was filled with
bitterness and sorrow. This rustic apostle scruples not, in his history, to
inform us, that he once treated her with such severity, that she lost all
command of her temper, and dissolved into tears before him: Yet so far from
being moved with youth, and beauty, and royal dignity reduced to that
condition, he persevered in his insolent reproofs; and when he relates this
incident, he even discovers a visible pride and satisfaction in his own conduct
^nox, p. 332, 3^3.
. The pulpits had become nothing but scenes of railing against the vices of the
court; among which was always noted as the principal, feasting, finery,
dancing, balls, and whoredom their necessary attendant Ibid. p. 322.
. Some ornaments, which the ladies at that time wore upon their petticoats,
excited mightily the indignation of the preachers, and they affirmed, that such
vanity would provoke God's vengeance, not only against these foolish women, but
against the whole realm Ibid. p. 330.
.

MARY, whose age, and condition, and education, invited her to liberty and
cheerfulness, was curbed in every amusement, by the absurd severity of these
reformers; and she found each moment reason to regret her leaving that country
from whose manners she had in her early youth received the first impressions
Ibid. p ^9^.
. Her two uncles, the duke of Aumale, and the grand prior, with the other
French nobility, soon took their leave of her: The marquess of Elbeuf remained
some time longer; but after his departure, she was left alone to the society of
her own subjects; men at that time unacquainted with the pleasures of
conversation, ignorant of arts and civility, and corrupted beyond their usual
rusticity by a dismal fanaticism, which rendered them incapable of all humanity
or improvement. Though she had made no attempt to restore the ancient religion,
her popery was a sufficient crime: Though her behavior was hitherto
irreproachable, and her manners sweet and engaging, her gaiety and ease were
interpreted as signs of dissolute vanity. And to the harsh and preposterous
usage which this princess met with, may, in part, be ascribed those errors of
her subsequent conduct, which seemed to be so little of a piece with the
general tenor of her character.

THERE happened to the marquess of Elbeuf, before his departure, an adventure
which, though frivolous, might enable him to give Mary's friends in France, a
very melancholy idea of her situation. This nobleman, with the earl of Bothwel,
and some other young courtiers, had been engaged, after a debauch, to pay a
visit to a woman called Alison Craig, who was known to be liberal of her
^avours; and because they were denied entrance, they broke the windows, thrust
open the door, and committed some disorders, in searching for the damsel. It
happened that the assembly of the church was sitting at that time, and they
immediately took the matter under their cognizance. In conjunction with several
of the nobility, they presented an address to the Queen, which was introduced
with this awful prelude. "To the Queen's majesty, and to her secret and great
council, her grace's faithful and obedient subjects, the professors of Christ
Jesus's holy evangil wish the spirit of righteous judgment." The tenor of the
petition was, that the fear of God, the duty which they owed her grace, and the
terrible threatenings denounced by God against every city or country where
horrible crimes are openly committed, compelled them to demand the severe
punishment of such as had done what in them lay to kindle the wrath of God
against the whole realm: That the iniquity of which they complained, was so
heinous, and so horrible, that they would esteem themselves accomplices in it,
if they had been engaged by worldly fear, or servile complaisance, to pass it
over in silence, or bury it in oblivion: That as they owed her grace obedience
in the administration of justice, so were they entitled to require of her, in
return, the sharp and condign punishment of this enormity, which, they repeated
it, might draw down the vengeance of God on the whole kingdom: And that they
insisted on it to be her duty to lay aside all private affections toward the
actors in this heinous crime and enormous villainy, and without delay bring
them to a trial, and inflict the severest penalties upon them. The Queen gave a
gracious reception to this peremptory address; but because she probably
thought, that breaking the windows of a brothel merited not such severe
reprehension, she only replied, that her uncle was a stranger, and that he was
attended with a young company: But she should put such order to him and to all
others, that her subjects should henceforth have no reason to complain. Her
passing over this incident so slightly, was the source of great discontent, and
was regarded as a proof of the most profligate man^s Knox, p. 30^, 303, 304.
Keith, p. 509.
. It is not to be omitted, that Alison Craig, the cause of all the uproar, was
known to entertain a commerce with the earl of Arran, who, on account of his
great zeal for the reformation, was, without scruple, indulged in that enormity
Knox. Ibid.
.

SOME of the populace of Edinburgh broke into the Queen's chapel during her
absence, and committed some outrages; for which two of them were indicted, and
it was intended to bring them to a trial. Knox wrote circular letters to the
most considerable zealots of the party, and charged them to appear in town, and
protect their brethren. The holy sacraments, he there said, are abused by
profane papists; the mass has been said; and in worshipping that idol, the
priests have omitted no ceremony, not even the conjuring of their accursed
water, that had ever been practiced in the time of the greatest blindness.
These violent measures for opposing justice differed little from rebellion; and
Knox was summoned before the council to answer for his offense. The courage of
this man was equal to his insolence. He scrupled not to tell the Queen, that
the pestilent papists, who had enflamed her against these holy men, were the
sons of the devil; and must therefore obey the directions of their father, who
had been a liar and a manslayer from the beginning. The matter ended with the
full acquital of Knox Knox, p. 336, 342.
. Randolf, the English ambassador in Scotland at this time, had reason to write
to Cecil, speaking of the Scotch nation: "I think marvelously of the wisdom of
God, that gave this unruly, inconstant, and cumbersome people no more power nor
substance: For they would otherwise run wild Keith, p. 202.
."

WE have related these circumstances at greater length, than the necessity of
our subject may seem to require: But even trivial incidents, which show the
manners of the age, are often more instructive, as well as entertaining, than
the great transactions of wars and negotiations, which are pretty similar in
all periods and in all countries of the world.

THE reformed clergy in Scotland had, at that time, a very natural reason for
their ill humor, viz. the poverty or rather beggary to which they were
reduced: The nobility and gentry had at first laid their hands on all the
property of the regular clergy, without making any provision for the friars and
nuns, whom they turned out of all their possessions. The secular clergy of the
catholic communion, though they lost all ecclesiastical jurisdiction, still held
some of the temporalities of their benefices; and either became laymen
themselves, and converted them into perpetual property, or made conveyance of
them at low prices to the nobility, who thus enriched themselves by the plunder
of the church. The new teachers had hitherto subsisted chiefly by the voluntary
oblations of the faithful; and in a poor country, divided in religious
sentiments, this establishment was regarded as very scanty and very precarious.
Repeated applications were made for a le^al settlement to the preachers; and
though almost every thing in the kingdom was governed by their zeal and caprice,
it was with difficulty that their request was at last complied with. The
fanatical spirit which they indulged, and then industry in decrying the
principles and practices of the Romish communion, which placed such a merit in
enriching the clergy, proved now a very sensible obstacle to their
acquisitions. The boundaries of the royal power were, during that age, more
uncertain in Scotland than even in England; and the privy council alone thought
themselves entitled, without a Parliament, to regulate this important matter.
They passed a vote Knox, p. 296. Keith, p. 210.
, by which they divided all the ecclesiastical benefices into twenty one parts:
They assigned fourteen to the ancient possessors: Of the remaining seven, they
granted three to the crown; and if that was found to answer the public
expenses, they bestowed the overplus on the reformed ministers. The Queen was
empowered to levy the whole seven; and it was ordained, that she should
afterward pay to the clergy what should be judged to suffice for their
maintenance. The necessities of the crown, the rapacity of the courtiers, and
the small affection which Mary bore the protestant ecclesiastics, rendered
their revenues very contemptible as well as uncertain; and the preachers,
finding that they could not rival the gentry, nor even the middling rank of men
in opulence and plenty, were necessitated to betake themselves to other
expedients for supporting their authority. They affected a furious zeal for
religion, morose manners, a vulgar and familiar, and yet mysterious, cant; and
though the liberality of subsequent princes put them afterward on a better
footing with regard to revenue and thereby corrected in some degree these
vicious habits; it must be confessed, that, while many other advantages attend
presbyterian government, these inconveniences are not easily separated from
the genius of that ecclesiastical polity.

THE Queen of Scots, destitute of all force, possessing a narrow revenue,
surrounded with a factious turbulent nobility, a bigoted people, and insolent
ecclesiastics, soon found, that her only expedient for maintaining tranquillity
was to preserve a good correspondence with Jebb, vol. II. p. 456.
Elizabeth, who by former engagements and services, had acquired such authority
over all these ranks of men. Soon after her arrival in Scotland, secretary
Lidington was sent to London, in order to pay her compliments to the Queen, and
express her desire of friendship and a good correspondence; and he received a
commission from her, as well as from the Scotch nobility, to demand, as a means
of cementing this friendship, that Mary should, by act of Parliament or by
Proclamation (for the difference between these securities was not then esteemed
very considerable) be declared successor to the crown. No request could be more
unreasonable, or made at a more improper juncture. The Queen replied, that Mary
had once discovered her intention not to wait for the succession, but had
openly, without ceremony or reserve, assumed the title of Queen of England, and
had pretended superior right to her throne and kingdom: That though her
ambassadors, and those of her husband, the French King, had signed a treaty,
where they renounced that claim, and promised satisfaction for so great an
indignity, she was so intoxicated with this imaginary right, that she had
rejected the most earnest solicitations, and even, as some endeavored to
persuade her, incurred some danger in crossing the seas, rather than ratify
that equitable treaty: That her partisans every where had still the assurance
to insist on her title, and had presumed to talk of her own birth as spurious
and illegitimate: That while affairs were on this footing; while a claim thus
openly made, so far from being openly renounced, was only suspended till a more
convenient opportunity; it would in her be the most egregious imprudence to
fortify the hands of a pretender to her crown, by declaring her the successor:
That no expedient could be worse imagined for cementing friendship than such a
declaration, and Kings were often sound to bear no good will to their
successors, even though their own children; much more when the connection was so
much less intimate, and when such cause of disgust and jealousy had already
been given, and indeed was still centinued, on the part of Mary: That though she
was willing, from the amity which she bore her kinswoman, to ascribe her former
pretensions to the advice of others, by whose direction she was then governed;
her refusal to relinquish them could proceed only from her own prepossessions,
and were a proof that she still retained some dangerous project against her:
That it was the nature of all men to be disgusted with the present, to
entertain flattering views of futurity, to think their services ill rewarded,
to expect a better recompense from the successor; and she would esteem herself
scarce half a sovereign over the English, if they saw her declare her heir, and
arm her rival with authority against her own repose and safety: That she knew
the inconstant nature of the people; she was acquainted with the present
divisions in religion; she was not ignorant, that the same party, which
expected greatest favor during the reign of Mary, did also imagine, that the
title of that princess was superior to her own: That for her part, whatever
claims were advanced, she was determined to live and die Queen of England; and
after her death, it was the business of others to examine who had the best
pretensions, either by the laws or by right of blood, to the succession: That
she hoped the Queen of Scots's claim would then be found preserable; and
considering the injury, which she herself had received, it was sufficient
indulgence, if she premised, in the mean time, to do nothing which might, in
any respect, weaken or invalidate that claim: And that Mary, if her title was
really superior, a point, which, for her own part, she had never enquired into,
possessed all advantages above her rivals; who, destitute both of present
power, and of all support by friends, would only expose themselves to
inevitable ruin, by advancing any weak, or even doubtful pretensions Buchanan,
lib. XVII. c. 14-17. Camden. p. (...).
.

THESE views of the Queen were so prudent and judicious, that there was no
likelihood of her ever departing from them: But that she might put the matter
to a fuller proof, she offered to explain the words of the treaty of Edinburgh,
so as to leave no suspicion of their excluding Mary's right of succession
Spotswood, p. 181.
; and in this form, she again required her to ratify that treaty. Matters at
last came to this issue, that Mary agreed to the proposal, and offered to
renounce all present pretensions to the crown of England, provided Elizabeth
would agree to declare her the successor Haynes, vol. I. p. 377.
. But such was the jealous character of this latter princess, that she never
would consent to strengthen the interest and authority of any claimant, by
fixing the succession; much less would she make this concession in favor of a
rival Queen, who possessed such plausible pretensions for the present, and who,
though she might verbally resign them, could easily resume her title on the first
opportunity. Mary's demand, however, bore so specious an appearance of equity
and justice, that Elizabeth, sensible that reason would be deemed to lie
entirely on that side, made no more mention of the matter; and though no farther
concessions were made by either Princess, they put on all the appearances of a
cordial reconcilement and friendship with each other. Wise government of
Elizabeth.
The Queen observed, that, even without her interposal, Mary was sufficiently
depressed by the mutinous disposition of her own subjects; and instead of
giving Scotland, for the present, any unquietude or disturbance, she employed
herself, much more usefully and laudably, in regulating the affairs of her own
kingdom, and promoting the happiness of her people. She made some progress in
paying those great debts which lay upon the crown: she regulated the coin,
which had been extremely debased by her predecessors; she furnished her
arsenals with great quantities of arms from Germany and other places; engaged
her gentry and nobility to imitate her example in this particular; introduced
into the kingdom the art of making gunpowder and brass cannon; fortified her
frontiers on the side of Scotland; made frequent reviews of the militia;
encouraged agriculture by allowing a free exportation of corn; promoted trade
and navigation; and so much increased the shipping of her kingdom, both by
building vessels of force herself, and suggesting like undertakings to the
merchants, that she was justly styled the restorer of naval glory, and the
Queen of the northern seas Camden, p. 388. Strype, vol. I. p. (...).
. The natural frugality of her temper, so far from disqualifying her for these
great enterprises, only enabled her to execute them with greater certainty and
success; and all the world saw in her conduct the happy effects of a vigorous
perseverance in judicious and well conducted projects.

IT is easy to imagine, that so great a princess, who enjoyed such felicity and
renown, would receive proposals of marriage from every one, who had any
likelihood of succeeding; and though she had made some public declarations in
favor of a single life, few believed, that she would persevere forever in that
resolution. The archduke Charles, second son to the emperor Haynes, vol. I. p.
(...).
, as well as Casimir, son to the elector palatine, made applications to her;
and as this latter prince made profession of the reformed religion, he thought
himself, on this account, better entitled to succeed in his addresses. Eric,
King of Sweden, and Adolph, duke of Holstein, were encouraged by the same views
to become suitors; and the earl of Arran, heir to the crown of Scotland, was,
by the states of that kingdom, recommended to her as a suitable marriage. Even
some of her own subjects, though they did not openly declare their pretensions,
entertained hopes of success. The earl of Arundel, a person declining in years,
but descended from a very ancient and noble family, as well as possessed of
great riches, flattered himself with this prospect; as did also Sir William
Pickering, a man much esteemed for his personal merit. But the person most
likely to succeed, was a younger son of the late duke of Northumberland, the
lord Robert Dudley, who, by means of his exterior qualities, joined to address
and flattery, had become, in a manner, her declared favorite, and had great
influence in all her councils. The less worthy he appeared of this distinction,
the more was his great favor ascribed to some violent affection, which could
thus seduce the judgment of this penetrating princess; and men long expected,
that he would obtain the preference above so many princes and monarchs. But the
Queen gave all these suitors a gentle refusal, which still encouraged their
pursuit; and she thought, that she should the better attach them to her
interests, if they were still allowed to entertain hopes of succeeding in their
pretensions. It is also probable, that this policy was not entirely free from a
mixture of female coquetry; and that, though she was determined in her own mind
never to share her power with any man, she was not displeased with the
courtship, solicitation, and professions of love, which the desire of
acquiring so valuable a prize, procured her from all quarters.

WHAT is most singular in the conduct and character of Elizabeth, is, that,
though she was determined never to have any heir of her own body, she was not
only extremely averse to six any successor to the crown; but seems also to have
resolved, as far as lay in her power, that no one, who had pretensions to the
succession, should ever have any heirs or successors. After the exclusion given
by the will of Henry VIII. to the posterity of Margaret, Queen of Scotland, the
right to the crown devolved on the house of Suffolk; and the lady Catherine
Gray, younger sister to the lady Jane, was now the heir of that family. This
lady had been married to the lord Herbert, son to the earl of Pembroke; but
having been divorced from that nobleman, she had entered into a private
contract with the earl of Hartford, son to the protector; and her husband, soon
after consummation, traveled into France. In a little time she appeared to be
pregnant, which so enraged Elizabeth, that she threw her into the Tower, and
summoned him to appear, in order to answer for his misdemeanor. He made no
scruple to acknowledge the marriage, which, though concluded without the Queen's
consent, was entirely suitable to both parties; and for this offense he was
also committed to the Tower. Elizabeth's severity stopped not here: She issued
a commission to enquire into the matter; and as Hartford could not, within the
time limited, prove the nuptials by witnesses, their commerce was declared
unlawful, and their posterity illegitimate. They were still continued in
custody; but by bribing their keepers, they found means to have farther
intercourse; and another child appeared to be the fruit of their commerce. This
was a fresh source of vexation to the Queen; who made a fine of fifteen
thousand pounds be set on Hartford by the Star Chamber, and ordered his
confinement to be thenceforth still more rigid and severe. He lay in this
condition for nine years, till the death of his wife, by freeing Elizabeth from
all fears, procured him his liberty Haynes, vol. I. p. 369, 378, 396. Camden,
p. 389. Heylin, p. 154.
. This extreme severity must be accounted for, either by the unrelenting
jealousy of the Queen, who was afraid that any pretender to the succession
would acquire credit by having issue; or by her malignity, which, with all her
great qualities, made one ingredient in her character, and which led her to
envy in others those natural pleasures of love and posterity, of which her own
ambition and desire of dominion made her renounce all prospect for herself.

THERE happened, about this time, some other events in the royal family, where
the Queen's conduct was more laudable. Arthur Pole, and his brother, nephews to
the late cardinal, and descended from the duke of Clarence, brother to Edward
the fourth, together with Anthony Fortescue, who had married a sister of these
gentlemen, and some other persons, were brought to their trial for conspiring
to withdraw into France, with a view of receiving succors from the duke of
Guise, of returning thence into Wales, and proclaiming Mary Queen of England,
and Arthur Pole duke of Clarence. They confessed the indictment, but asserted,
that they never intended to execute these projects during the Queen's
lifetime: They had only esteemed such precautions requisite in case of her
death, which, some pretenders to judicial astrology had assured them, they
might with certainty look for before the year expired. They were condemned by
the jury; but received their pardon from the Queen's clemency Strype, vol. I.
p. 333. Heylin, p. 1^4.
.

CHAP. II.
State of Europe. -- Civil wars of France. -- Havre de Grace put in possession
of the English. -- A Parliament. -- Havre lost. -- Scotch affairs. -- The Queen
of Scots marries the earl of Darnley. -- Confederacy against the Protestants.
-- Murder of Rizzio. -- A Parliament. -- Murder of Darnley. -- Queen of Scots
marries Bothwel. -- Insurrections in Scotland. -- Imprisonment of Mary. -- Mary
flies into England. -- Conferences at York and Hampton Court.

State of Europe.
AFTER the commencement of the religious wars in France, which rendered that
flourishing kingdom, during the course of near forty years, a scene of horror
and devastation, the great rival powers in Europe were Spain and England; and
it was not long before an animosity, first political, then personal, broke out
between the sovereigns of these countries.

PHILIP the second of Spain, though he reached not any enlarged views of policy,
was endowed with great industry and sagacity, a remarkable caution in his
enterprises, an unusual foresight in all his measures; and as he was ever cool
and unmoved by passion, and possessed neither talents nor inclination for war,
both his subjects and his neighbors had reason to expect great justice,
happiness and tranquillity, from his administration. But prejudices had on him
a more pernicious effect than ever passions had on any other monarch; and the
spirit of bigotry and tyranny, by which he was actuated, with the fraudulent
maxims which governed his councils, excited the most violent agitation among
his own people, engaged him in acts of the most enormous cruelty, and threw all
Europe into combustion.

AFTER Philip had concluded peace at Cambray, and had remained some time in the
Netherlands, in order to settle the affairs of that country, he embarked for
Spain; and as the gravity of that nation, with their respectful obedience to
their prince, had appeared much more agreeable to his humor, than the homely
familiar manners, and the pertinacious liberty of the Flemish, it was expected,
that he would reside altogether at Madrid, and govern all his extensive
dominions by Spanish ministers and Spanish councils. Having met with a violent
tempest on his voyage, he no sooner arrived in harbor, than he fell on his
knees, and after giving thanks for this deliverance, he vowed, that his life,
which was thus providentially saved, should be thenceforth entirely dedicated
to the extirpation of heresy Thuanus, lib. xxiii. cap. 1^.
. His subsequent conduct corresponded to these professions. Finding that the
new doctrines had penetrated into Spain, he let loose the rage of persecution
against all who professed them, or were suspected of adhering to them; and by
his violence he gave new edge, even to the unrelenting cruelty of priests and
inquisitors. He committed to custody Constantine Ponce, who had been confessor
to his father, the emperor Charles; who had attended him during his retreat;
and in whose arms that great monarch had terminated his life: And after this
ecclesiastic died in prison, he still ordered him to be tried and condemned for
heresy, and his statue to be committed to the flames. He even deliberated,
whether he should exercise like severity against the memory of his father, who
was suspected, during his latter years, to have indulged a propensity toward
the Lutheran principles: In his furious zeal for orthodoxy, he spared neither
age, sex, nor condition: He was present, with an inflexible countenance, at the
most barbarous executions: He issued rigorous orders for the prosecution of
heretics, in Spain, Italy, the Indies, and the Low Countries: And having
founded his determined tyranny on maxims of civil policy, as well as on
principles of religion, all his subjects saw, that there was no method, except
the most entire compliance, or most obstinate resistance, to escape or elude
the severity of his vengeance.

DURING that extreme animosity which prevailed between the adherents of the
opposite religions, the civil magistrate, who found it difficult, if not
impossible, for the same laws to govern such enraged adversaries, was naturally
led by specious rules of prudence, in embracing one party, to declare war
against the other, and to exterminate, by fire and sword, those bigots, who,
from abhorrence of his religion, had proceeded to an opposition of his power,
and to an hatred of his person. If any prince possessed such enlarged views as
to foresee, that a mutual toleration would in time abate the fury of religious
prejudices, he yet met with difficulties in reducing this principle to
practice; and might deem the malady too violent to await a remedy, which, though
certain, must necessarily be slow in its operations. But Philip, though a
profound hypocrite, and extremely governed by self-interest, seems also to have
been himself actuated by an imperious bigotry; and as he employed great
reflection in all his conduct, he could easily palliate the gratification of
his natural temper under the color of wisdom, and find in this system no less
advantage to his foreign than his domestic politics. By placing himself at the
head of the catholic party, he converted the zealots of the ancient faith into
partisans of the Spanish greatness; and by employing the powerful allurement of
religion, he seduced every where the subjects from that allegiance which they
owed their native sovereign.

THE course of events, guiding and concurring with choice, had placed Elizabeth
in a situation diametrically opposite; and had raised her to be the glory, the
bulwark, and the support of the numerous, though still persecuted protestants,
throughout all Europe. More moderate in her temper than Philip, she found, with
pleasure, that the principles of her sect required not such extreme severity in
her domestic government, as was exercised by that monarch; and having no object
but self-preservation, she united her interests in all foreign negociations
with those who were every where struggling under oppression, and guarding
themselves against ruin and extermination. The more virtuous sovereign was thus
happily thrown into the more favorable cause; and fortune, in this instance,
concurred with policy and nature.

DURING the lifetime of Henry the second and his successor, the force of these
principles was somewhat restrained, though not altogether overcome, by the
motives of a superior interest; and the dread of uniting England with the
French monarchy, engaged Philip to maintain a good correspondence with
Elizabeth. Yet even during this period he rejected the garter which she sent
him; he refused to ratify the ancient league between the house of Burgundy and
England Digg^^ Complete ambassador, p. 369. Haynes, p. 585. Strype, vol. (...).
; he furnished ships to transport the French forces into Scotland; he
endeavored to intercept the earl of Arran, who was hastening to join the
malcontents in that country; and the Queen's wisest ministers still regarded
his friendship as hollow and precarious Haynes, vol. I. p. 280, 281, 283, 284.
. But no sooner did the death of Francis the second put an and to Philip's
apprehensions with regard to Mary's succession, than his animos^^^ against
Elizabeth began more openly to appear, and the interests of Spain and England
were found opposite in every negotiation and transaction.

THE two great monarchies of the continent, France and Spain, being possessed
of nearly equal force, were naturally antagonists; and England, from its power
and situation, was entitled to support its own dignity, as well as
tranquill^^y, by holding the balance between them. Whatever incident,
therefore, tended too much to depress any one of these rival powers, as it left
the other without control, might be deemed contrary to the interest of
England: Yet so much were these great maxims of policy overruled, during that
age, by the disputes of theology, that Philip found an advantage in supporting
the established government and religion of France; and Elizabeth in protecting
faction and innovation.

Civil wars of France.
THE Queen-regent of France, when re-instated in authority by the death of her
son, Francis, had formed a plan of administration more subtle than judicious;
and ballancing the Catholics with the Hugonots, the duke of Guise with the
prince of Conde, she endeavored to render herself necessary to both, and to
establish her own dominion on their constrained obedience Davila, lib. ii.
. But the equal counterpoise of power, which, among foreign nations, is the
source of tranquillity, proves always the ground of quarrel between domestic
factions; and if the animosity of religion concur with the frequent occasions
which present themselves of mutual injury, it is impossible, during any time,
to preserve a firm concord in so delicate a situation. The constable,
Montmorency, moved by concern for the ancient faith, joined himself to the duke
of Guise: The King of Navarre, from his inconstant temper, and his jealousy of
the superior genius of his brother, embraced the same party: And Catherine,
finding herself depressed by this combination, had recourse to Conde and the
hugonots, who gladly embraced the opportunity of fortifying themselves by her
countenance and protection Ibid. lib. iii.
. An edict had been published, granting a toleration to the protestants; but
the interested violence of the duke of Guise, covered with the pretense of
religious zeal, broke through this agreement; and the two parties, after the
fallacious tranquillity of a moment, renewed their mutual insults and injuries.
Conde, Coligni, Andelot, assembled their friends, and flew to arms: Guise and
Montmorency got possession of the King's person, and constrained the
Queen-regent to embrace their party: Fourteen armies were levied and put in
action in different places of France Father Paul, lib. vii.
: Each province, each city, each family, was agitated with intestine rage and
animosity. The father was divided against the son; the brother against the
brother; and women themselves, sacrificing their humanity as well as their
timidity to the religious fury, distinguished themselves by acts of ferocity
and valor Ibid.
. Wherever the hugonots prevailed, the images were broke, the altars pillaged,
the churches demolished, the monasteries consumed with fire: Where success
attended the catholics, they burned the bibles, rebaptized the infants,
constrained married persons to pass anew through the ceremony: And plunder,
desolation, and bloodshed attended equally the triumph of both parties. The
Parliament of Paris itself, the seat of law and justice, instead of employing
its authority to compose these fatal quarrels, published an edict, by which it
put the sword into the hands of the enraged multitude, and empowered the
catholics every where to massacre the hugonots Father Paul, lib. vii. Haynes, p
391.
: And it was during this period, when men began to be somewhat enlightened, and
in this nation, renowned for polished manners, that the theological rage, which
had long been boiling in men's veins, seems to have attained its last stage of
virulence and ferocity.

PHILIP, who was jealous of the progress which the hugonots made in France, and
who dreaded that the contagion would spread into the Low Country Provinces, had
formed a secret alliance with the princes of Guise, and had entered into a
mutual concert for the protection of the ancient faith, and the suppression of
heresy. He now sent six thousand men, with some supply of money, to reinforce
the catholic party; and the prince of Conde, finding himself unequal to so
great a combination, countenanced by the regal authority, was obliged to
dispatch the Vidame of Chartres and Briguemaut to London, in order to crave the
assistance and protection of Elizabeth. Havre de Grace put in possession of the
English.
Most of the province of Normandy was possessed by the hugonots; and Conde
offered to put Havre de Grace into the hands of the English; on condition,
that, together with three thousand men for the garrison of that place, the
Queen should likewise send over three thousand to defend Dieppe and Rouen, and
should furnish the prince with a supply of a hundred thousand crowns (...) vol.
II. p (...)
.

ELIZABETH, besides the general and essential interest of supporting the
protestants, and opposing the rapid progress of her enemy, the duke of Guise,
had other motives which engaged her to accept this proposal. 20th September.
When she concluded the peace at Cateau Cambresis, she had good reason to
foresee, that France never would voluntarily fulfill the article with regard to
the restitution of Calais; and many subsequent incidents had tended to confirm
this suspicion. Considerable sums of money had been laid out on the
fortifications; long leases had been granted of the lands; and many inhabitants
had been encouraged to build and settle there, by assurances that Calais should
never be restored to the English (...) p. 54, ^57.
. The Queen, therefore, very wisely concluded, that could she get possession of
Havre, a place which commanded the mouth of the Seine, and was of much greater
importance than Calais, she would easily constrain the French to execute the
treaty, and would have the glory of restoring to the crown that ancient
possession, which was so much the favorite of the nation.

NO measure could be more generally odious in France, than the conclusion of
this treaty with Elizabeth. Men were naturally led to compare the conduct of
Guise, who had finally chased the English from France, and had barred these
dangerous and destructive enemies from all access into it, with the treasonable
politics of Conde, who had again granted them an entry into the heart of the
kingdom. The prince had the more reason to repent of this measure, that he
reaped not from it all the advantage which he expected. Three thousand English
immediately took possession of Havre and Dieppe, under the command of Sir
Edward Poinings; but the latter place was found so little capable of being
defended, that it was immediately abandoned Forbes, vol. II. p. 199.
. The siege of Rouen was already formed by the catholics, the command of the
King of Navarre and the constable Montmorency; and it was with difficulty that
Poinings could throw a small reinforcement into the place. Though these English
troops behaved with great gallantry Ibid. p. 161.
, and the King of Navarre was mortally wounded during the siege; the catholics
still continued the attack of the place, and carrying it at last by assault,
put the whole garrison to the sword. The earl of Warwic, eldest son to the late
duke of Northumberland, arrived soon after at Havre, with another body of three
thousand English, and took on him the command of the place.

IT was expected, that the French catholics, flushed with their success at
Rouen, would immediately have formed the siege of Havre, which was not as yet
in any condition of defense; but the intestine disorders of the kingdom soon
diverted their attention to another enterprise. Andelot, seconded by the
negociations of Elizabeth, had levied a considerable body of protestants in
Germany; and having arrived at Orleans, the seat of the hugonots' power, he
enabled the prince of Conde and the admiral to take the field, and oppose the
progress of their enemies. After threatening Paris during some time, they took
their march toward Normandy, with a view of engaging the English to act in
conjunction with them, and of fortifying themselves with the farther assistance
which they expected from the zeal and vigor of Elizabeth Ibid. p. 230. Davila,
llb. iii.
. The catholics, commanded by the constable, and under him by the duke of
Guise, followed on their rear; and overtaking them at Dreux, obliged them to
give battle. 19th of December.
The field was fought with great obstinacy on both sides; and the action was
distinguished by this signal event, that Conde and Montmorency, the commanders
of the opposite armies, remained both of them prisoners in the hands of their
enemies. The appearances of victory remained with Guise; but the admiral, whose
fate it ever was to be defeated, and still to rise more terrible after his
misfortunes, collected the remains of the army, and inspiring his own
unconquerable courage and constancy into every breast, kept them in a body, and
subdued some of the most considerable places in Normandy. Elizabeth, the better
to support his cause, sent him a new supply of a hundred thousand crowns; and
offered, if he could find merchants to lend him the money, to give her bond for
another hundred thousand Forbes, vol. II. p. 322, 317.
.

12 January.
A Parliament.
THE expenses incurred by assisting the French hugonots, had emptied the
Queen's exchequer, notwithstanding her extreme frugality; and in order to
obtain supply, she found herself under a necessity of summoning a Parliament:
An expedient to which she never voluntarily had recourse. A little before the
meeting of this assembly, she had fallen into a dangerous illness, the
smallpox; and as her life, during some time, was despaired of, the people
became the more sensible of the perilous condition in which they were placed,
on account of the uncertainty which, in case of her decease, attended the
succession of the crown. The partisans of the Queen of Scots and those of the
house of Suffolk, already divided the nation into two factions; and every one
foresaw, that, though it might be possible at present to determine the
controversy by law, yet, if the throne was vacant, nothing but the sword would
be able to fix a successor. The commons, therefore, on the very opening of the
session, voted an address to the Queen; in which, after enumerating the dangers
attending a broken and doubtful succession, and mentioning the evils which
their fathers had experienced from the contending titles of York and Lancaster,
they entreated the Queen to put an end to their apprehensions, by choosing some
husband, whom, they promised, whoever he was, gratefully to receive, and
faithfully to serve, honor, and obey: Or if she had entertained any reluctance
to the married state, they desired, that the lawful successor might be named,
or at least appointed by act of parliament. They remarked, that during all the
reigns which had passed since the conquest, the nation had never before been so
unhappy, as not to know the person who, in case of the sovereign's death, was
legally entitled to the succession. And they observed, that the certain and
fixed order which took place in the inheritance of the French monarchy, was one
chief source of the usual tranquillity, as well as of the happiness of that
kingdom Sir Simon Dewe^'s Journ. p. 81.
.

THIS subject, though extremely interesting to the nation, was very little
agreeable to the Queen; and she was sensible, that great difficulties would
attend every decision. A declaration in favor of the Queen of Scots, would
form a settlement perfectly legal; because that princess was commonly allowed
to possess the right of blood, and the exclusion given by Henry's will,
deriving its weight chiefly from an act of parliament, would lose all authority
whenever the Queen and Parliament had made a new settlement, and restored the
Scottish line to their place in the succession. But she dreaded the giving
encouragement to the catholics, her secret enemies, by this declaration. She
was sensible, that every heir was, in some degree, a rival; much more one who
possessed a claim for the present possession of the crown, and who had already
advanced, in a very open manner, these dangerous pretensions. The great power
of Mary, both from the favor of the catholic princes, and her connections with
the house of Guise, not to mention the force and situation of Scotland, was
well known to her; and she saw no security that that princess, if fortified by
a sure prospect of succession, would not again revive claims which she could
never yet be prevailed on formally to relinquish. On the other hand, the title
of the house of Suffolk was supported only by the more zealous protestants; and
it was very doubtful, whether even a parliamentary declaration in its favor
would bestow on it such validity as to give satisfaction to the people. The
republican part of the constitution had not as yet acquired such an ascendant
as to control, in any degree, the ideas of hereditary right; and as the
legality of Henry's will was still disputed, though founded on the utmost
authority which a Parliament could bestow; who could be assured, that a more
recent act would be acknowleged to have any greater force or validity? In the
frequent revolutions which had of late taken place, the right of blood had
still prevailed over religious prejudices; and the nation had ever showed
itself disposed rather to change its faith than the order of succession. Even
many Protestants declared themselves in favor of Mary's claim of inheritance
Keith, p. (...).
; and nothing would endanger more general disgust, than to see the Queen
openly, and without reserve, take party against it. That princess also, finding
herself injured in so sensible a point, would thenceforth act as a declared
enemy; and uniting together her foreign and domestic friends, the partisans of
her present title and of her eventual succession, would soon bring matters to
extremity against the public establishment. The Queen, therefore, weighing all
these inconveniences, which were great and urgent, was determined to keep both
parties in awe, by maintaining still an ambiguous conduct; and she chose rather
that the people should run the hazard of contingent events, than that herself
should visibly endanger her throne, by employing expedients, which, at best,
did not give entire security to the nation. She made, therefore, an evasive
answer to the applications of the commons; and when the house, at the end of
the sessions, desired, by the mouth of their speaker, farther satisfaction on
that head, she could not be prevailed on to make her reply more explicit. She
only told them, contrary to her declarations in the beginning of her reign,
that she had fixed no absolute resolution against marriage; and she added, that
the difficulties with which the question of the succession was attended, were
so great, that she would be contented, for their sake, to remain some time
longer in this vale of misery; and never would depart this life with
satisfaction, till she had laid some solid foundation for their future security
Sir Simon D'Ewes's Journal, p. 75.
.

THE most remarkable law passed this session, was that which bore the title of
Assurance of the Queen's royal power over all states and subjects within her
dominions ^ Eliz. c. 1.
. By this act, the asserting twice by writing, word, or deed, the pope's
authority, was subjected to the penalties of treason. All persons in holy
orders were bound to take the oath of supremacy; as also, all who were advanced
to any degrees, either in the universities or in common law; all schoolmasters,
officers in court, or members of Parliament: And the penalty of their second
refusal was treason. The first offense in both cases, was punished by
banishment and forfeiture. This rigorous statute, which involved a real, though
not general, persecution, and of the worst kind too, as it made a scrutiny into
men's secret sentiments, was not extended to any of the degree of a baron;
because it was not supposed, that the Queen could entertain any doubt with
regard to the fidelity of persons possessed of such high dignity. The lord
Montacute made vigorous opposition to this bill; and asserted, in favor of the
catholics, that they disputed not, they preached not, they disobeyed not the
Queen, they caused no trouble nor tumults among the people Strype, vol. I. p.
(...).
. It is, however, probable, that some suspicions of their secret conspiracies
had made the Queen and Parliament increase their rigor against them; though it
is also more than probable, that they were mistaken in the nature of the remedy.

THERE was likewise another point where the Parliament, this session, showed
more the goodness of their intention than the soundness of their judgment. They
passed a law against fond and fantastical prophecies, which had been observed
to seduce the people into rebellion and disorder ^ Eliz. c. 15.
: But at the same time they enacted a statute which was most likely to increase
these and such like superstitions: It was levelled against conjurations,
enchantments, and witchcra^^^ Ibid. c. ^^.
. Witchcraft and heresy are two crimes which always increase by punishment, and
never are so essectually suppressed as by being totally neglected. After the
Parliament had granted the Queen a supply of one subsidy and two fifteenths, it
was finished by a prorogation. The convocation likewise voted the Queen a
subsidy of six shillings in the pound, payable in three years.

WHILE the English parties exerted these calm efforts against each other, in
parliamentary votes and debates, the French factions, enflamed to the highest
degree of animosity, continued that cruel war which their intemperate zeal,
actuated by the ambition of their leaders, had kindled in the kingdom. The
admiral was successful in reducing the towns of Normandy which held for the
King; but he frequently complained, that the numerous garrison of Havre
remained totally unactive, and was not employed in any military operations
against the common enemy. The Queen, in taking possession of that place, had
published a manifesto Forbes, vol. II.
, in which she pretended, that her concern for the French King's interest, had
engaged her in that measure, and that her sole intention was to oppose her
enemies of the house of Guise, who held their prince in captivity, and employed
his power to the destruction of his best and most faithful subjects. It was
chiefly her desire to preserve appearances, joined to the great frugality of
her temper, which made her, at this critical juncture, keep her soldiers in
garrison, and restrain them from committing farther hostilities upon the enemy
Ibid. p. 276, 2^7.
. The duke of Guise, meanwhile, was aiming a mortal blow at the power of the
Hugonots; and had commenced the siege of Orleans, which was commanded by
Andelot, and where the constable was detained prisoner. He had the prospect of
speedy success in this undertaking; when he was assassinated by Poltrot, a
young gentleman, whose zeal, instigated (as it is pretended, though without any
certain foundation) by the admiral and Beza, a famous preacher, led him to
attempt that criminal enterprise. The death of this gallant prince was a very
sensible loss to the catholic party; and though the cardinal of Lorraine, his
brother, still supported the interest of the family, the danger of their
progress appeared much less imminent, both to Queen Elizabeth and to the French
protestants. The union, therefore, between these allies, which had been
cemented by their common fears, began thenceforth to be less intimate; and the
leaders of the Hugonots were persuaded to hearken to terms of accommodation.
Conde and Montmorency held conferences for settling the peace; and as they were
both of them impatient to relieve themselves from captivity, they soon came to
an agreement with regard to the conditions. The character of the Queen-regent,
whose ends were always violent, but who endeavored, by subtilty and policy,
rather than force, to attain them, led her to embrace any plausible terms; and
in spite of the admiral's protestations, whose sagacity could easily discover
the treachery of the court, the articles of agreement were finally settled
between the parties. A toleration, under some restrictions, was anew granted to
the protestants; a general amnesty was published; Conde was reinstated in his
offices and governments; and after money was advanced for the payment of
arrears due to the German troops, they were dismissed the kingdom.

BY the agreement between Elizabeth and the prince of Conde, it had been
stipulated Forbes, vol II. p. 79.
, that neither party should conclude peace without the consent of the other;
but this article was at present but little regarded by the leaders of the
French protestants. They only comprehended her so far in the treaty, as to
obtain a promise, that, on her relinquishing Havre, her charges and the money
which she had advanced them, should be repaid her by the King of France, and
that Calais, on the expiration of the term, should be restored to her. But she
disdained to accept of these terms; and thinking the possession of Havre a much
better pledge for the obtaining her purpose, she sent Warwic orders to prepare
himself against an attack from the now united power of the French monarchy.

THE earl of Warwic, who commanded a garrison of six thousand men, beside seven
hundred pioniers, had no sooner got possession of Havre, than he employed every
means for putting it in a posture of defense Ibid. p. 158.
; and after expelling the French from the town, he encouraged his soldiers to
make the most desperate defense against the enemy. The constable commanded the
French army; the Queen-regent herself, and the King were present in the camp;
even the prince of Conde joined the King's forces, and gave countenance to this
enterprise; the admiral and Andelot alone, who still desired to preserve
Elizabeth's friendship, kept at a distance, and prudently refused to join their
ancient enemies in an attack upon their allies.

BY the force, and dispositions, and situation of both sides, it was expected,
that the siege would be attended with some very memorable event; yet did France
make a much easier acquisition of this important place, than was at first
apprehended. The plague crept in among the English soldiers; and being
increased by their fatigue and bad diet (for they were but ill supplied with
provisions Ibid p. 337, 498.
) it committed such ravages, that sometimes an hundred men a day died of it,
and there remained not at last fifteen hundred in a condition to do duty Ibid.
p. 450, 458.
. The French, meeting with such feeble resistance, carried on their attacks
successfully; and having made two breaches, each of them sixty feet wide, they
prepared for a general assault, which must have terminated in the slaughter of
the whole garrison Forbes, vol. II. p. 498.
. Havre lost. 28th July.
Warwic, who had frequently warned the council of the danger, and who had
loudly demanded a supply of men and provisions, found himself obliged to
capitulate, and to content himself with the liberty of withdrawing his
garrison. The articles were no sooner signed, than lord Clinton, the admiral,
who had been detained by contrary winds, appeared off the harbor with a
reinforcement of three thousand men; and found the place surrendered to the
enemy. To increase the misfortune, the infected army brought the plague with
them into England, where it swept off great multitudes, particularly in the
city of London. Above twenty thousand persons there died of it in one year Thi^
year the council of Trent was dissolved, which had sat from 1545. The
publication of it^ decrees excited anew the general serment in Europe; while
the catholics endeavored to enforce the acceptance of them, and the
protestants rejected them. The religious controversies were too far advanced to
expect that any conviction would result from the decrees of this council. It is
the only general council which has been held in an age truly learned and
inquisitive; and (...) the history of it has been wrote with great penetration
and judgment, it has tended very much to expose clerical usurpation, and in
trigues, and may serve us as a specimen of more ancient councils. No one
expects to see another general council, till the decay of learning and the
progress of ignorance shall again fit mankind for these great impostures.
.

Davila, lib 3.
. 2d April.
It was agreed, that the hostages, which the French had given for the
restitution of Calais, should be restored for 220,000 crowns; and that both
sides should reserve all their claims and pretensions.

Scotch affairs.
THE peace still continued with Scotland; and even a cordial friendship seemed
to have been cemented between Elizabeth and Mary. These princesses made
profession of the most entire affection; wrote amicable letters every week to
each other; and had adopted, in all appearance, the sentiments, as well as
style, of sisters. Elizabeth punished one Hales, who had composed a book
against Mary's title Keith, p. 252.
; and as the lord keeper, Bacon, was thought to have encouraged Hales in this
undertaking, he fell under her displeasure, and it was with some difficulty
that he wa able to give her satisfaction, and recover her good opinion Ibid. p.
253.
. The two Queens had agreed in the foregoing summer to an interview at York
Hayres. p. ^88.
; in order to remove all difficulties with regard to Mary's ratification of the
treaty of Edinburgh, and to consider of the proper method for settling the
succession of England: But as Elizabeth carefully avoided touching on this
delicate subject, she employed a pretext of the wars in France, which, she
said, would detain her in London; and she delayed till next year the intended
interview. It is also probable, that, being well acquainted with the beauty and
address and accomplishments of Mary, she did not choose to stand the comparison
with regard to those exterior qualities, in which she was eclipsed by her
rival; and was unwilling, that that princess, who had already made great
progress in the esteem and affections of the English, should have a farther
opportunity of increasing the number of her partisans.

MARY'S close connexions with the house of Guise, and her devoted attachment to
her uncles, by whom she had been educated and protected, was the ground of just
and unsurmountable jealousy to Elizabeth, who regarded them as her mortal and
declared enemies, and was well acquainted with their dangerous character and
ambitious projects. They had made offer of their niece to Don Carlos, Philip's
son; to the King of Sweden, the King of Navarre, the archduke Charles, the duke
of Ferrara, the cardinal of Bourbon, who had only taken deacons orders, from
which he might easily be absolved; and they were ready to marry her to any one,
who could strengthen their interest, or give inquietude and disturbance to
Elizabeth Forbes, vol. II. p. 287. Strype, vol. I. p. 400.
. Elizabeth on her part was equally vigilant to obviate the execution of their
schemes, and was particularly anxious, lest Mary should form any powerful
foreign alliance, which might tempt her to revive her pretensions to the crown,
and to invade the kingdom from the side where it was weakest and lay most
exposed Keith, p. 24^, ^84.
. As she believed, that the marriage with the archduke Charles was the most
likely to have place, she used every expedient to prevent it; and besides
remonstrating against it to Mary herself, she endeavored to draw off the
archduke from that pursuit, by giving him some reason to hope for success in
his pretensions to herself, and by inviting him to a renewal of the former
treaty of marriage Me^il, p. 41.
. She always told the Queen of Scotts, that nothing would satisfy her but her
espousing some English nobleman, who would remove all grounds of jealousy, and
cement the union between the two kingdoms; and she offered on this condition to
have her title examined, and to declare her the successor to the crown Keith,
p. 243, 2^0, 259, 26^.
. After keeping the matter in these general terms during a twelvemonth, she at
last named the lord Robert Dudley, now created earl of Leicester, as the person
on whom she desired that Mary's choice should fall.

THE earl of Leicester, the great and powerful favorite of Elizabeth,
possessed all those exterior qualities, which are naturally alluring to the
fair sex; a handsome person, a polite address, an insinuating behavior; and by
means of these accomplishments, he had been able to blind even the penetration
of Elizabeth, and conceal from her the great defects, or rather odious vices,
which attended his character. He was proud, insolent, interested, ambitious;
without honor, without generosity, without humanity; and attoned not for these
bad qualities, by any such abilities or courage, as could fit him for that high
trust and confidence with which she always honored him. Her constant and
declared attachment to him had very naturally emboldened him to aspire to her
bed; and in order to make way for these nuptials, he was universally believed
to have murdered, in a barbarous manner, his wife, the heiress of one Robesart.
The proposal of espousing Mary was by no means agreeable to him; and he always
ascribed it to the contrivance of Cecil, his enemy; who intended by that
artifice to make him lose the friendship of Mary from the temerity of his
pretensions, and that of Elizabeth from jealousy of his attachments to another
woman Camden, p. 396.
. The Queen herself had not any serious intention of effecting this marriage;
but, as she was desirous, that the Queen of Scots should never take any
husband, she named a man, who, she believed, was not likely to be accepted of;
and she hoped, by that means, to gain time, and elude the project of any other
alliance. The earl of Leicester was too great a favorite to be parted with;
and when Mary, allured by the prospect of being declared successor to the
crown, seemed at last to hearken to Elizabeth's proposal, this princess receded
from her former offers, and withdrew the bait, which she had formerly thrown
out to her rival Keith, p. 269, 270. Appendix, p. 1^8. Strype, vol. I. p. (...).
. This duplicity of conduct, joined to some appearance of an imperious
superiority, assumed by her, had drawn a peevish letter from Mary; and the
seemingly amicable correspondence of the two Queens was during some time
interrupted. In order to make up this breach, the Queen of Scots dispatched Sir
James Melvil to London; who has given us a very particular account of this
negotiation.

MELVIL was an agreeable courtier, a man of address and conversation; and it
was recommended to him by his mistress, that, besides grave reasonings
concerning politics and state affairs, he should introduce more entertaining
topics of conversation, suitable to the sprightly character of Elizabeth; and
should endeavor by that means to insinuate himself into her confidence. He
succeeded so well, that he threw that artful princess entirely off her guard
Haynes, p. 447.
, and brought her to discover the bottom of her heart, full of all those
levities and follies and ideas of rivalship, which possess the youngest and
most frivolous of her sex. He talked to her of his travels, and forgot not to
mention the different dresses of the ladies in different countries, and the
particular advantages of each, in setting off the beauties of the shape and
person. The Queen said that she had dresses of all countries, and she took care
thenceforth to meet the ambassador every day apparelled in a different habit:
Sometimes she was dressed in the English garb, sometimes in the French,
sometimes in the Italian; and she asked him, which of them became her most. He
answered, the Italian; a reply, that he knew would be agreeable to her, because
that mode showed her flowing locks, which, he remarked, though they were more red
than yellow, she fancied to be the finest in the world. She desired to know of
him what was reputed the best color of hair: She asked whether his Queen's
hair or hers was best: She even enquired which of them he esteemed the fairest
person: A very delicate question, and which he prudently eluded, by saying that
her majesty was the fairest person in England, and his mistress in Scotland.
She next demanded which of them was tallest: He replied, his queen: Then, said
Elizabeth, she is too tall: For I myself am of a just stature. Having learned
from him, that his mistress sometimes recreated herself by playing on the
harpsicord, an instrument at which she herself excelled, she gave orders to
lord Hunsdon, that he should lead him, as it were casually, into an apartment,
where he might hear her performance; and when Melvil, as if ravished with the
harmony, broke into the Queen's apartment, she pretended to be displeased at
his intrusion; but still took care to ask whether he thought Mary or her the
best performer on that instrument Melvil, p. ^9, (...).
. From the whole of her behavior, Melvil thought he might, on his return,
assure his mistress that she had no reason ever to expect any cordial
friendship from Elizabeth, and that all her professions of amity were full of
falsehood and dissimulation.

AFTER two years had been spent in evasions and artifices Keith, p. (...).
, Mary's subjects and counselors, and probably herself, began to think it full
time that some alliance were concluded; and the lord Darnley, son to the earl
of Lenox, was the person, in whom most men's opinions and wishes centered. He
was Mary's cousingerman, by the lady Margaret Douglas, niece to Harry the
eighth, and daughter to the earl of Angus, by Margaret, Queen of Scotland. He
had been born and educated in England, where the earl of Lenox had constantly
resided, ever since he had been banished by the prevalence of the house of
Hamilton; and as Darnley was now in his twentieth year, and was a very comely
person, tall and delicately shaped, it was hoped, that he might soon render
himself agreeable to the Queen of Scots. He was also by his father a branch of
the same family with herself; and would, in espousing her, preserve the royal
dignity in the house of Stuart: He was, after her, next heir to the crown of
England; and those who pretended to exclude her on account of her being a
foreigner, had endeavored to recommend his title, and give it the preference.
It seemed no inconsiderable advantage, that she could, by marrying him, unite
both their claims; and as he was by birth an Englishman, and could not by his
power or alliances give any ground of suspicion to Elizabeth, it was hoped that
the proposal of this marriage would not be unacceptable to that jealous
princess.

ELIZABETH was well informed of these intentions of the court of Edinburgh
Keith, p. 261.
; and was secretly not displeased with the projected marriage between Darnley
and the Queen of Scots Keith, p. 280, 282. Jebb, vol. II. p. 46.
. She would rather have wished, that Mary had continued for ever in a single
life; but finding little probability of rendering this scheme effectual, she
was satisfied with a choice, which freed her at once from the dread of a
foreign alliance, and from the necessity of parting with Leicester, her
favorite. In order to pave the way to Darnley's marriage, she secretly desired
Mary to invite Lenox into Scotland, to reverse his attainder, and to restore
him to his honors and fortune Keith, p. 2^^. 259, 272.
. And when her request was complied with, she took care, in order to preserve
the friendship of the Hamiltons and her other partisans in Scotland, to blame
openly this conduct of Mary Melvil, p. 42.
. 28th July.
and, though it was impossible for her to assign one single reason of her
displeasure Keith, p. 274, 275.
, she menaced, and protested, and complained, as if she had suffered the most
grievous injury in the world.

THE politics of Elizabeth, though judicious, were usually full of duplicity and
artifice; but never more so than in her transactions with the Queen of Scots,
where there entered so many little passions and narrow jealousies, that she
du^st not avow to the world the reasons of her conduct, scarcely to her
ministers, and scarcely even to herself. But besides a womanish rivalship and
envy against the marriage of this princess, she had some motives of interest
for feigning a displeasure on the present occasion. It served her as a pretense
for refusing to acknowledge Mary's title to the succession of England; a point
to which she was determined never to consent. And it was useful to her for a
purpose, still more unfriendly and dangerous, for encouraging the discontents
and rebellion of the Scotch nobility and ecclesiastics Keith, p. 290.
.

NOTHING can be more unhappy for a people than to be governed by a sovereign,
who is attached to a religion different from that which is established; and it
is scarce possible, that a mutual confidence can ever, in such a situation,
have place between the prince and his subjects. Mary's conduct had been
hitherto, in every respect, unexceptionable, and even laudable; yet had she not
made such progress in acquiring popularity, as might have been expected from
her gracious deportment and agreeable accomplishments. Suspicions every moment
prevailed on account of her attachment to the catholic faith, and especially to
her uncles, the open and avowed promoters of the scheme for exterminating the
professors of the reformed religion throughout all Europe. She still refused to
ratify the acts of Parliament, which had established the reformation; she made
attempts for restoring to the catholic bishops some part of their civil
jurisdiction Spotswood, p. 198.
; and she wrote a letter to the council of Trent, in which, besides professing
her attachment to the catholic faith, she took notice of her title to succeed
to the crown of England, and expressed her hopes of being able, in some period,
to bring back all her dominions to the bosom of the church Father Paul, lib.
VII.
. The zealots among the protestants were not wanting, in their turn, to
practice insults upon her, which tended still more to alienate her from their
faith. A law was enacted, making it capital, even on the first offense, to say
mass any where, except in the Queen's chapel Keith, p 268.
; and it was with great difficulty that this small indulgence was granted her:
The general assembly importuned her anew to change her religion, to renounce
the blasphemous idolatry of the mass, with the tyranny of the Roman Antichrist,
and to embrace the true religion of Christ Jesus Keith, p. 545. Knox, p. 37^.
. As she answered with temper, that she was not yet convinced of the falsehood
of her religion or the impiety of the mass; and that her apostasy would lose
her the friendship of her allies on the continent; they replied, by assuring
her, that their religion was undoubtedly the same which had been revealed by
Jesus Christ, which had been preached by the apostles, and which had been
embraced by the faithful in the primitive ages; that neither the religion of
Turks, Jews, nor Papists was built on so solid a foundation as theirs; that
they alone, of all the various species of religionists spread over the face of
the earth, were so happy as to be possessed of the truth; that those who hear,
or rather who gaze on the mass, allow sacrilege, pronounce blasphemy, and
commit most abominable idolatry; and that the friendship of the King of kings
was preferable to all the confederacies and alliances in the world Keith* 550,
551.
.

The Queen of Scots marries the earl of Darnley.
THE marriage of the Queen of Scots had kindled afresh the zeal of the
reformers, because the family of Lenox was believed to adhere to the catholic
faith; and though Darnley, who now bore the name of King Henry, went often to the
established church, he could not, by this exterior compliance, gain the
confidence and regard of the ecclesiastics. They rather laid hold of this
opportunity to insult him to his face; and Knox scrupled not to tell him from
the pulpit, that God, for punishment of the offenses and ingratitude of the
people, was wont to commit the rule over them to boys and women Ibid. p. 546.
Knox, p. 381.
. The populace of Edinburgh, instigated by such doctrine, began to meet and to
associate themselves against the government Knox, p. 377.
. But what threatened with more immediate danger Mary's authority, were the
discontents which prevailed among some of the principal nobility.

THE duke of Chatelrault was displeased with the restoration, and still more
with the aggrandizement, of the family of Lenox, his hereditary enemies; and
entertained fears lest his eventual succession to the crown of Scotland should
be excluded by his rival, who had formerly advanced some pretensions to it. The
earl of Murray found his credit at court much diminished by the interest of
Lenox, and his son; and began to apprehend the revocation of some considerable
grants which he had obtained from Mary's liberality. The earls of Argyle,
Rothes, and Glencairne, the lords Boyde and Ochiltry, Kirkaldy of Grange,
Pittarow, were instigated by like motives; and as these were the persons who
had most zealously promoted the reformation, they were disgusted to find that
the Queen's favor was entirely engrossed by a new cabal, the earls of Bothwel,
Athole, Sutherland, and Huntley; men who were esteemed either lukewarm in
religious controversy, or inclined to the catholic party. The same ground of
discontent, which, in other courts, is the source of intrigue, faction, and
opposition, commonly produced in Scotland, either projects of assassination, or
of rebellion; and besides mutual accusations of the former kind, which it is
difficult to clear up It appears, however, from Randolf's ^etter. Keith, p 290,
that some others had been made to that minister, of seizing Lenox and Darnley,
and delivering them into Queen Elizabeth's h^^d. Mol* vil confirms the same
story, and says that the design wa^ acknowledged by the (...) This serves to
justify the account given by the Queen' party of the Raid of B^ith, (...). See
farther Goodall; vol. II. p. 358. The other conspiracy, of which Murray
complained, ^ made more uncertain, and is founded on very doubtful evidence.
, the discontented lords, as soon as they saw the Queen's marriage entirely
resolved on, entered into a confederacy for taking arms against their
sovereign. They met at Stirling; pretended an anxious concern for the security
of religion; framed engagements for mutual defense; and made applications to
Elizabeth for assistance and protection Keith, p. 293, 29^, 300, ^01.
. That princess, after publishing the expressions of her displeasure against
the marriage, had secretly ordered her ambassadors Randolf and Throcmorton, to
give in her name some promises of support to the malcontents; and had even
sent them a supply of ten thousand pounds, to enable them to begin their
insurrection Knox, p. 380. Keith, Appen. p. 16^ Anderson, vol. III. p. 191.
.

MARY was no sooner informed of the meeting at Stirling, and the movements of
the lords, than she summoned them to appear at court, in order to answer for
their conduct; and having levied some forces to execute the laws, she obliged
the malcontents to leave the low country, and take shelter in Argyleshire.
That she might more effectually cut off all their resources, she proceeded with
the King to Glasgow, and forced them from their retreat. They appeared at
Paisly in the neighborhood with about a thousand horse; and passing the
Queen's army, proceeded to Hamilton, and thence to Edinburgh, which they
entered without resistance. They expected great reinforcements in this place,
from the efforts of Knox and the seditious preachers; and they beat their
drums, desiring all men to enlist, and receive wages for the defense of God's
glory Knox. p. ^81.
. But the nation was in no disposition for rebellion: Mary was esteemed and
beloved: Her marriage was not generally disagreeable to the people: And the
interested views of the malecontent lords were so well known, that their
pretense of zeal for religion had little influence even on the ignorant
populace Ibid. ^8, 38^.
. The King and Queen advanced to Edinburgh at the head of their army: The
insurgents were obliged to retire into the south; and being pursued by a force
which now amounted to eighteen thousand men Ibid. (...)
, they found themselves under a necessity of abandoning their country, and of
taking shelter in England.

ELIZABETH, when she found the event so much to disappoint her expectations,
thought proper to disown all connections with the Scotch malcontents, and to
declare every where, that she had never given them any encouragement, or any
promise of countenance or assistance. She even carried farther her
dissimulation and hypocrisy. Murray had come to London, with the abbot of
Kilwinning, agent for Chatelrault; and she seduced them, by secret assurances
of protection, to declare, before the ambassadors of France and Spain, that she
had no-wise contributed to their insurrection. No sooner had she extorted this
confession from them, than she chased them from her presence, called them
unworthy traitors, declared that their detestable rebellion was of bad example
to all princes, and assured them, that as she had hitherto given them no
encouragement, so they should never thenceforth receive from her any assistance
or protection Melvil, p. 57. Knox, p. 388. Keith, p. 319. Crawford, p. 62, 63.
. Throcmorton alone, whose honor was equal to his abilities, could not be
prevailed on to conceal the part which he had acted in the enterprise of the
Scotch insurgents; and being well apprised of the usual character and conduct
of Elizabeth, he had had the precaution to obtain an order of council to
authorize the engagements which he had been obliged to take with them Melvil,
p. 60.
.

THE banished lords, finding themselves so ill used by Elizabeth, had recourse
to the clemency of their sovereign; and after some solicitation, and some
professions of sincere repentance, the duke of Chatelrault obtained his pardon,
on condition that he should retire into France. Mary was more implacable
against the ungrateful earl of Murray, and the other confederates, on whom she
threw the chief blame of the enterprise; but as she was continually plied with
applications from their friends, and as some of her most judicious partisans in
England thought, that nothing would more promote her interests in that kingdom,
than the gentle treatment of men so celebrated for their zeal against the
catholic religion; she agreed to give way to her natural temper, which inclined
not to severity, and she seemed determined to restore them to her favor Ibid.
p. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63. Keith, p. 322.
. In this interval, Rambouillet arrived as ambassador from France, and brought
her advice from her uncle, the cardinal of Lorraine, to whose opinion she
always paid an extreme deference, by no means to pardon these protestant
leaders, who had been engaged in a rebellion against her Keith, p. 325. Melvil,
p. 63.
.

THE two religions, in France, as well as in other parts of Europe, were rather
irritated than satiated with their mutual violences; and the peace granted to
the ^ugonots, as had been foreseen by the admiral, was intended only to lull
them asleep, and prepare the way for their final and absolute destruction. The
Queen-regent made a pretense of traveling through the kingdom, in order to visit
the provinces, and correct all the abuses arising from the late war; and after
having held some conferences on the frontiers with the duke of Lorraine, and
the duke of Savoy, she came to Bayonne, where she was met by her daughter, the
Queen of Spain, and the duke of Alva. Nothing appeared in the congress of these
two splendid courts, but gaity, festivity, love, and joy; but amidst these
smiling appearances were secretly fabricated schemes the most bloody, and the
most destructive to the repose of mankind, which had ever been thought of in
any age or nation. No less than a total and universal extermination of the
protestants by fire and sword, was concerted by Philip and Catherine of
Medicis; and Alva, agreeable to his fierce and sanguinary disposition, advised
the Queen-regent to commence the execution of this project, by the immediate
massacre of all the leaders of the Hugonots ^^^vila, lib. iii.
. But that princess, though equally hardened against every humane sentiment,
would not forego this opportunity of displaying her wit and refined politics;
and she proposed, rather by treachery and dissimulation, which she called
address, to lead the Protestants into the snare, and never to draw the sword
till they were totally disabled from resistance. Confederacy against the
protestants.
The cardinal of Lorraine, whose character bore a greater affinity to that of
Alva, was a chief author of this barbarous association against the reformers;
and having connected his prospect of success with the aggrandizement of his
niece, the Queen of Scots, he took care that her measures should agree with
those violent councils, which were embraced by the other catholic princes. It
is not probable It is, however, positively affirmed by Randolf, the (...),
Appen p. 1^^.
, that he entrusted the depth of this dangerous secret with that young
princess; but he had acquired such authority over her, that he turned her from
the road of clemency, which she intended to have followed, and made her resolve
on the total ruin of the banished lords Melvil, p 65.
.

THE marriage of the Queen of Scots with lord Darnley was so natural, and so
inviting in all its circumstances, that it had been precipitantly agreed to by
that princess and her council; and while she was allured by his youth, and
beauty, and exterior accomplishments, she had at first overlooked the qualities
of his ^^ind, which no wise corresponded with the excellence of his outward
figure. Violent, yet variable in his enterprises; insolent, yet credulous and
easily governed by flatterers; he was devoid of all gratitude, because he
thought no favors equal to his merit; and being addicted to low pleasures, he
was equally incapable of all true sentiments of love and tenderness Keith, p.
287, 329. Appen. p. 163.
. The Queen of Scots, in the first effusions of her fondness, had taken a
pleasure in exalting him beyond measure: She had granted him the title of King;
she had joined his name with her own in all public acts; she intended to have
procured him from the states a matrimonial crown: But having leisure afterward
to remark his weakness and vices, she began to see the danger of her profuse
liberality, and was resolved thenceforth to proceed with more reserve in the
trust which she conferred upon him. His resentment against this prudent
conduct, served but the more to increase her disgust; and the young prince,
enraged at her imagined neglects, pointed his vengeance against every one whom
he esteemed the cause of this change in her measures and behavior.

Murder of Rizzio.
THERE was one David Rizzio in the court, who had of late obtained a very
extraordinary degree of confidence and favor with the Queen of Scots. He was a
Piedmontese, of mean birth, son to a teacher of music, himself a musician; and
finding it difficult to subsist by his art in his own country, he had followed
into Scotland an ambassador whom the duke of Savoy sent thither, to pay his
compliments to Mary, some time after her first arrival. He possessed a good
ear, and a tolerable voice; and as that princess found him useful to complete
her band of music, she retained him in her service after the departure of his
master. Her secretary for French dispatches having, some time after, fallen
under her displeasure, she promoted Rizzio to that office, which gave him
frequent opportunities of approaching her person, and insinuating himself into
her favor. He was shrewd and sensible, as well as aspiring, much beyond his
rank and education; and made so good use of the access which fortune had
procured him, that he was soon regarded as the chief confident and counselor
of the Queen. He was consulted on all occasions; no favors could be obtained
but by his intercession; all suitors were obliged to gain him by presents and
flattery; and the man, insolent from his new exaltation, as well as rapacious
in his acquisitions, soon drew on himself the hatred of the nobility, and of
the whole kingdom Keith, p. 282, 302. Crawford's Memoirs, p. (...) Spotswood,
p. 193.
. He had at first employed his credit to promote Darnley's marriage; and a firm
friendship seemed to be established between them: But on the subsequent change
of the Queen's sentiments, it was easy for Henry's friends to persuade him,
that Rizzio was the real author of her indifference, and even to rouse in his
mind jealousies of a more dangerous nature. The favorite was of a disagreeable
figure, but was not past his youth (...) he was ugly; but it may be in^^^^ed,
from the (...) of that author. (...). He (...) that o^ the return o^ the (...)
Savoy to (...), in the (...) of youth. Now that (...)
; and though the opinion of his criminal correspondence with Mary might seem of
itself unreasonable, if not absurd, a suspicious husband could find no other
means of accounting for that lavish and imprudent kindness, with which she
honored him. The rigid austerity of the ecclesiastics, who could admit of no
freedoms, contributed to spread this opinion among the people; and as Rizzio
was universally believed to be a pensionary of the pope, and to be deeply
engaged in all schemes against the protestants, any story to his and Mary's
disadvantage, received an easy credit among the zealots of that communion.

RIZZIO, who had connected his interest with the Roman catholics, was the
declared enemy of the banished lords; and by promoting the violent prosecution
against them, had exposed himself to the animosity of their numerous friends
and retainers. A scheme was also thought to be formed for revoking some
exorbitant grants made during the Queen's minority; and even the nobility, who
had seized the ecclesiastical benefices, began to think themselves less secure
in the possession of them Keith, p 3^6. Melvil, p. 64.
. The earl of Morton, chancellor, was affected by all these considerations, and
still more by a rumor spread abroad, that Mary intended to appoint Rizzio
chancellor in his place, and to bestow that dignity on a mean and upstart
foreigner, who was ignorant of the laws and language of the country (...) xvii.
(...) Crawford, p 6. (...) p 19^. Knox, p. 393. Jebb* vol (...) p (...).
. So indiscreet had this princess been in her kindness to Rizzio, that even
that strange report met with credit, and proved a great means of accelerating
the ruin of the favorite. Morton, insinuating himself into Henry's confidence,
employed all his art to inflame the discontent and jealousy of that prince; and
he persuaded him, that the only means of freeing himself from the indignities
under which he labored, was to bring the base stranger to that fate which he
had so well merited, and which was so passionately desired by the whole nation.
George Douglas, natural brother to the countess of Lenox, concurred in the same
advice; and the lords Ruthven and Lindesey, being consulted, offered their
concurrence in the enterprise; nor was even the earl of Lenox, the King's
father, averse to the design Crawford p. 7.
. But as these conspirators were well acquainted with Henry's levity, they
engaged him to sign a paper, in which he avowed the undertaking, and promised
to protect them against every consequence which might ensue upon the
assassination of Rizzio Goo^^^, vol. I. p. 26^. Crawford, p. 7.
. All these measures being fully concerted, a messenger was dispatched to the
banished lords, who were hovering near the borders; and they were invited by
the King to return to their native country.

9th March.
THIS design, so atrocious in itself, was rendered still more so by the
circumstances which attended its execution. Mary, who was in the seventh month
of her pregnancy, was supping in private, and had at table the countess of
Argyle, her natural sister, with Rizzio, and others of her servants. The King
entered the room by a private passage, and stood at the back of Mary's chair:
The lord Ruthven, George Douglas, and other conspirators, being all armed,
rushed in after him; and the Queen of Scots, terrified with the appearance,
demanded of them the reason of this rude intrusion. They told her, that they
intended no violence against her person; but meant only to bring that villain,
pointing at Rizzio, to his deserved punishment. Rizzio, aware of the danger,
ran behind his mistress, and seizing her by the waist, called aloud to her for
protection; while she interposed in his behalf, with cries, and menaces, and
entreaties. The impatient assassins, regardless of her efforts, rushed upon
their prey, and by overturning every thing which stood in their way, increased
the horror and confusion of the scene. Douglas, seizing Henry's dagger, stuck
it in the body of Rizzio, who, screaming with fear and agony, was torn from
Mary by the other conspirators, and pushed into the antichamber, where he was
dispatched with fifty-six wounds Melvil, p. 64. Keith, p. 330, 331. Crawford,
p. 9.
. The unhappy princess, informed of his fate, immediately dried her tears, and
said, she would weep no more; she would now think of revenge. The insult,
indeed, upon her person; the stain attempted to be fixed on her honor; the
danger to which her life was exposed, on account of her pregnancy; were
injuries so atrocious, and so complicated, that they scarce left room for
pardon, even from the greatest lenity and mercy.

THE assassins, apprehensive of Mary's resentment, detained her a prisoner in
the palace; and the King dismissed all those who seemed willing to attempt her
rescue, by telling them, that nothing was done without his orders, and that he
would be careful of the Queen's safety. Murray, and the banished lords,
appeared two days after; and Mary, whose anger was now engrossed by injuries
more recent and violent, was willingly reconciled to them; and she even
received her brother with tenderness and affection. They obtained an acquital
from the Parliament, and were re-instated in their honors and fortunes. The
accomplices also in Rizzio's murder applied to her for a pardon; but she
artfully delayed compliance, and persuaded them, that so long as she was
detained in custody, and was surrounded by guards, any deed which she should
sign, would have no force nor validity. Mean while she had gained the
confidence of her husband, by her persuasion and caresses; and no sooner were
the guards withdrawn, than she engaged him to escape with her in the night
time, and take shelter in Dunbar. Many of her subjects here offered her their
assistance; and Mary, having collected an army, which the conspirators had no
power to resist, advanced to Edinburgh, and obliged them of fly into England,
where they lived in great poverty and distress. They made applications,
however, to the earl of Bothwel, a new favorite of Mary's; and that nobleman,
desirous to strengthen his party by the accession of their interest, was able
to pacify her resentment, and he soon after procured them liberty to return
into their own country Melvil, p. 75, 76. Keith, p. 33^. Knox, p. 398.
.

THE vengeance of the Queen of Scots was implacable against her husband alone,
whose person was before disagreeable to her, and who, by his violation of every
tie of gratitude and duty, had drawn on him her highest resentment. She engaged
him to disown all connections with the assassins, to deny any concurrence in
their crime, even to publish a proclamation containing a falsehood so notorious
to the whole world Goodall, vol. I. p. 280. Keith, Appen. p. 167.
; and having thus made him expose himself to universal contempt, and rendered
it impracticable for him ever aster to acquire the confidence of any party, she
threw him off with disdain and indignation Melvil, p. 66, 67.
. As if she had been making an escape from him, she suddenly withdrew to Alloa,
a seat of the earl of Mar; and when Henry followed her thither, she returned
suddenly to Edinburgh; and gave him every where the strongest proofs of
displeasure, and even of antipathy. She encouraged her courtiers in their
neglect of him; and she was pleased, that his mean equipage, and small train of
attendants, should draw on him the contempt of the very populace. He was
permitted, however, to have apartments in the castle of Edinburgh, which Mary
had chosen for the place of her delivery. 19th June.
She was there delivered of a son; and as this was very important news to
England, as well as to Scotland, she immediately dispatched Sir James Melvil to
carry intelligence of the happy event to Elizabeth. Melvil tells us, that that
princess, the evening of his arrival in London, had given a ball to her court
at Greenwich, and was displaying all that spirit and alac^ity which usually
attended her on these occasions: But when the prince of Scotland's birth was
notified to her, all her joy was damped: She sunk into melancholy; she reclined
her head upon her arm; and complained to-some of her attendants, that the Queen
of Scots was mother of a fair son, while she was but a barren stock. Next day,
however, on the reception of the Scotch ambassador, she assumed her former
dissimulation, put on a joyful countenance, gave Melvil thanks for the haste he
had made in conveying to her the agreeable intelligence, and expressed the
utmost cordiality and friendship to her sister Melvil, p. 69, 70.
. Some time after, she dispatched the earl of Bedford, with her relation,
George Carry, son to the lord Hunsdon, in order to officiate at the baptism of
the young prince; and she sent by them some magnificent presents to the Queen
of Scots.

THE birth of a son gave additional zeal to Mary's partisans in England Camden,
p. ^^^.
; and even men of all parties began to cry aloud for some settlement of the
succession. 3^th September.
A Parliament.
These humors broke out with great vehemence in a new session of Parliament,
which was held after six prorogations. The house of peers, which had hitherto
forborne to touch on the delicate point of the succession, here took the lead;
and the house of commons soon after imitated the zeal of the lords. Molineux
opened the matter in the lower house, and proposed that the question of the
succession and that of supply should go hand in hand; as if it were intended to
constrain the Queen to a compliance with the request of her Parliament D'Ewes,
p. 179.
. The courtiers endeavored to elude the debate: Sir Ralph Sadler told the
house, that he had heard the Queen positively affirm, that, for the good of her
people, she was determined to marry. Secretary Cecil and Sir Francis Knollys
gave their testimony to the same purpose; as did also Sir Ambrose Cave,
chancellor of the duchy, and Sir Edward Rogers, comptroler of the household
Ibid. p. 12^.
. Elizabeth's ambitious and masculine character was so well known, that few
members gave any credit to this intelligence; and it was considered merely as
an artifice, by which she endeavored to retract that positive affirmation,
which she had made in the beginning of her reign, that she meant to live and
die a virgin. The ministers therefore gained nothing farther by this piece of
policy, but only to engage the house, for the sake of decency, to join the
question of the Queen's marriage with that of a settlement of the crown; and
they were proceeding with great earnestness in the debate, and had even
appointed a committee to confer with the lords, when express orders were
brought them from Elizabeth not to proceed farther in that matter. Cecil told
them, that she pledged to the house the word of a Queen for her sincerity in
her intentions to marry; that the appointment of a successor would be attended
with great danger to her person; that she herself had bad experience, during
the reign of her sister, how much court was paid to the next heir, and what
dangerous sacrifices men were commonly disposed to make of their present duty
to their future prospects; and that she was therefore determined to delay, till
a more proper opportunity, the decision of that important question D'Ewes, p.
127, 128.
. The house were not satisfied with these reasons, and still less with the
command, prohibiting them all debate on that subject. Paul Wentworth, a
spirited member, went so far as to question whether such a prohibition were not
an infringement of the liberties and privileges of the house Ibid. p. 128.
. Some even ventured to violate that profound respect which they had hitherto
preserved to the Queen; and affirmed that she was bound in duty, not only to
provide for the happiness of her subjects during her own life, but also to pay
regard to their future security, by fixing a successor; that by fixing a
successor; that by a contrary conduct, she showed herself the stepmother, not
the natural parent, of her people, and would seem desirous, that England should
no longer subsist than she should enjoy the glory and satisfaction of governing
it; that none but timorous princes, or tyrants, or faint hearted women, ever
stood in fear of their successors; and that the affections of the people were a
firm and impregnable rampart to every sovereign, who, laying aside all artifice
or by ends, had courage and magnanimity to put his sole trust in that
honorable and sure defense Camden, p. 400.
. The Queen, hearing of these debates, sent for the speaker, and after
reiterating her former prohibition, she bid him inform the house, that, if any
member remained still unsatisfied, he might appear before the privy council,
and there give his reasons D'Ewes, p. 128.
. As the members showed a disposition, notwithstanding these peremptory orders,
still to proceed upon the question, Elizabeth thought proper, by a message, to
revoke them, and to allow the house liberty of debate Ibid. p. 130.
. They were so mollified by this gracious condescension, that they thenceforth
conducted the matter with more calmness and temper; and they even voted her a
supply, to be levied at three payments, of a subsidy and a fifteenth, without
annexing any condition to it. 2^ January.
The Queen soon after dissolved the Parliament, and told them with some
sharpness in the conclusion, that their proceedings had contained much
dissimulation and artifice; that under the plausible pretenses of marriage and
succession, many of them covered very malevolent intentions to wards her; but
that, however, she reaped this advantage from their attempts, that she could
now distinguish her friends from her enemies. "But do you think," added she,
"that I am unmindful of your future security, or will be negligent in settling
the succession? That is the chief object of my concern; as I know myself to be
liable to mortality. Or do you apprehend, that I meant to incroach on your
liberties? No: It was never my meaning: I only intended to stop you before you
approached the precipice. All things have their time; and though you may be
blessed with a sovereign more wise or more learned than I, yet I assure you,
that no one will ever rule over you, who shall be more careful of your safety.
And therefore, henceforward, whether I live to see the like assembly or no, or
whoever holds the reins of government, let me warn you to beware of provoking
your sovereign's patience, so far as you have done mine. But I shall now
conclude, notwithstanding the disgusts I have received (for I mean not to part
with you in anger) that the greatest part of you may assure themselves that
they go home in their prince's good graces D'Ewes, p. 116, 117.
."

ELIZABETH carried farther her dignity on this occasion. She had received the
subsidy without any condition; but as it was believed, that the commons had
given her that gratuity with a view of engaging her to yield to their requests,
she thought proper, on her refusal, to remit voluntarily the third payment; and
she said, that money in her subjects purses was as good as in her own exchequer
Camden, p. 400.
.

BUT though the Queen was able to elude, for the present, the applications of
Parliament, the friends of the Queen of Scots multiplied every day in England;
and besides the catholics, many of whom kept treasonable correspondence with
her, and were ready to rise at her command Haynes, p. 446, 448.
, the court itself of Elizabeth was full of her avowed partisans. The duke of
Norfolk, the earls of Leicester, Pembroke, Bedford, Northumberland, Sir
Nicholas Throcmorton, and most of the considerable men in England, except
Cecil, seemed convinced of the necessity of declaring her the successor. None
but the more zealous protestants adhered either to the countess of Hartford, or
to her younger sister, Eleanor, who had espoused the earl of Cumberland; and as
the marriage of the former seemed liable to some objections, and had been
declared invalid, men were alarmed, even on that side, with the prospect of new
disputes concerning the succession. Mary's behavior also, so moderate toward
the protestants, and so gracious toward all men, had procured her universal
respect Melvin, p. 53, 61, 74.
; and the public was willing to ascribe any imprudences, into which she had
fallen, to her youth and inexperience. But all these slattering prospects were
blasted by the subsequent incidents, where her egregious indiscretions, shall I
say, or atrocious crimes, threw her from the height of her prosperity, and
involved her in infamy and ruin.

THE earl of Bothwel was of a considerable family and power in Scotland; and
though not distinguished by any talents either of a civil or military nature, he
had made a figure in that party, which opposed the greatness of the earl of
Murray, and the more rigid reformers. Murder of Darnley.
He was a man of profligate manners; had involved his opulent fortune in great
debts, and even reduced himself to beggary, by his profuse expenses Keith, p.
240.
; and seemed to have no resource but in desperate councils and enterprises. He
had been accused more than once of an attempt to assassinate Murray; and
notwithstanding that the frequency of these accusations on all sides diminish
somewhat the credit due to any particular imputation, they prove sufficiently
the prevalence of that detestable practice in Scotland, and may in that view
serve to render such rumors the more likely and credible. This man had of late
acquired the favor and entire confidence of Mary; and all her measures were
directed by his advice and authority. Reports were spread of more particular
intimacies and familiarities between them; and these reports gained ground from
the continuance or rather increase of her hatred toward her husband Melvil, p.
66, 77.
. That young prince was reduced to such a state of desperation, by the neglects
which he underwent from his Queen and the courtiers, that he had once resolved
to fly secretly into France or Spain, and had even provided himself of a vessel
for that purpose Keith, p. 345-348.
. Some of the most considerable nobility, on the other hand, observing her
fixed aversion to him, had proposed some expedients for a divorce; and though
Mary is said to have spoke honorably on that occasion, and to have embraced
the proposal no farther than it should be found consistent with her own honor
and her son's legitimacy Camden, p. 404. Goodal's. Queen Mary, vol II p. 317.
, men were inclined to believe, that the difficulty of finding proper means for
effectuating that purpose, was the real cause of laying aside all farther
thoughts of it. So far were the suspicions against her carried, that, when
Henry, discouraged with the continual proofs of her hatred, left the court and
retired to Glasgow, an illness of an extraordinary nature, with which he was
seized immediately on his arrival in that place, was universally ascribed by
her enemies to a dose of poison, which, it was pretended, she had administered
to him.

WHILE affairs were on this footing, all those who wished well to her character
or the repose of their country, were extremely pleased, and somewhat surprised,
to hear, that a friendship was again conciliated between them, that she had
taken a journey to Glasgow on purpose to visit him during his sickness, that
she behaved toward him with great tenderness, that she had brought him along
with her, and that she appeared thenceforth determined to live with him on a
sooting more suitable to the connexions between them. Henry, naturally
uxorious, and not mistrusting this sudden reconcilement, put himself implicitly
into her hands, and attended her to Edinburgh. She lived in the palace of
Holy-rood-house; but as the situation of that place was low, and the concourse
of persons about the court was necessarily attended with noise, which might
disturb him in his present infirm state of health, these reasons were assigned
for fitting up an apartment for him in a solitary house, at some distance,
called the Kirk of Field. Mary here gave him marks of kindness and attachment;
she conversed cordially with him; and she lay some nights in a room below his;
but on the ninth of February, she told him, that she would pass that night in
the palace, because the marriage of one of her servants was there to be
celebrated in her presence. 10th February.
About two o'clock in the morning the whole town was much alarmed at hearing a
great noise; and were still more astonished, when it was discovered, that the
noise came from the King's house, which was blown up by gunpowder; that his
dead body was found at some distance in a neighboring field; and that no marks
either of fire, contusion or violence appeared upon it It was imagined, that
Henry had been strangled before the house was blown up: But this supposition is
contradicted by the confession of the criminals; and there is no necessity to
admit it in order to account for the condition of his body. There are many
instances that men's lives have been saved who have been blown up in ships. Had
Henry fallen on water he had not probably been killed.
.

NO doubt could be entertained but Henry was murdered; and the general
conjecture soon pointed toward the earl of Bothwel as the author of that crime
Melvil, p. ^8. Cabbala, p. 136.
. But as his favor with Mary was open and visible, and his power great, no one
ventured to declare openly his sentiments, and all men remained in silence and
mute astonishment. Voices, however, were heard in the streets, during the
darkness of the night, proclaiming Bothwel, and even Mary herself, to be the
murderers of the King; placards were secretly affixed to the same purpose;
offers were made, that, upon giving proper securities, his guilt should be
openly proved: But after one proclamation from the court, offering a reward and
indemnity to any one that would discover the author of that villainy, greater
vigilance was employed in searching out the spreaders of the libels and reports
against Bothwel, and the Queen, than in tracing the causes of the King's
murder, or detecting the regicides Anderson's Collections, vol. II. p. 38. vol.
IV. p. 167, 168. Spotswood, p. 200. Keith, p. 374.
.

THE earl of Lenox, who lived at a distance from the court, in poverty and
contempt, was rouzed by the report of his son's murder, and wrote to the Queen,
imploring speedy justice against the assassins; among whom he named the earl of
Bothwel, Sir James Balfour and Gilbert Balfour his brother, David Chalmers, and
four others of the Queen's household; all of them persons, who had been
mentioned in the placards affixed on the walls at Edinburgh Keith, p. 372.
Anderson, vol. II. p. 3.
. Mary took his demand of speedy justice in a very literal sense; and allowing
only fifteen days for the examination of this important affair, she sent a
citation to Lenox, requiring him to appear in court, and prove his charge
against Bothwel Keith, p. 373.
. This nobleman, meanwhile, and all the other persons, accused by Lenox,
enjoyed their full liberty Ibid. p. 374, 375.
; Bothwel himself was continually surrounded with armed men Ibid. p. 405.
; took his place in council Anderson, vol. I. p. 38, 40, 50, 52.
; lived during some time in the house with Mary Ibid. vol. II. p. 274.
; and seemed to possess all his wonted confidence and familiarity with her.
Even the castle of Edinburgh, a place of great consequence, in this critical
time, was entrusted to his creature, Sir James Balfour, who had himself been
publicly charged as an accomplice in the King's murder Spotswood, p. 201.
. Lenox, who had come as far as Stirling, with a view of appearing at the
trial, was informed of all these circumstances; and reflecting on the small
train, which attended him, he began to entertain very just apprehensions from
the power, insolence, and temerity of his enemy. He wrote to Mary, desiring
that the day of trial might be prorogued; and conjured her, by all the regard
which she bore to her own honor, to employ more leisure and deliberation in
determining a question of such extreme moment Keith, p. 375. Anderson, vol. I.
p. 52.
. No regard was paid to his application: The jury was enclosed, of which the
earl of Caithness was chancellor; and though Lenox, foreseeing the precipitation,
had ordered Cunningham, one of his retinue, to appear in court, and protest, in
his name, against the acquital of the criminal, the jury proceeded to a
sentence Keith, p. 376. Anderson, vol. II. p. 106 Spotswood, p. 201.
. 12th April.
The sentence was such as it behoved them to give, where neither accuser nor
witness appeared; and Bothwel was absolved from the King's murder. The jury,
however, apprehensive that their sentence would give great scandal, and perhaps
expose them afterward to some danger, entered a protest, in which they
represented the necessity of their proceedings Spotswood, p. 201. Anderson,
vol. I. p. 113.
. It is remarkable, that the indictment was laid against Bothwel for committing
the crime on the ninth of February, not the tenth, the real day on which Henry
was assassinated Keith, p 375. Anderson, vol. II. p. 93. Spotswood, p. 201.
. The interpretation generally put upon this error, too gross, it was thought,
to have proceeded from mistake, was, that the secret council, by whom Mary was
governed, not trusting entirely to precipitation, violence, and authority, had
provided this plea, by which they ensured, at all adventures, a plausible
pretense for acquitting Bothwel.

TWO days after this extraordinary transaction, a Parliament was held; and though
the sentence in favor of Bothwel was attended with such circumstances as
strongly confirmed, rather than diminished, the general opinion of his guilt,
he was the person chosen to carry the royal scepter on the first meeting of
that national assembly Keith, p. 78. Crawford, p. 14.
. In this Parliament, a rigorous act was made against those who set up
defamatory placards; but no notice was taken of the King's murder Keith, p.
380. The Queen, in order to gain the people, agreed to an act of Parliament,
which established the protestant religion; a concession which she could never
before be brought to make.
. The favor, which Mary openly bore to Bothwel, kept every one in awe; and the
effects of this terror appeared more plainly in another transaction, which
ensued immediately upon the dissolution of the Parliament. A bond or
association was framed; in which the subscribers, after relating the acquital
of Bothwel by a legal trial, and a farther offer, which he had made, to prove
his innocence by single combat, oblige themselves, in case any person should
afterward impute to him the King's murder, to support him with their whole
power against such calumniators. After this promise, which implied no great
assurance in Bothwel of his own innocence, the sub^cribers mentioned the
necessity of their Queen's marriage, in order to support the government, and
they recommended Bothwel to her as a husband Keith, p. 381.
. 24th April.
This paper was subscribed by all the considerable nobility there present. In a
country, divided by violent factions, such a concurrence in favor of one
nobleman, no wise distinguished above the rest, except by his flagitious
conduct, could never have been obtained, had not every one been certain, at
least firmly persuaded, that Mary was fully determined on this measure Mary
herself confessed, in her instructions to the ambassadors, which she sent to
France, tha^ Bothwel persuaded all the noblemen, that their application in
favor of his marriage was agre^able to her. Keith, p. 389. And^^son, vol. I.
p. 94. Murray afterward produced to Queen ^lizabeth's commissioners a paper
signed by Mary, by which she permitted them to make this application to her.
This permission was a sufficient declaration of her intentions, and was
es^eemed equivalent to a command. Anderson, vol. IV. p 59. They even asserted,
that the house, in which they met, w^^ surrounded with a^med men. ^oodal, vol.
II. p. 141.
. Nor would such a motive have sufficed to influence men, commonly so stubborn
and intractable, had they not been taken by surprise, been ignorant of each
others sentiments, and overawed by the present power of the court, and by the
apprehensions of farther violence, from persons so little governed by any rules
of honor and humanity. Even with all these circumstances, the subscription to
this paper may justly be regarded as a reproach to the nation.

THE subsequent measures of Bothwel were equally precipitant and audacious.
Mary having gone to Stirling to pay a visit to her son, he assembled a body of
eight hundred horse, under pretense of pursuing some robbers on the borders,
and having waylaid her on her return, he seized her person near Edinburgh, and
carried her to Dunbar, with an avowed design of forcing her to yield to his
purpose. 24th April.
Sir James Melvil, who was in her retinue, was carried along with her; and says
not, that he saw any signs of reluctance or constraint: He was even informed,
as he tells us, by one of Bothwel's officers, that the whole transaction was
managed in concert with her Melvil, p. 80.
. A woman, indeed, of that spirit and resolution, which is acknowledged to
belong to Mary, does not usually, on these occasions, give such marks of
opposition to real violence, as can appear any wise doubtful or ambiguous. Some
of the nobility, however, in order to put matters to farther trial, sent her a
private message; in which they told her, that, if in reality she lay under
force, they would use all their efforts to relieve her. Her answer was, that
she had indeed been carried to Dunbar by violence; but since her arrival had
been so well treated there, that she willingly remained with Bothwel Spotswood,
p. 202.
. No one gave themselves thenceforth any solicitude to relieve her from a
captivity, which they believed to have proceeded entirely from her own
approbation and connivance.

THIS unusual conduct was at first ascribed to Mary's sense of the infamy,
attending her purposed marriage; and her desire of finding some color to gloss
over the irregularity of her conduct. But a pardon given to Bothwel a few days
afterward, made the public carry somewhat farther their conjectures. In this
deed, Bothwel received a remission for the violence committed on the Queen's
person; and for all other crimes: A clause, by which the murder of the King was
indirectly pardoned. The rape was then conjectured to be only a contrivance of
these politicians, in order to afford a pretense for indirectly remitting a
crime, of which they durst not openly make any mention Anderson, vol. IV. part
2. p. 61.
.

THESE events passed with such rapidity, that men had no leisure to admire
sufficiently one incident, when they were surprised with a new one, equally
rare and uncommon. There still, however, remained one difficulty, which, it was
not easy to foresee, how the Queen and Bothwel, determined as they were to
execute their shameful purpose, could find expedients to overcome. The man, who
had procured the subscription of the nobility, recommending him as a husband to
the Queen, and who had acted this seeming violence on her person, in order to
force her consent, had been married six months before to another woman; to a
woman of merit, of a very noble family, sister to the earl of Huntley. But
persons blinded with passion, and infatuated with crimes, soon shake off all
appearance of decency. A suit was commenced for a divorce between Bothwel and
his wife; and this suit was opened at the same instant in two different, or
rather opposite courts; in the court of the archbishop of St. Andrews, which
was popish, and governed itself by the canon law; and in the new consistorial
or commissariot court, which was protestant, and was regulated by the
principles of the reformed teachers. The plea advanced in each court, was so
calculated as to suit the principles which there prevailed: In the archbishop's
court, the pretense of consanguinity was employed, because Bothwel was related
to his wife in the fourth degree; in the commis^ariot court, the accusation of
adultery was made use of against him. The parties too who applied for the
divorce, were different in the different courts: Bothwel was the person who
sued in the former; his wife in the latter. And the suit in both courts was
opened, pleaded, examined, and decided with the utmost precipitation, and a
sentence of divorce was pronounced in four days Anderson, vol. II. p. 280.
.

THE divorce being thus obtained, it was thought proper that Mary should be
conducted to Edinburgh, and should there appear before the courts of
judicature, and should acknowledge herself to be restored to entire freedom.
This was understood to be contrived with a view of obviating all doubts with
regard to the validity of her marriage. Orders were then given to publish the
banns in the church, between the Queen and the duke of Orkney; for that was the
title which he now bore; and Craig, a minister of Edinburgh, was applied to for
that purpose. This clergyman, not content with having, for some time, refused
compliance, publicly in his sermons condemned the marriage; and exhorted all
those who had access to the Queen, to give her their advice against so
scandalous an alliance. Being called before the council, to answer for this
liberty, he showed a courage which might cover the whole nobles with shame, on
account of their tameness and servility. He said, that, by the rules of the
church, the earl of Bothwel, being convicted of adultery, could not be
permitted to marry; that the divorce between him and his former wife, was
plainly procured by collusion, as appeared by the precipitation of that
sentence, and the sudden conclusion of his marriage with the Queen; and that
all the suspicions which prevailed, with regard to the King's murder, and the
Queen's concurrence in the former rape, would thence receive undoubted
confirmation. He therefore exhorted Bothwel, who was present, no longer to
persevere in his present criminal enterprises; and turning his discourse to the
other counselors, he charged them to employ all their influence with the
Queen, in diverting her from a measure which would cover her with infamy and
dishonor. Not satisfied even with this admonition, he took the first
opportunity of informing the public, from the pulpit, of this whole
transaction, and expressed to them his fears, that, notwithstanding all
remonstrances, their sovereign was still obstinately bent on her fatal purpose.
"For himself," he said, "he had already discharged his conscience, and yet
again would take heaven and earth to witness, that he abhorred and detested
that marriage, as scandalous and hateful in the sight of mankind: But since the
Great, as he perceived, either by their flattery or silence, gave countenance
to the measure, he besought the Faithful to pray fervently to the Almighty,
that a resolution, which was taken contrary to all law, reason, and good
conscience, might, by the divine blessing, be turned to the comfort and benefit
of the church and kingdom." These speeches offended the court extremely; and
Craig was anew summoned before the council, to answer for his temerity in thus
passing the bounds of his commission. But he told them, that the bounds of his
commission were the word of God, good laws, and natural reason; and were the
Queen's marriage tried by any of these three standards, it would appear
infamous and dishonorable, and would be so esteemed by the whole world. The
council were so overawed by this heroic behavior in a private clergyman, that
they dismissed him without farther censure or punishment Spotswood, p. 203.
Anderson, vol. II. p. 280.
.

BUT though this transaction might have recalled Bothwel and the Queen of Scots,
from their infatuation, and might have instructed them in the dispositions of
the people, as well as their own inability to oppose them; they were still
resolute to rush forward to their own manifest destruction. 15 May.
Queen of Scots marties Bothw^l.
The marriage was celebrated by the bishop of Orkney, a protestant, who was
afterward deposed by the church for this scandalous compliance. Few of the
nobility appeared at the ceremony: For they had most of them, either from shame
or fear, retired to their own houses. The French ambassador, Le Croc, an aged
gentleman of honor and character, could not be prevailed on, though a dependent
of the house of Guise, to countenance the marriage by his presence Spotswood,
p. (...) Melvil, p. 82.
. Elizabeth remonstrated, by very friendly letters and messages, against the
marriage (...) p. 392. Digges, p. 14.
: The court of France made like oppotition; but Mary, though on all other
occasions she was extremely obsequious to the advice of her relations in that
country, was here determined to pay no regard to their opinion.

THE news of these transactions, being carried to foreign countries, filled all
Europe with amazement, and threw infamy not only on the principal actors in
them, but also on the whole nation, who seemed, by their submission and
silence, and even by their declared approbation, to give their sanction to
these scandalous practices Melvil, p. 82. Keith, p. 402. Anderson, vol. I. p.
128, 134.
. The Scotch, who resided abroad, met with such reproaches, that they durst no
where appear in public; and they earnestly exhorted their countrymen at home,
to free them from the public odium, by bringing to condign punishment the
authors of such atrocious crimes. This intelligence, with a little more leisure
for reflection, roused men at last from their lethargy; and the rumors, which
from the very beginning Crawford, p. 11. Keith, Pref. p. 9.
, had been spread against Mary, as if she had concurred in the King's murder,
seemed now, by the subsequent transactions, to have received a strong
confirmation and authority. It was every where said, that, even though no
particular and direct proofs had as yet been produced of the Queen's guilt, the
whole tenor of her late conduct was sufficient, not only to beget suspicion,
but to produce entire conviction against her: That her sudden resolution of
being reconciled to her husband, whom before she had long and justly hated; her
bringing him to court, from which she had banished him by neglects and rigours;
her fitting up separate apartments for him; were all of them circumstances,
which, though trivial in themselves, yet, being compared with the following
events, bore a very unfavourable aspect for her: That the least which, after
the King's murder, might have been expected in her situation, was a more than
usual caution in her measures, and an extreme anxiety to punish the real
assassins, in order to free herself from all reproach and suspicion: That no
woman, who had any regard to her character, would allow a man, publicly accused
of her husband's murder, so much as to approach her presence, far less give him
a share in her councils, and endow him with favor and authority: That an
acquital merely in the absence of accusers, was very ill fitted to satisfy the
public; especially if that absence proceeded from a designed precipitation of
the sentence, and from the terror which her known friendship for the criminal
had infused into every one: That the very mention of her marriage to such a
person, in such circumstances, was horrible; and the contrivance of extorting a
consent of the nobility, and of concerting a rape, were gross artifices, more
proper to betray her guilt than prove her innocence: That where a woman thus
shows a consciousness of merited reproach, and, instead of correcting, provides
only thin glosses to cover her exceptionable conduct, she betrays a neglect of
fame, which must either be the effect or the cause of the most shameful
enormities: That to espouse a man, who had a few days before been so
scandalously divorced from his wife; who, to say the least, was believed to
have, a few months before, assassinated her husband, was so contrary to the
plainest rules of behavior, that no pretense of indiscretion or imprudence
could account for such a conduct: That a woman, who, so soon after her
husband's death, though not attended with any extraordinary circumstances,
contracts a marriage which might, in itself, be the most blameless, cannot
escape severe censure; but one who overlooks, for her pleasure, so many other
weighty considerations, was equally capable, in gratifying her appetites, to
neglect every regard to honor, and to humanity: That Mary was not ignorant of
the prevailing opinion of the public, with regard to her own guilt, and of the
inferences which would every where be drawn from her conduct; and therefore, if
she still continued to pursue measures which gave such just offense, she
ratified, by her actions, as much as by the most formal confession, all the
surmizes and imputations of her enemies: That the only circumstance which
opposed all these presumptions, was, the benignity and goodness of her
preceding behavior, which seemed to remove her from all suspicion of such
atrocious inhumanity; but that the characters of men were extremely variable,
and the persons who were guilty of the worst actions, were not always naturally
of the worst and most criminal dispositions: That a woman, who, in a critical
and dangerous moment, had sacrificed her honor to a man of abandoned
principles, might thenceforth be led blindfold by him to the commission of the
most enormous crimes, and was in reality no longer at her own disposal: And
that though one supposition was still left to alleviate her blame, viz. that
Bothwel, presuming on her affection toward him, had of himself committed the
crime, and had never communicated it to her, yet such a sudden and passionate
love to a man whom she had long known, could not easily be accounted for,
without supposing some degree of preceding guilt; and as it appeared that she
was not afterward restrained, either by shame or prudence, from incurring the
highest reproach and danger, it was not likely, that a sense of duty or
humanity would have a more powerful influence over her.

THESE were the general sentiments which prevailed throughout Scotland; and as
the protestant teachers, who had great authority, had long borne a great
animosity toward Mary, the opinion of her guilt was, by that means, the more
widely diffused, and made the deeper impression on every one. Some attempts
made by Bothwel, and, as it is pretended, with her consent, to get the young
prince into his power, excited the most serious attention; and the principal
nobility, even many of those who had formerly been constrained to sign the
application in favor of Bothwel's marriage, met at Stirling, and formed an
association for protecting the prince, and punishing the King's murderers
Keith, p. 394.
. The earl of Athole himself, a known catholic, was the first author of this
confederacy: The earls of Argyle, Morton, Mar, Glencarne, the lords Boyd,
Lindesey, Hume, Semple, Kirkaldy of Grange, Tullibardine, and secretary
Lidington, entered zealously into it. The earl of Murray, foreseeing such
turbulent times, and being desirous to keep free of these dangerous factions,
had, some time before, desired and obtained Mary's permission to retire into
France.

Insurrections in Scotland.
LORD Hume was first in arms; and leading a body of eight hundred horse,
suddenly environed the Queen of Scots and Bothwel, in the castle of Borthwic*
They found means to make their escape to Dunbar; while the confederate lords
were assembling their troops at Edinburgh, and taking measures to effectuate
their purpose. Had Bothwel been so prudent as to keep within the fortress of
Dunbar, his enemies must have been dissipated for want of pay and subsistence;
but hearing that the lords were fallen into distress, he was so rash as to take
the field, and advance toward them. 15th June.
The armies met at Carberry Hill, about six miles from Edinburgh; and Mary
became soon sensible, that her own troops disapproved of her cause, and were
averse to spend their blood in the quarrel Keith, p. 402. Spotswood, p. 207.
. After some bravadoes of Bothwel, where he discovered very little courage, she
saw no resource but that of holding a conference with Kirkaldy of Grange, and
of putting herself, upon some general promises, into the hands of the
confederates. She was conducted to Edinburgh, amidst the insults of the
populace, who reproached her with her crimes, and even held before her eyes,
which ever way she turned, a banner, on which was painted the murder of her
husband, and the distress of her infant son Melvil, p. 83, 84.
. Mary, overwhelmed with her calamities, had recourse to tears and
lamentations. Meanwhile Bothwel, during her conference with Grange, fled
unattended to Dunbar; and fitting out some ships, set sail for the Orkneys,
where he subsisted during some time by pyracy. He was pursued thither by
Grange, and his ship was taken, with several of his servants, who afterward
discovered all the circumstances of the King's murder, and were punished for
the crime And^^^on, vol. II. p. 167, 166, etc.
. Bothwel himself escaped in a boat, and found means to get a passage to
Denmark, where he was thrown into prison, lost his senses, and died miserably
about ten years afterward: An end worthy of his flagitious conduct and
behavior.

Imprisonment of Mary.
THE Queen of Scots, now in the hands of an enraged faction, met with such
treatment as a sovereign may naturally expect from subjects who have their
future ^ears to provide against, as well as their present animosity to gratify.
It is pretended, that she behaved with a spirit very little suitable to her
condition, avowed her inviolable attachment to Bothwel Keith, p. 419.
, and even wrote him a letter, which the lords intercepted, where she declared,
that she would endure any extremity, nay, resign her dignity and power, rather
than relinquish his affections Melvil, p. 84. The reality of this letter
appears somewhat disputable; chie^ly because Murray and his associates never
mentioned it in their accusation of her before Queen Elizabeth's commissioners.
. The insurgents, finding the danger to which they were exposed, in case Mary
should finally prevail, thought themselves obliged to proceed with rigor
against her; and they sent her next day under a guard to the castle of
Lochlevin, situated in a lake of that name. The mistress of the house was
mother to the earl of Murray; and as she pretended to have been lawfully
married to the late King of Scots, she naturally bore an animosity to Mary, and
treated her with the utmost harshness and severity.

ELIZABETH, who was exactly informed of all those events, seemed touched with
compassion toward the unfortunate Queen; and as all her fears and jealousies
were now laid asleep, by the consideration of that ruin and infamy in which
Mary's conduct had involved her, she began to reflect on the instability of
human affairs, the precarious state of royal grandeur, the danger of
encouraging rebellious subjects; and she resolved to employ her authority for
alleviating the calamities of her unhappy sister. She sent Sir Nicholas
Throcmorton ambassador to Scotland, in order to remonstrate both with Mary and
the associated lords; and she gave him instructions which, though mixed with some
lofty pretensions, were full of that good sense which was so natural to her,
and of that generosity which the present interesting situation had called
forth. She empowered him to declare in her name to Mary, that the late conduct
of that princess, so enormous, and in every respect so unjustifiable, had given
her the highest offense; and though she felt the movements of pity toward her,
she had once determined never to interpose in her affairs, either by advice or
assistance, but to abandon her entirely, as a person whose condition was
totally desperate, and honor irretrieveable: That she was well assured, that
other foreign princes, Mary's near relations, had embraced the same resolution;
but, for her part, the late events had touched her heart with more tender
sympathy, and had made her adopt measures more favorable to the liberty and
interests of the unhappy Queen: That she was determined not to see her
oppressed by her rebellious subjects, but would employ all her good offices,
and even her power, to redeem her from captivity, and place her in such a
condition as would at once be compatible with her dignity, and the safety of
her subjects: That she entreated her to lay aside all thoughts of revenge,
except against the murderers of her husband; and as she herself was his near
relation, she was better entitled than the subjects of Mary to interpose her
authority on that head, and she therefore besought that princess, if she had
any regard to her own honor and safety, not to oppose so just and reasonable a
demand: That after those two points were provided for, her own liberty, and the
punishment of her husband's assassins, the safety of her infant son was next to
be considered; and there seemed no expedient more proper for that purpose, than
the sending him to be educated in England: And that besides the security which
would attend his removal from all factions and convulsions, there were many
other beneficial consequences, which it was easy to foresee as the result of
his education in that country Keith, p. 411, 412, etc.
.

THE remonstrances which Throcmorton was instructed to make to the associated
lords, were entirely conformable to these sentiments which Elizabeth
entertained in Mary's favor. She empowered him to tell them, that whatever
blame she might throw on Mary's conduct, any opposition to their sovereign was
totally unjustifiable, and incompatible with all order and good government:
That it belonged not to them to reform, much less to punish, the
mal-administration of their prince; and the only arms which subjects could in
any case lawfully employ against the supreme authority, were entreaties,
councils, and representations: That if these expedients failed, they were next
to appeal by their prayers to Heaven; and to wait with patience till the
Almighty, in whose hands are the hearts of princes, should be pleased to turn
them to justice and to mercy: That she inculcated not this doctrine because she
herself was interested in its observance; but because it was universally
received in all well governed states, and was essential to the preservation of
civil society: That she required them to restore their Queen to liberty; and
promised, in that case, to concur with them in all proper expedients for
regulating the government, for punishing the King's murderers, and for guarding
the life and liberty of the infant prince: And that if the services which she
had lately conferred on the Scottish nation, in protecting them from foreign
usurpation, were duly considered by them, they would repose confidence in her
good offices, and would esteem themselves blameworthy, in never having as yet
made any application to her Ibid. 414, 415, 42^.
.

ELIZABETH, besides these remonstrances, sent by Throcmorton some articles of
accommodation, which he was to propose to both parties, as expedients for the
settlement of public affairs; and though these articles included some
considerable restraints on the sovereign power, they were in the main
calculated for Mary's advantage, and were sufficiently indulgent to her Keith,
p. 416.
. The associated lords, who were determined to proceed with greater severity,
were apprehensive of Elizabeth's partiality; and being sensible, that Mary
would take courage from the protection of that powerful princess Ibid. p. 427.
, they thought proper, after several affected delays, to refuse the English
ambassador all access to her person. There were four different schemes proposed
in Scotland, for the treatment of the captive Queen: One, that she should be
restored to her authority under very strict limitations: The second, that she
should be obliged to resign her crown to the prince, be banished the kingdom,
and be confined either to France or England; with assurance from the sovereign
in whose dominions she should reside, that she should make no attempts to the
disturbance of the established government: The third, that she should be
publicly tried for her crimes, of which her enemies pretended to have undoubted
proof and be condemned to perpetual imprisonment: The fourth was still more
severe, and required, that, after her condemnation, capital punishment should
be inflicted upon her Ibid. p. 420.
. Throcmorton supported the mildest proposal; but though he promised his
mistress's guarantee for the performance of articles, threatened them with
immediate vengeance in case of refusal Ibid. p. 4^8.
, and warned them not to draw on themselves, by their violence, the public
reproach, which now lay upon the Queen; he found, that excepting secretary
Lidington, he had not the good fortune to convince any of the leaders. All
councils seemed to tend toward the more severe expedients; and the preachers,
in particular, drawing their examples from the rigorous maxims of the Old
Testament, which can only be warranted by particular revelations, inflamed the
minds of the people against their unhappy sovereign Ibid. p. 422, 426.
.

THERE were several pretenders to the regency of the young prince, after the
intended deposition of Mary. The earl of Lenox claimed that authority as
grandfather to the prince: The duke of Chatelrault, who was absent in France,
had pretensions as next heir to the crown: But the greatest number of the
associated lords inclined to the earl of Murray, in whose capacity they had the
greatest trust, and who possessed the entire confidence of the preachers and
more zealous reformers. All measures being therefore concerted, three
instruments were sent to Mary, by the hands of lord Lindesey and Sir Robert
Melvil; by one of which she was to resign the crown in savor of her son, by
another to appoint Murray regent, by the third to name a Council, which should
administer the government till his arrival in Scotland. The Queen of Scots,
seeing no prospect of relief, lying justly under apprehensions of her life, and
believing, that no deed, which she executed during her captivity, could be
valid, was prevailed on, after a plentiful effusion of tears, to sign these
three instruments; and she took not the trouble of inspecting any one of them
Melvil, p. 85. Spotswood, p. 211. Anderson, vol. III. p. 19.
. In consequence of this forced resignation, the young prince was proclaimed
King, under the name of James the sixth. 29th July.
He was soon after crowned at Stirling, and the earl of Morton took in his name
the oath of Coronation; in which a promise to extirpate heresy was not forgot.
Some republican pretensions in favor of the people's power were countenanced
in this ceremony Keith, p. 439, 44^.
; and a coin was soon after struck, on which the famous saying of Trajan was
inscribed, Pro me; si merear, in me: For me; if I deserve it, against me Ibid.
p. 440. Appen. p. 150.
. Throcmorton had orders from his mistress not to assist at the coronation of
the King of Scots Keith, p. 430.
.

THE council of regency had not long occasion to exercise their authority. The
earl of Murray arrived from France, and took possession of his high office. He
paid a visit to the captive Queen; and spoke to her in a manner which better
suited her past conduct than her present condition. This harsh treatment quite
extinquished in her breast any remains of affection toward him Melvil, p. 87.
Keith, p. 445.
. Murray proceeded afterward to break, in a more public manner, all terms of
decency with her. 15th of December.
He summoned a Parliament; and that assembly, after voting that she was
undoubtedly an accomplice in her husband's murder, condemned her to
imprisonment, ratified her dimission of the crown, and acknowleged her son for
King, and Murray for regent Anderson, vol. II. p. 206, and seq.
. The regent, who was a man of vigor and abilities, employed himself
successfully in reducing the kingdom. He bribed Sir James Balfour to surrender
the castle of Edinburgh: He constrained the garrison of Dunbar to open their
gates: And he demolished that fortress.

BUT though every thing thus bore a favorable aspect to the new government, and
all men seemed to submit to Murray's authority; a violent revolution, however
necessary, can never be effected without great discontents; and it was not
likely, that in a country, where the government, in its most settled state,
possessed a very disjointed authority, a new establishment should meet with no
interruption or disturbance. Few considerable men of the nation seemed willing
to support Mary, so long as Bothwel was present; but the removal of that
obnoxious nobleman had altered the sentiments of many. The duke of Chatelrault,
being disappointed of the regency, bore no good will to Murray and his
counselors; and the same sentiments were embraced by all his numerous
retainers: Several of the nobility, finding that others had taken the lead
among the associators, formed a faction apart, and opposed the prevailing
power: And besides some remains of duty and affection toward Mary, the
malecontent lords, finding every thing carried to extremity against her, were
naturally led to embrace her cause, and shelter themselves under her authority.
All those who retained any propensity to the catholic religion were inclined to
join this party; and even the people in general, though they had formerly either
detested Mary's crimes, or blamed her imprudence, were now moved by her
misfortunes to compassionate her present situation, and lamented, that a
person, possessed of so many amiable accomplishments, joined to such high
dignity, should be treated with such extreme rigor and severity Buchan. lib.
xviii. c. 53.
, Animated by all these motives, many of the principal nobility, now adherents
to the Queen of Scots, met at Hamilton, and concerted measures for supporting
the cause of that princess.

2d May.
He conveyed her in disguise into a small boat, and himself rowed her ashore.
She hastened to Hamilton; and the news of her arrival in that place being
immediately spread abroad, many of the nobility flocked to her with their
forces. A bond of association for her defense was signed by the earls of
Argyle, Huntley, Eglington, Crawford, Cassiles, Rothes, Montrose, Southerland,
Errol, nine bishops, and nine barons, besides many of the most considerable
gentry Keith, p. 475.
. And in a few days an army, to the number of six thousand men, was assembled
under her standard.

ELIZABETH was no sooner informed of Mary's escape, than she discovered her
resolution of persevering in the same generous and friendly measures, which she
had hitherto pursued. If she had not employed force against the regent, during
the imprisonment of that princess, she had been chiefly withheld by the fear
of pushing him to greater extremities against her Keith, p. 463. Cabbala, p.
^41.
; but she had proposed to the court of France an expedient, which, though less
violent, would have been no less effectual for her service: She desired that
France and England should by concert cut off all commerce with the Scotch, till
they should do justice to their injured sovereign Keith, p. 462.
. She now dispatched Leighton into Scotland to offer both her good offices, and
the assistance of her force to Mary; but as she was apprehensive of the
entrance of French troops into the kingdom, she desired that the controversy
between the Queen of Scots and her subjects might by that princess be referred
entirely to her arbitration, and that no foreign succors should be introduced
into Scotland Keith, p. 473. in the notes. Anderson, vol. IV. p. 26.
.

BUT Elizabeth had not leizure to exert fully her efforts in favor of Mary.
The regent made haste to assemble forces; and notwithstanding that his army was
inferior in number to that of the Queen of Scots, he took the field against
her. 13th May.
A battle was fought at Langside near Glasgow, which was entirely decisive in
favor of the associated lords; and though the regent, after his victory, stopped
the bloodshed, yet was the action followed by a total dispersion of the Queen's
party. That unhappy princess fled southwards from the field of battle with
great precipitation, and came, with a few attendants, to the borders of
England. Mary flies into England.
She here deliberated concerning her next measures, which would probably prove
so important to her future happiness or misery. She found it impossible to
remain in her own kingdom: She had an aversion, in her present wretched
condition, to return into France, where she had formerly appeared with so much
splendor; and was not, besides, provided of a vessel, which could safely
convey her thither: The late generous behavior of Elizabeth made her hope for
defense, and even assistance, from that quarter Jebb's Collection, vol. I. p.
420.
; and as the present fears of her domestic enemies were the most urgent, she
overlooked all other considerations, and embraced the resolution of taking
shelter in England. 16th May.
She embarked on board a fishing-boat in Galloway, and landed the same day at
Wirkington in Cumberland, about thirty miles distant from Carlisle; whence she
immediately dispatched a messenger to London; notifying her arrival, desiring
liberty to visit Elizabeth, and craving her protection, in consequence of
former professions of friendship, made her by that princess.

ELIZABETH now found herself in a situation, when it was become necessary to
take some decisive resolution with regard to her treatment of the Queen of
Scots; and as she had hitherto, contrary to the opinion of Cecil, attended more
to the motives of generosity than of policy Cabala, p. 140.
, she was engaged by that prudent minister to weigh anew all the
considerations, which occurred in this critical conjuncture. He represented,
that the party, which had dethroned Mary, and had at present assumed the
government of Scotland, were always the partisans of the English alliance, and
were engaged, by all the motives of religion and of interest, to persevere in
their connexions with Elizabeth: That though Murray and his friends might
complain of some unkind usage during their banishment in England, they would
easily forget these grounds of quarrel, when they considered, that Elizabeth
was the only ally, on whom they could safely depend, and that their own Queen,
by her attachment to the catholic faith, and by her other connexions, excluded
them entirely from the friendship of France, and even from that of Spain: That
Mary, on the other hand, even before her violent breach with her protestant
subjects, was in secret entirely governed by the counsels of the house of
Guise; much more, would she implicitly comply with their views, when by her own
misconduct the power of that family and of the zealous catholics was become her
sole resource and security: That her pretensions to the English crown would
render her a very dangerous instrument in their hands; and were she once able
to suppress the protestants in her own kingdom, she would unite the Scotch and
English catholics, with those of all foreign states, in one confederacy against
the religion and government of England: That it behoved Elizabeth therefore to
proceed with caution in the design of restoring her rival to the throne; and to
take care, both that that enterprise, if undertaken, should be effected by
English forces alone, and that full securities should beforehand be provided
for the reformers and the reformation in Scotland: That above all, it was
requisite to guard carefully the person of that princess; lest, finding this
unexpected reserve in the English friendship, she should suddenly take the
resolution of flying into France, and should attempt by foreign force to
recover possession of her authority: That her desperate fortunes and broken
reputation fitted her for any attempt; and her resentment, when she should find
herself thus deserted by the Queen, would concur with her ambition and her
bigotry, and render her an unrelenting, as well as powerful, enemy to the
English government: That if she was once abroad, in the hands of enterprizing
catholics, the attack of England would appear to her as easy as that of
Scotland; and the only method, she must imagine, of recovering her native
kingdom, would be to acquire that crown, to which she would esteem herself
equally entitled: That a neutrality in such interesting situations, though it
might be pretended, could never, without the most extreme danger, be upheld by
the Queen; and the detention of Mary was equally requisite, whether the power
of England were to be employed in her favor, or against her: That nothing
indeed was more becoming a great prince than generosity; yet the suggestions of
this noble principle could never, without the utmost imprudence, be consulted
in such delicate circumstances as those in which the Queen was at present
placed; where her own safety and the interests of her people were intimately
concerned in every resolution which she embraced: That though the example of
successful rebellion, especially in a neighboring country, could be no wise
agreeable to any sovereign, yet Mary's imprudence had been so great, perhaps
her crimes so enormous, that the insurrection of subjects, after such
provocation, could no longer be regarded as a precedent against other princes:
That it was first necessary for Elizabeth to ascertain, in a regular and
satisfactory manner, the extent of Mary's guilt, and thence to determine the
degree of protection which she ought to afford her, against her discontented
subjects: That as no glory could surpass that of defending oppressed innocence,
it was equally infamous to patronize vice and murder on the throne; and the
contagion of such dishonor would extend itself to all who countenanced or
supported it: And that if the crimes of the Scotch princess should, on enquiry,
appear as great and certain as was affirmed and believed, every measure against
her, which policy should dictate, would thence be justified; or if she should
be found innocent, every enterprise, which friendship should inspire, would be
acknowledged laudable and glorious.

AGREEABLE to these views, Elizabeth resolved to proceed in a seemingly
friendly, but really cautious manner, with the Queen of Scots; and she
immediately sent orders to lady Scrope, sister to the duke of Norfolk, a lady
who lived in the neighborhood, to attend on that princess. Soon after she
dispatched to her the lord Scrope himself, warden of the marches, and Sir
Francis Knolles, vice chamberlain. They found Mary already lodged in the castle
of Carlisle; and after expressing the Queen's sympathy with her in her late
misfortunes, they told her, that her request of being allowed to visit their
sovereign, and of being admitted to her presence, could not at present be
complied with: Till she had cleared herself of her husband's murder, of which
she was so strongly accused, Elizabeth could not without dishonor show her any
countenance, or appear indifferent to the assassination of so near a kinsman
Anderson, vol. IV. p. 54, 66, 82, 83, 86.
. So unexpected a check threw Mary into tears; and the necessity of her
situation extorted from her a declaration, that she would willingly justify
herself to her sister from all imputations, and would submit her cause to the
arbitration of so good a friend Ibid. p. 10, 55, 87.
. Two days after, she sent lord Herreis to London with a letter to the same
purpose.

THIS concession, which Mary could scarce avoid, without an acknowlegement of
guilt, was the point expected and desired by Elizabeth: She immediately
dispatched Midlemore to the regent of Scotland; requiring him both to desist
from the farther prosecution of his Queen's party, and to send some persons to
London to justify his conduct with regard to her. Murray might justly be
startled at receiving a message, which must have appeared somewhat imperious;
but as his domestic enemies were numerous and powerful, and England was the
sole ally, which he could expect among foreign nations, he was resolved rather
to digest the affront than provoke Elizabeth by a refusal. He also considered,
that though that Queen had hitherto appeared partial to Mary, her interest
evidently engaged her to support the King's cause in Scotland; and it was not
to be doubted but that penetrating princess would in the end discover this
advantage, and would at least afford him a patient and equitable hearing. He
therefore replied, that he would himself take a journey into England, attended
with other commissioners, and would willingly submit the determination of his
cause to Elizabeth Anderson, vol. IV. p. 1^ -- 16.
.

LORD Herreis now perceived, that his mistress had advanced too far in her
concessions: He endeavored to maintain, that Mary could not, without
diminution of her royal dignity, submit to a contest with her rebellious
subjects before a foreign prince; and he required either present aid from
England, or liberty for his Queen to pass over into France. Being pressed,
however, with the former agreement before the English council, he again renewed
his consent; but in a few days he began anew to recoil, and it was with some
difficulty that he was brought to acquiesce in the first determination Ibid. p.
16-20.
. These fluctuations, which were incessantly renewed, showed his visible
reluctance to the measures pursued by the court of England.

THE Queen of Scots discovered no less aversion to the trial proposed; and it
required all the artifice and prudence of Elizabeth to make her persevere in
the agreement to which she had at first consented. This latter princess still
said to her, that she desired not, without Mary's consent and approbation, to
enter into this question, and pretended only as a friend to hear her
justification: That she was confident there would be found no difficulty in
refuting all the calumnies of her enemies; and even if her apology should fall
short of full conviction, Elizabeth was determined to support her cause, and
procure her some reasonable terms of accommodation: And that it was never
meant, that she should be cited to a trial with her rebellious subjects, but on
the contrary, that they should be summoned to appear and justify themselves for
their conduct toward her Ibid. p. 11, (...)
. Allured by these plausible professions, the Queen of Scots agreed to justify
herself by her own commissioners before commissioners which should be appointed
by Elizabeth.

DURING these transactions, the lord Scrope and Sir Francis Knolles, who
resided with Mary at Carlisle, had leizure to study her character, and to make
report of it to Elizabeth. Unbroken by her misfortunes, resolute in her
purpose, active in her enterprises, she aspired to nothing but victory, and was
determined to endure any extremity, to undergo any difficulty, and to try every
fortune, rather than abandon her cause, or yield the superiority to her
enemies. Eloquent, insinuating, affable; she had already convinced all those,
who approached her, of the innocence of her past conduct; and as she declared
her fixed purpose to require aid of her friends all over Europe, and even to
have recourse to infidels and barbarians, rather than fail of vengeance against
her persecutors, it was easy to foresee the danger to which her charms, her
spirit, her address, if allowed to operate with their full force, would expose
them Anderson, vol. IV. p. 5^, 71, 72, 74, 78, 92.
. The court of England, therefore, who under pretense of guarding her, had
already, in effect, detained her close prisoner, were determined to watch her
with still greater vigilance. As Carlisle, by its situation on the borders,
afforded her great opportunities for contriving her escape, they removed her to
Bolton, a seat of lord Scrope's in Yorkshire: And the issue of the controversy
between her and the Scotch nation was regarded as a subject more momentous to
Elizabeth's security and interests, than it had ever hitherto been apprehended.

Conferences at York and Hamptoncourt.
THE persons, appointed by the English court for the examination of this great
cause, were the duke of Norfolk, the earl of Sussex, and Sir Ralph Sadler; and
York was named as the place of conference. 4th October.
Lesley, bishop of Ross, the lords Herreis, Levingstone and Boyde, with five
persons more, appeared as commissioners from the Queen of Scots. The earl of
Murray, regent, the earl of Morton, the bishop of Orkney, lord Lindesey, and
the abbot of Dunfermling were appointed commissioners from the King and kingdom
of Scotland. Secretary Ledington, George Buchanan, the famous poet and
historian, with some others, were named as their assistants.

IT was a great circumstance of Elizabeth's glory, that she was thus chosen
umpire between the factions of a neighboring kingdom, which had, during many
centuries, entertained the most violent jealousy and animosity against England;
and her felicity was equally rare, in having the fortune and fame of so
dangerous a rival, who had long given her the greatest inquietude, now entirely
at her disposal. Some circumstances of her late conduct had discovered a bias
toward the side of Mary: Her prevailing interests led her to favor the
enemies of that princess: The professions of impartiality, which she had made,
were open and frequent; and she had so far succeeded, that each side accused
her commissioners of partiality toward their adversaries Anderson, vol. IV.
part 2. p. 40.
. She herself appears, by the instructions given them, to have fixed no plan
for the decision; but she knew, that the advantages, which she should reap,
must be great, whatever issue the cause should take. If Mary's crimes could be
ascertained by undoubted proof, she could for ever blast the reputation of that
princess, and might justifiably detain her for ever a close prisoner in
England: If the evidence fell short of conviction, it was proposed to restore
her to her throne, but with such strict limitations, as would leave Elizabeth
perpetual arbiter of all differences between the parties in Scotland, and
render her in effect absolute mistress of that kingdom Ibid. p. 14, 15, etc.
Goodall, vol. II. p. 11^.
.

MARY'S commissioners, before they gave in their complaints against her enemies
in Scotland, entered a protest, that their appearance in the cause should no
wise affect the independance of her crown, or be construed as a mark of
subordination to England: The English commissioners received this protest, but
with a reserve to the claim of England. The complaint of that princess was next
read, and contained a detail of all the injuries, which she had suffered, since
her marriage with Bothwel: That her subjects had taken arms against her, under
pretense of freeing her from captivity; that when she put herself into their
hands, they had committed her to close custody in Lochlevin; had crowned her
son, an infant, in her place; had again taken arms against her after her
delivery from prison; had rejected all her proposals for accommodation; had
given battle to her troops; and had obliged her, for the safety of her person,
to take shelter in England Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 52. Goodall, vol. II.
p. 128. Haynes, p. (...).
. The earl of Murray, in answer to this complaint, gave a summary and imperfect
account of the late transactions: That the earl of Bothwel, the known murderer
of the late King, had, a little time after the commission of that crime, seized
the person of the Queen and led her to Dunbar; that he acquired such influence
over her as to gain her consent to marry him, and he had accordingly procured a
divorce from his former wife, and had pretended to celebrate his marriage with
the Queen; that the scandal of this transaction, the dishonor which it brought
on the whole nation, the danger to which the infant prince was exposed from the
attempts of that audacious man, had obliged the nobility to take arms, and
oppose his criminal designs and enterprises; that after the Queen, in order to
save him, had thrown herself into their hands, she still discovered such a
violent attachment to him, that they found it necessary, for their own and the
public safety, to confine her person, during a season, till Bothwel and the
other murderers of her husband could be tried and punished for their crimes;
and that during this confinement, she had voluntarily, without compulsion or
violence, merely from disgust at the inquietudes and vexations attending power,
resigned her crown to her only son, and had appointed the earl of Murray regent
during the minority Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 64 and seq. Goodall, vol. II.
p. 144.
. The Queen's answer to this apology was obvious: That she did not know and
never could suspect, that Bothwel, who had been acquitted by a jury, and
recommended to her by all the nobility for her husband, was the murderer of the
King; that she ever was, and still continues desirous, that, if he be guilty,
he may be brought to condign punishment; that her resignation of the crown was
extorted from her by the well-grounded fears of her life, and even by the
direct menaces of violence; and that Throcmorton, the English ambassador, as
well as others of her friends, had advised her to sign that paper as the only
means of saving herself from the last extremity, and had assured her, that a
consent, given under these circumstances, could never have any force or
validity Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 60 and seq. Goodall, vol. II. p. 162.
.

SO far the Queen of Scots seemed plainly to have the advantage in the contest;
and the English commissioners might have been surprised, that Murray had made
so weak a defense, and had suppressed all the material imputations against that
princess, on which his party had ever so strenuously insisted, had not some
private conferences previously informed them of the secret. Mary's
commissioners had boasted, that Elizabeth, from regard to her kinswoman, and
from her desire of maintaining the rights of sovereigns, was determined,
however criminal the conduct of that princess might appear, to restore her to
the throne Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 45. Goodall, vol. II. p. 127.
; and Murray, reflecting on some past measures of the English court, began to
apprehend that there was but too just grounds for their expectations. He
believed, that Mary, if he would agree to conceal the most violent part of the
accusation against her, would submit to any reasonable terms of accommodation;
but if he once proceeded so far as to charge her with the whole of her supposed
guilt, no composition could afterward take place; and should she ever be
restored, either by the power of Elizabeth, or the assistance of her other
friends, he and his party must be exposed to her most severe and implacable
vengeance Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 47, 48. Goodall, vol. II. p. 159.
. He resolved therefore not to venture rashly on a measure, which it would be
impossible for him ever to recall; and he paid privately a visit to Norfolk and
the other English commissioners, confessed his scruples, laid before them the
evidences of the Queen's guilt, and desired to have some security for
Elizabeth's protection, in case these evidences should, upon examination,
appear entirely satisfactory. Norfolk was not secretly displeased with these
scruples of the regent Crawford, p. 92. Melvil, p 94, 95. Haynes, p 574.
. He had ever been a partizan of the Queen of Scots: Secretary Ledington, who
began also to incline to that party, and was a man of singular address and
capacity, had engaged him to embrace farther views in her favor, and even to
think of espousing her: And though that duke confessed Anderson, vol. IV. part 2.
p. 77.
, that the proofs against Mary seemed to him unquestionable, he encouraged
Murray in his present resolution not to produce them publicly in the
conferences before the English commissioners Ibid. p. 57, 77. State Trials, vol
I. p. 76.
.

NORFOLK, however, was obliged to transmit to court the queries proposed by the
regent. These queries consisted of four particulars: Whether the English
commissioners had authority from their sovereign to pronounce any sentence
against Mary, in case her guilt should be fully proved before them? Whether
they would promise to exercise that authority, and proceed to an actual
sentence? Whether the Queen of Scots, if she was found guilty, should be
delivered into the hands of the regent, or, at least, so secured in England,
that she never should be able to disturb the tranquillity of Scotland? and,
Whether Elizabeth would also, in that case, promise to acknowledge the young
King, and protect the regent in his authority Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 55.
Goodall, vol. II. p. 130.
?

ELIZABETH, when these queries, with the other transactions, were laid before
her, began to think that they pointed toward a conclusion more decisive and
more advantageous than she had hitherto expected. She was determined,
therefore, to bring the matter into full light; and under pretext that the
distance from her person retarded the proceedings of her commissioners, she
ordered them to come to London, and there continue the conferences. On their
appearance, she immediately joined in commission with them, some of the most
considerable of her council; Sir Nicholas Bacon lord keeper, the earls of
Arundel and Leicester, lord Clinton, admiral, and Sir William Cecil, secretary
Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 99.
. The Queen of Scots, who knew nothing of these secret motives, and who
expected, that fear or decency would still restrain Murray from proceeding to
any violent accusation against her, expressed an entire satisfaction in this
adjournment, and declared, that the affair, being under the immediate
inspection of Elizabeth, was now in the hands where she most desired it Ibid.
p. 95. Goodall, vol. II. p. 177, 179.
. The conferences were accordingly continued at Hampton Court; and Mary's
commissioners, as before, made no scruple to be present at them.

THE Queen, meanwhile, gave a satisfactory answer to all Murray's demands; and
having declared, that though she wished and hoped, from the present enquiry, to
be entirely convinced of Mary's innocence, yet if the event should prove
contrary, and if that princess should appear guilty of her husband's murder,
she should, for her part, esteem her ever after unworthy of a throne Goodall,
vol. II. p. 199.
. The regent, encouraged by this declaration, opened more fully his charge
against the Queen of Scots; and after expressing his reluctance to proceed to
that extremity, and protesting, that nothing but the necessity of self-defence,
which must not be abandoned for any delicacy, could have engaged him in such a
measure, he proceeded to accuse her in plain terms, of participation and
consent in the assassination of the King Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 115, and
seq. Goodall, vol. II. p. 206.
. The earl of Lenox too appeared before the English commissioners; and
imploring vengeance for the murder of his son, accused Mary as an accomplice
with Bothwel in that enormity Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 122. Goodall, vol.
II. p. 208.
.

WHEN this charge was so unexpectedly given in, and copies of it transmitted to
the bishop of Ross, lord Herreis, and the rest of Mary's commissioners, they
absolutely refused to return any answer; and they grounded their silence on
very extraordinary reasons: They had orders, they said, from their mistress, if
any thing was advanced that might touch her honor, not to make any defense, as
she was a sovereign princess, and could not be subject to any tribunal; and
they required, that she should previously be admitted to Elizabeth's presence,
to whom, and to whom alone, she was determined to justify her innocence
Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 125, and seq. Goodall, vol. II. 184, 211, 217.
. They forgot, that the conferences were at first begun, and were still
continued, with no other view than to clear her from the accusations of her
enemies; that Elizabeth had ever pretended to enter into them only as her
friend, by her own consent and approbation, not as assuming any superior
jurisdiction over her; that that princess had from the beginning refused to
admit her to her presence, till she should clear herself of the crimes imputed
to her; that she had therefore discovered no new signs of partiality by her
perseverance in that resolution; and that though she had granted an audience to
the earl of Murray and his colleagues, she had previously conferred the same
honor on Mary's commissioners Lesley's Negociations in Anderson, vol. III. p.
25. Haynes, p. 487.
; and her conduct was so far entirely equal to both parties.

AS the Queen of Scots refused to give in any answer to Murray's charge, the
necessary consequence seemed to be, that there could be no farther proceedings
in the trial. But though this silence might be interpreted as a presumption
against her, it did not fully answer the purpose of those English ministers,
who were the enemies of that princess. They still desired to have in their
hands the proofs of her guilt; and in order to draw them with decency from the
regent, a judicious artifice was employed by Elizabeth. Murray was called
before the English commissioners; and reproved by them, in the Queen's name,
for the atrocious imputations which he had had the temerity to throw upon his
sovereign: But though the earl of Murray, they added, and the other
commissioners, had so far forgot the duty of allegiance to their prince, the
Queen never would overlook what she owed to her friend, her neighbor, and her
kinswoman; and she therefore desired to know what they could say in their own
justification Anderson, vol. IV. part 2. p. 147. Goodall, vol. II. p. 233.
. Murray, thus urged, made no difficulty of producing the proofs of his charge
against the Queen of Scots; and among the rest, some love letters and sonnets
of here is to Bothwel, wrote all in her own hand, and two other papers, one wrote
in her own hand, another signed by her, and wrote by the earl of Huntley; each
of which contained a promise of marriage with Bothwel.

ALL these important papers had been kept by Bothwel in a silver box or casket,
which had been given him by Mary, and which had belonged to her first husband,
Francis; and though the princess had enjoined him to burn the letters as soon as
he had read them, he had thought proper to preserve them carefully, as pledges
of her fidelity, and had committed them to the custody of Sir James Balfour,
governor of the castle of Edinburgh. When that fortress was besieged by the
associated lords, Bothwel sent a servant to receive the casket from the hands
of the governor. Balfour delivered it to the messenger; but as he had at that
time received some disgust from Bothwel, and was secretly negociating an
agreement with the ruling party, he took care, by conveying private
intelligence to the earl of Morton, to make the papers be intercepted by him.
They contained incontestible proofs of Mary's criminal correspondence with
Bothwel, of her consent to the King's murder, and of her concurrence in that
rape which Bothwel pretended to commit upon her Anderson, vol II. p. 115.
Goodall, vol. II. p. 1.
. Murray fortified this evidence by some testimonies of correspondent facts
Anderson, vol. II. part 2. p. 165, etc. Goodall, vol. II. p. 213.
; and he added, sometime after, the dying confession of one Hubert, or French
Paris, as he was called, a servant of Bothwel's, who had been executed for the
King's murder, and who directly charged the Queen with her being accessory to
that criminal enterprise Anderson, vol. II. p. 192. Goodall, vol. II. p. 76.
.

MARY'S commissioners had used every expedient to ward this blow, which they
saw coming upon them, and against which, it appears, they were not provided in
any proper defense. As soon as Murray opened his charge, they endeavored to
turn the conferences from an enquiry into a negotiation; and though informed by
the English commissioners, that nothing could be more dishonorable for their
mistress, than to enter into a treaty with such undutiful subjects, before she
had justified herself from those enormous imputations which had been thrown
upon her, they still insisted, that Elizabeth should settle terms of
accommodation between Mary and her enemies in Scotland Anderson, vol. II. part
2. p. 135, 139. Goodall, vol. II. p. 224.
. They maintained, that till their mistress had given in her answer to Murray's
charge, his proofs could neither be called for nor produced Anderson, vol. IV.
part 2. p. 139, 145. Goodall, vol. II. p. 228.
; and finding, that the English commissioners were still determined to proceed
in the method which had been projected, they finally broke off the conferences,
and never would make any reply. These papers have all of them been since
published. The objections made to their validity, are in general of small
force: But were they ever so specious, they cannot now be hearkened to; since
Mary, at the time when the truth could have been fully cleared, did, in effect,
ratify the evidence against her, by recoiling from the enquiry at the very
critical moment, and refusing to give any answer to the accusation of her
enemies We shall not enter into a long discussion of the authenticity of these
letters: We shall only remark in general, that the chief objections against
them are, that they are supposed to have passed through the earl of Morton's
hands, the least scrupulous of all Mary's enemies; and that they are, to the
last degree, indecent, and even somewhat inelegant, such as it is not likely
she would write. But to these presumptions we may oppose the following
considerations. (1) The' it be not difficult to counterfeit a subscription, it
is very difficult, and almost impossible, to counterfeit several pages, so as
to resemble exactly the hand writing of any person. (2.) The letters are very
long, much longer than they needed to have been, in order to serve the purposes
of Mary's enemies; a circumstance, which increased the difficulty, and exposed
any forgery the more to the risk of a detection. (3.) They are not so gross and
palpable, as forgeries commonly are; for they left still a pretext for Mary's
friends to assert, that their meaning was strained to make them appear
criminal; see Goodall, vol. II. p. 361. (4.) There is a long contract of
marriage, said to be wrote by the earl of Huntley, and signed by the Queen,
before Bothwel's acquital. Would Morton, without any necessity, have thus
doubled the difficulties of the forgery, and the danger of detection? (5.) The
letters are indiscreet; but such was apparently Mary's conduct at that time:
They are inelegant; but they have a careless, natural air, like letters hastily
wrote between familiar friends. (6.) They contain such a variety of particular
circumstances, as no body could have thought of inventing, especially as they
must necessarily have asforded her many means of detection. (7.) We see, that
in writing the first and longest letter, which she penned late at night, her
paper failed her, and she takes down a memorandum of what she intended to add
next morning; and it is accordingly added: A circumstance very particular, and
not likely to occur to any person who would forge these letters. (8.) We have
not the originals of the letters, which were in French: We have only a Scotch
and Latin translation from the original, and a French translation professedly
done from the Latin. Now it is remarkable, that the Scotch translation is full
of Gallicisms, and is clearly a translation from a French original: Such as
make fault, fair des fautes; make it seem that I believe, fair semblant de le
cro^re; make br^k, fair breche; this is my first journay, cest ma premiere
journee; have you not desire to laugh, navez vous pas envy de rire; the place
will hald unto the death, la place tiendra jusqu'a la mort; he may not come
forth of the house this long time, il ne peut pas sortir du logis de long tems;
to make me advertisen ent, fair m'avertir; put order to it, mettre order a
cela; discharge your heart, decharger votre coeur; make good watch, faites bon
guard, etc. (9.) There is a conversation, which she mentions, between herself
and the King one evening: But Murray produced before the English commissioners,
the testimony of one Crawford, a gentleman of the earl of Lenox, who swore,
that the King, on her departure from him, gave him an account of the same
conversation. (10.) There seems very little reason why Murray and his
associates should run the risk of such a dangerous forgery, which must have
rendered them infamous, if detected; since their cause, from Mary's known
conduct, even without these letters, was sufficiently good and justifiable.
(11.) Murray exposed these letters to the examination of persons qualified to
judge of them; the Scotch council, the Scotch Parliament, Queen Elizabeth and
her council, who were possessed of a great number of Mary's genuine letters.
(12.) He gave Mary herself an opportunity of refuting and exposing him, if she
had chosen to lay hold of it. (13.) The letters tally so well with all the
other parts of her conduct during that transaction, that these proofs throw the
strongest light on each other. (14.) The duke of Norfolk, who had examined
these papers, and who favored so much Queen Mary, that he intended to marry
her, and in the end lost his life in her cause, yet believed them authentic,
and was fully convinced of her guilt. This appears not only from his letters
above mentioned, to Queen Elizabeth and her ministers, but by his secret
acknowlegement to Banister, his most trusty confident. See State Trials, vol.
1. p. 81. In the conferences between the duke, secretary Lidington, and the
bishop of Ross, all of them zealous partisans of that princess, the same thing
seems always to be taken for granted. Ibid. p. 74, 75. See farther MS. in the
Advocate's library. A. 3. 28. p. 314. from Cott. lib. Calig. c. 9. (15.) I need
not repeat the presumption drawn from Mary's refusal to answer. The only excuse
for her silence, is, that the suspected Elizabeth to be a partial judge: It was
not, indeed, the interest of that princess to acquit and justify her rival and
competitor; and we accordingly find that Lidington, from the secret information
of the duke of Norfolk, informed Mary, by the bishop of Ross, that the Queen of
England never meant to come to a decision; but only to get into her hands the
proofs of Mary's guilt, in order to blast her character: See State Trials, vol.
1. p. 77. But this was a better reason for declining the trial altogether than
for breaking it off, on frivolous pretenses, the very moment the chief
accusition was unexpectedly opened against her. Though she could not expect
Elizabeth's final decision in her favor, it was of importance to give a
satisfactory answer, if she had any, to the accusation of the Scotch
commissioners. That answer could have been dispersed for the conviction of the
public, of toreign nations, and of posterity. And surely after the accusation
and proofs were in Queen Elizabeth's hand, it could do no hurt to give in the
answers. Mary's information, that the Queen never inteaded to come to a
decision, could be no obs^^cle to her justification. (16.) The very
disappearance of these letters, is a presumption of their authenticity. That
event can be accounted for no way but from the care of King James's friends,
who were disirous to destroy every proof of his mother's crimes. The
disappearance of Morton's narrative, and of Crawford's evidence, from the
Cotton library, Calig. c. 1. must have proceeded from a like cause. See MS. in
the Advocate's library, A. 3. 29. p. 88.

I find an objection made to the authenticity of the letters, drawn from the
vote of the Scotch privycouncil, which affirms the letters to be wrote and
subscribed by Queen Mary's own hand; whereas the copies given in to the
Parliament a few days after, were only wrote, not subscribed. See Goodall, vol.
II. p. 64, 67. But it is not considered, that this circumstance is of no manner
of force: There were certainly letters, true or false, laid before the council;
and whether the letters were true or false, this mistake proceeds equally from
the inaccuracy or blunder of the clerk. The mistake is easily accounted for:
The letters were only wrote by her; the second contract with Bothwel was only
subscribed. A proper accurate distinction was not made; and they are all said
to be wrote and subscribed. A late writer, Mr. Goodall, has endeavored to
prove, that these letters clash with chronology, and that the Queen was not in
the places mentioned in the letters, on the days there assigned: To confirm
this, he produces charters and other deeds signed by the Queen, where the date
and place do not agree with the letters. But it is well known, that the date of
charters, and such like grants, is no proof of the real day in which they were
signed by the sovereign. Papers of that kind commonly pass through different
offices: The date is affixed by the first office; and may precede very long the
day of the signature.

The account given by Morton of the manner in which the papers came into his
hands, is very natural. When he gave it to the English commissioners, he had
reason to think it would be canvassed with all the severity of able
adversaries, interested in the highest degree to refute it. It is probable,
that he could have confirmed it by many circumstances and testimonies; since
they declined the contest.

The like observation extends to Hubert's dying confession. It is in vain at
present to seek improbabilities in it, and to magnify the smallest difficulty
into a contradiction. It was certainly a regular judicial paper, given in
regularly and judicially; and ought to have been canvassed at the time, if the
persons whom it concerned had been assured of their own innocence.

The sonnets are inelegant; insomuch, that both Brantome and Ronsard, who knew
Queen Mary's style, were assured, when they saw them, that they could not be
her composition. Jebb, vol. II. p. 478. But no person is equal in his
productions, especially one whose style is so little formed as Mary's must be
supposed to be. Not to mention, that such dangerous and criminal enterprises
leave little tranquillity of mind for elegant, poetical compositions.

In a word, Queen Mary might easily have conducted the whole conspiracy against
her husband, without opening her mind to any one person except Bothwel, and
without writing a scrap of paper about it; but it was very difficult to have
conducted it, so as that her conduct should not betray her to men of
discernment. In the present case, her conduct was so gross as to betray her to
every body; and fortune threw into her enemies hands, papers by which they
could convict her. The same insatuation and imprudence, which happily is the
usual attendant of great crimes, will account for both. It is proper to
observe, that there is not one circumstance of the foregoing narrative,
contained in the history, that is taken from Knox, Buchanan, or even Thuanus,
or, indeed, from any suspected authority.


.

BUT Elizabeth, though she had seen enough for her own satisfaction, was
determined, that the most eminent persons of her court should also be
acquainted with these transactions, and should be convinced of the equity of
her proceedings. She ordered her privy council to assembled; and that she might
render the matter more solemn and authentic, she added to them the earls of
Northumberland, Westmoreland, Shrewsbury, Worcester, Huntingdon, and Warwic.
The whole proceedings of the English commissioners were read to them: The
evidences produced by Murray were perused: A great number of letters, wrote by
Mary to Elizabeth, were laid before them, and the handwriting compared with
that of letters delivered in by the regent: The refusal of the Queen of Scots
commissioners to make any reply, was related: And on the whole Elizabeth told
them, that as she had, at first, thought it improper, that Mary, after such
horrible crimes were imputed to her, should be admitted to her presence, before
she had, in some measure, justified herself from the charge; so now, that her
guilt was confirmed by so many plausible evidences, and all answer denied, she
must, for her part, persevere more steadily in that resolution Anderson, vol.
IV. part 2. p. 170, etc. Goodall, vol. II. p. 254.
. Elizabeth next called in the Queen of Scots commissioners, and after
observing, that she esteemed it much more decent for their mistress to continue
the conferences, than to require the liberty of justifying herself in person;
she told them, that Mary might either send her reply by a person whom she
trusted, or deliver it herself to some English noblemen, whom Elizabeth should
appoint to wait upon her: But as to her resolution of making no reply at all,
she must regard it as the strongest confession of guilt; nor could they ever be
esteemed her friends, who advised her to that method of proceeding Anderson,
vol. IV. part 2. p. 179, etc. Goodall, vol. II. p. 268.
. These topics she enforced still more strongly in a letter which she wrote to
Mary herself Anderson, vol. IV. part 2 p. 183. Goodall, vol. II. p. 269.
.

THE Queen of Scots had no other subtersuge from these pressing instances than
still to demand a personal conference with Elizabeth: A concession which, she
was sensible, could never be granted Cabala, p. 1^7.
; both because Elizabeth knew, that that expedient could decide nothing, and
because it brought matters to extremity, which that princess wanted to avoid.
In order to keep herself better in countenance, Mary thought of another device.
Even after all the conferences were broke off, she ordered her commissioners to
accuse the earl of Murray and his associates as the murderers of the Kind
Goodall, vol. II. p. 280.
: But this accusation, coming so late, being extorted merely by a complaint to
Murray's, and being unsupported by any proof, could only be regarded as an
angry retaliation upon her enemy Unless we take this angry accusation, advanced
by Queen Mary, to be an argument of Murray's guilt, there remains not the least
presumption which should lead us to suspect him to have been any way an
accomplice in the King's murder. That Queen never pretended to give any proof
of the charge; and her commissioners affirmed at the time, that they themselves
knew of none, though they were ready to maintain its truth by their mistress's
orders, and would produce such proof as she should send them. It is remarkable,
that, at that time, it was impossible for either her or them to produce any
proof; because the conferences before the English commissioners were previously
broke off.

It is true, the bishop of Ross, in an angry pamphlet, wrote by him under a
borrowed name, (where it is easy to say any thing) affirms, that lord Herreis,
a few days after the King's death, charged Murray with the guilt, openly, to
his face, at his own table. That nobleman, as Lesly relates the matter,
affirmed, that Murray, riding in Fife with one of his servants, the evening
before the commission of that crime, said to him among other talk, This night'
ere morning the lord Darnley shall lose his life. See Anderson, vol. I. 75. But
this is only hearsay of Lesly's, concerning a hearsay of Herreis's; and
contains a very improbable fact. Would Murray, without any use or necessity,
communicate to a servant, such a dangerous and important secret, merely by way
of conversation? We may also observe, that lord Herreis himself was one of
Queen Mary's commissioners who accused Murray. Had he ever heard this story, or
given credit to it, was not that the time to have produced it; and not have
affirmed, as he did, that he, for his part, knew nothing of Murray's guilt. See
Goodall, vol. II. p. 307.

The earls of Huntley and Argyle accuse Murray of this crime; but the reason
which they assign is most ridiculous. He had given his consent to Queen Mary's
divorce from the King; therefore he was the King's murderer. See Anderson, vol.
IV. part 2. p. 192. It is a sure argument, that these earls knew no better
proof against Murray, otherwise they would have produced it, and not have
infilled on so absurd a presumption. Was not this also the time for Huntley to
deny his writing Mary's contract with Bothwel, if that paper had been a forgery?

Murray could have no motive to commit that crime. The King, indeed, bore him
some ill will; but the King himself was become so despicable, both from his own
ill-conduct and the Queen's aversion to him, that he could neither do good nor
harm to any body. To judge by the event, in any case, is always absurd; but
more especially in the present. The King's murder, indeed, procured Murray the
regency: But much more Queen Mary's ill conduct and imprudence, which he could
not possibly foresee, and which never would have happened, had she been
entirely innocent.


. She also desired to have copies of the papers given in by the regent; but as
she still persisted in her resolution to make no reply, this demand was finally
refused her Goodall, vol. II. p. 2, 3, 310, 311. Haynes, vol. I. p. 492.
.

As Mary had thus put an end to the conference, the regent expressed great
impatience to return into Scotland; and he complained, that his enemies had
taken advantage of his absence, and had thrown the whole government into
confusion. Elizabeth, therefore, dismissed him; and granted him the loan of
five thousand pounds, to bear the charges of his journey Rymer, tom. XV. p. 677.
. During the conference at York, the duke of Chatelrault arrived at London, in
passing from France; and as the Queen knew, that he was engaged in Mary's
party, and had very plausible pretensions to the regency of the King of Scots;
she thought proper to detain him till after Murray's departure. But
notwithstanding these marks of favor, and some other assistance, which she
secretly gave the regent MS. in the Advocate's library. A. 3, 29. p. 128, 129,
130, from Cott. lab. Call, c. ^.
, she still declined acknowleging the young King, or treating with Murray as
regent of Scotland.

ORDERS were given for removing the Queen of Scots from Bolton, a place
surrounded with catholics, to Tutbury in the county of Stafford; where she was
put under the custody of the earl of Shrewsbury. Elizabeth entertained hopes,
that that princess, discouraged by her misfortunes, and confounded by the late
transactions, would be glad to secure a safe retreat from all the tempests,
with which she had been agitated; and she promised to bury every thing in
oblivion, provided Mary would agree, either to resign voluntarily her crown, or
to associate her son with her in the government; and the administration to
remain, during his minority, in the hands of the earl of Murray Goodall, vol.
II. p. 295.
. But that high-spirited princess refused all treaty upon such terms, and
declared, that her last words should be those of a Queen of Scotland. Besides
many other reasons, she said, which fixed her in that resolution, she knew,
that, if, in the present emergence, she made such concessions, her submission
would be universally deemed an acknowlegement of guilt, and would ratify all
the calumnies of her enemies Ibid. p. 301.
.

MARY still insisted upon the alternative of two demands; either that Elizabeth
should in assist her in recovering her authority, or should give her liberty to
retire into France, and make trial of the friendship of other princes: And as
she asserted, that she had come voluntarily into England, invited by many
former professions of amity, she thought that one of these requests could not,
without the most extreme injustice, be refused her. But Elizabeth, sensible of
the danger, which attended either of these proposals, was secretly resolved to
detain her still a captive; and as her retreat into England had been very
little voluntary, her claim upon the Queen's generosity appeared much less
urgent than she was willing to pretend. Necessity, it was thought, would to the
prudent justify her detention: Her past misconduct would apologize for it to
the equitable: And though it was foreseen, that compassion for her situation,
joined to her intrigues and insinuating behavior, would, while she remained in
England, excite the zeal of her friends, especially of the catholics; these
inconveniences were esteemed much less than those which attended any other
expedient. Elizabeth trusted also to her own address, for eluding all those
difficulties: She proposed to avoid breaking absolutely with the Queen of
Scots, to keep her always in hopes of accommodation, to negotiate perpetually
with her, and still to throw the blame of not coming to any conclusion, either
on unforeseen accidents, or on the obstinacy and perverseness of others.

WE come now to mention some English affairs, which we left behind us, that we
might not interrupt our narration of the events in Scotland, which form so
material a part of the present reign. The term, fixed by the treaty of
Cateau-Cambresis for the restitution of Calais expired in 1567; and Elizabeth,
after making her demand at the gates of that city, sent Sir Thomas Smith to
Paris; and that minister, in conjunction with Sir Henry Norris, her ordinary
ambassador, enforced her pretensions. Conferences were held on that head,
without coming to any conclusion. The chancellor De L'Hopital told the English
ambassadors, that though France by an article of the treaty was obliged to
restore Calais on the expiration of eight years, there was another article of
the same treaty, which now deprived Elizabeth of all right, that could accrue
to her by that engagement: That it was agreed, if the English should, during
that interval, commit hostilities upon France, they should instantly forfeit
all claim to Calais; and the taking possession of Havre and Dieppe, with
whatever pretenses that measure might be covered, was a plain violation of the
peace between the nations: That though these places were not taken by force, but
put into Elizabeth's hands by the governors; these governors were rebels; and a
correspondence with such offenders was the most flagrant injury, which could be
committed to any sovereign: That in the treaty, which ensued upon the expulsion
of the English from Normandy, the French ministers had absolutely refused to
make any mention of Calais, and had thereby declared their intention to take
advantage of the title which had accrued to the crown of France: And that though
a general clause had been inserted, implying a reservation of all claims; this
concession could not avail the English, who at that time possessed no just
claim to Calais, and had previously forfeited all pretensions to that fortress
Haynes, p. 587.
. The Queen was no wise surprised at hearing these allegations; and as she
knew, that the French court intended not from the first to make restitution,
much less, after they could defend their refusal by such plausible reasons, she
thought it better for the present to submit to the loss, than to pursue a
doubtful title by a war both dangerous and expensive, as well as unseasonable
Camden, p. 406.
.

ELIZABETH entered anew into negotiations for marrying the archduke Charles;
and she seemed at present to have no great motive of policy, which might induce
her to make this fallacious offer: But as she was very rigorous in the terms
insisted on, and refused him all power and title, and even the exercise of his
religion in England, the treaty came to nothing; and that prince, despairing of
success in his addresses, married the daughter of Albert, duke of Bavaria Ibid.
p. 407, 408.
.

CHAP. III.
Character of the puritans. -- Duke of Norfolk's conspiracy. -- Insurrection in
the north. -- Assassination of the earl of Murray. -- A Parliament. -- Civil
wars of France. -- Affairs of the Low Countries. -- New conspiracy of the duke
of Norfolk -- Trial of Norfolk. -- His execution. -- Scotch affairs. -- French
Affairs. Massacre of Paris. -- French affairs. -- Civil wars of the Low
Countries. -- A Parliament.

Character of the puritans.
OF all the European churches, which shook off the yoke of the papal authority,
no one proceeded with so much reason and moderation as the church of England;
an advantage, which had been derived partly from the interposition of the civil
magistrate in this innovation, partly from the gradual and slow steps by which
the reformation was conducted in that kingdom. Rage and animosity against the
catholic religion was as little indulged as could be supposed in such a
revolution: The fabric of the secular hierarchy was maintained entire: The
ancient liturgy was preserved, so far as was thought consistent with the new
principles: Many ceremonies, become venerable from age and preceding use, were
retained: The splendour of the catholic worship, though removed, had at least
given place to order and decency: The distinctive habits of the clergy,
according to their different ranks, were continued: No innovation was admitted
merely from spite and opposition to the former usage: And the new religion, by
mitigating the genius of the ancient superstition, and rendering it more
compatible with the peace and interests of society, had preserved itself in
that happy medium, which wise men have always sought, and which the people have
so seldom been able to maintain.

BUT though such in general was the spirit of the reformation in that country,
many of the English reformers, being men of a more warm complexion and more
obstinate temper, endeavored to push matters to extremity against the church
of Rome, and indulged themselves in the most violent contrariety and antipathy
to all former practices. Among these, Hooper, who afterward suffered for his
religion with such extraord nary constancy, was chiefly distinguished. This man
was named, during the reign of Edward, to the fee of Gloucester, and had no
scruple to accept of the episcopal office; but he refused to be consecrated in
the episcopal habits, the cymarre and rochette, which had formerly, he said,
been abused to superstition, and which were thereby rendered unbecoming a true
christian. Cranmer and Ridley were surprised at this objection, which opposed
the received practice, and even the established laws; and though young Edward,
desirous to promote a man so celebrated for his eloquence, his zeal, and his
morals, enjoined them to dispense with this ceremony, they still continued
resolute to retain it. Hooper then embraced the resolution, rather to refuse
the bishopric than cloth himself in those hated garments; but it was
determined, that, for the sake of the example, he should not escape so easily.
He was first confined to Cranmer's house, and then thrown into prison, till he
should consent to be a bishop on the terms proposed: He was plied with
conferences, and reprimands, and arguments: Bucer and Peter Martyr and the most
celebrated foreign reformers were consulted on this important question: And a
compromise, with great difficulty, was at last made, that Hooper should not be
obliged to wear commonly the obnoxious robes, but should agree to be
consecrated in them, and to use them during cathedral service Burnet, vol. II.
p. 152. Heylin, p. 90.
: A condescension not a little extraordinary in a man of so inflexible a spirit
as this reformer.

THE same objection, which had arisen with regard to the episcopal habits, had
been moved against the raiment of the inferior clergy; and the surplice in
particular, with the tippet and corner cap, was a great object of abhorrence to
many of the popular zealots Strype, vol. I. p. 416.
. In vain was it urged, that particular habits, as well as postures and
ceremonies, being constantly used by the clergy, and employed in religious
service, acquire a veneration in the eyes of the people, appear sacred to their
apprehensions, excite their devotion, and contract a kind of mysterious virtue,
which attaches the affections of men to the national and established worship:
That in order to produce this effect an uniformity in these particulars is
requisite, and even a perseverance, as far as possible, in the former practice:
And that the nation would be happy, if, by retaining these inoffensive
observances, they could engage the people to renounce willingly what was
hurtful or pernicious in the ancient superstition. These arguments, which had
influence with wise men, were the very reasons, which engaged the violent
protestants to reject the habits. They pushed matters to a total opposition
with the church of Rome: Every compliance, they said, was a symbolizing with
Antichrist Ibid. p. 416.
: And this spirit was carried so far by some reformers, that in a national
remonstrance, which was afterward made by the church of Scotland against these
habits, it was asked, "What has Christ Jesus to do with Belial? What has
darkness to do with light? If surplices, corner caps, and tippets have been
badges of idolaters in the very act of their idolatry; why should the preacher
of Christian liberty, and the open rebuker of all superstition partake with the
dregs of the Romish beast? Yea, who is there that ought not rather to be afraid
of taking in his hand or on his forehead the print and mark of that odious
beast? Keith, p. 565. Knox, p. 402.
" But this application was rejected by the English church.

THERE was only one instance, where the spirit of contradiction to the
Romanists took place universally in England: The altar was removed from the
wall, was placed in the middle of the church, and was thenceforth denominated
the communion table. The reason, why this reformation met with such general
compliance, was, that the nobility and gentry got thereby a pretense for making
spoil of the plate, vestures, and rich ornaments, which belonged to the altars
Heylin, preface, p. 3. Hist. p. 106.
.

THESE disputes, which had been started during the reign of Edward, were
carried abroad by the protestants, who fled from the persecutions of Mary; and
as their zeal had received an increase from the furious cruelty of their
enemies, they were generally inclined to carry their opposition to the utmost
extremity against the practices of the church of Rome. Their communication with
Calvin and the other reformers, who followed the discipline and worship of
Geneva, confirmed them farther in this obstinate reluctance; and though some of
the refugees, particularly those established at Frankfort, still adhered to
King Edward's liturgy, the prevailing spirit carried these confessors to seek a
still farther reformation. On the accession of Elizabeth, they returned to
their native country; and being regarded with general veneration on account of
their zeal and past sufferings, they ventured to insist on the establishment of
their projected model; nor did they want countenance from many of the
considerable persons in the Queen's council. But the Princess herself, so far
from being willing to despoil religion of the few ornaments and ceremonies,
which remained in it, was of herself rather inclined to bring the public
worship still nearer to the Romish ritual When Nowel, one of her chaplains, had
spoke less reverently in a sermon, preached before her of the sign of the
cross, she called aloud to him from her closet window, commanding him to retire
from that un^^lly digression and to return unto his text. And on the other
side, when one of her divines had preached a sermon in defense of the real
presence, she openly gave him thanks for his pains and piety. Heylin, p. 124.
She would have absolutely forbid the marriage of the clergy, if Cecil had not
interposed. Strype's Life of Parker, p. 107, 108, 109. She was an enemy to
sermons; and usually said, that she thought two or three preachers were
sufficient for a whole county.
; and she thought, that the reformation had already gone too far in shaking off
those forms and observances, which, without distracting men of more refined
apprehensions, tend in a very innocent manner to allure, and amuse, and engage
the vulgar. She took care to have a law for uniformity strictly enacted: She
was empowered by the parliament to add any new ceremonies, which she thought
proper: And though she was sparing in the exercise of this prerogative, she
continued rigid in exacting an observance of the established laws, and in
punishing all nonconformity. The zealots, therefore, who harbored a secret
antipathy to the episcopal order and to the whole liturgy, were obliged, in a
great measure, to conceal these sentiments, which would have been regarded as
highly audacious and criminal; and they confined their avowed objections to the
surplice, the confirmation of children, the sign of the cross in baptism, the
ring in marriage, kneeling at the sacrament, and bowing at the name of Jesus.
So fruitless is it for sovereigns to watch with a rigid care over orthodoxy,
and employ the sword in religious controversy, that the work, perpetually
renewed, is perpetually to begin; and a garb, a gesture, nay, a metaphysical or
grammatical distinction, when rendered important by the disputes of theologians
and the zeal of the magistrate, is sufficient to destroy the unity of the
church and even the peace of society. These controversies had already excited
such ferment among the people, that in some places they refused to frequent the
churches where the habits and ceremonies were used, would not salute the
conforming clergy, and proceeded so far as to revile them in the streets, to
spit in their faces, and to use them with all manner of contumely Strype's Life
of Whitgift, p. 460.
. And while the sovereign authority checked these excesses, the flame was
confined, not extinguished; and burning fiercer from confinement, it burst out
in the succeeding reigns to the destruction of the church and monarchy.

ALL enthusiasts, indulging themselves in rapturous flights, ecstasies, visions,
inspirations, have a natural aversion to episcopal authority, to ceremonies,
rites, and forms, which they denominate superstition, or beggarly elements, and
which seem to restrain the liberal effusions of their zeal and devotion: But
there was another set of opinions adopted by these innovators, which rendered
them in a peculiar manner the object of Elizabeth's aversion. The same bold and
daring spirit, which accompanied them in their addresses to the divinity,
appeared in their political speculations; and the principles of civil liberty,
which, during some reigns had been very little avowed in the nation, and which
were totally incompatible with the present exorbitant prerogative, had been
strongly adopted by this new sect. Scarce any sovereign before Elizabeth, and
none after her, carried higher, both in speculation and practice, the authority
of the crown; and the puritans (so these sectaries were called, on account of
their pretending to a greater purity of worship and discipline) could not
recommend themselves worse to her favor, than by preaching up the doctrine of
resisting or restraining princes. From all these motives, the Queen neglected
no opportunity of depressing those zealous innovators; and while they were
countenanced by some of her most favored ministers, Cecil, Leicester, Knolles,
Bedford, Walsingham, she never was, to the end of her life, reconciled to their
principles and practices.

WE have thought proper to insert in this place an account of the rise and the
genius of the puritans; because Camden marks the present year, as the period
when they began to make themselves most considerable in England. We now return
to our narration.

Duke of Norfolk's conspiracy.
THE Duke of Norfolk was the only peer, who enjoyed the highest title of
nobility; and as there were at present no princes of the blood, the splendour of
his family, the opulence of his fortune, and the extent of his influence, had
rendered him without comparison the first subject in England. The qualities of
his mind corresponded to his high station: Beneficent, affable, generous, he
had acquired the affections of the people; prudent, moderate, obsequious, he
possessed without jealousy the good graces of his sovereign. His grandfather
and father had long been regarded as the leaders of the catholics; and this
hereditary attachment, joined to the alliances of blood, had procured him the
friendship of the most considerable men of that party: But as he had been
educated among the reformers, was sincerely devoted to their principles, and
maintained that strict decorum and regularity of life, by which the protestants
were at that time distinguished; he thereby enjoyed the rare felicity of being
popular even with the most opposite factions. The height of his prosperity
alone was the source of his misfortunes, and engaged him into attempts, from
which his virtue and prudence would naturally have for ever kept him at a
distance.

NORFOLK was at this time a widower; and being of a suitable age to espouse the
Queen of Scots, that marriage had appeared so natural, that it had occurred to
several of his friends and those of that princess: But the first person, who,
after secretary Lidington, opened the scheme to the duke is said to be the earl
of Murray, before his departure for Scotland Lesley, p. 36, 37.
. That nobleman set before Norfolk both the advantage of composing the
differences in Scotland by an alliance which would be so generally acceptable,
and the prospect of reaping the succession of England; and in order to bind
Norfolk's interest the faster with Mary's, he proposed that the duke's daughter
should espouse the young king of Scotland. The obtaining previously Elizabeth's
consent, was regarded both by Murray and Norfolk as a circumstance essential to
the success of their project; and all circumstances being adjusted between
them, Murray took care, by the means of Sir Robert Melvil, to have the design
communicated to the Queen of Scots. That princess replied, that the vexations,
which she had met with in her two last marriages, had made her more inclined to
lead a single life; but she was determined to sacrifice her own inclinations to
the public welfare: And therefore, so soon as she should be legally divorced
from Bothwel, she would be determined by the opinion of her nobility and people
in the choice of another husband Lesley, p. 40, 41.
.

IT is probable, that Murray was not sincere in this proposal. He had two
motives to engage him to dissimulation. He knew the danger, which he must run
in his return through the North of England, from the power of the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmoreland, Mary's partisans in that country; and he
dreaded an insurrection in Scotland from the duke of Chatelrault; and the earls
of Argyle and Huntley, whom she had appointed her lieutenants during her
absence. By these feigned appearances of friendship, he both engaged Norfolk to
write in his favor to the northern noblemen State Trials, p. 76, 78.
; and he persuaded the Queen of Scots to give her lieutenants permission, and
even advice, to make a cessation of hostilities with the regent's party Lesley,
p. 41.
.

THE duke of Norfolk, though he had agreed, that Elizabeth's consent should be
previously obtained, before the completion of his marriage, had good reason to
apprehend, that he never would prevail with her voluntarily to make that
concession. He knew her perpetual and unrelenting jealousy against her heir and
rival; he was acquainted with her former reluctance to all proposals of
marriage with the Queen of Scots; he foresaw, that that princess's espousing a
person of his power, and character, and interest, would give the greatest
umbrage; and as it would then become necessary to re-instate Mary in possession
of her throne on some tolerable terms, and even endeavor to re-establish her
character, he dreaded, that Elizabeth, whose politics had now taken a different
turn, would never agree to such indulgent and generous conditions. He therefore
endeavored previously to gain the consent and approbation of several of the
most considerable nobility; and he was successful with the earls of Pembroke,
Arundel, Derby, Bedford, Shrewsbury, Southampton, Northumberland, Westmoreland,
Sussex Lesley, p. 55. Camden, p. 419. Spotswood, p. 230.
. The lord Lumley, and Sir Nicholas Throcmorton embraced cordially the
proposal: Even the earl of Leicester, Elizabeth's declared favorite, who had
forme^ly entertained some views of espousing Mary, willingly resigned all his
pretensions, and seemed to enter zealously into Norfolk's interests Haynes, p.
535.
. There were other motives, besides affection to the duke, which produced this
general combination of the nobility.

SIR William Cecil, secretary of state, was the most vigilant, active, and
prudent minister ever known in England; and as he was governed by no views but
the interests of his sovereign, which he inflexibly pursued, his authority over
her became every day more predominant. Ever cool himself, and uninfluenced by
prejudice or affection, he checked those sallies of passion, and sometimes of
caprice, to which she was subject; and if he failed of persuading her in the
first movement, his perseverance, and remonstrances, and arguments were sure at
last to recommend themselves to her sound discernment. The more credit he
gained with his mistress, the more was he exposed to the envy of her other
counselors; and as he had been supposed to adopt the interests of the house of
Suffolk, whose claim seemed to carry with it no danger to the present
establishment, his enemies, in opposition to him, were naturally led to attach
themselves to the Queen of Scots. Elizabeth saw, without uneasiness, this
emulation among her courtiers, which served to augment her authority; and though
she supported Cecil, wherever matters came to extremity, and dissipated every
conspiracy against him, particularly one laid about this time to have him
thrown into the Tower under some pretense or other Camden, p. 417.
, she never gave him such unlimited confidence as might enable him entirely to
crush his adversaries.

NORFOLK, sensible of the difficulty, which he must meet with in controling
Cecil's councils, especially where they concurred with the inclinations, as
well as interests of the Queen, durst not open to her his intentions of
marrying the Queen of Scots; but proceeded still in the same course of
increasing his interest in the kingdom, and engaging more of the nobility to
take part in his measures. A letter was wrote to Mary by Leicester, and signed
by several men of the first rank, recommending Norfolk for her husband, and
stipulating conditions for the advantage of both kingdoms: That she should give
sufficient surety to Elizabeth, and the heirs of her body, for the free
enjoyment of the crown of England; that a perpetual league, offensive and
defensive, be made between their realms and subjects; that the protestant
religion be established by law in Scotland; and that she should grant an
amnesty to her rebels in that kingdom Lesley, p. 50. Camden, p. 420. Haynes, p.
535, 539.
. When Mary returned a favorable answer to this application, Norfolk applied
himself with new ardor to the execution of his project; and besides securing
the interests of many of the considerable gentry and nobility who resided at
court, he wrote letters to such as lived at their country seats, and possessed
the greatest authority in the several counties Lesly, p. 62.
. The Kings of France and Spain, who interested themselves extremely in Mary's
cause, were secretly consulted, and expressed their approbation of these
measures Ibid. p. 63.
. And though Elizabeth's consent was always supposed as a previous condition to
the finishing this alliance, it was apparently Norfolk's intention, when he
proceeded such lengths without consulting her, to render his party so strong,
that it should no longer be in her power to refuse it State Trials, vol. I. p.
82.
.

IT was impossible, that so extensive a conspiracy could entirely escape the
Queen's vigilance and that of Cecil. She dropped several surmises to the duke, by
which he might learn, that she was acquainted with his designs; and she
frequently warned him to beware on what pillow he reposed his head Camden, p.
420. Spotswood, p. 231.
: But he never had the prudence or the courage to open to her his full
intentions. The first certain intelligence, which she received of this
dangerous combination was from the earl of Murray Lesly, p. 71. It appears by
Haynes, p. 521, 525, that Queen Elizabeth had heard rumors of Norfolk's
dealing with Murray* and charged the latter to inform her of the whole truth,
which he accordingly did. See also the earl of Murray's letter produced on
Norfolk's trial.
, who, if ever he was sincere in promoting Norfolk's marriage, which is much to
be suspected, had at least proposed, for his own safety and that of his party,
that Elizabeth should, in reality as well as in appearance, be entire arbiter
of the conditions, and should not have her consent extorted by any confederacy
of her own subjects. This information gave great alarm to the court of England;
and the more so, that those intrigues were attended with other circumstances,
of which, it is probable, Elizabeth was not wholly ignorant.

AMONG the nobility and gentry, that seemed to enter into Norfolk's views,
there were many, who were zealously attached to the catholic religion, who had
no other design than that of restoring Mary to her liberty, and who would
gladly, by a combination with foreign powers, or even at the expense of a civil
war, have placed her on the throne of England. The earls of Northumberland and
Westmoreland, who possessed great power in the north, were leaders of this
party; and the former nobleman made offer to the Queen of Scots, by Leonard
Dacres, brother to lord Dacres, that he would free her from confinement, and
convey her to Scotland or any other place, to which she should think proper to
retire Lesly, p. 76.
. Sir Thomas and Sir Edward Stanley, sons to the earl of Derby, Sir Thomas
Gerard, Rolstone, and other gentlemen, whose interest lay in the neighborhood
of the place where Mary resided, concurred in the same views, and required,
that, in order to facilitate the execution of the scheme, a diversion should,
in the mean time, be made from the side of Flanders Lesly, p. 98.
. Norfolk discouraged, and even in appearance suppressed, these conspiracies;
both because his duty to Elizabeth would not allow him to think of effecting
his purpose by rebellion, and because he foresaw, that, if the Queen of Scots
came into the possession of these men, they would rather choose for her husband
the King of Spain, or some foreign prince, who had power, as well as
inclination, to reestablish the catholic religion Ibid. p. 77.
.

WHEN men of honor and good principles, like the duke of Norfolk, engage in
dangerous enterprises, they are commonly so unfortunate as to be criminal by
halves; and while they balance between the execution of their designs and
their remorses, their fear of punishment and their hope of pardon, they render
themselves an easy prey to their enemies. The duke, in order to repress the
surmizes, spread against him, spoke contemptuously to Elizabeth of the Scotch
alliance; affirmed that his estate in England was more valuable than the
revenue of a kingdom wasted by civil wars and factions; and declared, that,
when he amused himself in his own tennis-court at Norwich amidst his friends
and vassals, he esteemed himself at least a petty prince, and was fully
contented with his condition Camden, p. 420.
. Finding, that he did not convince her by these asseverations, and that he was
looked on with a jealous eye by the courtiers, he retired to his country-seat
without taking leave Haynes, p (...).
. He soon after repented of this measure, and set out on his return to court,
with a view of using every expedient to regain the Queen's good graces; but he
was met at St. Albans by Fitz-Garret, lieutenant of the band of pensioners, by
whom he was conveyed to Burnham, three miles from Windsor, where the court then
resided Ibid. p. ^^9.
. He was soon after committed to the Tower, under the custody of Sir Henry
Nevil Camden, p. 421. Haynes, p (...)
. Lesley, bishop of Ross, the Queen of Scots's ambassador, was examined and
confronted with Norfolk before the council Lesly, p. 80.
. The earl of Pembroke was confined to his own house: Arundel, Lumley, and
Throcmorton were taken into custody. The Queen of Scots herself was removed to
Coventry; all access to her was, during some time, more strictly prohibited;
and the viscount Hereford was joined to the earls of Shrewsbury and Huntingdon,
in the office of guarding her.

Insurrections in the north.
A RUMOR had been very generally diffused in the north of an intended
rebellion; and the earl of Sussex, president of York, alarmed with the danger,
sent for Northumberland and Westmoreland, in order to examine them; but not
finding any proof against them, he allowed them to depart. The report meanwhile
gained ground daily; and many appearances of its reality being discovered,
orders were dispatched by Elizabeth to these two noblemen, to appear at court,
and answer for their conduct Haynes, p. 552.
. They had already proceeded so far in their criminal designs, that they dared
not to trust themselves in her hands: They had prepared measures for a
rebellion; had communicated their design to Mary and her ministers Ibid. p.
59^. Strype, vol. II. append. p. 30. MS. in the Advocate's Library from Cott.
Lib. Call. c. ^.
; had entered into a correspondence with the duke of Alva, governor of the Low
Countries; had obtained his promise of a reinforcement of troops, and of a
supply of arms and ammunition; and had prevailed on him to send over to London
Chiapini Vitelli, one of his most famous captains, under pretense of adjusting
some differences with the Queen, but in reality with a view of putting him at
the head of the northern rebels. The summons, sent to the two earls,
precipitated the rising before they were fully prepared; and Northumberland
remained in suspense between opposite dangers, when he was informed, that some
of his enemies were on the way with a commission to arrest him. He took horse
instantly, and hastened to his associate Westmoreland, whom he found surrounded
with his friends and vassals, and deliberating with regard to the measures,
which he should follow in the present emergence. They determined to begin the
insurrection without delay; and the great credit of these two noblemen, with
that zeal for the catholic religion, which still prevailed in the
neighborhood, soon drew together multitudes of the common people. They
published a manifesto, in which they maintained, that they intended to attempt
nothing against the Queen, to whom they vowed unshaken allegiance; and that
their sole aim was to re-establish the religion of their ancestors, to remove
evil counselors, and to restore the duke of Norfolk and other faithful peers
to their liberty and to the Queen's favor Cabbala, p. 169. Strype, vol. I. p.
547.
. Their number amounted to four thousand foot and sixteen hundred horse, and
they expected the concurrence of all the catholics in England Stowe, p. 663.
.

THE Queen was not negligent in her defense, and she had beforehand, from her
prudent and wise conduct, acquired the general good will of her people, the
best security of a sovereign; insomuch that even the catholics in most counties
expressed an affection for her service Cabbala, p. 170. Digges, p. 4.
; and the duke of Norfolk himself, though he had lost her favor, and lay in
confinement, was not wanting, as far as his situation permitted, to promote the
levies among his friends and retainers. Sussex, attended with the earls of
Rutland, the lords Hunsdon, Evers, and Willoughby of Parham marched against the
rebels at the head of seven thousand men, and found them already advanced to
the bishopric of Durham, of which they had taken possession. They retired
before him to Hexham; and hearing that the earl of Warwic and lord Clinton were
advancing upon them with a greater body, they found no other expedient but to
disperse themselves without striking a blow. The common people retired to their
houses: The leaders fled into Scotland. Northumberland was found skulking in
that country, and was confined by Murray to the castle of Lochlevin.
Westmoreland received shelter from the cheiftains of the Kers and Scots,
partisans of Mary; and persuaded them to make an inroad into England, with a
view of exciting a quarrel between the two kingdoms. After they had committed
great ravages, they retreated to their own country; and Westmoreland made his
escape into Flanders, where he was protected. This sudden and precipitate
rebellion was followed soon after by another still more imprudent, raised by
Leonard Dacres. Lord Hunsdon, at the head of the garrison of Berwic, was able,
without other assistance, to quell these ^nfurgents. Great severity was
exercised against the people, who had taken part in those rash enterprises.
Sixty-six petty constables were hanged Camden, p. 423.
; and no less than eight hundred persons are said, on the whole, to have
suffered by the hands of the executioner Lesly, p. 82.
. But the Queen was so well pleased with Norfolk's behavior, that she released
him from the Tower, allowed him to live under some show of confinement in his
own house, and only exacted a promise from him not to proceed any farther in
his pretensions to marriage with the Queen of Scots Ibid. p. (...) Camden, p.
42^ (...).
.

ELIZABETH now found that the detention of Mary in England was attended with
all the ill consequences, which she had foreseen when she first embraced that
measure. This latter princess recovering, by means of her misfortunes and her
own natural good sense, from that delirium, in which she seems to have been
thrown during her attachment to Bothwel, had behaved with such modesty and
judgment, and even dignity, that every one, who approached her, was charmed
with her demeanor, and her friends were enabled, on some plausible grounds, to
deny the reality of all those crimes, which had been imputed to her Lesly, p.
^^^. Haynes, p. 511, 5^8.
. The compassion for her situation, and the necessity of effecting her relief,
proved an incitement among all her partisans to be active in promoting her
cause; and a^ her delivery from captivity, it was thought, could no way be
effected but by attempts, dangerous to the established government, Elizabeth
had reason to expect little tranquillity so long as the Scotch Queen remained a
prisoner in her hands. But as this inconvenience had been preferred to the
danger of allowing that princess to enjoy her liberty, and to seek relief in
all the catholic courts of Europe, it behoved the Queen to support the measure
which she had adopted, and to guard by every prudent expedient against the
mischiefs to which it was exposed. She still flattered Mary with hopes of her
protection, maintained an ambiguous conduct between that Queen and her enemies
in Scotland, negotiated perpetually concerning the terms of her restoration,
made constant professions of friendship to her; and by these artifices
endeavored both to prevent her from making any desperate efforts for her
delivery, and to satisfy the French and Spanish ambassadors, who never
intermitted their solicitations, sometimes accompanied with menaces, in her
favor. This deceit was received with the same deceit by the Queen of Scots:
Professions of confidence were returned by professions equally insincere: And
while an appearance of friendship was maintained on both sides, the animosity
and jealousy, which had long prevailed between them, was every day becoming
more inveterate and incurable. These two princesses, in address, capacity,
activity, and spirit, were nearly a match for each other; but unhappily, Mary,
besides her present forlorn condition, was always inferior in personal conduct
and discretion, as well as in power, to her illustrious rival.

ELIZABETH and Mary wrote at the same time letters to the regent. The Queen of
Scots desired, that her marriage with Bothwel might be examined, and a divorce
legally pronounced between them. The Queen of England gave Murray the choice of
three conditions; that Mary should be restored to her dignity on certain terms;
that she should be associated with her son, and the administration remain in
the regent's hands, till the young prince should come to years of discretion;
or that she should be allowed to live at liberty as a private person in
Scotland, and have an honorable settlement made upon her MSS. in the
advocate's library. A. 3. 29. p 137. from Cott. Li b. al. c. 1*
. Murray summoned a convention, in order to deliberate on these proposals of
the two Queens. No answer was made by them to Mary's letter, under pretense
that she had there maintained the style of a sovereign, addressing herself to
her subjects; but in reality, because they saw that her request was calculated
to prepare the way for a marriage with Norfolk, or some powerful prince, who
could support her cause, and restore her to the throne. They replied to
Elizabeth, that the two former conditions were so derogatory to the royal
authority of their prince, that they could not so much as deliberate concerning
them: The third alone could be the subject of treaty. It was evident, that
Elizabeth, in proposing conditions so unequal in their importance, invited the
Scotch to a refusal of those which were most advantageous to Mary; and as it
was difficult, if not impossible, to adjust all the terms of the third, so as
to render it secure and eligible to all parties, it was concluded that she was
not sincere in any of them Spotswood, p. 230, 231. Lesly, p 71.
.

Camden, p 425. Lesly, p. 83.
; and as Elizabeth found the detention of her in England so dangerous, it is
probable, that she would have been pleased, on any honorable or safe terms, to
rid herself of a prisoner who gave her so much inquietude. 23 January.
Assassination of the earl of Murray.
But all these projects vanished by the sudden death of the regent, who was
assassinated, in revenge of a private injury, by a gentleman of the name of
Hamilton. Murray was a person of considerable vigor, ability, and constancy;
but though he was not unsuccessful, during his regency, in composing the
dissentions in Scotland, his talents shone out more eminently in the beginning
than in the end of his life. His manners were rough and austere; and he
possessed not that perfect integrity, which frequently accompanies, and can
alone atone for, that unamiable character.

BY the death of the regent, Scotland relapsed into its former anarchy. Mary's
party assembled together, and made themselves masters of Edinburgh. The castle,
commanded by Kirkaldy of Grange, seemed to favor her cause; and as many of the
principal nobility had embraced that side, it became probable, though the people
were in general averse to her, that her authority might again acquire the
ascendant. To check its progress, Elizabeth dispatched Sussex, with an army, to
the North, under color of chastizing the ravages committed by the borderers.
He entered Scotland, and laid waste the lands of the Kers and Scots, seized the
castle of Hume, and committed hostilities on all Mary's partisans, who, he
said, had offended his mistress, by harboring the English rebels. Sir William
Drury was afterward sent with a body of troops, and he threw down the houses
of the Hamiltons, who were engaged in the same faction. The English armies were
afterward recalled by agreement with the Queen of Scots, who promised, that no
French troops should be introduced into Scotland, and that the English rebels
should, by her partisans, be delivered up to the Queen Lesly, p. 91.
.

BUT though the Queen, covering herself with the pretense of revenging her own
quarrel, so far contributed to support the party of the young King, she was
cautious not to declare openly against the Queen of Scots; and sh even sent a
request, which was equal to a command, to the enemies of that princess, not to
elect, during some time, a regent in the place of Murray Spotswood, p. 240.
. Lenox, the King's grandfather, was, therefore, chosen temporary governor,
under the title of Lieutenant. Hearing afterward, that Mary's partisans,
instead of delivering up Westmoreland, and the other fugitives, as they had
promised, had allowed them to escape into Flanders; she permitted the King's
party to give Lenox the title of regent Ibid. p. 241.
, and she sent Randolf, as her resident, to maintain a correspondence with him.
But notwithstanding this slep, taken in favor of Mary's enemies, she never
laid aside her ambiguous conduct, or quitted the pretensions of amity to that
princess. Being importuned by the bishop of Ross, and her other agents, as well
as by foreign ambassadors, she twice procured a suspension of arms between the
Scotch factions, and by that means stopped the hands of the regent, who was
likely to obtain advantages over the opposite party Ibid. p. 243.
. By these seeming contrarieties she kept alive the factions in Scotland,
increased their mutual animosity, and rendered the whole country a scene of
devastation and of misery Crawford, p. 1^6.
. She had no intention to conquer the kingdom, and consequently no interest nor
design to instigate the parties against each other; but this consequence was an
accidental effect of her cautious politics, by which she was engaged, as far as
possible, to keep on good terms with the Queen of Scots, and never to violate
the appearances of friendship with her, at least those of neutrality Sir James
Melvil, p. 108, 109, ascribes to Elizabeth a positive design of animating the
Scotch factions against each other; but his evidence is too inconsiderable to
counterballance many other authorities, and is, indeed, contrary to her
posterior conduct, as well as her interests, and the necessity of her
situation. It was plainly her interest, that the King's party should prevail,
and nothing could have engaged her to stop their progress, or even forbear from
openly assisting them, but her intention of still amusing the Queen of Scots,
by the hopes of being peaceably restored to her throne. See farther, Strype,
vol. II. Appen. p. 20.
.

THE better to amuse Mary with the prospect of an accommodation, Cecil and Sir
Walter Mildway were sent to her, with proposals from Elizabeth. The terms were
somewhat rigorous, such as a captive Queen might expect from a jealous rival;
and they thereby bore the greater appearance of sincerity on the part of the
English court. It was required, that the Queen of Scots, besides renouncing all
title to the crown of England during the lifetime of Elizabeth, should make a
perpetual league, offensive and defensive, between the kingdoms; that she
should marry no Englishman without Elizabeth's consent, nor any other person
without the consent of the states of Scotland; that redress should be made for
the late ravages committed in England; that justice should be executed on the
murderers of the late King; that the young prince should be sent into England,
to be educated there; that six hostages, all of them noblemen, should be
delivered to the Queen of England, with the castle of Hume, and some other
fortress, for the security of performance Spotswoood, p. 245. Lesly, 101.
. Such were the conditions upon which Elizabeth promised to contribute her
endeavors toward the restoration of the deposed Queen. The necessity of
Mary's affairs obliged her to consent to them; and the Kings of France and
Spain, as well as the pope, when consulted by her, approved of her conduct;
chiefly on account of the civil wars by which all Europe was at that time
agitated, and which incapacitated the catholic princes from giving her any
assistance Lesly, p. 109, etc.
.

ELIZABETH'S commissioners proposed also to Mary a plan of accommodation with
her subjects in Scotland; and after some reasoning on that head, it was agreed,
that the Queen should require Lenox, the regent, to send up commissioners, to
treat of conditions under her mediation. The partisans of Mary boasted, that
all terms were fully settled with the court of England, and that the Scotch
rebels would soon be constrained to submit to the restoration of their
sovereign: But Elizabeth took care that these rumors should meet with no
credit, and that the King's party should not be discouraged, nor sink too low
in their demands. Cecil wrote to inform the regent, that all the Queen of
England's proposals, so far from being fixed and irrevocable, were to be
discussed anew in the conference; and desired him to send commissioners, who
should be constant to the King's cause, and cautious not to make concessions
which might be prejudicial to their party Spotswood p. 245.
. Sussex also, in his letters, dropped hints to the same purpose; and Elizabeth
herself said to the abbot of Dunfermling, whom Lenox had sent to the court of
England, that she would not insist on Mary's restoration, provided the Scotch
could make the justice of their cause appear to her satisfaction; and that
even, if their reasons should fall short of full conviction, she would take
effectual care to provide for their future security Ibid. p. 247, 248.
.

1st of March,
THE Scotch Parliament appointed the Earl of Morton, the Abbot of Dunfermling,
and Sir James Macgill to manage the treaty. These commissioners first presented
memorials, containing reasons for the deposition of their Queen; and they
seconded their arguments, with examples drawn from the Scotch history, with the
authority of laws, and with the sentiments of many famous divines. The losty
ideas, which Elizabeth had entertained of the absolute, indese^zable right of
sovereigns, made her be shocked with these republican topics; and she told the
Scotch commissioners, that she was no-wise satisfied with their reasons for
justifying the conduct of their countrymen; and that they might therefore
proceed to propose the conditions, which they required for their security
Spotswood, p. 248, 249.
. They replied, that their commission did not empower them to treat of any
terms, which might infringe the title and sovereignty of their young king; but
they would gladly hear whatever proposals should be made them by her majesty.
The conditions, recommended by the Queen, were not disadvantageous to Mary; but
as the commissioners still insisted, that they were not authorized to treat, in
any manner, concerning the restoration of that Princess Haynes, 623.
, the conferences were necessarily at an end; and Elizabeth dismissed the
Scotch commissioners with injunctions, that they should return, after having
procured more ample powers from their Parliament Spotswood, p. 249, 250, etc.
Lesly, p. 133, 136. Camden, p. 431, 432.
. The bishop of Ross complained openly to the English council, that they had
abused his mistress by fair promises and professions; and Mary herself was no
longer at a loss to judge of Elizabeth's insincerity. By reason of these
disappointments, matters came still nearer to extremity between the two
Princesses; and the Queen of Scots, finding all her hopes eluded, was more
strongly incited to make, at all hazards, every possible attempt for her
liberty and security.

AN incident also happened about this time, which tended to widen the breach
between Mary and Elizabeth, and to increase the vigilance and jealousy of the
latter Princess. Pope Pius the fifth, who had succeeded Paul, after having
endeavored in vain to conciliate by gentle means the friendship of Elizabeth,
whom his predecessor's violence had irritated, issued at last a bull of
excommunication against her, deprived her of all title to the crown, and
absolved her subjects from their oaths of allegiance Camden, p. 427.
. It seems probable, that this attack on the Queen's authority was made in
concert with Mary, who intended by that means to forward the northern
rebellion; a measure, which was at that time projected Ibid p. 441, from
Caietanus Life of P^us the fifth.
. John Felton affixed this bull to the gates of the bishop of London's palace;
and scorning either to fly or deny the fact, he was seized, and condemned, and
received the crown of martyrdom, for which he appears to have entertained so
violent an ambition Ibid p. 428.
.

2d of April. A Parliament.
A new Parliament, after five years interval, was assembled at Westminster; and
as the Queen, by the rage of the pope against her, was become still more the
head of the ruling party, it might be expected, both from this incident and
from her own prudent and vigorous conduct, that her authority over the two
houses would be absolutely uncontrouleable. It was so in fact; yet is it
remarkable, that it prevailed not without some small opposition; and that too
arising chiefly from the height of zeal for protestantism; a disposition of the
English, which, in general, contributed extremely to increase the Queen's
popularity. We shall be somewhat particular in relating the transactions of
this fession, because they show, as well the extent of the royal power during
that age, as the disposition of Elizabeth and the genius of her government. It
will be curious also to observe the faint dawnings of the spirit of liberty in
the English, the jealousy with which that spirit was repressed by the
sovereign, the imperious conduct which was maintained in opposition to it, and
the ease with which it was subdued by this arbitrary Princess.

THE Lord keeper, Bacon, after the speaker of the commons was elected, told the
Parliament, in the Queen's name, that she enjoined them not to meddle with any
matters of state D'Ewes, p. 141.
: Such was his expression; by which he probably meant, the questions of the
Queen's marriage and the succession, about which they had before given her some
trouble: For as to the other great points of government, alliances, peace and
war, or foreign negotiations; no Parliament in that age ever had the
presumption to take them under consideration, or question, in these
particulars, the conduct of their sovereign.

IN the former Parliament, the puritans had introduced seven bills for a
farther reformation in religion; but they had not been able to prevail in any
one of them Ibid. p. 185.
. This house of commons had sat a very few days, when Stricland, a member,
revived one of the bills, that for the amendment of the liturgy Ibid. p. 156,
157.
. The chief objection, which he mentioned, was the sign of the cross in
baptism. Another member added, the kneeling at the sacrament; and remarked,
that if a posture of humiliation was requisite in that act of devotion, it were
better, that the communicants should throw themselves prostrate on the ground,
in order to keep at the widest distance from former superstition Ibid. p. 167.
.

RELIGION was a point, of which Elizabeth was, if possible, still more jealous
than of matters of state. She pretended, that, in quality of supreme head or
governor of the church, she was fully empowered, by her prerogative alone, to
decide all questions which might arise with regard to doctrine, discipline, or
worship; and she never would allow her Parliaments so much as to take these
points into consideration D'Ewes, p. 158.
. The courtiers forgot not to insist on this topic: The treasurer of the
household, though he allowed, that any heresy might be condemned by Parliament, (a
concession which seems to have been very rash and unguarded; since the act,
investing the crown with the supremacy, or rather acknowledging that
prerogative, gave the sovereign full power to reform all heresies) yet he
affirmed, that it belonged to the Queen alone, as head of the church, to
regulate every question of ceremony in worship Ibid. p. 166.
. The comptroller seconded this argument; insisted on the extent of the Queen's
prerogative; and said, that the house might, from former examples, have taken
warning not to meddle with such matters. One Pistor opposed these remonstrances
of the courtiers. He was scandalized, he said, that affairs of such infinite
consequence (viz. kneeling and making the sign of the cross) should be passed
over so lightly. These questions, he added, concern the salvation of our souls,
and interest every one of us more deeply than the monarchy of the whole world.
This cause he showed to be God's; the rest were all but terrene, yea trifles in
comparison, call you them ever so great: Subsidies, crowns, kingdoms, he knew
not what weight they had, when laid in the balance with subjects of such
unspeakable importance Ibid.
. Though the zeal of this member seems to have been highly approved of, the
house, overawed by the prerogative, voted upon the question, that a petition
should be presented to her majesty, for her license to proceed farther in this
bill; and in the mean time to stop all debate or reasoning concerning it Ibid.
p. 167.
.

MATTERS would probably have rested here, had not the Queen been so highly
offended with Stricland's presumption, in moving the bill for reformation of
the liturgy, that she sent for him to the council, and prohibited him
thenceforth to appear in the house of commons Ibid. p. 175.
. That act of power was too violent even for this submissive Parliament to
endure. Carleton took notice of the matter, complained that the liberties of
the house were violated; observed that Stricland was not a private man, but
represented a multitude; and moved, that he might be sent for, and if he was
guilty of any offense, might answer for it at the bar of the house, which he
insinuated to be the only competent tribunal Ibid.
. Yelverton enforced the principles of liberty with still greater boldness. He
said, that the precedent was dangerous: And though in this happy time of lenity,
among so many good and honorable personages as were at present invested with
authority, nothing of extremity or injury was to be apprehended; yet the times
might alter; what now is permitted, hereafter might be construed as duty, and
might be enforced even on the ground of the present permission. He added, that
all matters not treasonable, or which implied too much derogation of the
imperial crown, might, without offense, be introduced into Parliament; where
every question that concerned the community, must be considered, and where even
the right of the crown itself must finally be determined. He remarked, that men
sat not in that house in their private capacities, but as elected by their
country; and though it was proper, that the prince should retain his prerogative,
yet was that prerogative limited by law: As the sovereign could not of himself
make laws, neither could he break them, merely from his own authority D'Ewes,
p. 175, 176.
.

THESE principles were popular, and noble, and generous; but the open assertion
of them was somewhat new in England: And the courtiers were more warranted by
present practice, when they advanced a contrary doctrine. The treasurer warned
the house to be cautious in their proceedings; neither to venture farther than
their assured warrant might extend, nor hazard their good opinion with her
majesty in any doubtful cause. The member, he said, whom they required, was not
detained on account of any liberty of speech, but for the exhibiting a bill in
the house against the prerogative of the Queen; a temerity which was not to be
tolerated. And he concluded with observing, that even speeches made in that
house, have been questioned and examined by the sovereign Ibid. p. 175.
. Clear, another member, remarked, that the sovereign's prerogative is not so
much as disputable, and that the safety of the Queen is the safety of the
subjects. He added, that in questions of divinity, every man was for his
instruction to repair to his ordinary; and he seems to imply, that the bishops
themselves, for their instruction, must repair to the Queen Ibid.
. Mr. Fleetwood observed, that, in his memory, he knew a man, who, in the fifth
of the present Queen, had been called to account for a speech in the house. But
left this example should be esteemed too recent, he would inform them, from the
parliament rolls, that in the reign of Henry the fifth, a bishop was committed
to prison by the King's command, on account of his freedom of speech; and the
Parliament presumed not to go farther than to be humble suitors for him: In the
subsequent reign, the speaker himself was committed, with another member; and
the house found no other remedy than a like submissive application. He advised
the house to have recourse to the same expedient; and not to presume, either to
send for their member, or demand him as of right Ibid. p. 17^.
. During this speech, those members of the council who sat in the house,
whispered together; upon which the speaker moved, that the house should make
stay of all farther proceedings: A motion, which was immediately complied with.
The Queen, finding that the experiment which she had made, was likely to excite
a great commotion, saved her honor by this silence of the house; and that the
question might no more be resumed, she sent next day to Stricland her
permission to give his attendance in Parliament D'Ewes, p. 176.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING this rebuke from the throne, the zeal of the commons still
engaged them to continue the discussion of those other bills which regarded
religion; but they were interrupted by a still more arbitrary proceeding of the
Queen, in which the lords condescended to be her instrument. That house sent a
message to the commons, desiring that a committee might attend them. Some
members were accordingly appointed for that purpose; and the upper house
informed them, that the Queen's majesty being informed of the articles of
reformation which they had canvassed, approved of them, intended to publish
them, and to make the bishops execute them, by virtue of her regal authority,
as supreme head of the church of England: But that she would not permit them to
be treated of in Parliament Ibid. p. 180, 185.
. The house, though they did not entirely stop proceedings on account of this
injunction, seem no-wise to have been offended at such haughty treatment; and
in the issue all their bills came to nothing.

A MOTION, made by Robert Bell, a puritan, against an exclusive patent granted
to a company of merchants at Bristol Ibid. p. 158.
, gave also occasion to some remarkable incidents. The Queen, some days after
the motion was made, sent her orders, by the mouth of the speaker, commanding
the house to spend little time in motions, and to avoid long speeches. All the
members understood that she had been offended, because a matter had been moved
which seemed to touch her prerogative Ibid. p. 159.
. Fleetwood accordingly spoke of this delicate subject. He observed, that the
Queen had a prerogative of granting patents; that to question the validity of
any patent, was to invade the royal prerogative; that all foreign trade was
entirely subjected to the pleasure of the sovereign; that even the statute
which gave liberty of commerce, admitted of all prohibitions from the crown;
and that the prince, when he granted an exclusive patent, only employed the
power vested in him, and prohibited all others from dealing in any particular
branch of commerce. He quoted the Clerk of the Parliament's book, to prove,
that no man might speak in Parliament of the statute of wills, unless the King
first gave license; because the royal prerogative in the wards was thereby
touched. He showed likewise the statutes of Edward the first, Edward the third,
and Henry the fourth, with a saving of the prerogative. And in Edward the
sixth's time, the protector was applied to, for his allowance to mention
matters of prerogative D'Ewes, p. 160.
.

SIR Humphrey Gilbert, the gallant sea-adventurer, carried these topics still
farther. He endeavored to prove, the motion made by Bell; to be a vain device,
and perilous to be treated of; since it tended to the derogation of the
prerogative imperial, which, whoever should attempt so much as in fancy, could
not, he said, be otherwise accounted than an open enemy. For what difference is
there between saying, that the Queen is not to use the privilege of the crown,
and saying that she is not Queen? And though experience has shown so much
clemency in her majesty, as might, perhaps, make the subjects forget their
duty; it is not good to sport or venture too much with princes. He remembered
them of the fable of the hare, who, upon the proclamation, that all horned
beasts should depart the court, immediately fled, lest his ears should be
construed to be horns; and by this apologue he seems to insinuate, that even
those who heard or permitted such dangerous speeches, would not themselves be
entirely free from danger. He desired them to beware, lest, if they meddled
farther with these matters, the Queen might look to her own power, and finding
herself able to suppress their challenged liberty, and to exert an arbitrary
authority, might imitate the example of Lewis the eleventh of France, who, as
he termed it, delivered the crown from wardship Ibid. p. 168.
.

THOUGH this speech gave some disgust, no body, at the time, replied any thing,
but that Sir Humphrey mistook the meaning of the house, and of the member who
made the motion: They never had other purpose, than to represent their
grievances in due and seemly form unto her majesty. But, in a subsequent
debate, Peter Wentworth, a man of a superior free spirit, called that speech an
insult on the house; noted Sir Humphrey's disposition to flatter and fawn on
the prince; compared him to the cameleon, which can change itself into all
colors, except white; and recommended to the house, a due care of liberty of
speech, and of the privileges of Parliament Ibid. p. 175.
. It appears, on the whole, that the motion against the exclusive patent had no
effect. Bell, the member who first introduced it, was sent for by the council,
and was severely reprimanded for his temerity. He returned to the house with
such an amazed countenance, that all the members, well informed of the reason,
were struck with terror; and during some time, no one durst rise to speak of
any matter of importance, for fear of giving offense to the Queen and the
council. Even after the fears of the commons were somewhat abated, the members
spoke with extreme precaution; and by employing most of their discourse in
preambles and apologies, they showed their conscious terror of the rod which
was hanging over them. Wherever any delicate point was touched; though ever so
gently; nay seemed to be approached, though at ever so great a distance, the
whisper ran about the house, "The Queen will be offended; the council will be
extremely displeased:" And by these surmizes men were warned of the danger to
which they exposed themselves. It is remarkable, that the patent which the
Queen defended with such imperious violence, was contrived for the profit of
four courtiers, and was attended with the utter ruin of seven or eight thousand
of her industrious subjects D'Ewes, p. 242.
.

29th May.
THUS every thing which passed the two houses, was extremely respectful and
submissive; yet did the Queen think it incumbent on her, at the conclusion of
the session, to check, and that with great severity, those feeble efforts for
liberty, which had appeared in the motions and speeches of some members. The
lord keeper told the commons, in her majesty's name, that, though the majority of
the lower house had showed themselves, in their proceedings, discreet, and
dutiful, yet a few of them had discovered a contrary character, and had justly
merited the reproach of audacious, arrogant, and presumptuous: Contrary to
their duty, both as subjects and parliament men, nay contrary to the express
injunctions given them from the throne at the beginning of the session;
injunctions, which it might well have become them to have better attended to;
they had presumed to call in question her majesty's grants and prerogatives.
But her majesty warns them, that since they will thus wilfully forget
themselves, they are otherwise to be admonished: Some other species of
correction must be found for them; since neither the commands of her majesty,
nor the example of their wiser brethren, can reclaim their audacious, arrogant,
and presumptuous folly, by which they are thus led to meddle with what no way
belongs to them, and what lies not within the compass of their understanding
Ibid. p. 151.
.

IN all these transactions appears clearly the opinion which Elizabeth had
entertained of the duty and authority of Parliaments. They were not to canvass
any matters of state: Still less were they to meddle with the church. Questions
of either kind were far above their reach, and were appropriated to the prince
alone, or to those councils and ministers with whom he was pleased to entrust
them. What then was the office of Parliaments? They might give directions for
the due tanning of leather, or milling of cloth; for the preservation of
pheasants and partridges; for the reparation of bridges and highways; for the
punishment of vagabonds or common beggars. Regulations concerning the police of
the country came properly under their inspection; and the laws of this kind
which they prescribed, had, if not a greater, yet a more durable authority,
than those derived solely from the proclamations of the sovereign. Precedents
or reports could fix a rule for decisions in private property, or the
punishment of crimes; but no alteration or innovation in the municipal law
could proceed from any other source than the Parliament; nor would the courts
of justice be induced to change their established practice by an order of
council. But the most acceptable part of parliamentary transactions was the
granting of subsidies; the attainting and punishing the obnoxious nobility, or
any minister of state after his fall; the countenancing such great efforts of
power, as might be deemed somewhat exceptionable, where they proceeded entirely
from the sovereign. The redress of grievances was sometimes promised to the
people; but seldom could have place, while it was an established rule, that the
prerogatives of the crown must not be abridged, or so much as questioned and
examined in Parliament. Even though monopolies and exclusive companies had
already reached an enormous height, and were every day increasing, to the
destruction of all liberty, and extinction of all industry; it was criminal in
a member to propose, in the most dutiful and regular manner, a parliamentary
application against any of them.

THESE maxims of government were not kept secret by Elizabeth, or smoothed over
by any fair appearances or plausible pretenses. They were openly avowed in her
speeches and messages to Parliament; and were accompanied with all the
haughtiness, nay sometimes bitterness of expression, which the meanest servant
could look for from his offended master. Yet notwithstanding this conduct,
Elizabeth continued the most popular sovereign that ever swayed the scepter of
England; because the maxims of her reign were conformable to the principles of
the times, and to the opinion which was generally entertained with regard to
the constitution. The continued encroachments of popular assemblies on
Elizabeth's successors have so changed our ideas of these matters, that the
passages above mentioned appear to us extremely curious, and even at first
surprising; but they were so little remarked, during the time, that neither
Camden, though a contemporary writer, nor any other historian, has taken any
notice of them. So absolute was the authority of the crown, that the precious
spark of liberty had been kindled, and was preserved, by the puritans alone;
and it was to this sect, whose principles appear so frivolous and habits so
ridiculous, that the English owe the whole freedom of their constitution.
Actuated by that zeal which belongs to innovators, and by the courage which
enthusiasm inspires, they hazarded the utmost indignation of their sovereign;
and employing all their industry to be elected into Parliament; a matter not
difficult, while a feat was rather regarded as a burden than an advantage It
appeared this session, that a bribe of four pounds had been given to a mayor
for a seat in Parliament. D'Ewes, p. 181. It is probable, that the member had
no other view but the privilege of being free from arrests.
; they first acquired a majority in that assembly, and then obtained an
ascendant over the church and monarchy.

THE following were the principal laws enacted this session of Parliament. It
was declared treason, during the lifetime of the Queen, to affirm, that she
was not the lawful sovereign, or that any other possessed a better title, or
that she was an heretic, schismatic, or infidel, or that the laws and statutes
cannot limit and determine the right of the crown and the successor thereof: To
maintain in writing or printing, that any person, except the natural issue of
her body, is or ought to be the Queen's heir or successor, subjected the person
and all his abettors, for the first offense, to imprisonment during a year, and
to the forfeiture of half their goods: The second offense subjected them to the
penalty of a praemunire 1^ Eliz. c. 1.
. This law was plainly leveled against the Queen of Scots and her partisans;
and employed an avowal, that Elizabeth never intended to declare her successor*
It may be noted, that the usual phrase of lawful issue, which the Parliament
thought indecent toward the Queen, as if she could be supposed to have any
other, was changed into that of natural issue. But this alteration was the
source of great ridicule during the time; and some persons suspected a deeper
design, as if Leicester intended, in case of the Queen's death, to produce some
bastard of his own, and affirm that he was her offspring Camden, p. 436.
.

IT was also enacted, that whosoever by bulls shall publish absolutions or
other rescripts of the pope, or shall by means of them reconcile any man to the
church of Rome, such offenders, as well as those who were so reconciled, should
be guilty of treason. The penalty of a praemunire was imposed on every one who
imported any Agnus Dei, crucifix, or such other implement of superstition,
consecrated by the pope 13 Eliz. c. 2.
. The former laws against taking interest, which was denominated usury, were
enforced by a new statute Ibid. c. 8.
. A supply of one subsidy and two fifteenths was granted by Parliament. The
Queen, as she was determined to yield to them none of her power, was very
cautious of asking from them any supplies. She endeavored, either by a rigid
frugality to make her ordinary revenues suffice for the necessities of the
crown, or she employed her prerogative and acquired money by the granting of
patents, monopolies, or by some such ruinous expedient.

THOUGH Elizabeth possessed such uncontrouled authority over her parliaments, and
such extensive influence over her people; though during a course of thirteen
years, she had been able to maintain the public tranquillity, which was only
interrupted by the hasty and ill concerted insurrection of the north; she was
still kept in great anxiety, and felt her throne perpetually totter under her.
The violent commotions, excited in France and the Low Countries, as well as in
Scotland, seemed in one view to secure her against any disturbance; but they
served, on more reflection, to instruct her in the danger of her situation,
when she remarked, that England, no less than these neighboring countries,
contained the seeds of intestine discord, the differences of religious opinion,
and the furious intolerance and animosity of the opposite sectaries.

Civil wars of France.
THE league, formed at Bayonne in 1566 for the extermination of the
protestants, had not been concluded so secretly but intelligence of it had
reached Conde, Coligni, and the other leaders of the hugonots; and finding,
that the measures of the court agreed with their suspicions, they were
determined to prevent the cruel perfidy of their enemies, and to strike a blow
before the catholics were aware of the danger. The hugonots, though dispersed
over the whole kingdom, formed a kind of empire within itself; and being
closely united, as well by their religious zeal, as by the dangers, to which
they were perpetually exposed, they obeyed with entire submission the orders of
their leaders, and were ready on every alarm to fly to arms. The King and
Queen Mother were living in great security at Monceaux in Brie; when they found
themselves surrounded by protestant troops, which had secretly marched thither
from all quarters; and had not a body of Swiss come hastily to their relief,
and conducted them with great intrepidity to Paris, they must have fallen,
without resistance, into the hands of the insurgents. A battle was afterward
fought in the plains of St. Dennis, where, though the old constable Montmorency,
the general of the catholics, was killed combating bravely at the head of his
troops, the hugonots were finally defeated. Conde collecting his broken troops,
and receiving a strong reinforcement from the German protestants, appeared
again in the field; and laying siege to Chartres, a place of great importance,
obliged the court to agree to a new accommodation. Such was the mutual
animosity of these religionists, that, even had the leaders on both sides been
ever so sincere in their intentions for peace, and reposed ever so great
confidence in each other, it would have been difficult to have retained the
people in tranquillity; much more, where such extreme jealousy prevailed, and
where the court employed every pacification as a snare for their enemies. A
plan was laid for seizing the person of the prince and admiral; who narrowly
escaped to Rochelle, and summoned their partisans to their assistance Davila,
lib. 4.
. The civil wars were renewed with greater fury than ever, and the parties
became still more exasperated against each other. The young duke of Anjou,
brother to the King, commanded the forces of the catholics; and fought in 1569
a great battle at Jarnac with the hugonots, where the prince of Conde was
killed, and his army defeated. This discomfiture, with the loss of so great a
leader, reduced not the hugonots to despair. The admiral still supported the
cause; and having placed at the head of the protestants, the prince of Navarre,
then sixteen years of age, and the young prince of Conde, he encouraged the
party rather to perish bravely in the field, than ignominiously by the hands of
the executioner. He collected such numbers, so determined to endure every
extremity, that he was enabled to make head against the duke of Anjou; and
being strengthened by a new reinforcement of Germans, he obliged that prince to
retreat and to divide his forces. Coligni then laid siege to Poitiers; and as
the eyes of all France were turned on this enterprise, the duke of Guise,
emulous of the renown, which his father had acquired by the defense of Metz,
threw himself into the place, and so animated the garrison by his valor and
conduct, that the admiral was obliged to raise the siege. Such was the
commencement of that unrivaled fame and grandeur, afterward attained by this
duke of Guise. The attachment, which all the catholics had borne to his father,
was immediately transferred to the son; and men pleased themselves in comparing
all the great and heroic qualities, which seemed, in a manner, hereditary in
that family. Equal in affability, in munificence, in address, in eloquence, and
in every quality, which engages the affections of men; equal also in valor, in
conduct, in enterprise, in capacity; there seemed only this difference between
them, that the son, educated in more turbulent times, and finding a greater
dissolution of all law and order, exceeded the father in ambition and temerity,
and was engaged in enterprises still more destructive to the authority of his
sovereign and to the repose of his native country.

ELIZABETH, who kept her attention fixed on the civil commotions of France, was
no wise pleased with this new rise of her enemies, the Guises; and being
anxious for the fate of the protestants, whose interests were connected with
her own Haynes, p. 471.
, she was engaged, notwithstanding her aversion against all rebellion, and all
opposition to the will of the sovereign, to give them secretly some assistance.
Besides employing her authority with the German princes, she sent money to the
Queen of Navarre, and received some jewels as pledges for the loan. And she
permitted Henry Champernon to levy, and transport over into France, a regiment
of an hundred gentlemen volunteers; among whom Walter Raleigh, then a young
man, began to distinguish himself in that great school of military valor
Camden, p. 423.
. The admiral, constrained by the impatience of his troops, and by the
difficulty of subsisting them, fought with the duke of Anjou, the battle of
Moncontour in Poictou, where he was wounded and defeated. The court of France,
notwithstanding their frequent experience of the obstinacy of the hugonots, and
the vigor of Coligni, vainly flattered themselves that the force of the rebels
was at last finally annihilated; and they neglected farther preparations
against a foe, who, they thought, could never more become dangerous. They were
surprised to hear, that that leader had appeared in another quarter of the
kingdom; had encouraged the young princes, whom he governed, to equal
constancy; had assembled an army; had taken the field; and was even strong
enough to threaten Paris. The public finances, diminished by the continued
disorders of the kingdom, and wasted by so many fruitless military enterprises,
could no longer bear the charge of a new armament; and the King,
notwithstanding his extreme animosity against the hugonots, was obliged, in
1570, to conclude an accommodation with them, to grant them a pardon for all
past offenses, and to renew the edicts for liberty of conscience.

THOUGH a pacification was seemingly concluded, the mind of Charles was no way
reconciled to his rebellious subjects; and this accommodation, like all the
foregoing, was nothing but a snare, by which the perfidious court had projected
to destroy at once, without danger, all its formidable enemies. As the two
young princes, the admiral, and all the leaders of the hugonots, instructed by
past experience, discovered an extreme distrust of the King's intentions, and
kept themselves in security, at a distance, all possible artifices were
employed to remove their apprehensions, and convince them of the sincerity of
the new councils, which seemed to be embraced. The terms of the peace were
exactly observed to them; the toleration was regularly maintained; all
attempts, made by the zealous catholics to infringe it, were punished with
severity; offices, and favors, and honors were bestowed on the principal
nobility among the protestants; and the King and council every where declared,
that, tired of civil disorders, and convinced of the impossibility of forcing
men's conscience, they were thenceforth determined to allow every one the free
exercise of his religion.

AMONG the other artifices, employed to ^ull the protestants into a fatal
security, Charles assected to enter into close connexions with Elizabeth; and
as it seemed not the interest of France to forward the union of the two
kingdoms of Great Britain, that princess the more easily flattered herself,
that the French monarch would prefer her friendship to that of the Queen of
Scots. The better to deceive her, proposals of marriage were made her with the
duke of Anjou; a prince whose youth, beauty, and reputation for valor might
naturally be supposed to recommend him to a woman, who had appeared not
altogether indifferent to these endowments. The Queen immediately founded on
this offer the project of deceiving the court of France; and being intent on
the artifice of that scheme, she laid herself the more open to be deceived.
Negotiations were entered into with regard to the marriage; terms of the
contract were proposed; difficulties started and removed; and the two courts,
equally insincere, though not equally criminal, seemed to approach every day
nearer each other in their demands and concessions. The great obstacle seemed
to lie in adjusting the differences of religion; because Elizabeth, who
recommended toleration to Charles, was determined not to grant it in her own
dominions, not even to her husband; and the duke of Anjou seemed unwilling to
submit, for the sake of interest, to the dishonor of an apostasy Camden, p
433. Davila* lib. 5. Digges's Complete Ambassador, p. 84, 101, 111.
.

THE artificial politics of Elizabeth never triumphed so much in any
contivances as in those which were conjoined with her coquetry; and as her
character in this particular was generally known, the court of France thought
that they might, without danger of forming any final conclusion, venture the
farther in their concessions and offers to her. The Queen also had other
motives for dissimulation. Besides the advantage of discouraging Mary's
partisans by the prospect of an alliance between France and England, her
situation with Philip demanded her utmost vigilance and attention; and the
present revolutions in the Low Countries made her glad of fortifying herself
even with the appearance of a new confederacy.

Affairs of the Low Countries.
THE theological controversies, which had long agitated Europe, had, from the
beginning, penetrated into the Low Countries; and as these provinces maintained
a very extensive commerce, they had early received from every kingdom, with
which they corresponded, a tincture of religious innovation. An opinion at that
time prevailed, which had been zealously propagated by the priests, and
implicitly received by sovereigns, that heresy was closely connected with
rebellion, and that every great or violent alteration in the church involved a
like revolution in the state and civil government. The forward zeal of the
reformers would seldom allow them to wait the consent of the magistrate to
their innovations; they became less dutiful when they were opposed and
persecuted; and though their pretended spirit of reasoning and enquiry was in
reality nothing but a new species of implicit faith, the prince took the alarm;
as if no institutions could be secure from the temerity of their researches.
The emperor Charles, who proposed to augment his authority under the pretense
of defending the catholic faith, easily adopted these political principles; and
notwithstanding the limited prerogative, which he possessed in the Netherlands,
he published the most arbitrary, severe, and tyrannical edicts against the
protestants, and he took care that the execution of them should be no less
violent and sanguinary. He was neither cruel nor bigoted in his natural
disposition; yet an historian, celebrated for moderation and caution, has
computed, that, in the several persecutions, promoted by that monarch, no less
than an hundred thousand persons perished by the hands of the executioner
Grotii Annal. lib. 1. Father Paul, another great authority, computes, in a
passag^ above (...) that 50,000 persons were put to death in the Low Countries
alone.
. But these severe remedies, so far from answering the purpose intended, had
rather served to augment the numbers as well as zeal of the reformers; and the
magistrates of the several towns, seeing no end of those barbarous executions,
felt their humanity rebel against their principles, and declined any farther
persecution of the new doctrines.

WHEN Philip succeeded to his father's dominions, the Flemings were justly
alarmed with new apprehensions; lest their prince, observing the lenity of the
magistrates, should take the execution of the edicts from such remiss hands,
and establish the inquisition in the Low Countries, accompanied with all the
iniquities and barbarities which attended it in Spain. The severe and
unrelenting character of the man, his professed attachment to Spanish manners,
the inflexible bigotry of his principles; all these circumstances increased
their terror: And when he left the Netherlands, with a known intention never to
return, the disgust of the inhabitants was extremely augmented, and their dread
of those tyrannical orders, which their sovereign, surrounded with Spanish
ministers, would issue from his cabinet of Madrid. He left the duchess of
Parma governess of the Low Countries; and the natural good sense and good
temper of that princess, had she been entrusted with the sole power, would have
preserved the submission of those opulent provinces, which were lost from that
refinement of treacherous and barbarous politics, on which Philip so highly
valued himself. The Flemings ^ound, that the name alone of regent remained with
the duchess; that cardinal Granville possessed entirely the King's confidence;
that attempts were every day made on their liberties; that a resolution was
taken never more to assemble the s^ates; that new bishoprics were arbitrarily
elected, in order to enforce the execution of the persecuting edicts; and that
on the whole, they must make account of being reduced to the condition of a
province under the Spanish monarchy. The discontents of the nobility gave
countenance to the complaints of the gentry, which encouraged the mutiny of the
populace; and all orders of men showed a strong disposition to revolt.
Associations were formed, tumultuary petitions presented, names of distinction
assumed, badges of party displayed; and the current of the people, irritated by
feeble resistance, and impelled by religious zeal, rose to such a height, that
in several towns, particularly in Antwerp, they made an open invasion on the
established worship, pillaged the churches and monasteries, broke the images,
and committed the most unwarrantable disorders.

THE wiser part of the nobility, particularly the prince of Orange, and the
counts Egmont and Horn, were alarmed with these excesses, to which their
discontents had at first given countenance; and seconding the wisdom of the
governess, they suppressed those dangerous insurrections, punished the
ringleaders, and reduced all the provinces to a state of order and submission.
But Philip was not contented with the re-establishment of his ancient
authority: He considered, that provinces, so remote from the seat of
government, could not be ruled by a limited prerogative; and that a prince, who
must entreat rather than command, would necessarily, when he resided not among
the people, feel every day a diminution of his power and influence. He was
determined, therefore, to lay hold of the late popular mutinies as a pretense
for abolishing entirely the privileges of the Low Country provinces; and for
ruling them thenceforth with a military and arbitrary authority. In the
execution of this violent design, he employed a man, who was a proper
instrument in the hands of such a tyrant. Ferdinand of Toledo, duke of Alva,
had been educated entirely amidst arms; and having attained a consummate
knowledge in the military art, his habits led him to transfer into all
government the severe discipline of a camp, and to conceive no measures between
prince and subject but those of rigid command and implicit obedience. This
general, in 1568, conducted from Italy to the Low Countries a powerful body of
veteran Spaniards; and his avowed animosity to the Flemings, with his known
character, struck that whole people with terror and consternation. It belongs
not to our subject to relate at length those violences, which Alva's natural
barbarity, steeled by reflection, and aggravated by insolence, exercised on
those flourishing provinces. It suffices to say, that all their privileges, the
gift of so many princes and the inheritance of so many ages, were openly and
expressly abolished by edict; arbitrary and sanguinary tribunals erected; the
counts Fgmont and Horn, notwithstanding their great merits and past services,
brought to the scaffold; multitudes of all ranks thrown into pri^on; and thence
delivered over to the executioner: And notwithstanding the peaceable submission
of all men, nothing was heard of but confiscation, imprisonment, exile,
torture, and death.

ELIZABETH was equally displeased to see the progress of that scheme, laid for
the extermination of the protestants, and to observe the erection of so great a
military power, in a state situated so near her. She gave protection to all the
Flemish exiles who took shelter in her dominions; and as many of these were the
most industrious inhabitants of the Netherlands, and had rendered that country
so celebrated for its arts, she reaped the advantage of introducing into
England some useful manufactures, which were formerly unknown in that kingdom.
Foreseeing that the violent government of Alva could not long subsist without
exciting some commotion, she ventured to commit an insult upon him, which she
would have been cautious not to hazard against a more established authority.
Some Genoese merchants had engaged by contract with Philip, to transport into
Flanders the sum of four hundred thousand crowns; and the vessels in which this
money was embarked, had been attacked in the Channel by some privateers equiped
by the French Hugonots, and had taken shelter in Plymouth and Southampton. The
commanders of the ships pretended, that the money belonged to the King of
Spain; but the Queen finding, upon enquiry, that it was the property of Genoese
merchants, took possession of it as a loan; and by that means deprived the duke
of Alva of this resource in the time of his greatest necessity. Alva, in
revenge, seized all the English merchants in the Low Countries, threw them into
prison, and confiscated their effects. The Queen retaliated by a like violence
on the Flemish and Spanish merchants; and gave all the English liberty to make
reprizals on the subjects of Philip. These differences were afterward
accommodated by treaty, and mutual reparations were made to the merchants: But
nothing could repair the loss which so well-timed a blow inflicted on the
Spanish government in the Low Countries. Alva, in want of money, and dreading
the immediate mutiny of his troops, to whom large arrears were due, imposed by
his arbitrary will the most ruinous taxes on the people. He not only required
the hundredth penny, and the twentieth of all immovable goods: He also
demanded the tenth of all moveable goods on every sale; an absurd tyranny,
which would not only have destroyed all arts and commerce, but even have
restrained the common intercourse of life. The people refused compliance: The
duke had recourse to his usual expedient of hanging: And thus matters came
still nearer the last extremity between the Flemings and the Spaniards
Bentivoglio, part I. lib. V. Camden, p. 416.
.

ALL the enemies of Elizabeth, in order to revenge themselves for her insul^^,
had naturally recourse to one expedient, the supporting the cause and
pr^tensions of the Queen of Scots; and Alva, whose measures were ever violent,
soon opened a secret intercourse with that princess. New conspiracy of the duke
of Norfolk.
There was one Radolphi, a Florentine merchant, who had resided about fifteen
years at London, and who, at the same time that he conducted his commerce in
England, had managed all the intrigues of the court of Rome with the catholic
nobility and gentry Lesley, p. 123. State Trials, vol. I. p. 87.
. He had been thrown into prison at the time when the duke of Norfolk's
intrigues with Mary were discovered; but either no proof was found against him,
or the part which he had acted was not very criminal; and he soon after
recovered his liberty. This man, zealous for promoting the catholic faith, had
formed a scheme, in concert with the Spanish ambassador, for subverting the
government, by a foreign invasion, and a domestic insurrection; and when he
communicated his project, by letter, to Mary, he found, that as she was now
fully convinced of Elizabeth's artifices, and despaired of ever recovering her
authority, or even her liberty, by pacific measures, she very willingly gave
her concurrence. The great number of discontented catholics were the chief
source of their hopes on the side of England; and they also observed, that the
kingdom was, at that time, full of indigent gentry, chiefly younger brothers,
who having at present, by the late decay of the church, and the yet languishing
state of commerce, no prospect of a livelihood suitable to their birth, were
ready to throw themselves into any desperate enterprise Lesley, p. 123.
. But in order to inspire spirit and courage into all these malcontents, it
was requisite, that some great nobleman should put himself at their head; and
no one appeared to Rodolphi, and to the bishop of Ross, who entered into all
these intrigues, so proper, both on account of his power and his popularity, as
the duke of Norfolk.

THIS nobleman, when released from confinement in the Tower, had given his
promise, that he would drop all intercourse with the Queen of Scots Haynes, p.
571.
; but finding that he had lost, and, as he feared, beyond all recovery, the
confidence and favor of Elizabeth, and being still, in some degree, restrained
from his liberty, he was tempted, by impatience and despair, to violate his
word, and to open anew his correspondence with the captive princess State
Trials, vol. I. p. 102.
. A promise of marriage was renewed between them; the duke engaged to enter
into all her interests; and as his remorses gradually decayed in the course of
these transactions, he was pushed to give his assent to enterprises still more
criminal. Rodolphi's plan was, that the duke of Alva should, under some other
pretense, assemble a great quantity of shipping in the Low Countries; should
transport a body of six thousand foot, and four thousand horse, into England;
should land them at Harwich, where the duke of Norfolk was to join them with
all his friends; should thence march directly to London, and oblige the Queen
to submit to whatever conditions the conspirators should please to impose upon
her Lesley, p. 155. State Trials, vol. I. p. 86, 87.
. Norfolk gave his consent to this plan; and three letters, in consequence of
it, were wrote in his name by Rodolphi to Alva, the pope, and the King of
Spain; but the duke, apprehensive of the danger, refused to sign them Lesley,
p. 159, 161. Camden, p. 432.
. He only sent to the Spanish ambassador a servant and confident, named Barker,
as well to notify his concurrence in the plan, as to vouch the authenticity of
these letters; and Rodolphi, having obtained a letter of credence from the
ambassador, proceeded on his journey to Brussels and to Rome. The duke of Alva
and the pope embraced the scheme with alacrity: Rodolphi informed Norfolk of
their intentions State Trials, vol. I. p. 93.
: and every thing seemed to concur in forwarding the undertaking.

NORFOLK, notwithstanding these criminal enterprises, had never entirely forgot
his duty to his sovereign, his country, and his religion; and though he had laid
the plan both for an invasion and an insurrection, he still flattered himself,
that the innocence of his intentions would justify the violence of his
measures, and that, as he aimed at nothing but the liberty of the Queen of
Scots, and the obtaining Elizabeth's consent to his marriage, he could not
justly reproach himself as a rebel and a traitor Lesley, p. 1^8.
. It is certain, however, that, considering the Queen's vigor and spirit, the
scheme, if successful, must finally have ended in her dethronement; and her
authority was here exposed to the utmost danger. The conspiracy had hitherto
entirely escaped the vigilance of Elizabeth, and that of secretary Cecil, who
now bore the title of lord Burleigh. It was from another attempt of Norfolk,
that they first obtained a hint, which, being diligently traced, led at last to
a full discovery. Mary had intended to send a sum of money to lord Herreis, and
her partisans in Scotland; and Norfolk undertook to have it conveyed to
Bannister, a servant of his, at that time in the north, who was to find some
expedient to have it delivered to lord Herreis Ibid. p. 169. State Trials, vol.
I. p. 87. Camden, p. 434. Digges, p. 134, 137, 140. Strype, vol. II. p. 82.
. He entrusted the money to a servant, who was not in the secret, and told him
that the bag contained a sum of silver, which he was to deliver to Bannister
with a letter: But the servant, conjecturing from the weight and size of the
bag, that it was full of gold, carried the letter to Burleigh; who immediately
ordered Bannister, Barker, and Hicford, the duke's secretary, to be put under
arrest, and to undergo a severe examination. The fear of torture made them
confess the whole truth; and as Hicford, though ordered to burn all papers, had
carefully kept them concealed under the mats of the duke's chamber, and under
the tiles of the house, full evidence now appeared against his master Lesley,
p. 173
. Norfolk himself, who was entirely ignorant of the discoveries made by his
servants, was brought before the council, and though exhorted to atone for his
guilt by a full confession, he persisted in denying every accusation with which
he was charged. The Queen always declared, that if he had given her this proof
of his sincere repentance, she would have pardoned all his former offenses
Ibid. p. 175.
; but finding him obstinate, she committed him to the Tower, and ordered him to
be brought to his trial. The bishop of Ross had, on some suspicion, been
committed to custody before the discovery of Norfolk's guilt; and every
expedient was employed to make him reveal his share in the conspiracy. He at
first insisted on his privilege as an ambassador; but he was told, that as his
mistress was no longer a sovereign, he would not be regarded as an ambassador,
and that even if that character was allowed, it did not warrant him in
conspiring against the sovereign in whose court he resided Ibid. p. 189.
Spotswood.
. As he still refused to answer interrogatories, he was informed of the
confession made by Norfolk's servants; after which he entertained no longer any
scruple to make a full discovery, and his evidence put the guilt of that
nobleman beyond all question. 12 January. Trial of Norfolk.
A jury of twenty-five peers unanimously passed sentence upon him. The trial
was quite regular, even according to the strict rules observed at present in
these matters; except that the witnesses gave not their evidence in court, and
were not confronted with the criminal: A laudable practice, which was not at
that time observed in trials for high treason.

THE Queen still hesitated concerning Norfolk's execution; whether that she was
really moved by friendship and compassion, toward a peer of that rank and
merit, or, that affecting the praise of clemency, she only put on the
appearance of these sentiments. His execution.
Twice she signed a warrant for his execution, and twice revoked the fatal
sentence Carte, p. 527. from Fenelon's dispatches. Digges, p. 166. Strype, vol.
II. p. 83.
; and though her ministers and counselors pushed her to rigor, she still
appeared irresolute and undetermined. 8 May.
After four months hesitation, a Parliament was assembled; and the commons
addressed her, in very strong terms, for the execution of the duke; a sanction
which, when added to the greatness and certainty of his guilt, would, she
thought, justify, in the eyes of all the world, her severity against that
nobleman. 2 June.
Norfolk died with great calmness and constancy; and though he cleared himself of
any disloyal intentions against the Queen's authority, he acknowleged the
justice of the sentence by which he suffered Camden, p. 440. Strype, vol. II.
App. p. 23.
. That we may relate together affairs of a like nature, we shall mention, that
the earl of Northumberland, being delivered up to the Queen by the regent of
Scotland, was also a few months after brought to the scaffold for his rebellion.

THE Queen of Scots was either the occasion or the cause of all these
disturbances but as she was a sovereign princess, and might reasonably, from
the harsh treatment which she had met with, think herself entitled to use any
expedient for her relief, Elizabeth durst not, as yet, form any resolution of
proceeding to extremity against her. She only sent lord Delawar, Sir Ralph
Sadler, Sir Thomas Bromley, and Dr. Wilson, to expostulate with her, and to
require satisfaction for all those parts of her conduct, which, from the
beginning of her life, had given exception to Elizabeth: Her assuming the arms
of England, refusing to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, her intending to marry
Norfolk without the Queen's consent, her concurring in the northern rebellion
Digges, p. 16, 107. Strype, vol. II. p. 51, 52.
, practicing with Rodolphi to engage the King of Spain in an invasion of
England Ibid. p. 194, 208, 209. Strype, vol. II. p. 40, 51.
, procuring the pope's bull of excommunication, and allowing her friends abroad
to give her the title of Queen of England. Mary justified herself from the
several articles of this charge, either by denying the facts imputed to her, or
by casting the blame on others Camden, p. 442.
. But the Queen was little satisfied with her apology; and the Parliament was
so enraged against her, that the commons made a direct application for her
immediate trial and execution. They employed some topics derived from practice
and reason, and the laws of nations; but the chief stress was laid on passages
and examples from the Old Testament D'Ewes, p. 207, 208, etc.
, which, if considered as a general rule of conduct, (an intention which it is
unreasonable to suppose) would imply consequences dangerous to all the
principles of humanity and morality. Matters were here carried to greater
extremity than Elizabeth intended; and being satisfied with showing Mary the
disposition of the nation, she sent to the house her express commands not to
deal any farther at present in the affair of the Scottish Queen Ibid. p. 219,
241.
. Nothing could be a stronger proof that the puritanical interest prevailed in
the house, than the intemperate use of authorities derived from scripture,
especially from the Old Testament; and the Queen was so little a lover of that
sect, that she was not likely to make any concession merely in deference to
their solicitation. She showed this session her disapprobation of their
schemes in another remarkable instance. There had passed in the lower house two
bills, for regulating ecclesiastical ceremonies; but she sent them a like
imperious message with the foregoing, and by the terror of her prerogative
stopped all farther proceedings D'Ewes, p. 213, 238.
.

BUT though Elizabeth would not proceed to such extremities against Mary, as were
recommended to her by the Parliament, she was alarmed with the great interest
and the restless spirit of that princess, as well as her close connections with
Spain; and she thought it necessary both to increase the rigor and strictness
of her confinement, and to follow maxims different from what she had hitherto
pursued in her management of Scotland Digges, p. 152.
. Scotch affairs.
That kingdom remained still in a state of anarchy. The castle of Edinburgh,
commanded by Kirkaldy of Grange, had declared for the Queen; and the lords of
that party, encouraged by his countenance, had taken possession of the capital,
and carried on a vigorous war against the regent. By a sudden and unexpected
inroad, they seized that nobleman at Stirling; but finding that his friends,
sallying from the castle, were likely to relieve him, they instantly put him to
death. The earl of Mar was chosen regent in his place; and found the same
difficulties to encounter in the government of that divided country. He was
therefore glad to accept of the mediation of the French and English
ambassadors, and to conclude on equal terms a truce with the Queen's party
Spotswood, p. 263.
. He was a man of a free and generous spirit, and scorned to submit to any
dependence on England; and for this reason Elizabeth, who had formed close
connections with France, yielded with less reluctance to the solicitations of
that court, still maintained the appearance of neutrality between the parties,
and allowed matters to remain on a balance in Scotland Digges, p. 156, 165,
169.
. But affairs soon after took a new turn, Mar died of melancholy, with which
the distracted state of the country affected him: Morton was chosen regent; and
as this nobleman had secretly taken all his measures with Elizabeth, who no
longer relied on the friendship of the French court, she resolved to exert
herself more effectually for the support of that party, whom she had always
favored. She sent Sir Henry Killigrew ambassador into Scotland, who found
Mary's partisans so discouraged by the discovery and punishment of Norfolk's
conspiracy, that they were glad to submit to the King's authority, and accept
of an indemnity for all past offenses Spotswood, p. 268.
. The duke of Chatelrault, and the earl of Huntley, with the most considerable
of Mary's friends, laid down their arms on these conditions. The garrison alone
of the castle of Edinburgh continued refractory. Kirkaldy's fortunes were
desperate; and he flattered himself with assistance from the Kings of France
and Spain, who encouraged his obstinacy, in hopes of being able, from that
quarter, to give disturbance to England. Elizabeth was alarmed with the danger;
she no more apprehended the coming to extremity with the Queen of Scots, who,
she found, could not any longer be amused by her artifices; she had an entire
reliance on Morton; and she saw, that, by the submission of all the
considerable nobility, the pacification of Scotland would be an easy, as well
as a most important undertaking. She, therefore, ordered Sir William Drury,
governor of Berwic, to march with some troops and artillery to Edinburgh, and
to besiege the castle Camden, p. 449.
. The garrison submitted at discretion; Kirkaldy was delivered to his
countrymen, by whom he was tried and executed: Secretary Lidington, who had
taken part with him, died soon after a voluntary death, as is supposed; and
Scotland, submitting entirely to the regent, gave not, during a long time, any
farther inquietude to Elizabeth.

French affairs.
THE events which happened in France, were not so agreeable to the Queen's
interests and inclinations. The fallacious pacifications which had been so
often made with the Hugonots, gave them good reason to suspect the present
intentions of the court; and after all the other leaders of that party were
deceived into a dangerous credulity, the sagacious admiral still remained
doubtful and uncertain. But his suspicions were at last overcome, partly by the
profound dissimulation of Charles, partly by his own earnest desire to end the
miseries of France, and return again to the performance of his duty toward his
prince and country. He considered besides, that as the former violent conduct
of the court had ever met with such fatal success, it was not unlikely, that a
prince, who had newly come to years of discretion, and was not rivetted in any
dangerous animosities or prejudices, would be induced to govern himself by more
moderate maxims. And as Charles was young, was of a passionate hasty temper,
and addicted to pleasure Digges, p. 8, 39.
, such deep perfidy seemed either remote from his character, or difficult, and
almost impossible to be so uniformly supported by him. Moved by these
considerations, the admiral, the Queen of Navarre, and all the Hugonots began
to repose themselves in full security, and gave credit to the treacherous
caresses and professions of the French court. Elizabeth herself,
notwithstanding her great experience and penetration, entertained not the least
mistrust of Charles's sincerity; and being pleased to find her enemies of the
house of Guise removed from all authority, and to observe an animosity every
day growing between the French and Spanish monarchs, 11th April.
she concluded a defensive league with the former Camden, p. 443.
, and regarded this alliance as an invincible barrier to her throne.
Walsingham, her ambassador, sent her over, by every courier, the most
satisfying accounts of the honor, and plain-dealing, and fidelity of that
perfidious prince.

THE better to blind the eyes of the jealous Hugonots, and draw their leaders
into the snare prepared for them, Charles offered his sister, Margaret, in
marriage to the prince of Navarre; and the admiral, with all the considerable
nobility of that party, had come to Paris, in order to assist at the
celebration of these nuptials, which, it was hoped, would finally, if not
compose the differences, at least appease the bloody animosity of the two
religions. The Queen of Navarre was poisoned by orders from the court; the
admiral was dangerously wounded by an assassin: 24 August.
Yet Charles, by redoubling his dissimulation, was still able to retain the
Hugonots in their security: Massacre of Paris.
Till on the evening of St. Bartholomew, the day of the marriage, the signal
was given for a general massacre of these religionists, and the King himself in
person led the way to these assassinations. The hatred long entertained by the
Parisians against the protestants, made them second, without any preparation,
the fury of the court; and all conditions, ages and sexes, suspected of any
propensity to that religion, were involved in an undistinguished ruin. The
admiral, his son-in-law Teligni, Soubize, Rochefoucaut, Pardaillon, Piles,
Lavardin; men, who, during the late wars, had distinguished themselves by the
most heroic actions, were miserably butchered without resistance; the streets
of Paris flowed with blood; and the populace, more enraged than satiated with
their cruelty, as if repining that death had saved the victims from farther
insult, exercised on their dead bodies all the rage of the most licentious
brutality. About five hundred gentlemen and men of rank perished in this
massacre; and near ten thousand of inferior condition Davila, lib. V.
. Orders were suddenly dispatched to all the provinces for a like general
execution of the protestants; and in Rouen, Lions, and many other cities, the
people emulated the fury of the capital. Even the murder of the King of
Navarre, and the prince of Conde, had been proposed by the duke of Guise; but
Charles, softened by the amiable manners of the King of Navarre, and hoping
that these young princes might easily be converted to the catholic faith, was
determined to spare their lives, though he obliged them to purchase their safety
by a seeming change of their religion.

CHARLES, in order to cover this barbarous perfidy, pretended, that a
conspiracy of the Hugonots to seize his person had been suddenly discovered;
and that he had been necessitated, for his own defense, to proceed to this
severity against them. He sent orders to Fenelon, his ambassador in England, to
ask an audience, and to give Elizabeth this account of the late transaction.
That minister, who was a man of probity, abhorred the treachery and cruelty of
his court, and even scrupled not to declare, that he was now ashamed to bear
the name of a Frenchman Digges, p. 247.
; yet was he obliged to obey his orders, and make use of the apology, which had
been prescribed to him. He met with that reception from all the courtiers,
which, he knew, the conduct of his master had so well merited. Nothing could be
more awful and affecting than the solemnity of his audience. A melancholy
sorrow sat on every face: Silence, as in the dead of night, reigned through all
the chambers of the royal apartment: The courtiers and ladies, clad in deep
mourning, were ranged on each side, and allowed him to pass, without affording
him one salute or favorable look; till he was admitted to the Queen herself
Carte, vol. III. p. 522. from Fenelon's Dispatches.
. That princess received him with a more easy, if not a more gracious
countenance; and heard his apology, without discovering any visible symptoms of
indignation. She told him, that, though, on the first rumor of this dreadful
intelligence, she had been astonished, that so many brave men and loyal
subjects, who rested secure on the faith of their sovereign, should have been
suddenly butchered in so barbarous a manner; she had hitherto suspended her
judgment, till farther and more certain information should be brought her: That
the account, which he had given, even if founded on no mistake or bad
information; though it might alleviate, would by no means remove the blame of the
King's counselors, or justify the strange irregularity of their proceedings:
That the same force, which without resistance had massacred so many defenseless
men, could easily have secured their persons, and have reserved them for a
trial, and for punishment by a formal sentence, which would have distinguished
the innocent from the guilty: That the admiral in particular, being dangerously
wounded, and environed by the guards of the King, on whose protection he seemed
entirely to rely, had no means of escape, and might surely, before his death,
have been convicted of the crimes imputed to him: That it was more worthy of a
sovereign to reserve in his own hands the sword of justice, than to commit it
to bloody murderers, who, being the declared and mortal enemies of the persons
accused, employed it without mercy and without distinction: That if these
sentiments were just, even supposing the conspiracy of the protestants to be
real; how much more, if that crime was nothing but a calumny of their enemies,
invented for their ruin and destruction? That if upon enquiry the innocence of
these unhappy victims should afterward appear, it was the King's duty to turn
his vengeance on their enemies and calumniators, who had thus cruelly abused
his confidence, had murdered so many of his brave subjects, and bad done what
in them lay to cover him with infamy and dishonor: And that for her part, she
should form her judgment of his intentions by his subsequent conduct; and in
the mean time should act as desired by the ambassador, and rather pity than
blame his master for the extremities, to which he had been carried Digges, p.
247, 248.
.

ELIZABETH was fully sensible of the dangerous situation in which she now
stood. In the massacre of Paris, she saw the result of that general conspiracy,
which had been formed, for the extermination of the protestants; and she knew,
that she herself, as the head and protector of that religion, was exposed to
the utmost fury and resentment of the catholics. The violences and cruelties of
the Spaniards in the Low Countries were another branch of the same conspiracy;
and as Charles and Philip, two princes nearly allied in perfidy and barbarity,
as well as in bigotry, had now laid aside their pretended quarrel, and had
avowed the most entire friendship Ibid. p. 268, 282.
, she had reason, so soon as they had appeased their domestic commotions, to
dread the effects of their united councils. The duke of Guise also and his
family, whom Charles, in order to deceive the admiral, had hitherto kept at a
distance, had now acquired an open and entire ascendant in the court of France;
and she was sensible, that these princes, from personal as well as political
reasons, were her declared and implacable enemies. The Queen of Scots, their
near relation and close confederate, was the pretender to her throne; and though
detained in custody, was actuated by a restless spirit, and besides her foreign
allies, possessed very numerous and zealous partisans in the heart of the
kingdom. For these reasons, Elizabeth thought it more prudent not to break all
terms with the French monarch; but still to listen to the professions of
friendship, which he made her. She allowed even the negotiations to be renewed
for her marriage with the duke of Alancon, Charles's third brother Ibid.
passim. Camden, p. 447.
: Those with the duke of Anjou had already been broke off. She sent the earl of
Worcester to assist in her name at the baptism of a young princess, born to
Charles; but before she agreed to give this last mark of condescension, she
thought it becoming her dignity, to renew her expressions of blame and even of
detestation against the cruelties exercised on his protestant subjects Digges,
p. 297, 298. Camden, p. 447.
. Meanwhile, she prepared herself for that attack, which seemed to threaten her
from the combined power and violence of the Romanists: She fortified
Portsmouth, put her fleet in order, exercised her militia, cultivated
popularity with her subjects, acted with vigor for the farther reduction of
Scotland under obedience to the young King, and renewed her alliance with the
German princes, who were no less alarmed than herself at these treacherous and
sanguinary measures, so universally embraced by the catholics.

French affairs.
BUT though Elizabeth cautiously avoided the coming to extremities with Charles,
the greatest security, which she possessed against his violence, was derived
from the difficulties, which the obstinate resistance of the hugonots still
created to him. Digges, p. 313.
; nor could that prince deem himself secure from the invasion threatened him by
all the other protestants of Europe. The nobility and gentry of England were
rouzed to such a pitch of resentment, that they offered to levy an army of
twenty-two thousand foot and four thousand horse, to transport them into
France, and to maintain them six months at their own charge: But Elizabeth, who
was cautious in her measures, and who feared to inflame the quarrel between the
two religions by these dangerous croisades, refused her consent, and moderated
the zeal of her subjects Ibid. p 335, ^41
. The German princes, less political, or more secure from the resentment of
France, forwarded the levies made by the protestants; and the prince of Conde,
having escaped from court, put himself at the head of these troops, and
prepared to enter the kingdom. The duke of Alencon, the King of Navarre, the
family of Montmorenci, and many considerable men even among the catholics,
displeased, either on a private or public account, with the measures of the
court, favored the progress of the hugonots; and every thing relapsed into
confusion. Davila. lib 5
; nor could even the mortal distemper, under which he labored, moderate the
rage and animosity, by which he was actuated. 30th May.
He died without male issue, at the age of twenty-five years; a prince, whose
character, containing that unusual mixture of dissimulation and serocity, of
quick resentment and unrelenting vengeance, executed the greatest mischiefs,
and threatened still worse, both to his native country and to all Europe.
Henry, duke of Anjou, who had, some time before, been elected King of Poland,
no sooner heard of his brother's death, than he hastened to take possession of
the crown of France; and found the kingdom, not only involved in the greatest
present disorders, but exposed to infirmities, for which it was extremely
difficult to provide any suitable remedy. and a concession for liberty of
conscience, which would have probably appeased the reformers, excited the most
violent resentment and animosity in the catholics.

THE civil commotions of France were of too great importance to be overlooked
by the other princes of Europe; and Elizabeth's foresight and vigilance, though
somewhat restrained by her frugality, led her to take secretly some part in
them. Besides employing on all occasions her good offices in favor of the
hugonots, she had expended no inconsiderable sums of money in levying that army
of Germans, which the prince of Conde and prince Casimir conducted into France
Camden, p. 452.
; and notwithstanding all her negotiations with the court, and her professions
of amity, she always considered her own interests as connected with the
prosperity of the French protestants and the depression of the house of Guise.
Philip, on the other hand, had declared himself protector of the league; had
entered into the closest correspondence with Guise; and had employed all his
authority in supporting the credit of that factious leader. The sympathy of
religion, which of itself begot a connection of interests, was one considerable
inducement; but that monarch had also in view, the subduing his rebellious
subjects in the Netherlands; who, as they received great encouragement from the
French protestants, would, he hoped, finally despair of success, after the
entire suppression of their friends and confederates.

Civil wars of the Low Countries.
THE same political views, which engaged Elizabeth to support the hugonots,
would have led her to assist the distressed protestants in the Low Countries;
but the mighty power of Philip, the tranquillity of all his other dominions,
and the great force, which he maintained in these mutinous provinces, kept her
in awe, and obliged her, notwithstanding all temptations and all provocations,
to preserve some terms of amity with that monarch. The Spanish ambassador
remonstrated with her, that many of the Flemish exiles, who infested the seas,
and preyed on his master's subjects, were received into the harbors of
England, and were there permitted to dispose of their prizes; and by these
remonstrances the Queen found herself under a necessity of denying them all
entrance into her dominions. But this measure proved in the issue extremely
prejudicial to the interests of Philip. These desperate exiles, finding no
longer any possibility of subsistence, were forced to attempt the most
perilous enterprises; and they made an assault on the Brille, a seaport town
in Holland, where they met with success, and, after a short resistance, became
masters of the place Camden, p. 4^^.
. The duke of Alva was alarmed with the danger; and stopping those bloody
executions, which he was making on the defenseless Flemings, he hastened with
his army to extinguish the flame, which, falling on materials so well prepared
for combustion, seemed to menace a general conflagration. His fears soon
appeared to be well grounded. The people in the neighborhood of the Brille,
enraged by that complication of cruelty, oppression, insolence, usurpation, and
persecution, under which they labored, flew to arms; and in a few days almost
the whole provinces of Holland and Zealand had revolted from the Spaniards, and
had openly declared against the tyranny of Alva. This event happened in the
year 1572.

WILLIAM, prince of Orange, descended from a sovereign family of great luster
and antiquity in Germany, inheriting the possessions of a sovereign family in
France, had fixed his residence in the Low Countries; and on account of his
noble birth and immense riches, as well as of his personal virtues, was
universally regarded as the greatest subject, who lived in those provinces. He
had opposed by all regular and dutiful means the progress of the Spanish
usurpations; and when Alva conducted his army into the Netherlands, and assumed
the government, this prince, well acquainted with the violent character of the
man, and the tyrannical spirit of the court of Madrid, wisely fled from the
danger which threatened him, and retired to his paternal estate and dominions
in Germany. He was cited to appear before Alva's tribunal, was condemned in
absence, was declared a rebel, and his ample possessions in the Low Countries
were confiscated. In revenge, he levied an army of protestants in the empire,
and made some attempts to restore the Flemings to liberty; but was still
repulsed with loss by the vigilance and military conduct of Alva, and by the
great bravery as well as discipline, of those veteran Spaniards who served
under that general. The revolt of Holland and Zealand, provinces which the
Prince of Orange formerly commanded, and where he was infinitely beloved,
called him anew from his retreat; and he added conduct, no less than spirit, to
that obstinate resistance, which was here made to the Spanish dominion. By
uniting the revolted towns into a league, he laid the foundation of that
illustrious commonwealth, the offspring of industry and liberty, whose arms and
policy have made long so signal a figure in every transaction of Europe. He
inflamed the inhabitants by every motive, which religion, resentment, or love
of freedom could inspire. Though the present greatness of the Spanish monarchy
might deprive them of all courage, he still flattered them with the concurrence
of the other provinces, and with assistance from the neighboring states; and
he exhorted them, in defense of their religion, their liberties, their lives,
to endure the utmost extremities of war. From this spirit proceeded the
desperate defense of Harlem; a defense, which nothing but the most consuming
famine could overcome, and which the Spaniards revenged by the execution of
more than two thousand of the inhabitants Bentivoglio, lib. 7.
. This extreme severity, instead of striking terror into the Hollanders,
animated them by despair; and the vigorous resistance made at Alcmaer, where
Alva was finally repulsed, showed them that their insolent enemies were not
wholly invincible. The duke, finding at last the pernicious effects of his
violent councils, solicited to be recalled from the government: Medina-celi,
who was appointed his successor, refused to accept the charge: Requesens,
commendator of Castile, was sent from Italy to replace Alva; and this tyrant
departed from the Netherlands in 1574; leaving his name in execration to the
inhabitants, and boasting in his turn, that, during the course of five years
government, he had delivered above eighteen thousand of these rebellious
heretics into the hands of the executioner Grotius, lib. 2.
.

REQUESENS, though a man of milder dispositions, could not appease the violent
hatred, which the revolted Hollanders had entertained against the Spanish
government; and the war continued as obstinate as ever. In the siege of Leyden,
undertaken by the Spaniards, the Dutch opened the dykes and sluices, in order
to drive them from that enterprise; and the very peasants were active in
ruining their fields by an inundation, rather than fall again under the hated
tyranny of Spain. But notwithstanding this repulse, the governor still pursued
the war; and the contest seemed too unequal between so mighty a monarchy, and
two small provinces, however fortified by nature, and however defended by the
desperate resolution of the inhabitants. The prince of Orange, therefore, in
1575, was resolved to sue for foreign assistance, and to make applications to
one or other of his great neighbors, Henry or Elizabeth. The court of France
was not exempt from that spirit of tyranny and persecution which prevailed with
the Spaniards; and that kingdom, torn by domestic dissensions, seemed not to
enjoy, at present, either leizure or ability to pay regard to foreign
interests. But England, long connected both by commerce and alliance with the
Netherlands, and now more concerned in the fate of the revolted provinces by a
sympathy in religion, seemed naturally interested in their defense; and as
Elizabeth had justly entertained great jealousy against Philip, and governed
her powerful and opulent kingdom in perfect tranquillity, great hopes were
entertained, that her policy, her ambition, or her generosity, would engage her
to support them under their present calamities. They sent, therefore, a solemn
embassy to London, consisting of St. Aldegonde, Douza, Nivelle, Buys, and
Melsen; and after employing the most humble supplications to the Queen, they
proferred her the possession and sovereignty of their provinces, if she would
employ her power in their defense.

THERE were many strong motives which might impel Elizabeth to accept so
liberal an offer. She was apprized of the injuries which Philip had done her,
by his intrigues with the malcontents in England and Ireland Digges, p. 73.
: She was displeased to see a violent and military government e^ected in her
neighborhood: She foresaw the danger which she should incur from a total
prevalence of the catholics in the Low Countries: And the maritime situation of
those provinces, as well as their command over the great rivers, was a very
inviting circumstance to a nation like the English, who were beginning to
cultivate commerce and naval power. But this princess, though magnanimous, had
never entertained the ambition of making conquests, or gaining new
acquisitions; and the whole purpose of her vigilant and active politics, was to
maintain, by the most frugal and cautious expedients, the tranquillity of her
own dominions. An open war with the Spanish monarchy was the apparent
consequence of her accepting the dominion of these provinces; and after taking
the inhabitants under her protection, she could never afterward in honor
abandon them, but, however desperate their defense might become, she must
embrace it, even farther than her convenience or interest would permit. For
these reasons, she refused, in plain terms, the sovereignty proffered her; but
told the ambassadors, that, in return for the good will which the prince of
Orange and the States had shown her, she would endeavor to mediate an
agreement for them, on the most reasonable conditions which could be obtained
Camden, p. 453, 454.
. She sent accordingly Sir Henry Cobham to Philip; and represented to him, the
danger which the whole Low Countries, as well as the revolted provinces, would
incur, if France could obtain the least interval from her intestine disorders,
and find leizure to offer her protection to that mutinous and discontented
people. Philip seemed to take this remonstrance in good part; but no accord
ensued, and the war continued with the same rage and violence as before.

IT was an accident that delivered the Hollanders from their present desperate
situation. Requesens, the governor, dying suddenly, the Spanish troops,
discontented for want of pay, and licentious for want of a proper authority to
command them, broke out into a furious mutiny; and threw every thing into
confusion. They sacked and pillaged the cities of Maestricht and Antwerp, and
committed great slaughter on the inhabitants: They threatened all the other
cities with a like fate: And the whole provinces, excepting Luxembourg, united
for mutual defense against their violence, and called in the prince of Orange
and the Hollanders, as their protectors. A treaty, commonly called the
Pacification of Ghent, was formed by common agreement; where the removal of
foreign troops, and the restoration of their ancient liberties, were the
objects which the provinces stipulated to pursue. Don John of Austria, natural
brother to Philip, being appointed governor, found, on his arrival at
Luxembourg, that the States had so fortified themselves, and that the Spanish
troops were so divided by their situation, that there was no possibility of
resistance; and he agreed to the terms required of him. The Spaniards were
recalled; and these provinces seemed at last to breathe a little from their
calamities.

BUT it was not easy for an entire peace to be settled, while the thirst of
revenge and dominion governed the King of Spain, and while the Flemings were so
strongly agitated with resentment of past, and fear of future injuries. The
ambition of Don John, who coveted this great theater for his military talents,
engaged him rather to inflame than appease the quarrel; and as he found the
States determined to impose very strict limitations on his authority, he broke
all articles, seized Namur, and procured the recall of the Spanish army from
Italy. This prince, endowed with a lofty genius, and animated by the prosperous
successes of his youth, had opened his mind to vast undertakings; and looking
much beyond the conquest of the revolted provinces, had projected to marry the
Queen of Scots, and to acquire in her right the dominion of the British
kingdoms Camden, p. 466. Grotius, lib. iii.
. Elizabeth was aware of his intentions; and seeing now, from the union of all
the provinces, a fair prospect of making a long and vigorous defense against
Spain, she no longer scrupled to embrace the protection of their liberties,
which seemed to be so intimately connected with her own safety. After sending
them over a sum of money, about twenty thousand pounds, for the immediate pay
of their troops, she concluded a treaty with them; in which she stipulated to
assist them with five thousand foot and a thousand horse, at the charge of the
Flemings; and to lend them a hundred thousand pounds, on receiving the bonds of
some of the most considerable towns of the Netherlands, for her re-payment
within the year. It was farther agreed, that the commander of the English army,
should be admitted into the council of the States; and nothing be determined
concerning war or peace, without previously informing the Queen or him of it;
that they should enter into no league without her consent; that if any discord
arose among themselves, it should be referred to her arbitration; and that, if
any prince, on any pretext, should attempt hostilities against her, they should
send to her assistance an army equal to that which she employed in their
defense. This alliance was signed on the 7th of January, 1578 Camden, p. 466*
. One considerable inducement to the Queen for entering into treaty with the
States, was to prevent their throwing themselves into the arms of France; and
she was desirous to make the King of Spain believe, that it was her sole
motive. She represented to him, by her ambassador, Thomas Wilkes, that she had
hitherto acted religiously the part of a good neighbor and ally; had refused
the sovereignty of Holland and Zealand, when proffered her; had counseled the
prince of Orange to submit to the King; and had even accompanied her advice
with menaces, in case of his refusal. She persevered, she said, in the same
friendly intentions; and, as a proof of it, would venture to interpose with her
advice for the composure of the present differences: Let Don John, whom she
could not but regard as her mortal enemy, be recalled; let some other prince
more popular be substituted in his place; let the Spanish armies be withdrawn;
let the Flemings be restored to their ancient liberties and privileges: And if,
after these concessions, they are still obstinate not to return to their duty,
she promised to join her arms to those of the King of Spain, and force them to
a compliance. Philip dissembled his resentment against the Queen; and still
continued to supply Don John with money and troops. That prince, though once
repulsed at Rimenant, by the valor of the English under Norris, and though
opposed, as well by the army of the States as by prince Casimir, who had
conducted to the Low Countries a great body of Germans, paid by the Queen,
gained a great advantage over the Flemings at Cemblours; but was cut off in the
midst of his prosperity by poison, given him secretly, as was suspected, by
orders from Philip, who dreaded his ambition. The prince of Parma succeeded to
the command, who uniting valor and clemency, negotiation and military
exploits, made great progress against the revolted Flemings, and advanced the
progress of the Spaniards by his arts as well as by his arms.

DURING these years, while Europe was almost every where in great commotion,
England enjoyed a profound tranquillity; owing chiefly to the prudence and
vigor of the Queen's administration, and to the wise precautions which she
employed in all her measures. By supporting the zealous protestants in
Scotland, she had twice given them the superiority over their antagonists, had
connected their interests closely with her own, and had procured herself entire
security from that quarter, whence the most dangerous invasions could be made
upon her. She saw in France her enemies, the Guises, though extremely powerful,
yet counterballanced by the Hugonots, her zealous partisans; and even hated by
the King, who was jealous of their restless and exorbitant ambition. The
bigotry of Philip gave her just ground of anxiety; but the same bigotry had
happily excited the most obstinate opposition among his own subjects, and had
created him enemies, which his arms and policy were not likely soon to
overcome. The Queen of Scots, her antagonist and rival, and the pretender to
her throne, was a prisoner in her hands; and by her impatience and high spirit
had been engaged in practices which afforded the Queen a pretense for rendering
her confinement more rigorous, and for cutting off her communication with her
partisans in England. Religion was the capital point, on which depended all the
political transactions of that age; and the Queen's conduct in this particular,
making allowance for the prevailing prejudices of the age, could scarcely be
accused of severity or imprudence. She established no inquisition into men's
bosoms; she imposed no oaths of supremacy, except on those who received trust
or emolument from the public: And though the exercise of all religion but the
established was prohibited, the violation of this law, by the saying mass, and
receiving the sacrament, in private houses, was, in many instances, connived at
Camden, p. 459.
; while, at the same time, the catholics, in the beginning of her reign, showed
little reluctance against going to church, or frequenting the ordinary duties
of public worship. The pope, sensible that this practice would by degrees
reconcile all his partisans to the reformed religion, hastened the publication
of the bull, excommunicating the Queen, and freeing her subjects from all oaths
of allegiance; and great pains were taken by the emissaries of Rome, to render
the breach between the two religions as wide as possible, and to make the
frequenting protestant churches appear highly criminal to the catholics
Walsingham's Letter in Burnet, vol. II. 418. Cabbala, p. 406.
. These practices, with the rebellions which ensued, increased the vigilance
and severity of the government; but the Romanists, if their condition was
compared with that of the Nonconformists in other countries, and with their own
practices where they domineered, could not justly complain much of violence or
persecution. The Queen appeared rather more anxious to keep a strict hand over
the puritans; who, though their pretensions were not so immediately dangerous to
her authority, seemed to be actuated by a more unreasonable obstinacy, and to
retain claims, of which, both in civil and ecclesiastical matters, it was, as
yet, difficult to discern the full scope and intention. Some secret attempts of
that sect to establish a separate congregation and discipline, had been
carefully repressed in the beginning of this reign Strype's Life of Parker, p.
342. Ibid. Life of Grindal, p. 315.
; and when any of the established clergy discovered a tendency to their
principles, by omitting the legal habits or ceremonies, the Queen had shown a
determined resolution to punish them by fines and deprivations Heylin, p. 165,
16^*
; though her orders to that purpose had, by the protection which these sectaries
received from some of the most considerable courtiers, been frequently eluded.
But what chiefly tended to gain Elizabeth the hearts of her subjects, was, her
frugality, which, though carried sometimes to an extreme, led her not to amass
treasures, but only to prevent impositions upon the people, who were at that
time very little accustomed to bear the burdens of government. By means of her
rigid economy, she paid all the debts which she found on the crown, with their
full interest; though some of these debts had been contracted even during the
reign of her father D'Ewes, p. 245. Camden, p. 446.
. She repaid some loans, which she had exacted at the commencement of her
reign; a practice in that age somewhat unusual D'Ewes, p. 246.
: And she established her credit on such a footing, that no sovereign in Europe
could more readily command any sum which the public exigencies might at any
time require Ibid. p. ^45.
. During this peaceable and uniform government, England furnishes few materials
for history; and except the small part which Elizabeth took in foreign
transactions, there scarce passed any occurrence which requires a particular
detail.

A Parliament.
THE most memorable event in this period was a session of Parliament, summoned
on the 8th of February, 1576, where debates were started, which may appear
somewhat curious and singular. Peter Wentworth, a puritan, who had signalized
himself former Parliaments, by his free and undaunted spirit, opened this
session with a premeditated harangue, which drew on him the indignation of the
house, and gave great offense to the Queen and the courtiers. As it seems to
contain the first rude sketch of those principles of liberty which happily
gained afterward the ascendant in England, it may not be improper to give, in
a few words, the substance of it. He premised, that the very name of liberty is
sweet; but the thing itself is precious beyond the most inestimable treasure:
And that it behoved them to be careful, lest, contenting themselves with the
sweetness of the name, they forego the substance, and abandon what of all
earthly possessions was of the highest value to the kingdom. He then proceeded
to observe, that freedom of speech in that house, a privilege so useful both to
sovereign and subject, had been formerly infringed in many essential articles,
and was, at present, exposed to the most imminent danger: That it was usual,
when any subject of importance was handled, especially if it regarded religion,
to surmize, that these topics were disagreeable to the Queen, and that the
farther proceeding in them would draw down her indignation upon their temerity:
That Solomon had justly affirmed, the King's displeasure to be a messenger of
death; and it was no wonder that men, even though urged by motives of conscience
and duty, should be inclined to stop short, when they found themselves exposed
to so severe a penalty: That by employing this argument, the house was
incapacitated from serving their country, or even from serving the Queen
herself; whose ears, besieged by pernicious flatterers, were thereby rendered
inaccessible to the most salutary truths: That it was a mockery to call an
assembly a Parliament, and yet deny them that privilege, which was so essential
to their being, and without which they must degenerate into an abject school of
servitude and dissimulation: That as the Parliament was the great guardian of
the laws, they ought to have liberty to discharge their trust, and to maintain
that authority whence even Kings themselves derive their being: That a King was
constituted such by law, and though he was not dependant on man, yet was he
subordinate to God and the law, and was obliged to make their prescriptions,
not his own will, the rule of his conduct: That even his commission, as God's
vicegerent, enforced, instead of loosening, this obligation; since he was
thereby invested with authority to execute on earth the will of God, which is
nothing but law and justice: That though these surmizes of displeasing the Queen
by their proceedings, had impeached, in a very essential point, all freedom of
speech, a privilege granted them by a special law; yet was there a more express
and more dangerous invasion made on their liberties, by frequent messages from
the throne: That it had become a practice, when the house were entering on any
question, either ecclesiastical or civil, to bring an order from the Queen,
prohibiting them absolutely to treat of such matters, and barring them all
farther discussion of these momentuous articles: That the prelates, emboldened
by her royal protection, had assumed a decisive power in all questions of
religion, and required that every one should implicitly submit his faith to
their arbitrary determinations: That the love which he bore his sovereign,
forbad him to be silent under such abuses, or to sacrifice, on this important
occasion, his duty to servile flattery and complaisance: And that, as no
earthly creature was exempt from fault, so neither was the Queen herself; but
in imposing this servitude on her faithful commons, had committed a great, and
even dangerous, fault against herself and the whole realm D'Ewes, p. 236, 237,
etc.
.

IT is easy to observe, from this speech, that in these first dawnings of
liberty, the parliamentary style was still crude and unformed; and that the
proper decorum of attacking ministers and counselors, without interesting the
honor of the crown, or mentioning the person of the sovereign, was not as yet
entirely established. The commons expressed great displeasure at this unusual
license: They sequestered Wentworth from the house, and committed him prisoner
to the sergeant at arms. They even ordered him to be examined by a committee,
consisting of all those members who were also members of the privy council, and
a report to be made next day to the house. This committee met in the
Star Chamber, and wearing the aspect of that arbitrary court, summoned
Wentworth to appear before them, and answer for his behavior. But though the
commons had discovered so little delicacy or precaution, in thus confounding
their own authority with that of the Star Chamber; Wentworth understood better
the principles of liberty, and refused to give these counselors any account of
his conduct in Parliament, till he was satisfied that they acted not as members
of the privy council, but as a committee of the house Ibid. p. 241.
. He justified himself by pleading the rigor and hardship of the Queen's
messages; and notwithstanding that the committee showed him, by instances in
other reigns, that the practice of sending such messages was not unprecedented,
he would not agree to express any sorrow or repentance. The issue of the affair
was, that, after a month's confinement, the Queen sent to the commons,
informing them, that, from her special grace and favor, she had restored him
to his liberty and to his place in the house D'Ewes, p. 244.
. By this seeming lenity, she indirectly retained the power which she had
assumed, of imprisoning the members, and obliging them to answer before her for
their conduct in Parliament. And Sir Walter Mildmay endeavored to make the
house sensible of her Majesty's goodness, in so gently remitting the
indignation which she might justly conceive at the temerity of their member:
But he informed them, that they had not the liberty of speaking what and of
whom they pleased; and that indiscreet freedoms used in that house, had, both
in the present and foregoing ages, met with a proper punishment. He warned
them, therefore, not to abuse farther the Queen's clemency; lest she be
constrained, contrary to her inclination, to turn an unsuccessful lenity into a
necessary severity Ibid. p. 259.
.

THE behavior of the two houses was, in other respects, equally tame and
submissive. Instead of a bill, which was at first introduced Ibid. p. 252.
, for the reformation of the church, they were contented to present a petition
to her majesty for that purpose: And when she told them, that she would give
orders to her bishops, to amend all abuses, and if they were negligent, she
would herself, by her supreme power and authority over the church, give such
redress as would entirely satisfy the nation; the Parliament willingly
acquiesced in this sovereign and peremptory decision Ibid. p. 257.
.

THOUGH the commons showed so little spirit in opposing the authority of the
crown, they maintained, this session, their dignity against an incroachment of
the lords, and would not agree to a conference which, they thought, was desired
of them in an irregular manner. They acknowleged, however, with all humbleness,
(such was their expression) the superiority of the lords: They only refused to
give that house any reason for their proceedings; and asserted, that where they
altered a bill sent them by the peers, it belonged to them to desire a
conference, not to the upper house to require it Ibid. p. 263.
.

THE commons granted an aid of one subsidy and two fifteenths. Mildmay, in
order to satisfy the house concerning the reasonableness of this grant, entered
into a detail of the Queen's past expenses in supporting the government, and of
the increasing charges of the crown, from the daily increase in the price of
all commodities. He did not, however, forget to admonish them, that they were
to regard this detail as the pure effect of the Queen's condescension, since
she was not bound to yield them any account how she employed her treasure Ibid.
p. 246.
.

CHAP. IV.
Scotch affairs. -- Spanish affairs. -- Sir Francis Drake. -- A Parliament. --
Negociations of marriage with the duke of Anjou. -- Scotch affairs. -- Letter
of Queen Mary to Elizabeth. -- Conspiracies in England. -- A Parliament. -- The
ecclesiastical commission. -- Affairs of the Low Countries. -- Hostilities with
Spain.

THE greatest and most absolute security which Elizabeth enjoyed during her
whole reign, never exempted her from vigilance and attention; but the scene
began now to be more overcast, and danger gradually multiplied on her from more
than one quarter.

Scotch affairs.
THE earl of Morton had hitherto retained Scotland in strict alliance with the
Queen, and had also restored domestic tranquillity: But it was not likely, that
the factitious and legal authority of a regent would long maintain itself in a
country unacquainted with law and order; where even the natural dominion of
hereditary princes so often met with opposition and control. The nobility
began anew to break into factions: The people were disgusted with some
instances which appeared of Morton's avarice: And the clergy, who complained of
farther innovations on their narrow revenue, joined and increased the
discontent of the other orders. The regent was sensible of his dangerous
situation; and having dropped some peevish expressions, as if he were willing or
desirous to resign the government, the noblemen of the opposite party,
favorites of the young King, laid hold of this concession, and required that
demission which he seemed so frankly to offer them. James was at this time but
eleven years of age; yet Morton, having secured himself, as he imagined, by a
general pardon, resigned his authority into the hands of the King, who
pretended to conduct, in his own name, the administration of the kingdom. The
regent retired from the government, and seemed to employ himself entirely in
the care of his domestic affairs; but either tired with this tranquillity,
which appeared insipid after the agitations of ambition, or thinking it time to
throw off dissimulation, he returned again to court, acquired an ascendant in
the council; and though he resumed not the title of regent, governed with the
same authority as before. The opposite party, after holding separate
conventions, took to arms, under pretense of delivering their

THE count d'Aubigney, of the house of Lenox, cousin-german to the King's
father, had been born and educated in France; and being a young nobleman of a
good address, and a sweet disposition, he appeared to the duke of Guise a very
proper instrument for detaching James from the English interest, and connecting
him with his mother and her relations. He no sooner appeared at Stirling, where
James resided, than he acquired the affections of the young monarch; and
joining his interests with James Stuart of the house of Ochiltree, a young man
of profligate manners, who had acquired the King's favor, he employed himself,
under the appearance of play and amusement, in instilling into the tender mind
of the prince, new sentiments of politics and government. He represented to him
the injustice which had been done Mary in her deposition, and made him
entertain thoughts, either of resigning the crown into her hands, or of
associating her with him in the administration Digges, p. 412, 423. Melvil, p.
130.
. Elizabeth, alarmed with the danger which might ensue from the prevalence of
this interest in Scotland, sent anew Sir Robert Bows to Stirling; and accusing
Aubigney, now created earl of Lenox, of an attachment to the French; warned
James against entertaining such suspicious and dangerous connections Spotswood,
p. 309.
. The King excused himself, by Alexander Hume his ambassador; and Lenox,
finding that the Queen had openly declared against him, was farther confirmed
in his intention of overturning the English interest, and particularly of
ruining Morton, who was regarded as the head of it. That nobleman was arrested
in council, accused as an accomplice in the late King's murder, committed to
prison, brought to trial, and condemned to suffer as a traitor. He confessed,
that Bothwel had communicated to him the design, had pleaded Mary's assent, and
had desired his concurrence; but he denied, that he had ever given his
approbation to that crime; and in excuse for his concealment, alleged the
danger of revealing it, either to Henry, who had no resolution nor constancy,
or to Mary, who appeared to be an accomplice in the murder Ibid. p. 31^.
Crawford, p. 333. Moyse's Memoirs, p. 54.
. Sir Thomas Randolph was sent by the Queen to intercede in favor of Morton;
and that ambassador, not content with discharging this duty of his function,
engaged, by his persuasion, the earls of Argyle, Montrose, Angus, Mar, and
Glencarne, to enter into confederacy for protecting, even by force of arms, the
life of the prisoner. The more to overawe that nobleman's enemies, Elizabeth
ordered forces to be assembled on the borders of England; but this expedient
served only to hasten his sentence and execution Spotswood, p. 312.
. Morton died with that constancy and resolution which had attended him through
all the various events of his life; and left a reputation, which was less
disputed with regard to ability than probity and virtue. But this conclusion of
the scene happened not till the subsequent year.

Spanish affairs.
ELIZABETH was at this time extremely anxious on account of every revolution in
Scotland; because that country alone, not being separated from England by sea,
and bordering on all the catholic and malecontent counties, afforded her
enemies a safe and easy method of attacking her; and because she was sensible,
that Mary, thinking herself abandoned by the French monarch, had been engaged
by the Guises to have recourse to the powerful protection of Philip, who, though
he had not yet come to an open rupture with the Queen, was every day, both by
the injuries which he committed and received, more exasperated against her.
That he might retaliate for the assistance which she gave to his rebels in the
Low Countries, he had sent under the name of the pope Digges, p. 359, 370.
, a body of seven hundred Spaniards and Italians into Ireland; where the
inhabitants, always turbulent, and discontented with the English government,
were now more alienated by religious prejudices, and were ready to join every
invader. The Spanish general, San Josepho, built a fort in Kerry; and being
there besieged by the earl of Ormond, president of Munster, who was soon after
joined by lord Gray, the deputy, he made a very weak and cowardly resistance.
After some assaults, feebly sustained, he surrendered at discretion; and Gray,
who was attended with a very small force, finding himself embarrassed with so
many prisoners, put all the Spaniards and Italians to the sword without mercy,
and hanged about fifteen hundred Irish: A cruelty which gave great displeasure
to Elizabeth Camden, p. 475. Cox's History of Ireland, p. 368.
.

Sir Francis Drake.
WHEN the English ambassador made complaints of this invasion, he was answered
by like complaints of the pyracies committed by Francis Drake, a bold seaman,
who had assaulted the Spaniards in the place where they esteemed themselves the
most secure, in the new world. This man, sprung from mean parents in the county
of Devon, having acquired considerable riches by some depredations made on the
Spaniards in the isthmus of Panama, and having there got a sight of the Pacific
ocean, was so stimulated by ambition and avarice, that he scrupled not to
employ his whole fortune in a new adventure through those seas, so much unknown
at that time to all the European nations Camden, p. 478. Stow, p. 689.
. By means of Sir Christopher. Hatton, then vice chamberlain, a great favorite
of the Queen, he obtained her consent and approbation; and set sail from
Plymouth in 1577, with four ships and a pinnace, on board of which were 164
able sailors Camden, p 478. Hakluy^'s Voyages, vol. III. p ^30, 748. Pu^chas's
Pilgrim, vol. I. p. 46.
. He passed into the South Sea by the Straits of Magellan, and falling on the
Spaniards, who expected no enemy in these quarters, he took many rich prizes,
and prepared to return with the immense booty, which he had acquired.
Apprehensive of being intercepted by the enemy, if he took the same way
homewards, by which ^e had reached the Pacific Ocean, he attempted to find a
passage by the north of California; and failing in that enterprise, he set sail
for the East Indies, and returned safely this year by the Cape of Good Hope. He
was the first Eng ishman who compassed the Globe; and the first commander in
chief: For Magellan, whose ship executed the same adventure, died in his
passage. His name became very celebrated on account of so bold and fortunate an
attempt; but many, apprehending the resentment of the Spaniards, endeavored to
persuade the Queen, that it would be more prudent to disown the enterprise, to
punish Drake, and to restore the treasure. But Elizabeth, who admired valor,
and who was allured by the prospect of sharing in the riches, was determined to
countenance that gallant sailor: She conferred on him the honor of knighthood,
and accepted of a banquet from him at Deptford, on board the ship which had
achieved so memorable a voyage. When Philip's ambassador, Mendoza, exclaimed
against Drake's pyracies, she told him, that the Spaniards, by arrogating a
right to the whole new world, and excluding thence all other European nations,
who should sail thither, even with a view of exercising the most lawful
commerce, very naturally tempted others to make a violent irruption into these
countries Camden, p. 480.
. To pacify, however, the Spanish monarch, she caused part of the booty to be
restored to Pedro Sebura, a Spaniard, who pretended to be agent for the
merchants, whom Drake had spoiled.

THERE was another cause, which induced the Queen to take this resolution: She
was in such want of money, that she was obliged to assemble a Parliament; a
measure, which, as she herself openly declared, she never embraced, except when
obliged by the necessity of her affairs. 16th January.
A Parliament.
The Parliament, besides granting her a supply of one subsidy and two fifteens,
enacted some statutes for the security of the government, chiefly against the
attempts of the catholics. Whoever, in any way, reconciled any one to the
church of Rome, or was himself reconciled, was declared to be guilty of
treason: To say mass was subjected to the penalty of a year's imprisonment, and
a fine of two hundred merks; the hearing it was punishable by a year's
imprisonment and a fine of an hundred merks: A fine of twenty pounds a month
was imposed on every one who continued, during that time, absent from church 23
Eliz. cap. 1.
. To utter slanderous or seditious words against the Queen was punishable, for
the first offense, with the pillory and loss of ears; the second offense was
declared felony: The writing or printing such words was felony even on the
first offense Ibid. c. 2.
. The puritans prevailed to have farther application made for reformation in
religion D'Ewes, p. 302.
. Paul Wentworth, brother to the member of that name, who had distinguished
himself in the preceding session, moved, that the commons, from their own
authority, should appoint a general fast and prayers; and the commons rashly
assented to his motion. For this presumption, they were severely reprimanded by
a message from the Queen, as encroaching on the royal prerogative and
supremacy; and they were obliged to submit, and ask forgiveness Ibid. p. 284,
285.
.

THE Queen and Parliament were engaged to pass these severe laws against the
catholics, by some late discoveries, which had been made of the treasonable
practices of the Romish priests. When the worship of the catholics was
suppressed, and the reformation introduced into the universities, the King of
Spain reflected, that as some species of literature was requisite for the
support of these doctrines and controversies, the Romish communion must totally
decay in England, if no means were found to give erudition to the
ecclesiastics; and for this reason, he founded a seminary at Douay, where the
catholics sent their children, chiefly those intended for the priesthood, in
order to receive the rudiments of their education. The cardinal of Lorraine
imitated this example by erecting a like seminary in his diocese of Rheims; and
though Rome was somewhat distant, the pope would not neglect to adorn, with a
foundation of the same nature, that capital of orthodoxy. These seminaries,
founded with this hostile intention, sent over every year a colony of priests,
who maintained the catholic superstition in the full height of its bigotry; and
being educated with a view to the crown of martyrdom, were not deterred, either
by danger or fatigue, from maintaining and propagating their principles. They
infused into all their votaries an extreme hatred against the Queen; whom they
treated as an usurper, a schismatic, a heretic, a persecutor of the orthodox,
and one solemnly and publicly anathematized by the holy father. Sedition,
rebellion, and even sometimes assassination, were the expedients, by which they
proposed to effectuate their purposes against her; and the severe restraint,
not to say persecution, under which the catholics labored, made them the more
willingly receive, from their ghostly fathers, such violent doctrines.

THESE seminaries were all of them under the direction of the jesuits, a new
order of regular priests erected in Europe; when the court of Rome perceived,
that the lazy monks and beggarly friars, who sufficed in times of ignorance,
were no longer able to defend the ramparts of the church, assailed on every
side, and that the inquisitive spirit of the age required a society more active
and more learned, to oppose its dangerous progress. These men, as they stood
foremost in the contest against the protestants, drew on them the extreme
animosity of that whole sect; and by assuming a superiority over the other more
numerous and more ancient orders of their own communion, were even exposed to
the envy of their brethren: So that it was no wonder, if the blame to which
their principles and conduct might be exposed, has, in many instances, been
much exaggerated. This reproach, however, they must bear from posterity, that,
by the very nature of their institution, they were engaged to pervert learning,
the only effectual remedy against superstition, into a nourishment of that
infirmity; and as their erudition was chiefly of the ecclesiastical and
scholastic kind (though a few members have cultivated polite literature) they
were only the more enabled, by that acquisition, to refine away the plainest
dictates of morality, and to erect a regular system of casuistry, by which
prevarication, perjury, and every crime, where it served their ghostly
purposes, might be justified and defended.

THE jesuits, as devoted servants to the court of Rome, exalted the prerogative
of the sovereign pontiff above all earthly power; and by maintaining his
authority of deposing Kings, set no bounds, either to his spiritual or temporal
jurisdiction. This doctrine became so prevalent among the zealous catholics in
England, that the excommunication, fulminated against Elizabeth, excited many
scruples of a singular kind, to which it behoved the holy father to provide a
remedy. The bull of Pius, in absolving the subjects from their oaths of
allegiance, required them to resist the Queen's usurpation; and many Romanists
were apprehensive, that, by this clause, they were obliged in conscience, even
though no favorable opportunity offered, to rebel against her, and that no
dangers nor difficulties could free them from this indispensible duty. But
Parsons and Campian, two jesuits, were sent over with a mitigation and
explanation of the doctrine; and they taught their votaries, that, though the
bull was for ever binding on Elizabeth and her partisans, it did not oblige the
catholics to obedience, except when the sovereign pontiff should think proper,
by a new summons, to require it Camden, p. 477.
. Campian was afterward detected in treasonable practices; and being put to
the rack, and confessing his guilt, he was publicly executed. His execution was
ordered at the very time, when the duke of Anjou was in England, and prosecuted
with the greatest appearance of success his marriage with the Queen; and this
severity was probably intended to appease her protestant subjects, and to
satisfy them, that, whatever measures she might pursue, she never would depart
from the principles of the reformation.

WHILE hostilities were daily multiplying between Spain and England, and while
Elizabeth knew, that Philip, from resentment, from bigotry, and from interest,
was strongly, though secretly, induced to effect her ruin, she saw the necessity
of securing herself against the efforts of so powerful and political a monarch.
The obstinate resistance of the states in the Netherlands gave her hopes, that
his force and treasure would be wasted in subduing these provinces; but the
admirable conduct and rapid progress of the prince of Parma struck her with
apprehensions; and as the acquisition, which Philip, about this time, made of
Portugal, brought him a great accession of riches and naval power, the
expediency of seeking the protection of some powerful alliance became every day
the more apparent. The animosity, which still increased between the French
monarch and the duke of Guise, and the confederacy, which the latter prince had
secretly formed with Philip, opened the prospect of a close alliance between
the sovereigns of France and England; and the general apprehensions,
entertained by all Europe of the Spanish power, seemed to require some general
union for resisting its farther progress.

Negotiations of marriage with the duke of Anjou.
THE duke of Alencon, now created duke of Anjou, had never entirely dropped his
pretensions to espouse Elizabeth; and that princess, though her suitor was near
twenty-five years younger than herself, and had no knowledge of her person but
by pictures or descriptions, was still pleased with the counterfeit image,
which his addresses afforded her of love and tenderness. The duke, in order to
forward his suit, besides employing his brother's ambassadors, sent over
Simier, an agent of his own; an artful man, of an agreeable conversation, who,
soon remarking the Queen's humor, amused her with gay discourse, and instead
of serious political reasonings, which, he found, only awakened her ambition,
and hurt his master's interests, introduced every moment all the topics of
passion and of gallantry. The pleasure, which she found in this man's society,
soon produced a great familiarity between them; and amidst the greatest hurry
of business, her wisest ministers had not such ready access to her person, as
had Simier, who, under pretense of negotiation, entertained her with accounts
of the tender attachment borne her by the duke of Anjou. The earl of Leicester,
who had never before been alarmed with any courtship made to her, and who
always trusted that her love of dominion would prevail over her inclination to
marriage, began to apprehend, that she was at last caught in her own snare, and
that the artful encouragement, which she had given to this young suitor, had
unawares engaged her affections. To render Simier odious, he availed himself of
the credulity of the times, and spread reports, that that minister had gained
an ascendant over the Queen, not by any natural principles of her constitution,
but by incantations and love potions. Simier, in revenge, endeavored to
discredit Leicester, and revealed to her a secret, which none of her courtiers
dared to discover, that this nobleman was secretly, without her consent,
married to the widow of the earl of Essex; an action, which the Queen
interpreted either to proceed from want of respect to her, or as a violation of
their mutual attachment; and which so provoked her, that she threatened to send
him prisoner to the Tower Camden, p. 471.
. The quarrel went so far between Leicester and the French agent, that the
former was suspected of having employed one Tudor, a bravo, to take away the
life of his enemy; and the Queen thought it necessary, by proclamation, to put
Simier under her own protection. It happened, that while the Queen was rowed in
her barge on the Thames, attended by Simier, and some of her courtiers, a shot
was fired which wounded one of her bargemen; but Elizabeth finding, upon
enquiry, that the piece had been discharged by accident, gave the person his
liberty, without farther punishment. So far was she from entertaining any
suspic on against her people, that she was many times heard to say, "That she
would lend ^re* it to nothing against them, which parents would not believe of
their own children (...).
."

THE duke of Anjou, encouraged by the accounts, which he received of the
Queen's prepossessions in his favor, paid her secretly a visit at Greenwich;
and after some conference with her, the purpo^^ of which i^ not kn wn, he
departed. It appeared, that, though his figure was not advance^ (...) ground by
being personally known to her; and (...) now treasurer, Sussex, Leicester,
(...) Walsingham, to concert with the French an (...) contract. Henry had sent
over on this occassion a very (...) consisting of Francis de Bourbon, (...)
^^^phiny, at (...) rabble noblemen; and as the Queen had in a manner the power
of prescribing what terms she pleased, the articles were soon settled with the
English commissioners. It was agreed, that the marriage should be celebrated
within six weeks after the ratification of the articles; that the duke and his
retinue should have the exercise of their religion; that after the marriage he
should bear the title of King, exercise of their religion; that after the
marriage he should bear the title of King, but the administration should remain
solely in the Queen; that their children, male or female, should succeed to the
crown of England; that if there be two males, the eldest, in case of Henry's
death without issue, should be King of France, the younger of England; that if
there be but one male, and he succeed to the crown of France, he should be
obliged to reside in England eight months every two years; that the laws and
customs of England should be preserved inviolate; and that no foreigner should
be promoted by the duke to any office in England Camden, p. 484.
. These articles, providing for the security of England, in case of its
annexation to the crown of France, opened but a dismal prospect to the English;
had not the age of the Queen, who was now in her forty-ninth year, contributed
very much to allay their apprehensions of this nature. The Queen also, as a
proof of her still remaining uncertainty, added a clause, that she was not
bound to complete the marriage, till farther articles, which are not specified,
shall be agreed on between the parties, and till the King of France be
certified of their agreement. Soon after the Queen sent over Walsingham, as
ambassador to France, in order to form closer connexions with Henry, and enter
into a league offensive and defensive against the increasing power and
dangerous usurpations of Spain. The French King, who had been extremely
disturbed with the unquiet spirit, the restless ambition, the enterprizing, and
yet timid and inconstant disposition of Anjou, had already sought to free the
kingdom from his intrigues, by opening a scene for his activity in Flanders;
and having allowed him to embrace the protection of the states, had secretly
supplied him with men and money for that undertaking. The prospect of settling
him in England was for a like reason very agreeable to that monarch; and he was
desirous to cultivate, by every expedient, the favorable sentiments, which
Elizabeth seemed to entertain toward them. But this princess, though she had
gone farther in her amorous dalliance Digges, p. 387, 396, 408, 426.
than could be justified or accounted for by any principles of policy, was not
yet determined to bring matters to a final conclusion; and she confined
Walsingham, in his instructions, to the negotiating conditions of a mutual
alliance between France and England Ibid. p. 352.
. Henry with reluctance submitted to hold conferences on that subject; but no
sooner had Walsingham begun to settle the conditions of alliance, than he was
informed, that the Queen, foreseeing hostility with Spain to be the result of
this confederacy, had declared, that she would prefer the marriage with the
war, before the war without the marriage Digges, p. 375, 391.
. The French court, pleased with this change of resolution, broke off the
conferences concerning the league, and opened a negotiation for the marriage
Ibid. p. 392.
: But matters had not long proceeded in this train, before the Queen again
declared for the league in preference to the marriage, and ordered Walsingham
to renew the conferences for that purpose. Before he had leizure to bring this
point to maturity, he was interrupted by a new change of resolution Ibid. p.
408, 411.
; and not only the court of France, but Walsingham himself, Burleigh, and all
the wisest ministers of Elizabeth, were in amaze, doubtful where this contest
between inclination and reason, love and ambition, would at last terminate.

IN the course of this affair, Elizabeth felt another variety of intentions,
from a new contest between her reason and her ruling passions. The duke of
Anjou expected some assistance of money, by which he might be enabled to open
the campaign in Flanders; and the Queen herself, though her frugality made her
long reluctant, was sensible that this supply was necessary; and she was at
last induced, after much hesitation, to comply with his request Ibid p. 3^7,
387, 3^8, 4^9, 426, 439. Rymer, XV. p. 7^3.
. She sent him a present of an hundred thousand crowns; by which, joined to his
own demesns and the assistance of his brother and the Queen dowager, he levied
an army, and took the field against the prince of Parma. He was successful in
raising the siege of Cambray; and being chosen by the states governor of the
Netherlands, he put his army into winter quarters, and came over to England, in
order to prosecute his suit to the Queen. The reception, which he met with,
made him promise himself entire success, and gave him hopes, that Elizabeth had
surmounted all her scruples, and was finally determined to make choice of him
for her husband. 17th November.
In the midst of the pomp, which attended the anniversary of her coronation,
she was seen, after long and intimate discourse with him, to take a ring from
her own finger, and to put it upon his; and all the spectators concluded, that,
in this ceremony, she had given him a promise of marriage, and was even
desirous of signifying her intention to all the world. St. Aldegonde,
ambassador from the states, dispatched immediately a letter to his masters,
informing them of this great event; and the inhabitants of Antwerp, who, as
well as the other lemings, regarded the Queen as a kind of tutelar divinity,
testified their joy by bonesires and the discharge of their great ordnance
Camden, p. 480. Thuau. lib 74.
. A puritan of Lincoln's Inn had wrote a passionate book, which he entitled,
"The Gulf in which England will be swallowed by the French Marriage." He was
apprehended and prosecuted by order from the Queen, and was condemned to lose
his right hand as a libeller. Such was the constancy and loyaity of the man,
that, immediately after the sentence was executed, he took off his hat with his
other hand, and waving it over his head, cried "God save the Queen."

BUT notwithstanding this attachment, which Elizabeth so openly discovered to
the duke of Anjou, the contest of her sentiments was not entirely over; and her
ambition, as well as prudence, rouzing itself by intervals, still filled her
breast with doubt and hesitation. Almost all the courtiers, whom she trusted
and favored, Leicester, Hatton, and Walsingham, discovered an extreme aversion
to the marriage; and the ladies of her bed chamber made no scruple of opposing
her resolution with the most zealous remonstrances Camden, p. 486.
. Among other enemies to the match, Sir Philip Sidney, son to Sir Henry Sidney,
lord deputy of Ireland, and nephew to Leicester; a young man the most
accomplished of that age; used the freedom to write her a letter, where he
dissuaded her from her present resolution, with an unusual elegance of
expression, as well as force of reasoning. He told her, that the security of
her government depended entirely on the affections of her protestant subjects;
and she could not, by any measure, more effectually disgust them than by
espousing a prince, who was son to the perfidious Catherine, brother to the
cruel and perfidious Charles, and who had himself embrued his hands in the
blood of the innocent and defenseless protestants: That the catholics were her
mortal enemies, and believed either that she had originally usurped the crown,
or was now lawfully deposed by the pope's bull of excommunication; and nothing
had ever so much elevated their hopes as the prospect of her marriage with the
duke of Anjou: That her chief security at present against the efforts of so
numerous, rich, and united a saction was, that they possessed no head who could
conduct their dangerous enterprises; and she herself was rashly supplying that
defect, by giving an interest in the kingdom to a prince, whose education had
zealously attached him to that communion: That though he was a stranger to the
royal blood, the dispositions of men were now such, that they preferred the
religious to the civil connexions; and were more influenced by the sympathy of
religion than by the principles of legal and hereditary government: That the
duke himself had discovered a very restless and turbulent spirit; and having
often violated his loyalty to his elder brother and his sovereign, there
remained no hopes that he would passively submit to a woman, whom he might
think himself entitled, in quality of husband, to command: That the French
nation, so populous, so much abounding in soldiers, so full of nobility, who
were devoted to arms, and, for some time, accustomed to serve for plunder,
would supply him with partisans, dangerous to a people, unwarlike and
defenseless like the generality of her subjects: That the plain and honorable
path, which she had followed, of cultivating the affections of her people, had
hitherto rendered her reign secure and happy; and however her enemies might
seem to multiply upon her, the same invincible rampart was still able to
protect and defend her: That so long as the throne of France was filled by
Henry or his posterity, it was vain to hope that the ties of blood would ensure
the amity of that kingdom, preferably to the maxims of policy or the prejudices
of religion; and if ever the crown devolved to the duke of Anjou, the
conjunction of France and England would prove a burden, rather than a
protection, to the latter kingdom: That the example of her sister Mary was
sufficient to instruct her in the danger of such connections; and to prove,
that the affections and confidence of the English could never be maintained,
where they had such reason to apprehend that their interests would every moment
be sacrificed to those of a foreign and hostile nation: That notwithstanding
these great inconveniences, discovered by past experience, the house of
Burgundy, it must be confessed, was more popular in the nation than the family
of France; and, what was of chief moment, Philip was of the same communion with
Mary, and was connected with her by this great band of interest and affection:
And that however the Queen might remain childless, even though old age should
grow upon her, the singular felicity and glory of her reign would preserve her
from contempt; the affections of her subjects, and those of all the protestants
in Europe, would defend her from attacks; and her own prudence, without other
aid or assistance, would baffle all the efforts of her most malignant enemies
Letters of the Sydneys, vol. I. p. 28^, and seq. Cabbala, p. 36^.
.

THESE reflections kept the Queen in great anxiety and irresolution; and she
was observed to pass several nights without any sleep or repose. At last her
settled habits of prudence and ambition prevailed over her temporary
inclination; and having sent for the duke of Anjou, she had a long conversation
with him in private, where she was supposed to have made him apologies for the
breaking her former engagements. He expressed great disgust on his departure;
threw away the ring which she had given him; and uttered many curses on the
mutability of women, and of islanders Camden, p. 48^.
. Soon after, he went over to his government of the Netherlands; lost the
confidence of the States, by a rash and violent attempt on their liberties; was
expelled that country; retired into France; and there died. The Queen, by her
timely reflection, saved herself from the numerous mischiefs which must have
attended so imprudent a marriage: And the present distracted

Scotch affairs.
THE anxiety of the Queen, from the attempts of the English catholics, never
ceased during the whole course of her reign; but the variety of revolutions
which happened in all the neighboring kingdoms, were the source sometimes of
her hopes, sometimes of her apprehensions. This year the affairs of Scotland
strongly engaged her attention. The influence which the earl of Lenox, and
James Stuart, who now assumed the title of earl of Arran, had acquired over the
young King, was but a slender foundation of authority; while the generality of
the nobles, and all the preachers, were so much discontented with their
administration. The assembly of the church appointed a solemn fast; of which
one of the avowed reasons was the danger in which the King stood from the
company of wicked persons Spotswood, p. 319.
: And on that day the pulpits resounded with declamations against Lenox, Arran,
and the King's present counselors. When the minds of the people were
sufficiently prepared by these lectures, a conspiracy of the nobility was
formed, probably with the concurrence of Elizabeth, for seizing the person of
James at Ruthven, a seat of the earl of Gowry; and the design, being kept very
secret, succeeded without any opposition. 23 August.
The leaders in this enterprise were, the earl of Gowry himself, the earl of
Mar, the lords Lindesey and Boyd, the masters of Glamis and Oliphant, the
abbots of Dunfermline, Paisley, and Cambuskenneth. The King wept when he found
himself detained a prisoner; but the master of Glamis said, "No matter for his
tears: Better that boys should weep than bearded men:" An expression which
James could never afterward forget Ibid. p. 320.
. But notwithstanding his resentment, he found it necessary to submit to the
present necessity. He pretended an entire acquiescence in the conduct of the
associators; acknowleged the detention of his person to be acceptable service;
and agreed, to summon both an assembly of the church and a convention of
estates, in order to ratify that enterprise. The assembly, though they had
established it as an inviolable rule, that the King, on no account, and on no
occasion, should ever intermeddle in ecclesiastical matters, made no scruple of
taking civil affairs under their cognizance, and of giving their verdict, that
the attempt of the conspirators was acceptable to all that feared God, or
tendered the preservation of the King's person, and prosperous state of the
realm. They even enjoined all the clergy to recommend these sentiments from the
pulpit; and they threatened with ecclesiastical censures every man who should
oppose the authority of the consederated lords Ibid. p. 322.
. The convention, being composed chiefly of these lords themselves, added their
sanction to these proceedings. Arran was confined a prisoner to his own house:
Lenox, though he had power to resist, yet rather than excite a civil war, or be
the cause of bloodshed Heylin's Hist. Presbyter. p. 227. Spotswood.
, chose to retire into France, where he soon after died. He persevered to the
last in his conversion to the protestant religion; which the Scotch clergy
would never be persuaded that he had sincerely embraced. The King sent for his
family, restored his son to his paternal honors and estate, took care to
establish the fortunes of all his other children; and to his last moments never
forgot the early friendship which he had borne their father: A strong proof of
the good dispositions of that prince Spotswood, p. ^28.
.

NO sooner was this revolution known in England, than the Queen sent Sir Henry
Carry, and Sir Robert Bows to James, in order to congratulate him on his
deliverance from the pernicious counsels of Lenox and Arran; to exhort him not
to resent the seeming violence of the lords' enterprise; and to procure from
him permission for the return of the earl of Angus, who, ever since Morton's
fall, had lived in England. They easily prevailed in the last application; and
as James suspected, that Elizabeth had not been entirely unacquainted with the
project of his detention, he thought proper, before the English ambassadors, to
dissemble his resentment against the confederated noblemen. Soon after La
Mothe-Fenelon, and Menneville, appeared as ambassadors from France: passing the
sentence of excommunication against them, on account of their submission to
royal, preferably to clerical, authority Spotswood, p. 324.
.

WHAT increased the alarm with regard to an accommodation between James and
Mary, was, that the English ambassadors seemed to concur with the French in
this proposal; and the clergy were so ignorant as to credit the sincerity of
the professions made by the former. The Queen of Scots had often made overtures
to Elizabeth, which had been entirely neglected; Letter of Queen Mary to
Elizabeth.
but hearing of James's detention, she wrote a letter in a more pathetic and
more spirited strain than usual; craving the assistance of that princess, both
for her own and her son's liberty. She said, that the account of the prince's
captivity had excited her most tender concern; and the experience which she
herself, during so many years, had of the extreme infelicity attending that
situation, had made her the more apprehensive, lest a like fate should her
unhappy offspring: That the long train of injustice which she had suffered; the
calumnies to which she had been exposed; were so grievous, that, finding no
place for right or truth among men, she was reduced to make her last appeal to
heaven, the only competent tribunal between princes of equal jurisdiction,
degree, and dignity: That after her rebellious subjects, secretly instigated by
Elizabeth's ministers, had expelled her from the throne, had confined her to
prison, had pursued her with arms, she had voluntarily thrown herself under the
protection of England, fatally allured by those reiterated professions of amity
which had been made her, and by her confidence in the generosity of a friend,
an ally, and a kinswoman: That not contented with debarring her from her
presence, with supporting the usurpers of her throne, with contributing to the
destruction of her faithful subjects, Elizabeth had reduced her to a worse
captivity than that from which she had escaped, and had made her this cruel
return for the unlimited trust which she had reposed in her: That though her
resentment of such severe usage had never carried her farther than to use some
disappointed efforts for her deliverance, unhappy to herself, and fatal to
others, she found the rigours of confinement daily multiplied upon her; and at
length carried to such a height as surpassed the bounds of all human patience
any longer to endure them: That she was cut off from all communication, not
only with the rest of mankind, but also with her only son; and her maternal
fondness, which was now more enlivened by their unhappy sympathy in situation,
and was her sole remaining attachment to the world, deprived even of that
melancholy solace, which letters or messages could give: That the bitterness of
her sorrows, still more than her close consinement, had preyed upon her health,
and had added the insufferable weight of bodily infirmity to all those other
calamities under which she labored: That while the daily experience of her
maladies opened to her the comfortable prospect of an approaching deliverance
into a region where pain and sorrow are no more, her enemies envied her that
last consolation; and having secluded her from every joy on earth, had done
what in them lay to debar her from all hopes in her future and eternal
existence: That the exercise of her religion was refused her; the usage of
those rites in which she had been educated; the commerce with those holy
ministers, whom heaven had appointed to receive the acknowlegement of our
transgressions, and to seal our penitence by a solemn readmission into
heavenly favor and forgiveness: That it was in vain to complain of the rigours
of persecution exercised in other kingdoms; when a Queen, and an innocent
woman, was excluded from an indulgence which never yet, in the most barbarous
countries, had been denied to the meanest and most criminal malefactor: That
could she ever be induced to descend from that royal dignity in which
Providence had placed her, or depart from her appeal to Heaven, there was only
one other tribunal to which she would appeal from all her enemies; to the
justice and humanity of Elizabeth's own breast, and to that lenity, which,
uninfluenced by malignant counsel, she would naturally be induced to exercise
toward her: And that she finally entreated her, to resume her natural
disposition, and to reflect on the support, as well as comfort, which she might
receive from her son and herself, if, joining the obligations of gratitude to
the ties of blood, she would deign to raise them from their present melancholy
situation, and reinstate them in that liberty and authority to which they were
entitled Camden, p. 4^9.
.

ELIZABETH was chiefly induced to obstruct Mary's restoration, because she
foresaw an unhappy alternative attending that event. If this princess recovered
any considerable share of authority in Scotland, her resentment, ambition,
zeal, and connections, both domestic and foreign, might render her a dangerous
neighbor to England, and enable her, after suppressing the English party among
her subjects, to revive those pretensions which she had formerly advanced to
the crown, and which her partisans in both kingdoms still supported with great
industry and assurance. If she was reinstated in power, with such strict
limitations as could not be broken, she might be disgusted with her situation;
and flying abroad, form more desperate attempts than any sovereign, who had a
crown to hazard, would willingly undertake. Mary herself, sensible of these
difficulties, and convinced by experience, that Elizabeth would for ever debar
her the throne, was now become more humble in her wishes; and as age and
infirmities had repressed those sentiments of ambition and indignation, by
which she was formerly so much agitated, she was willing to sacrifice all her
hopes of power and grandeur, in order to obtain a little more liberty; a
blessing to which she very naturally aspired with the fondest impatience. She
proposed, therefore, that she should be associated with her son in the title to
the crown of Scotland, but that the administration should remain solely in him:
And she was contented to live in England, in a private station, and even in a
kind of restraint; but with some more liberty, both for exercise and company,
than she had enjoyed since the first discovery of her intrigues with the duke
of Norfolk. But Elizabeth, who was afraid lest such a loose method of guarding
her, would facilitate her escape into France or Spain, or, at least, would
encourage and increase her partisans, and enable her to conduct those intrigues
to which she had already discovered so strong a propensity, was secretly
determined to deny her requests; and though she feigned to assent to them, she
well knew how to disappoint the expectations of the unhappy princess. While
Lenox maintained his authority in Scotland, she never gave any reply to all the
applications made her by the Scottish Queen Jebb, vol. II. p. 540.
: At present, when her own creatures had acquired possession of the government,
she was resolved to throw the odium of the refusal upon them; and pretending,
that nothing was required to a perfect accommodation, but the concurrence of
the council of state of Scotland, she ordered her ambassador, Bows, to open
the negotiation for Mary's liberty, and her association with her son in the
title to the crown. Though she seemed to make this concession to Mary, she
refused her the liberty of sending any ambassador of her own; and that princess
could easily conjecture, from this circumstance, what would be the issue of the
pretended negotiation. The Scotch council, instigated by the clergy, rejected
all treaty; and James, who was now a captive in their hands, affirmed, that he
had never assented to an association with his mother, and that the matter had
never gone farther than some loose proposals for that purpose MS. in the
Advocate's library, A. 3. 28. p. 401. from the Cott. Lib. Calig. c. 9.
.

THE affairs of Scotland remained not long on the present footing. James,
impatient of restraint, made his escape from his keepers; and flying to St.
Andrews, summoned his friends and partisans to attend him. The earls of Argyle,
Marshal, Montrose, and Rothes, hastened to pay their duty to their sovereign;
and the opposite party found themselves unable to resist so powerful a
combination. They were offered a pardon, upon their submission, and an
acknowlegement of their fault, in seizing the King's person, and restraining
him from his liberty. Some of them accepted of the terms: The greater number,
particularly Angus, Hamilton, Mar, Glamis, left the country; and took shelter
in Ireland or England, where they were protected by Elizabeth. The earl of
Arran was recalled to court; and the malcontents, who could not brook the
authority of Lenox, a man of virtue and moderation, found, that, by their
resistance, they had thrown all the power into the hands of a person whose
councils were as violent as his manners were profligate Spotswood, p. 325, 326,
and seq.
.

ELIZABETH wrote a letter to James; where she quoted a moral sentence from
Isocrates, and indirectly reproached him with inconstancy, and a breach of his
engagements. James, in his reply, justified his measures; and turned two
passages of Isocrates against her, for one which she had directed against him
Melvil, p. 140, 141. Strype, vol. III. p. 165.
. She next sent Walsingham in an embassy to him; and her chief purpose in
employing that aged minister on an errand where so little business was to be
transacted, was to learn, from a man of so much penetration and discernment,
the real character and capacity of James. This young prince possessed very good
parts, though not accompanied with that vigor and industry which his station
required; and as he excelled in general discourse and conversation, Walsingham
entertained a higher idea of his talents than he was afterward found, when
real business was transacted, to have fully merited Melvil, p. 148. Jebb, vol.
II. p. 536.
. The account which he gave his mistress, induced her to treat him thenceforth
with some more regard than she had hitherto been inclined to pay him.

Spotswood, p. 333.
. The clergy, finding that the pulpit would be no longer a sanctuary for them,
were extremely offended: They said, that the King was become popish in his
heart; and they gave their adversaries the epithets of gross libertines, belly
gods, and infamous persons Ibid. p. 334.
. The violent conduct of Arran soon brought over the popularity to their side.
The earl of Gowry, though pardoned for the late attempt, was committed to prison,
was tried on some new accusations, condemned, and executed. Many innocent
persons suffered from the tyranny of this favorite; and the banished lords,
being assisted by Elizabeth, now found the time favorable for the recovery of
their estates and authority. After they had been soiled in one attempt upon
Stirling, they prevailed in another; and being admitted to the King's presence,
were pardoned, and restored to his favor.

ARRAN was degraded from authority; deprived of that estate and title which he
had usurped; and the whole country seemed to be composed to tranquillity.
Elizabeth, after opposing, during some time, the credit of this favorite, had
found it more expedient, before his fall, to compose all differences with him,
by the means of Davison, a minister whom she sent to Scotland: But having more
confidence in the lords, whom she had helped to restore, she was pleased with
this alteration of affairs; and maintained a good correspondence with the new
court and ministry of James.

Conspiracies in England.
THESE revolutions in Scotland would have been regarded as of small importance
to the repose and security of Elizabeth, had her own subjects been entirely
united, and had not the zeal of the catholics, excited by constraint, more
properly than persecution, daily threatened her with some dangerous
insurrection. The vigilance of the ministers, particularly of Burleigh and
Walsingham, was raised in proportion to the activity of the malcontents; and
many arts, which had been blameable in a more peaceable government, were
employed to detect conspiracies, and even discover the secret inclinations of
men. Counterfeit letters were wrote in the name of the Queen of Scots, or of
the English exiles, and privately conveyed to the houses of the catholics:
Spies were hired to observe the actions and discourse of suspected persons:
Informers were countenanced: And though the sagacity of these two great ministers
helped them to distinguish the true from the false intelligence, many calumnies
were, no doubt, hearkened to, and all the subjects, particularly the catholics,
kept in the utmost anxiety and inquietude. Henry Piercy, earl of
Northumberland, brother to the earl beheaded some years before, and Philip
Howard, earl of Arundel, son to the unfortunate duke of Norfolk, fell under
suspicion; and the latter was, by order of the council, confined to his own
house. Francis Throcmorton, a private gentleman, was committed to custody, on
account of a letter which he had wrote to the Queen of Scots, and which was
intercepted. Lord Pager, and Charles Arundel, who had been engaged with him in
treasonable designs, immediately withdrew beyond sea. Throcmorton confessed,
that a plan for an invasion and insurrection had been laid; and though, on his
trial, he was desirous of retracting this confession, and imputing it to the
fear of torture, he was found guilty and executed. Mendoza, the Spanish
ambassador, having promoted this conspiracy, was ordered to depart the kingdom;
and Wade was sent into Spain, to excuse his dismission, and to desire the King
to send another ambassador in his place: But Philip would not so much as admit
the English ambassador to his presence. Creighton, a Scotch Jesuit, coming over
on board a vessel which was seized, tore some papers, with an intention of
throwing them into the sea; but the wind blowing them back upon the ship, they
were put together, and discovered some dangerous secrets Camden, p. 499.
.

MANY of these conspiracies were, with great appearance of reason, imputed to
the contrivances of the Queen of Scots Strype, vol. III. p. 246.
; and as her name was employed in all of them, the council thought, that they
could not use too many precautions against the danger of her claims, and the
restless activity of her temper. She was removed from under the care of the
earl of Shrewsbury, who, though vigilant and faithful in that trust, had also
been indulgent to his prisoner, particularly with regard to air and exercise:
And she was committed to the custody of Sir Amias Paulet and Sir Drue Drury;
men of honor, but inflexible and rigid in their care and attention. An
association was also set on foot by the earl of Leicester and other courtiers;
and as Elizabeth was extremely beloved by the whole nation, except the more
zealous catholics, men of all ranks willingly flocked to the subscription of
it. The purport of this association was to defend the Queen, to revenge her
death or any injury committed against her, and to exclude from the throne any
person, whatever title they possessed, by whose suggestion, or for whose
behoof, any violence should be offered to her majesty State Trial^, vol. I. p.
122, 123.
. The Queen of Scots was sensible, that this association was levelled against
her; and to remove all suspicion from herself, she also desired leave to
subscribe it.

23d November.
A Parliament.
ELIZABETH, that she might the more discourage all malcontents, by showing
them the concurrence of the nation in her favor, summoned a new Parliament;
and she met with that dutiful attachment, which she expected. The association
was confirmed by Parliament; and a clause was added, by which the Queen was
empowered to name commissioners for the trial of any pretender to the crown,
who should attempt or imagine any invasion, insurrection, or assassination
against the Queen: Upon condemnation, pronounced by these commissioners, the
person was excluded from all claim to the succession, and was farther
punishable, as her majesty should direct. And for the greater security, a
council of regency, in case of the Queen's violent death, was appointed to
govern the kingdom, to settle the succession, and to take vengeance of that act
of treason 27 Eliz. cap. 1.
.

A SEVERE law was also enacted against jesuits and popish priests: That they
should depart the kingdom within forty days; that those who should remain
beyond that time, or should afterward return, should be guilty of high
treason; that those who harbored or relieved them should be guilty of felony;
that those who were educated in seminaries, if they returned not in six months
after notice given, and submitted not themselves to the Queen, before a bishop
or two justices, should be guilty of high treason: And that if any, so
submitting themselves, should, within ten years, approach the Queen's court, or
come within ten miles of it, their submission should be void 2^ Eliz. cap. 2.
. By this law, the exercise of the catholic religion, which had formerly been
prohibited under lighter penalties, and which was, in many instances, connived
at, was totally suppressed. In the subsequent part of the Queen's reign, the
law was sometimes executed, by the capital punishment of priests; and though the
partisans of that princess asserted, that they were punished for their treason,
not their religion, the apology must only be so understood that this severe law
was enacted on account of the treasonable views and attempts of the sect, not
that every individual, who suffered the penalty of the law, was convicted of
treason Some even of those who defend the Queen's measures, allow that in ten
years fifty priests were executed and fifty-five banished. Camden, p. 649.
. The catholics, therefore, might now justly complain of a very violent
persecution; which, we may safely affirm, in spite of the rigid and bigoted
maxims of that age, not to be the best method of converting them, or of
reconciling them to the established government and religion.

THE Parliament, besides arming the Queen with these powers, granted her a
supply of one subsidy and two fifteenths. The only circumstance, in which their
proceedings were disagreeable to her, was an application, which the commons
made for a farther reformation in ecclesiastical matters. Yet even in this
attempt, which affected her, as well as them, in a very delicate point, they
discovered how much they were overawed by her authority. The majority of the
house were puritans, or inclined to that sect Besides the petition
after-mentioned, another proof of the prevalency of the puritans among the
commons was their passing a bill for the reverend observance of Sunday, which
they called the Sabbath, and the depriving the people of those amusements,
which they were accustomed to take on that day. D'Ewes, p. 335. It was a strong
symptom of a contrary spirit in the upper house, that they proposed to add
Wednesday to the fast days, and to prohibit entirely the eating of flesh on
that day* D'Ewes, p. 373.
; but the severe reprimands, which they had already, in former sessions, met
with from the throne, deterred them from introducing any bill concerning
religion; a proceeding which would have been interpreted as an incroachment on
the royal prerogative: They were contented to proceed by way of humble
petition, and that not to her majesty, which would certainly have given some
offense, but to the house of lords, or rather to the bishops, who had a seat in
that house, and from whom alone they were contented to receive all advances
toward reformation D'Ewes, p. 357.
. A strange departure from what we now apprehend to be the dignity of the
commons!

THE commons desired in their humble petition, that no bishop should exercise
his function of ordination but with the consent and concurrence of six
presbyters: A demand, which as it would have introduced a change of
ecclesiastical government, was firmly rejected by the prelates. They desired,
that no clergyman should be instituted into any benefice, without previous
warning being given to the parish, that they might examine whether there lay
any objection to his life or doctrine: But this attempt toward a popular model
naturally met with the same fate. In another article of the petition, they
prayed, that the bishops should not insist upon every ceremony, or deprive
incumbents for omitting a part of the service: As if uniformity in public
worship had not been established by law; or as if the prelates had been endowed
with a dispensing power. They complained of abuses, which prevailed, in
denouncing the sentence of excommunication, and entreated the reverend fathers
to think of some law for the remedy of these abuses: Implying, that those
matters were too high for the commons of themselves to meddle with them.

BUT the most material article, which the commons touched upon in their
petition, was the ecclesiastical commission, and the oath ex officio, as it was
called, exacted by that court. This is a subject of such importance, as to
merit some explanation.

The ecclesiastical court.
THE first primate after the Queen's accession, was Parker; a man rigid in
exacting conformity to the established worship, and in punishing by fines or
deprivations, all the puritans, who attempted to innovate any thing in the
habits, ceremonies, or liturgy of the church. He died in 1575; and was
succeeded by Grindal, who, as he himself inclined to the new sect, was with
great difficulty brought to execute the law against them, or to punish the
nonconforming clergy. He declined obeying the Queen's orders for the
suppression of prophecyings, which, she apprehended, had become so many
academies of fanaticism; and for this offense, she had, by an order of the Star
Chamber, sequestered him from his archiepiscopal function, and confined him to
his own house. Upon his death, which happened in 1583, she was determined not
to fall into the same error in her next choice; and she named Whitgift, a
zealous churchman, who had already signalized his pen in controversy, and who,
having in vain attempted to convince the puritans by argument, was now
determined to open their eyes by power, and by the execution of penal statutes.
He informed the Queen, that all the spiritual authority lodged in the prelates
was vain without the sanction of the crown; and as there was no ecclesiastical
commission at that time in force, he engaged her to issue a new one; more
arbitrary than any of the former, and conveying more unlimited authority Neal's
History of the Puritans, vol. I. p. 410.
. She appointed forty-four commissioners, twelve of whom were ecclesiastics;
three commissioners could exercise the whole power of the court; their
jurisdiction extended over the whole kingdom, and over all orders of men; and
every circumstance of their authority, and all their methods of proceeding,
were contrary to the clearest principles of law and natural equity. They were
empowered to visit and reform all errors, heresies, schisms, in a word, to
regulate all opinions, as well as to punish all breach of uniformity in the
exercise of public worship. They were directed to make enquiry, not only by the
legal methods of juries and witnesses, but by all other means and ways, which
they could devise; that is, by the rack, by torture, by inquisition, by
imprisonment. Where they thought proper to suspect any person, they might
administer to him an oath, called ex officio, by which he was bound to answer
all questions, and might thereby be obliged to accuse himself or his most
intimate friend. The fines, which they imposed, were merely discretionary, and
often occasioned the total ruin of the offenders, contrary to the established
law of the kingdom. The imprisonment, to which they condemned any delinquent,
was limited by no rule but their own pleasure. They assumed a power of imposing
on the clergy what new articles of subscription, and consequently of faith,
they thought proper. Though all other spiritual courts were subject, since the
reformation, to inhibitions from the supreme courts of law, the ecclesiastical
commissioners exempted themselves from that legal jurisdiction, and were liable
to no control. And the more to enlarge their authority, they were empowered to
punish all incests, adulteries, fornications; all outrages, misbehaviours, and
disorders in marriage: And the punishments, which they might inflict, were
according to their wisdom, conscience, and discretion. In a word, this court
was a real inquisition; attended with all the iniquities, as well as cruelties,
inseparable from that horrid tribunal. And as the jurisdiction of the
ecclesiastical court was destructive of all law, so its erection was deemed by
many a mere usurpation of this imperious princess, and had no other foundation
than a clause of a statute, restoring the supremacy to the crown, and
empowering the sovereign to appoint commissioners for exercising that
prerogative. But prerogative in general, and especially the supremacy, were
supposed in that age to involve powers, which no law, precedent, or reason
could limit and determine.

BUT though the commons, in their humble petition to the prelates, had touched so
gently and submissively the ecclesiastical grievances, the Queen, in a speech
from the throne at the end of the session, could not forbear taking notice of
their presumption, and reproving them for those murmurs, which, for fear of
offending her, they had pronounced so low as not directly to reach her royal
ears. After giving them some general thanks for their attachment to her, and
making professions of affection to her subjects, she told them, that whoever
found fault with the church threw a slander upon her, since she was appointed
by God supreme ruler over it, and no heresies or s^hisms could prevail in the
kingdom but by her permission and negligence: That some abuses must necessarily
have place in every thing; but she warned the prelates to be watchful; for if
she found them careless of their charge, she was fully determined to depose
them: That she was commonly supposed to have employed herself in many studies,
particularly philosophical (by which, I suppose, she meant theological) and she
would confess, that few, whose leizure had not allowed them to make profession
of science, had read or reflected more: That as she could discern the
presumption of many, in curiously canvassing the scriptures, and starting
innovations, she would no longer endure this license; but meant to guide her
people, by God's rule, in the just mean between the corruptions of Rome and the
errors of modern sectaries: And that as the Romanists were the inveterate
enemies of her person, so the other innovators were dangerous to all kingly
government; and under color of preaching the word of God, presumed to exercise
their private judgment, and to censure the actions of the prince D'Ewes, p.
328. This sect had indeed gone so far, that a book of discipline was secretly
subscribed by above five hundred clergymen; and the presbyterian government
thereby established in the midst of the church, notwithstanding the rigor of
the prelates and of the high commission. So impossible is it by penal statutes,
however severe, to suppress all religious innovation. See Neal's Hi^^of the
Puritans, Vol. I. p. 483. Strype's Life of Whitgift, p. 291.
.

FROM the whole of this transaction, we may observe, that the commons, in their
general application to the prelates, as well as some particular articles of
their petition, showed themselves wholly ignorant, no less than the Queen, of
the principles of liberty and a legal constitution. And it may not be unworthy
of remark, that Elizabeth, so far from yielding to the displeasure of the
Parliament against the ecclesiastical commission, granted a new commission
before the end of her reign; in which she enlarged, rather than restrained, the
powers of the commissioners Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 292, 386, 400.
.

DURING this session of Parliament, there was discovered a conspiracy, which
much increased the natural animosity against the catholics, and still farther
widened the breach between the religious parties. William Parry, a catholic
gentleman, had received the Queen's pardon for a crime, by which he was exposed
to capital punishment; and having got permission to travel, he retired to
Milan, and made open profession of his religion, which he had concealed while
he remained in England. He was here persuaded by Palmio, a jesuit, that he
could not perform a more meritorious action, than to take away the life of his
sovereign and his benefactress; the nuncio, Campeggio, when consulted, approved
extremely of this pious undertaking; and Parry, though still agitated with
doubts, came to Paris, with an intention of passing over to England, and
executing his bloody purpose. He was here encouraged in the design by Thomas
Morgan, a gentleman of great credit in the party; and though Watts and some other
catholic priests told him, that the enterprise was criminal and impious, he
preferred the authority of Raggazzoni, the pope's nuncio at Paris, and was
determined to persist in his resolution. He here wrote a letter to the pope,
which was conveyed to cardinal Como; communicated his intention to the holy
father; and craved his absolution and paternal benediction. He received an
answer from the cardinal, by which he perceived that his purpose was extremely
applauded; and he came over to England with a full design of carrying it into
execution. So deeply are the sentiments of morality engraved in men's breasts,
that it is very difficult even for the prejudices of false religion totally to
efface them; and this bigoted assassin resolved, before he came to extremity,
to try every other expedient for alleviating the persecutions, under which the
catholics at that time labored. He found means of being introduced to the
Queen; assured her that many conspiracies were formed against her; and exhorted
her, as the only means of saving her life, to give the Romanists some more
indulgence in the exercise of their religion: But lest he should be tempted by
the opportunity to assassinate her, he always came to court unprovided of every
offensive weapon. He even procured himself to be elected member of Parliament;
and having made a vehement speech against the severe laws enacted this last
session, was committed to custody for his freedom, and sequestered from the
house. His failure in these attempts confirmed him the more in his former
resolution, and he communicated his intentions to Nevil, who entered zealously
into the design, and was determined to have a share in the merits of its
execution. A book, newly published by Dr. Allen, afterward created a cardinal,
served farther to efface all their scruples, with regard to the murder of a
heretical prince; and having agreed to shoot the Queen as she was riding on
horseback, they resolved, if they could not make their escape, to sacrifice
their lives in fulfilling a duty, so agreeable, as they imagined, to the will
of God, and to true religion. But while they were watching an opportunity for
the execution of their purpose, the earl of Westmoreland happened to die in
exile; and as Nevil was next heir to that family, he began to entertain hopes,
that, by doing an acceptable service to the Queen, he might recover the estate
and honors which had been forfeited by the rebellion of the last earl. State
Trials, vol. I. p. 103. and seq. Strype, vol. III. p. 255 and seq.
, suffered the punishment, which the law appointed for his treasonable
conspiracy This year, the earl of Northumberland, brother to the earl beheaded
some years before, had been engaged in a conspiracy with lord Paget for the
delivery of the Queen of Scots. He was thrown into the Tower; and being
conscious that his guilt could be proved upon him, at least, that sentence
would infallibly be pronounced against him, he freed himself from farther
prosecution by a voluntary death. He shot himself into the breast with a
pistol. About the same time, the earl of Arundel, son to the unfortunate duke
of Norfolk, having entered into some exceptionable measures, and reflecting on
the unhappy fate, which had attended his family, endeavored to depart secretly
beyond sea, but was discovered and thrown into the Tower. In 1587 this nobleman
was brought to his trial for high treason; chiefly because he had dropped some
expressions of affection to the Spaniards, and had affirmed that he would have
masses said for the success of the armada. His peers found him guilty of
treason: This severe sentence was not executed; but Arundel never recovered his
liberty. He died a prisoner in 1595. He carried his religious austerities so
far, that they were believed the immediate cause of his death.
.

THESE bloody designs now appeared every where, as the result of that bigoted
spirit by which the two religions, especially the catholic, were at this time
actuated. One Somerville, a gentleman of the county of Warwic, somewhat
disordered in his understanding, had heard so much of the merit attending the
assassination of heretics and persecutors, that he came to London with a view
of murdering the Queen; but having betrayed his design by some extravagances,
he was thrown into prison, and there perished by a voluntary death Camden, p.
495.
. Affairs of the Low Countries.
About the same time, Baltazar Gerard, a Burgundian, undertook, and executed
the same design against the prince of Orange; and that great man perished at
Delst, by the hands of a desperate assassin, who, with a resolution worthy of a
better cause, sacrificed his own life, in order to destroy the famous restorer
and protector of religious liberty. The Flemings, who regarded that prince as
their father, were filled with infinite regret, as well when they considered
the miserable end of so brave a patriot, as their own forlorn condition, from
the loss of so powerful and prudent a leader, and from the rapid progress of
the Spanish arms. The prince of Parma had made every year great advances upon
them, had reduced several of the provinces to obedience, and had laid close
siege to Antwerp, the richest and most populous city of the Netherlands, whose
subjection, it was foreseen, would give a mortal blow to the already declining
affairs of the revolted States. The only hopes which remained to them, arose
from the prospect of foreign succors. Being well acquainted with the cautious
and frugal maxims of Elizabeth, they promised themselves better success in
France; and in the view of engaging Henry to embrace their defense, they
tendered him the sovereignty of their provinces. But the present condition of
that monarchy obliged the King to reject so advantageous an offer. The duke of
Anjou's death, which, he thought, would have delivered him from the intrigues
of that fickle and turbulent prince, plunged him into the deepest distress; and
the King of Navarre, a professed Hugonot, being next heir to the crown, the
duke of Guise took thence occasion to revive the catholic league, and to urge
Henry, by the most violent expedients, to seek the exclusion and suppression of
that brave and virtuous prince. Henry himself, though a zealous catholic, yet,
because he declined complying with their precipitant measures, became an object
of aversion to the league; and as his zeal in practicing all the superstitious
observances of the Romish church, was accompanied with a very licentious
conduct in private life, the catholic faction, in contradiction to the most
vulgar experience, embraced thence the pretext of representing his devotion as
mere hypocrisy and deceit. Finding his authority to decline, he was obliged to
declare war against the Hugonots, and to put arms into the hands of the League,
whom, both on account of their dangerous pretensions at home, and their close
alliance with Philip, he secretly regarded as his more dangerous enemies.
Constrained by the same policy, he perceived the danger of associating himself
with the revolted protestants in the Low Countries, and was obliged to renounce
that inviting occasion of revenging himself for all the hostile intrigues and
enterprises of Philip.

THE States, reduced to this extremity, sent over a solemn embassy to London,
and made offer to the Queen, of acknowleging her for their sovereign, on
condition of obtaining her protection and assistance. Elizabeth's wisest
counselors were very much divided in opinion, in regard to the conduct which
she should hold in this critical and important emergence. Some advised the
rejecting the offer of the States, and represented the imminent dangers, as
well as injustice, attending the acceptance of them. They said, that the
rebellion of subjects was the common cause of all sovereigns, and the
encouragement of a revolt in the Flemish, might prove the example to a like
pernicious practice in the English: That though princes were bound by the laws of
the Supreme Being, not to oppress their subjects, the people never were
entitled to forget all duty to their sovereign, or transfer, from every fancy
or disgust, or even from the justest ground of complaint, their obedience to
any other master: That the Queen, in the succors hitherto afforded the
Flemings, had considered them as laboring under oppression, not as entitled to
freedom; and had intended only to admonish Philip not to persevere in his
tyranny, without any view of ravishing from him these provinces, which he
enjoyed by hereditary right from his ancestors: That her situation in Ireland,
and even in England, would afford that powerful monarch sufficient opportunity
of retaliating upon her; and she must henceforth expect, that, instead of
secretly somenting faction, he would openly employ his whole force in the
protection and defense of the catholics. That the pope would undoubtedly unite
his spiritual arms to the temporal ones of Spain; and that the Queen would soon
repent her making so small and precarious an acquisition in foreign countries,
by exposing her own dominions to such imminent danger Camden, p. 507.
Bentivoglio, partz. lib. iv.
.

OTHER counselors of Elizabeth maintained a contrary opinion. They asserted,
that the Queen had not even from the beginning of her reign, but certainly had
not at present, the choice, whether she would embrace friendship or hostility
with Philip: That by the whole tenor of that prince's conduct it appeared, that
his sole aims were, the extension of his empire, and the utter extermination of
the protestants, under the specious pretense of maintaining the catholic faith:
That the provocations which she had already given him, joined to this general
scheme of policy, would for ever render him her implacable enemy; and as soon
as he had subdued his revolted subjects, he would undoubtedly fall, with the
whole force of his united empire, on her defenseless state: That the only
question was, whether she would maintain a war, abroad and supported by allies,
or wait till the subjection of all the confederates of England, should give her
enemies leisure to begin their hostilities in the bowels of that kingdom: That
the revolted provinces, though in a declining condition, possessed still
considerable force; and by the assistance of England, by the advantages of
their situation, and by their inveterate antipathy to Philip, might still be
enabled to maintain the contest against the Spanish monarchy: That their
maritime power, united to the Queen's would give her entire security on that
side from which alone she could be assaulted, and would even enable her to make
inroads on Philip's dominions, both in Europe and the Indies: That a war which
was necessary, could never be unjust; and self-defence was concerned, as well
in warding certain dangers at a distance, as in repelling any immediate
invasion: And that since hostility with Spain was the unavoidable consequence
of the present interests and situations of the two monarchies, it was better to
compensate that danger and loss by the acquisition of such important provinces
to the English empire Camden, ibid. Bentivoglio, ibid.
.

AMIDST these opposite councils, the Queen, apprehensive of the consequences
attending each extreme, was inclined to steer a middle course; and though such
conduct is seldom prudent, she was not, in this resolution, guided by any
prejudice or affection. She was determined not to see, without opposition, the
total ruin of the revolted provinces, whose interests she esteemed so closely
connected with her own: But foreseeing, that the acceptance of their
sovereignty would engage her to employ her whole force in their defense, would
give umbrage to her neighbors, and would expose her to the reproach of
ambition and usurpation, imputations which she had hitherto carefully avoided,
she immediately rej cted this offer. She concluded a league with the States on
the following conditions: That she should send over an army to their
assistance, of five thousand foot and a thousand horse, and pay them during the
war; that the general, and two others, whom she should appoint, should be
admitted into the council of the States; that neither party should make peace
without the consent of the other; that her expenses should be refunded after
the conclusion of the war; and that the towns of Flushing and the Brille, with
the castle of Rammekins, should, in the mean time, be consigned into her hands,
by way of security.

THE Queen knew that this measure would immediately engage her in open
hostilities with Philip; yet was she not terrified with the view of the present
greatness of that ambitious, and enterprizing monarch. The continent of Spain
was at that time rich and populous; and the late addition of Portugal, besides
securing internal tranquillity, had annexed an opulent kingdom to Philip's
dominions, had made him master of many settlements in the East Indies, and of
the whole commerce of those regions, and had mightily increased his naval
power, in which he was before chiefly deficient. All the princes of Italy, even
the pope and the court of Rome, were reduced to a kind of subjection under him,
and seemed to possess their sovereignty on very precarious and uncertain terms.
The Austrian branch in Germany, with all their dependant principalities, was
closely connected with him, and was ready to supply him with troops for every
enterprise. The whole treasures of the West Indies were in his possession; and
the present scarcity of the precious metals in every country of Europe,
rendered the inssuence of his riches the more forcible and extensive. The
Netherlands seemed on the point of relapsing into servitude; and small hopes
were entertained of their withstanding those numerous and veteran armies which,
under the command of the most experienced generals, he employed against them.
Even France, which used to counterballance the Austrian greatness, had lost all
her force from intestine commotions; and as the catholics, the ruling party,
were closely connected with him, he rather expected thence an augmentation,
than a diminution, of his power. Upon the whole, such prepossessions were every
where entertained concerning the force of the Spanish monarchy, that the King
of Sweden, when he heard that Elizabeth had openly embraced the defense of the
revolted Flemings, scrupled not to say, that she had now taken the diadem from
her head, and had adventured it upon the doubtful chance of war Camden. ^8.
. Yet was this princess rather cautious than enterprizing in her natural
temper: She ever needed more to be impelled by the vigor, than restrained by
the prudence of her ministers: But when she saw an evident necessity, she
braved danger with magnanimous courage; and trusting to her own consummate
wisdom, and to the affections, however divided, of her people, she prepared
herself to resist, and even to assault, the whole force of the catholic monarch.

THE earl of Leicester was sent over to Holland, at the head of the English
auxiliary forces. He carried with him a splendid retinue; being accompanied
with the young earl of Essex, his son in-law, the lords Audley and North, Sir
William Russel, Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir Arthur Basset, Sir Walter Waller. Sir
Gervase Clifton, and a select troop of five hundred gentlemen. He was received,
on his arrival at Flushing, by his nephew, Sir Philip Sidney, the governor; and
every town through which he passed, expressed their joy by acclamations, and
triumphal arches, as if his presence, and the Queen's protection, had brought
them the most certain deliverance. The States, desirous of engaging Elizabeth
still farther in their defense, and knowing the interest which Leicester
^^^^^ssed with her, conserred on him the title of governor and captain general
of the United Provinces, appointed a guard to attend him, and treated him, in
(...) respects, as their sovereign. But this step had a contrary effect to what
they expected. The Queen was displeased with the artifice of the States, (...)
of Leicester. She reprimanded both of them very severely by l^tters and it was
with some difficulty, that, after many humble submissions, they were able to
appease her.

(...).
AMERICA was regarded as the chief ^ource of Philip's power, as will as the
^oll desenceless part of his dominions; and Elizabeth finding that an (...)
reach with that monarch was unavoidable, resolved not to leave him unmolested
on that quarter. The great success of the Spaniards and Portugueze in both
Indies had excited a spirit of emulation in England; and as the success of
commerce, still more of planting colonies, is slow and gradual, it was happy,
that a war, in this critical age, had opened a more flattering prospect to the
avarice and ambition of the English, and had tempted them, by the view of
sudden and exorbitant profit, to engage in naval enterprises. A fleet of twenty
sail was equipped to attack the Spaniard in the West Indies: Two thousand three
hundred volunteers, besides seamen, engaged on board of it: Sir Francis Drake
was appointed admiral; Christopher Carlisle commander of the land forces. They
took St. Jago, near Cape Verde, by surprise; and found in it plenty of
provisions, but no riches. 1 January.
They sailed to Hispaniola; and easily making themselves master of St. Domingo
by assault, obliged the inhabitants to ransom their houses by a sum of money.
Carthagena fell next into their hands, after some more resistance, and was
treated in the same manner. They burned St. Anthony and St. Helens, two towns
on the coast of Florida. Sailing along the coast of Virginia, they found the
small remains of a colony which had been planted there by Sir Walter Raleigh,
and which had gone extremely to decay. This was the first attempt of the
English to form such settlements; and though they have since surpassed all
European nations, both in the situations of their colonies, and in the noble
principles of liberty and industry, on which they are founded; they had here
been so unsuccessful, that the miserable planters abandoned their settlements,
and prevailed on Drake to carry them with him to England. He returned with so
much riches as encouraged the volunteers, and with such accounts of the Spanish
weakness in those countries as served extremely to inflame the spirits of the
nation to future enterprises. The great mortality which the climate had
produced in his fleet, was, as is usual, but a feeble restraint on the avidity
and sanguine hopes of young adventurers Camden, p. 509.
. It is thought that Drake's fleet first introduced the use of tobacco into
England.

THE enterprises of Leicester were much less successful than those of Drake.
This man possessed neither courage nor capacity, equal to the trusts reposed in
him by the Queen; and as he was the only bad choice whom she made for any
considerable advancement, men naturally believed, that she had here been
influenced by an affection still more partial than that of friendship. He
gained at first some advantage in an action against the Spaniards; and threw
succors into Grave, by which that place was enabled to make a vigorous
defense: But the cowardice of the governor, Van Hemert, rendered all these
efforts useless. He capitulated after a very feeble resistance; and being tried
for his conduct, suffered a capital punishment from the sentence of a court
martial. The prince of Parma next undertook the siege of Venlo, which was
surrendered to him, after some resistance. The fate of Nuys was more dismal;
being taken by assault, while the garrison was treating of a capitulation.
Rhimberg, which was garrisoned by twelve hundred English, under the command of
colonel Morgan, was afterward besieged by the Spaniards; and Leicester,
thinking himself too weak to attempt raising the siege, endeavored to draw off
the prince of Parma by forming some other enterprise. He first attacked
Doesberg, and succeeded: He then sat down before Zutphen, which the Spanish
general thought so important a place, that he hastened to its relief. He made
the marquess of Guasto advance with a convoy, which he intended to throw into
the place. They were favored by a fog; but falling by chance on a body of
English cavalry, a furious action ensued, in which the Spaniards were worsted,
and the marquess of Gonzaga, an Italian nobleman of great reputation and
family, was slain. The pursuit was stopped by the advance of the prince of Parma
with the main body of the Spanish army; and the English cavalry, on their
return from the field, found their advantage more than compensated by the loss
of Sir Philip Sidney, who, being mortally wounded in the action, was carried
off by the soldiers, and soon after died. This person is described by the
writers of that age as the most perfect model of an accomplished gentleman
which was ever formed even by the wanton imagination of poetry or fiction.
Virtuous conduct, polite conversation, heroic valor, and elegant erudition,
all concurred to render him the ornament and delight of the English court; and
as the credit which he possessed with the Queen and the earl of Leicester, was
wholly employed in the encouragement of genius and literature, his praises have
been transmitted with advantage to posterity. No person was so low as not to
become an object of his humanity. After this last action, while he was lying on
the field, mangled with wounds, a bottle of water was brought him to relieve
his thirst; but observing a soldier near him in a like miserable condition, he
said, This man's necessity is still greater than mine: And resigned to him the
bottle of water. The King of Scots, struck with admiration of Sidney's virtue,
celebrated his memory by a copy of Latin verses, which he composed on occasion
of the death of that young hero.

THE English, though a long peace had deprived them of all experience, were
strongly possessed of military genius; and the advantages gained by the prince
of Parma were not attributed to the superior bravery and discipline of the
Spaniards, but solely to the misconduct of Leicester. The States were much
discontented with his management of the war; but still more with his arbitrary
and imperious conduct; and at the end of the campaign, they applied to him for
a redress of all their grievances. But Leicester, without giving them any
satisfaction, departed soon after for England Camden, p. 512. Bentivoglio, part
2. lib. iv.
.

THE Queen, while she provoked so powerful an enemy as the King of Spain, was
not forgetful to secure herself on the side of Scotland; and she endeavored
both to cultivate the friendship and alliance of her kinsman, James, and to
remove all grounds of quarrel between them. An attempt which she had made some
time before, was not well calculated to gain the confidence of that prince. She
dispatched Wotton as her ambassador to Scotland; but though she gave him private
instructions with regard to her affairs, she informed James, that when she had
any political business to discuss with him, she would employ another minister*
that this man was not fitted for serious negociations; and that her chief
purpose in sending him, was to entertain the King with witty and facetious
conversation, and to partake without reserve of his pleasures and amusements.
Wotton was master of profound dissimulation, and knew how to cover, under the
appearance of a careless gaiety, the deepest designs, and most dangerous
artifices. When but a youth of twenty, he had been employed by his uncle, Dr.
Wotton, ambassador in France during the reign of Mary, to ensnare the
constable, Montmorency; and had not his purpose been frustrated by pure
accident, his cunning had prevailed over all the caution and experience of that
aged minister. It is no wonder, that, after years had so much improved him in
all arts of deceit, he should gain an ascendent over a young prince, of so open
and unguarded a temper as James, especially when the Queen's recommendation
prepared the way for his artifices. He was admitted into all the pleasures of
the King; made himself master of all his secrets; and had so much the more
authority with him in political transactions, that he did not seem to pay the
least attention or regard to these matters. The Scotch ministers, who observed
the growing interest of this man, endeavored to acquire his friendship; and
scrupled not to sacrifice to his intrigues the most essential interests of
their master. Elizabeth's usual jealousies with regard to her heirs began now
to be levelled against James; and as that prince had a tained the years proper
for marriage, she was apprehensive, lest, by being strengthened with children
and alliances, he should acquire the greater interest and authority with her
English subjects. She directed Wotton to form a secret concert with some Scotch
nobleman, and to procure their promise, that James, during three years, should
not, on any account, be permitted to marry. In consequence of this view, they
endeavored to embroil him with the King of Denmark, who had sent ambassadors
to Scotland, under pretense of demanding the restitution of the Orkneys, but
really with a view of opening a proposal of marriage between James and his
daughter. Wotton is said to have employed his intrigues to purposes still more
dangerous. He formed a conspiracy with some malcontents, to seize the person
of the King, and to deliver him into the hands of Elizabeth, who would probably
have denied all concurrence in the design, but who would have been careful to
retain him in perpetual thraldom, if not captivity. The conspiracy was
discovered, and Wotton fled hastily from Scotland, without taking leave of the
King Melvil.
.

JAMES'S situation obliged him to dissemble his resentment of this traitorous
attempt, and his natural temper inclined him soon to forgive and forget it. The
Queen found no difficulty to renew the negociations for a strict alliance
between Scotland and England; and the more effectually to gain the prince's
affections, she granted him a pension, equivalent to his claim on the
inheritance of his grandmother the countess of Lenox, lately deceased
Spotswood, p. 351.
. A league was formed between Elizabeth and James, for mutual defense of their
dominions, and of their religion, now menaced by the open combination of all
the catholic powers of Europe. It was stipulated, that if Elizabeth was
invaded, James should aid her with a body of two thousand horse and five
thousand foot; that Elizabeth, in a like case; should send to his assistance
three thousand horse and six thousand foot; that the charge of these armies
should be defrayed by the prince who demanded assistance; that if the invasion
should be made upon England, within sixty miles of the frontiers of Scotland,
this latter kingdom should march its whole forces to the assistance of the
former; and that the present league should supercede all former alliances of
either state with any foreign kingdom, so far as religion was concerned Ibid.
p. 349. Camden, p. 513. Rymer, tom. XV. p. 803.
.

BY this league James secured himself against all attempts from abroad, opened
a way for acquiring the confidence and affection of the English, and might
entertain some prospect of domestic tranquillity, which, so long as he lived on
bad terms with Elizabeth, he could never expect long to enjoy. Besides the
turbulent disposition, and inveterate feuds of the nobility, ancient maladies
of the Scotch government, the spirit of fanaticism had introduced a new
disorder; so much the more dangerous, that religion, when corrupted by false
opinion, is not restrained by any rules of morality, and is even searcely to be
accounted for in its operations, by any principles of ordinary conduct and
policy. The insolence of the Scotch preachers, who triumphed in their dominion
over the populace, had, at this time, reached an extreme height; and they
carried their arrogance so far, not only against the King, but against the
Parliament, and the whole civil power, that they dared to excommunicate the
archbishop of St. Andrews, because he had been active for promoting a law which
restrained their seditious sermons Spotswood, p. 345, 346.
: Nor could that prelate save himself any way from this terrible sentence, but
by renouncing all pretensions to ecclesiastical authority. One Gibson said in
the pulpit, that captain James Stuart (meaning the late earl of Arran) and his
wife, Jezabel, had been esteemed the chief persecutors of the church; but it
was now seen, that the King himself was the great offender: And for this crime
the preacher denounced against him, the curse which fell on Jeroboam, that he
should die childless, and be the last of his race Ibid. p. 344.
.

THE secretary, perceiving the King so much molested with ecclesiastical
affairs, and with the refractory disposition of the clergy, advised him to
leave them to their own courses: For that in a short time they would become so
intolerable, that the people would rise against them, and chase them out of the
country. "True," replied the King: "If I purposed to undo the church and
religion, your counsel were good: But my intention is to maintain both;
therefore cannot I suffer the clergy to follow such a conduct, as will in the
end bring religion into contempt Ibid. p. 348.
."

CHAP. V.
Zeal of the Catholics. -- Babington's conspiracy. -- Mary assents to the
conspiracy. -- The conspirators seized and executed. -- Resolution to try the
Queen of Scots. -- The commissioners prevail on her to submit to the trial. --
The trial. -- Sentence against Mary. -- Interposition of King James. -- Reasons
for the execution of Mary. -- The execution. -- Mary's character. -- The
Queen's affected sorrow. -- Drake destroys the Spanish fleet at Cadiz. --
Philip projects the invasion of England. -- The Invincible Armada. --
Preparations in England. -- The Armada arrives in the Channel. -- Defeated. --
A Parliament. -- Expedition against Portugal. -- Scotch affairs.

THE dangers which arose from the character, principles, and pretensions of the
Queen of Scots, had engaged, very early, Elizabeth to consult, in her treatment
of that unfortunate princess, the dictates of jealousy and politics, rather
than of friendship or generosity: The resentment of this usage had pushed Mary
into enterprises, which had very nearly threatened the repose and authority of
Elizabeth: The rigor and restraint, which were thence redoubled upon the
captive Queen Digges, p. 139. Haynes, p. 607.
, still impelled her to attempt greater extremities; and while her impatience
of confinement, her revenge Mary's extreme animosity against Elizabeth may
easily be conceived, and broke out, about this time, in an incident, which may
appear curious. While the former Queen was kept in custody by the earl of
Shrewsbury, she lived during a long time in great intimacy with the countess;
but that lady, entertaining jealousy of an amor between her and the earl,
their friendship was converted into enmity; and Mary took a method of revenge,
which at once gratified her spite against the countess and that against
Elizabeth. She wrote to the Queen, informing her of all the malicious
scandalous stories, which, she said, the countess of Shrewsbury had reported of
her: That Elizabeth had given a promise of marriage to a certain person, whom
she afterward often admitted to her bed: That she had been equally indulgent
to Simier, the French agent, and to the duke of Anjou: That Hatton was also one
of her paramours, who was even disgusted with her excessive love and fondness:
That though she was on other occasions avaritious to the last degree, as well as
ungrateful, and kind to very few, she spared no expense in gratifying her
amorous passions: That notwithstanding her licentious amors, she was not made
like other women; and all those who courted her marriage would in the end be
disappointed: That she was so conceited of her beauty, as to swallow the most
extravagant flattery from her courtiers, who could not, on these occasions,
forbear even sneering at her for her folly: That it was usual for them to tell
her, that the luster of her beauty dazzled them like that of the sun, and they
could not behold it with a fixed eye: She added, that the countess had said,
that Mary's best policy would be to engage her son to make love to the Queen;
nor was there any danger that such a proposal would be taken for mockery; so
ridiculous was the opinion which she had entertained of her own charms. She
pretended, that the countess had represented her as no less odious in her
temper than prostigate in her manners, and absurd in her vanity: That she had
so beaten a young woman of the name of Scudamore as to break that lady's
finger; and in order to cover over the matter, it was pretended, that the
accident had proceeded from the fall of a candlestick: That she had cut another
across the hand with a knife, who had been so unfortunate as to offend her.
Mary added, that the countess had informed her, that Elizabeth had suborned
Rolstone to pretend friendship to her, in order to debauch her, and thereby
throw in^amy on her rival. See Murden's State Papers, p. 558. This imprudent
and malicious letter was wrote a very little before the detection of Queen
Mary's conspiracy; and contributed, no doubt, to render the proceedings against
her more rigorous. How far all these imputations against Elizabeth can be
credited, may perhaps appear doubtful: But her extreme fondness for Leicester,
H^tton, and Easex, not to mention Mountjoy and others, with the curious
passages between her and admiral Say mour, contained in Haynes, render her
cha^lity very suspicious. Her self conceit with regard to beauty, we know from
other undoubted authority, to have been extravagant. Even when she was a very
old woman, she allowed her counters to flatter her with regard to her excellent
(...). Birch, vol II p. 442, 443. Her passionate temper may also be proved from
many lively instance; and it was not unusual with her to beat her maids of
honor. See the Sydney Papers, vol. II. p ^8. The blow the gave to Essex before
the privy council is another instance. Had this Queen been both in a private
station, she would not have been very amiable: But her absolute authority, at
the same time that it gave an uncontroled swing to her violent passions,
enabled her to compensate for her infirmities by many great and signal virtues.
, and her high spirit concurred with religious zeal, and the suggestions of
desperate bigots, she was at last engaged in designs, which afforded her
enemies, who waited for the opportunity, a pretext or reason for effectuating
her final ruin.

Zeal of the catholics.
THE English seminary at Rheims had wrought themselves up to a high pitch of
rage and animosity against the Queen. The recent persecutions, from which they
had fled: The new rigours, which, they knew, awaited them in the course of
their missions: The liberty which for the present they enjoyed of declaiming
against that princess: And the contagion of religious fury, which every where
surrounded them in France: All these causes had obliterated with them every
maxim of common sense, and every principle of morals or humanity. Intoxicated
with admiration of the omnipotence and infallibility of the pope, they revered
his bull by which he excommunicated and deposed the Queen; and some of them had
gone to that height of extravagance, as to assert, that that performance had
been immediately dictated by the Holy Ghost. The assassination of heretical
sovereigns, and of that princess in particular, was represented as the most
meritorious of all enterprises; and they taught, that whoever perished in such
pious attempts enjoyed without dispute the glorious and never-fading crown of
martyrdom. By such doctrines, they instigated John Savage, a man of desperate
courage, who had served some years in the Low Countries under the prince of
Parma, to attempt the life of Elizabeth; and this assassin, having made a vow
to persevere in his design, was sent over to England, and recommended to the
confidence of the more zealous catholics.

ABOUT the same time, John Ballard, a priest of that seminary, had returned to
Paris from his mission in England and Scotland; and as he had discovered a
spirit of mutiny and rebellion very prevalent among the catholic devotees in
these countries, he had founded on that disposition the project of dethroning
Elizabeth, and of restoring by force of arms the exercise of the ancient
religion in England Murden's State Papers, p. 517.
. The situation of affairs abroad seemed favorable to this enterprise: The
pope, the Spaniard, the duke of Guise, the prince, created by the pope duke, of
Parma, concurring in interests, had formed a resolution to make some attempt
upon the Queen: And Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador at Paris, strongly
encouraged Ballard to hope for succors from these princes. Charles Paget
alone, a zealous catholic and a devoted partizan of the Queen of Scots, being
well acquainted with the prudence, vigor, and general popularity of Elizabeth,
always maintained, that so long as that princess was allowed to live, it was in
vain to expect any success from an enterprise upon England. Ballard, persuaded
of this truth, saw more clearly the necessity of executing the design, formed
at Rheims: He came over to England in the disguise of a soldier, and assumed
the name of captain Fortescue: And he bent his endeavors to effectuate at once
the project of an assassination, an insurrection and an invasion Camden, p. 515.
.

Babington's conspiracy.
THE first person, to whom he addressed himself, was Anthony Babington of
Dothic in the county of Derby. This young gentleman was of a good family,
possessed a plentiful fortune, had discovered an excellent capacity, and was
accomplished in literature beyond most of his years or station. Being zealously
devoted to the catholic communion, he had secretly made a journey to Paris some
time before; and had fallen into intimacy with Thomas Morgan, a bigoted
fugitive from England, and with the bishop of Glasgow, Mary's ambassador to the
court of France. By continually extolling the amiable accomplishments and
heroical virtues of that princess, they inflamed the unguarded mind of young
Babington to make some attempt for her service; and they employed every
principle of ambition, gallantry, and religious zeal to give him a contempt of
those dangers, which attended any enterprise against the vigilant government of
Elizabeth. Finding him well disposed for their purpose, they sent him back to
England, and secretly, unknown to himself, recommended him to the Queen of
Scots as a person worth engaging in her service. She wrote him a letter, full
of friendship and confidence; and Babington, sanguine in his temper and zealous
in his principles, thought, that these advances now bound him in honor to
devote himself entirely to the service of that unfortunate princess. During
some time, he had found means of conveying to her all her foreign
correspondence; but after she was put under the custody of Sir Amias Paulet,
and reduced to a more rigorous confinement, he experienced so much difficulty
and danger in rendering her this service, that he had desisted from every
attempt of that nature.

WHEN Ballard began to open his intentions to Babington, he found his zeal
suspended, not extinguished: His former ardour revived on the mention of any
enterprise, which seemed to promise success in the cause of Mary or of the
catholic religion. He had entertained, however, sentiments conformable to those
of Paget, and represented the solly of all attempts, which, during the
lifetime of Elizabeth, could be formed against the established religion and
government of England. Ballard, encouraged by this hint, proceeded to discover
to him the design undertaken by Savage Ibid. State Trials, p. 111.
; and was pleased to observe, that, instead of being shocked with that project,
Babington only thought it not secure enough, when entrusted to one single hand,
and proposed to join four others with Savage in this desperate and bloody
enterprise.

IN prosecution of these views, Babington employed himself in augmenting the
number of his associates; and he secretly drew into the conspiracy many
catholic gentlemen, discontented with the present government. Barnwel, of a
noble family in Ireland, Charnoc, a gentleman of Lancashire, and Abington,
whose father had been cofferer to the household, readily undertook the
assassination of the Queen. Charles Tilney the heir of a very ancient family,
and Titchborne of Southampton, when the design was proposed to them, expressed
some scruples, which were at last removed by the arguments of Babington and
Ballard. Savage alone refused for some time to share the glory of the
enterprise with any others State Trials, vol. I. p. 111.
; he challenged the whole to himself; and it was with some difficulty he was
induced to depart from this preposterous ambition.

THE delivery of the Queen of Scots, at the very same instant, when Elizabeth
should be assassinated, was requisite for effecting the purpose of the
conspirators; and Babington undertook, with a party of an hundred horse, to
attack her guards, while she should be taking the air on horseback. In this
enterprise, he engaged Edward Windsor, brother to the lord of that name, Thomas
Salisbury, Robert Gage, John Travers, John Jones, and Henry Done; most of them
men of family and interest. The conspirators much wanted, but could not find,
any nobleman of name, whom they might place at the head of their enterprise;
but they trusted, that the great events, of the Queen's death and Mary's
delivery, would rouse all the zealous catholics to arms; and that foreign
forces, taking advantage of the general confusion, would easily fix the Queen
of Scots on the throne, and re-establish the ancient religion.

THESE desperate projects had not escaped the vigilance of Elizabeth's council,
particularly of Walsingham, secretary of state. That artful minister had
engaged Maud, a catholic priest, whom he retained in pay, to attend Ballard in
his journey to France, and had thereby got a hint of the designs, entertained
by the fugitives. Polly, another of his spies, had found means to insinuate
himself among the conspirators in England; and though not entirely trusted, had
obtained some insight into their dangerous secrets. But the bottom of the
conspiracy was never fully known, till Gifford, a seminary priest, came over,
and made a tender of his service to Walsingham. By his means, the discovery
became of the utmost importance, and involved the fate of Mary, as well as of
those zealous partisans of that princess.

BABINGTON and his associates, having laid such a scheme, as, they thought,
promised infallible success, were impatient to communicate the design to the
Queen of Scots, and to obtain her approbation and concurrence. For this
service, they employed Gifford, who immediately applied to Walsingham, that the
interest of that minister might forward his secret correspondence with Mary.
Walsingham proposed the matter to Paulet, and desired him to connive at
Gifford's corrupting one of his servants: But Paulet was averse to the
introducing such a pernicious precedent into his family, and desired, that they
would rather think of some other expedient. Gifford found a brewer, who
supplied the family with ale; and bribed him to convey letters to the captive
Queen. The letters, by Paulet's connivance, were thrust through a chink in the
wall; and answers were returned by the same conveyance.

BALLARD and Babington were at first diffident of Gifford's fidelity; and to
make trial of him, they gave him only blank papers made up like letters: But
finding by the answers, that these had been faithfully delivered, they laid
aside all farther scruple, and conveyed by his hands the most criminal and
dangerous parts of their conspiracy. Babington informed Mary of the design laid
for a foreign invasion, the plan of an insurrection at home, the scheme for her
delivery, and the conspiracy for assassinating the usurper, by six noble
gentlemen, as he termed them, all of them his private friends, who, from the
zeal, which they bore to the catholic cause and her majesty's service, would
undertake the tragical execution. Mary assents to the conspiracy.
Mary replied, that she approved highly of the design, that the gentlemen might
expect all the rewards, which it should ever be in her power to conler, and
that the death of Elizabeth was a requisite circumstance, before any attempts
were made either for her own delivery or an insurrection State Trials, vol. I.
p 135. Camden, p. 515
. These letters, with others to Mendoza, Charles Paget, the archbishop of
Glasgow, and Sir Francis Ingelfield, were carried by Gifford to secretary
Walsingham; were decyphered by the art of Philips, his clerk; and copies taken
of them. Walsingham employed a new artifice, in order to obtain full insight
into the plot: He subjoined to a letter of Mary's a postscript in the same
cipher; in which he made her desire Babington to inform her of the names of the
six conspirators. The indiscretion of Babington furnished Walsingham with still
another means of detection as well as of defense. That gentleman had made a
picture be drawn, where he himself was represented standing amidst the six
assassins; and a motto was subjoined, expressing, that their common perils were
the band of their consederacy. A copy of this picture was brought to Elizabeth,
that she might know the assassins, and guard herself against their approach to
her person.

MEANWHILE, Babington, anxious to ensure and hasten the foreign succors,
resolved to dispatch Ballard into France; and he procured for him, under a
feigned name, a license to travel. In order to remove from himself all
suspicion, he applied to Walsingham, pretended great zeal for the Queen's
service, offered to go abroad, and promised to employ that confidence, which he
had gained among the catholics, to the detection and disappointment of their
conspiracies. Walsingham commended his loyal purposes; and promising his own
council and assistance in the execution of them, still fed him with hopes, and
maintained a close correspondence with him. A warrant, meanwhile, was issued
for seizing Ballard; and this incident, joined to the consciousness of guilt,
begot in all the conspirators the utmost anxiety and concern. Some advised that
they should immediately make their escape: Others proposed, that Savage and
Charnoc should without delay execute their purpose against Elizabeth; and
Babington, in prosecution of this scheme, furnished Savage with money, that he
might buy good clothes, and have thereby the more easy access to the Queen's
person. Next day, they began to apprehend, that they had taken the alarm too
hastily; and Babington, having renewed his correspondence with Walsingham, was
persuaded by that subtle minister, that the seizure of Ballard had proceeded
entirely from the usual diligence of informers in the detection of popish and
seminary priests. He even consented to take secretly lodgings in Walsingham's
house, that they might have more frequent conferences together, before his
intended departure for France: But observing, that he was watched and guarded,
he made his escape, and gave the alarm to the other conspirators. They all took
to flight, covered themselves with several disguises, and lay concealed in
woods or barns; The conspirators seized and executed.
but were soon discovered and thrown into prison. In their examinations, they
contradicted each other; and the leaders were obliged to make a full confession
of the truth. September.
Fourteen were condemned and executed: Of whom, seven acknowleged the crime on
their trial; the rest were convicted by evidence.

THE lesser conspirators being dispatched, measures were taken for the trial
and conviction of the Queen of Scots; on whose account, and by whose
concurrence, all these attempts had been made against the life of the Queen,
and the tranquillity of the kingdom. Some of Elizabeth's counselors were averse
to this procedure; and thought, that the close confinement of a woman, who was
become very sickly, and who would probably put a speedy end to their anxiety by
her natural death, might give sufficient security to the government, without
attempting a measure of which there scarcely remains any example in history.
Leicester advised, that Mary should be secretly dispatched by poison; and he
sent a divine to convince Walsingham of the lawfulness of that action: But
Walsingham declared his abhorrence of it; and insisted still, in conjunction
with the majority of the counselors, for the open trial of the Queen of Scots.
The situation of England, and of the English ministers had, indeed, been
hitherto not a little dangerous. No successor of the crown was declared; but
the heir of blood, to whom the people in general were likely to adhere, was, by
education, an enemy to the national religion; was, from multiplied injuries, an
enemy to the ministers and principal nobility: And their personal safety, as
well as the security of the government, seemed to hang alone on the Queen's
life, who was now somewhat advanced in years. No wonder, therefore, that
Elizabeth's counselors, knowing themselves to be so obnoxious to the Queen of
Scots, endeavored to push every measure to extremity against her; and were
even more anxious than the Queen herself, to prevent her from ever mounting the
throne of England.

THOUGH all England was acquainted with the detection of Babington's conspiracy,
every avenue to the Queen of Scots was so strictly guarded, that she remained
in utter ignorance of the whole matter; and it was a great surprise to her,
when Sir Thomas Gorges, by Elizabeth's orders, informed her, that all her
partisans were discovered and arrested. He chose the time for giving her this
intelligence, when she was mounted on horseback to go a hunting; and she was
not permitted to return to her former place of abode, but was conducted from
one gentleman's house to another, till she was landed in Fotheringhay castle in
the county of Northampton, which it was determined to make the last stage of
her trial and sufferings. Her two secretaries, Nau, a Frenchman, and Curle, a
Scot, were immediately arrested: All her papers were seized, and sent up to the
council: Above sixty different keys to ciphers were discovered: There were also
found many letters from persons beyond sea; and several too from English
noblemen, containing expressions of respect and attachment. The Queen took no
notice of this last discovery; but the persons themselves, knowing their
correspondence to be detected, thought that they had no other method of making
atonement for their imprudence, than declaring themselves thenceforth the most
inveterate enemies to the Queen of Scots Camden, p. 518.
.

Resolution to try the Queen of Scots.
IT was resolved to try Mary, not by the common statutes of treason, but by the
act which had passed the former year, with a view to this very event; and the
Queen, in terms of that act, appointed a commission, consisting of forty
noblemen and privy-counsellors, and empowered them to examine and pass sentence
on Mary, whom she denominated the late Queen of Scots, and heir to James the
fifth of Scotland. The commissioners came to Fotheringhay castle, and sent to
her Sir Walter Mildmay, Sir Amias Paulet, and Edward Barker, who delivered her
a letter from Elizabeth, informing her of the commission, and of the
approaching trial. Mary received the intelligence without any commotion or
astonishment. She said, however, that it seemed strange to her, that the Queen
should command her, as a subject, to submit to a trial and examination before
subjects: That she was an absolute independent princess, and would yield to
nothing which might derogate either from her royal majesty, from the state of
sovereign princes, or from the dignity and rank of her son: That, however
oppressed by misfortunes and calamities, her spirits were not yet so much
broke, as her enemies flattered themselves; nor would she, on any account, be
accessory to her own degradation and dishonor: That she was ignorant of the
laws and statutes of England; was utterly destitute of council; and could not
conceive who were entitled to be called her peers, or could legally sit as
judges on her trial: That though she had lived in England for many years, she had
lived in captivity; and not having received the protection of the laws, she
could not, merely by her involuntary residence in the country, be supposed to
have subjected herself to their jurisdiction and authority: That
notwithstanding the superiority of her rank, she was willing to give an account
of her conduct before an English Parliament; but could not view these
commissioners in any other light, than as men appointed to justify, by some
color of legal proceeding, her condemnation and execution: And that she warned
them to look to their conscience and their character, in trying an innocent
person; and to reflect, that these transactions would somewhere be subject to
revision, and that the theater of the whole world was much wider than the
kingdom of England.

The commissioners prevail on her to submit to the trial.
IN return, the commissioners sent a new deputation, informing her, that her
plea, either from her royal dignity or from her imprisonment, could not be
admitted; and that they were empowered to proceed against her, even though she
should refuse to appear before them. Burleigh, the treasurer, and Bromley, the
chancellor, employed much reasoning to make her submit to the trial; but the
person whose arguments had the chief influence, was Sir Christopher Hatton,
vice-chamberlain. His speech was to this purpose. "You are accused, Madam,"
said he, "but not condemned, of having conspired the destruction of our Lady
and Queen anointed. You say, you are a Queen: But, in such a crime as this, and
such a situation as yours, the royal dignity itself, neither by the civil nor
canon law, nor by the law of nature or of nations, is exempt from judgment. If
you be innocent, you wrong your reputation in avoiding a trial. We have been
present at your protestations of innocence; but Queen Elizabeth thinks
otherwise; and is heartily sorry for the appearances which lie against you. To
examine, therefore, your cause, she has appointed commissioners, honorable
persons, prudent and upright men, who are ready to hear you with equity, and
even with favor, and will rejoice if you can clear yourself of the imputations
which have been thrown upon you. Believe me, Madam, the Queen herself will
rejoice, who affirmed to me at my departure, that nothing which ever befell her,
had given her so much uneasiness, as that you should be suspected of a
concurrence in these criminal enterprises. Laying aside, therefore, the
fruitless claim of privilege from your royal dignity, which can now avail you
nothing, trust to the better defense of your innocence, make it appear in an
open trial, and leave not upon your memory that stain of infamy which must
attend your obstinate silence on this occasion Camden, p. 5^^
."

BY this artful speech, Mary was persuaded to appear before the court; and
thereby gave an appearance of legal procedure to the trial, and prevented those
difficulties, which the commissioners must have fallen into, had she persevered
in maintaining so specious a plea as that of her sovereign and independent
character. Her conduct in this particular must be regarded as the more
imprudent, that formerly, when Elizabeth's commissioners pretended not to
exercise any jurisdiction over her, and only entered into her cause by her own
consent and approbation, she declined justifying herself, when her honor,
which ought to have been dearer to her than life, seemed absolutely to require
it.

The trial.
ON her first appearance before the commissioners, Mary, either sensible of her
imprudence, or still unwilling to degrade herself by submitting to a trial,
renewed her protestation against the authority of her judges: The chancellor
answered her by pleading the supreme authority of the English laws over every
one who resided in England: And the commissioners accommodated matters, by
ordering both her protestation and his answer to be recorded.

THE lawyers of the crown then opened the charge against the Queen of Scots.
They proved, by intercepted letters, that she had allowed cardinal Allen and
others to treat her as Queen of England; and that she had kept a correspondence
with lord Paget and Charles Paget, in a view of engaging the Spaniards to
invade the kingdom. Mary seemed not a^xious to clear herself from either of
these imputations. She only said, that she could not hinder others from using
what style they pleased in writing to her; and that it was lawful for her to
employ every expedient for the recovery of her liberty.

AN intercepted letter of here is to Mendoza was next produced; in which she
promised to transfer to Philip her right to the kingdom of England, if her son
should refuse to be converted to the catholic faith; an event, she said, of
which there was no expectation, while he remained in the hands of his Scotch
subjects State Trials, vol. I. p. 138.
. Even this part of the charge, she took no pains to deny, or rather she seemed
to acknowledge it. She said, that she had no kingdoms to dispose of; yet was it
lawful for her to give at her pleasure what was her own, and she was not
accountable to any for her actions. She added, that she had formerly rejected
that proposal from Spain, but now, since all her hopes in England were gone,
she was fully determined not to refuse foreign assistance. There was also
produced evidence to prove, that Allen and Parsons were at that very time
negotiating by her orders in Rome the conditions of transferring her English
crown to the King of Spain, and of disinheriting her heretical son Canden, p.
525. This evidence was that of Curle, her secretary, whom she allowed to be a
very honest man; and who as well as Nau, had given proofs of his integrity, by
keeping so long such important secrets, from whose discovery he could have
reaped the greatest profit. Mary, after all, thought that she had so little
reason to complain of Curle's evidence, that she took care to have him paid a
considerable sum by her testament, which she wrote the day before her death.
Coodal, vol. I. p. 413. Neither did she forget Nau, though less satisfied with
his conduct. Id. Ibid.
.

IT is remarkable, that Mary's prejudices against her son were, at this time,
carried so far, that she had even entered into a conspiracy against him, had
appointed lord Claude Hamilton regent of Scotland, and had instigated her
adherents to seize the King's person and deliver him into the hands of the pope
or the King of Spain; whence he was never to be delivered but on the condition
of his becoming catholic The detail of this conspiracy is to be found in a
letter of the Queen of Scots to Charles Paget, her great consident. This letter
is dated the 20th of May 1586, and is contained in Dr. ^orbe^'s manuscript
collections, at present in the possession of lord Royston. It is a copy
attested by Curle, Mary's secretary, and indorsed by lord Burleigh. What proves
its authenticity beyond question is, that we find in Murden's Collection, p.
^10, that Mary actually wrote that very day a letter to Charles Pag^t: And
further, she mentions, in the manuscript letter, a letter of Charles Paget's of
Charles Paget's of the 10th of April: New we find by Murden, p. 500, that
Charles Paget did actually write her a letter of that date.

This violence of spirit is very consistent with Mary's character. Her maternal
affection was too weak to oppose the gratification of her passions,
particularly her pride, her ambition, and her bigotry. Her son, having made
some fruitless attempts to associate her with him in the title, and having
found this s^h^me impracticable, on account of the prejudices of his protestant
subjects, at last desisted from that design, and entered into an alliance with
England, without comprehending his mother. She was in such a rage at this
undutiful behavior, as she imagined it, that she wrote to Queen Elizabeth,
that she no longer cared what became of him or her in the world; the greatest
satisfaction she could have before her death was to see him and all his
adherents become a signal example of tyranny, ingratitude and impiety, and
undergo the vengeance of God for their wickedness. She would sind in
Christerdom other heirs, and doubted not to put her inheritance in such hands
as would retain the firmest hold of it. She cared not, after taking this
revenge, what became of her body: The quickest death would then be the most
agreeable to her. And she assured her, that, if he persevered, she would disown
him for her son, would give him her malediction, would disinherit him, as well
of his present possessions as of all he could expect by her; abandoning him not
only to her subjects to treat him as they had done her, but to all strangers to
subdue and conquer him. It was in vain to employ menaces against her: The fear
of death or other misfortune would never induce her to make one step or
pronounce one syllable beyond what she had determined: She would rather perish
with honor, in maintaining the dignity, to which God had raised her, than
degrade herself by the least pusillanimity, or act what was unworthy of her
station and of her race. Murden, p. 566. 567.

James said to Courcelles, the French ambassador, that he had seen a letter
under her own hard, where she threatened to disinherit him, and said that he
might betake him to the lordship of D^^ley: For that was all he had by his
father. Counceller' Letter, a MS. of D. Camp^el^s. There is in Jebb. vol. II.
p. 573, a letter of here is, where she throws out the same menace against him.

We sind this scheme of seizing the King of Scots, and delivering him into the
hands of the pope of the king of Spain, proposed by Morgan to Mary. See Murden,
p. 525.


.

THE only part of the charge, which Mary positively denied, was her concurrence
in the design of assassinating Queen Elizabeth: This article indeed was the
most heavy, and the only one, which could fully justify the Queen in proceeding
to extremities against her. In order to prove the accusation, there were
produced the following evidence: Copies taken in secretary Walsingham's office
of the intercepted letters between her and Babington, in which her approbation
of the murder was clearly expressed; the evidence of her two secretaries, Nau
and Curle, who had sworn, without being put to any torture, that she both
received these letters from Babington, and that they had wrote the answers by
her order; the confession of Babington, that he had wrote the letters and
received the answers State Trials, vol. I. p. 113.
; and the confession of Ballard and Savage, that Babington had showed them
these letters of Mary, wrote in the cipher, which had been settled between them.

IT is evident, that this seeming complication of evidence resolves itself
finally into the testimony of the two secretaries, who alone were acquainted
with their mistress's concurrence in Babington's conspiracy, and who knew
themselves exposed to all the rigours of imprisonment, torture and death, if
they refused to give any evidence, which might be required of them. In the case
of an ordinary criminal, this proof, with all its disadvantages, would be
esteemed legal, and even satisfactory, if not opposed by some other
circumstances, which shake the credit of the witnesses: But on the present
trial, where the absolute power of the prosecutor concurred with such important
interests and such a strong inclination to have the princess condemned; the
testimony of two witnesses, even though men of character, ought to be supported
by very strong circumstances, in order to remove all suspicion of tyranny and
injustice. The proof against Mary, it must be confessed, is not destitute of
this advantage; and it is very difficult, if not impossible, to account for
Babington's receiving an answer, wrote in her name, and in the cipher concerted
between them, without allowing, that the matter had been communicated to that
princess. Such is the light in which this matter appears, even after time has
discovered every thing, which could guide our judgment with regard to it: No
wonder, therefore, that the Queen of Scots, unassisted by council, and
confounded by so extraordinary a trial, found herself incapable of making a
satisfactory defense before the commissioners. Her reply consisted chiefly in
her own denial: Whatever force may be in that denial was much weakened, by her
positively affirming, that she never had had any correspondence of any kind
with Babington; a fact, however, of which there remains not the least question
The volume of State Papers collected by Mr. Murden, prove beyond controversy,
that Mary was long in close correspondence with Babington, p. 513, 516, 532,
533. She entertained a like correspondence with Ballard, Morgan, and Charles
Paget, and laid a scheme with them for an insurrection, and for the invasion of
England by Spain, p. 528, 531. The same papers show, that there had been a
discontinuance of Babington's correspondence, agreeable to Camden's narration.
See State Papers p 513, where Morgan recommends it to Queen Mary to renew the
correspondence with Babington. The former letters, which passed between that
Queen and Babington, seem to have been destroyed by some accident. These
circumstances prove, that no weight can be laid on Mary's denial of guilt, and
that her correspondence with Babington contained particulars, which could not
be avowed.
. She asserted, that as Nau and Curle had taken an oath of secrecy and fidelity
to her, their evidence against her ought not to be credited. She confessed,
however, that Nau had been in the service of her uncle, the cardinal of
Lorraine, and had been recommended to her by the King of France, as a man in
whom she might safely confide. She also acknowleged Curle to be a very honest
man, but simple, and easily imposed on by Nau. If these two men had received
any letters, or had wrote any answers, without her knowledge; the imputation,
she said, could never lie on her. And she was the more inclined, she added, to
entertain this suspicion against them, that Nau had, in other instances, been
guilty of a like temerity, and had ventured to transact business in her name,
without communicating the matter to her There are three suppositions, by which
the letter to Babington may be accounted for, without allowing Mary's
concurrence in the conspiracy for assassinating Elizabeth. The first is, that
which she seems herself to have embraced, that her secretaries had received
Babington's letter, and had ventured of themselves to answer it, without
communicating the matter to her: But it is utterly improbable, that a princess
of that sense and spirit would, in an affair of that importance, be so treated
by her servants, who lived in the house with her, and who had every moment an
opportunity of communicating the secret to her. If the conspiracy failed, they
must expect to suffer the severest punishment from the court of England; if it
succeeded, the lightest punishment, which they could hope for from their own
mistress, must be disgrace, on account of their temerity. Not to mention, that
Mary's concurrence was in some degree requisite for effectuating the design of
her escape: It was proposed to attack her guards, while she was employed in
hunting: She must therefore concert the time and place with the conspirators.
The second supposition is, that these two secretaries were previously traitors;
and being gained by Walsingham, had made such a reply in their mistress's
cipher, as might involve her in the guilt of the conspiracy. But these two men
had lived long with the Queen of Scots, had been entirely trusted by her, and
had never fallen under suspicion either with her or her partisans. Camden tells
us, that Curle afterward claimed a reward from Walsingham on pretense of some
promise; but Walsingham told him, that he owed him no reward, and that he had
made no discoveries on his examination, which were not known with certainty
from other quarters. The third supposition is, that neither the Queen nor the
two secretaries, Nau and Curle, ever saw Babington's letter, or made any
answer; but that Walsingham, having decyphered the former, forged a reply. But
this supposition implies the falsehood of the whole story, told by Camden, of
Gifford's access to the Queen of Scots's family, and Paulet's resusal to concur
in allowing his servants to be bribed. Not to mention, that as Nau's and
Curle's evidence must, on this supposition, have been extorted by violence and
terror, they would necessarily have been engaged, for their own justification,
to have told the truth afterward; especially upon the accession of James. But
Camden informs us, that Nau, even after that event, persisted still in his
testimony.

We must also consider, that the two last suppositions imply such a monstrous
criminal conduct in Walsingham, and consequently in Elizabeth (for the matter
could be no secret to her) as exceeds all credibility. If we consider the
situation of things and the prejudices of the times, Mary's consent to
Babington's conspiracy appears much more natural and probable. She believed
Elizabeth to be an usurper and a heretic: She regarded her as a personal and a
violent enemy: She knew that schemes of assassinating heretics were very
familiar in that age, and generally approved of by the zealous catholics: Her
own liberty and sovereignty were connected with the success of this enterprise:
And it cannot ^ppear strange, that where men of so much merit as Babington
could be engaged, by bigotry alone, in so criminal an enterprise, Mary, who was
actuated by the same motive, joined to so many others, should have given her
consent to a scheme projected by her friends. We may be previously certain,
that, if such a scheme was ever communicated to her, with any probability of
success, she would assent to it: And it served the purpose of Walsingham and
the English ministry to facilitate the communication of these schemes, as soon
as they had got an expedient sor intercepting her answer, and detecting the
conspiracy. Now Walsingham's knowledge of the matter is a supposition necessary
to account for the letter delivered to Babington.

As to the not punishing of Nau and Curle by Elizabeth, it never is the
practice to punish lesser criminals, who had given evidence against the
principal.

But what should induce us to reject these three suppositions, is, that they
must, all of them, be considered as bare possibilities: The partisans of Mary
can give no reason for preferring one to the other: Not the slightest evidence
ever appeared to support any one of them: Neither at that time, nor at any time
after, was any reason discovered, by the numerous zealots at home and abroad
who had embraced Mary's defense, to lead us to the belief os any of these three
suppositions; and even her apologists at present seem not to have fixed on any
choice among these supposed possibilities. The positive proof of two credible
witnesses, supported by the other very strong circumstances, still remains
unimpeached. Babington, who had an extreme interest to have communication with
the Queen of Scots, believed he had found a means of correspondence with her,
and had received an answer from her: He, as well as the other conspirators,
died in that belief: There has not occurred, since that time, the least
argument to prove they were mistaken: Can there be any reason at present to
doubt of the truth of their opinion? Camden, though a professed apologist for Mary,
is constrained to tell the story in such a manner as evidently supposes her
guilt. Such was the impossibility of sinding any other consistent account, even
by a man of parts, who was a contemporary!

In this light might the question have appeared even during Mary's trial. But
what now puts her guilt beyond all controversy is the following passage of her
letter to Thomas Morgan, dated the 27th of July 1^86. "As to Babington, he has
both kindly and honestly offered himself and all his means to be employed any
way I would. Whereupon I hope to have satisfied him by two of my several
letters, since I had his; and the rather, for that I opened him the way,
whereby I received his with your aforesaid." Murden, p. 533. Babington
confessed, that he had offered her to assassinate the Queen: It appears by
this, that she had accepted the offer: So that all the suppositions of
Walsingham's ^^^gery, or her secretary's temerity or treachery, sall to the
ground.


.

THE sole circumstance of her defense, which to us may appear to have some
force, was her requiring that Nau and Curle should be confronted with her, and
affirming that they never would to her face persist in their evidence. But that
demand, however equitable, was not supported by law in trials of high treason,
and was often refused even in other trials where the crown was prosecutor. The
clause, contained in an act of the 13th of the Queen, was a novelty; that the
species of treason there enumerated must be proved by two witnesses, confronted
with the criminal The law of 5 and 6 of Edward VI. cap. 11. which required the
confrontation of two witnesses for all species of treason was repealed in the
first of Mary.
. But Mary was not tried upon that act; and the ministers and crown lawyers of
this reign were always sure to refuse every indulgence beyond what the strict
letter of the law and the settled practice of the courts of justice required of
them. Not to mention, that these secretaries were not probably at Fotheringay
during the time of the trial, and could not, upon Mary's demand, be produced by
the commissioners Queen Elzabeth was willing to have allowed Curle and Nau to
be produced in the trial, and writes to that purpose, to Burleigh and
Walsingham, in her letter of the 7th of October in Forber's MS. collections.
She only says, that she thinks it needles^, though she was willing to agree to
it. The not consionting the with (...) was not result of design, but the
practice of the age.
.

THERE passed two incidents in this trial, which may be worth observing. A
letter between Mary and Babington was read, in which mention was made of the
earl of Arundel and his brothers: On hearing their names she broke into a sigh,
"Alas," said she, "what has that noble house of the Howards suffered for my
sake!" She affirmed, with regard to the same letter, that it was easy to forge
the handwriting and cipher of another; she was afraid, that this was too
familiar a practice with Walsingham, who, she also heard, had frequently
practiced both against her life and her son's. Walsingham, who was one of the
commissioners, rose up when he heard this accusation. He protested, that in his
private capacity, he had never acted any thing against the Queen of Scots: In
his public capacity, he owned, that his concern for his sovereign's safety had
made him very diligent in searching out, by every expedient, all designs
against her sacred person or her authority. For attaining that end, he would
not only make use of the assistance of Ballard or any other conspirator: He
would also reward them for betraying their companions. But if he had tampered
in any manner, unworthy of his character and office, why did none of the late
criminals either at their trial or execution, accuse him of such practices?
Mary endeavored to pacify him by saying that she spoke from information; and
she begged him, that he would thenceforth give no more credit to such as
standered her, than she would to such as accused him. The great character
indeed, which Sir Francis Walsingham bears for probity and honor, should
remove from him all suspicion of such base arts as forgery and subornation;
arts, which even the most corrupt ministers in the most corrupt times would
scruple to employ.

25th October.
HAVING finished the trial, the commissioners adjourned from Fotheringay, and
met in the Star Chamber at London; where, after taking the oaths of Mary's two
secretaries, who, voluntarily, without hope or reward, vouched the authenticity
of those letters before produced, they pronounced sentence of death upon the
Queen of Scots, and confirmed it by their seals and subscriptions. Sentence
against Mary.
The same day, a declaration was published by the commissioners and the judges,
"that the sentence did no way derogate from the title and honor of James, King
of Scotland; but that he was in the same place, degree, and right, as if the
sentence had never been pronounced Camden, p. 526.
."

THE Queen had now brought her affairs with Mary to that situation, which she
had long ardently desired; and had sound a plausible reason for executing
vengeance on a competitor, whom, from the beginning of her reign, she had ever
equally dreaded and hated. But she was restrained from gratifying instantly her
resentment, by several important considerations. She foresaw the invidious
colors in which this example of uncommon jurisdiction would be represented by
the numerous partisans of Mary, and the reproach, to which she herself might be
exposed with all foreign princes, perhaps with all posterity. The rights of
hospitality, of kindred, and of royal majesty, seemed in one signal instance to
be all violated; and this sacrifice of generosity to interest, of clemency to
revenge, might appear equally unbecoming a sovereign and a woman. Elizabeth,
therefore, who was an excellent hypocrite, pretended the utmost reluctance to
proceed to the execution of the sentence, affected the most tender sympathy
with her prisoner, displayed all her scruples and objections, rejected the
solicitation of her courtiers and ministers, and affirmed, that, were she not
moved by the deepest concern for her people's safety, she would not hesitate a
moment in pardoning all the injuries, which she herself had received from the
Queen of Scots.

29th October.
THAT the voice of her people might be more audibly heard in the demand of
justice upon Mary, she summoned a new Parliament; and she knew, both from the
usual dispositions of that assembly, and from the influence of her ministers
over them, that she should not want the most earnest solicitation to consent
to that measure, which was so agreeable to her secret inclinations. She opened
not this assembly in person, but appointed for that purpose three
commissioners, the chancellor Bromley, the treasurer Burleigh, and the earl of
Derby. The reason assigned for this measure, was, that the Queen, foreseeing
that the affair of the Queen of Scots would be tried in Parliament, found her
tenderness and delicacy so much hurt by that melancholy incident, that she had
not the courage to be present while it was under deliberation, but withdrew her
eyes from what she could not behold without the utmost reluctance and
uneasiness. She was also willing, that, by this unusual caution, the people
should see the danger, to which her person was hourly exposed; and should
thence be more strongly incited to take vengeance on the criminal, whose
restless intrigues and bloody conspiracies had so long exposed her to the most
imminent perils D'Ewes, p. 375.
.

THE Parliament answered the Queen's expectations: The sentence against Mary
was unanimously ratisied by both houses; and an application was agreed on to
obtain Elizabeth's consent to its publication and execution Ibid. p. 379.
. She gave them an answer ambiguous, embarrassed; full of real artifice, and
seeming irresolution. She mentioned the extreme danger to which her life was
continually exposed; she declared her willingness to die, did she not foresee
the great calamities, which would thence fall upon the nation; she made
professions of the greatest tenderness to her people; she displayed the
clemency of her temper, and expressed her violent reluctance to proceed to
extremity against her unhappy kinswoman; she affirmed, that the late law, by
which that princess was tried, so far from being made to ensnare her, was only
intended to give her warning beforehand, not to engage in such attempts, as
might expose her to the penalties, with which she was thus openly menaced; and
she begged them to think once again, whether it was possible to find any other
expedient besides the death of the Queen of Scots for securing the public
tranquillity D'Ewes, p. 402, 403.
. The Parliament, in obedience to her commands, took the affair again under
deliberation; but could find no other possible expedient. They reiterated their
solicitations and entreaties and arguments: They even remonstrated, that mercy
to the Queen of Scots was cruelty to them, her subjects and children: And they
affirmed, that it were injustice to deny execution of the law to any
individual; much more, to the whole body of the people, now unanimously and
earnestly suing for this pledge of her parental care and tenderness. This
second address set the pretended doubts and scruples of Elizabeth anew in
agitation: She complained of her own unfortunate situation; expressed her
uneasiness from their importunity; renewed the professions of affection to her
people; and dismissed the committee of Parliament in an uncertainty, what,
after all this deliberation, might be her final resolution This Parliament
granted the Queen a supply of a subsidy and two fifteenths. They adjourned, and
met again after the execution of the Queen of Scots; when there passed some
remarkable incidents, which it may be proper not to omit. We shall give them in
the words of Sir Simo^ D'Ewes, p. 410, 411, which are almost wholly transcribed
from Townsend's Journal. On Monday the 27th of February, Mr. Cope, first using
some speeches touching the necessity of a learned ministry (...) the amendment
of things amiss in the ecclesiastical estate, offered to the house a bill and a
book written; the bill containing a petition, that it might be enacted, that
all laws now in force touching ecclesiastical government should be void: And
that it might be enacted that that book of common prayer now offered, and none
other, might be received into the church to be used. The book (...) the form of
prayer and administration of the sacraments, with diverse rite^ and ceremonies
to be hied in the church; and he desired that the book might be read. Whereupon
Mr. Speaker in effect us (...) this speech: For that her majesty before this
time had commanded the house not to meddle with thi^ matter, and that her
majesty had promised to take order in those causes, he doubted ^ot ^ut to the
(...) satisfaction of all her people, he desired that it would please them to
(...) the reading of (...) ^^^withstanding, the house desired the reading of
it. Whereupon Mr. Speaker desired the clerk to read. And the court being ready
to read it, Mr. Dalton made a motion against the reading of (...) saying that
it was not meet to be read, and it did appoint a new form of administration of
the (...) men^ and ceremonies of the church, to the discredit of the book of
common prayer and of the where (...) and thought that this dealing would bring
her majesty's indignation against the house, thus to c^t^^prize this dealing
with those things which her majesty especially had taken into her own charge
and direction. Whereupon Mr. Lewkenor spoke, showing the necessity of preaching
and of a learned ministry, and thought it very fit that the petition and book
should be read. To this purpose spoke Mr. Hurleston and Mr. Bainbrigg; and so,
the time being passed, the house broke up, and the petition nor book read. This
done, her Majesty sent to Mr. Speaker, as well for this petition and book, as
for that other petition and book for the like effect, that was delivered the
last session of Parliament, which Mr. Speaker sent to her majesty. On Tuesday
the 28th of February, her Majesty sent for Mr. Speaker, by occasion whereof the
house did not sit. On Wednesday the first day of March, Mr. Wentworth delivered
to Mr. Speaker certain articles, which contained questions touching the
liberties of the house, and to some of which he was to answer, and desired they
might be read. Mr. Speaker desired him to spare his motion, until her Majesty's
pleasure was farther known touching the petition and book lately delivered into
the house; but Mr. Wentworth would not be so satisfied, but required his
articles might be read. Mr. Wentworth introduced his queries by lamenting, that
he as well as many others were deterred from speaking by their want of knowledge
and experience in the liberties of the house; and the queries were as follows:
Whether this council were not a place for any member of the same here
assembled, freely and without controulment of any person or danger of laws, by
bill or speech to utter any of the griefs of this commonwealth whatsoever
touching the service of God, the safety of the prince and this noble realm?
Whether that great honor may be done unto God, and benefit and service unto
the prince and state, without free speech in this council that may be done with
it? Whether there be any council which can make, add, or diminish from the laws
of the realm but only this council of Parliament? Whether it be not against the
orders of this council to make any secret or matter of weight, which is here in
hand known to the prince or any other, concerning the high service of God,
prince or state, without the consent of the house? Whether the speaker or any
other may interrupt any member of this council in his speech used in this house
tending to any of the forenamed services? Whether the speaker may rise when he
will, any matter being propounded, without consent of the house or not? Whether
the speaker may overruled the house in any matter or cause there in question,
or whether he is to be ruled or overruled in any matter or not? Whether the
prince and state can continue, and stand, and be maintained without this
council of Parliament, not altering the government of the state? At the end of
these questions, says Sir Simon D'Ewes, I found set down this short note or
memorial ensuing: By which it may be perceived, both what sergeant Puckering,
the speaker, did with the said questions after he had received them, and what
became also of this business, viz. "These questions Mr. Puckering pocketed up
and showed Sir Thomas Heneage, who so handled the matter, that Mr. Wentworth
went to the Tower, and the questions not at all moved. Mr. Buckler of Essex
herein brake his says in forsaking the matter, etc. and no more was done"
After setting down, continues Sir Simon D'Ewes, the said business of Mr.
Wentworth in the original journal book, there follows only this
short-conclusion of the day itself, viz. "This day, Mr. Speaker being sent for
to the Queen's majesty, the house departed." On Thursday, the second of March,
Mr. Cope, Mr L^w^enor, Mr. Hurlston, and Mr. Bainbrigg were sent for to my lord
chancellor and by diverse of the privy council, and from thence were sent to the
Tower. On Saturday, the fourth day of March, Sir John Higham made a motion to
this house, for that diverse good and necessary members thereof were taken from
them, that it would please them to be humble petitioners to her majesty son the
ressitution of them again to the house. To which speeches Mr. vice-chamberlain
answered, that it the gentlemen were committed for matter within the compass of
the privilege of this house, then there might be a petition; but if not, then
we should give occasion to her majesty's farther displeasure: And therefore
advised to stay until they heard more, which could not be long: And farther, he
said touching the book and the petition, her majesty had for diverse good
causes, best known to herself, thought sit to suppress the same, without any
farther examination thereof; and yet thought it very unsit for her majesty to
give any account of her doings. -- But whatsoever Mr. vice-chamberlain
pretended, it is most probable these members were committed for intermeddling
with matters touching the church, which her majesty had often inhibited, and
which had caused so much disputation and so many meetings between the two
houses the last Parliament."

This is all we find of the matter in Sir Simon D'Ewes and Townsend; and it
appears that those members, who had been committed, were detained in custody
till the Queen thought sit to release them. These questions of Mr. Wentworth
are curious; because they contain the first faint dawnings of the present
English constitution; though suddenly eclipsed by the arbitrary government of
Elizabeth. Wentworth was indeed, by his puritanism, as well as his love of
liberty (for these two characters, of such unequal merit, arose and advanced
together) the true forerunner of the Hambdens, the Pyms, and the Hollises, who,
in the next age, with less courage, because with less danger, rendered their
principles so triumphant. I shall only ask, whether it be not sufficiently
clear from all these transactions, that in the two succeeding reigns it was the
people who encroached upon the sovereign; not the sovereign ^ho attempted, as
is pretended, to usurp upon the people?


.

BUT though the Queen affected reluctance to execute the sentence against Mary,
she complied with the Parliament's request to publish it; and the proclamation
seemed to be attended with the unanimous and hearty rejoicings of the people.
The lord Buckhurst, and Beale, clerk to the council, were sent to the Queen of
Scots, and notified to her the sentence pronounced against her, its
ratification by Parliament, and the earnest applications made for its execution
by that assembly, who thought, that their religion could never, while she was
alive, attain a full settlement and security. Mary was no way dismayed at this
intelligence: On the contrary, she joyfully laid hold of the last circumstance
mentioned to her; and insisted, that since her death was demanded by the
protestants for the establishment of their faith, she was really a martyr to
her religion, and was entitled to all the merits, attending that glorious
character. She added, that the English had often imbrued their hands in the
blood of their sovereigns: No wonder, they exercised cruelty toward her, who
derived her descent from these monarchs Camden, p. 528.
. Paulet, her keeper, received orders to take down her canopy, and to serve her
no longer with that respect, due to sovereign princes. He told her, that she
was now to be considered as a dead person; and incapable of any dignity Jebb,
vol. II. p. 293
. This insult she received without any seeming emotion. She only replied, that
she received her royal character from the hands of the Almighty, and no earthly
power was ever able to bereave her of it.

THE Queen of Scots wrote her last letter to Elizabeth; full of dignity,
without departing from that spirit of meekness and of charity, which appeared
suitable to this concluding scene of her unfortunate life. She preferred no
petition for averting the fatal sentence: On the contrary, she expressed her
gratitude to heaven for thus bringing to a speedy period her sad and lamentable
pilgrimage. She requested some favors of Elizabeth, and entreated her, that
she might be beholden for them to her own goodness alone, without making
applications to those ministers, who had discovered such an extreme antipathy
to her person and her religion. She desired, that, after her enemies should be
satiated with her innocent blood, her body, which, it was determined, should
never enjoy rest, while her soul was united to it, might be consigned to her
servants, and be conveyed by them into France, there to repose in a catholic
land, with the sacred relicts of her mother. In Scotland, she said, the
sepulchers of her ancestors were violated, and the churches either demolished
or profaned; and in England, where she might be interred among the ancient
kings, her own and Elizabeth's progenitors, she could entertain no hopes of
being accompanied to the grave with those rites and ceremonies, which her
religion required. She desired that no one might have the power of inflicting a
private death upon her, without Elizabeth's knowledge; but that her execution
should be public, and attended with her ancient servants, who might bear
testimony of her perseverance in the faith, and of her submission to the will
of heaven. She begged, that these servants might afterward be allowed to
depart whither they pleased, and might enjoy those legacies which she should
leave them. And she conjured her to grant these favors, by their near kindred,
by the soul and memory of Henry the seventh, the common ancestor of both, and
by the royal dignity of which they equally participated Camden, p. 529. Jebb,
vol. II. p. 295.
. Elizabeth made no answer to this letter; being unwilling to give Mary a
refusal in her present situation, and foreseeing inconveniences from granting
some of her requests.

WHILE the Queen of Scots thus prepared herself to meet her fate, great efforts
were made by foreign powers with Elizabeth to prevent the execution of the
sentence, pronounced against her. Besides employing L'Aubespine, the French
resident at London, a man devoted to the house of Guise, Henry sent over
Bellievre, with a professed intention of interceding for the life of Mary. The
duke of Guise and the league, at that time, threatened very nearly the King's
authority; and Elizabeth knew, that, though that monarch might, from decency and
policy, think himself obliged to interpose publicly in behalf of the Queen of
Scots, he could not secretly be much displeased with the death of a princess,
on whose fortune and elevation his mortal enemies had always founded so many
da^ing and ambitious projects Ibid. p. 494.
. It is even pretended, that Bellievre had orders, after making public and
vehement remonstrances against the execution of Mary, to exhort privately the
Queen, in his master's name, not to defer an act of justice, so necessary for
their common interests Du Maurier.
. But whether the French King's intercession was sincere or not, it had no
weight with the Queen; and she still persisted in her former resolution.

Interposition of King James
THE interposition of the young King of Scots, though it was not able to change
Elizabeth's determination, seemed, on every account, to merit more attention.
So soon as James heard of the trial and condemnation of his mother, he sent
William Keith, gentleman of his bed chamber, to London; and wrote a letter to
the Queen, in which he remonstrated, in very severe terms, against the
indignity of the procedure. He said, that he was astonished to hear of the
presumption of English noblemen and counselors, who had dared to sit in
judgment and pass sentence upon a Queen of Scotland, descended from the royal
blood of England; but was still more astonished to hear, that thoughts were
seriously entertained of putting that sentence in execution: That he entreated
Elizabeth to reflect on the dishonor, which she would draw on her name, by
embruing her hands in the blood of her near kinswoman, a person of the same
royal dignity and the same sex with herself: That in this unparalelled attempt,
she offered an affront to all diadems, and even to her own; and by reducing
sovereigns to a level with other men, taught the people to neglect all duty
toward those whom Providence had appointed to rule over them: That for his
part, he must esteem the injury and insult so enormous, as to be incapable of
all atonement; nor was it possible for him thenceforth to remain on any terms
of correspondence with a person, who, without any pretense of legal authority,
had deliberately inflicted an ignominious death upon his parent: And that even
if the sentiments of nature and duty did not inspire him with this purpose of
vengeance, his own honor required it of him; nor could he ever acquit himself
in the eyes of the world, if he did not use every effort, and endure every
hazard, to revenge so great an indignity Spotswood, p. 351.
. Soon after, James sent the master of Gray and Sir Robert Melvil to enforce
the remonstrances of Keith; and to employ with the Queen every expedient of
argument and menaces. Elizabeth was at first offended with sharpness of these
applications; and she replied in a like strain to the Scotch ambassadors. When
she afterward reflected, that this earnestness was no more than what duty
required of James, she was pacified; but retained still her resolution of
proceeding to extremities against Mary Ibid. p. 353.
. It is believed, that the master of Gray, gained by the enemies of that
princess, gave secretly his advice not to spare her, and undertook at all
adventures to pacify his master. The Queen also, from many circumstances, was
induced to pay small attention to the applications of James, and to disregard
all the efforts, which he could employ in behalf of his mother. She was well
acquainted with his character and interests, the factions which prevailed among
his people, and the inveterate hatred, which the zealous protestants,
particularly the preachers, bore to the Queen of Scots. The present incidents
put these dispositions of the clergy in a full light. James, observing the
fixed purpose of Elizabeth, ordered prayers to be offered up for his mother in
all the churches; and knowing the captious humor of the ecclesiastics, he took
care that the form of the petition should be most cautious, as well as humane
and charitable: "That it might please God to illuminate Mary with the light of
his truth, and save her from the apparent danger with which she was
threatened." But excepting the King's own chaplains, and one clergyman more,
all the preachers refused to pollute their churches by prayers for a papist,
and would not so much as prefer a petition for her conversion. James, unwilling
or unable to punish this disobedience, and desirous of giving the preachers an
opportunity of amending their fault, appointed a new day when prayers should be
said for his mother; and that he might at least secure himself from any insult
in his own presence, he desired the archbishop of St. Andrews to preach before
him. In order to disappoint this purpose, the clergy instigated one Couper, a
young man, who had not yet received holy orders, to take possession of the
pulpit early in the morning, and to exclude the prelate. When the King came to
church, and saw the pulpit occupied by Couper, he called to him from his seat,
and told him, that the place was destined for another; yet since he was there,
if he would obey the charge given, and remember the Queen in his prayers, he
might proceed to divine service. The preacher replied, that he would do as the
spirit of God should direct him. This answer sufficiently instructed James in
his purpose; and he commanded him to leave the pulpit: As Couper seemed not
disposed to obey, the captain of the guard went to pull him from his place;
upon which the young man cried aloud, that this day would be a witness against
the King in the great day of the Lord; and he denounced a woe upon the
inhabitants of Edinburgh for permitting him to be treated in that manner
Spotswood, p. 354.
. The audience at first appeared desirous to take part with him; but the sermon
of the prelate brought them over to a more dutiful and more humane disposition.

ELIZABETH, when solicited, either by James or by foreign princes, to pardon
the Queen of Scots, seemed always determined to proceed to extremities against
her: But when her ministers urged her to interpose no more delays in the
execution, her scruples and her hesitation returned; her humanity could not
allow her to embrace such violent and sanguinary measures; and she was touched
with compassion for the misfortunes, and with respect for the dignity of the
unhappy prisoner. The courtiers, sensible that they could do nothing more
acceptable to her, than to employ persuasion on this head, failed not to
enforce every motive for the punishment of the Queen of Scots, and to combat
all the objections urged against that act of justice. Reasons for the execution
of Mary.
They said, that the treatment of that princess in England had been, on her
first reception, such as sound reason and policy required; and if she had been
governed by principles of equity, she would not have refused willingly to
acquiesce in it: That the obvious inconveniences, either of allowing her to
retire into France, or of restoring her by force to her throne, in opposition
to the protestants, and the English party in Scotland, had obliged the Queen to
detain her in England, till time should offer some opportunity of serving her,
without danger to the kingdom, or to the protestant religion: That her usage
had there been such as became her rank; her own servants, in considerable
numbers, had been permitted to attend her; exercise had been allowed her for
her health, and all access of company for amusement; and these indulgencies
would, in time, have been carried farther, if by her subsequent conduct she had
appeared worthy of them: That after she had instigated the rebellion of
Northumberland, the conspiracy of Norfolk, the bull of excommunication of pope
Pius, an invasion from Flanders; after she had seduced the Queen's friends, and
incited every enemy, foreign or domestic, against her; it became necessary to
treat her as a most dangerous rival, and to render her confinement more strict
and rigorous: That the Queen, notwithstanding these repeated provocations, had,
in her favor, rejected the importunity of her Parliaments, and the advice of
her sagest ministers Digges, p 276, (...) vol. II. p. 48, 135, 136, 1^9.
; and was still, in hopes of her amendment, determined to delay coming to the
last extremity against her: That Mary, even in this forlorn condition, retained
so high and unconquerable a spirit, that she acted as competitor to the crown,
and allowed her partisans every where, and in their very letters, addressed to
herself, to treat her as Queen of England: That she had carried her animosity
so far as to encourage the atrocious design of assassinating the Queen; and
this crime was unquestionably proved upon her, by her own letters, by the
evidence of her secretaries, and by the dying confession of her accomplices*
That she was but a titular Queen, and at present possessed no where any right
of sovereignty; much less in England, where every one was subject to the laws,
and to Elizabeth, the only true sovereign: That even allowing her to be still
the Queen's equal in rank and dignity, self-defence was permitted by a law of
nature, which could never be abrogated; and every one, still more a Queen, had
sufficient jurisdiction over an enemy, who by open violence, and still more,
who by secret treachery, threatened the utmost danger against her life: That the
general combination of the catholics to exterminate the protestants, was no
longer a secret; and as the sole resource of the latter persecuted sect lay in
Elizabeth, so the chief hope which the former entertained of final success,
consisted in the person, and in the title of the Queen of Scots: That this very
circumstance brought matters to extremity between these princesses, and
rendering the life of the one the death of the other, pointed out to Elizabeth
the path, which either regard to self-preservation, or to the happiness of her
people, should direct her to follow: And that necessity, more powerful than
policy, thus demanded of the Queen, that resolution which equity would
authorize, and which duty prescribed Camden, p. 533.
.

Ibid.
. A criminal attempt of this nature was even imputed to L'Aubespine, the French
ambassador; and that minister was obliged to leave the kingdom. The Queen,
affecting to be in great terror and perplexity, was observed to sit much alone,
pensive and silent, and sometimes to mutter to herself half sentences,
importing the difficulty and distress to which she was reduced Ibid. p. 5^4.
. She at last called Davison, a man of parts, but easy to be imposed on, and
who had lately, for that very reason, been made secretary; and she ordered him,
to draw out secretly a warrant for the execution of the Queen of Scots; which,
she afterward said, she intended to keep by her, in case any attempt should be
made for the delivery of that princess. She signed the warrant; and then
commanded Davison to carry it to the chancellor, in ord r to have the seal
affixed to it. Next day she sent Killigrew to Davison, enjoining him to forbear
some time executing her former orders; and when Davison came and told her, that
the warrant had already passed the seals, she seemed to be somewhat moved, and
blamed him for his precipitation. Davison, being in some perplexity, acquainted
the council with this whole transaction; and they endeavored to persuade him
to send off Beale, clerk of the council, with the warrant: If the Queen should
be displeased, they promised to justify his conduct, and to take on themselves
the whole blame of this measure It appears by some letters published by Strype,
vol. III. book ii. c* 1. that Elizabeth had not expressly communicated her
intention to any of her ministers, not even to Burleigh: They were such
experienced courtiers, that they knew they could not g^at^ly her more than by
serving her without waiting till the desired them.
. The secretary, not perceiving their intention, complied with the advice; and
the warrant was dispatched to the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, and some
others, ordering them to see the sentence executed upon the Queen of Scots.

7th February.
The execution.
THE two earls came to Fotheringhay; and being introduced to Mary, informed her
of their commission, and told her to prepare for death next morning at eight
o'clock. She was no-wise dismayed, though somewhat surprised, with the
intelligence. She said, with a cheerful, and even a smiling countenance, that
she did not think the Queen, her sister, would have consented to her death, or
have executed the sentence against a person who was not subject to the laws and
jurisdiction of England. "But as such is her will," said she, "death, which
puts an end to all my miseries, shall be to me most welcome; nor can I esteem
that soul worthy the felicities of heaven, which cannot support the body under
the horrors of the last passage to these blissful mansions Camden, p. 534.
^ebb, vol. II. p. ^01. MS. in the Advocate's library, p. 2. from the Cott. Lib.
Call. c. 9.
." She then requested the two noblemen, that they would permit some of her
servants, and particularly her confessor, to attend her: But they told her,
that compliance with this last demand was contrary to their conscience ^ebb,
vol. II. p. 302.
, and that Dr. Fletcher, dean of Peterborow, a man of great learning, should be
present, to instruct her in the principles of true religion. Her refusal to
have any conference with this divine inflamed the earl of Kent's zeal; and he
bluntly told her, that her death would be the life of their religion; as, on
the contrary, her life would have been the death of it. Mention being made of
Babington, she constantly denied his conspiracy to have been at all known to
her; and the revenge of her wrong, she resigned into the hands of the Almighty.

WHEN the earls had left her she ordered supper to be hastened, that she might
have the more leizure to finish the few affairs which remained to her in this
world, and to prepare for her passage to another. It was necessary for her, she
said, to take some sustenance, left a failure of her bodily strength should
depress her spirits on the morrow, and lest her behavior should thereby betray
a weakness unworthy of herself Ibid. p. 4^9.
. She supped sparingly, as her manner usually was; and her wonted cheerfulness
did not even desert her on this occasion. She comforted her servants under the
affliction which overwhelmed them, and which was too powerful for them to
conceal from her. Turning to Bourgoin, her physician, she asked him, whether he
did not remark the great and invincible force of truth. "They pretend," said
she, "that I must die, because I conspired against the Queen's life: But the
earl of Kent avowed, that there was no other cause of my death, but the
apprehensions, which, if I should live, they entertain for their religion. My
constancy in the faith is my real crime: The rest is only a color, invented by
interested and designing men." Toward the end of supper, she called in all her
servants, and drank to them: They pledged her, in order, on their knees; and
craved her pardon for any past neglect of their duty: She deigned, in return,
to ask their pardon for her offenses toward them; and a plentiful effusion of
tears attended this last solemn farewell, and exchange of mutual forgiveness
Jebb, vol. II. p. 302, 626. Camden, p. 531.
.

HER care of her servants was the sole remaining affair which employed her
concern in this world. She perused her will, in which she had provided for them
by legacies: She ordered the inventory of her goods, clothes, and jewels to be
brought her; and she wrote down the names of those to whom she bequeathed each
particular: To some she distributed money with her own hands; and she adapted
the recompense to their different degrees of rank and merit. She wrote also
letters of recommendation for her servants to the French King, and to her
cousin the duke of Guise, whom she made the chief executor of her testament. At
her wonted time she went to bed, slept some hours; and then rising, spent the
rest of the night in prayer. Having foreseen the difficulty of exercising the
rites of her religion, she had had the precaution to obtain a consecrated host
from the hands of pope Pius, and she had reserved the use of it for this last
period of her life. By this expedient she supplied, as much as she could, the
want of a priest and confessor, who was refused her Jebb, vol. II. p. 489.
.

TOWARD the morning she dressed herself in a rich habit of silk and velvet,
the only one which she had reserved to herself. She told her maids, that she
would willingly have left them this dress rather than the plain garb which she
wore the day before: But it was necessary for her to appear at the ensuing
solemnity in a decent habit.

THOMAS Andrews, sheriff of the county, entered the room, and informed her,
that the hour was come, and that he must attend her to the place of execution.
She replied, that she was ready; and bidding adieu to her servants, she leaned
on two of Sir Amias Paulet's guards, because of an infirmity in her limbs; and
she followed the sheriff with a serene and composed aspect. In passing through a
hall adjoining to her chamber, she was met by the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent,
Sir Amias Paulet, Sir Drue Drury, and many other gentlemen of distinction. Here
she also found Andrew Melvil, her steward, who flung himself on his knees
before her; and, wringing his hands, cried aloud: "Ah! madam! unhappy me! What
man was ever before the messenger of such heavy tidings as I must carry, when I
shall return to my native country, and shall report, that I saw my gracious
Queen and Mistress beheaded in England?" His tears prevented further speech;
and Mary too felt herself moved, more from sympathy than affliction. "Cease, my
good servant," said she, "cease to lament: Thou have cause rather to rejoice
than to mourn: For now shall thou see the troubles of Mary Stuart receive their
long expected period and determination." "Know," continued she, "good servant,
that all the world at best is vanity, and subject still to more sorrow than a
whole ocean of tears is able to bewail. But I pray thee, carry this message
from me, that I die a true woman to my religion, and unalterable in my
affections to Scotland and to France. Heaven forgive them, that have long
desired my end, and have thirsted for my blood as the heart pants after the
water brooks." "O God," added she, "thou that art the author of truth and truth
itself, thou know the inmost recesses of my heart: Thou know, that I was
ever desirous to preserve an entire union between Scotland and England, and to
obviate the source of all these fatal discords. But recommend me, Melvil, to my
son, and tell him, that notwithstanding all my distresses, I have done nothing
prejudicial to the state and kingdom of Scotland." After these words, reclining
herself, with weeping eyes, and face bedewed with tears, she kissed him. "And
so," said she, "good Melvil, farewell: Once again, farewell, good Melvil; and
grant the assistance of thy prayers to thy Queen and mistress MS. p. 4. Jebb,
vol. II. p. 631. Strype, vol III. p. 384.
."

SHE then turned about to the noblemen who attended her, and made a petition in
behalf of her servants, that they might be well treated, that they might be
allowed to enjoy the presents which she had made them, and be sent safely into
their own country. Having received a favorable answer, she moved another
request, that they might be permitted to attend her at her death: In order,
said she, that their eyes may behold, and their hearts bear witness, how
patiently their Queen and mistress can bear her execution, and how constantly
she perseveres in her attachments to her religion. The earl of Kent opposed
this desire, and told her, that they would be apt, by their speeches and cries,
both to disturb herself and the spectators: He was also apprehensive, lest they
should practice some superstition, unmeet for him to suffer; such as dipping
their handkerchiefs in her blood: For that was the instance which he made use
of. "My lord," said the Queen of Scots, "I will give my word (although it be but
dead) that they shall not incur any blame in any of the actions which you have
named. But alas! poor souls! it would be a great consolation to them to bid
their mistress farewell. And I hope," added she, "that your mistress, being a
maiden Queen, would vouchsafe, in regard of womanhood, that I should have some
of my own people about me at my death. I know, that her majesty has not given
you any such strict command, but that you might grant me a request of far
greater courtesy, even though I were a woman of much inferior rank to that which
I bear." Finding that the earl of Kent persisted still in his refusal, her
mind, which had fortified itself against the terrors of death, was affected by
this circumstance of indignity, for which she was not prepared. "I am cousin to
your Queen," cried she, "and descended from the blood royal of Henry the
seventh, and a married Queen of France, and an anointed Queen of Scotland." The
commissioners perceiving how invidious their obstinacy would appear, conferred
a little together, and agreed, that she might carry a few of her servants along
with her. She made choice of four men, and two maidservants, for that purpose.

SHE then passed into another hall, where was erected the scaffold, covered
with black; and she saw, with an undismayed countenance, the two executioners,
and all the preparations of death. The room was crowded with spectators, and no
one was so steeled against all sentiments of humanity, as not to be moved, when
he reflected on her royal dignity, considered the surprising train of her
misfortunes, beheld her mild but inflexible constancy, recalled her amiable
accomplishments, or surveyed her beauties, which, though faded by years, and yet
more by her afflictions, still discovered themselves in this fatal moment. Here
the warrant for her execution was read to her; and during this ceremony she was
silent, but showed, in her behavior, an indifference and unconcern, as if the
business had no way regarded her. Before the executioners performed their
office, the dean of Peterborow stepped forth; and though the Queen frequently
told him, that he needed not concern himself about her, that she was settled in
the ancient catholic and Roman religion, and that she meant to lay down her
life in defense of that faith; he still thought it his duty to persist in his
lectures and exhortations, and to endeavor her conversion. He told her, that
the Queen of England had in this moment shown a tender care of her; and
notwithstanding the punishment justly to be inflicted on her, for her manifold
trespasses, was determined to use every expedient for saving her soul from that
destruction with which it was so nearly threatened: That she was now standing
upon the brink of eternity, and had no other means of escaping endless
perdition, but by repenting her former wickedness, by justifying the sentence
pronounced against her, by acknowleging the Queen's favors, and by exerting a
true and lively faith in Christ Jesus: That the scriptures were the only rule
of doctrine, the merits of Christ the only means of salvation; and if she
trusted in the inventions or devices of men, she must expect in a moment to
fall into utter darkness, into a place where shall be weeping, howling, and
gnashing of teeth: That the hand of death was upon her, the ax was laid to the
root of the tree, the throne of the great judge of heaven was erected, the book
of her life was spread wide, and the particular sentence and judgment was ready
to be pronounced upon her: And that it was now, during this important instant,
in her choice, either to rise to the resurrection of life, and hear that joyful
salutation, Come, ye blessed of my Father, or to share the resurrection of
condemnation, replete with sorrow and grief; and to suffer that dreadful
denunciation, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire MS. p. 8, 9, 10* 11. Strype,
vol. III. p. ^8^.
.

DURING this discourse the Queen could not forbear sometimes betraying her
impatience, by interrupting the preacher; and the dean, finding that he had
profited nothing by his lecture, at last bid her change her opinion, repent her
of her former wickedness, and settle her faith upon this ground, that only in
Christ Jesus could she hope to be saved. She answered, again and again, with
great earnestness: "Trouble not yourself any more about the matter: For I was
born in this religion, I have lived in this religion, and in this religion I am
resolved to die." Even the two earls perceived, that it was fruitless to
harrass her any further with theological disputes; and they ordered the dean to
desist from his unseasonable exhortations, and to pray for her conversion.
During the dean's prayer, she employed herself in private devotion from the
office of the Virgin; and after he had finished, she pronounced aloud some
petitions in English, for the afflicted church, for an end of her own troubles,
for her son, and for Queen Elizabeth; and prayed God, that that princess might
long prosper, and be employed in his service. The earl of Kent observing, that
in her devotions she made frequent use of the crucifix, could not forbear
reproving her, for her attachment to that popish trumpery, as he termed it; and
he exhorted her to have Christ in her heart, not in her hand MS. p. 15. Jebb,
vol. II. p. 3^7, 491, 637.
. She replied with presence of mind, that it was difficult to hold such an
object in her hand, without feeling her heart touched with some compunction
Jebb. Ibid.
.

SHE now began, with the aid of her two women, to disrobe herself; and the
executioner also lent his hand, to assist them. She smiled, and said, that she
was not accustomed to undress herself before so large a company, nor to be
served by such valets. Her servants, seeing her in this condition, ready to lay
her head upon the block, burst into tears and lamentations: She turned about to
them; put her finger upon her lips, as a sign of imposing silence upon them
Jebb, p. 307, 492.
; and having given them her blessing, desired them to pray for her. One of her
maids, whom she had appointed for that purpose, covered her eyes with a
handkerchief; she laid herself down, without any sign of fear or trepidation;
and her head was severed from her body at two strokes by the executioner.

Mary's character.
THUS died, in the forty-sixth year of her age, and the nineteenth of her
captivity in England, Mary Queen of Scots; a princess of great accomplishments
both of body of mind, natural as well as acquired; but unfortunate in her life,
and during one period, very unhappy in her conduct. The beauties of her person,
and of her air, combined to make her the most amiable of women; and the charms
of her address and conversation aided the impression which her lovely figure
made on the hearts of all beholders. Ambitious and active in her temper, yet
inclined to cheerfulness and society; of a lofty spirit, constant and even
vehement in her purpose; yet polite, and gentle, and affable in her demeanor;
she seemed to partake only so much of the male virtues as to render her
estimable, without relinquishing those soft graces which compose the proper
ornaments of her sex. In order to form a just idea of her character, we must
set aside one part of her conduct, while she abandoned herself to the guidance
of a profligate man; and must consider these faults, whether we admit them to
be imprudences or crimes, as the result of an inexplicable, though not uncommon,
inconstancy in the human mind, of the frailty of our nature, of the violence of
passion, and of the influence which situations, and sometimes momentary
incidents, have on persons, whose principles are not thoroughly confirmed by
experience and reflection. Enraged by the ungrateful conduct of her husband,
seduced by the treacherous counsels of one in whom she reposed confidence,
transported by the violence of her own temper, which never lay sufficiently
under the guidance of discretion; she was betrayed into actions, which may,
with some difficulty, be accounted for, but which admit of no apology, nor even
of alleviation. An enumeration of her qualities might carry the appearance of a
panegyric; an account of her conduct must, in some parts, wear the aspect of a
severe satire and invective.

HER numerous misfortunes, the solitude of her long and tedious captivity, and
the persecutions to which she had been exposed on account of her religion, had
wrought her up to a degree of bigotry during her latter years; and such was the
prevalent spirit and principles of that age, that it is the less wonder, if her
zeal, her resentment and her interest uniting, induced her to give consent to a
design, which conspirators, actuated only by the first of these motives, had
formed against the life of Elizabeth.

The Queen's affected sorrow.
WHEN the Queen heard of Mary's execution, she affected the utmost surprise and
indignation. Her countenance changed, her speech faltered and failed her, and
for a long time, her sorrow was so deep that she could not express it, but
stood fixed, like a statue, in silence and mute astonishment. After her grief
was able to find vent, it burst out in loud wailings and lamentations; she put
herself into deep mourning for this deplorable event; and she was seen
perpetually bathed in tears, and surrounded only by her maids and women. None
of her ministers or counselors dared to approach her; or if any assumed such
temerity, she chaced them from her, with the most violent expressions of rage
and resentment: They had all of them been guilty of an unpardonable crime, in
putting to death her dear sister and kinswoman, contrary to her fixed purpose
and intention Camden, p. 536. St^ype, vol. III. Appendix, p. 145. Jebb, vol.
II. p. 6^8.
, of which they were sufficiently apprized and acquainted.

No sooner was her sorrow so much abated as to leave room for reflection, than
she wrote a letter of apology to the King of Scots, and sent it by Sir Robert
Carry, son to lord Hunsdon. She there told him, that she wished he knew, but not
felt, the unutterable grief of mind, she experienced, on account of that
lamentable accident, which, without her knowledge, much less concurrence, had
happened in England: That as her pen trembled, when she attempted to write it,
she found herself obliged to commit the relation of it to the messenger, her
kinsman; who would likewise inform his majesty of every circumstance, which
attended this dismal and unlooked for misfortune: That she appealed to the
Supreme Judge of heaven and earth for her innocence; and was also so happy,
amidst her other afflictions, as to find, that many persons in her court could
bear witness to her veracity in this protestation: That she abhorred hypocrisy
and dissimulation, esteemed nothing more worthy of a prince than a sincere and
open conduct, and could never surely be esteemed so base and poor-spirited, as
that, if she had really given orders for this latal execution, she could, on
any consideration, be induced to deny it: That though she was sensible of the
justice of the sentence, she was determined from clemency never to carry it
into execution; and could not but resent the temerity of those, who on this
occasion had disappointed her intentions: And that as no one loved him more
dearly than herself, or bore a more anxious concern for his welfare; she hoped,
that he would consider every one as his enemy, who endeavored, on account of
the present incident, to excite any animosity between them Camden, p. 536.
Spotswood, p. 358.
.

IN order the better to appease James, she committed Davison to prison, and
ordered him to be tried in the Star Chamber for his misdemeanour. The secretary
was confounded; and being sensible of the danger, which must attend his
entering into a contest with the Queen, he expressed penitence for his error,
and submitted very patiently to be railed at by those very counselors, whose
persuasion had induced him to incur the guilt, and who had promised to
countenance and protect him. He was condemned to imprisonment during the
Queen's pleasure, and to pay a fine of ten thousand pounds. He remained a long
time in prison; and the fine, though it reduced him to want and beggary, was
strictly levied upon him. All the favor, which he could obtain from the Queen,
was the sending him small supplies from time to time, to keep him from
perishing in necessity Camden, p. 538.
. He privately wrote an apology to his friend Walsingham, which contains many
curious particulars: The French and Scotch ambassadors, he said, had been
remonstrating with the Queen in Mary's behalf; and immediately after their
departure, she commanded him, of her own accord, to deliver her the warrant for
the execution of that princess. She signed it readily and ordered it to be
sealed with the great seal of England. She appeared in such good humor on this
occasion, that she said to him in a jocular manner, "Go tell all this to
Walsingham, who is now sick: Though I fear he will die for sorrow, when he hears
it." She added, that, though she had so long delayed the execution, lest she
should seem to be actuated by malice or cruelty, she was all along sensible of
the necessity of it. In the same conversation, she blamed Drury and Paulet,
that they had not before eased her of this trouble; and she expressed her
desire that Walsingham would bring them to a compliance in that particular. She
was so bent on this purpose, that, some time after, she asked Davison, whether
any letter had come from Paulet with regard to the service expected of him.
Davison showed her Paulet's letter; in which that gentleman flatly refused to
act any thing inconsistent with the principles of honor and justice. The Queen
fell into a passion, and accused Paulet, as well as Drury, of perjury, that,
having taken the oath of association, in which they had bound themselves to
avenge her wrongs, they had yet refused to lend their hand on this occasion.
"But others," she said, "will be sound less scrupulous." Davison adds, that
nothing but the consent and exhortations of the whole council could have
engaged him to send off the warrant. He was well aware of his danger, and
remembered, that the Queen, after having ordered the execution of the duke of
Norfolk, had endeavored, in like manner, to throw the whole blame and odium of
that action upon lord Burleigh Camden, p. 5^8. Strype, vol. III. (...) library,
A. (...) from the ^ott. Lib. (...)
.

ELIZABETH'S dissimulation was so gross, that it could deceive no body who was
not previously resolved to be blinded; but as James's concern for his mo her
was certainly more sincere and cordial, he discovered the highest resentment,
a^^ refused to admit Carry into his presence. He recalled his ambassadors from
(...) land; and seemed to breathe nothing but war and vengeance. The States of
(...) being assembled, entered into the quarrel, and professed, that they (...)
ready to spend their lives and sortenes in revenge of his mother's dea h, and
(...) defense of his title to the crown of England. Many of his nobility
instigated i am to take arms: Lord Sinclair, when the courtiers appeared in
deep mourning, presented himself to the King arrayed in complete armor, and
said, that that was the proper mourning for the Queen. The catholics took the
opportunity of ^^^^rting James to ally himself with the King of Spain, to lay
imm diate claim to the crown of England, and to prevent the danger, which, from
his mother's example, he might conclude, would certainly, if Elizabeth's power
prevailed, overwhelm his person and his kingdom. The Queen was s nsible of the
danger attending these councils; and, after allowing James some decent interval
to vent his grief and anger, she employed her emissaries to pacify him, and to
set before him every motive of hope or fear, which might induce him to live in
peace and friendship with her.

(...)
WALSINGHAM wrote to lord Thirlstone, the Scotch secretary of state, a very
judicious letter to the same purpose. He said, that he was much surprised to
hear of the violent resolutions taken in Scotland, and of the passion
discovered by a prince of so much judgment and temper as James: That a war,
founded merely on the principle of revenge, and that too on account of an act
of justice, which necessity had extorted, would for ever be exposed to blame,
and could not be excused by any principles of equity or reason: That if these
views were deemed less momentous among princes, policy and interest ought
certainly to be attended to; and these motives did still more evidently oppose
all thoughts of a rupture with England, and all revival of expioded claims and
pretensions to the English throne: That the inequality between the two (...)
^^^^ived James of any hopes of in^^^ss if he trusted merely to the force of his
own slate, and had no recourse to foreign powers for assistance: That the
objections, attending the introduction of succors from a more powerful
monarch, appeared so evident from all the transactions of history, that they
could not escape a person of the King's extensive knowledge; but there were in
the present case, several peculiar circumstances, which ought for ever to
prevent him from having recourse to so dangerous an expedient: That the French
monarch, the ancient ally of Scotland, might willingly use the assistance of
that kingdom against England; but would be displeased to see the union of these
two crowns on the head of James; an union, which would ever after exclude him
from all hopes of practicing that policy, formerly so useful to France and so
pernicious to the Scotch nation: That Henry, besides, infested with faction and
domestic war, was not in a condition of supporting distant allies; much less,
would he undergo any hazard or expense, in order to aggrandize a near kinsman
to the house of Guise, the most determined enemies of his repose and authority:
That the extensive power and exorbitant ambition of the Spanish monarch
rendered him a still more dangerous ally to James; and as he evidently aspired
to an universal monarchy in the west, and had in particular advanced some
claims on England, as if he were descended from the house of Lancaster, he was
at the same time the common enemy of all princes, who desired to maintain their
liberty and independance; and the immediate rival and competitor of the King of
Scots: That the Queen, by her own naval power, and her alliance with the
Hollanders, would probably intercept all succors which James might receive
from abroad, and be enabled to decide the controversy in this island with the
superior forces of her own kingdom, opposed to those of Scotland: That if the
King revived his mother's pretensions to the crown of England, he must also
embrace her religion, by which alone they could be justified; and must thereby
undergo the infamy of abandoning those principles, in which he had been
strictly educated, and to which he had hitherto religiously adhered: That as he
would, by such an apostasy, totally alienate all the protestants in Scotland
and England, he could never gain the confidence of the catholics, who would
still entertain a very reasonable doubt of his honor and sincerity: That by
advancing a present claim to the crown, he forfeited the certain prospect of
his succession; and revived that national animosity, which the late peace and
alliance between the kingdoms had happily extinguished: That the whole gentry
and nobility of England had openly declared themselves for the execution of the
Queen of Scots; and if James showed such violent resentment against that act of
justice, they would be obliged, for their own security, to prevent for ever so
implacable and revengeful a prince from ruling over them: And that, however
some persons might represent his honor as engaged to seek vengeance for the
present affront and injury, the true honor of a prince consisted in wisdom and
moderation and justice, not in following the dictates of blind passion, or in
pursuing revenge at the expense of every motive and every interest Strype, vol.
III. p. ^77. Spotswood.
These considerations, joined to the peaceable, unambitious temper of the young
prince, prevailed over his resentment; and he fell gradually into a good
correspondence with the court of England.

WHILE Elizabeth ensured tranquillity from the attempts of her nearest
neighbor, she was not negligent of more distant dangers. Hearing that Philip,
while he seemed to dissemble the daily insults and injuries, which he received
from the English, was secretly preparing a great navy to attack her; she sent
Sir Francis Drake with a fleet to intercept his supplies, to pillage his coast,
and to destroy his shipping. Drake (...) at Cadiz
Drake carried out four capital ships of the Queen's, and twenty-six, great and
small, with which the London merchants, in hopes of sharing in the plunder, had
supplied him. Having learned from two Dutch ships, whom he met in his passage,
that a Spanish fleet, richly laden, was lying at Cadiz, ready to set sail for
Lisbon, the rendezvous of the intended Armada; he bent his course to the former
harbor, and boldly, as well as fortunately, made an attack on the enemy. He
obliged six galleys, which made head against him, to take shelter under the
forts; he burned about an hundred vessels, laden with ammunition and naval
stores; and he destroyed a great ship of the marquess of Santa Croce. Thence,
he set sail for Cape St. Vincent, and took by assault the castle situated on
that promontory, with three other strong holds. He next insulted Lisbon; and
finding, that the merchants, who had engaged entirely in expectation of profit,
were discontented with these military enterprises, he set sail for the Tercera
Islands, with an intention of lying in wait for a rich Carrack, which was
expected in these quarters. He was so fortunate as to meet with his prize; and
in this short expedition, where the public bore so small a share, the
adventurers were encouraged to attempt farther enterprises, the English seamen
learned to despise the great unwieldy ships of the enemy, the naval
preparations of Spain were destroyed, the intended expedition against England
was retarded a twelvemonth, and the Queen had thereby leizure to take more
secure measures against that formidable invasion Camden, p 54^. Sir William
Monson* (...) Tracts in Churchill's Voyages, vol. III. p 1^^
.

THIS year Thomas Cavendish, a gentleman of Devonshire, who had dissipated his
estate by living at court, being resolved to repair his fortune at the expense
of the Spaniards, fitted out three ships at Plymouth, one of an hundred and
twenty tons, another of sixty, and a third of forty; and with these small
vessels he adventured into the South Seas, and committed great depredations on
the Spaniards. He took nineteen vessels, some of which were richly laden; and
returning by the Cape of Good Hope, he came to England, and entered the river
in a kind of triumph. His mariners and soldiers were clothed in silk, his
sails were of damask, his topmast cloth of gold; and his prize was esteemed
the richest that ever had been brought into England (...) vol. I p (...).
.

THE land enterprises of the English were not, during this campaign, so
advantageous or honorable to the nation. The important place of Deventer was
entrusted by Leicester to William Stanley, with a garrison of twelve hundred
English; and ^his gentleman, being a catholic, was alarmed with the discovery
of Babington's conspiracy, and became apprehensive, lest every one of his
religion should thenceforth be treated with distrust in England. He entered
into a correspondence with the Spaniards, betrayed the city to them for a sum
of money, and engaged the whole garrison to desert with him to the Spanish
service. Roland York, who commanded a fort near Zutphen, imitated his example;
and the Hollanders, formerly disgusted with Leicester, and suspicious of the
English, broke out into loud complaints against the improvidence, if not the
treachery of his administration. Soon after, he arrived himself in the Low
Countries; but his conduct was no-wise calculated to give them satisfaction, or
to remove the suspicions, which they had entertained against him. The prince of
Parma having besieged Sluys, he attempted to relieve the place, first by sea,
then by land; but failed in both enterprises, and as he ascribed his bad
success to the ill behavior of the Hollanders, they were equally free in
reflections upon his conduct. The breach between them became wider every day:
They slighted his authority, opposed his measures, and neglected his councils;
while he endeavored, by an imperious behavior, and by violence, to recover
that influence, which he had lost by his imprudent and ill concerted measures.
He was even suspected by the Dutch of a design to usurp upon their liberties;
and the jealousy entertained against him, began to extend toward the Queen
herself. That princess had made some advances toward a peace with Spain: A
congress had been opened at Bourbourg, a village near G^aveline: And though the
two courts, especially that of Spain, had no other intention than to amuse each
of them its enemy by negotiation, and mutua ly relax the preparations for
defense or assault, the Dutch, who were determined, on no condition, to return
under the Spanish yoke, became apprehensive lest their liberty should be
sacrificed to the political interests of England (...) part II. lib. 4. Strype,
vol. IV. (...).
. But the Queen, who knew the importance of her alliance with the slates in the
present (...) was resolved to give them entire satisfaction by recalling (...)
commanding him to resign his government. Maurice, son to the prince of Orange,
a youth of twenty years of age, was elected by the states governor in his
place; and Peregrine lord Willoughby, was appointed by the Queen commander of
the English forces. The measures of these two generals were much disturbed by
the malignity of Leicester, who had left a faction behind him, and who still
attempted, by means of his emissaries, to disturb all the operations of the
slates. So soon as Elizabeth got intelligence of these disorders, she took care
to redress them, and she obliged all the partisans of England to fall into
unanimity with prince Maurice Rymer, tom. XV p (...)
. But though her good sense so far prevailed over her partiality to Leicester,
she never could be made fully sensible of his vices and imprudence: The
submissions, which he made her, restored him to her wonted favor; and the lord
Bu^khurst, who had accused him of misconduct in Holland, lost for some time her
confidence, and was even committed to custody.

SIR Christopher Hatton was another favorite, who, at this time, received some
marks of her partiality. Though he had never followed the profession of the law,
he was made chancellor in the place of Bromley, deceased; but notwithstanding
all the expectations and wishes of the lawyers, he behaved in a manner not
unworthy that high station: His good natural capacity supplied the place of
experience and study; and his decisions were not found deficient either in
point of equity or judgment. His enemies had contributed to this promotion, in
hopes that his absence from court, while he attended the business of chancery,
would gradually estrange him from the Queen, and give them an opportunity of
undermining him in her favor.

(...).
Philip, though he had not yet declared war, on account of the hostilities, whi h
Elizabeth every where committed upon him, had long harbored a secret and
violent desire of revenge against her. His ambition also and the hopes of
extending his empire were much encouraged by the present prosperous situation
of his affairs; by the conquest of Portugal, the acquisition of the Indian
commerce and ^ ttlements, and the yearly importation of vast treasures from
America. The point on which he r^sted his highest glory, the perpetual object
of his policy, was to support orthodoxy and exterminate heresy; and as the
power and credit of Elizabeth was the chief bulwark of the protestants, he
hoped, if (...) subdue that princess, to acquire the eternal ^nown, of being
able to (...) i^ the (...) christian world in the catholic communion. Above
all, his (...) Camden. Strype, vol. III. p. 512.
.

THESE hopes and motives engaged Philip, notwithstanding his cautions temper,
to undertake this hazardous enterprise; and though the duke of Parma, when
consulted, opposed the attempt, at least represented the necessity of
previously getting possession of some seaport town in the Netherlands, which
might afford a retreat to the Spanish navy Bentivoglio, part II. lib 4
, it was determined by the catholic monarch, to proceed immediately to the
execution of his ambitious projects. During some time he had been secretly
making preparations; The Invincible Armada.
but so soon as the resolution was fully taken, every part of his vast empire
resounded with the noise of armaments, and all hisministers, generals, and
admirals, were employed in forwarding the design. The marquess of Santo Croce,
a sea officer of great reputation and experience, was destined to command the
fleet; and by his counsel were the naval equipments conducted In all the ports
of Sicily, of Naples, of Spain and Portugal, artizans were employed in building
vessels of uncommon size and force; naval stores were bought up at a prodigious
expense; provisions amassed; armies levied and quartered in the maritime towns
of Spain; and plans laid for fitting out such a fleet and embarkation as had
never before had its equal in Europe. The military preparations in Flanders
were no less formidable. Forces from all quarters were every moment assembling,
to reinforce the duke of Parma. Capizuchi and Spinelli, conducted forces from
Italy: The marquess of Borgaut, a prince of the house of Austria, levied troops
in Germany: The Walloon and Burgundian regiments were completed or augmented:
The Spanish infantry was supplied with recruits; and an army of thirty four
thousand men were assembled in the Netherlands, and kept in a readiness to be
transported into England. The duke of Parma employed all the carpenters which
he could procure, either in Flanders or in Lower Germany, and the coasts of the
Baltic; and he built at Dunkirk, and Newport, but especially at Antwerp, a
great number of boats and flat bottomed vessels, for the transport of his
infantry and cavalry into England. The most renowned nobility and princes of
Italy and Spain were ambitious of sharing in the honor of this great
enterprise. Don Amadeaeus of Savoy, Don John of Medicis, Vespasian Gonzaga,
duke of Sabionetta, and the duke of Pastrana, hastened to join the army under
the duke of Parma. About two thousand volunteers, many of them men of family,
had inlisted for the service in Spain. No doubt was entertained, but such vast
preparations, conducted by officers of such consummate skill, must finally be
successful. And the Spaniards, ostentatious of their power, and elevated with
vain hopes, had already denominated their navy the Invincible Armada.

NEWS of these extraordinary preparations soon reached England; and
notwithstanding the secrecy of the Spanish council, and their pretending
intentions to employ this force in the Indies, it was easily concluded, that
they meant to make some effort against England. Preparations in England.
The Queen had foreseen the invasion; and finding that she must now contend for
her crown with the whole force of Spain she made preparations for resistance;
nor was she dismayed with that danger, by which all Europe apprehended she must
of necessity be overwhelmed. Her force seemed very unequal to resist so
powerful an enemy. All the seamen in England amounted at that time only to
fourteen thousand two hundred and ninety-five Monson, p. 2^6.
. The size of the English shipping was, in general, so small, that, except a
few of the Queen's ships of war, there were not four vessels belonging to the
merchants which exceeded four hundred tuns Ibid. p. ^68.
. The royal navy consisted only of twenty-eight vessels Ibid. p. 157.
, many of which were of very small size; none of them exceeding the bulk of our
largest frigates, and most of them deserving rather the name of pinnaces than
of ships. The only advantage of the English fleet, consisted in the dexterity
and courage of the seamen, who being accustomed to sail in tempestuous seas,
and expose themselves to all dangers, as much exceeded in this particular the
Spanish mariners, as their vessels were inferior in size and force to those of
that nation Ibid. p. 3^1.
. All the commercial towns of England were required to furnish ships for
reinforcing this small navy; and they discovered, on the present occasion,
great alacrity in defending their liberty and religion against those imminent
perils with which they were menaced. The city of London, in order to show their
vigor in the common cause, instead of fifteen vessels which they were
commanded to equip, voluntarily fitted out double the number Ibid. p. 267.
. The gentry and nobility hired, and armed, and manned, forty-three ships at
their own charge Lives of the Admirals, vol. I. p. 451.
; and all the loans of money which the Queen demanded, were frankly granted by
the persons applied to. Lord Howard of Effingham, a man of great courage and
capacity, was lord admiral, and took on him the command of the navy: Drake,
Hawkins, and Frobisher, the most renowned seamen in Europe, served under him.
The main sleet was stationed at Plymouth. A smaller squadron, consisting of
forty vessels, English and Flemish, was commanded by the lord Seymour, second
son of protector Somerset; and lay off Dunkirk, in order to intercept the duke
of Parma.

THE land forces of England, compared to those of Spain, possessed contrary
qualities to its naval power: They were more numerous than the enemy, but much
inferior in discipline, reputation, and experience. An army of twenty thousand
men was disposed in different bodies along the south coast; and orders were
given them, if they could not hinder the Spaniards from landing, to retire
backwards, to waste the country around, and to wait for reinforcement from the
neighboring counties, before they approached the enemy. A body of twenty-two
thousand foot, and a thousand horse, under the command of the earl of
Leicester, was stationed at Tilbury, in order to defend the capital. The main
army* consisted of thirty-four thousand foot, and two thousand horse, and was
commanded by lord Hunsdon. These forces were reserved for the guard of the
Queen's person; and were appointed to march whithersoever the enemy should
appear. The fate of England, if the whole Spanish armies should be able to
land, seemed to depend on the issue of a single battle; and men of reflection
entertained the most dismal apprehensions, when they considered the force of
fifty thousand veteran Spaniards, commanded by experienced officers, under the
duke of Parma, the most consummate general of the age; and compared this
formidable armament with the military power which England, not enervated by
peace* but long disused to war, could muster up against it.

THE chief support of the kingdom seemed to consist in the vigor and prudence
of the Queen's conduct; who, undismayed by the present dangers, issued all her
orders with tranquillity, animated her pe ple to a steady resistance, and
employed every resource, which either her domestic situation or her foreign
alliances could afford her. She sent Sir Robert Sydney into Scotland; and
exhorted the King to remain attached to her, and to consider the danger which
at present menaced his sovereignty no less than her own, from the ambition of
the Spanish tyrant She made him some promises which she (...) fulfilled, to
give him a dukedom in England, with suitable lands and revenue, to settle 5000
l a year on him and pay him a guard, for the safety of his person. From a M^.
of lord Loyston
: The ambassador found James sufficiently disposed to cultivate an union with
England, and he even kept himself prepared to march with the force of his whole
kingdom to the assistance of Elizabeth. Her authority with the King of Denmark,
and the tie of their common religion, engaged this prince, upon her
application, to seize a squadron of ships which Philip had bought or hired in
the Danish harbors Strype, vol. III. p 5^4.
: The Hanse Towns, though not at that time on good terms with England, were
induced by the same motives, to retard so long the equipment of some vessels in
their ports, that they became useless to the purpose of invading England. All
the protestants throughout Europe, regarded this enterprise as the critical
event which was to decide for ever the fate of their religion; and though unable,
by reason of their distance, to join their force to that of Elizabeth, they
kept their eyes fixed on her conduct and fortune, and beheld with anxiety,
mixed with admiration, the intrepid countenance with which she encountered that
dreadful tempest, which was every moment approaching toward her.

THE Queen also was sensible, that, next to the general popularity which she
enjoyed, and the confidence which her subjects reposed in her prudent
government, the firmest support of her throne consisted in the general zeal of
the people for the protestant religion, and the strong prejudices which they
had imbibed against popery. She took care, on this occasion, to revive in the
nation this attachment to their own sect, and this abhorrence of the opposite.
The English were reminded of their former danger from the tyranny of Spain: All
the barbarities exercised by Mary against the protestants, were ascribed to the
counsels of that bigoted and imperious nation: The bloody massacres in the
Indies, the unrelenting executions in the Low Countries, the horrid cruelties
and iniquities of the inquisition, were set before men's eyes: A list and
description was published, and pictures dispersed, of the several instruments
of torture with which, it was pretended, the Spanish Armada was loaded: And
every artifice, as well as reason, was employed, to animate the people to a
vigorous defense of their religion, their laws, and their liberties.

BUT while the Queen, in this critical emergence, rouzed the animosity of the
nation against popery, she treated the partisans of that sect with moderation,
and gave not way to an undistinguishing fury against them. Though she knew, that
Sixtus Quintus, the present pope, famous for his capacity and his tyranny, had
fulminated a new bull of excommunication against her, had deposed her from the
throne, had absolved her subjects from their oaths of allegiance, had published
a croisade against England, and had granted plenary indulgence to every one
engaged in the present invasion; she would not believe, that all her catholic
subjects could be so blinded, as to sacrifice to bigotry their duty to their
sovereign, and the liberty and independency of their native country. She
rejected all violent counsels, by which she was prompted to seek pretexts for
dispatching the leaders of that party: She would not even consine any
considerable number of them: And the catholics, sensible of this good usage,
generally expressed the highest zeal for the public defense. Some gentlemen of
that sect, conscious that they could not justly expect any trust or authority,
entered themselves as volunteers in the fleet or army Stowe, p. 747.
: Some equipped ships at their own charge, and gave the command of them to
protestants: Others were active in animating their tenants and vassals, and
neighbors, to the defense of their country: And every rank of men, burying for
the present all party distinctions, seemed to prepare themselves, with order as
well as vigor, to resist the violence of these invaders.

THE more to excite the martial spirit of the nation, the Queen appeared on
horseback in the camp at Tilbury; and riding through the lines, discovered a
cheerful and animated countenance, exhorted the soldiers to remember their duty
to their country and their religion, and professed her intention, though a woman,
to lead them herself into the field against the enemy, and rather to perish in
battle than survive the ruin and slavery of her people The Queen's speech to
the (...) Military was in (...) w^rd^: My loving people, We have been persuaded
by some, that are careful of (...) safety, to take h^ed how we commit (...) to
armed multitudes, for fear of (...) but assure you, I do not desire to liv^
(...) my faithful (...) loving people. Let tyrant (...) I have always so (...)
^ myself, that, (...) I have pl^ced my ^^^^and;est (...) and safeguard in the
loyal (...) of my (...) am come amongst you at thy time not as for my (...) in
the midst and (...) of the battle to live or die amongst you all; (...), nor my
God, and (...)

(...) my people, my (...) m^ blood, even (...) of (...) woman, but I have the
heart of a (...) and of a (...) that P^rma or Spai^, or any prince of (...)
should (...) my (...) To which, rather than any di^n^nous shall (...) be your
general, judge, and rewarded of every one of your (...) by your forwardnes,
that you have (...) wo^d of a prince, they shall be duly paid (...) In the
mean, time, my (...) I shall be in my (...) than whom never prince commanded
(...) noble and w^^thy obedience to my general, by your (...) in the c^^p, and
your have (...) victory over those enemies of my God, of my kingdom* and of my
(...).


. By this spirited behavior she revived the tenderness and admiration of the
soldiery: An attachment to her person became a species of enthusiasm among
them: And they asked one another, whether it were possible that Englishmen
could abandon this glorious cause. could display less courage than appeared in
the female sex, or could ever, by any dangers, be induced to relinquish the
defense of their heroic princess.

THE Spanish Armada was ready on the beginning of May; but the moment it was
preparing to sail, the marquess of Santa Croce, the admiral, was seized with a
violent fever, of which he soon after died. The vice admiral, the duke of
Paliano, by a strange concurrence of accident, at the very same time, (...) the
same fate; and the King appointed for admiral, the duke of Me^ina Sidonia, the
nobleman of the greatest family in Spain, but unexperienced in action, and
utterly unacquainted with sea affairs. Alcarede was appointed vice admiral.
This misfortune, besides the loss of so great an officer as Santa Croce,
retarded the sailing of the Armada, and gave the English more time for their
preparations to oppose them. At last, the fleet, full of hopes and alacrity,
set sail from Lisbon; 29th May.
but next day met with a violent tempest, which scattered the ships, sunk some
of the smallest, and forced the rest to take shelter in the Groyne, where they
waited till they could be refitted. When news of this event was carried to
England, the Queen concluded, that the design of an invasion was disappointed
for this summer; and being always ready to lay hold of every pretense for
saving money, she made Walsingham write to the admiral, directing him to lay up
some of the larger ships, and to discharge the seamen: But lord Effingham, who
was not so sanguine in his hopes, used the freedom to disobey these orders; and
he beged leave to retain the whole ships in service, though it should be at his
own expense Camden, p. 545.
. He took advantage of a north wind, and sailed toward the coast of Spain,
with an intention of attacking the enemy in their harbors; but the wind
changing to the south, he became apprehensive, lest they might have set sail,
and by passing him at sea, invade England, now exposed by the absence of the
fleet. He returned, therefore, with the utmost expedition to Plymouth, and lay
at anchor in that harbor.

MEANWHILE, the Armada had repaired all her damages; and with fresh hopes set
out again to sea, in prosecution of her enterprise. The fleet consisted of a
hundred and thirty vessels, of which near a hundred were galleons, and were of
greater size than any which had ever before been used in Europe. It carried on
board nineteen thousand two hundred and ninety-five soldiers, eight thousand
four hundred and fifty-six mariners, two thousand and eighty-eight galley
slaves, and two thousand six hundred and thirty great pieces of brass ordnance.
It was victualled for six months; and was attended with twenty lesser ships,
called caravals, and ten salves with six oars apiece Strype, vol. III. Appen.
p. 221.
.

THE plan formed by the King of Spain, was, that the Armada should sail to the
coast opposite to Dunkirk and Newport; and having chased away all English or
Flemish vessels which might obstruct the passage, (for it was never supposed
they could make opposition) should join themselves with the duke of Parma,
should thence make sail to the Thames, and having landed the whole Spanish
army, thus complete at one blow the entire conquest of England. In prosecution
of this plan, Philip gave orders to the duke of Medina, that, in passing along
the channel, he should sail as near the coast of France as he could with
safety; that he should by this policy avoid meeting with the English fleet; and
keeping in view the main enterprise, should neglect all smaller successes,
which might prove an obstacle, or even interpose a delay, to the acquisition of
a kingdom Monson. p. 157.
. After the Armada was under sail, they took a fisherman, who informed them,
that the English admiral had been lately at sea, had heard of the tempest which
scattered the Armada, had retired back into Plymouth, and no longer expecting
an invasion this season, had laid up his ships, and discharged most of the
seamen. From this false intelligence the duke of Medina conceived the great
facility of attacking and destroying the English ships in harbor; and he was
tempted, by the prospect of so decisive an enterprise, to break his orders, and
make sail directly for Plymouth: A resolution which proved the safety of
England. 19th July.
The Armada arrives in the Channel.
The Lizard was the first land made by the Armada, about sunset; and as the
Spaniards took it for the Ram-head near Plymouth, they bore out to sea, with an
intention of returning next day, and attacking the English navy. They were
descried by Fleming, a Scottish pyrate, who was roving in these seas, and who
immediately set sail, to inform the English admiral of their approach Monson,
p. 1^8.
: Another fortunate event, which contributed extremely to the safety of the
fleet. Effingham had just time to get out of port, when he saw the Spanish
Armada coming full sail toward him, disposed in the form of a half moon, and
stretching the distance of seven miles from the extremity of one division to
that of the other.

THE writers of that age raise their style by a pompous description of this
spectacle; the most magnificent which had ever appeared upon the ocean,
infusing equal terror and admiration into the minds of all beholders. The lofty
masts, the swelling sails, and the towering prows of the Spanish galleons, seem
impossible to be justly painted, otherwise than by assuming the colors of
poetry; and an eloquent historian of Italy, in imitation of Camden, has
asserted, that the Armada, though the ships bore every sail, yet advanced with a
slow motion; as if the ocean groaned with supporting, and the winds were tired
with impelling, so enormous a weight (...) p^r^ ^. (...) 4.
. The truth, however, is, the largest of the Spanish vessels would scarce pass
for third rates in the present navy of England; yet were they so ill framed, or
so ill governed, that they were quite unwieldy, and could not sail upon a wind,
nor tack on occasion, nor be managed in stormy weather by the seamen. Neither
the mechanics of ship-building, nor the experience of mariners, had attained so
great perfection as could serve for the security and government of such bulky
vessels; and the English, who had already had experience how unserviceable they
commonly were, were not dismayed with their tremendous appearance.

EFFINGHAM gave orders, not to come to a close sight with the Spaniards, where
the size of the ships, he suspected, and the numbers of soldiers, would be a
disadvantage to the English; but to cannonade them at a distance, and to wait
the opportunity which winds, currents, or various chances must afford them, of
intercepting some scattered vessels of the enemy. Nor was it long before the
event answered expectation. A great ship of Bis^ay, on board of which was a
considerable part of the Spanish money, was set on fire by accident; and while
all hands were employed in extinguishing it, she fell behind the rest of the
Armada: The great galleon of Andaluzia was detained by the springing of her
mast: And both these vessels were taken, after some resistance, by Sir Francis
Drake. As the Armada advanced up the channel, the English hung upon their rear,
and still infested them with skirmishes. Each trial abated the confidence of
the Spaniards, and added courage to the English; and the latter soon found,
that even in close fight the size of the Spanish ships was no advantage to
them. Their bulk exposed them the more to the bullets of the enemy; while their
cannon, placed too high, shot over the heads of the English. The alarm having
now reached the coast of England, the nobility and gentry hastened out with
their vessels from every harbor, and reinsorced the admiral. The earls of
Oxford, Northumberland, and Cumberland, Sir Thomas Cecil, Sir Robert Cecil, Sir
Walter Raleigh, Sir Thomas Vavasor, Sir Thomas Gerrard, Sir Charles Blount;
with many others, distinguished themselves by this generous and disinterested
service of their country. The English fleet, after the conjunction of these
ships, amounted to an hundred and forty fail.

THE Armada had now reached Calais, a d cast anchor before that place, in
expectation, that the duke of Parma, who had got intelligence of their
approach, would put to sea, and join his forces to them. The English admiral
practiced here a very successful stratagem upon the Spaniards. He took eight of
his smaller ships, and filling them with all combustible materials, sent them,
one after another, into the midst of the enemy. The Spaniards fancied, that
they were fireships of the same contrivance with a famous vessel which had
lately done so much execution at Antwerp; and they immediately cut their
cables, and took to slight with the greatest disorder and precipitation. The
English sell upon them next morning, while in confusion; and besides doing
great damage to other ships, they took or destroyed about twelve of the enemy.

BY this time, it was become apparent, that the intention, for which these
great preparations were made by the Spaniards, was entirely srustrated. The
vessels, provided by the duke of Parma, were made for transport, not for
sighting; and that general, when urged to leave the harbor, utterly refused to
expose his flourishing army to such apparent hazard, as it must incur; while
the English, not only were able to keep the sea, but seemed even to triumph
over their enemy. The Spanish admiral found, in many r^ncounters, that while he
lost so considerable a part of his own navy, he had destroyed only one small
vessel of the English; and he foresaw, that, by continuing so unequal a combat,
he must draw inevitable destruction on all the remainder. He prepared therefore
to Defeated.
A violent tempest overtook the Armada after it passed the Orkneys: The ships
had already lost their anchors, and were obliged to keep to sea: The mariners,
unaccustomed to such hardships, and not able to govern such unwieldy vessels,
yielded to the fury of the storm, and allowed their ships to drive either on
the western isles of Scotland, or on the coast of Ireland, where they were
miserably shipwrecked. Not a half of the navy returned to Spain; and the
seamen, as well as soldiers, who remained, were so overcome with hardship and
fatigue, so dispirited by their discomfiture, that they filled all Spain with
accounts of the valor of the English, and of the tempestuous violence of that
ocean which surrounds them.

SUCH was the miserable and dishonorable conclusion of an enterprise, which
had been preparing for three years, which had exhausted the revenue and force
of Spain, and which had long filled all Europe with anxiety or expectation.
Philip, who was a slave to his passions, but had an entire command over his
countenance, no sooner heard of the mortifying event, which blasted all his
schemes of ambition, than he fell on his knees, and rendering thanks for that
gracious dispensation of providence, expressed his joy that the calamity was
not greater. The Spanish priests, who had so ofttn blessed this holy croisade,
and foretold its intallible success, were somewhat at a loss to account for the
victory gained over the catholic monarch by excommunicated heretics and an
execrable usurper: But they at last discovered, that all the calamities of the
Spaniards had proceeded from their allowing the infidel Moors to live among
them Strype, vol. III. p. 525. On the fourth of September, soon after the
dispersion of the Spanish Armada, died the earl of (...), the Queen's great,
but unworthy, favorite. Her ^tt^^tion to him continued to the last. He had
discovered no conduct in any of his military enterprize^: and was suspected of
cowardice. Yet she (...) him with the command of her armies during the danger
of the Spanish invasion; a partiality, which might have proved fatal to her,
had the duke of (...) been able to land his troops in England. She had even
ordered a commission to be drawn lot him, (...) him her lieutenant in the
kingdom* of England and Ireland; but Burleigh and Ha^^on ^^^^^sented to her the
danger of entrusting such unlimited authority in the hands of any subject, and
prevented the execution of that design. No wonder, that a conduct, so unlike
the usual jealousy of Elizabeth, gave reason to suspect, that her partiality
was founded on some other passion than friendship. But Elizabeth seemed to
carry her affection to Leicester no farther than the grave: She ordered his
goods to be disposed of at a public sale, to reimburse herself of some money
which he owed her; and her usual attention to money was observed to prevail
over her regard to the memory of the deceased. This earl was a great hypocrite,
a pretender to the strictest religion, an encourager of the puritans, and a
founder of hospitals.
.

4th February.
SOON after the defeat and dispersion of the Spanish Armada, the Queen summoned
a new Parliament; and received from them a supply of two subsidies and four
fifteenths payable in four years. This is the first instance that subsidies
were doubled in one supply; and so unusual a concession was probably obtained
from the joy of the present success, and from the general sense of the Queen's
necessities. Some members objected to this heavy charge, on account of the
great burden of loans, which had lately been imposed upon them Strype, vol.
III. p. 542. Id. appen. p. 239. There are some singular passages in this last
speech, which may be worth taking notice of; especially as they came from a
member who was no courtier: For he argues against the subsidy. "And first,"
says he, "for the necessity thereof, I cannot deny, but if it were a charge
imposed upon us by her majesty's commandment, or a demand proceeding from her
majesty by way of request, that I think there is not one among us all, either
so disobedient a subject in regard of our duty, or so unthankful a man in
respect of the inestimable benefits which by her or from her, we have received,
which would not with frank consent, both of voice and heart, most willingly
submit himself thereunto, without any unreverend enquiry into the causes
thereof. For it is continually in the mouth of us all, that our lands, goods,
and lives are at our prince's disposing. And it agrees very well with that
position of the civil law, which says, Quod omnia regis sunt. But how? Pa
tamen, ut omnium sint. Ad regem enim potestas omntum pertinet; ad singulos
p^oprieta^. So that although it be most true, that her majesty has over
ourselves and our goods, p^t^statem imperandi; yet it is true, that until that
power command (which, no doubt, will not command without very just cause) every
subject has his own proprietatem possidend^. Which power and commandment from
her majesty, which we have not yet received, I take it (saving reformation)
that we are freed from the cause of necessity. And the cause of necessity, is
the dangerous estate of the common wealth, etc." The tenor of the speech pleads
rather for a general benevolence than a subsidy: For the law of Richard the
third against benevolence was never conceived to have any force. The member
even proceeds to assert, with some precaution, that it was in the power of
Parliament to refuse the King's demand of a subsidy. And that there was an
instance of that liberty in Henry the third's time near four hundred years
before. Sub sine.
.

A Parliament.
ELIZABETH foresaw, that this house of commons, like all the foregoing, would
be governed by the puritans; and therefore, to obviate their enterprises, she
renewed, at the beginning of the session, her usual injunction, that they
should not on any account, presume to treat of matters ecclesiastical.
Notwithstanding this strict inhibition, the zeal of one Damport moved him to
present a bill to the commons for remedying the grievances, and restraining the
tyranny, of the ecclesiastical commission, which were certainly enormous: But
when Mr. secretary Wolley reminded the house of her majesty's commands, no one
durst second the motion; the bill was not so much as read; and the speaker
returned it back to Damport, without taking the least notice of it D'Ewe, p.
43^.
. Some members of the house, notwithstanding the general submission, were even
committed to custody on account of this attempt Strype's Life of Whitgist, p.
2^0. Neal, vol 1. p. 500.
.

THE imperious conduct of Elizabeth appeared still more clearly in another
parliamentary transaction. The right of purveyance was an ancient prerogative,
by which the officers of the crown could at pleasure take provisions for the
household from all the neighboring counties, and the use of carts and
carriages; and the price of these services was fixed and stated. The payment of
the money was often distant and uncertain; and the rates were always much
inferior to the market price; so that purveyance, besides the slavery of it,
was always regarded as a great burden, and being arbitrary and casual, was
liable to great abuses. We may fairly presume, that the hungry courtiers of
Elizabeth, supported by her unlimited power, would be sure to render this
prerogative very oppressive to the people; and the commons had, last session,
found it necessary to pass a bill for regulating these exactions: But the bill
was lost in the house of peers D'Ewe* p (...)
. The continuance of the abuses begot a new attempt for redress; and the same
bill was now revived, and sent up again to the house of peers, together with a
bill for some new regulations in the court of Exchequer. Soon after, the
commons received a message from the upper house, desiring them to appoint a
committee for a conference. At this conference, the peers informed them, that
the Queen, by a message, delivered by lord Burleigh, had expressed her
displeasure, that the commons should presume to touch on her prerogative. If
there were any abuses, she said, either in imposing purveyance, or in the
practice of the court of Exchequer, her majesty was both able and willing to
provide due reformation; but would not permit the Parliament to intermeddle in
these matters Ibid. p 4^^.
. The commons, alarmed at this intelligence, appointed a new committee to
attend the Queen, and endeavor to satisfy her of their humble and dutiful
intentions* Elizabeth gave a gracious reception to the committee: She expressed
her great ^nestimable loving care toward her loving subjects; which, she said,
was greater than of her own self, or even than any of them could have of
themselves. She told them, that she had already given orders for an enquiry
into the abuses attending purveyance, but the dangers of the Spanish invasion
had retarded the progress of that design; that she had as much skill, will, and
power to rule her own household as any subjects whatsoever to govern theirs,
and needed as little the assistance of her neighbors; that the Exchequer was
her chamber, consequently more near to her than even her household, and
therefore the less proper for them to intermeddle with; and that she would of
herself, with the advice of her council and the judges, redress all grievances
in these matters, but would not permit them, by laws moved without her privity,
to bereave her of the honor attending these regulations D'Ewes, p. 444.
. The issue of this matter was the same that attended all contests between
Elizabeth and her Parliaments Si rixa est, ubi tu pulsas, ego vapulo tantum.
Juven.
. She seems even to have been more imperious, in this particular, than her
predecessors; at least, her more remote ones: For they often permitted the
abuses of purveyance We may judge of the extent and importance of these abuses
by a speech of Bacon's against purveyors, delivered in the first Parliament of
the subsequent reign. "First," says he, "they take in hand what they ought not
to take; secondly, they take in quantity a far greater proportion than comes
to your majesty's use; thirdly, they take in an unlawful manner, in a manner, I
say, directly and expressly prohibited by several laws. For the first, I am a
little to alter their name: For instead of takers, they become taxers: Instead
of taking provisions for your majesty's service, they tax your people ad
redimendam vexationem; imposing upon them and extorting from them diverse sums
of money, sometimes in gross, sometimes in the nature of stipends annually
paid, ne noceant, to be freed and eased of their oppression. Again, they take
trees, which by law they cannot do; timber trees, which are the beauty,
countenance and shelter of men's houses; that men have long spared from their
own purse and profit; that men esteem, for their use and delight, above ten
times the value; that area loss which men cannot repair or recover. These do
they take, to the defacing and spoiling of your subjects mansions and
dwellings, except they may be compounded with to their own appetites. And if a
gentleman be too hard for them while he is at home, they will watch their time
when there is but a bailiss or a servant remaining, and put the ax to the root
of the tree, ere ever the master can stop it. Again, they use a strange and
most unjust exaction in causing the subjects to pay poundage of their own
debts, due from your majesty unto them: So as a poor man, when he has had his
hay or his wood, or his poultry (which perchance he was full loath to part
with, and had for the provision of his own family and not to put to sale) taken
from him, and that not at a just price, but under the value, and comes to
receive his money, he shall have after the rate of twelve pence in the pound
abated for poundage of his due payment upon so hard conditions. Nay farther
they are grown to that extremity (as is affirmed, though it be scarce credible,
save that in such (...) all things are credible) that they will take double
poundage, once when the debenture is made^ and again the second time, when the
money is paid. For the second point, most gracious soverign, touching the
quantity which they take sar above that which is answered to your majesty's
use; (...) affirmed unto me by diverse gentlemen of good report, as a matter
which I may safely avouch unto your majesty, that there is no pound profit,
which redoundeth unto your majesty in this course but induces and begets
three pound damage upon your subjects, beside the coffeehouse. And to the
end they may make their spoil more securely, what do they? Whereas diverse
statutes do strictly provide, that whatsoever they take shall be registered and
attested, to the end that by making a collation of that which is taken from the
country and that which is answered above, their deceits might appear, they, to
the end to obscure their deceits, utterly omit the observation of this which
the law prescribes. And therefore to descend, if it may please your majesty,
to the third sort of abuse, which is of the unlawful manner of their taking,
whereof this question is a branch; it is so manifold, as it rather asks an
enumeration of some of the particulars than a prosecution of all. For their
price, by law they ought to take as they can agree with the subject; by abuse
they take at an imposed and enforced price: By law they ought to make but one
apprizement by neighbors in the country; by abuse, they make a second
apprizement at the court gate, and when the subjects cattle come up many miles
lean and out of plight by reason of their travel, then they prize them anew at
an abated price: By law, they ought to take between sun and sun; by abuse, they
take by twilight and in the nightime, a time well chosen for malefactors: By
law, they ought not to take in the highways (a place by her majesty's high
prerogative protected, and by statute by special words excepted) by abuse, they
take in the highways: By law, they ought to show their commission, etc. A
number of other particulars there are, etc." Bacon's works, vol. IV. p. 305,
306.

Such were the abuses, which Elizabeth would neither permit her Parliaments to
meddle with, nor redress herself. I believe it will readily be allowed, that
this slight prerogative alone, which ha^ passed almost unobserved amidst other
branches of so much greater importance, was sufficient to extinguish all
regular liberty. For what elector, or member of Parliament, or even juryman,
dust oppose the will of the court, while he lay under the lash of such an
anbitrary prerogative? For a farther account of the grievous and incredible
oppressions of purveyors, see the journals of the house of commons, vol. I. p.
190. There is a story of a carter, which may be worth mentioning on this
occasion. "A carter had three time^ been at Windsor with his cart to carry
away, upon summons of a remove some part of the stuff of her majesty's
wardrobe; and when he had repaired thither once, twice, and the third time, and
that they of the wardrobe had told him the third time that the remove held not,
the carter, clapping his hand on his thigh, said. Now life, than the (...) as
well as my wife. Which words being overheard by her majesty, who then stood at
the window, she said, What a viliain is this? and so sent him three angels to
stop his mouth. ^irch's Memoi^, vol. I. p. 155.


to be redressed by law See the statutes under this head of purveyance.
. Edward the third allowed ten several statutes to be enacted for that purpose.

IN so great awe did the commons stand of every courtier, as well as of the
crown, that they durst use no freedom of speech, which, they thought, would
give the least offense to any of them. Sir Edward Hobby showed in the house his
great grief, that by some great personage, not a member of the house, he had
been sharply rebuked for speeches delivered in Parliament: He craved the favor
of the house, and desired that some of the members might inform that great
personage of his true meaning and intention in these speeches D'Ewes. p. 432,
433.
. The commons, to obviate these inconveniences, passed a vote, that no one
should reveal the secrets of the house An act was passed this session,
enforcing the former statute, which imposed twenty pounds a month on every one
absent from public worship: But the penalty was restricted to two thirds of the
income of the recusant ^9 Eliz. cap. 6.
.

THE discomfiture of the Armada had begot in the nation a kind of enthusiastic
passion for enterprises against Spain; and nothing seemed now impossible to be
achieved by the valor and fortune of the English. Don Antonio, prior of
Crato, was a natural son of the royal family of Portugal, who, trusting to the
aversion of his countrymen against the Castilians, had advanced a claim to the
crown, and flying first to France, thence to England, had been encouraged both
by Henry and Elizabeth in his pretensions. Expedition against Portugal.
A design was formed by the people, not the court, of England to conquer the
kingdom for Don Antonio: Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Norris were the leaders
in this romantic enterprise: Near twenty thousand volunteers Birch's Memoirs of
Queen Elizabeth, vol. l. p. 61. Monson, p. 267, says, that there were only
fourteen thousand soldiers and four thousand seamen in the whole on this
expedition: But the account contained in Dr. Birch, is given by one of the most
considerable of the adventurers.
inlisted themselves in the service: And ships were hired, as well as arms
provided, at the sole charge of the adventurers. The Queen's frugality kept her
from contributing more than sixty thousand pounds to the expense; and she only
allowed six of her ships of war to attend the expedition Monson, p. 267.
. There was more spirit and bravery, than foresight or prudence, in the conduct
of this enterprise. The small stock of the adventurers would not permit them to
buy either provisions or ammunition sufficient for such an undertaking: They
even wanted vessels to stow the numerous volunteers, who crowded to them; and
they were obliged to seize by force some ships of the hanse towns, which they
met with at sea: An expedient, which set them somewhat more at their case in
point of room for their men, but remedied not the deficiency of their
provisions Ibid. p. 159.
. Had they sailed directly to Portugal, it is believed, that the good will of
the people, joined to the defenseless state of the kingdom, might have ensured
them of success: But hearing, that great preparations were making at the Groine
for the invasion of England, they were induced to go thither, and destroy this
new armament of Spain. They broke into the harbor; burned some ships of war,
particularly one commanded by Recalde, vice admiral of Spain; they defeated an
army of four or five thousand men, which was assembled to oppose them; they
assaulted the Groine, and took the lower town, which they pillaged; and they
would have taken the higher, though well fortified, had they not found their
ammunition and provisions beginning to fall short. The young earl of Essex, a
nobleman of very promising hopes, who, ^ired with the thirst of military
honor, had secretly, unknown to the Queen, stole from England, here joined the
adventurers; and it was then agreed by common consent to make ^ail for
Portugal, the main object of their enterprise.

THE English landed at Paniche, a seaport town, twelve leagues from Lisbon;
and Norris led the army to that capital, while Drake undertook to sail up the
river, and attack the city with his united forces. By this time, the court of
Spain had got leizure to prepare against the invasion of the English. Forces
were thrown into Lisbon: The Portuguese were disarmed: All suspected persons
were taken into custody: And thus, though the inhabitants bore great affection to
Don Antonio, none of them dared to declare in favor of the invaders. The
English army, however, made themselves masters of the suburbs, which abounded
with riches of all kinds; but as they desired to conciliate the affections of
the Portugueze, and were more intent on honor than profit, they observed a
strict discipline, and abstained from all plunder. Meanwhile they found their
ammunition and provisions totally exhausted; they had not a single cannon to
make a breach in the walls; the admiral had not been able to pass some
fortresses, which guarded the river; there was no appearance of any
insurrection in their favor; sickness from fatigue, hunger, and intemperance
in wine and fruits had seized the army: So that it was found requisite to make
all haste possible to reimbark. They were not pursued by the enemy; and
finding, at the mouth of the river, sixty ships laden with naval stores, they
seized them as lawful prize; though they belonged to the Hanse Towns, a neutral
power. They sailed thence to Vigo, which they took and burned; and having
ravaged the country round, they set sail and arrived safely in England. Above
the half of these gallant adventurers perished by sickness, famine, fatigue,
and the sword Birch's Memoit^, vol. l. p 61.
; and England reaped much more honor than profit from this extraordinary
expedition. It is computed, that eleven hundred gentlemen embarked on board
this fleet, and that only three hundred and fifty survived these multiplied
disasters Birch, Ibid.
.

WHEN these ships were on their voyage homewards, they met with the earl of
Cumberland, who was outward bound, with a fleet of seven sail, all equipped at
his own charge, except one ship of war, which the Queen had lent him. That
nobleman supplied Sir Francis Drake with some provisions; a generosity, which
saved the lives of many of Drake's men, but which the others suffered severely
for afterward. Cumberland sailed toward the Ter^eras, and took several prizes
from the enemy; but the richest, valued at an hundred thousand pounds, perished
in her return, with all her cargo, near St. Michael's Mount in Cornwall. Many of
these adventurers were killed in a rash attempt at the Terceras: A destructive
mortality seized the rest: And it was with difficulty that the few hands, which
remained, were able to st^^r the ships home into harbor Monson, p. 161.
.

Scotch affairs.
THOUGH the signal advantages, gained over the Spaniards, and the spirit, which
they infused into the English, gave Elizabeth great security during the rest of
her reign, she could not forbear keeping an anxious eye toward Scotland, whose
situation rendered the revolutions of that kingdom always of importance to her.
It might have been expected, that this high-spirited princess, who knew so well
to encounter danger, would not have retained that suspicious jealousy toward
Scotland, with which, during the lifetime of Mary, she had been so much
agitated. James had indeed succeeded to all his mother's claims; but he had not
succeeded to the favor of the catholics, which could alone render these claims
dangerous Winwood, vol. I. p. 51.
: And as the Queen was now well advanced in years, and enjoyed the most
uncontrouled authority over her subjects, it was not likely, that the King of
Scots, who was of an indolent unambitious temper, would ever give her any
disturbance in the possession of her throne. Yet all these circumstances could
not remove her timorous suspicions: And so far from satisfying the nation by a
settlement of the successi n, or a declaration of James's title, she was as
anxious to prevent every incident, which might raise his credit or procure him
the regard of the English, as if he had been her immediate rival and
competitor. Most of his ministers and favorites were her pensioners; and as
she was desirous to hinder him from marrying and having children, she obliged
them to throw obstacles in the way of every alliance, even the most reasonable,
which could be offered him; and during some years, she succeeded in this
malignant policy Melvil, p. 166, 177.
. He had fixed on the eldest daughter of the King of Denmark, who being a
remote prince and not very powerful, could give her no umbrage; yet did she so
artfully cross this negotiation, that the Danish monarch, impatient of delay,
married his daughter to the duke of Brunswic. James then renewed his suit to
the younger princess; and still found obstacles from the intrigues of
Elizabeth, who, merely with a view of interposing delay, proposed to him the
sister of the King of Navarre, a princess much older than himself, and entirely
destitute of fortune. The young King, besides the desire of securing himself by
offspring, from those traitorous attempts, too frequent among his subjects, had
been so watched by the rigid austerities of the ecclesiastics, that he had
another inducement to marriage, which is not so usual with monarchs. His
impatience, therefore, broke through all the politics of Elizabeth: The articles
of marriage were settled: The ceremony was performed by proxy: And the princess
embarked for Scotland; but was drove by a storm into a port of Norway. This
tempest, and some others, which happened near the same time, were universally
believed in Scotland and Denmark to have proceeded from a combination of the
Scottish and Danish witches; and the dying confession of the criminals was
supposed to place the accusation beyond all controversy Melvil, p. 180.
. James, however, though a great believer in sorcery, was not deterred by this
incident from taking a voyage, in order to conduct his bride home: He arrived
in Norway; carried the Queen thence to Copenhagen; and having passed the winter
in that city, he brought her next spring to Scotland, where they were joyfully
received by the people. The clergy alone, who never let pass an opportunity of
vexing him, made opposition to the Queen's coronation, on account of the
ceremony of anointing her, which, they alleged, was either a Jewish or a
popish rite; and therefore utterly antichristian and unlawful. But James was as
much bent on the ceremony, as they were averse to it; and after much
controversy and many intrigues, his authority, which had not often happened, at
last prevailed over their opposition Spot^wood p. (...)
.

CHAP. VI.
French affairs. -- Murder of the duke of Guise. -- Murder of Henry the third.
-- Progress of Henry the fourth. -- Naval enterprises against Spain. -- A
Parliament. -- Henry the fourth embraces the catholic religion. -- Scotch
affairs. -- Naval enterprises. -- A Parliament. -- Peace of Vervins. -- The
earl of Essex.



French affairs.
THE violence of the League having constrained Henry to declare war against the
Hugonots, these religionist, seemed exposed to the utmost danger; and
Elizabeth, sensible of the intimate connection between her own interests and
those of that party, had supported the King of Navarre by her negociations in
Germany, and still more by large sums of money, which she remitted for levying
forces in that country. That heroic prince, not discouraged by the great
superiority of his enemies, took the field; and in the year 1587 gained, at
Coutras, a complete victory over the army of the French King; but as his
allies, the Germans, were at the same time discomfited by the army of the
League, under the duke of Guise, his situation, notwithstanding his victory,
seemed still as desperate as ever. The chief advantage which he reaped from
this diversity of success, was the divisions which, by that means, took place
among his enemies. The inhabitants of Paris, intoxicated with admiration of
Guise, and strongly prejudiced against their King, whose intentions had become
suspicious to them, took to arms, and obliged Henry to fly for his safety. That
prince, dissembling his resentment, entered into negotiation with the League;
and having conferred many high offices on Guise and his partisans, summoned an
assembly of the states at Blois, under preten e of finding means and expedients
to support the intended war against the Hugonots. The various scenes of persidy
and cruelty which had been exhibited in France, had justly begot a mutual
di^^idence among all parties; yet Guise, trusting more to the timidity than
honor of the King, rashly put himself into the hands of that monarch, and
expected, by the ascendant of his own genius, to make him submit to all his
exorbitant pretensions. Henry, though of an easy disposition, not steady to his
resolutions, nor even to his promises, wanted neither courage nor capacity;
Murder of the duke of (...).
and finding all his subtilties eluded by the vigor of Guise, and even his
throne exposed to the most imminent danger, he embraced more violent counsels
than were natural to him, and ordered that duke and his brother, the cardinal
of Guise, to be assassinated in his palace.

THIS cruel execution, which the necessity of it could alone excuse, had nearly
proved fatal to the author, and seemed at first to plunge him into greater
dangers than those which he sought to avoid, by taking vengeance on his enemy.
The partisans of the league were enflamed with the utmost rage against him: The
populace every where, particularly at Paris, renounced all allegiance to him:
The ecclesiastics and the preachers filled all places with execrations against
his name: And the most powerful cities, and the most opulent provinces,
appeared to combine in a resolution of renouncing monarchy, or of changing
their monarch. Henry, finding slender resources among his catholic subjects,
was constrained to enter into a confederacy with the Hugonots and the King of
Navarre: He enlisted large bodies of Swiss infantry and German cavalry: And
being still supported by his chief nobility, he assembled, by all these means,
an army of near forty thousand men, and advanced to the gates of Paris, ready
to crush the League, and subdue all his enemies. The desperate resolution of
one man diverted the course of these great events. Jaques Clement, a Dominican
monk, inflamed by that bloody spirit of bigotry which distinguishes this
century, and a great part of the following one, beyond all other ages of the
world, embraced the resolution of sacrificing his own life, in order to save
the church from the persecutions of an heretical tyrant; Murder of Henry the
third.
and being admitted, under some pretext, to the King's presence, he gave that
prince a mortal wound with a knife, and was immediately put to death, by the
courtiers, who hastily revenged the murder of their sovereign. This remarkable
incident happened on the first of August, 1589.

THE King of Navarre, next heir to the crown, assumed the government, under the
title of Henry the fourth; but succeeded to much greater difficulties than
those which surrounded his predecessor. The prejudices entertained against his
religion, made a great part of the nobility desert him; and it was only by his
promise of hearkening to conferences and instruction, that he could engage any
of the catholics to adhere to his undoubted title. The League, governed by the
duke of Mayenne, brother to Guise, gathered new force; and the King of Spain
entertained views, either of dismembering the monarchy, or of annexing the
whole to his own dominions. In these distressful circumstances, Henry addressed
himself to Elizabeth, and found her well disposed to contribute to his
assistance, and to oppose the progress of the catholic League, and of the King
of Spain, her inveterate and dangerous enemies. To prevent the desertion of his
Swiss and German troops, she made him a present of twenty-two thousand pounds;
a larger sum than, as he declared, he had ever seen before: And she sent him a
reinforcement of four thousand men, under lord Willoughby, an officer of
reputation, who joined the French at Dieppe. Strengthened by these supplies,
Henry marched directly to Paris; and having taken the suburbs, sword in hand,
he abandoned them to be pillaged by his soldiers. He employed this body of
English troops in many other enterprises; and found still great cause to praise
their courage and fidelity. The time of their service being elapsed, he
dismissed them with many high commendations. Sir William Drury, Sir Thomas
Baskerville, and Sir John Boroughs, acquired reputation this campaign, and
revived in France the ancient fame of English valor.

Progress of Henry the fourth.
THE army which Henry next campaign led into the field, was much inferior to
that of the League; but as it was composed of the chief nobility of France, he
feared not to encounter his enemies in a pitched battle at Yvr^^, and he gained
a complete victory over them. This success enabled him to blockade Paris, and
he reduced that capital to the last extremity of famine: When the duke of
Parma, in consequence of orders from Philip, marched to the relief of the
League, and obliged Henry to raise the blockade. Having performed this
important service, he retired back to the Low Countries; and by his consummate
skill in the art of war, performed these long marches in the face of the enemy,
without affording the French monarch that opportunity which he sought, of
giving him battle, or so much as putting his army once in disorder. The only
loss which he sustained, was in the Low Countries; where prince Maurice took
advantage of his absence, and recovered some towns which Parma had formerly
conquered from the States This year the nation suffered a great loss, by the
death of Sir Francis Walsingham, secretary o^ state; a man equally celebrated
for his ability and his integrity. He had passed through many employment, had
been very frugal in his expenses, yet died so poor, that his family was obliged
to give him a private burial. He l^^t only one daughter, first married to Sir
Philip Sidney, then to the earl of Eale^, favorite to Queen Elizabeth, and
lastly to the earl of Clanricarde of Ireland. The same year (...) Thomas
Randolph, who had been employed by the Queen in several embassies to Scotland;
as d^^ also the earl of Warwic, elder brother to Leicester.
.

alarmed with the danger; and foresaw, that the Spaniards, besides infesting
the English commerce by privateers, might employ these harbors as the seat of
their naval preparations, and might more easily, from that near neighborhood,
than from Spain or Portugal, project an invasion of England. She concluded,
therefore, a new treaty with Henry, in which she engaged to send over three
thousand men, to be employed in the reduction of Britanny, and stipulated, that
her charges should, in a twelve month, or so soon as the enemy was expelled, be
refunded her Camden, p. 561.
. These forces were commanded by Sir John Norris; and under him by his brother
Henry, and by Anthony Shirley. Sir Roger Williams was at the head of a small
body which garrisoned Dieppe: And a squadron of ships, under the command of Sir
Henry Palmer, lay upon the coast of France, and intercepted all the vessels
belonging to the Spaniards or the Leaguers.

THE events of war can very little be regulated before hand by any treaty or
agreement; and Henry, who found it requisite to lay aside the projected
enterprise against Britanny, persuaded the English commanders to join his army,
and to take a share in the war which he carried on in Picardy Rymer, tom. XIV.
p. 116.
. Notwithstanding the disgust which Elizabeth received from this
disappointment, he laid before her a plan for expelling the Leaguers from
Normandy, and persuaded her to send over a new body of four thousand men, to
assist him in that enterprise. The earl of Essex was appointed general of these
forces; a young nobleman, who, by many exterior accomplishments, and still more
real merit, was daily advancing in favor with Elizabeth, and seemed to occupy
that place in her affections which Leicester, who was now deceased, had so long
enjoyed. Essex, impatient for military fame, was extremely uneasy to lie some
time at Dieppe unemployed; and had not the orders which he received from his
mistress been so positive, he would gladly have accepted of Henry's invitation,
and have marched to join the French army now in Champagne. This plan of
operations was also proposed to Elizabeth, by the French ambassador; but she
rejected it with great displeasure; and she threatened immediately to recall her
troops, if Henry should persevere any longer in his present practice, of
breaking all concert with her, and attending to nothing but his own interests
Birch's Negociations. (...). Rymer, tom. XIV. p. 123, 140.
. Urged by these motives, the French King, at last, led his army into Normandy,
and laid siege to Rouen, which he reduced to great difficulties. But the
League, who were unable of themselves to take the field against him, had again
recourse to the duke of Parma, who received orders to march to their
assistance. He executed this enterprise with his usual ability Camden, p. 562.
. It is probable, however, that their own ardent courage, and their desire of
distinguishing themselves in so celebrated a theater for war, were the cause
why they so often enjoyed this perilous honor.

NOTWITHSTANDING the indifferent success of former enterprises, the Queen was
sensible how necessary it was to support Henry against the League and the
Spaniards; and she formed a new treaty with him, in which they agreed, never to
make peace with Philip, but by common consent; she promised to send him a new
supply of four thousand men; and he stipulated to repay her charges in a
twelvemonth, to employ these forces, joined to a body of French troops, in an
expedition against Britanny, and to consign into her hands a seaport town of
that province, for a retreat to the English Rymer, vol. XVI. p. 151, 168, 171,
173.
. Henry knew the impossibility of executing some of these articles, and the
imprudence of fulfilling others; but finding them rigidly insisted on by
Elizabeth, he accepted of her succors, and trusted that he might easily, under
some pretense, be able to excuse his failure in the execution of his part of
the treaty. This campaign was the least successful to Henry of all those which
he had yet carried on against the League:

Naval enterprises against Spain.
DURING these military operations in France, Elizabeth employed her naval power
against Spain, and endeavored to intercept the West-Indian treasures, the
source of that greatness which rendered Philip so formidable to all his
neighbors. She sent a squadron of seven ships, under the command of lord
Thomas Howard, for this service; but the King of Spain, informed of her
purpose, fitted out a navy of fifty-five sail, and dispatched them to escort
the Indian fleet. They fell in with the English squadron; and by the courageous
obstinacy of Sir Richard Greenville, the vice admiral, who refused to make sail
with the rest of the squadron, they took one ship, the first English man of war
which had yet fallen into the hands of the Spaniards This action of Sir Richard
Greenville is so singular, as to merit a more particular relation. He was
engaged alone with the whole Spanish fleet of fifty-three sail, which had ten
thousand men on board; and from th time the fight begun, which was about three
in the afternoon, to the break of day next morning, he repulsed the enemy
fifteen times, though they continually shifted their vessels, and boarded with
fresh men. In the beginning of the action he himself received a wound; but he
continued doing his duty above deck till eleven at night, when receiving a
fresh wound, he was carried down to be dressed. During this operation he
received a shot in the head, and the surgeon was killed by his side. The
English began now to want powder; all their small arms were broke or become
useless; of their number, which were but a hundred and three at first, forty
were killed, and almost all the rest wounded; their masts were beat overboard,
their tackle cut in pieces, and nothing but a hulk left, unable to move one way
or other. In this situation Sir Richard proposed to the ship's company, to
trust to the mercy of God, not to that of the Spaniards, and to destroy the
ship with themselves, ^ather than yield to the enemy. The master gunner, and
many of the seamen, agreed to this desperate resolution; but others opposed it,
and obliged Greenville to surrender himself prisoner. He died a few days after;
and his last words were* "Here die I, Richard Greenville, with a joyful and
quiet mind; for that I have ended my life as a true soldier ought to do,
fighting for his country, Queen, religion, and honor: My soul willingly
departing from this body, leaving behind the lasting fame of having behaved as
every valiant soldier is in duty bound to do." The Spaniards lost in this sharp
though unequal action, sour ships, and about a thousand men. And Greenville's
vessel herself perished soon after, with two hundred Spaniards in her.
Hackluyt's Voyages, vol. II. part 2. p. 169* Camden, p. 565.
. The rest of the squadron returned safely into England, frustrated of their
expectations, but pleasing themselves with the idea that their attempt had not
been altogether fruitless in hurting the enemy. The Indian fleet had been so
long detained in the Havanna, from the fear of the English, that they were
obliged at last to set sail in an improper season, and most of them perished by
shipwreck ere they reached the Spanish harbors Monson, p. 163.
. The earl of Cumberland made a like unsuccessful enterprise against the
Spanish trade. He carried out one ship of the Queen's, and seven others,
equipped at his own expense; but the prizes which he made, did not compensate
him for the charge Ibid. p. 169.
.

THE spirit of these expensive and hazardous adventures was very prevalent in
England. Sir Walter Raleigh, who had enjoyed great favor with the Queen,
finding his interest to decline, resolved to recover her good graces by some
important undertaking; and as his reputation was high in England, he persuaded
great numbers to engage with him as volunteers, in an attempt on the
West Indies. The fleet was detained so long in the Channel, by contrary winds,
that the season was lost: Raleigh was recalled by the Queen: Sir Martin
Forbisher succeeded to the command, and made a privateering voyage against the
Spaniards. He took a rich Carrack near the island of Flores, and destroyed
another Ibid. p. 165. Camden, p. 569.
. About the same time, Thomas White, a Londoner, took two Spanish ships, which,
besides fourteen hundred chests of quicksilver, contained above two millions of
bulls for indulgences; a commodity useless to the English, but which had cost
the King of Spain three hundred thousand florins, and would have been sold by
him in the Indies for five millions.

Strype, vol III.
; a charge which, notwithstanding her extreme frugality, was too burdensome
for her narrow revenues to bear. 19 February.
A Parliament
She summoned, therefore, a Parliament, in order to obtain supply: But she
either thought her authority so established, that she needed to make them no
concessions in return, or she rated her power and prerogative above money: For
there was never any Parliament whom she treated in so haughty a manner, whom
she made more sensible of their own weakness, or whose privileges she more
undervalued. When the speaker, Sir Edward Coke, made the three usual demands,
of freedom from arrests, of access to her person, and of liberty of speech; she
replied to him, by the mouth of Puckering, lord keeper, that liberty of speech
was granted the commons, but they must know what liberty they were entitled to;
not a liberty for every one to speak what he lists, or what comes in his
brain to utter; their privilege extended no farther than a liberty of Aye or
No: That she enjoined the speaker, if he perceived any idle heads so negligent
of their own safety, as to attempt reforming the church, or innovating in the
commonwealth, that he should refuse any bills exhibited to that purpose, till
they were examined by such as were fitter to consider of these things, and
could better judge of them: That she would not impeach the freedom of their
persons; but they must beware, lest, under color of this privilege, they
imagined, that any neglect of their duty could be covered or protected: And
that she would not refuse them access to her person; provided it was upon
urgent and weighty causes, and at times convenient, and when she might have
leisure from other important causes of the realm D'Ewes, p. 460, 469. Townsend,
p. 37.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING the menacing and contemptuous air of this speech, the intrepid
and indefatigable Peter Wentworth, not discouraged by his former ill success,
ventured to transgress the imperial orders of Elizabeth. He presented to the
lord keeper a petition, in which he desired the upper house to join the lower
in a supplication to her majesty, for entailing the succession of the crown;
and declared, that he had a bill ready prepared for that purpose. This method
of proceeding was sufficiently respectful and cautious; but the subject was
always extremely disagreeable to the Queen, and what she had expressly
prohibited any one to meddle with: She sent Wentworth immediately to the Tower;
committed Sir Thomas Bromley, who had seconded him, to the Fleet prison,
together with Stevens, and Welsh, two members, to whom Sir Thomas had
communicated his intention D'Ewes, p 470. Townsend* p. 5^.
About a fortnight after, a motion was made in the house, to petition the
Queen, for the release of these members; but it was answered by all the privy
counselors there present, that her majesty had committed them for causes best
known to herself, and that to press her on that head would only tend to the
prejudice of the gentlemen whom they meant to serve: She would release them
whenever she thought proper, and would be better pleased to do it of her own
proper motion, than from their suggestion D'Ewes, p. 497.
. The house willingly acquiesced in this reasoning.

SO arbitrary an act, at the commencement of the session, might well repress
all farther attempts for freedom: But the religious zeal of the puritans was
not so easily restrained; and it inspired a courage which no human motive was
able to surmount. Morris, attorney of the court of wards, made a motion for
redressing the abuses in the bishops' courts, but above all, in the high
commission; where subscriptions, he said, were exacted to articles at the
pleasure of the prelates; where oaths were imposed, obliging persons to answer
to all questions without distinction, even though they should tend to their own
condemnation; and where every one who refused entire satisfaction to the
commissioners, was imprisoned, without relief or remedy (...) p. 474. Townsend,
p. 60.
. This motion was seconded by some members; but the ministers and privy
counselors opposed it; and foretold the consequences which ensued. The Queen
sent for the speaker; and after requiring him to deliver Morrice's bill to her,
she told him, that it was in her power to call Parliaments, in her power to
dissolve them, in her power to give assent or dissent to any determination
which they should form: That her purpose in summoning thy* Parliament was
twofold, to have laws enacted for the farther enforcement of uniformity in
religion, and to provide for the defense of the nation, against the exorbitant
power of Spain: That these two points ought, therefore, to be the object of
their deliberation: She had enjoin d them already, by the mouth of the lord
keeper, to meddle neither with matters of state nor of religion; and she
wondered how any one could be so assuming, as to attempt a subject so expressly
contrary to her prohibition: That she was highly offended with this
presumption; and took the present opportunity to reiterate the commands given
by the keeper, and to require, that to bill, regarding other state (...), or
reformation in causes ecclesiastical, be exhibited in the house: And that in
particular she charged the speaker upon his allegiance, that if any such bills
were offered, ab olutely to refuse them a r a^ing, and not so much as per^^^
them to be debated by the members D'Ewes, p. 474, 478. Townsend, p. 62.
. This command from the Queen was submitted to, without farther question.
Morris was seized in the house by a sergeant at arms, discharged from his
office of chancellor of the duchy, disabled from any practice in his
profession as a common lawyer, and kept for some years prisoner in Tilbury
castle Heylin's History of the Presbyterians, p. 320.
.

THE Queen having thus expressly pointed out, both what the house should and
should not do, the commons were as obsequious to the one as to the other of her
injunctions. They passed a very severe law against recusants; such a law as was
suited to the persecuting spirit of Elizabeth, and of that age. It was
entitled, An act to retain her majesty's subjects in their due obedience; and
was meant, as the preamble declares, to obviate such inconveniences and perils
as might grow from the wicked practices of seditious sectaries and disloyal
persons: For these two species of criminals were always, at that time,
confounded together, as equally dangerous to the peace of society. It was
enacted, that any person, above sixteen years of age, who obstinately refused,
during the space of a month, to attend the public worship, should be committed
to prison; that, if after being condemned for this offense, he persist three
months in his refusal, he must abjure the realm; and that if he either refuse
this condition, or return after banishment, he is to suffer capitally as a
felon, without benefit of clergy 35 Eliz. c. 1.
. This law bore equally hard upon the puritans as upon the catholics; and had
it not been imposed by the Queen's authority, was probably, in that respect,
very much contrary to the private sentiments and inclinations of the majority
in the house of commons. Very little opposition, however, appears there to have
been openly made to it After enacting this statute, the clergy, in order to
remove the odium from themselves, often took care that recusants should be
tried by the civil judges at the assizes, rather than by the ecclesiastical
commissioners. Strype's Ann. vol. IV. p. 2^4.
.

THE expenses of the war with Spain having reduced the Queen to great necessity
of a supply, the grant of subsidies seems to have been the most important
business of this Parliament; and it was a singular mark of the high spirit of
Elibeth, that, while conscious of a present dependence on the commons, she
opened the session with the most haughty treatment of them, and covered her
weakness under such a lofty appearance of superiority. The commons readily
voted two subsidies and four fifteenths; but this sum not appearing sufficient
to the court, a very unusual expedient was fallen upon to induce them to make
an enlargement in their concession. The peers informed the commons in a
conference, that they could not give their assent to the supply voted, thinking
it too small for the Queen's occasions: They therefore proposed a grant of
three subsidies and six fifteenths, and desired a conference, in order to
persuade the commons to agree to this measure. The commons, who had acquired
the privilege of beginning all bills of subsidy, took offense at this procedure
of the lords, and at first absolutely rejected the conference: But being
afraid, on reflection, that they had, by this refusal, given offense to their
superiors, they both agreed to the conference, and afterward voted the
additional subsidy D'Ewes, p. 18^, 487, 4^8. Townsend, p. 66*
.

THE Queen, notwithstanding this unusual concession of the commons, ended the
session with a speech, containing some reprimands to them, and full of the same
high pretensions, which she had assumed at the opening of the Parliament. She
took notice, by the mouth of the keeper, that some members spent more time than
was requisite, by indulging themselves in harangues and reasonings: And she
expressed her displeasure on account of their not paying the due reverence to
privy counselors, "who," she told them, "were not to be accounted as common
knights and burgesses of the house, who are counselors but during the
Parliament: Whereas, the others are standing counselors, and for their wisdom
and great service are called to the council of the state D'Dwes, p. (...)
Townsend, p. (...).
." The Queen also, in her own person, made the Parliament a spirited harangue;
in which she spoke of the justice and moderation of her government, expressed
the small ambition she had ever entertained of making conquests, displayed the
just grounds of her quarrel with the King of Spain, and discovered how little
she apprehended the power of that monarch, even though he should make a greater
effort than that of his Invincible Armada. "But I am informed," added she,
"that when he attempted this last invasion, some upon the seacoasts forsook
their towns, sled up higher into the country, and left all naked and exposed to
his entrance But I swear unto you, by God, if I knew those persons, or may know
of any that shall do so hereafter, I will make them feel what it is to be so
fearful in so urgent a cause D Ewes, p. 466. Townsend, p. 4^.
." By this menace, she probably gave the people to understand that she would
exercise martial law upon such cowards: For there was no statute by which a man
could be punished for changing his habitation.

THE King of France, though he had hitherto made war on the league with great
bravery and reputation, though he had this campaign gained considerable
advantages over them, and though he was assisted by a considerable body of
English under Norris, who carried hostilities into the heart of Britanny; was
become sensible, that he never could, by force of arms alone, render himself
master of his kingdom. The nearer his military successes seemed to approach him
to a full possession of the throne, the more discontent and jealousy arose
among those Romanists who adhered to him; and a party was formed in his own
court to elect some catholic monarch of the royal blood, if he refused any
longer to satisfy them by declaring his conversion. This excellent prince was
far from being a bigot to his sect; and as he esteemed these theological
disputes to be entirely subordinate to the public good, he had tacitly
determined, from the beginning, to come, some time or other, to the resolution
required of him. He had found, on the death of his predecessor, that the
hugonots, who formed the bravest and most faithful part of his army, were such
determined zealots, that, if he had, at that time, abjured their faith, they
would instantly have abandoned him to the pretensions and usurpations of the
catholics. The more bigoted catholics, he knew, particularly those of the
League, had entertained such an unsurmountable prejudice against his person,
and diffidence of his sincerity, that even his conversion would not reconcile
them to his title; and he must either expect to be entirely excluded the
throne, or to be admitted to it on such terms as would leave him little more
than the mere shadow of royalty. In this delicate situation he had resolved to
temporize; to retain the hugonots by continuing the profession of their
religion; to gain the moderate catholics by giving them hopes of his
conversion; to attach both to his person by conduct and success; and he hoped,
either that the animosity of war against the League would make them drop
gradually the question of religion, or that he might, in time, after some
victories over his enemies and some conferences with divines, make finally,
with more decency and dignity, that abjuration, which must have appeared, at
first, both mean and suspicious to both parties.

Henry IV. embraces the catholic religion.
WHEN the people are attached to any theological tenets, merely from a general
persuasion or prepossession, they are easily induced, by any motive or
authority, to change their faith in these mysterious subjects; as appears from
the example of the English, who, during some reigns, generally embraced,
without scruple, the still varying religion of their sovereigns. But a nation,
like the French, where principles had so long been displayed as the badges of
faction, and where each party had fortified its belief by an animosity against
the other, were not found so pliable or inconstant; and Henry was at last
convinced, that the catholics of his party would entirely abandon him, if he
gave them not immediate satisfaction in this particular. The hugonots also,
taught by experience, clearly saw, that his desertion of them was become
entirely necessary for the public settlement; and so general was this
persuasion among them, that, the duke of Sully pretends, even the divines of
that party purposely allowed themselves to be overcome in the disputes and
conferences; that the King might more readily be convinced of the weakness of
their cause, and might more cordially and sincerely, at least more decently,
embrace the religion, which it was so much his interest to believe. If this
self-denial, in so tender a point, should appear incredible and supernatural in
theologians, it will, at least, be thought very natural, that a prince, so
little instructed in these points as Henry, and so desirous to preserve his
sincerity, should insensibly bend his opinion to the necessity of his affairs,
and should believe that party to have the best arguments, who could alone put
him in possession of a kingdom. All circumstances, therefore, being prepared
for this great event, that monarch renounced the protestant religion, and was
solemnly received by the French prelates of his party, into the bosom of the
church.

ELIZABETH, who was, herself, chiefly attached to the protestants, by her
interests and the circumstances of her birth, and who seems to have entertained
some propensity, during her whole life, to the catholic superstition, at least,
to the ancient ceremonies, yet pretended to be extremely displeased with this
abjuration of Henry, and she wrote him a very angry letter, reproaching him
with this interested change of his religion. Sensible, however, that the League
and the King of Spain were still their common enemies, she hearkened to his
apologies; continued her succors both of men and money; and formed a new
league, in which they mutually stipulated never to make peace but by common
agreement.

Scotch affairs.
THE intrigues of Spain were not limited to France and England: The never
failing pretense of religion, joined to the influence of money, excited new
disorders in Scotland, and gave fresh alarms to Elizabeth. George Ker, brother
to the lord Newbottle, had been taken, while he was making his passage secretly
into Spain; and some papers were found about him, by which a dangerous
conspiracy of some catholic noblemen with Philip was discovered. The earls of
Angus, Errol, and Huntley, the heads of three potent families, had entered into
a confederacy with the Spanish monarch; and had stipulated to raise all their
forces, to join with thirty thousand Spanish troops, which Philip engaged to
send into Scotland; and after re-establishing the catholic religion in that
kingdom, to march with their united power, in order to effectuate the same
purpose in England Spotswood, p. 391. Rymer, tom. XVI p. 19^
. Graham of Fintry, who had also entered into this conspiracy, was taken and
arraigned, and executed. Elizabeth sent lord Borough ambassador into Scotland,
and exhorted the King to exercise the same severity on the three earls, to
forfeit their estates, and by annexing them to the crown, both increase his own
demesns, and set an example to all his subjects of the dangers attending
treason and rebellion. This advice was certainly very rational, but not easy to
be executed by the small revenue and limited authority of James. He desired,
therefore, some supply from her of men and money; but though she had reason to
esteem the prosecution of the three popish earls a common cause, he never could
obtain the least assistance from her. The tenth part of the expense, which she
bestowed in supporting the French King and the States, would have sufficed to
execute this purpose, more immediately essential to her security Spotswood, p.
^93. Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 235.
: But she seems ever to have borne some degree of malignity to James, whom she
hated, both as her heir, and as the son of Mary, her hated rival and
competitor. So far from giving him assistance to prosecute the catholic
conspirators, she rather contributed to his inquietude, by countenancing the
turbulent disposition of the earl of Bothwel Ibid. p. 257, 258.
, a nobleman descended from a natural son of James the fifth. Bothwel more than
once attempted to render himself master of the King's person; and being
expelled the kingdom for these traitorous designs, he took shelter in England,
was secretly protected by the Queen, and lurked near the borders, where his
power lay, with a view of still enterprizing some new violence. He succeeded at
last in an attempt on the King; and by the mediation of the English ambassador,
imposed very dishonorable terms upon that prince: But James, with the
authority of the convention of states, annulled this agreement as imposed by
violence; again expelled Bothwel the country; and obliged him to take shelter
in England. Elizabeth, pretending ignorance of the place of his retreat, never
executed the treaties, by which she was obliged to deliver up all rebels and
fugitives to the King of Scotland. During these disorders, increased by the
refractory disposition of the ecclesiastics, the prosecution of the catholic
earls remained in suspense;

THE established authority of the Queen secured her from all such attempts as
James was exposed to from the mutinous disposition of his subjects; and her
enemies found no other means of giving her any domestic disturbance than by
such traitorous and perfidious machinations, as ended in their own disgrace,
and in the ruin of their criminal instruments. Roderigo Lopez, a Jew, domestic
physician to the Queen, being imprisoned on suspicion, confessed, that he had
received a bribe to poison her from Fuentes and Ibarra, who had succeeded
Parma, lately deceased, in the government of the Netherlands; but he
maintained, that he had no other intention than to cheat Philip of his money,
and never meant to fulfill his promise. He was, however, executed for the
conspiracy; and the Queen complained to Philip of these dishonorable attempts
of his ministers, but could obtain no satisfaction Camden. p 577. Birch's Negot
p. 15. Bacon, vol. IV. p. 381.
. York and Williams, two English traitors, were afterward executed for a like
conspiracy with Ibarra Camden, p. 58^.
.

INSTEAD of revenging herself, by retaliating in this shameful manner,
Elizabeth sought a more honorable vengeance, by supporting the King of France,
and assisting him in finally breaking the force of the League, which, after the
conversion of that monarch, went daily to decay, and was threatened with speedy
ruin and dissolution. Norris commanded the English forces in Britanny, and
assisted at the taking of Morlaix, Quimpercorentin, and Breast, towns guarded by
Spanish forces in that province. In every action, the English, though they had so
long enjoyed domestic peace, discovered a strong military disposition; and the
Queen, though herself a heroine, found more frequent occasion to reprove her
generals for encouraging their temerity, than for countenancing their fear or
caution Ibid. p. 5^8.
. Sir Martin Forbisher, her brave admiral, perished with many others, before
Breast. Morlaix had been promised the English for a place of retreat; but the
duke d'Aumont, the French general, eluded this promise by making it be inserted
in the capitulation, that none but catholics should be admitted into that city.

she began to be more sparing in his cause, of the blood and treasure of her
subjects.

SOME disgusts, which she had received from the states, joined to the
remonstrances of her frugal minister, Burleigh, made her also inclined to
diminish her charges on that side; and she even demanded, by her ambassador,
Sir Thomas Bodley, to be reimbursed of all the money, which she had expended in
supporting them. The states, besides alleging the conditions of the former
treaty, by which they were not obliged to repay her, till the conclusion of a
peace, pleaded their present poverty and distress, the great superiority of the
Spaniards, and the difficulty of supporting the war; much more, of saving money
to discharge their encumbrances. After much negotiation, a new treaty was at
last formed; by which the states were bound to free the Queen immediately from
the charge of the English auxiliaries, computed at forty thousand pounds a
year, to pay her annually twenty thousand pounds for some years, to assist her
with a certain number of ships, and to conclude no peace nor treaty without her
consent. They also bound themselves, on the conclusion of the peace with Spain,
to pay her annually the sum of an hundred thousand pounds for four years; but
on this condition, that the payment should be in lieu of all debts, and that
they should be supplied, at their own charges, with a body of four thousand
auxiliaries from England Camden, p. 586.
.



undertaken against the common enemy. In the great battle of Turnhoult, gained
this campaign by prince Maurice, the English auxiliaries under Sir Francis Vere
and Sir Robert Sidney had extremely distinguished themselves; and the fortunate
success of that day was universally ascribed to their discipline and valor.

Naval enterprises.
THOUGH Elizabeth, at a great expense of blood and treasure, made war against
Philip in France and the Low Countries, the most severe blows, which she gave
the Spanish greatness, were owing to those naval enterprises, which either she
or her subjects scarce ever intermitted during one season. In 1594, Richard
Hawkins, son to Sir John, the famous navigator, procured the Queen's
commission, and sailed with three ships to the South Sea by the straits of
Magellan: But his voyage proved unfortunate, and he himself was taken prisoner
on the coast of Chili. James Lancaster was fitted out the same year with three
ships and a pinnace by the merchants of London; and was more fortunate in his
adventures. He took thirty-nine ships of the enemy; and not contented with this
success, he made an attempt on Fernambouc in Brazil, where, he knew, great
treasures were at that time lodged. As he approached the land, he saw it lined
with great numbers of the enemy; but no-wise daunted with this appearance, he
placed the stoutest of his men in boats, and ordered them to row with such
violence against the shore as to split them in pieces. By this bold action, he
both deprived his men of all hopes of returning but by victory, and terrified
the enemy, who fled after a short resistance. He returned home safely with the
treasure, which he had so bravely acquired. In 1595, Sir Walter Raleigh, who
had anew forfeited the Queen's friendship by an intrigue with one of the maids
of honor, and who had been confined in prison for this misdemeanor, no sooner
recovered his liberty than he was pushed by his active and enterprizing genius
to attempt some great action. The success of the first Spanish adventurers
against Mexico and Peru had begot an extreme avidity in Europe; and a
prepossession universally took place, that in the inland parts of South
America, called Guiana, a country as yet undiscovered, there were mines and
treasures and riches far beyond any thing which Cortes or Pizarro had yet met
with. Raleigh, whose turn of mind was somewhat romantic and extravagant,
undertook at his own charge the discovery of this wonderful country. Having
taken the small tower of St. Joseph in the isle of Trinidado, where he found no
riches, he left his ship, and sailed up the river Oroonoko in pinnaces, but
without meeting with any thing to answer his expectations. On his return, he
published an account of this country, full of the greatest and most palpable
lies, that were ever attempted to be imposed on the credulity of mankind
Camden, p. 584.
.

Monson, p. 167.
.

THE bad success of this enterprise in the Indies made the English rather
attempt the Spanish dominions in Europe, where, they heard, Philip was making
great preparations for a new invasion of England. A powerful fleet was equipped
at Plymouth consisting of an hundred and seventy vessels, seventeen of which
were capital ships of war; the rest tenders and small vessels: Twenty ships
were added by the Hollanders. In this fleet there were computed to be six
thousand three hundred and sixty soldiers, a thousand volunteers, and six
thousand seven hundred and seventy-two seamen, beside the Dutch. The land
forces were commanded by the earl of Essex. The navy by lord Effingham, high
admiral. Both these commanders had expended great sums of their own in this
armament: For such was the spirit of Elizabeth's reign. The lord Thomas Howard,
Sir Camden, p. 591.
.

THE fleet set sail on the first of June 1596; and meeting with a fair wind,
bent their course to Cadiz, at which place, by sealed orders delivered to all
the captains, the general rendesvous was appointed. They sent before them some
armed tenders, which intercepted every ship, that could carry intelligence to
the enemy; and they themselves were so fortunate when they came near Cadiz, as
to take an Irish vessel, by which they learned, that that port was full of
merchant ships of great value, and that the Spaniards lived in perfect
security, without any apprehensions of an enemy. This intelligence much
encouraged the English fleet, and gave them the prospect of a fortunate issue
to the enterprise.

AFTER a fruitless attempt to land at St. Sebastians on the western side of the
island of Cadiz; it was, upon deliberation, resolved by the council of war to
attack the ships and galleys in the bay. This attempt was esteemed very rash;
and the lord admiral himself, who was cautious in his temper, had entertained
great scruples with regard to it: But Essex strenuously urged the enterprise;
and when he found the resolution at last taken, he threw his hat into the sea,
and gave symp'oms of the most extravagant joy. He felt, however, a great
mortification, when Effingham informed him, that the Queen, who was anxious for
his safety, and who dreaded the effects of his youthful ardour, had secretly
given orders, that he should not be permitted to command the van in the attack
Monson, p. 196.
. That duty was performed by Sir Walter Raleigh and the lord Thomas Howard; but
Essex no sooner came within reach of the enemy, than he forgot the promise
which the admiral had exacted of him to keep in the midst of the fleet: He
broke through and pressed forward into the thickest of the fire. Emulation for
glory, avidity of plunder, animosity against the Spaniards, proved incentives
to every one; and the enemy were soon obliged to loose anchor, and retreat
farther into the bay, where they ran many of their ships aground. Essex then
landed his men at the fort of Puntal; and immediately marched to the attack of
Cadiz, which the impetuous valor of the English soon carried sword in hand.
The generosity of Essex, which was not inferior to his valor, made him soon
stop the slaughter, and treat his prisoners with the greatest humani y, and
even assability and kindness. The English made a rich plunder in the (...) but
missed of a much richer by the resolution, which the duke of M^^ina, the
Spanish admiral took, of setting fire to the ships, in order to prevent their
(...) into the hands of the enemy. It was computed, that the loss, which the
Spaniards suffered in this enterprise, amounted to twenty millions of ducats
Birch's Memoirs, vol II p. 97.
; besides the indignity, which that proud and ambitious people received, from
the taking one of their chief cities, and destroying in their harbor a fleet
of such force and value.

ESSEX, all on fire for glory, regarded this great success only as a step to
future achievements: He insisted on the keeping possession of Cadiz, and he
undertook with four hundred men and three months provisions, to defend the
place till succors should arrive from England. But all the other seamen and
soldiers were satisfied with the glory which they had acquired; and were
impatient to return home, in order to secure their plunder. Every other
proposal of Essex to annoy the enemy, met with a like reception; his scheme for
intercepting the carracks at the Azores, for assaulting the Groyne, for taking
St. Andero, and St. Sebastian: And the English, finding so great difficulty to
drag this impatient warrior from the enemy, at last left him on the Spanish
coast, attended with very few ships. He complained much to the Queen, of their
want of spirit in this enterprise; nor was she satisfied, that they had
returned without attempting to intercept the Indian fleet Ibid. p. 121.
; but the great success in the enterprise on Cadiz, had covered all their
miscarriages: And that princess, though she admired the lofty genius of Essex,
could not forbear expressing an esteem for the other officers Camden, p. 593.
. The admiral was created earl of Nottingham; and this promotion gave great
disgust to Essex Sydney Papers, vol. II. p. 77.
. In the preamble of the patent it was said, that the new dignity was conferred
on him, on account of his good services in taking Cadiz, and destroying the
Spanish ships; a merit which Essex pretended to belong solely to himself: And
he offered to maintain this plea by single combat against the earl of
Nottingham, or his sons, or any of his kindred.

THE achievements in the subsequent year proved not so fortunate; but, as the
Indian fleet very narrowly escaped the English, Philip had still reason to see
the great hazard and disadvantage of that war in which he was engaged, and the
superiority which the English, by their naval power, and their situation, had
acquired over him. The Queen, having received intelligence, that the Spaniards,
though their fleets were so much shattered and destroyed, by the expedition at
Cadiz, were preparing a squadron at Ferrol and the Groyne, and were marching
troops thither, with a view of making an invasion on Ireland, was resolved to
prevent their enterprise, and to destroy the shipping in these harbors. She
prepared a large fleet of a hundred and twenty sail, of which seventeen were
her own ships, forty-three were smaller vessels, and the rest tenders and
victuallers: She embarked on board this fleet five thousand new-levied
soldiers, and added a thousand veteran troops, whom Sir Francis Vere brought
from the Netherlands. The earl of Essex, commander in chief, both of the land
and sea forces, was at the head of one squadron: Lord Thomas Howard was
appointed vice admiral of another; Sir Walter Raleigh of the third: Lord
Mountjoy commanded the land forces under Essex: Vere was appointed marshal: Sir
George Carew lieutenant of the ordnance, and Sir Christopher Blount first
colonel. The earls of Rutland and Southampton, the lords Gray, Cromwell, and
Rich, with several other persons of distinction, attended as volunteers. Essex
declared his resolution, either to destroy this new Armada, which threatened
England, or to perish in the attempt.

9th July.
THIS powerful fleet set sail from Plymouth; but were no sooner out of the
harbor than they met with a furious storm, which shattered and dispersed them;
and before they could be refitted, Essex found, that their provisions were so
far spent, that it would not be safe to carry so numerous an army along with
him. He dismissed, therefore, all the soldiers, except the thousand veterans
under Vere; and laying aside all thoughts of attacking Ferrol or the Groyne, he
confined the object of his expedition to the intercepting the Indian fleet;
which had at first been considered only as the second enterprise which he was
to attempt.

THE Indian fleet, at that time, by reason of the imperfection of navigation,
had a stated course, as well as season, both in their going out and in their
return; and there were certain islands, at which, as at fixed stages, they
always touched, and where they took in water and provisions. The Azores, being
one of these places where, about this time, the fleet was expected, Essex bent
his course thither; and he informed Raleigh, that he, on his arrival, intended
to attack Fayal, one of these islands. By some accident the squadrons were
separated; and Raleigh arriving first before Fayal, thought it more prudent,
after waiting some time for the general, to begin the attack alone, lest the
inhabitants should, by farther delay, have leizure to make greater preparations
for their desence. He succeeded in the enterprise; but Essex, jealous of
Raleigh, expressed great displeasure at this conduct, and construed it as an
intention of robbing the general of the glory which attended that action: He
cashiered, therefore, Sydney, Bret, Berry, and others, who had concuried in the
attempt; and would have proceeded to the same extremity against Raleigh
himself, had not lord Thomas Howard interposed with his good offices, and
persuaded Raleigh, though very high-spirited, to make submissions to the general.
Essex, who was placable, as well as hasty and passionate, was soon appeased,
and both received Raleigh into favor, and restored the other officers to their
command Monson, p. 173.
. This incident, however, though the quarrel was seemingly accommodated, laid the
first foundation of that violent animosity which afterward took place between
these two gallant commanders.

ESSEX made next a disposition proper for intercepting the Indian galleons; and
Sir William Monson, whose station was the most remote of the fleet, having
fallen in with them, made the signals which had been agreed on. That able
officer here ascribes Essex's failure of success, when he was so near attaining
so mighty an advantage, to his want of experience in seamanship; and the
account which he gives of the errors committed by that nobleman, appears very
reasonable as well as candid Ibid. p. 174.
. The Spanish fleet, finding that their enemy was upon them, made all the sail
possible to the Terceras, and got into the safe and well fortified harbor of
Angra, before the English fleet could overtake them. Essex intercepted only
three ships; which, however, were so rich as to pay all the charges of the
expedition.

THE causes of this miscarriage of Essex's enterprise, were much canvassed in
England, upon the return of the fleet; and though the courtiers took party
differently, as they affected either Essex or Raleigh, the people, in general,
who bore an extreme affection to the gallantry, spirit, and generosity of the
former, were inclined to justify every circumstance of his conduct. The Queen,
who loved the one as much as she esteemed the other, maintained a kind of
neutrality, and endeavored to share her favors with an impartial hand between
the parties. Sir Robert Cecil, second son to lord Burleigh, was a courtier of
very promising hopes, much connected with Raleigh; and she made him secretary
of state, instead of Sir Thomas Bodley, whom Essex recommended for that office.
But not to disgust Essex by this preference, she promoted him to the dignity of
earl marshal of England, an office which had been vacant ever since the death
of the earl of Shrewsbury. Essex might perceive from this conduct, that she
never intended to give him the entire ascendant over his rivals, and might
learn thence the necessity of moderation and caution. But his temper was too
high for submission; his behavior too open and candid to practice the arts of
a court; and his free sallies, while they rendered him only more amiable in the
eyes of good judges, gave his enemies many advantages against him.

24th October.
THE war with Spain, though successful, having exhausted the Queen's treasure,
she was obliged to assemble a Parliament; where Yelverton, a lawyer, was chosen
speaker by the house of commons It is usual for the speaker to disqualify
himself for the office; but the reasons employed by this speaker are so
singular, that they may be worth transcribing. "My estate," said he, "is
nothing correspondent for the maintenance of this dignity: For my father dying
left me a y^^^ (...) brother; and nothing to me but my bare annuity. Then
growing to man's estate and some in all practice of the law, I took a wife, by
whom I have had many children; the keeping of as all being a great
impoverishing to my estate, and the daily living of us all nothing but my daily
industry. Neither from my person nor my nature does this choice arise: For he
that supplieth this place ought to be a man big and comely, stately, and
well-spoken, his voice great, his ca^^iage (...), his nature haughty, and his
purse plentiful and heavy: But (...), the st^t^e of my body is small, myself
not so well spoken, my voice low, my ca^riage lawyer hi^, a^^ of the common
fashion, my nature soft and bashful, my purse, thin, light, and never yet
plentiful -- ^f ^m^sthenes, being so learned and eloquent as he was, one whom
none surpassed, tr^^bled to speak before Phocion at Athens; how much more shall
I, being unlearned and (...) to supply the place of dignity, charge, and
trouble, to speak before so many P^^^^ons a, here be? Yea, which is the
greatest, before the unspeakable majesty and sacred personage of our dread and
(...) The terror of whose countenance will appal and abase even the ^^outest
hearts; yea, whole very name will pull down the greatest courage. For how
mightily do the estate and name of a prince deject the haughtiest stomach even
of their greatest subjects^" D'Ewes, p. 549.
. Elizabeth took care, by the mouth of Sir Thomas Egerton, lord keeper, to
inform this assembly of the necessity of a supply. She said, that the wars
formerly waged in Europe, had commonly been conducted by the parties without
farther view than to gain a few towns, or at most a province, from each other;
but the object of the present hostilities, on the part of Spain, was no other
than utterly to bereave England of her religion, her liberty, and her
independance: That these blessings, however, she had hitherto been enabled to
preserve, in spite of the devil, the pope, and the Spanish tyrant, and all the
mischievous designs of all her enemies: That in this contest she had disbursed
a sum treble to all the parliamentary supplies granted her; and besides
expending her ordinary revenues, had been obliged to sell many of the crown
lands: And that she could not doubt, but her subjects, in a cause where their
own honor and interest were so deeply concerned, would willingly contribute to
such moderate taxations as would be found requisite for their common defense
D'Ewes, p. 525, 527. Townsend, p. 79.
. The commons granted her three subsidies and six fifteenths; the same supply
which had been given four years before, but which had then appeared so unusual,
that they had voted it should never afterward be regarded as a precedent.

THE commons, this session, ventured to engage in two controversies about forms
with the house of peers; a prelude to those encroachments which, as they
assumed more courage, they afterward made upon the prerogatives of the crown.
They complained, that the lords failed in civility to them, by receiving their
messages sitting with their hats on; and that the keeper returned an answer in
the same negligent posture: But the upper house proved, to their full
satisfaction, that they were not entitled by custom, and the usage of
Parliament, to any more respect D'Ewes, p. 539, 540, 580, 585. Townsend, p 93,
94, 95.
. Some amendments had been made by the lords, on a bill sent up by the commons;
and these amendments were wrote on parchment, and returned with the bill to the
commons. The lower house took umbrage at the novelty: They pretended, that
these amendments ought to have been wrote on paper, not on parchment; and they
complained of this innovation to the peers. The peers replied, that they
expected not such a frivolous objection from the gravity of the house; and that
it was not material, whether the amendments were wrote on parchment or on
paper, nor whether the paper was white, black, or brown. The commons were
offended with this reply, which seemed to contain a mocquery of them; and they
complained of it, though without obtaining any satisfaction D'Ewes, p. 576, 577.
.

AN application was made, by way of petition, to the Queen, from the lower
house, against monopolies; an abuse which had risen to an enormous height; and
they received a gracious, though a general answer; for which they returned their
thankful acknowlegements Ibid. p. 570, 573.
. But not to give them too great encouragement in such applications, she told
them, in the speech which she delivered at their dissolution, "That with regard
to these patents, she hoped, that her dutiful and loving subjects would not
take away her prerogative, which is the chief flower in her garden, and the
principal and head pearl in her crown and diadem; but that they would rather
leave these matters to her disposal Ibid. p. 547.
." The commons also took notice this session, of some transactions in the court
of high commission; but not till they had previously received permission from
her majesty to that purpose Ibid. p. 557, 558.
.

had been amidst war and danger, and he had passed the whole course of his life
either in arms or in military preparations: That after the proofs which he had
given of his alacrity in the field, no one could doubt, but he would willingly,
for his part, have continued in a course of life, to which he was now
habituated, till the common enemy was reduced to such a condition as no longer
to give umbrage either to him or to his allies: That no private interest of his
own, not even that of his people, nothing but the most inevitable necessity,
could ever induce him to think of a separate peace with Philip, or make him
embrace measures which were not entirely formed with the approbation of all his
confederates: That his kingdom, torn with the convulsions and civil wars of
near half a century, required some interval of repose, ere it could reach a
condition in which it might sustain itself, much more support its allies: That
after the minds of his subjects were composed to tranquillity and accustomed to
obedience, after his finances were brought into order, and after agriculture
and the arts were restored, France, instead of being a burden, as at present,
to her confederates, would be able to lend them effectual succors, and amply
to repay them all the assistance which she had received during her calamities:
And that if the ambition of Spain would not at present grant them such terms as
they should think reasonable, he hoped, that, in a little time, he should
attain such a situation as would enable him to mediate more effectually, and
with more decisive authority, in their behalf.

THE ambassadors were sensible, that these reasons were not feigned; and they
therefore remonstrated with the less vehemence against the measures which, they
saw, Henry was determined to pursue. The States knew, that that monarch was
interested never to permit their final ruin; and having received private
assurances, that he would still, notwithstanding the peace, give them
assistance, both of men and money, they were well pleased to remain on terms of
amity with him. His greatest concern was to give satisfaction to Elizabeth for
this breach of treaty. He had a cordial esteem for that princess* a sympathy of
manners, and a gratitude for the extradinary favors which he had received from
her, during his greatest difficulties: And he used every expedient to apologize
and atone for that measure, which necessity extorted from him. Peace of Vervins.
But as Spain refused to treat with the Dutch as a free state, and Elizabeth
would not negociate without her ally, Henry found himself obliged to conclude,
at Vervins, a separate peace, by which he recovered possession of all the
places seized by Spain during the course of the civil wars, and procured
himself leizure to attend to the domestic settlement of his kingdom. His
capacity for the arts of peace were not inferior to his military talents; and,
in a little time, by his frugality, order, and wise government, he raised
France, from the desolation and misery in which she was at present involved, to
a more flourishing condition than she had ever before enjoyed.

THE Queen knew, that it would be also in her power, whenever she pleased, to
conclude the war on equitable terms, and that Philip, having no pretensions
upon her, would be glad to free himself from an enemy who had foiled him in
every contest, and who had it still so much in her power to make him feel the
weight of her arms. Some of her wisest counselors, particularly the lord
treasurer, advised her to embrace pacific measures; and set before her the
advantages of tranquillity, security, and frugality, as more considerable than
any success which could attend the greatest victories. But that high-spirited
princess, though she was at first averse to the war, seemed now to have attained
such an ascendant over the enemy, that she was unwilling to stop the course of
her prosperous fortune. She considered, that her situation, and her past
victories, had given her entire security against any dangerous invasion; and
the war must henceforth be conducted by sudden enterprises, and naval
expeditions, in which she possessed an undoubted superiority: That the weak
condition of Philip in the Indies opened to her the view of the most desirable
advantages; and the yearly return of his treasure by sea, afforded a continual
prospect of important, though more temporary, successes: That, after his peace
with France, if she also should consent to an accommodation, he would be able
to turn all his force against the revolted provinces of the Netherlands, which,
though they had surprizingly increased their power by commerce and good
government, were still unable, if not supported by their confederates, to
maintain the war against so mighty a monarchy: And that as her defense of that
commonwealth was the original ground of the quarrel, it was unsafe, as well as
dishonorable, to abandon their cause, till she had placed them in a state of
greater security.

THESE reasons were frequently inculcated on her by the earl of Essex, whose
passion for glory, as well as his military talents, made him earnestly desire
the continuance of that war from which he expected to reap so much advantage
and distinction. The rivalship between this nobleman and lord Burleigh, made
each of them insist the more strenuously on his own councils; The earl of (...).
and as Essex's person was agreeable to the Queen, as well as his advice
conformable to her inclinations, the favorite seemed daily to acquire an
ascendant over the minister. Had he been endowed with caution and self-command,
equal to his shining qualities, he would have so riveted himself in the Queen's
considence, that none of his enemies had ever been able to impeach his credit:
But his lofty spirit could ill submit to that implicit deference which her
temper required, and which she had ever been accustomed to receive from all her
subjects. Being once engaged in a dispute with her, about the choice of a
governor for Ireland, he was so heated in the argument, that he entirely forgot
the rules both of duty and civility; and turned his back upon her in a
contemptuous manner. Her anger, which was naturally prompt and violent, rose at
this provocation; and she instantly gave him a box in the ear; adding a
passionate expression, suited to his impertinence. Instead of recollecting
himself, and making the submissions due to her sex and station, he clapped his
hand on his sword, and swore he would not bear such usage, were it from Henry
the eighth himself; and, in a great passion, he immediately withdrew from
court. Egerton, the chancellor, who loved Essex, exhorted him to repair his
indiscretion by proper acknowlegements; and entreated him not to give that
triumph to his enemies, that affliction to his friends, as must ensue by his
supporting a contest with his sovereign, and deserting the service of his
country: But Essex was deeply stung with the dishonor which he had received;
and seemed to think, that an insult which might be pardoned a woman, was become
a mortal affront when it came from his sovereign. "If the vilest of all
indignities," said he, "is done me, does religion enforce me to sue for pardon?
Does God require it? Is it impiety not to do it? Why? Cannot princes err?
Cannot subjects receive wrong? Is an earthly power infinite? Pardon me, my
lord, I can never subscribe to these principles. Let Solomon's fool laugh when
he is stricken; let those that mean to make their profit of princes, show no
sense of princes' injuries: Let them acknowledge an infinite absoluteness on
earth, that do not believe an absolute Infiniteness in heaven." (alluding,
probably, to the character and conduct of S^r Walter Raleigh, who lay under the
general reproach of impiety) "As for me," continued he, "I have received wrong,
I feel it: My cause is good, I know it; and whatsoever happens, all the powers
on earth can never exert more strength and constancy in oppressing, than I can
show in suffering every thing that can or shall be imposed upon me. Your
lordship, in the beginning of your letter, makes me a player, and yourself a
looker on: And me a player of my own game, so you may see more than I: But give
me leave to tell you, that since you do but see and I do suffer, I must of
necessity feel more than you Cabbala, p. 234. Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 386.
Speed, p. 877. The whole letter is so curious and so spirited, that the reader
may not be displeased to read it. "My very good lord; Though there is not that
man this day living, whom I would sooner make judge of any question that might
concern me than yourself, yet you must give me leave to tell you, that in some
cases I must appeal from all earthly judges: And if in any, then surely in
this, when the highest judge (...) earth has imposed on me the heaviest
punishment without trial or hearing. Since then I must either answer your
lordship's argument, or else forsake mine own just defense. I will force mine
aching head to do me service for an hour. I must first deny my discontent,
which was forced, to be an humourous discontent; and that it was unseasonable
or is of so long continuing, your lordship should rather condole with me than
expostulate: Natural seasons are expected here below; but violent and
unreasonable storms come from above: There is no tempest equal to the
passionate indignation of a prince; nor yet at any time so unseasonable as when
it sighteth on those that might expect a harvest of their careful and painful
labors. He that is once wounded, must needs feel smart, till his hurt is
cured, or the part hurt become senseless: But cure I expect none, her majesty's
heart being obdurate against me; and be without sense I cannot, being of flesh
and blood. But, say you, I may aim at the end: I do more than aim; for I see an
end of all my fortunes, I have set an end to all my desires. In this course do
I any thing for my enemies? When I was at court, I found them absolute; and,
therefore, I had rather they should triumph alone, than have me attendant upon
their chariots. Or do I leave my friends? When I was a courtier, I could yield
them no fruit of my love unto them; and now, that I am a hermit, they shall
bear no envy for their love toward me. Or do I forsake myself, because I do
enjoy myself? Or do I overthrow my fortunes, because I build not a fortune of
paper walls, which every puff of wind blows down? Or do I ruinate mine
honor, because I leave following the pursuit, or wearing the false badge or
mark of the shadow of honor? Do I give courage or comfort to the foreign foe,
because I reserve myself to encounter with him? Or because I keep my heart from
business, though I cannot keep my fortune from declining? No, no, my good lord, I
give every one of these considerations its due weight; and the more I weigh
them, the more I find myself justified from offending in any of them. As for
the two last objections, that I forsake my country, when it has most need of
me, and fail in that indissoluble duty which I owe to my sovereign; I answer,
that if my country had at this time any need of my public service, her majesty,
that governs it, would not have driven me to a private life. I am tied to my
country by two bonds; one public, to discharge carefully and industriously that
trust which is committed to me; the other private, to sacrifice for it my life
and carcass, which has been nourished in it. Of the first I am free, being
dismissed, discharged, and disabled by her majesty: Of the other, nothing can
free me but death; and therefore no occasion of my performance shall sooner
offer itself but I shall meet it half way. The indissoluble duty which I owe
unto her majesty, is only the duty of allegiance, which I never have, nor ever
can fail in: The duty of attendance, is no indissoluble duty. I owe her majesty
the duty of an earl and of lord marshal of England. I have been content to do
her majesty the service of a clerk; but I can never serve her as a villain or a
slave. But yet you say I must give way unto the time. So I do; for now that I
see the storm come, I have put myself into the harbor. Sene^a says, we must
give way to Fortune: I know that Fort^ne is both blind and strong, and
therefore I go as far as I can out of her way You say, the remedy is not to
strive: I neither strive nor seek for remedy. But, you say, I must yield and
submit: I can neither yield myself to be guilty, nor allow the imputation laid
upon me to be just: I owe so much to the Author of all truth, as I can never
yield truth to be falsehood, nor falsehood to be truth. Have I given cause, you
ask; and yet take a scandal when I have done? No: I gave no cause, not so much
as Fimbria's complaint against me; for I did totum telum corpore recipere:
Receive the whole sword into my body. I patiently bear all, and sensibly feel
all that I then received, when this scandal was given me. Nay more, when the
vilest of all indignities are done unto me," etc. This noble letter, Bacon
afterward, in pleading against Essex, called bold and presumptuous, and
derogatory to her majesty. Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 388.
."

THIS spirited letter was shown by Essex to his friends; and they were so
imprudent as to disperse copies of it: Yet notwithstanding this additional
provocation, the Queen's partiality was so prevalent, that she reinstated him
in his former favor; and her kindness toward him, appeared rather to have
acquired new force from that short interruption of anger and resentment. 4
August.
The death of lord Burleigh, his antagonist, which happened about this time,
seemed to ensure him a constant possession of the Queen's confidence; and
nothing indeed but his own indiscretion could thenceforth have shaken his well
established credit. Lord Burleigh died in an advanced age; and, by a rare
fortune, was equally regretted by his sovereign and the people. He had risen
gradually, from small beginnings, by the mere force of merit; and though his
authority was never entirely absolute or uncontrouled with the Queen, he was
still, during a course of near forty years, regarded as her principal minister.
None of her other inclinations or affections could ever overcome her confidence
in so useful a counselor; and as he had had the generosity or good sense to
pay assiduous court to her, during her sister's reign, when it was dangerous to
appear her friend, she thought herself bound in gratitude, when she mounted the
throne, to persevere in her attachments to him. He seems not to have possessed
any shining talents of address, eloquence, or imagination; and was chiefly
distinguished by solidity of understanding, probity of manners, and
indefatigable application in business: Virtues, which, if they do not always
enable a man to rise to high stations, do certainly qualify him best for
filling them. Of all the Queen's ministers he was the only one who left a
considerable fortune to his posterity; a fortune not acquired by rapine or
oppression, but gained by the regular profits of his offices, and preserved by
frugality.

8 August.
THE last act of this able minister was the concluding a new treaty with the
Dutch; who, after being, in some measure, deserted by the King of France, were
glad to preserve the Queen's alliance, by submitting to any terms which she
pleased to require of them. The debt which they owed the Queen, was now fixed
at eight hundred thousand pounds: Of this sum they agreed to pay, during the
war, thirty thousand pounds a year; and these payments were to continue till
four hundred thousand pounds of the debt should be extinguished. They engaged
also, during the time that England should continue the war with Spain, to pay
the garrison of the cautionary towns. They stipulated, that, if Spain should
invade England, or the isle of Wight, or Jersey or Scilly, they should assist
her with a body of five thousand foot, and five hundred horse; and that in case
she undertook any naval armament against Spain, they should join an equal
number of ships to hers Rymer, vol. XVI. p. 340.
. By this treaty the Queen was eased of an annual charge of an hundred and
twenty thousand pounds.

SOON after the death of Burleigh, the Queen, who regreted extremely the loss
of so wise and faithful a minister, was informed of the death of her capital
enemy, Philip the second; who, after languishing under many infirmities,
expired in an advanced age at Madrid. This haughty prince, desirous of an
accommodation with his revolted subjects in the Netherlands, but disdaining to
make in his own name the concessions requisite for that purpose, had
transferred to his daughter, married to the archduke Albert, the property of
the Low Country provinces; but as it was not expected, that that princess could
have any posterity, and as the reversion, in case of the failure of her issue,
was still*reserved to the crown of Spain, the States considered this deed only
as the change of a name, and persisted with equal obstinacy in their resistance
to the Spanish arms. The other states also of Europe made no distinction
between the courts of Brussels and Madrid; and the secret opposition of France,
as well as the avowed force of England, continued to operate against the
progress of Albert, as it had done against that of Philip.

CHAP. VII.
State of Ireland. -- Tyrone's rebellion. -- Essex sent over to Ireland. -- His
ill success. -- Returns to England. -- Is disgraced. -- His intrigues. -- His
insurrection. -- His trial and execution. -- French affairs. -- Mountjoy's
success in Ireland. -- Defeat of the Spaniards and Irish. -- A Parliament. --
Tyrone's submission. -- Queen's sickness. -- And death. -- And character. --
Government, manners, commerce, arts, and learning.

it was able to prevent the rise of any such form, from the internal
combination or subjection of the Irish.

MOST of the English institutions likewise, by which that island was governed,
were to the last degree absurd, and such as no state before had ever thought
of, for the preserving dominion over its conquered provinces.

THE English nation, all on fire for the project of subduing France, a project,
whose success was the most improbable, and would to them have proved the most
pernicious; neglected all other enterprises, to which their situation so
strongly invited them, and which, in time, would have brought them an accession
of riches, grandeur, and security. The small army which they maintained in
Ireland, they never supplied regularly with pay; and as no money could be
levied from the island, which possessed none, they gave their soldiers the
privilege of free quarter upon the natives. Rapine and insolence inflamed the
hatred, which prevailed between the conquerors and the conquered: Want of
security among the Irish, introducing despair, nourished still farther the
sloth, so natural to that uncultivated people.

BUT the English carried farther their ill-judged tyranny. Instead of inviting
the Irish to adopt the more civilized customs of their conquerors, they even
refused, though earnestly solicited, to communicate to them the privilege of
their laws, and every where marked them out as aliens and as enemies. Thrown
out of the protection of justice, the natives could find security no where but
in force; and flying the neighborhood of cities, which they could not approach
with safety, they sheltered themselves in their marshes and forests from the
insolence of their inhuman masters. Being treated like wild beasts, they became
such; and joining the ardor of revenge to their yet untamed barbarity, they
grew every day more intractable and dangerous.

AS the English princes esteemed the conquest of the dispersed Irish to be more
the object of time and patience than the source of military glory, they
willingly delegated that office to private adventurers, who inlisting soldiers
at their own charge, conquered provinces of that island, which they converted
to their own profit. Separate jurisdictions and principalities were established
by these lordly conquerors: The power of peace and war was assumed: Military
law was exercised over the Irish, whom they subdued, and, by degrees, over the
English, by whose assistance they conquered: And, after their dominion had once
taken root, deeming the English institutions less favorable to barbarous
empire, they degenerated into mere Irish, and abandoned the garb, language,
manners and laws of their native country.

BY all this imprudent conduct of England, the natives of its dependant state,
remained still in that abject condition, into which the northern and western
parts of Europe were sunk, before they received civility and slavery from the
refined policy and irresistible bravery of Rome. Even at the end of the
sixteenth century, when every christian nation was cultivating with ardour
every civil art of life, that island, lying in a temperate climate, enjoying a
fertile soil, accessible in its situation, possessed of innumerable harbors,
was still, notwithstanding these advantages, inhabited by a people, whose
customs and manners approached nearer those of savages than of barbarians.

AS the brutality and ignorance of the Irish was extreme, they were sunk below
the reach of that curiosity and love of novelty, by which every other people in
Europe had been seized at the beginning of that century, and which had engaged
them in innovations and religious disputes, with which they were still so
violently agitated. The ancient superstition, the practices and observances of
their fathers, mingled and polluted with many wild opinions, still maintained
an unshaken empire over them; and the example alone of the English was
sufficient to render the reformation odious to the prejudiced and discontented
Irish. The old opposition of manners, laws, and interest, was now inflamed by
religious antipathy; and the subduing and civilizing that country seemed to
become every day more difficult and more impracticable.

THE animosity against the English was carried so far by the Irish, that, in an
insurrection, raised by two sons of the earl of Clanricard, they put to the
sword the whole inhabitants of the town of Athenry, though Irish; because they
began to conform themselves to English customs and institutions, and had
embraced a more cultivated and civilized form of life, than had been practiced
by their barbarous ancestors Camden, p. 457.
.

THE usual revenue of Ireland amounted only to six thousand pounds a year
Memoirs of the Sydneys, vol. I. p. 86.
: The Queen, though with much repining Cox, p. 342. Sydney, vol* I p. 85, 200.
, commonly added twenty thousand more, which she remitted from England: And
with this small revenue, a body of one thousand men was supported, which, in
extraordinary emergencies, was augmented to two thousand Camden, p. 542.
Sydney, vol. I. p. 65, 109, 183, 184.
. No wonder, that a force, so disproportioned to the occasion, instead of
subduing a mutinous kingdom, served rather to provoke the natives, and to
excite those frequent insurrections and rebellions, which still farther
inflamed the animosity between the two nations, and increased the barbarity and
disorders, to which the Irish were naturally subject.

IN 1560, Shan O'Neale, or the great O'Neale, as the Irish called him, because
head of that potent clan, raised a rebellion in Ulster; and after some
skirmishes, was received into favor, upon his submission, and his promise of a
more dutiful behavior for the future Camden, p. 385, 391.
. This impunity tempted him to undertake a new insurrection in 1567; but being
pushed by Sir Henry Sidney, lord deputy, he retreated into Clandeboy, and
rather than submit to the English, he put himself into the hands of some Scotch
islanders, who commonly infested those parts by their incursions. The Scotch,
who retained a quarrel against him on account of former injuries, violated the
laws of hospitality, and murdered him in a festival, to which they had invited
him. He was a man equally noted for his pride, his violences, his debaucheries,
and his hatred of the English nation. He is said to have put some of his
followers to death, because they endeavored to introduce the use of bread
after the English fashion Ibid. p. 409.
. Though so violent an enemy to luxury, he was extremely addicted to riot; and
was accustomed, after his intemperance had thrown him into a fever, to plunge
his body into mire, that he might allay the flame, which he had raised by
former excesses Ibid. p. 409. Cox, p. 324.
. Such was the life led by this haughty barbarian, who scorned the title of
earl of Tyrone, which Elizabeth intended to have restored to him, and who
assumed the rank and appellation of King of Ulster. He used also to say, that
though the Queen was his sovereign lady, he never made peace with her but at her
seeking Ibid. p. 321.
.

SIR Henry Sidney was one of the wisest and most active governors whom Ireland
had enjoyed for several reigns Ibid. p. 350.
; and he possessed his authority eleven years; during which time, he struggled
with many difficulties, and made some progress in repressing those disorders,
which had become inveterate among that people. The earl of Desmond, in 1569,
gave him disturbance from the hereditary animosity which prevailed between that
nobleman and the earl of Ormond, who was descended from the only family,
established in Ireland, that had ever steddily maintained its loyalty to the
English crown Camden, p. 424.
. The earl of Thomond, in 1570, attempted a rebellion in Connaught, but was
obliged to fly into France, before his designs were ripe for execution.
Stukeley, another fugitive, found such credit with the pope, Gregory the 13th,
that he flattered his holiness with the prospect of making his nephew, Buon
Compagno, King of Ireland; and as it this project had already taken effect, he
accepted the title of marquess of Leinster from the new sovereign Ibid. p. 430.
Cox, p. 354.
. He passed next into Spain; and after having received much encouragement and
great rewards from Philip, who intended to make use of him as an instrument to
disturb Queen Elizabeth, he was found to possess too little interest for
executing those high promises, which he had made to that monarch. He retired
into Portugal; and following the fortunes of Don Sebastian, he perished with
that gallant prince in his bold but fatal expedition against the Moors.

LORD Gray succeeded Sydney in the government of Ireland; and, in 1579,
suppressed a new rebellion of the earl of Desmond, though supported by a body of
Spaniards and Italians. The rebellion of the Bourks followed a few years
afterward; occasioned by the strict and equitable administration of Sir
Richard Bingham, governor of Connaught, who endeavored to repress the tyranny
of the chieftains over their vassals Stowe, p. 720.
. The Queen, finding Ireland so burdensome to her, tried several expedients
for reducing it to a state of greater order and submission. She encouraged the
earl of Essex, father to that nobleman, who was afterward her favorite, to
attempt the subduing and planting Clandeboy, Ferny and other territories, part
of some late forfeitures: But that enterprise proved unfortunate; and Essex
died of a distemper, occasioned, as is supposed, by the vexation, which he had
conceived, from his disappointments. An university was founded in Dublin with a
view of introducing arts and learning into that kingdom, and civilizing the
uncultivated manners of the inhabitants Camden, p. 566.
. But the most unhappy expedient, employed in the government of Ireland, was
that made use of in 1585 by Sir John Perrot, at that time lord deputy: He put
arms into the hands of the Irish inhabitants of Ulster, in order to enable
them, without the assistance of the government, to repress the incursions of
the Scotch islanders, by which these parts were much infested Nanton's
Fragmenta Regalia, p. 203.
. At the same time, the invitations of Philip, joined to their zeal for the
catholic religion, engaged many of the gentry to serve in the Low Country wars;
and thus Ireland, being provided both of officers and soldiers, of discipline
and arms, became formidable to the English, and was able to maintain a more
regular war against her ancient masters.

Tyrone's rebellion.
HUGH O'Neale, nephew to Shan O'Neale, had been raised by the Queen to the
dignity of earl of Tyrone; but having murdered his cousin, son to that rebel,
and being acknowledged head of his clan, he preferred the pride of barbarous
license and dominion, to the pleasures of opulence and tranquillity, and
fomented all those disorders, by which he hoped to weaken or overturn the
English government. He was noted for the vices of perfidy and cruelty, so
common among uncultivated nations; and was also eminent for courage, a virtue,
which their disorderly course of life requires, and which, notwithstanding,
being unsupported by the principle of honor, is commonly more precarious among
them, than among a civilized people. Tyrone, actuated by this spirit, secretly
fomented the discontents of the Maguires, Odonnels, O'Rourks, Macmahons, and
other rebels; yet trusting to the influence of his deceitful oaths and
professions, he put himself into the hands of Sir William Russel, who, in the
year 1594, was sent over lord deputy into Ireland. Contrary to the advice and
protestation of Sir Henry Bagnal, marshal of the army, he was dismissed; and
returning to his own country, he embraced the resolution of raising an open
rebellion, and of relying no longer on the lenity or inexperience of the
English government. He entered into a correspondence with Spain: He procured
thence a supply of arms and ammunition: And having united all the Irish
chieftains in a dependence upon him, he began to be regarded as a formidable
enemy.

THE native Irish were so miserably poor, that their country afforded few other
commodities but cattle and oatmeal, which were easily destroyed or driven away
on the approach of the enemy; and as Elizabeth was averse to the expense
requisite for supporting her armies, the English found much difficulty in
pushing their advantages, and in pursuing the rebels into the bogs, woods, and
other fastnesses, to which they retreated. These motives made Sir John Norris,
who commanded the English army, the more ready to hearken to any proposals of
accommodation made him by Tyrone; and after the war was spun out by these
artifices for some years, that gallant Englishman, finding that he had been
deceived by treacherous promises, and that he had performed nothing worthy of
his ancient reputation, was seized with a languishing distemper, and died of
vexation and discontent. Sir Henry Bagnal, who succeeded him in the command,
was still more unfortunate. As he advanced to relieve the sort of Black-water,
besieged by the rebels, he was surrounded in disadvantageous ground; his
soldiers, discouraged by their powder's accidentally taking fire, were put to
flight; and, though the pursuit was stopped by Montacute, who commanded the English
horse, fifteen hundred men, together with the general himself, were left dead
upon the spot. This victory, so unusual to the Irish, mightily raised their
spirits, supplied them with arms and ammunition, and exalted the reputation of
Tyrone, who assumed the character of the deliverer of his country, and patron
of Irish liberty Cox, p. 415.
.

THE English council were now sensible that the rebellion in Ireland was come
to a dangerous head, and that the former temporizing arts, of granting truces
and pacifications to the rebels, and of allowing them to purchase pardons by
resigning part of the plunder, acquired during their insurrections, served only
to encourage the spirit of mutiny and disorder among them. It was therefore
resolved to push the war by vigorous measures; and the Queen cast her eye on
Charles Blount, lord Mountjoy, as a man, who, though hitherto less accustomed to
arms than to books and literature, was endowed, she thought, with talents equal
to that undertaking. But the young earl of Essex, ambitious of glory, and
desirous of obtaining this government for himself, opposed the choice of
Mountjoy; and represented the necessity of appointing, for that important
employment, some person more experienced in war than this nobleman, more
practiced in business, and of higher quality and reputation. By this
description, he was understood to mean himself Bacon, vol. IV. p. 512.
; and no sooner was his desire known, to be possessed of that government, than
his enemies, even more zealously than his friends, conspired to render his
wishes effectual. Many of his friends thought, that he never should consent,
except for a very short time, to accept of employments which must remove him
from court, and prevent him from cultivating that personal inclination, which
the Queen so visibly bore him Cabbasa, p. 79.
. His enemies hoped, that if, by his absence, she had once leizure to forget
the charms of his person and conversation, his impatient and lofty demeanor
would soon disgust a princess, who usually exacted such profound submission and
implicit obedience from all her servants. Essex sent over to Ireland.
But Essex was incapable of entering into such cautious views; and even
Elizabeth, who was extremely desirous of subdoing the Irish rebels, and who was
much prepossessed in favor of Essex's genius, readily agreed to appoint him
governor of Ireland, under the title of lord lieutenant. The more to encourage
him in his undertaking, she granted him by his patent more extensive authority
than had ever before been conferred on any lieutenant; the power of carrying on
or finishing the war as he pleased, of pardoning the rebels, and of filling all
the most considerable employments of the kingdom Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 366.
. And to ensure him of success, she levied a numerous army of sixteen thousand
foot and thirteen hundred horse, which she afterward augmented to twenty
thousand foot and two thousand horse: A force, which, it was apprehended, would
be able, in one campaign, to overwhelm the rebels, and make an entire conquest
of Ireland. Nor did Essex's enemies, the earl of Nottingham, lord admiral, Sir
Robert Cecil, secretary, Sir Walter Raleigh, and lord Cobham, throw any
obstacles in the way of these preparations; but hoped, that the higher the
Queen's expectations were raised of success, the more difficult it would be for
the event to correspond to them. In a like view, they rather seconded, than
opposed, those exalted encomiums, which Essex's numerous and sanguine friends
dispersed, of his high genius, of his elegant endowments, his heroic courage,
his unbounded generosity, and his noble birth; nor were they displeased to
observe that passionate fondness, which the people every where expressed for
this nobleman. These artful politicians had studied his character; and finding,
that his open and undaunted spirit, if taught temper and reserve from
opposition, must become invincible, they resolved rather to give full breath to
those sails, which were already too much expanded, and to push him upon
dangers, of which he seemed to make such small account Camden. Osborne, p 371.
. And the better to make advantage of his indiscretions, spies were set upon
all his actions and even expressions; and his vehement spirit, which, while he
was in the midst of the court and environed by his rivals, was unacquainted
with disguise, could not fail, after he thought himself surrounded by none but
friends, to give a pretense for malignant suspicions and constructions.

Essex left London in the month of March, attended by the acclamations of the
populace, and what did him more honor, accompanied by a numerous train of
nobility and gentry, who, from affection to his person, had attached themselves
to all his fortunes, and proposed to acquire fame and military experience under
so renowned a commander. The first act of authority, which he exercised, after
his arrival in Ireland, was an indiscretion, but of the generous kind; and in
both these respects, suitable to his character. He appointed his intimate
friend, the earl of Southampton, general of the horse; a nobleman, who had
displeased the Queen by secretly marrying without her consent, and whom she had
therefore enjoined Essex not to employ in any command under him. She no sooner
heard of this instance of disobedience than she reprimanded him, and ordered
him to recall his commission to Southampton. But Essex, who had imagined, that
some reasons, which he opposed to her first injunctions, had convinced her, had
the imprudence to remonstrate against these second orders Birch's Memoirs, vol.
II p. 421, 451
; and it was not till she reiterated her commands, that he could be prevailed
on to displace his friend.

His ill success.
ESSEX, on his landing at Dublin, had deliberated with the Irish council,
concerning the proper methods of carrying on war against the rebels; and here
he was guilty of a capital error, which was the ruin of his enterprise. He had
always, while in England, blamed the conduct of former commanders, who artfully
protracted the war, who harrassed their troops in small enterprises, and who,
by agreeing to truces and temporary pacifications with the rebels, had given
them leizure to recruit their broken forces Ibid. p. (...) bacon, vol. IV. p.
512.
. In conformity to these views, he had ever insisted upon leading his forces
immediately into Ulster against Tyrone, the capital enemy; and his instructions
had been drawn agreeable to these his declared intentions and resolutions. But
the Irish counselors persuaded him, that the season was too early for the
enterprise, and that as the morasses, in which the Irish usually sheltered
themselves, would not, as yet, be penetrable to the English forces, it would be
better to employ the present time in an expedition into Munster. Their secret
reason for this advice was, that many of them possessed estates in that
province, and were desirous to have the enemy dislodged from their
neighborhood Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p 448.
: But the same selfish spirit, which had induced them to give this council,
made them soon after disown it, when they found the bad consequences with which
it was attended Winwood, vol. I. p. 140.
.

ESSEX obliged all the rebels of Munster either to submit or to fly into the
neighboring provinces: But as the Irish, from the greatness of the Queen's
preparations, had concluded, that she intended to reduce them to total
subjection, or even utterly to exterminate them, they considered their present
defense as a common cause; and the English forces were no sooner withdrawn,
than the inhabitants of Munster relapsed into rebellion, and renewed their
confederacy with their other countrymen. The army, meanwhile, by the fatigue of
long and tedious marches, and by the influence of the climate, was become
extreme sickly; and on their return to Dublin, about the middle of July, were
suprizingly diminished in number. Their courage was even much abated: For though
they had prevailed in some lesser enterprises, as against the lord Cahir and
others; yet had they sometimes met with a more stout resistance than they
expected from the Irish, whom they were wont to despise; and as they were raw
troops and unexperienced, a considerable body of them had been put to flight at
the Glins, by an inferior number of the enemy: Essex was so enraged at this
misbehaviour, that he cashiered all the officers, and decimated the private men
Cox, p. 421.
. But this instance of severity, though necessary, had intimidated the soldiers,
and had increased their aversion to the present service.

THE Queen was extremely disgusted, when she heard, that so considerable a part
of the season was consumed in these frivolous enterprises; and was still more
surprised, that Essex persevered in the same practice, which he had so much
condemned in others, and which he knew to be so much contrary to her purpose
and intention. That nobleman, in order to give his troops leizure to recruit
from their sickness and fatigue, marched with a small body of fifteen hundred
men into the county of Ophelie against the O'Connors and O'Mores, whom he
forced to a submission: But on his return to Dublin, he found the army so
extremely diminished, that he wrote to the English council an account of his
condition, and informed them, that if he received not immediately a
reinforcement of two thousand men, it would be impossible for him this season
to attempt any thing against Tyrone. That there might be no pretense for
farther inactivity, the Queen immediately sent over the number demanded Birch's
Memoirs, vol. II. p. 430. Cox, p. 421.
; and Essex began at last to assemble his forces for the expedition into
Ulster. The army was so extremely averse to this enterprise, and terrified with
the reputation of Tyrone, that many of them counterfeited sickness, many of
them deserted Sydney's Letters, vol. II. p. 112, 113.
; and Essex found, that after leaving the necessary garrisons, he could scarce
lead four thousand men against the rebels. He marched, however, with this small
army; but was soon sensible, that, in so advanced a season, it would be
impossible for him to effectuate any thing against an enemy, who, though superior
in number, were determined to avoid every decisive action. He hearkened,
therefore, to a message sent him by Tyrone, who desired a conference; and a
place, near the two camps, was accordingly appointed. The generals met without
any of their attendants, and a river ran between them, into which Tyrone
entered to the depth of his saddle: But Essex stood on the opposite bank. After
half an hour's conference, where Tyrone behaved with great submission and
respect to the lord lieutenant, a cessation of arms was concluded to the first
of May, renewable from six weeks to six weeks; but which might be broke off by
either party upon a fortnight's warning Ibid. p. 125.
. Essex also received from Tyrone proposals for a peace, in which that rebel
had inserted many unreasonable and exorbitant conditions: And there appeared
afterward some reason to suspect, that he had here commenced a very
unjustifiable correspondence with the enemy Winwood, vol. I. p. 307. State
Trials. Bacon, vol. IV. p. 514, 535, 537.
.

SO unexpected an issue of an enterprise, the greatest and most expensive which
Elizabeth had ever undertaken, provoked her extremely against Essex; and this
disgust was much augmented by other circumstances of that nobleman's conduct.
He wrote many letters to the Queen and council, full of peevish and impatient
expressions; complaining of his enemies, lamenting that their calumnies should
be believed against him, and discovering symptoms of a mind, equally haughty
and discontented. She took care to inform him of her dissatisfaction; but
commanded him to remain in Ireland till farther orders.

ESSEX heard at once of Elizabeth's anger, and of the promotion of his enemy,
Sir Robert Cecil, to the office of master of the wards, an office which he
himself aspired to: And dreading, that, if he remained any longer absent, the
Queen would be totally alienated from him, he hastily embraced a resolution,
which, he knew, had once succeeded with the earl of Leicester, the former
favorite of Elizabeth. Leicester being informed, while in the Low Countries,
that his mistress was extremely displeased with his conduct, disobeyed her
orders by coming over into England; and having pacified her by his presence, by
his apologies, and by his flattery and insinuation, disappointed all the
expectations of his enemies Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 453.
. Returns to England.
Essex, therefore, weighing more the similarity of circumstances than the
difference of characters between himself and Leicester, immediately set out for
England; and making speedy journeys, he arrived at court before any one was in
the least apprized of his intentions Winwood, vol. I. p. 118.
. Though besmeared with dirt and sweat, he hastened up stairs to the presence
chamber, thence to the privy chamber; nor stopped till he was in the Queen's
bed chamber, who was newly risen, and was sitting with her hair about her face.
He threw himself on his knees, kissed her hand, and had some private conference
with her; where he was so graciously received, that on his departure he was
heard to express great satisfaction, and to thank God, that, though he had
suffered much trouble and many storms abroad, he found a sweet calm at home
Sydney's Letters, vol. II. p. 127.
.

But this placability of Elizabeth was merely the result of her surprise, and
of the momentary satisfaction, which she felt on the sudden and unexpected
appearance of her favorite: After she had found leizure for recollection, all
his faults recurred to her memory; and she thought it necessary by some severe
discipline, to subdue this haughty and imperious spirit, who, presuming on her
partiality and indulgence, had pretended to domineer in her councils, to
engross all her favor, and to act in the most important affairs, without
regard to her orders and instructions. Is disgraced.
When Essex waited on her in the afternoon, he found her extremely altered in
her carriage toward him: She ordered him to be consined to his chamber; to be
twice examined by the council; and though his answers were calm and submissive,
she committed him to the custody of the lord keeper, Egerton, and held him
sequestered from all company, even from that of his countess, nor was so much
as the intercourse of letters permitted between them. Essex dropped many
expressions of humiliation and sorrow, none of resentment: He prosessed an
entire submission to the Queen's will: Declared his intention of retiring into
the country, and of leading thenceforth a private life, remote from courts and
business: But though he assected to be so entirely cured of his aspiring
ambition, the vexation of this disappointment, and of the triumph gained by his
enemies, preyed upon his haughty spirit; and he sell into a distemper, which
seemed to put his life in hazard.

THE Queen had always declared to all the world, and even to the earl himself,
that the purpose of her severity was to correct, not to ruin him Birch's
Memoirs, p. 444, 445. Sydney Papers, vol. II. p. 106.
; and when she heard of his condition, she was not a little alarm d with the
danger. She ordered eight physicians of the best reputation and experience to
consult of his case; and being informed, that the issue was much to be
apprehended, she sent Dr. James to him with some broth, and desired that
physician to deliver him a message, which she probably deemed of still greater
virtue; that, if she thought such a step consistent with her honor, she would
herself pay him a visit. The by standers, who carefully observed her
countenance, remarked, that in pronouncing these words, her eyes were suffused
with tears Sydney Letters, vol. II. p. 151.
.

WHEN these symptoms of the Queen's returning affection toward's Essex were
known, they gave a sensible alarm to the faction which had declared their
opposition to him. Sir Walter Raleigh, in particular, the most violent as well
as the most ambitious of his enemies, was so affected with the appearance of
that sudden revolution, that he was seized with sickness in his turn, and the
Queen was obliged to apply the same salve to his wound, and to send him a
favorable message, expressing her desire of his recovery Ibid. p. 139.
.

Ibid. p. 153.
; and she relapsed into her former rigor against him. He wrote her a letter,
and sent her a rich present on New Year's day; as was usual among the courtiers
of that time: She read the letter, but rejected the present Ibid. p 155, 156.
. After some interval, however, of severity; she allowed him to retire to his
own house* And though he remained still under custody, and was sequestered from
all company, he was so grateful for this mark of lenity, that he sent her a
letter of thanks on the occasion. "This farther degree of goodness," said he,
"does sound in mine ears, as if your majesty spoke these words, Die not Essex;
for though I punish thine offense, and humble thee for thy good, yet will I one
day be served again by thee. My prostrate soul makes this answer. I hope for
that blessed day. And in expectation of it, all my afflictions of body or mind
are humbly, patiently, and cheerfully borne by me Birch's Memoirs, p. 444.
." The countess of Essex, daughter of Sir Francis Walsingham, possessed, as
well as her husband, a very refined taste in literature; and the chief
consolation which Essex enjoyed, during this period of anxiety and expectation,
consisted in her company, and in reading with her those instructive and
entertaining authors which, even during the time of his greatest prosperity, he
had never entirely neglected.

THERE were several incidents which kept alive the Queen's anger against Essex.
Every account which she received from Ireland, convinced her more and more of
his misconduct in that government, and of the insignificant purposes to which
he had employed so much force and treasure. Tyrone, so far from being quelled,
had thought proper, in less than three months, to break the truce, and joining
with O Donel, and other rebels, had overrun almost the whole kingdom. He
boasted, that he was certain of receiving a supply of men, money, and arms from
Spain: He pretended to be champion of the catholic religion: And he loudly
exulted in the present of a phaenix plume, which the pope, Clement the eighth,
in order to encourage him in the prosecution of so good a cause, had
consecrated, and had conferred upon him Camden, p. 617.
. The Queen, that she might check his progress, returned to her former
intention, of appointing Mountjoy lord-deputy; and though that nobleman, who was
an intimate friend of Essex, and desired his return to the government of
Ireland, did at first very earnestly excuse himself, on account of his bad
state of health, she obliged him to accept of that employment. Mountjoy found
the island almost in a desperate situation; but being a man of capacity and
vigor, he was so little discouraged, that he immediately advanced against
Tyrone in Ulster. He penetrated into the heart of that country, the chief seat
of the rebels: He fortified Derry and Mount-Norris, in order to bridle the
Irish: He chaced them from the field, and obliged them to take shelter in the
woods and morasses: He employed, with equal success, Sir George Carew in
Munster: And by these promising successes, he gave new life to the Queen's
authority in that country.

AS the comparison of Mountjoy's administration with that of Essex, contributed
to alienate her from her favorite, she received additional disgust from the
partiality of the people, who, prepossessed with an extravagant idea of Essex's
merit, complained of the injustice which was done him, by his removal from
court, and by his consinement. Libels were secretly dispersed against Cecil and
Raleigh, and all his enemies. And his popularity, which was always great,
seemed rather to be increased than diminished by his misfortunes. Elizabeth, in
order to justify to the public her conduct with regard to him, had often taken
the resolution of having him tried in the star chamber, for his offenses: But
her tenderness for him prevailed at last over her severity; and she was
contented to have him only examined by the privy council. The attorney general,
Coke, opened the cause against him, and treated him with the cruelty and
insolence which that great lawyer usually exercised against the unfortunate. He
displayed, in the strongest colors, all the faults committed by Essex in his
administration of Ireland: His making Southampton general of the horse,
contrary to the Queen's injunctions; his deserting the enterprise against
Tyrone, and marching to Leinster and Munster; his conferring knighthood on too
many persons; his secret conference with Tyrone; and his sudden return from
Ireland, in contempt of her majesty's commands. He also exaggerated the
indignity of the conditions which Tyrone had been allowed to propose; odious
and abominable conditions, said he; a public toleration of an idolatrous
religion, pardon for himself and every traitor in Ireland, and full restitution
of lands and possessions to all of them Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 449.
. The sollicitor-general, Fleming, insisted upon the wretched situation in
which the earl had left that kingdom; and Francis Bacon, son to Sir Nicholas
Bacon, who had been lord keeper in the beginning of the present reign, closed
the charge with displaying the undutiful expressions contained in some letters
wrote by the earl.

ESSEX, when his turn came to plead in his own behalf, renounced, with great
submission and humility, all pretensions to an apology Sydney's Letters, vol.
II. p. 200.
; and declared his resolution never, on this or any other occasion, to have any
contest with his sovereign. He said, that having severed himself from the
world, and abjured all sentiments of ambition, he had no scruple to confess
every failing or error into which his youth, folly, or manifold infirmities
might have betrayed him; that his inward sorrow for his offenses against her
majesty was so profound, that it exceeded all his outward crosses and
afflictions, nor did he retain any scruple of submitting to a public confession
of whatever she had been pleased to impute to him; that in his acknowlegements
he retained only one reserve, which he never would relinquish but with his
life, the assertion of a loyal and unpolluted heart, of an unfeigned affection,
of an earnest desire ever to perform to her majesty the best service which his
poor abilities would permit; and that if this sentiment was recognized by the
council, he willingly acquiesced in any condemnation or sentence which they
could pronounce against him. This submission was uttered with so much
eloquence, and in so pathetic a manner, that it drew tears from many of the
spectators Sydney's Letters, vol. II. p. 200, 201.
. All the privy-counsellors, in giving their judgment, made no scruple of doing
the earl justice, with regard to the loyalty of his intentions. Even Cecil,
whom he believed his capital enemy, treated him with regard and humanity. And
the sentence given by the lord keeper, (to which the council assented) was in
these words. "If this cause," said he, "had been heard in the Star Chamber, my
sentence must have been for as great a fine as ever was set upon any man's head
in that court, together with perpetual confinement in that prison which
belongs to a man of his quality, the Tower. But since we are now in another
place, and in a course of favor, my censure is, that the earl of Essex is not
to execute the office of a counselor, nor that of earl marshal of England, nor
of master of the ordinance; and to return to his own house, there to continue a
prisoner, till it shall please her majesty to release this and all the rest of
his sentence Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 454. Camden, p 6^^, 627.
." The earl of Cumberland made a slight opposition to this sentence; and said,
that if he thought it would stand, he would have required a little longer time
to deliberate, that he thought it somewhat severe, and that any commander in
chief might easily incur a like penalty. But, however, added he, in confidence
of her majesty's mercy, I agree with the rest. The earl of Worcester delivered
his opinion in a couple of Latin verses, implying, that, where the Gods are
offended, even misfortunes ought to be imputed as crimes, and that accident is
no excuse for transgressions against the Divinity.

BACON, so much distinguished afterward by his high offices, and still more by
his profound genius for the sciences, was nearly allied to the Cecil family,
being nephew to lord Burleigh, and cousin-german to the secretary: But
notwithstanding his extraordinary talents, he had met with so little protection
from his powerful relations, that he had not yet obtained any preferment in the
law, which was his profession. But Essex, who could distinguish merit, and who
passionately loved it, had entered into an intimate friendship with Bacon; had
zealously attempted, though without success, to procure him the office of Queen's
solicitor; and in order to comfort his friend under the disappointment, had
conferred on him a present of land to the value of eighteen hundred pounds
Cabbala, p. 78.
. The public could ill excuse Bacon's appearance before the council, against so
munificent a benefactor; though he acted in obedience to the Queen's orders: But
she was so well pleased with his behavior, that she imposed on him a new task,
of drawing a narrative of that day's proceedings, in order to satisfy the
nation of the justice and lenity of her conduct. Bacon, who wanted firmness of
character, more than humanity, gave to the whole transaction the most
favorable turn for Essex; and, in particular, painted out, in elaborate
expression, the dutiful submission which that nobleman discovered in the
defense which he made for his conduct. When he read the paper to her, she
smiled at that passage, and observed to Bacon, that old love, she saw, could
not easily be forgotten. He replied, that he hoped she meant that o^ herself
Cabbala, p. 83.
.

ALL the world, indeed expected, that Essex would soon be reinstated in his
former credit Winwood, vol. l. p. 251.
: Perhaps, as is usual in reconcilements founded on inclination, would acquire
an additional ascendant with the Queen, and after all his dilgraces, would
again appear more a favorite than ever. They were confirmed in this hope, when
they saw, that though he was still prohibited to appear at court Birch's Memoirs,
vol. II p 162.
, he was continued in his office of master of horse, and was restored to his
liberty, and that all his friends had access to him. Essex himself seemed
determined to persevere in that conduct which had hitherto been so successful,
and which the Queen, by all this discipline, had endeavored to render habitual
to him: He wrote to her, that he kissed her majesty's hands, and the rod with
which she had corrected him; but that he could never recover his usual
cheerfulness, till she deigned to admit him to that presence which had ever
been the chief source of his happiness and enjoyment: And that he had now
resolved to make amends for his past errors, to retire into a country solitude,
and to say with Nebuchadnezzar, "Let my dwelling be with the beasts of the
field; let me eat grass as an ox, and be wet with the dew of heaven; till it
shall please the Queen to restore me to my understanding." The Queen was much
pleased with these sentiments, and replied, that she heartily wished his
actions might correspond to his expressions; that he had tried her patience a
long time, and it was but just she should now make some experiment of his
submission; that her father would never have pardoned so much obstinacy; but
that, if the furnace of affliction produced such good effects, she should ever
after have the better opinion of her chemistry Camden, p. 628.
.

THE earl of Essex possessed a monopoly of sweet wines; and as his patent was
near expiring, he patiently expected that the Queen would renew it, and
considered this event as the critical circumstance of his life, which would
determine whether he could ever hope to be reinstated in credit and authority
Birch's Memoris vol II p. (...).
. But Elizabeth, though gracious in her demeanor, was of a temper somewhat
haughty and severe; and being continually surrounded with Essex's enemies,
means were found to persuade her, that his lofty spirit was not yet
sufficiently humbled, and that he must undergo this farther trial, before he
could again be safely received into favor. She therefore refused his demand;
and even added, in a contemptuous style, that an ungovernable beast must be
stinted in his provender Camden. p. 628.
.

His intrigues.
THIS rigor, pushed one step too far, proved the final ruin of this young
nobleman, and was the source of infinite sorrow and vexation to the Queen
herself. Essex, who had with great difficulty ^o long subdued his proud spirit,
and whose patience was now exhausted, imagining that the Queen was entirely
inexorable, burst at once all restraints of submission and of prudence, and was
determined to seek relief, by proceeding to the utmost extremities against his
enemies. Even during his greatest favor he had ever been accustomed to carry
matters with a high hand against his sovereign; and as this practice gratified
his own temper, and was sometimes successful, he had imprudently imagined, that
it was the only proper method of managing her Cabbala, p. 79.
: But being now reduced to despair, he gave entire reins to his violent
disposition, and threw off all appearance of duty and respect. Intoxicated with
the general favor which he already possessed, he practiced anew every art of
popularity; and endeavored to increase the general good will by an hospitable
manner of life, little suited to his situation and his circumstances. His
former employments had given him great connections with gentlemen of the
military profession; and he now entertained; by additional caresses and
civilities, a friendship with all desperate adventurers* whose attachment, he
hoped, might, in his present views, prove serviceable to him. He secretly
courted the confidence of the catholics; but his chief trust lay in the
puritans, whom he openly caressed, and whose manners he seemed to have entirely
adopted. He engaged the most celebrated preachers of that sect to resort to
Essex-house; he had daily prayers and sermons in his family; and he invited all
the zealots in London to attend those pious exercises. Such was the disposition
now beginning to prevail among the English, that, instead of feasting, and
public spectacles, the methods anciently practiced in commonwealths to gain the
populace, nothing so effectually ingratiated an ambitions leader with the
public, as these fanatical entertainments. And as the puritanical preachers
frequently inculcated in their sermons the doctrine of resistance to the civil
magistrate, they prepared the minds of their hearers for those purposes which
Essex was secretly contriving Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 463. Camden, p. 630.
.

BUT the most pernicious imprudence of this nobleman proceeded from the
openness of his temper, by which he was ill qualified to suceeed in such
difficult and dangerous projects. He indulged himself in great liberties of
speech, and was even heard to say of the Queen, that she was now grown an old
woman, and was become as crooked in her mind as in her body Camden, p. 629.
Osborne, p. 3^7. Sir Walter Raleigh's Prerogative of Parliaments, p. 43.
. Some court ladies, whose favors Essex had formerly neglected, carried her
these stories, and incensed her to a high degree against him. Elizabeth was
ever remarkably jealous on this head; and though she was now approaching to her
seventieth year, she allowed her courtiers Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 442, 443
, and even foreign ambassadors Sydney's Letters, vol. II. p. 171.
, to compliment her upon her beauty; nor had all her good sense been able to
cure her of this preposterous infirmity Most of Queen Elizabeth's courtiers
feigned love and desire toward her, and addressed themselves to her in the
style of passion and gallantry. Sir Walter Raleigh, having fallen into
disgrace, wrote the following letter to his friend Sir Robert Cecil, with a
view, no doubt, of having it shown to the Queen. "My heart was never broke till
this day, that I hear the Queen goes away so far off, whom I have followed so
many years, with so great love and desire, in so many journeys, and am now left
behind her in a dark prison all alone. While she was yet near at hand, that I
might hear of her once in two or three days, my sorrows were the less; but even
now my heart is cast into the depth of all misery. I, that was wont to behold
her riding like Alexander, hunting like Diana, walking like Venus, the gentle
wind blowing her fair hair about her pure cheeks, like a nymph, sometimes
sitting in the shade like a Goddess, sometimes singing like an angel, sometimes
playing like Orpheus; behold the sorrow of this world! once amiss has bereaved
me of all. O glory that only shines in misfortune, what is become of thy
assurance? All wounds have scars but that of fantasy: All affections their
relenting but that of womankind. Who is the judge of friendship but adversity,
or when is grace witnessed but in offenses? There were no divinity but by
reason of compassion: For revenges are brutish and mortal. All those times
past, the loves, the sighs, the sorrows, the desires, cannot they weigh down
one frail misfortune? Cannot one drop of gall be hid in so great heaps of
sweetness. I may then conclude, Spes and fortune valete. She is gone in whom I
trusted; and of me has not one thought of mercy, nor any respect of that which
was. Do with me now therefore what you list. I am more weary of life than they
are desirous I should perish; which, if it had been for her, as it is by her, I
had been too happily born." Murdin, 657. It is to be remarked, that this Nymph,
Venus, Goddess, Angel, was now about sixty. Yet five or six years after, she
allowed the same language to be used to her. Sir Henry Unton, her ambassador in
France, relates to her a conversation which he had with Henry the fourth. The
monarch, after having introduced Unton to his address, the fair Gabriell^,
asked him how he liked her. "I answered sparingly in her praise," said the
minister, "and told him, that if, without offense, I might speak it, I had the
picture of a far more excellent mistress, and yet did her picture come far
short of her perfection of beauty. As you love me, said he, show it me, if you
have it about you. I made some difficulties; yet upon his importunity offered
it to his view very secretly, holding it still in my hand: He beheld it with
passion and admiration, saying, that I had reason, J^ me rend^, protesting,
that he had never seen the like; so, with great reverence, he kissed it twice
or thrice, I detaining it still in my hand. In the end, with some kind of
contention, he took it from me, vowing, that I might take my leave of it: For
he would not forgo it for any treasure: And that to possess the favor of the
lively picture, he would forsake all the world, and hold himself most happy;
with many other most passionate speeches." Murdin, p. 718. For farther
particulars on this head, see the ingenious author of the Catalogue of royal
and noble Authors, article Essex.
.

THERE was another expedient of Essex, which, if possible, was more provoking
to the Queen than those sarcasms on her age and deformity; and that was, his
secret applications to the King of Scots, her heir and successor. That prince
had this year very narrowly escaped a dangerous, though ill formed, conspiracy of
the earl of Gowry; and even his delivery was attended with this disagreeable
circumstance, that the obstinate ecclesiastics persisted, in spite of the most
incontestible evidence, to maintain to his face, that there had been no such
conspiracy. James, harrassed with his turbulent and factious subjects, cast a
wistful eye to the succession of England; and in proportion as the Queen
advanced in years, his desire increased of mounting that throne, on which,
besides acquiring a great addition of power and splendour, he hoped to govern a
people, so much more tractable and submissive. He negociated with all the
courts of Europe, in order to ensure himself friends and partisans: He even
neglected not the court of Rome and that of Spain; and though he engaged himself
in no positive promise, he flattered the catholics with hopes, that, in case of
his succession, they might expect some more liberty than what was at present
indulged them. Elizabeth was the only sovereign in Europe to whom he never
dared to mention his right of succession: He knew, that though her great age
might now invite her to think of fixing an heir to the crown, she never could
bear the prospect of her own death without horror, and was determined still to
retain him, and all other competitors, in an entire dependence upon her.

ESSEX was descended by females from the royal family; and some of his sanguine
partisans had been so imprudent as to mention his name among those of other
pretenders to the crown; but the earl took care, by means of Henry Lee, whom he
secretly sent into Scotland, to assure James, that, so far from entertaining
such ambitious views, he was determined to use every expedient for extorting an
immediate declaration in favor of this monarch's right of succession. James
willingly hearkened to this proposal; but did not approve of the violent
methods which Essex intended to employ. Essex had communicated his scheme to
Mountjoy, lord deputy of Ireland; and as no man ever commanded more the cordial
affection and attachment of his friends, he had even engaged a person of that
virtue and prudence to entertain thoughts of bringing over part of his army
into England, and of forcing the Queen to declare the King of Scots her
successor Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 47^*
. And such was Essex's impatient ardour, that, though James declined this
dangerous expedient, he still endeavored to persuade Mountjoy not to desist
from the project: But the deputy, who thought that such violence, though it might
be prudent, and even justifiable, when supported by a sovereign prince next
heir to the crown, would be rash and criminal, if attempted by subjects,
entirely refused his concurrence. The correspondence, however, between Essex
and the court of Scotland was still conducted with great secrecy and
cordiality; and that nobleman, besides conciliating the favor of James,
represented all his own adversaries as enemies to that prince's succession, and
as men entirely devoted to the interests of Spain, and partisans of the
chimerical title of the Infanta.

THE Infanta and archduke, Albert, had made some advances to the Queen for
peace; and Boulogne, as a neutral town, was chosen for the place of conference.
16 May.
Sir Henry Neville, the English resident in France, Herbert, Edmondes, and
Beale, ^ere sent thither as ambassadors from England; and negociated with
Zuniga, Carillo, Richardot, and Verheiken, ministers of Spain and the archduke:
But the conferences were soon broke off, on account of a dispute of ceremony.
Among the European states England had ever been allowed the precedence above
Castile, Arragon, Portugal, and the other kingdoms of which the Spanish
monarchy was composed; and Elizabeth insisted, that this ancient right was not
lost on account of the junction of these states, and that Spain, in its present
situation, though it surpassed England in extent, as well as in power, could not
compare with it in point of antiquity, the only durable and regular foundation
of precedence among kingdoms, as well as noble families. That she might show,
however, a disposition to peace, she was contented to yield to an equality; but
the Spanish ministers, as their country had always disputed precedence even
with France, to which England submitted, would proceed no farther in the
conferences, till their superiority of rank was acknowleged Winwood's
Mem^^o^^ls, vol. l. p. (...) 21^.
. During the preparations for this abortive negotiation, the earl of
^uttingham, the admiral, lord Buckhurst, the treasurer, and secretary Cecil,
had discovered their in^^nation to peace; and as the English nation, flushed
with success, and sanguine in the^^ hopes of plunder and conqued, were in
general averse to that (...), i^ was easy for a person so popular as Essex, to
infuse into the multitude an opinion, that these ministers had sacrificed the
interests of their (...) to Spain, and would even make no scruple of receiving
a sovereign from that hostile nation.

His insurrection.
It was agreed, that Sir Christopher Blount, with a choice detachment, should
possess himself of the palace gates, that Davis should seize the hall, Davers
the guard-chamber and presence chamber; and that Essex should rush in from the
Meuse, attended by a body of his partisans, should entreat the Queen, with all
demonstrations of humility, to remove his enemies, should oblige her to
assemble a Parliament, and should with common consent settle a new plan of
government Camden, p. 630. Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 464. State Trials.
Bacon, vol. IV. p. 542, 543.
.

WHILE these desperate projects were in agitation, many reasons of suspicion
were carried to the Queen; and she sent Robert Sacville, the treasurer's son,
to Essex-house, under pretense of a visit, but, in reality, with a view of
discovering whether there was in that place any concourse of people, or any
extraordinary preparations, which might threaten an insurrection. Soon after,
Essex received a summons to attend the council, which met at the treasurer's
house; and while he was musing on this circumstance, and comparing it with the
late unexpected visit from Sacville, a private note was conveyed to him, by
which he was warned to provide for his own safety. He concluded, that all his
conspiracy was discovered, or at least suspected, and that the easiest
punishment which he could expect, was a new and more severe consinement: He
therefore excused himself to the council on pretense of an indisposition; and
he immediately dispatched messages to his more intimate confederates,
requesting their advice and assistance in the present critical situation of his
affairs. They deliberated, whether they should abandon all their projects, and
fly the kingdom; or instantly seize the palace with the force which they could
assemble; or rely upon the affections of the citizens, who were generally known
to bear a great affection to the earl. Essex declared against the first
expedient, and professed himself determined to undergo any fate rather than
submit to live the life of a fugitive. To seize the palace seemed impracticable
without more preparation; especially as the Queen seemed now aware of their
projects, and, as they heard, had used the precaution of doubling her ordinary
guards. There remained, therefore, no other expedient but that of betaking
themselves to the city; and while the prudence and expediency of this
resolution was under debate, a person arrived, who, as if he had received a
commission for that purpose, gave them assurance of the good affection of the
Londoners, and affirmed, that they might securely rest any project on that
foundation. The popularity of Essex had chiefly buoyed him up in all his vain
undertakings; and he fondly imagined, that with no other assistance than the
good will of the multitude, he might be enabled to overturn Elizabeth's
government, confirmed by time, revered for wisdom, supported by vigor, and
concurring with the general sentiments of the nation. The wild project of
raising the city was immediately resolved on; the execution of it was delayed
till next day; and emissaries were dispatched to all Essex's friends, informing
them that Cobham and Raleigh had laid schemes against his life, and entreating
their presence and assistance.

8th February.
NEXT day, there appeared at Essex-house the earls of Southampton and Rutland,
the lords Sandys and Monteagle, with about three hundred gentlemen of good
quality and fortune; and Essex informed them of the danger, to which, he
pretended, the machinations of his enemies exposed him. To some, he said, that
he would throw himself at the Queen's feet, and crave her justice and
protection: To others, he boasted of his interest in the city, and affirmed,
that, whatever might happen, this resource could never fail him. The Queen was
informed of these designs, by means of intelligence, conveyed, as is supposed,
to Raleigh by Sir Ferdinando Gorges; and having ordered the magistrates of
London to keep the citizens in readiness, she sent Egerton, lord keeper, to
Essex-house, with the earl of Worcester, Sir William Knollys, controller, and
Pop^am, lord chief justice, in order to learn the cause of these unusual
commotions. They were with difficulty admitted through a wicket; but all their
servants were excluded, except the purse-bearer. After some alternation, in
which they charged Essex's retainers, upon their allegiance, to lay down their
army, and were in traced in their turn by the angry multitude, who surrounded
them, the earl* who found, that matters were past rec^^, resolved to (...) them
prisoners in his house, and to proceed to the execution of his former project.
He issued out with about two hundred attendants, armed only with swords; and in
his passage to the city was joined by the earl of Bedford and lord Cromwell. He
cried aloud, For the Queen! for the Queen! a plot is laid for my life; and then
proceeded to the house of Smith, the sheriff, on whose aid he had great
reliance. The citizens flocked about him in amazement; but though he told them,
that England was sold to the infanta, and exhorted them to arm instantly,
otherwise they could not do him any service, no one showed a disposition to
join him. The sheriff, on the earl's approach to his house, stole out at the
back door, and made the best of his way to the lord mayor. Essex, meanwhile,
observing the coldness of the citizens, and hearing, that he was proclaimed a
traitor by the earl of Cumberland and lord Burleigh, began to despair of
success, and thought of retreating to his own house. He found the streets in
his passage barricadoed, and guarded by the citizens, under the command of Sir
John Levison. In his attempt to force his way, Tracy, a young gentleman, to
whom he bore great friendship, was killed, with two or three of the Londoners;
and the earl himself, attended by a few of his partisans (for the greatest part
began secretly to withdraw themselves) retired toward the river, and taking
boat, arrived at Essex-house. He there found, that Gorges, whom he had sent
before to capitulate with the lord keeper and the other counselors, had given
them all their liberty, and had gone to court with them. He was now reduced to
despair; and appeared determined, in prosecution of lord Sandys's advice, to
defend himself to the last extremity, and rather to perish, like a brave man,
with his sword in his hand, than basely by the hands of the executioner: But
after some parley, and after demanding in vain, first hostages, then
conditions, from the besiegers, he surrendered at discretion; requesting only
civil treatment, and a fair and impartial hearing Camden, p 632.
.

THE Queen, who, during all this commotion, had behaved with as great
tranquillity and security, as if there had only passed a fray in the streets,
in which she was no way concerned Birch's Memoirs, vol. II. p. 469.
, soon gave orders for the trial of the most considerable of the criminals.
19th February.
His trial.
The earls of Essex and Southampton were arraigned before a jury of twenty-five
peers, where Buckhurst acted as lord steward. The guilt of the prisoners was
too apparent to admit of any doubt; and, besides the insurrection known to
every body, the treasonable conferences at Drury-house were proved by undoubted
evidence. Sir Ferdinando Gorges was produced in court* The confessions of the
earl of Rutland, of the lords Cromwell, Sandys, and Monteagle, of Davers,
Blount, and Davies, were only read to the peers, according to the practice of
that age. Essex's best friends were scandalized at his assurance in insisting
so positively on his innocence, and the goodness of his intentions; and still
more at his vindictive disposition, in accusing, without any appearance of
reason, secretary Cecil as a partizan of the infanta's title. The secretary,
who had expected this charge, stepped into the court, and challenged Essex to
produce his authority, which, on examination, was found extremely weak and
frivolous Bacon, vol. IV. p. 530.
. When sentence was pronounced, Essex spoke like a man who laid his account to
die: But he added, that he should be sorry, if he was represented to the Queen
as a person that despised her clemency; though he should not, he believed, make
any cringing submissions to obtain it. Southampton's behavior was more mild
and submissive: He entreated the good offices of the peers in so modest and
becoming a manner, as excited compassion in every one.

THE most remarkable circumstance in Essex's trial was Bacon's appearance
against him. He was none of the crown lawyers; so was not obliged by his office
to assist at this trial: Yet did he not scruple, in order to obtain the Queen's
favor, to be active in bereaving of life his friend and patron, whose
generosity he had often experienced. He compared Essex's conduct, in pretending
to fear the attempts of his adversaries, to that of Pisistratus, the Athenian,
who cut and wounded his own body; and making the people believe, that his
enemies had committed that violence, obtained a guard for his person, by whose
assistance he afterward subdued the liberties of his country.

AFTER Essex had passed some days in the folitude and reflection of a prison,
his proud heart was at last subdued, not by the fear of death, but by the
sentiments of religion; a principle, which he had before attempted to make the
instrument of his ambition, but which now took a more firm hold of his mind,
and prevailed over every other motive and consideration. His spiritual
directors persuaded him, that he never could obtain the pardon of heaven,
unless he made a full confession of his disloyalty; and he gave in to the
council an account of all his most criminal designs, as well as of his
correspondence with the King of Scots. He spared not even his most intimate
friends, such as lord Mountjoy, whom he had engaged in these conspiracies; and
he ^ought to pacify his present remorse, by making such attonements as in any
other period of his life, he would have deemed more blameable than those
attempts themselves, which were the objects of his penitence Winwood, vol. I.
p. 30^.
. Sir Harry Neville, in particular, a man of merit, he accused of a
correspondence with the conspirators; though it appears, that that gentleman had
never assented to the proposals made him, and was no farther criminal than in
not revealing the earl's treason; an office, to which every man of honor
naturally bears the strongest reluctance Winwood, vol. I. p. 3^2.
. Neville was thrown into prison, and underwent a severe persecution: But as
the Queen found Mountjoy a very able and successful commander, she continued
him in his government, and sacrificed her resentment to the public service.

ELIZABETH affected extremely the praise of clemency; and in every great
example, which she had made during her reign, she had always appeared full of
reluctance and hesitation: But the present situation of Essex called forth all
her tender affections, and kept her in the most real agitation and
irresolution. She felt a perpetual combat between resentment and inclination,
pride and compassion, the care of her own safety and concern for her favorite;
and her situation, during this interval, was perhaps more an object of pity,
than that to which Essex himself was reduced. She signed the warrant for his
execution; she countermanded it; she again resolved on his death; she felt a
new return of tenderness: Essex's enemies told her, that he himself desired to
die, and had assured her, that she could never be in safety while he lived: It
is likely, that this proof of penitence and of concern for her, would operate a
contrary effect to what they intended, and would revive all that fond
affection, which she had so long indulged to the unhappy prisoner. But what
chiefly hardened her heart against him was his supposed obstinacy, in never
making, as she hourly expected, any application to her for mercy and
forgiveness; and she finally gave her consent to his execution. He discovered
at his death symptoms rather of penitence and piety than of fear; and willingly
acknowleged the justice of the sentence, by which he suffered. 25th February
And execution
The execution was private in the Tower, agreeable to his own request. He was
apprehensive, he said, lest the favor and compassion of the people would too
much raise his heart in those moments, when humiliation under the afflicting
hand of Heaven was the only proper sentiment, which he could indulge Dr.
Barlow's sermon on Essex's execution. Bacon, vol. IV* ^. ^34.
. And the Queen, no doubt, thought, that prudence required the removal of so
melancholy a spectacle from the public eye. Sir Walter Raleigh, who came to the
Tower on purpose, and who beheld Essex's execution from a window, increased
much by this action the general hatred, under which he already labored: It was
thought, that he had no other purpose than to feast his eyes with the death of
his enemy; and no apology, which he could make for so exceptionable a
circumstance of conduct, could be accepted by the public. The cruelty and
animosity, with which he urged on Essex's fate, even when Cecil relented
Murdin, p 811.
, were still regarded as the principles of this unmanly and ungenerous
behavior.

THE earl of Essex was but thirty-four years of age, when his rashness,
imprudence, and violence brought him to this untimely end. We must here, as in
many other instances, lament the inconstancy of human nature, that a person
endowed with so many noble virtues, generosity, sincerity, friendship, valor,
eloquence, and industry, should in the latter period of his life have given
such reins to his ungovernable passions, as involved, not only himself, but
many of his friends, in utter ruin. The Queen's tenderness and passion, as it
was the cause of those premature honors, which he attained, seems, on the
whole, the chief circumstance which brought on his destruction. Confident of
her partiality toward him; as well as of his own merit, he treated her with a
haughtiness, which neither her love nor her dignity could bear; and as her
amorous inclinations in so advanced an age, would naturally make her appear
ridiculous, if not hateful in his eyes, he was engaged, by an imprudent
openness, of which he made profession, to discover too easily those sentiments
to her jealous pride. The many reconciliations and returns of affection, of
which he had still made advantage, made him venture on new provocations, till
he pushed her beyond all bounds of patience; and he forgot, that, though the
sentiments of the woman were ever strong in her, those of the sovereign had
still in the end appeared predominant.

SOME of Essex's associates, Cuffe, Davers, Blount, Meric, and Davis were tried
and condemned, and all of them, except Davis, were executed. The Queen pardoned
the rest; being persuaded that they were drawn in merely from their friendship
to that nobleman, and their care of his safety; and were ignorant of the more
criminal part of his intentions. Southampton's life was spared with great
difficulty; but he was kept in prison during all the remainder of this reign.

THE King of Scots, who was apprehensive left his correspondence with Essex
might have been discovered, and have given offense to Elizabeth, sent the earl
of Mar and the lord Kinloss as ambassadors to England, in order to congratulate
the Queen on her escape from the late insurrection and conspiracy. They were
also ordered to enquire whether any measures had been taken by her to exclude
him from the succession, as well as to discover the inclinations of the chief
nobility and counselors, in case of the Queen's demise Birch'^ Memoirs, vol.
II* p. 510.
. They found the dispositions of men as favorable as they could wish; and they
even entered into a correspondence with secretary Cecil, whose influence, after
the fall of Essex, was now uncontrouled Osborne, p. 615.
, and who was resolved, by this policy, to acquire, in time, the confidence of
the successor. He knew how jealous Elizabeth ever was of her authority, and he
therefore carefully concealed from her his attachment to James: But he
afterward asserted, that nothing could be more advantageous to her, than this
correspondence; because the King of Scots, secure of mounting the throne by his
undoubted title, aided by those connexions with the English ministry, was the
less likely to give any disturbance to the present sovereign. He also persuaded
that prince to remain in quiet, and patiently to expect, that time should open
to him the inheritance of the throne, without pushing his friends on desperate
enterprises, which would totally incapacitate them from serving him. James's
equity, as well as his natural want of enterprise, easily inclined him to
embrace this resolution Spotswood, p. 471, 472.
; and thus the minds of the English were silently, but universally disposed to
admit, without opposition, the succession of the Scottish line: The death of
Essex, by putting an end to faction, had been rather favorable than
prejudicial to that great event.

THE King of France, who was little prepossessed in favor of James, and who
was averse to the union of England and Scotland Winwood, vol. I. p. 352.
, made his ambassador drop some hints to Cecil of Henry's willingness to concur
in any measure for disappointing the hopes of the Scotch monarch; but as Cecil
showed an entire disapprobation of such schemes, the court of France took no
farther steps in that matter: and thus the only foreign power, which could give
much disturbance to James's succession, was induced to acquiesce in it
Spotswood, p. 471.
. French affairs.
Henry made a journey this summer to Calais; and the Queen, hearing of his
intentions, went to Dover, in hopes of having a personal interview with a
monarch, whom, of all others, she most loved and most respected. The French
King, who felt the same sentiments toward her, would gladly have accepted of
the proposal; but as many difficulties occurred, it appeared necessary to lay
aside, by common consent, the project of an interview. Elizabeth, however,
wrote successively two letters to Henry, one by Edmondes, another by Sir Robert
Sydney, in which she expressed a desire of conferring about a business of
importance, with some minister in whom that prince reposed entire confidence.
The marquess of Rhoni, the King's favorite and prime minister, came to Dover
in disguise; and the memoirs of that able statesman contain a full account of
his conversation with Elizabeth. That magnanimous princess had formed a scheme
of establishing, in conjunction with Henry, a new system of policy in Europe,
and of fixing a durable balance of power, by the erection of new states on the
ruins of the house of Austria. She had even the wisdom to foresee the perils,
which might ensue from the aggrandizement of her ally; and she proposed to
unite the whole seventeen provinces of the Low Countries into one republic, in
order to form a perpetual barrier against the dangerous increase of the French,
as well as of the Spanish, monarchy. Henry had himself long meditated such a
project against the Austrian family; and Rhoni could not forbear expressing his
astonishment, when he found that Elizabeth and his master, though they had never
communicated their thoughts on this subject, had not only entered into the same
general views, but had also formed the same project for their execution. The
affairs, however, of France were not yet brought to a situation, which might
enable Henry to begin that great enterprise; and Rhoni satisfied the Queen,
that it would be necessary to postpone for some years their united attack on
the Austrian family. He departed, filled with just admiration of the solidity
of Elizabeth's judgment, and the greatness of her mind; and he owns that she
was entirely worthy of that high reputation, which she possessed in Europe.

THE Queen's magnanimity in forming such extensive projects was the more
remarkable, that, besides her having fallen so far into the decline of life,
the affairs of Ireland, though conducted with ability and success, were still in
disorder, and made a great diversion of her forces. The expense incurred by
this war lay heavy upon her narrow revenues; and her ministers, taking
advantage of her great disposition to frugality, proposed to her an expedient
of saving, which, though she at first disapproved of it, she was at last induced
to embrace. It was represented to her, that the great sums of money remitted to
Ireland for the pay of the English forces, came, by the necessary course of
circulation, into the hands of the rebels, and enabled them to buy abroad all
requisite supplies of arms and ammunition, which, from the extreme poverty of
that kingdom and its want of every useful commodity, they could not otherwise
find means to purchase. It was therefore proposed to her, that she should pay
her forces in money of a base alloy; and it was asserted, that, besides the
great saving to the revenue, this species of coin could never be exported with
advantage, and would not pass in any foreign market. Some of the wiser
counselors maintained, that, if the pay of the soldiers was raised in
proportion, the Irish rebels would necessarily reap the same benefit from the
base money, which would always be taken at a rate suitable to its value; if the
pay was not raised, there was danger of a mutiny among the troops, who,
whatever names might be affixed to the pieces of metal, would soon find from
experience that they were defrauded in their income Camden, p. ^43.
But Elizabeth, though she justly valued herself on fixing the standard of the
English coin, much debased by her predecessors, and had innovated very little
in that delicate article, was seduced by the specious arguments employed by the
lord treasurer on this occasion; and she coined a great quantity of base money,
which she made use of in the pay of her forces in Ireland (...), tom. XVI p.
(...).
.

Mountjoy's success in Ireland.
MOUNTJOY, the deputy, was a man of great ability; and foreseeing the danger of
mutiny among the troops, he led them instantly into the field, and resolved, by
means of strict discipline, and by keeping them employed against the enemy, to
obviate those inconveniences, which were justly apprehended. He made military
roads, and built a fortress at Moghery; he drove the Mac-Genises out of Lecale;
he harrassed Tyrone in Ulster with inroads and lesser expeditions; and by
destroying, every where, and during all seasons, the provisions of the Irish,
he reduced them to perish with famine in the woods and morasses, to which they
were obliged to retreat. At the same time, Sir Henry Docwray, who commanded
another body of troops, took the castle of Derry, and put garrisons into Newton
and Ainogh; and having seized the monastery of Donnegal near Balishannon, he
threw troops into it, and defended it against the assaults of O'Donnel and the
Irish. Nor was Sir George Carew idle in the province of Munster. He seized the
titular earl of Desmond, and sent him over, with Florence Macarty, another
chieftain, prisoner to England. He arrested many suspected persons, and took
hostages from others. And having got a reinforcement of two thousand men from
England, he threw himself into Cork, which he supplied with arms and
provisions; and he put every thing in a condition for resisting the Spanish
invasion, which was daily expected. The deputy, informed of the danger, to
which the southern provinces were exposed, left the prosecution of the war
against Tyrone, who was reduced to great extremity; and he marched with his
army into Monster.

23d September.
AT last, the Spaniards, under Don John d'Aquila, arrived at Kingsale; and Sir
Richard Piercy, who commanded in the town with a small garrison of an hundred
and fifty men, sound himself obliged to abandon it on their appearance. These
invaders amounted to four thousand men, and the Irish expressed a great desire
to join them, in order to free themselves from the English government, with
which they were extremely discontented. One chief ground of their complaint was
the introduction of trials by jury Camden, p. 644.
; an institution, abhorred by this barbarous nation, though nothing contributes
more to the support of that equity and liberty, for which the English laws are
so justly celebrated. The Irish also bore a great favor to the Spaniards,
having entertained the opinion, that they themselves were descended from that
nation; and their attachment to the catholic religion proved a new cause of
affection to the invaders. D'Aquila assumed the title of general in the holy
war for the preservation of the faith in Ireland; and he endeavored to
persuade the people, that Queen Elizabeth was, by several bulls of the pope,
deprived of her crown; that her subjects were absolved from their oaths of
allegiance; and that the Spaniards were come to deliver the Irish from the
power of the devil (...) p ^^^.
. Defeat of the Spaniards and Irish.
Mountjoy found it necessary to act with vigor, in order to prevent a total
insurrection of the Irish; and having gathered together his forces, he formed
the siege of Kinsale by land; while Sir Richard Levison, with a small squadron,
blockaded it by sea. He had no sooner begun his operations than he heard of the
arrival of another body of two thousand Spaniards, under the command of
Alphonso Ocampo, who had taken possession of Baltimore and Bere-haven; and he
found himself obliged to detach Sir George Carew to oppose their progress.
Tyrone, meanwhile, with Randal, Mac Surley, Tirel baron of Killey, and other
chieftains of the Irish, had joined Ocampo with all their forces, and were
marching to the relief of Kinsale. The deputy, informed of their design by
intercepted letters, made preparations to receive them; and being joined by
Levison with six hundred marines, he posted his troops on an advantageous
ground, which lay on their passage, leaving some cavalry to prevent a sally
from D'Aquila and the Spanish garrison. When Tyrone, with a body of Irish and
Spaniards, approached, he was surprised to find the English so well posted, and
ranged in such good order; and he immediately sounded a retreat: But the deputy
gave orders to pursue him; and having thrown these advanced troops into
disorder, he followed them to the main body, whom he also attacked, and put to
flight, with the slaughter of twelve hundred men Winwood, vol I p 6^.
. Ocampo was taken prisoner; Tyrone fled into Ulster; Odonel made his escape
into Spain; and D'Aquila, finding himself reduced to the greatest difficulties,
was obliged to capitulate upon such terms as the deputy prescribed to him: He
surrendered Kinsale and Baltimore, and agreed to evacuate the Kingdom. This
great blow, joined to other successes, gained by Wilmot, governor of Kerry, and
by Roger and Gavin Harvey, threw the rebels into dismay, and gave a prospect of
the final reduction of that kingdom.

THE Irish war, though successful, was extremely burdensome on the Queen's
revenue; and besides the supplies granted by Parliament, which were indeed very
small, but which they ever regarded as mighty concessions, she had been
obliged, notwithstanding her great frugality, to employ other expedients, such
as selling the royal demesnes and crown jewels D'Ewes, p. 629.
, and exacting loans from the people Ibid.
, in order to support this cause, so essential to the honor and interests of
England. 2^th October.
A Parliament.
The necessity of her affairs obliged her again to summon a Parliament; and it
here appeared, that, though old age was advancing fast upon her, though she had
lost much of her popularity by the unfortunate execution of Essex, insomuch
that, when she appeared in public, she was not attended with the usual
acclamations Ibid. p. 602. Osborne, p. 604.
, yet the powers of her prerogative, supported by her vigor, still remained as
high and uncontrollable as ever.

THE active reign of Elizabeth had enabled many persons to distinguish
themselves in civil and military employments; and the Queen, who was not able,
from her revenue, to give them any rewards proportioned to their service, had
made use of an expedient, which had been employed by her predecessors, but
which had never been carried to such an extreme as under her administration.
She granted her servants and courtiers patents for monopolies; and these
patents they sold to others, who were thereby enabled to raise commodities to
what price they pleased, and who put invincible restraints upon all commerce,
industry, and emulation. It is astonishing to consider the number and
importance of those commodities, which were thus assigned over to patentees.
Currants, salt, iron, powder, cards, calf-skins, fells, pouldavies,
ox-shin-bones, train oil, lists of cloth, potashes, anniseeds, vinegar,
sea-coals, steel, aquavitae, brushes, pots, bottles, saltpeter, lead,
accidences, oil, calamint-stone, oil of blubber, glasses, paper, starch, tin,
sulphur, new drapery, dried pilchers, transportation of iron ordnance, of beer,
of horn, of leather, importation of Spanish wools, of irish yarn: These are but
a part of the commodities, which had been consigned over to monopolists D'Ewes,
p. 648, 650, 652.
. When this list was read over in the house, a member cried out, Is not bread
in the number? Bread, said every one with astonishment: Yes, I assure you,
replied he, if affairs go on at this rate, we shall have bread reduced to a
monopoly before next Parliament Ibid. p. 648.
. These monopolists were so exorbitant in their demands, that in some places
they raised the price of salt, from sixteen pence a bushel, to fourteen or
fifteen shillings Ibid. p. 647.
. Such high profits naturally begot intruders upon their commerce; and in order
to secure themselves against encroachments, the patentees were armed with high
and arbitrary powers from the council, by which they were enabled to oppress
the people at pleasure, and to exact money from such as they thought proper to
accuse of interfering with their patent Ibid. p. 641, 646, 652.
. The patentees of saltpeter, having the power of entering into every house,
and of committing what havoc they pleased in stables, cellars, or wherever
they suspected saltpeter might be gathered; commonly extorted money from those
who desired to free themselves of this damage or trouble D'Ewes, p. 653.
. And while all domestic intercourse was thus restrained, lest any scope should
remain for industry, almost every species of foreign commerce was confined to
exclusive companies, who bought and sold at any price, that they themselves
thought proper to offer or exact.

THESE grievances, the most intolerable for the present, and the most
pernicious in their consequences, that ever were known in any age or under any
government, had been mentioned in the last Parliament, and a petition had even
been presented to the Queen, complaining of the patents; but she still
persisted in defending her monopolists against her people. A bill was now
introduced into the lower house, abolishing all these monopolies; and as the
former application had been unsuccessful, a law was insisted on as the only
certain expedient for correcting these abuses: The courtiers, on the other
hand, maintained, that this matter regarded the prerogative, and that they
could never hope for success, if they did not make application, in the most
humble and respectful manner, to the Queen's goodness and beneficence. The
topics, which were advanced in the house, and which came equally from the
courtiers and the country gentlemen, and were admitted by both, will appear the
most extraordinary to such as are prepossessed with an idea of the ancient
privileges of the people, and of the liberty enjoyed under the administration
of Elizabeth. It was asserted, that the Queen possessed both an enlarging and a
restraining power; by her prerogative she might set at liberty what was
restrained by statute or otherwise, and by her prerogative she might restrain
what was otherwise at liberty Ibid. p. 64^, 675.
: That the royal prerogative was not to be canvassed nor disputed nor examined
Ibid. p. ^^4, 6^^.
; and did not even admit of any limitation Ibid. p. 646, 654.
: That absolute princes, such as the sovereigns of England, were a species of
divinity Ibid. p. 649.
: That it was in vain to attempt tying the Queen's hands by laws or statutes;
since, by means of her dispensing power, she could loosen herself at her
pleasure Ibid.
: That even if a clause should be annexed to a statute, excluding her
dispensing power; she could first dispense with that clause, and then with the
statute Ibid. p. 64^, 4^^.
. After all this discourse, more worthy of a Turkish divan than of an English
house of commons, according to our present idea of this assembly, the Queen,
who perceived how odious monopolies had become, and what heats were likely to
rise, sent for the speaker, and desired him to inform the house, that she would
immediately cancel the most grievous and oppressive of these patents It may not
be amiss to subjoin some passages of these speeches; which may serve very much
to give us a just idea of the ancient constitution, and of the political
principles, which prevailed during the reign of Elizabeth. Mr. Laurence Hyde
proposed a bill, entitled an act for the explanation of the common law in
certain cases of letters patent. Mr. Spicer said, This bill may touch the
prerogative-royal, which, as I learned the last Parliament, is so transcendant,
that the -- of the subject may not aspire thereunto. Far be it therefore from
me, that the state and prerogative-royal of the prince should be tied by me or
by the act of any other subject. Mr. Francis Bacon said, As to the
prerogative-royal of the prince, for my own part, I ever allowed of it; and it
is such as I hope will never be discussed. The Queen, as she is our sovereign,
has both an enlarging and restraining power. For by her prerogative she may
set at liberty things restrained by statute law or otherwise, and secondly by
her prerogative she may restrain things which be at liberty. For the first, she
may grant a non obstante contrary to the penal laws. -- With regard to
monopolies and such like cases, the case has ever been to humble ourselves
unto her majesty, and by petition desire to have our grievances remedied,
especially when the remedy touches her so nigh in point of prerogative. -- I
say, and I say it again, that we ought not to deal, to judge or meddle with her
majesty's prerogative. I wish therefore every man to be careful of this
business. Dr. Bennet said, He that goes about to debate her majesty's
prerogative had need to walk warily. Mr. Laurence Hyde said, For the bill
itself, I made it, and I think I understand it: And far be it from this heart
of mine to think, this tongue to speak, or this hand to write any thing either
in prejudice or derogation of her majesty's prerogative-royal and the state. --
Mr. Speaker, quoth sergeant Harris, for ought I see, the house moves to have
this bill in the nature of a petition. It must then begin with more
humiliation. And truly, Sir, the bill is good of itself, but the penning of it
is somewhat out of course. Mr. Montague said, The matter is good and honest,
and I like this manner of proceeding by bill well enough in this matter. The
grievances are great, and I would note only unto you thus much, that the last
Parliament we proceeded by way of petition, which had no successful effect. Mr.
Francis More said, I know the Queen's prerogative is a thing curious to be
dealt withal; yet all grievances are not comparable. I cannot utter with my
tongue or conceive with my heart the great grievances that the town and
country, for which I serve, suffers by some of these monopolies. It brings
the general profit into a private hand, and the end of all this is beggary and
bondage to the subjects. We have a law for the true and faithful currying of
leather: There is a patent sets all at liberty, notwithstanding that statute.
And to what purpose is it to do any thing by act of Parliament, when the Queen
will undo the same by her prerogative? Out of the spirit of humiliation, Mr.
Speaker, I do speak it, there is no act of here is that has been or is more
derogatory to her own majesty, more odious to the subject, more dangerous to
the commonwealth than the granting of these monopolies. Mr. Martin said, I do
speak for a town that grieves and pines, for a country that groaneth and
languisheth under the burden of monstrous and unconscionable substitutes to
the monopolitans of starch, tin, fish, cloth, oil, vinegar, salt and I know not
what; nay, what not? The principalest commodities both of my town and country
are engrost into the hands of these bloodsuckers of the commonwealth. If a
body, Mr. Speaker, being let blood, be left still languishing without any
remedy, how can the good estate of that body still remain? Such is the state of
my town and country; the traffic is taken away, the inward and private
commodities are taken away, and da^e not be used without the license of these
monopolitans. If these blood suckers be still let alone to suck up the best and
principallest commodities, which the earth there has given us, what will
become of us, from whom the fruits of our own soil and the commodities of our
own labor, which with the sweat of our brows, even up to the knees in mire and
dirt, we have labored for, shall be taken by warrant of supreme authority,
which the poor subject dare not gainsay? Mr. George Moore said, We know the
power of her majesty cannot be restrained by any act; why therefore should we
thus talk? Admit we should make this statute with a non obstante; yet the Queen
may grant a patent with a non obstante, to cross this non obstante. I think
therefore it agrees more with the gravity and wisdom of this house to proceed
with all humbleness by petition than bill. Mr. Downland said, As I would be no
let or over-vehement in any thing, so I am not sottish or senseless of the
common grievance of the commonwealth. If we proceed by way of petition, we can
have no more gracious answer, than we had the last Parliament to our petition.
But since that Parliament, we have no reformation. Sir Robert Wroth said, I
speak, and I speak it boldly, these patentees are worse than ever they were.
Mr. Hayward Townsend proposed, that they should make suit to her majesty, not
only to repeal all monopolies grievous to the subject, but also that it would
please her majesty to give the Parliament leave to make an act, that they might
be of no more force, validity, or effect, than they are at the common law,
without the strength of her prerogative. Which though we might now do, and the
act being so reasonable, we might assure ourselves her majesty would not delay
the passing thereof, yet we, her loving subjects, etc. would not offer without
her privity and consent (the cause so nearly touching her prerogative) or go
about to do any such act.

On a subsequent day, the bill against monopolies was again introduced, and Mr.
Spicer said, It is to no purpose to offer to tie her majesty's hands by act of
parliament, when she may loosen herself at her pleasure. Mr. Davies said, God
has given that power to absolute princes, which he attributes to himself. Dixi
quod Dii estis. (N. B. This axiom he applies to the Kings of England.) Mr.
secretary Cecil said, I am servant to the Queen, and before I would speak and
give consent to a case that should debase her prerogative, or abridge it, I
would wish that my tongue were cut out of my head. I am sure there were
lawmakers before there were laws: (Meaning, I suppose, that the sovereign wa
above the laws.) One gentleman went about to posters us, with the execution of
the law man ancient record of 5 or 7 of Edward the third. Likely enough to be
true in that time, when the King was afraid of the subject. If you stand upon
law, and dispute of the prerogative, he (...) what ^^ac^on says, Prarogativam
nostram ^e^ro (...) diffi^t^re. And for my own part, I li^e not these (...)
should be taken. And you, Mr. Speaker, should perform the charge h^ majesty
gave unto you, in the beginning of this Parliament, not to receive bills of
this nature: For her majesty's ears be open to all grievances, and her hands
stretched out to every man's petition. -- When the prince (...) penses with a
penal law, that is left to the alteration of sovereignity, that is good and
irrevocable Mr. Montague said, I am loath to speak what I know, l^^, per^ap, I
should displease. The prerogative royal is that which is now in question, and
which the laws of the land have ever allowed and maintained. Let us therefore
apply by petition to her majesty.

After the speaker told the house, that the Queen had annulled many of the
(...). Mr Franc^^ Moore said, I must confess, Mr. speaker, I moved the house
both the (...) Parliament and this, touching this point; but I never meant (and
I hope the house thinks so) to set limits and bounds to the prerogative
royal. He proceeds to move, that thanks should be given to her majesty; and
tho, the whereas diverse speeches have been moved extravagantly in the house,
which doubtless have been told her majesty, and perhaps ill conceived of by
her, Mr. Speaker would apologize, and humbly crave pardon for the same. N. B.
These extracts were taken by Townsend, a member of the house, who was no
courtier; and the extravagance of the speeches seems rather to be on the other
side: It will certainly appear odd to us, that this liberty should be thought
extravagant However, the Queen, notwithstanding her cajoling the house, was so
ill satisfied with these proceedings, that she spoke of them peevishly in her
concluding speech, and told them, that she perceived, that private respects
with them were privately masqued under public presence. D'Ewes, p. 619.

There were some other topics, in favor of prerogative, still more
extravagant, advanced in the house this Parliament. When the question of the
subsidy was before them, Mr. sergeant Heyle said, Mr. Speaker, I marvel much,
that the house should stand upon granting of a subsidy or the time of payment,
when all we have is her majesty's, and she may lawfully at her pleasure take it
from us: Yea, she has as much right to all our lands and goods as to any
revenue of her crown. At which all the house hemmed, and laughed, and talked.
Well, quoth sergeant Heyle, all your hemming shall not put me out of
countenance. So, Mr. Speaker stood up and said, It is a great disorder, that
this should be used. -- So the said sergeant proceeded, and when he had spoken
a little while, the house hemmed again; and so he fat down. In his latter
speech, he said, he could prove his former position by precedents in the time
of Henry the third, King John, King Stephen, etc. which was the occasion of
their hemming. D'Ewes, p. 633. It is observable, that Heyle was an eminent
lawyer, a man of character. Winwood, vol. I. p. 290. And though the house in
general showed their disapprobation, no one cared to take him down, or oppose
these extravagant positions. It was also asserted this session, that in the
same manner as the Roman consul was possessed of the power of rejecting or
admitting motions in the senate, the Speaker might either admit or reject bills
in the house. D'Ewes, p. 677. The house declared themselves against this
opinion; but the very proposal of it is a proof at what a low ebb liberty was
at that time in England.

In the year 1591, the judges made a solemn decree, that England was an
absolute empire, of which the King was the head. In consequence of this
opinion, they determined, that even if the act of the first of Elizabeth had
never been made, the King was supreme head of the church; and might have
erected, by his prerogative, such a court as the ecclesiastical commission: For
that he was the head of all his subjects. Now that court was plainly arbitrary:
The inference is, that his power was equally absolute over the laity. See
Coke's Reports, p. 5. Candrey's case.


.

THE house was struck with astonishment, and admiration, and gratitude at this
extraordinary instance of the Queen's goodness and condescension. A member
said, with tears in his eyes, that if a sentence of everlasting happiness had
been pronounced in his favor, he could not have felt more joy than that with
which he was at present overwhelmed D'Ewes, p. 654.
. Another observed, that this message from the sacred person of the Queen, was
a kind of gospel or glad-tidings, and ought to be received as such, and be
written in the tablets of their hearts Ibid. p. 656.
. And it was farther remarked, that in the same manner as the Deity would not
give his glory to another, so the Queen herself was the only agent in their
present prosperity and happiness Ibid. p. 657.
. The house voted, that the speaker, with a certain number of members, should
ask permission to wait on her majesty, and return her thanks for her gracious
concessions to her people.

WHEN the speaker, with the other members, was introduced to the Queen, they
all flung themselves on their knees; and remained in that posture a
considerable time, till she thought proper to express her desire, that they
should rise. The speaker displayed the gratitude of the commons, that her
sacred ears were ever open to hear them, and her blessed hands ever stretched
out to relieve them. They acknowleged, he said, in all duty and thankfulness
acknowleged, that, before they called, her preventing grace, and all-deserving
goodness watched over them for their good; more ready to give than they could
desire, much less deserve. He remarked, that the attribute which was most
proper to God, to perform all he promises, appertained also to her; and that
she was all truth, all constancy, and all goodness. And he concluded with these
expressions, "Neither do we present our thanks in words or any outward sign,
which can be no sufficient retribution for so great goodness; but in all duty
and thankfulness, prostrate at your feet, we present our most loyal and
thankful hearts, even the last drop of blood in our hearts, and the last spirit
of breath in our nostrils, to be poured out, to be breathed up, for your safety
D'Ewe^, p. 6^8, 6^^.
." The Queen heard very patiently this speech, where she was flattered in
phrases appropriated to the Supreme Being; and she returned an answer, full of
such expressions of tenderness toward her people, as ought to have appeared
fulsome after the late instances of rigor which she had employed, and from
which nothing but necessity had made her depart. Thus was this critical affair
happily terminated; and Elizabeth, by prudently receding, in time, from her
rights, maintained her dignity, and preserved the affections of her people.

THE commons granted her a supply very unprecedented, of four subsidies and
eight fifteenths; and they were even so dutiful as to vote this supply before
they received any satisfaction in the business of monopolies, which they justly
considered as of the utmost consequence to the interest and happiness of the
nation. Had they attempted to extort that concession by keeping the supply in
suspense; so haughty was the Queen's disposition, this appearance of constraint
and jealousy had been sufficient to have produced a denial of all their
requests, and to have forced her into some acts of authority still more violent
and arbitrary.

Monson, p. 181.
. They brought her home to England, and she was valued at a million of ducats
Camden, p. 647.
. A sensible loss to the Spaniards; and a supply still more considerable to
Elizabeth This year the Spaniards begun the siege of Ostend, which was bravely
defended for five months by Sir Francis Vere. The States then relieved him, by
sending a new governor; and on the whole the (...) three year, and is computed
to have cost the lives of an hundred thousand men
.

THE affairs of Ireland, after the defeat of Tyrone, and the expulsion of the
Spaniards, hastened to a settlement. Lord Mountjoy divided his army into small
parties, and harrassed the rebels on every side: He built Charlemount, and many
other small forts, which were impregnable to the Irish, and guarded all the
important passes of the country: The activity of Sir Henry Docwray and Sir
Arthur Chichester, permitted no repose or security to the rebels: And many of
the chiestains, after skulking like wild beasts, in woods and morasses,
submitted to mercy, and received such conditions as the deputy was pleased to
impose upon them. Tyrone's submission.
Tyrone himself made application by Arthur Mac-Baron, his brother, to be
received upon terms; but Mountjoy would not admit him, except he made an
absolute surrender of his life and fortune to the Queen's mercy. He appeared
before the deputy at Millefont, in a habit and posture suitable to his present
fortune; and after acknowleging his offense in the most humble terms, he was
committed to custody by Mountjoy, who intended to bring him over captive into
England, to be disposed of at the Queen's pleasure.

Queen's sickness,
BUT Elizabeth was now incapable of receiving any satisfaction from this
fortunate event: She had fallen into a prosound melancholy; which all the
advantages of her high fortune, all the glories of her prosperous reign, were
unable, in any degree, to alleviate or assuage. Some ascribed this depression
of mind to her repentance of granting a pardon to Tyrone, whom she had always
resolved to bring to condign punishment for his treasons, but who had made such
interest with the ministers, as to extort a remission from her. Others, with
more likelihood, accounted for her dejection, by a discovery which she had
made, of the correspondence maintained in her court with her successor the King
of Scots, and by the neglect, to which, on account of her old age and
infirmities, she imagined herself to be exposed. But there is another cause
assigned for her melancholy, which has long been rejected by historians as
remantic, but which late discoveries seem to have confirmed See the proofs of
this remarkable fact collected in Birth's Negociatious, p. 206. And Memoir,
vol. II. p. 481, 505, 50^, etc.
: Some incidents happened which revived her tenderness for Essex, and filled
her with the deepest sorrow for the consent which she had unwarily given to his
execution.

THE earl of Essex, after his return from the fortunate expedition against
Cadiz, observing the increase of the Queen's fond attachment toward him, took
occasion to regret, that the necessity of her service required him often to be
absent from her person, and exposed him to all those ill offices which his
enemies, more assiduous in their attendance, could practice against him. She
was moved with this tender jealousy; and making him the present of a ring,
desired him to keep that pledge of her affection, and assured him, that in
whatever disgrace he should fall, whatever prejudices she might be induced to
entertain against him, yet, if he sent her that ring, she would immediately,
upon the sight of it, recollect her former tenderness, would afford him again a
h aring, and would lend a favorable ear to his apology. Essex, notwithstanding
all his misfortunes, reserved this precious gift to the last extremity; but
after his trial and condemnation, he resolved to try the experiment, and he
committed the ring to the countess of Nottingham, whom he desired to deliver it
to the Queen. The countess was prevailed on by her husband, who was Essex's
capital enemy, not to execute the commission; and Elizabeth, who still expected
that her favorite would make this appeal to her tenderness, and who ascribed
the neglect of it to his invincible obstinacy, was, after much delay, and many
internal combats, pushed by resentment and policy to sign the warrant for his
execution. The countess of Nottingham, falling into sickness, and sinding
herself approach toward her end, was seized with remorse for her conduct; and
having obtained a visit from the Queen, she craved her pardon, and revealed to
her the fatal secret. The Queen, astonished with this incident, burst into a
surious passion: She shook the dying countess in her bed; and crying to her,
That God might pardon her, but she never ^ould, she broke from her, and
thenceforth resigned herself over to the deepest and most incurable melancholy.
She rejected all consolation: She even refused food and sustenance: And
throwing herself on the floor, she kept herself silent and immovable, feeding
her thoughts on her afflictions, and declaring life and existence an
insufferable burden to her. Few words she uttered; and they were all
expressive of some inward grief which she cared not to reveal: But sighs and
groans were the chief vent which she gave to her despondency, and which, though
they discovered her sorrows, were able to ease or abate them. Ten days and
nights she lay upon the carpet, leaning on cushions which her maids brought
her; and her physicians could not persuade her to allow herself to be put to
bed, much less to make trial of any remedies which they prescribed to her
Strype, vol. IV. No. 276.
. Her anxious mind at last had so long preyed on her frail body, that her end
was visibly approaching; and the council, being assembled, sent the lord
keeper, the lord admiral, and the secretary, to know her mind with regard to
her successor. She answered with a faint voice, that as she had held a regal
scepter, she desired no other than a royal successor. Cecil requesting her to
explain herself more particularly, she subjoined, that she would have a King to
succeed her; and who should that be but her nearest kinsman, the King of Scots.
Being then advised by the archbishop of Canterbury, to fix her thoughts upon
God, she replied, that she did so, nor did her mind in the least wander from
him. And death,
24 March.
Her voice soon after left her, her senses failed, she fell into a lethargic
slumber, which continued some hours, and she expired gently, without farther
struggle or convulsion, in the seventieth year of her age, and forty-fifth of
her reign.

And character.
SUCH a dark cloud overcast the evening of that day, which had shone out with a
mighty luster in the eyes of all Europe. There are few great personages in
history who have been more exposed to the calumny of enemies, and the adulation
of friends, than Queen Elizabeth; and yet there scarce is any, whose reputation
has been more certainly determined, by the unanimous consent of posterity. The
unusual length of her administration, and the strong features of her character,
were able to overcome all prejudices; and obliging her detractors to abate much
of their invectives, and her admirers somewhat of their panegyrics, have at
last, in spite of political factions, and what is more, of religious
animosities, produced an uniform judgment with regard to her conduct. Her
vigor, her constancy, her magnanimity, her penetration, vigilance, address,
are allowed to merit the highest praises, and appear not to have been surpassed
by any person who ever filled a throne: A conduct less rigorous, less
imperious, more sincere, more indulgent to her people, would have been
requisite to form a perfect character. By the force of her mind, she controuled
all her more active and stronger qualities, and prevented them from running
into excess: Her heroism was exempt from all temerity, her frugality from
avarice, her friendship from partiality, her enterprise from turbulency and a
vain ambition: She guarded not herself with equal care or equal success from
lesser infirmities; the rivalship of beauty, the desire of admiration, the
jealousy of love, and the sallies of anger.

HER singular talents for government were founded equally on her temper and on
her capacity. Endowed with a great command over herself, she soon obtained an
uncontrouled ascendant over her people; and while she merited all their esteem
by her real virtues, she also engaged their affection by her pretended ones.
Few sovereigns of England succeeded to the throne in more difficult
circumstances; and none ever conducted the government with such uniform success
and felicity. Though unacquainted with the practice of toleration, the true
secret for managing religious factions, she preserved her people, by her
superior prudence, from those confusions in which theological controversy had
involved all the neighboring nations: And though her enemies were the most
powerful princes of Europe, the most active, the most enterprizing, the least
scrupulous, she was able by her vigor to make deep impressions on their state:
Her own greatness meanwhile remained untouched and unimpaired.

THE wise ministers, and brave warriors, who flourished during her reign, share
the praise of her success; but instead of lessening the applause due to her,
they make great addition to it. They owed, all of them, their advancement to
her choice; they were supported by her constancy; and with all their ability,
they were never able to acquire any undue ascendant over her. In her family, in
her court, in her kingdom, she remained equally mistress: The force of the
tender passions was great over her, but the force of her mind was still
superior; and the combat which her victory visibly cost her, serves only to
display the firmness of her resolution, and the loftiness of her ambitious
sentiments.

THE fame of this princess, though it has surmounted the prejudices both of
faction and of bigotry, yet lies still exposed to another prejudice, which is
more durable because more natural, and which, according to the different views
in which we survey her, is capable either of exalting beyond measure, or
diminishing the luster of her character. This prejudice is founded on the
consideration of her sex. When we contemplate her as a woman, we are apt to be
struck with the highest admiration of her great qualities and extensive
capacity; but we are also apt to require some more softness of disposition,
some greater lenity of temper, some of those amiable weaknesses by which her
sex is distinguished. But the true method of estimating her merit, is to lay
aside all these considerations, and to consider her merely as a rational being,
placed in authority, and entrusted with the government of mankind. We may find
it difficult to reconcile our fancy to her as a wife or a mistress; but her
qualities as a sovereign, though with some considerable exceptions, are the
object of undisputed applause and approbation.

Government, manners, commerce, arts, and learning.
THE party amongst us who have distinguished themselves by their adherence to
liberty and a popular government, have long indulged their prejudices against
the succeeding race of princes, by bestowing unbounded panegyrics on the virtue
and wisdom of Elizabeth. They have even been so extremely ignorant of the
transactions of this reign, as to extol her for a quality which, of all others,
she was the least possessed of; a tender regard for the constitution, and a
concern for the liberties and privileges of her people. But as it is scarce
possible for the prepossessions of party to throw a veil much longer over facts
so palpable and undeniable, there is danger lest the public should run into the
opposite extreme, and should entertain an aversion to the memory of a princess
who exercised the royal authority in a manner so much contrary to all the ideas
which we at present entertain of a legal constitution. But Elizabeth only
supported the prerogatives which were transmitted to her by her immediate
predecessors: She believed that her subjects were entitled to no more liberty
than their ancestors enjoyed: She found that they entirely acquiesced in her
arbitrary administration: And it was not natural for her to find fault with a
form of government, by which she herself was invested with such unlimited
authority. In the particular exertions of power, the question ought never to be
forgot, What is best? But in the general distribution of power among the
several members of a constitution, there can seldom be admitted any other
question, than What is usual? Few examples occur of princes, who have willingly
resigned their power: None of those who have, without struggle, allowed it to
be extorted from them. If any other rule than ancient practice be followed,
factions and dissentions must multiply w thout end: And though many
constitutions, and none more than the British, have been improved even by
violent innovations, the praise which we bestow on those patriots, to whom we
are indebted for our privileges, ought to be given with some reserve, and
surely without the least rancour against those who adhered to the ancient
constitution.

IN order to understand the ancient constitution of England, there is not a
period which deserves more to be studied than the reign of Elizabeth. The
prerogatives of this princess were scarce ever disputed, and she therefore
employed them without scruple: Her imperious temper, a circumstance in which
she went far beyond her successors, rendered her exertions of power violent and
frequent, and discovered the full extent of her authority: The great popularity
which she enjoyed, proves, that the did not infringe any established liberties
of the people: There remain monuments numerous enough to as ertain the most
noted acts of her administration: And though th^se monument* must be sought
remote from the ordinary historians, they become only the more authenti on that
account, and serve as a stronger proof, that the particular exertions of her
power were conceived to be nothing but the ordinary course of administration,
since they were not thought remarkable enough to be recorded even by
contemporary writers. If there was any difference in this particular, the
people, in former reigns, seem rather to have been more submissive and servile
than during the age of Elizabeth In a memorial of the state of the realm, (...)
"Then follows the decay (...), which (...) and reverence of all inferior
estate (...) person, to behold the (...)." (...).
. It may not here be improper to recount some of the ancient prerogatives of
the crown, and lay open the sources of that great power which the English
monarchs formerly enjoyed.

ONE of the most ancient and most established instruments of power was the
court of Star Chamber, which possessed an unlimited discretionary authority of
fining, imprisoning, and inflict ng corporal punishment, and whose jurisdiction
extended to all sorts of offenses, contempts, and disorders, that lay not
within reach of the common law. The members of this court consisted of the
privy council and the judges; men, who all of them enjoyed their offices during
pleasure: And when the prince himself was present, he was the sole judge, and
all the others could only interpose with their advice. There needed but this
one court in any government, to put an end to all regular, legal, and exact
plans of liberty. For who durst ^^t himself in opposition to the crown and
ministry, or aspire to the character of being a patr^n of freedom, while
exposed to so arbitrary a jurisdiction? I much question, whether any of the
absolute monarchies in Europe contain, at present, so illegal and desp^ti^ a
tribunal.

THE court of High Commission was another jurisdiction still more terrible,
both because the crime of heresy, of which it took co^^^^ance, wa^ more
undesinable than any civil offense, and beca se its methods of inquisition and
of administering oaths, were more contrary to all the m^^^ si^p^ ideas of
justice and equity. The fines and imprisonments imposed by this court were
frequent: The deprivations and suspensions of the clergy for nonconformity,
were also very numerous, and comprehended at one time the third of all the
ecclesiastics of England Neal, vol. I. p. 479.
. The Queen, in a letter to the archbishop of Canterbury, said expressly, that
she was resolved, "That no man should be suffered to decline either on the left
or on the right hand, from the drawn line limited by authority, and by her laws
and injunctions Murden, p. 183.
.

BUT Martial Law went far beyond even these two courts in a prompt and
arbitrary and violent method of decision. Whenever there was any insurrection
or public disorder, the crown employed martial law; and it was during that time
exercised not only over the soldiers, but over the whole people: Any one might
be punished as a rebel, or an aider and abettor of rebellion, whom the
provostmarshal or lieutenant of counties, or their deputies, pleased to
suspect. Lord Bacon says, that the trial at common law granted the earl of
Essex, and his fellow conspirators, was a favor: For that the case would have
born and required the severity of martial law Vol. IV. p. 510.
. We have seen instances of its being employed by Queen Mary in defense of
orthodoxy. There remains a letter of Queen Elizabeth's to the earl of Suffex,
after the suppression of the northern rebellion, in which she reproves him
sharply, because she had not heard of his having done any execution by martial
law MS. of lord Royston's from the Paper Office.
. But the King of England did not always limit the exercise of martial law to
the times of war and rebellion. In 1552, when there was no rebellion or
insurrection, King Edward granted a commission of martial law; and empowered
the commissioners to execute it, as should be thought by their discretions most
necessary Strype's Eccles. Memoirs, vol. II. p. 3^^, 458, 9.
. Queen Elizabeth too was not sparing in the use of martial law. In 1573, one
Peter Burchet, a puritan, being persuaded that it was lawful or meritorious to
kill such as opposed the truth of the gospel, ran into the streets, and wounded
Hawkins, the famous sea-captain, whom he took for Hatton, the Queen's
favorite. The Queen was so incensed, that she ordered him to be punished
instantly by martial law; but upon the remonstrance of some prudent
counselors, who told her, that that law ought to be confined to turbulent
times, she recalled her order, and delivered over Burchet to the common law
Camden, p. 449. Strype, vol. II. p. 288.
. But she continued not always so reserved in exerting this authority. There
remains a proclamation of hers, where she orders martial law to be used against
all such as import bulls, or even forbidden books and pamphlets from abroad
Strype, vol. III. p. 570.
; and prohibits the lieutenants or their deputies to be questioned for their
arbitrary punishment of such offenders, any law or statute to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. We have another act of hers still more extraordinary.
The streets of London were very much infested with idle vagabonds and riotous
persons: The lord mayor had endeavored to repress this disorder: The
Star Chamber had exerted its authority, and inflicted punishment on these
rioters: But the Queen, finding those remedies ineffectual, revived martial
law, and gave Sir Thomas Wilford a commission of provost-marshal: "Granting him
authority, and commanding him, upon signification given by the justices of
peace in London or the neighboring counties, of such offenders, worthy to be
speedily executed by martial law, to attach and take the same persons, and in
the presence of the said justices, according to justice of martial law, to
execute them upon the gallows or gibbet openly, or near to such place where the
said rebellious and incorrigible offenders shall be found to have committed the
said great offenses Rymer, tom. XVI. p 279.
." I suppose it will be difficult to produce an instance of such an act of
authority in any place nearer than Muscovy.

THE Star Chamber, and High Commission, and Court Martial, though arbitrary
jurisdictions, yet had still some pretense of a trial, at least a sentence; but
there was a grievous punishment very familiarly inflicted in that age, without
any other authority than the warrant of a secretary of state, or of the privy
council (...) to prison, because they refused to pay the (...) p (...)
; and that was, imprisonment, in any jail, and during any time, that these
ministers should think proper. In suspicious times, all the jails were full of
prisoners of state; and these unhappy victims of public jealousy were sometimes
thrown into dungeons, and loaded with irons, and treated in the most cruel
manner, without any remedy from law.

THIS practice was an indirect way of employing torture: But the ra^k itself
was frequently used, upon any suspicion, without other authority than a warrant
from the secretary or the privy council. Even the council in the marches of
Wales were empowered, by their very commission, to make use of torture,
whenever they thought proper Haynes, p. 196.
. There cannot be a stronger proof how lightly the rack was employed, than the
following story, told by lord Bacon. We shall give it in his own words. "The
Queen was mightily incented against Haywarde, on account of a book he dedicated
to lord Essex, being a story of the first year of King Henry the fourth,
thinking it a seditious prelude to put into the people's heads boldness and
faction: She said, she had an opinion that there was treason in it, and asked
me, if I could not find any places in it, that might be drawn within the case
of treason: Whereto I answered, For treason, sure I found none; but for felony,
very many: And when her majesty hastily asked me, wherein? I told her, the
author had committed very apparent theft: For he had taken most of the
sentences of Cornelius Tacitus, and translated them into English, and put them
into his text. And another time, when the Queen could not be persuaded, that it
was his writing whose name was to it, but that it had some more mischievous
author, and said with great indignation, that she would have him racked, to
produce his author; I replied, nay, madam, he is a doctor, never rack his
person, but rack his style: Let him have pen, ink, and paper, and help of
books, and be enjoined to continue the story where it breaks off, and I will
undertake, by collating the styles, to judge whether he were the author or no
Cabbala, p. 81.
." Thus, had it not been for Bacon's humanity, or rather his wit, this author,
a man of letters, had been put to the rack, for a most innocent performance.
His real offense was, his dedicating a book to that munificent patron of the
learned, the earl of Essex, at a time when this nobleman lay under disgrace
with her majesty.

THE Queen's menace of trying and punishing Haywarde for treason, could easily
have been executed, let his book have been ever so innocent. While so many
terrors hung over the people's heads, no jury durst have acquitted a man whom
the court was resolved to have condemned. The practice also of not confronting
the witnesses with the prisoner, gave the crown lawyers all imaginable
advantages against him. And, indeed, there occurs not one instance, during all
these reigns, that the sovereign, or the ministers, were ever disappointed in
the issue of a prosecution. Timid juries, and judges who held their offices
during pleasure, never failed to second all the views of the court.

THE power of pressing, and obliging any person to accept of any office, was
another prerogative totally incompatible with freedom. Osborne gives the
following account of Elizabeth's method of employing this prerogative. "In case
she sound any likely to interrupt her occasions," says he, "she did seasonably
prevent him by a chargeable employment abroad, or putting him upon some service
at home, which she knew least grateful to the people: Contrary to a false
maxim, since practiced with far worse success, by such princes as thought it
better husbandry to buy off enemies than reward friends Page (...).
." The practice with which Osborne reproaches the two immediate successors of
Elizabeth, proceeded partly from the extreme difficulty of their situation,
partly from the greater lenity of their disposition. The power of pressing, as
may naturally be imagined, was often abused; and money was exacted by the
officers for freeing persons from the service Murden, p. 181.
.

THE government of England in that age, bore some resemblance to that of Turkey
at present: The sovereign possessed every power, except that of imposing taxes:
And in both countries this limitation, unsupported by other privileges, appears
rather prejudicial to the people. In Turkey, it obliges the Sultan to permit
the extortion of the bashas and governors of provinces, from whom he afterward
squeezes presents, or takes forfeitures: In England, it engaged the Queen to
erect monopolies, and grant patents for exclusive trade: An invention so
pernicious, that had she gone on, during a tract of years, at her own rate,
England, the seat of riches, arts, and commerce, would have contained at
present as little industry as Morocco, or the coast of Barbary.

WE may further observe, that this valuable privilege, valuable only because it
proved afterward the means by which the Parliament extorted all their other
privileges, was very much encroached on, in an indirect manner, during the
reign of Elizabeth, as well as of her predecessors. She often exacted loans
from her people; an arbitrary and unequal kind of imposition, and which
individuals felt severely: For though the money had been regularly restored,
which was seldom the case Bacon, vol. IV. p. 362.
, it lay in the prince's hands without interest, which was a sensible loss to
the individuals from whom the money was borrowed.

THERE remains a proposal made by the lord Burleigh, for levying a general loan
on the people, equivalent to a subsidy Haynes, p. 518, 519
; a scheme which would have laid the burden more equally, but which was, in
different words, nothing but a taxation, imposed without consent of Parliament.
It is remarkable, that the scheme, thus proposed, without any visible
necessity, by that wise minister, is the very same which Henry the eighth
attempted, and which Charles the first, enraged by ill usage from his
Parliament, and reduced to the greatest difficulties, put afterward in
practice, to the great discontent of the nation.

THE demand of benevolence was another invention of that age for taxing the
people. This practice was so little conceived to be irregular, that the
commons, in 1585, offered the Queen a benevolence; which she very generously
refused, as having no occasion, at that time, for money D'Ewes, p. 494.
. Queen Mary also, by an order of council, increased the customs in some
branches; and her sister imitated the example Bacon, vol. IV. p. 362.
. There was a species of ship money imposed at the time of the Spanish
invasion. The several ports were required to equip a certain number of ships at
their own charge; and such was the alacrity of the people for the public
defense, that some of the ports, particularly London, sent double the number
demanded of them Monson, p. 267.
. When any levies were made for Ireland, France, or the Low Countries, the
Queen obliged the counties to raise the soldiers, to arm and clothe them, and
carry them to the seaports at their own charge. New-Year's-Gifts were, at that
time, expected from the nobility, and from the more considerable gentry
Strype's Memor. vol. I. p. 137.
.

PURVEYANCE was another method of taxation, unequal, arbitrary, and oppressive.
The whole kingdom felt sensibly the burden of this imposition; and it was
regarded as a great privilege which was conferred on Oxford and Cambridge, to
prohibit the purveyors from taking any commodities within five miles of these
universities. The Queen victualled her navy by means of this prerogative,
during the first years of her government Camden, p. 388.
.

WARDSHIP was the most regular and legal of all these impositions by
prerogative: Yet was it a great badge of slavery, and oppressive to the great
families. When an estate fell to a female, the sovereign obliged her to marry
any one he pleased: Whether the heir was male or female, the crown enjoyed the
whole profit of the rents during the minority. The giving a rich wardship was
an usual method of rewarding a courtier or favorite.

THE inventions were endless, which arbitrary power might employ for extorting
of money, while the people imagined that their property was secured by
debarring the crown from imposing taxes. Strype has preserved a speech of lord
Burleigh to the Queen and council, wherein are contained some particulars not a
little extraordinary Annals, vol. IV. p. 234, and seq.
. Burleigh proposes that she should erect a court for the correction of all
abuses, and should confer on the commissioners a general inquisitorial power
over the whole kingdom. He sets before her eyes the example of her wise
grandfather, Henry the seventh, who, by such methods, augmented extremely his
revenue; and he recommends, that this new court should proceed, "as well by the
direction and ordinary course of the laws, as by virtue of her majesty's
supreme regiment and absolute power, from whence law proceeded." In a word, he
expects from this institution, greater accession to the royal treasure, than
Henry the eighth derived from the abolition of the abbeys, and all the
forfeitures of the ecclesiastical revenues. This project of lord Burleigh needs
not, I think, any comment. A form of government must be very arbitrary, where a
wise and good minister could make such a proposal to the sovereign.

EMBARGOES on merchandise was another engine of royal power, by which the
English princes were able to extort money from the people. We have seen
instances in the reign of Mary. Elizabeth, before her coronation, issued an
order to the custom-house, prohibiting the sale of all crimson silks which
should be imported, till the court was first provided Strype, vol. I. p. 27.
. She expected, no doubt, a good pennyworth from the merchants, while they lay
under this restraint.

THE Parliament pretended to the right of enacting laws, as well as of granting
subsidies; but this privilege was, during that age, still more insignificant
than the other. Queen Elizabeth expressly prohibited them from meddling with
state matters or ecclesiastical causes; and she openly sent the members to
prison, who dared to transgress her imperial edict in these particulars. There
passed few Parliaments, during her reign, where there occur not instances of
this arbitrary conduct.

BUT the legislative power of the Parliament was a mere fallacy, while the
sovereign was universally acknowleged to possess a dispensing power, by which
all the laws could be invalidated, and rendered of no effect. The use of this
power was also an indirect method practiced for erecting monopolies. Where the
statutes laid any branch of manufacture under restrictions, the sovereign, by
exempting one person from the laws, gave him in effect the monopoly of that
commodity Rymer, tom. W. p. (...) D'Ewes, 4. 6^^.
. There was no grievance, at that time, more universally complained of, than
the frequent dispensing with the penal laws Monson, p (...).
.

BUT in reality, the crown possessed the full legislative power, by means of
proclamations, which might affect any subject of the greatest importance, and
which the Star Chamber took care to see more rigorously executed than the laws
themselves. The motives of these proclamations were sometimes very ridiculous.
Queen Elizabeth had taken offense at the smell of woad; and she issued an edict
prohibiting any one to cultivate that useful plant Townsend's Journal, p. 2^0.
Stow's Annals.
. She was also pleased to take offense at the long swords and high ruffs then
in fashion: She sent about (...) officers, to break every man's sword, and clip
every man's ruff, which was beyond a certain length Townsend's Journal, p. 2^0.
Stow's Annals. Strype, vol. II. p. 6^^.
. This practice resembles somewhat the method employed by the great Czar Peter,
to make his subjects change their garb.

THE Queen's prohibition of the prophesyings was founded on a better reason*
but shows still the unlimited extent of her prerogative. Two or three people
could not meet together, in order to read the scriptures, and confer about
religion, though in ever so orthodox a manner, without her permission.

THERE were many other branches of prerogative incompatible with an exact or
regular enjoyment of liberty. None of the nobility could marry without
permission from the sovereign. The Queen detained the earl of Southampton long
in prison, because he privately married the earl of Essex's cousin Birch's
Memoirs, vol. II. p. 422.
. No man could travel without the consent of the prince. Sir William Evers
underwent a severe persecution, because he had presumed to pay a private visit
to the King of Scots Ibid. p. 511.
.

THE Parliament in the thirteenth of the Queen praised her for not imitating
the practice, usual among her predecessors, of stopping the course of justice
by particular warrants D'Ewes, p. 141.
. There could not possibly be a greater abuse, nor a stronger mark of arbitrary
power; and the Queen, in refraining from it, was very laudable. But she was by
no means constant in this reserve. There remain in the public records some
warrants of here is for exempting persons from all lawsuits and prosecutions
Rymer, tom. XV. p. 652, 708, 777.
; and these warrants, she says, she grants from her royal prerogative, which
she will not allow to be disputed.

IT is easy to imagine, that, in such a government, no justice could, by course
of law, be obtained of the sovereign, unless he was willing to allow it. In the
naval expedition, undertaken by Raleigh and Forbisher against the Spaniards, in
1592, a very rich carrack was taken worth two hundred thousand pounds. The
Queen's share in the adventure was only a tenth part; but as the prize was so
great, and exceeded so much the expectations of all the adventurers, she was
determined not to rest contented with her share. Raleigh, humbly and earnestly,
begged her to accept of an hundred thousand pounds, in lieu of all demands, or
rather exactions; and says, that the present, which the proprietors were
willing to make her of eighty thousand pounds, was the greatest that ever a
prince received from a subject Strype, vol. IV. p. 128, 129.
.

BUT it is no wonder the Queen, in her administration, should pay so little
regard to liberty; while the parliament itself, in enacting laws, were so
entirely negligent of it. The persecuting statutes, which they passed against
papists and puritans, are extremely contrary to the genius of freedom; and by
exposing such multitudes to the tyranny of priests and bigots, accustomed the
people to the most disgraceful subjection. Their conferring an unlimited
supremacy on the Queen, or what is worse, acknowleging her inherent right to
it, was another proof of their voluntary servitude.

THE law of the 23d of her reign, making seditious words against the Queen
capital, is another very tyrannical statute; and an use, no less tyrannical,
was sometimes made of it. The case of Udal, a puritannical clergyman, seems
singular, even in those arbitrary times. This man had published a book called a
demonstration of discipline, in which he inveighed against the government of
bishops; and though he had carefully endeavored to conceal his name, he was
thrown into prison upon suspicion, and brought to his trial for this offense.
It was pretended, that the bishops were part of the Queen's political body; and
to speak against them, was really to attack her, and was therefore felony by
the statute. This was not the only iniquity, to which Udal was exposed. The
judges would not allow the jury to determine any thing but the fact, whether
Udal had wrote the book, or not, without examining his intention, or the import
of the words. In order to prove the fact, the crown lawyers did not produce a
single witness to the court: They only read the testimony of two persons
absent, one of which said that Udal had told him he was the author; another,
that a friend of Udal's had said so. They would not allow Udal to produce any
exculpatory evidence; which, they said, was never to be permitted against the
Queen. And they tendered him an oath, by which he was required to swear, that
he was not author of the book; and his refusal to give that testimony was
employed as the strongest proof of his guilt. It is almost needless to add,
that, notwithstanding these multiplied iniquities, a verdict of death was given
by the jury against Udal: For as the Queen was extremely bent upon his
prosecution, it was impossible he could escape State Trials, vol. I. p. 144.
Strype, vol. IV. p. 21. Id. Life of Whitgift, p. 343.
. He died in prison before the execution of the sentence.

THE case of Penry was, if possible, still harder. This man was a zealous
puritan, or rather a Brownist; and he had wrote against the hierarchy several
tracts, such as Martin Mar-prelate, Theses Martinianae, and other compositions
full of low scurrility and petulant satyr. After concealing himself for some
years, he was seized; and as the statute against seditious words required that
the criminal should be tried within a year after committing the offense, he
could not be indicted for his printed books. He was therefore tried for some
papers found in his pocket, as if he had thereby scattered sedition Strype's
Life of Whitgift, book IV. chap. II. Neal, vol. I. p. 564.
. It was also imputed to him, by the lord keeper, Puckering, that in some of
these papers, "he had only acknowleged her majesty's royal power to establish
laws, ecclesiastical and civil; but had avoided the usual terms of making,
enacting, decreeing, and ordaining laws: Which imply," says the lord keeper, "a
most absolute authority Strype, vol. IV. p. 177.
." Penry for these offenses was condemned and executed.

THUS we have seen, that the most absolute authority of the sovereign, to make
use of the lord keeper's phrase, was established on above twenty branches of
prerogative, which are now abolished, and which were, every one of them,
totally incompatible with the liberty of the subject. But what ensured more
effectually the slavery of the people, than even these branches of prerogative,
was, the established principles of the times, which attributed to the prince
such an absolute and indefeizable authority, as was supposed to be the origin
of all law, and could be bound and circumscribed by none. The homilies,
published for the use of the clergy, and which they were enjoined to read every
Sunday in all the churches, inculcate every where a blind, and unlimited
passive-obedience to the prince, which, on no account, and under no pretense,
is it ever lawful for them, in the smallest article, to depart from or
infringe. Much noise has been made, because some court chaplains, during the
succeeding reigns, were permitted to preach such doctrines; but there is a
great difference between these sermons, and discourses published by authority,
avowed by the prince and council, and promulgated to the whole nation Gifford,
a clergyman, was suspended in 1584, for preaching up a limited obedience to the
civil magistrate. Neal, vol. I. p. 435.
. So thoroughly were these principles imbibed by the people, during the reigns
of Elizabeth and her predecessors, that opposition to them was regarded as the
most flagrant sedition, and was not even rewarded by that public praise and
approbation, which can alone support men under such dangers and difficulties,
as attend the resistance of tyrannical authority. It was only during the next
generation that the noble principles of liberty took root, and spreading
themselves, under the shelter of puritannical absurdities, became fashionable
among the people.

IT is worth remarking, that the advantage, usually ascribed to absolute
monarchy, a greater regularity of police and a more strict execution of the
laws, did not attend the ancient English government, though in many respects it
fell under that denomination: A demonstration of this truth is contained in a
judicious paper, which is preserved by Strype Annals, vol. IV. p. 290. and seq.
, and which was wrote by an eminent justice of peace of Somersetshire, in the
year 1596, near the end of the Queen's reign, when the authority of that
princess may be supposed to be fully corroborated by time, and her maxims of
government improved by long practice. This paper contains an account of the
disorders which then prevailed in the county of Somerset. The author says, that
forty persons had been there executed in a year for robberies, thefts, and
other felonies; thirty-five burnt in the hand, thirty-seven whipped, one hundred
and eighty-three discharged: That those who were discharged were most wicked
and desperate persons, who never could come to any good, because they would not
work, and none would take them into service: That notwithstanding this great
number of indictments, the fifth part of the felonies committed in the county
were not brought to a trial, the greater number escaped censure, either from
the superior cunning of the selons, the remissness of the magistrates, or the
foolish lenity of the people: That the rapines committed by the infinite number
of wicked, wandering, idle people were intolerable to the poor countrymen, and
obliged them to a perpetual watch of their sheep-folds, their pastures, their
woods and their cornfieldsd: That the other counties of England were in no
better condition than Somersetshire; and many of them were even in a worse:
That there were at least three or four hundred ablebodied vagabonds in every
county, who lived by theft and rapine; and who sometimes met in troops to the
number of sixty, and committed spoil on the inhabitants: That if all the felons
of this kind were assembled, they would be able, if reduced to good subjection,
to give the greatest enemy her majesty has a strong battle: And that the
magistrates themselves were intimidated from executing justice upon them; and
there were examples of justices of peace, who, after giving sentence against
rogues, had interposed to stop the execution of their own sentence, for fear of
the danger, which hung over them from the confederates of these felons.

IN the year 1575, the Queen complained in Parliament of the bad execution of
the laws; and threatened, if the magistrates were not, for the future, more
vigilant, that she would entrust authority to indigent and needy persons, who
would find an interest in the more exact distribution of justice D'Ewes, p. 23^.
. It appears, that she was as good as her word. For in 1601, there were great
complaints made in Parliament of the rapine of justices of peace; and a member
said, that this magistrate was an animal, who, for half a dozen of chickens,
would ^^pense with a dozen of penal statutes Ibid. p 661-664.
. It is not easy to account for this relaxation of government, and neglect of
police during a reign of so much (...) as that of Elizabeth. The small revenue
of the crown is the most likely cause that can be assigned. The Queen had it
not in her power to interest a great number in assisting her to execute the
laws.

ON the whole, the English have no reason, from the example of their ancestors,
to be in love with the picture of absolute monarchy; or to prefer the unlimited
authority of the prince, and his unbounded prerogatives, to that noble liberty,
that sweet equality, and that happy security, by which they are at present
distinguished above all nations of the universe. The utmost that can be said in
favor of the ancient government (and perhaps it may be said with truth) is,
that the power of the prince, though really unlimited, was exercised after the
European manner, and entered not into every part of the administration; that
the instances of a high exerted prerogative were not so frequent as to render
property sensibly insecure, or reduce the people to a total servitude; that the
freedom from faction, the quickness of execution, and the promptitude of those
measures, which could be taken for offense or defense, made some compensation
for the want of a legal and determined liberty; that as the prince commanded no
mercenary army, there was a tacit check on him, which maintained the government
in that medium, to which the people had been accustomed; and that this
situation of England was in reality more remote, though seemingly it approached
nearer, a despotic and eastern monarchy, than the present government of that
kingdom, where the people, though guarded by multiplied laws, are totally naked,
defenseless, and disarmed.

WE shall close this volume with a brief account of the revenues, the military
force, the commerce, the arts, and the learning of England during this period.

QUEEN Elizabeth's economy was very remarkable; and in some instances seemed
to border on avarice. The smallest expense, if it could possibly be saved,
appeared considerable in her eyes; and even the charge of an express, during
the most delicate transactions, was not below her notice Birch's Negot. p. 21.
. She was also attentive to every profit; and embraced opportunities of gain,
which may appear somewhat extraordinary. She kept the sea of Ely vacant
nineteen years, in order to pocket the revenue Strype, vol. IV. p. 351.
; and it was usual with her, when she promoted a bishop, to take the
opportunity of pillaging the sea of some of its manors Ibid. p. 215.
. But that there was in reality little or no avarice in the Queen's temper
appears from this circumstance, that she never amassed any treasure; and even
refused subsidies from the Parliament, when she had no present occasion for
them. Yet we must not conclude from this circumstance, that her economy
proceeded from a tender concern for her people: She loaded them with monopolies
and exclusive patents, which are infinitely more oppressive than the most heavy
taxes, levied in a legal and regular manner. The real source of her frugal
conduct was derived from her desire of independency, and her care to preserve
her dignity, which would have been endangered, had she reduced herself to the
necessity of having frequent recourse to parliamentary supplies. In consequence
of this motive, the Queen, though engaged in successful and necessary wars,
thought it more prudent to make a continual dilapidation of the royal demesnes
Rymer, tom. XVI. p. 141. D'Ewes, p. 151, 457, 525, 629. Bacon, vol. IV. p. 363.
, than demand the most moderate supplies from the commons. As she lived
unmarried and had no posterity, she was contented to serve her present turn,
though at the expense of her successors, who, by reason of this policy, joined to
other accidents, found themselves, on a sudden, reduced to the most extreme
indigence.

THE splendour of a court was, during this age, a great part of the public
charge; and as Elizabeth was a single woman, and expensive in no species of
magnificence, except clothes, this circumstance enabled her to perform great
things by her narrow revenue. She is said to have paid four millions of debt,
left on the crown by her father, brother and sister; an incredible sum for that
age D'Ewes, p. 473. I think it impossible to reconcile this account of the
public debts with that given by Strype, Eccles. Mem. vol. II. p. 344. that in
the year 1553, the crown owed but 300,000 pounds. I own, that this last sum
appears a great deal more likely. The whole revenue of Queen Elizabeth would
not in ten years have paid four millions.
. The states at the time of her death owed her about eight hundred thousand
pounds: And the King of France four hundred and fifty thousand Winwood, vol. I.
p. 29, 54.
. Though that prince was extremely frugal, and after the peace of Vervins, was
continually amassing treasure, the Queen never could, by the most pressing
remonstrances, prevail on him to make payment of those sums, which she had so
generously advanced him, during his greatest distresses. One payment of twenty
thousand crowns, and another of fifty thousand, were all she could obtain, by
the strongest representations she could make of the difficulties to which the
rebellion in Ireland had reduced her Ibid. p. 117, 395.
. The Queen expended on the wars with Spain between 1589 and 1593, the sum of
one million three hundred thousand pounds, beside the double subsidy, amounting
to two hundred and eighty thousand pounds, granted her by Parliament D'Ewes, p.
483.
. In the year 1599 she spent six hundred thousand pounds in six months in the
service of Ireland Camden, p. 167.
. Sir Robert Cecil affirmed, that in ten years time, Ireland cost her three
millions four hundred thousand pounds Appendix to the earl of Essex's apology.
. She gave the earl of Essex a present of thirty thousand pounds upon his
departure for the government of that kingdom Birch's Memoirs, vol. II.
. Lord Burleigh computed that the value of the gifts conferred on that
favorite amounted to three hundred thousand pounds: A proof of her strong
affection toward him! It was a common saying during this reign; The Queen pays
bountifully, though she rewards sparingly Nanton's Regalia, chap. I.
.

IT is difficult to compute exactly the Queen's ordinary revenue, but it
certainly fell much short of five hundred thousand pounds a year. In 1590, she
raised the customs from fourteen thousand pounds a year to fifty thousand
pounds; and obliged Sir Thomas Smith, who had farmed them, to refund some of
his former profits Camden, p. 558. This account of Camden is difficult or
impossible to be reconciled to the state of the customs in the beginning of the
subsequent reign, as they appear in the journals of the commons. See Hist. of
Great Britain, vol. I. chap. 1.
. This improvement of the revenue was owing to the suggestions of one
Caermarden; and was extremely opposed by Burleigh, Leicester, and Walsingham.
But the Queen's preseverance overcame all their opposition. The great
undertakings, which she executed with so narrow a revenue, and with such small
supplies from her people, prove the mighty effects of wisdom and economy. She
received from the Parliament, during the course of her whole reign, only twenty
subsidies and thirty-nine fifteenths. It is not easy to compute exactly the
amount of these supplies; because the value of a subsidy was continually
falling; and in the end of her reign it amounted only to eighty thousand pounds
D'Ewes, p. 630.
, which in the beginning had been an hundred and twenty thousand. If we suppose
that the whole supplies granted Elizabeth during a reign of forty-five years
amounted to three millions, we shall not probably be much wide of the truth.
This sum makes only sixty-six thousand six hundred and sixty-six pounds a year;
and it is surprising, that while the Queen's demands were so moderate, and her
expenses so well regulated, she should ever have found any difficulty of
getting a supply from the Parliament, or be reduced to make sale of the
crown lands. But such was the extreme, I had almost said, absurd parsimony of
the Parliaments during that period. They valued nothing in comparison of their
money: The members had no connection with the court; and the very idea, which
they conceived of the trust committed to them, was, to reduce the demands of
the crown, and to grant as few supplies as possible. The crown, on the other
hand, conceived the Parliament in no other light than a means of supply. Queen
Elizabeth made a merit to her people of seldom assembling Parliaments Strype,
vol. IV. p. 124.
. No redress of grievances was expected from these assemblies: They were
supposed to meet for no other purpose than to impose taxes.

BEFORE Queen Elizabeth's reign, the English princes had always recourse to the
city of Antwerp for voluntary loans; and their credit was so low, that, besides
the exorbitant interest of ten or twelve per cent, they were obliged to make
the city of London join in the security. Sir Thomas Gresham, that great and
enterprizing merchant, one of the chief ornaments of this reign, engaged the
company of merchant-adventurers to grant a loan to the Queen; and as the money
was regularly paid, her credit by degrees established itself in the city, and
she shook off this dependence on foreigners Stowe's Survey of London, book I.
p. 286.
.

In 1559, the Queen employed Gresham to borrow for her two hundred thousand
pounds at Antwerp, in order to enable her to reform the coinage, which was at
that time extremely debased MS. of lord Royston's from the paper office, p. ^95.
. She was so unpolitic as to make herself an innovation in the coin; by
dividing a pound of silver into sixty-two shillings, instead of sixty, the
former standard. This is the last time, that the coin has been tampered with in
England.

QUEEN Elizabeth, sensible how much the defense of her kingdom depended on its
naval power, was desirous to encourage commerce and navigation: But as her
monopolies tended to extinguish all domestic industry, which is much more
valuable than foreign trade, and is the foundation of it, the general train of
her conduct was very ill calculated to serve the purpose at which she aimed,
much less to promote the riches of her people. The exclusive companies also
were an immediate check on foreign trade. Yet, notwithstanding these
discouragements, the spirit of the age was strongly bent on naval enterprises;
and besides the military expeditions against the Spaniards, many attempts were
made for new discoveries, and many new branches of foreign commerce were opened
by the English. Sir Martin Forbisher undertook three fruitless voyages to
discover the northwest passage: Davis, not disheartened by this ill success,
made a new attempt, when he discovered the straits, which pass by his name. In
1600, the Queen granted the first patent to the East India company: The stock
of that company was seventy-two thousand pounds; and they fitted out four
ships, under the command of James Lancaster, for this new branch of trade. The
adventure was successful; and the ships returning with a rich cargo, encouraged
the company to continue that commerce.

THE communication with Muscovy had been opened in Queen Mary's time by the
discovery of the passage to Archangel: But the commerce to that country began
not to be carried to a great extent till about the year 15^9. The Queen
obtained from the Czar an exclusive patent to the English for the whole trade
to Muscovy Camden, p. 408.
; and she entered into a personal, as well as national, alliance with him. This
Czar was named John Basilides, a most furious tyrant, who suspecting
continually the revolt of his subjects, stipulated a safe retreat and
protection in England. In order the better to ensure himself of this resource,
he proposed to marry an English woman, and the Queen intended to have sent him
the lady Anne Hastings, daughter to the earl of Huntingdon: But when the lady
was informed of the barbarous manners of the country, she wisely declined
purchasing an empire at the expense of her ease and safety Ibid. p. 493.
.

THE English, encouraged by the privileges, which they had obtained from
Basilides, ventured farther into these countries, than any Europeans had
formerly done. They transported their goods along the river Dwina in boats made
of one entire tree, which they towed and rowed up the stream as far as Walogda.
From thence, they carried them seven days journey by land to Yerastau, and then
down the Volga to Astracan. At Astracan, they built ships, crossed the Caspian
Sea, and distributed their commodities into Persia. But this bold attempt met
with such discouragements that it was never renewed Ibid. p. 418.
.

AFTER the death of John Basilides, his son Theodore revoked the patent, which
the English enjoyed for a monopoly of the Russian trade; and when the Queen
remonstrated against this innovation, he told her ministers, that princes must
carry an indifferent hand, as well between their subjects as between
foreigners; and not convert trade, which by the laws of nations ought to be
common to all, into a monopoly for the private gain of a few Ibid. p. 493.
. So much juster notions of commerce were entertained by this barbarian, than
were practiced by the renowned Queen Elizabeth! Theodore, however, continued
some privileges to the English, on account of their being the first discoverers
of the communication between Europe and his country.

THE trade to Turkey was begun about 1583; and that commerce was immediately
confined to a company by Queen Elizabeth. Before that time, the grand signior
had always conceived England to be a dependant province of France Birch's
Memoirs, vol. I. p. 36.
; but having heard of the Queen's power and reputation, he gave a good
reception to the English, and even granted them larger privileges than he had
given to the French.

THE merchants of the Hanse-towns complained loudly in the beginning of
Elizabeth's reign of the treatment, which they had received in the days of King
Edward and Queen Mary. She very prudently replied, that as she would not
innovate any thing, she would protect them still in the immunities and
privileges, which she found them possessed of. This answer not contenting them,
their commerce was soon after suspended for a time, to the great advantage of
the English merchants, who tried what they could themselves effectuate for the
promotion of their commerce. They took the whole trade into their own hands;
and their returns proving successful, they divided themselves into staplers and
merchantadventurers; the former residing constantly at one place, the other
trying their fortunes in other towns and states abroad with cloth and other
manufactures. This success so enraged the Hanse-towns, that they tried all the
methods, which a discontented people could devise, to draw upon the English
merchants the ill opinion of other nations and states. They prevailed so far as
to obtain an imperial edict, by which the English merchants were prohibited all
commerce in the empire: The Queen, by way of retaliation, retained sixty of
their ships, which had been seized in the river of Lisbon with contraband goods
of the Spaniards. These ships the Queen intended to have restored, as desiring
to have compromised all differences with those trading cities; but when she was
informed, that a general assembly was held at Lubec, in order to concert
measures for distressing the English trade, she caused the ships and cargoes to
be confiscated; only two of them were released to carry home the news, and to
inform these states, that she had the greatest contempt imaginable for all
their proceedings Lives of the Admirals. vol. I. p. 470.
.

HENRY the eighth, in order to fit out a navy, was obliged to hire ships from
Hamburg, Lubec, Dantzick, Genoa, and Venice: But Elizabeth, very early in her
reign, put affairs upon a better footing; both by building some ships of her
own, and by encouraging the merchants to build large trading vessels, which, on
occasion, were converted into ships of war Camden, p. 388.
. In 1582, the seamen in England were computed at fourteen thousand two hundred
and ninety-five men Monson, p. 250.
; the number of vessels twelve hundred and thirty-two; of which there were only
two hundred and seventeen above eighty tons. Monson computes, that though the
navigation decayed in the first years of James the first, by the practice of
the merchants, who carried on their trade in foreign bottoms Ibid. p. 300.
, yet before 1640, this number of seamen was trebled in England Ibid. p. 210,
256.
.

THE navy which the Queen left at her decease appears considerable, when we
consider only the number of vessels, which were forty-two: But when we reflect
that none of these ships carried above forty guns; that four only came up to
that number; that there were but two ships of a thousand ton; and twenty-three
below five hundred, some of fifty, and some even of twenty tons; that the whole
number of the guns belonging to the fleet were seven hundred and seventy-four
Monson, p. 196. The English navy at present carries about 14000 guns.
; we must entertain a very contemptible idea of the English navy, compared to
the force which it has now attained. In the year 1588, there were not above
five vessels, equipped by the noblemen and seaports, which exceeded two
hundred tons Ibid. p. 300.
.

IN 1599, an alarm was given of an invasion from the Spaniards; and the Queen
equipped a fleet and levied an army in a fortnight to oppose them. Nothing gave
foreigners a higher idea of the power of England than this sudden armament. In
1575, all the militia in the kingdom were computed at an hundred and eighty-two
thousand nine hundred and twenty-nine ^ives of the Admiral, vol. I. p 432.
. A distribution was made, in 1595, of an hundred and forty thousand men,
besides those which Wales could supply Strype, vol. IV. p. 221.
. These armies were formidable by their numbers; but their discipline and
experience were not proportioned. Small bodies from Dunkirk and Newport
frequently ran over, and plundered the east coast: So unfit was the militia, as
it was then constituted, for the defense of the kingdom. The lord lieutenants
were first appointed to the counties in this reign.

MR. MURDEN p. 608.
has published a paper, which contains the military force of the nation at the
time of the Spanish Armada, and which is somewhat different from the account
given by our ordinary historians. It makes the whole ablebodied men of the
kingdom amount to an hundred and eleven thousand five hundred and thirteen;
those armed, to eighty thousand eight hundred and seventy-five; of whom forty
four thousand seven hundred and twenty-seven were trained. It must be supposed
that these able-bodied men consisted of such only as were registered, otherwise
the small number is not to be accounted for.

THE state of the English manufactures was at this time very low; and foreign
wares of almost all kinds had the preference (...), p. ^05.
. About 1590, there were in London four persons only rated in the subsidy-books
so high as four hundred pounds Ibid. p. 107.
. This computation is not indeed to be esteemed an exact estimate of their
wealth. In 1567, there were found on enquiry to be four thousand eight hundred
and fifty-one strangers of all nations in London: Of whom three thousand eight
hundred and thirty-eight were Flemish, and only fifty-eight Scotch Haynes, p.
461, 462.
. The persecut ons in France and the Low Countries drove afterward a greater
number of foreigners into England; and the commerce, as well as manufactures,
of that kingdom was very much improved by them Stowe, p. 668.
. It was then that Sir Thomas Gresham built, at his own charge, the magnificent
fabric of the Exchange for the reception of the merchants: The Queen visited
it, and gave it the appellation of the Royal Exchange.

THERE were two attempts made in this reign to settle colonies in America; one
by Sir Humphry Gilbert in Newfoundland, another by Sir Walter Raleigh in
Virginia: But neither of these projects proved successful. All these noble
settlements were made in the following reigns. The current money of the
kingdom, in the end of this reign, is computed at four millions Lives of the
Admirals, vol. I. p. 475.
.

THE nobility in this age supported a great deal of the ancient magnificence in
their hospitality, and in the numbers of their retainers; and the Queen found
it prudent to retrench, by proclamation, their expenses in this last particular
Strype, vol. III. Appen. p. 54.
. The expense of hospitality, she somewhat encouraged, by the frequent visits
she paid her nobility, and the magnificent feasts which she received from them.
The earl of Leicester gave her an entertainment in Kenibworth castle, which was
extraordinary for expense and magnificence. Among other particulars, we are
told, that three hundred and sixty-five hogsheads of beer were drank at it
Biogr. Brit. vol. III. p. 1791.
. The earl had fortified this castle at great expense; and it contained arms
for ten thousand men Strype, vol. III. p. 394.
. The earl of Derby had a family consisting of two hundred and forty servants
Stowe, p. 674.
. Stowe remarks it as a singular proof of beneficence in this nobleman, that he
was contented with his rent from his tenants, and exacted not any extraordinary
services from them: A proof that the absolute power of the sovereign, what was
unavoidable, had very generally countenanced the nobility in tyrannizing over
the people. Burleigh, though he was frugal, and had no paternal estate; kept a
family consisting of an hundred servants Strype, vol. III. p. 129. Appen.
. He had a standing table for gentlemen, and two other tables for persons of
meaner condition, which were always served alike, whether he were in town or in
the country. About his person he had people of great distinction, insomuch that
he could reckon up twenty gentlemen retainers who had each a thousand pounds a
year; and as many among his ordinary servants, who were worth from a thousand
pounds to three, five, ten, and twenty thousand pounds Biogr. Brit. p. 1267.
. It is to be remarked, that, though the revenue of the crown was at that time
very small, the ministers and courtiers found means, by employing the
exorbitant prerogative, to acquire much greater fortunes than it is possible
for them at present to gain, from their larger salaries, and more limited
authority.

BUT though there were preserved great remains of the ancient customs, the
nobility were, by degrees, acquiring a taste of elegant luxury; and many
edifices, in particular, were built by them, neat, large, and sumptuous, to the
great ornament of the kingdom, says Camden Page 452
; but to the no less decay of the glorious hospitality of the nation. It is,
however, more reasonable to think, that this new turn of expense promoted arts
and industry; while the ancient hospitality was the source of vice, disorder,
sedition, and idleness.

AMONG the other species of luxury, that of apparel began much to increase
during this age; and the Queen thought proper to restrain it by proclamation
Camden, p. 452.
. Her example was very little conformable to her edicts. As no woman was ever
more conceited of her beauty, nor more desirous of making impression on the
hearts of beholders, no one ever went to a greater extravagance in apparel, or
studied more the variety and richness of her dress. She appeared almost every
day in a different habit; and tried all the several modes, by which she hoped
to render herself agreeable. She was also so fond of her clothes, that she
never could part with any of them; and at her death she had in her wardrobe all
the different habits, to the number of three thousand, which she had ever worn
in her lifetime Carte, vol. III. p. 702. from Beaumont's Dispatches.
.

THE retrenchment of the ancient hospitality, and the diminution of retainers,
were favorable to the prerogative of the sovereign; and by disabling the great
noblemen from resistance, promoted the execution of the laws, and extended the
authority of the courts of justice. There were many particular causes in the
situation and character of Henry the seventh, which augmented the authority of
the crown: Most of these causes concurred in succeeding princes; together with
the factions of religion, and the acquisition of the supremacy, a most
important article of prerogative: But the manners of the age were a general
cause, which operated during this whole period, and which continually tended to
diminish the riches, and still more the influence of the Aristocracy, anciently
so formidable to the crown. The habits of luxury dissipated the immense
fortunes of the ancient barons; and as the new methods of expense gave
subsistence to mechanics and merchants, who lived in an independent manner on
the fruits of their own industry, a nobleman, instead of that unlimited
ascendant which he was wont to assume over those who were maintained at his
board, or subsisted by salaries conferred on them, retained only that moderate
influence which customers have over tradesmen, and which can never be dangerous
to civil government. The landproprietors also, having a greater demand for
money than for men, endeavored to turn their lands to the best account with
regard to profit, and either enclosing their fields, or joining many small
farms into a few large ones, discharged those useless hands which formerly were
always at their call, in every attempt to subvert the government, or oppose a
neighboring baron. By all these means the cities increased; the middle rank of
men began to be rich and powerful; the prince, who, in effect, was the same
with the law, was implicitly obeyed; and though the farther progress of the same
causes begot a new plan of liberty, founded on the privileges of the commons,
yet in the interval between the fall of the nobles and the rise of this order,
the sovereign took advantage of the present situation, and assumed an authority
almost absolute.

WHATEVER may be commonly imagined, from the authority of lord Bacon, and from
that of Harrington, and later authors, the laws of Henry the seventh
contributed very little toward the great revolutions which happened about this
period in the English constitution. The practice of breaking entails by a fine
and recovery, had been introduced in the preceding reigns; and this prince only
gave indirectly a legal sanction to the practice, by reforming some abuses
which attended it. But the settled authority which he acquired to the crown,
enabled the sovereign to encroach on the separate jurisdictions of the barons,
and produced a more general and regular execution of the laws. The counties
palatine underwent the same fate as the feudal jurisdictions; and by a statute
of Henry the eighth (...) Hon. VIII. c. 21.
, the jurisdiction of these counties was annexed to the crown, and all writs
were ordained to run in the King's name. But the change of manners was the
chief cause of the secret revolution of the government, and subverted the power
of the barons.

LEARNING, on its first revival, was held in great estimation by the English
princes and nobles; and as it was not yet prostituted by being too common, even
the Great deemed it an object of ambition to attain a character for literature.
The four successive sovereigns, Henry, Edward, Mary, and Elizabeth, may, on one
account or other, be admitted into the class of authors. Queen Catherine Parr
translated a book: Lady Jane Gray, considering her age, and her sex, and her
station, may be regarded as a prodigy of literature. Sir Thomas Smith was
raised from being professor in Cambridge, first to be ambassador to France, and
then secretary of state. The dispatches of those times, and among others those
of Burleigh himself, are very frequently interlarded with quotations from the
Greek and Latin classics. Even the ladies of the court valued themselves on
knowledge: Lady Burleigh, lady Bacon, and their two sisters, were mistresses of
the ancient, as well as modern languages; and valued themselves more on their
eurdition than on their rank and quality.

QUEEN Elizabeth wrote and translated several books; and she was familiarly
acquainted with the Greek as well as Latin tongue. It is pretended, that she
made an extemporary reply in Greek to the university of Cambridge, who had
addressed her in that language. It is certain, that she answered in Latin,
without preparation, and in a very spirited manner, to the Polish ambassador,
who had been wanting in respect to her. When she had finished, she turned about
to her courtiers, and said, "God's death, my lords," (for she was much addicted
to swearing) "I have been forced this day to scour up my old Latin, that has
long lain rusting Speed.
." Elizabeth, even after she was Queen, did not entirely drop the ambition of
appearing as an author; and next to her desire of admiration for beauty, this
seems to have been the chief object of her vanity. She translated Boethius of
the Consolation of Philosophy; in order, as she pretended, to allay her grief
for Henry the fourth's change of religion. As far as we can judge from
Elizabeth's compositions, we may pronounce, that notwithstanding her
application, and her excellent parts, her taste in literature was very
indifferent: She was much inferior to her successor in this particular, who was
himself far from being a just model of eloquence.

UNHAPPILY for literature, at least for the learned of this age, the Queen's
vanity lay more in shining by her own learning, than in encouraging men of
genius by her liberality. Spencer himself, the finest English writer of his
age, was long neglected; and after the death of Sir Philip Sydney, his patron,
was allowed to die almost for want. This poet contains great beauties, a sweet
and harmonious versification, easy elocution, a fine imagination: Yet does the
perusal of his work become so tedious, that one never finishes it from the mere
pleasure which it affords: It soon becomes a kind of task-reading; and it
requires some essort and resolution to carry us on to the end of his long
performance. This effect, of which every one is conscious, is usually ascribed
to the change of manners: But manners have more changed since Homer's age; and
yet that poet remains still the favorite of every reader of taste and
judgment. Homer copied true natural manners, which, however rough or
uncultivated, will always form an agreeable and interesting picture: But the
pencil of the English poet was employed in drawing the affectations, and
conceits, and fopperies of chivalry, which appear ridiculous as soon as they
lose the recommendation of the mode. The tediousness of continued allegory, and
that too seldom striking or ingenious, has also contributed to render the Fairy
Queen peculiarly tiresome; not to mention the too great frequency of its
descriptions, and the langour of its stanza. Upon the whole, Spencer maintains
his place in the shelves among our English classics: But he is seldom seen on
the table; and scarce any one, if he dares to be ingenuous, but will confess,
that, notwithstanding all the merit of the poet, he affords an entertainment
with which the palate is soon satiated. Several writers of late have amused
themselves with copying the style of Spencer; and no imitation has been so
indifferent as not to bear a great resemblance of the original: His manner is
so peculiar, that it is almost impossible not to transfer some of it into the
copy.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 622, line 11, for forty-sixth, read forty-fifth.

BOOKS printed for, and sold by A. MILLAR, in the Strand, LONDON.
1. A New History of Great Britain. In 2 vols. in Quarto. Vol. I. Containing
the Reigns of James I. and Charles I. Vol. II. Containing the Commonwealth,
and the Reigns of Charles II. and James II. By David Hume; Esquire 2. Essays and
Treatises on several Subjects, in 1 vol. Quarto. By David Hume, Esquire To which is
added, an Index. The same, in 5 vols. 12mo.

3. The History of Scotland, during the Reigns of Queen Mary, and of King James
VI. till his Accession to the Crown of England. With a Review of the Scotch
History previous to that Period; and an Appendix containing Original Papers. By
William Robertson, D. D. Price One Guinea in Boards. In 2 vols. Quarto. * There
are a few printed on a Royal Paper, Price 1^. 11s. 6d. in Boards.

4. The History and Antiquities of Scotland, from the earliest Account of Time,
to the Death of James I. anno 1437. By William Maitland, F. R. S. And from that
Period to the Accession of James VI. to the Crown of England, Anno 1603. By
another Hand. The whole compiled from the most authentic Vouchers, In 2 vols.
Folio. It ought to be observed, that as it was for many Centuries the Policy of
both England and France, to be allied with Scotland, so there is no
understanding the Histories of those Nations, without a thorough Knowledge of
that of the Scots, which however cannot be obtained from any History of that
People hitherto published. 5. An Universal History, from the earliest Account
of Time to the present. Illustrated with Maps, Cuts, Chronological and other
Tables. In 10 vols. folio, or 21 in 8vo. 6. The Works of Francis Bacon, Lord
High Chancellor of England. With several additional Pieces, never before
printed in any Edition of his Works. To which is prefixed, A New Life of the
Author. By Mr. Mallet. In three vols. folio. The 3d Edition. The Additional
Pieces and Life may be had alone, to complete the first Edition of the 4 vols.
in 1730.

7. All the Works of Join Lock, Esquire with Alphabetical Tables. The 5th Edition.
In 3 vols. 8. The Ruins of Palmyra, otherwise Tedmor in the Desert. This Work
contains 59 Plates of the Ruins, and 3 of Inscriptions, chiefly in the Greek
and Palmyrian Languages, with large Explications. To which are prefixed, the
Publisher's Account of the Undertaking. An Inquiry into the ancient State of
Palmyra, and a Journal of the Passage through the Desert. The above Work is
elegantly printed in French.

9. The Ruins of Balbec, anciently Heliopolis, in Caelesyria, near the Source
of the Orontes, and within 15 Leagues of Damascus. This Work contains Views of
the Ruins as they are at present, with Plans and Elevations of the Buildings,
from Drawings and Measures taken on the Spot, by the Gentlemen who made the
Tour of the Mediterranean in 1750 and 1751. And who have given the Public the
Ruins of Palmyra, as a Specimen of their Labors. To which is prefixed, an
Account of the ancient and present State of the Place, such as the Materials
collected by those Gentlemen afford. The Plates are equal to those of Palmyra
in Number, and are engraved by the same masterly Hands, and printed on the same
Size Paper. The above Work is also elegantly printed in French.

10. A Dictionary of the English Language, in which the Words are deduced from
their Originals, and illustrated in their different Significations, by Examples
from the best Writers. To which are prefixed, a History of the Language, and an
English Grammar. In 2 vols. Folio. By Samuel Johnson, A. M. 11. A General
Dictionary, Historical and Critical. By the Reverend Mr. John Peter Bernard,
the Rev. Dr. Thomas Birch, S. R. S. Mr. John Lockman, and other Hands. In 10
vols. Folio. The Oriental Lives, by the late George Sale, Esquire

