THE Lues Venerea, Rationally handled, in its Original CAUSE: WITH ITS CURE.

Nemo unquam legendo, fit Artifex.

By J. A. Surgeon.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Bickerton in Paternoster-Row; Cha. Pickman in
Upper-Shadwell, and J. Cluer, Printer, in Bow Churchyard. Price 6 d.

The PREFACE.
BY what can be collected from Authors, the Lues has, in all European
Countries, been found an obstinate Distemper. The ill Success of former
Practice, one would be apt to attribute to wrong Hypothesis's, and the
Processes consequent thereto, did not many Particulars at this Day justify
their Complaints, and show us the same Difficulties remain about the Nature and
Cure of this Distemper, as ever. No Nostrum as yet, how infallible soever in
the Opinion of its Possessor, will answer to all Symptoms, or to all Patients
under the same Circumstances; I have had Trial of several communicated as such,
but finding nothing extraordinary in them, I conclude the Art of Curing here,
as in other Diseases, lies as much in the Managemen^ as in the Medicines
themselves, tha^ they be administered in Season, an^ adapted to Constitutions;
so that to sa^ Mercury is the Foundation of Cure will be of little import to a
Reader o^ this Subject, unless at the same tim^ the Skill of using it could be
conveyed and this will never be attained in any great Perfection without
Practice However, an attention to Rules is no altogether unworthy a Regard, for
which Reason I have ventured on thi^ Essay, wherein I have, as it fell in my
way, made a summary of the best Opinions in the Therapeutick Part, ye^ with no
Restraint to my own Sentiments, which through the whole, I have endeavored to
make appear Rational if it shall be thought so by the proper Judges, it may
possibly hereafter receive an Improvement.

Lues Venerea.
THOSE who fetch the Original of this Distemper no farther back than the Siege
of Naples by the French, 1494, thence calling it the French, and sometimes the
Neapolitan Disease, must only mean that it received its present Name there,
that it became more common, or that luckily about that Time some Remedy was
found better adapted to its Cure than any before known: For no doubt it reaches
in Antiquity the First Ages; it being irrational either to suppose a World
drowned for their Sins, Strangers to the Vice that contracts it, or that their
Wickedness any more than ours deserved Exemption. No; Providence, we may safely
believe, stamped an immediate Punishment on this, as on all other Intemperance
and Sin, ab Origin, that the Pains and Sufferings succeeding a vicious Course
of Life, might, if nothing else would, restrain us to Virtue, and be both a
natural and moral Good to us. We find Moses describing a Leprosy, Levit. 13 and
14, that corresponds with the Symptoms, and seems to have been a Species of
this Distemper; so does the Difficulty of the Cure, Deuteronomy. 28. where it is said,
The botch and scab of Egypt of which thou can not be healed: And those many
Laws found here relating to a Leprosy, would suffer a greater Disappointment
than seems intended, as well from the Obstinacy as infrequency of the
Distemper, if applied only to what we now strictly understand by that Term: The
same may be said of many Ancient Physical Authors, who with the like or greater
Plainness have described the Symptoms, though not under the modern Titles.

In the prosecution of this Subject I propose to set forth the Nature and
Manner of Insection in all those Symptoms commonly understood by a Clap, viz.
the G^n^rrhea, Chancre, Phymosis, etc. and then exhibit a Method of Cure;
mentioning the Symptoms occasionally under either Head, as they serve to
enlighten each other: And First of the Gonorrhaea.

The Gonorrhaea is benign or malign: The first sort is an Emission of Humor
from the Glandulae prostatae, a Weakness only, and commonly proceeding from
great Strains, and where the natural Strength has been too far exerted in any
sort, whether by Labor or Venereal Pleasures; it has its Symptoms as well as
Process of Cure very different from the malignant, which at present I shall
make the only Subject of my Enquiry, and that under two Heads.

1. By showing how either Sex becomes infected. And,

2. A Cure for that Infection.

And 1st. Of the Woman: Her I look on must be primarily and originally
Infected, that is sine amplexu infecto, to introduce the being of this
Distemper in the World: For let a Man correspond with what Variety he pleases
(provided they are sound) he receives no Malignancy, which could it be so with
her, I cannot see why we ever should thus unhappily have had its Knowledge; but
Experience too fatally contradicting this, is a Conviction, that Coition with
Numbers has first of all, and probably does still, at some times effect the
same, as at other times Communication with an infected Person; and this I shall
endeavor to make out in a few Words.

Such who say the promiscuous Mixture of different Sperms excites a Ferment,
which in a little Time throws off such an Exspumation as we call a Running, do
agree that Numbers (though sound) carry Infection, we only differ in the Manner
they accomplish it, which I rather suppose to be thus: When the Venereal
Appetite is jaded with the too intemperate Efforts of several Men, it will be
next to impossible for those Parts to suffer the continued Frictions made there
(as common Women do) without excoriating and fretting the Membranes of the
Vagina; and such Excoriations, how small soever in the beginning, meeting with
an ill Habit of Body, together with the natural Incalescence and Moisture of
the Parts, will soon degenerate to an Ulcer; which Ulcer will be the Distemper:
And perhaps herein lies the Difference between a Fluor Albus and Gonorrhaea,
(when thus contracted) that the one is a Weakness from too frequent Irritations
made there, and the other besides that extrinsical Accident, has an ill Habit
of Body joined, that induces Intemperies.

What I think gives Credit to this Opinion is the Customs of the Jewish,
Mohammedan, and many other Countries, who allow a Plurality of Wives, and an
unlimited Number of Concubines, restraining their Sex at the same time to one:
For this, though an inferior Motive of the Law, argues the World to have
previously experienced such a Liberty in them more destructive of Health and a
sound Constitution than in us. Among other Creatures there is an Instinct
answering such a Purpose of the Law whereby the Females are provoked only at
certain Seasons to Propagation, and abstain after Conception; Nature intimating
by it a Lesson of Chastity to the Fair; that it should be their peculiar as
well as most ornamental Virtue.

Against it, I can form to my self only two Objections: First, That it may be
alleged the Activity of some Men this Way, might prejudice a weak Woman the
same as a Number: And Secondly, it may be asked how an Ulcer, in Vagina, can
acquire Malignity enough to communicate Infection on Coition, when the greatest
Degree of Virulency in another Ulcer produces no such Effect?

But, to these it may be answered, That the Strength and Activity of any two in
Health will seldom be found so disproportionate as to become hurtful, when it
is; the Disorder ensuing can be no more than a Fluor Albus, or a Weakness
without Malignity. And as to the other; why an Ulcer here should sooner impart
its Mischief than any other? Is, that the Parts concerned are in all Respects
more commodious for giving and receiving any Injury, and that the Heat raised
and excited by Lust gives a Force and Activity to the Salts generated under the
Corruption; whereas any other Ulcer, though never so virulent, cannot emit
Effluvia's in such Force or Numbers, nor to Parts so susceptible of their
Reception; but if they had those Advantages, it is likely their Effects would
be equal, many ill Consequences following from an Ulcer with Virulency in any
Part incautiously dried up.

That Lust also is a very necessary Adjunct for communicating Infection, and
giving Force to those virulent Miasms that are as it were darted by it from
her, we judge by that particular Power and Influence, Imagination is found to
have in the Commotion of these Parts: In this Case it is so much, that many
infected Women avoid hurting their Husbands principally on the Moderation and
Coolness of their Enjoyments, whereas a Stranger inciting more intense and
vigorous Desires as seldom escapes. The same may be said where two or three,
with weaker or stronger Inclinations, lie with one and the same infected Woman,
that one perhaps shall be caught, and the others come off unhurt, chiefly as
the Fancy on either side is brisk and lively, inclined or disinclin'd.

Venereal Contact seems of such Necessity for communicating Infection, that
with me it is a very unlikely thing for Venereal Matter ever to do it without,
those who have asserted the contrary of this have done it in such improbable
Instances, which whoever can assent to, will be very unreasonable if they deny
their Acquiescence in what I have advanced of Numbers. For Instance:

The Practical Scheme (Page 4.) says, It is not always necessary a Woman be
clapped to give it a Man, but that he may take off all the virulent Matter left
in the Passage by a preceding Gallant, and she remain perfectly well; or that
she may give it him by only taking the corrupted Matter from her Body in her
Hand and wetting his Privities.

And others relate its highest Degeneracy, or a Pox, to be Contagious by
wearing the Clothes, Lying, or Cohabiting with an infected Person; especially
if we suppose it of that Stage of the Distemper wherein the Body becomes
overspread with Cutaneous Eruptions and Blotches.

There are but Two Ways in this latter Case (for the former I have no Notion
of) whereby Contagion can be supposed to pass, and that is by their throwing
off a greater Quantity of noxious and virulent Effluvia, able to contaminate
where they reach, or else, (like what is related in the Philosophical
Transactions concerning Contagion in the Itch) Animalculae, are bred in those
Globules, dispersed about the Skin, which making their Way through, shift from
Place to Place, and so carry Infection, they living (says the Relation) two or
three Days when from the Body.

But how well these Assignata may resolve other contagious Distempers, they
will here be found but light in the Balance, Fact baffles Philosophy, and if
all those who have suffered this Way are like what have fallen to my Share,
there is not one who could stand by any other Pretense than Coition: Whence we
ought to account the Distemper a Mark of Divine Displeasure, and a present
bodily Correction for our Sin, that the Sense of our own Interest, might work
on us, and bring us back to Temperance and Virtue.

How a Man becomes infected.
WOmen we have adjudged sometimes to become infected by the Admission of
Numbers, though sound and healthful; but a Man cannot by the same Means, because
among other Reasons there is this invincible one, That Nature is not able to
support the Repetitions of those Acts to such a Multiplicity, or in such
Measure as with her who is passive; but could that be, I believe also he might
so contract it: Insatiable and impotent Efforts, or too painful Enjoyments
through the Straitness of the Vagina, frequently discovers something like this,
in what we call simple Gonorrhaea's and Christallins, which perhaps Time and an
ill Habit would change, and make to become virulent, did not Pain or the
Debility of Nature prevent a further Use of the Cause that first produced them,
and hinder our Actions from keeping Pace with the Viciousness of our Wills and
Inclinations. For this Reason therefore Venereal Symptoms thus contracted,
never settle or terminate in a Pox; and I am apt to think all Malignity that
does so to him, or is contagious, Must always be from an infected Person, and
always by Coition: For a clearer Understanding of which, and the Manner of
Communication, I shall Cite Two or Three Celebrated Opinions about it, and then
subscribe my own.

Dr. Keil says, It Is Conveyance is by the Elasticity of the Air, thrusting the
Morbifick Matter into the Excretory Ducts of the Proslatae, which are empty on
Coition; and that a simple Gonorrhaea is nothing, but a Corrosion of the
Spongious Borders of those Vessels terminating in the Urethra.

Some think, a Gonorrhaea to be the Effect of a Fermentation made between the
Infectious Liquor, and that of the Prostatae, and so without Corrosion an
Efflux thrown off like Yest from Beer.

Lastly, Dr. Cockburn supposes a Gonorrhaea to be the encrcase of that Liquor
that is discharged by the Excretory Glands of the Urethra, and done by the
Venereal Stimulus, in the same manner as Cantharides applied would do; the
Quantity of Matter discharged being in proportion to the Stimulating Force they
are affected with: And this Stimulus (he says) increasing its Acrimony, does in
Process of time, make Ulcers in the Urethra. This he farther opposes to Dr.
Keil's Opinion, by saying, the Urethra will admit very little, and that there
is no Muscle, Membrane, or Machine alleged to help it for ward.

But these Opinions, besides their Opposition to one another, are deficient in
carrying their Aim singly to a Gonorrhaea, without any Attempt at the Cause of
a Chancre, Chordee, or Phymosis, which Men often become infected with, without
a Gonorrhaea: I shall therefore begin my Enquiry here, being assured that they
at least want another and different Explication, which perhaps when found, will
facilitate also our Search in a Gonorrhaea; and if I am right in my Conjecture,
They arise from the Strength, Activity, and Solidity of the Salts hid with the
Corruption, which being dispersed about the Vagina, are volatiliz'd and made
fitter for Communication by the Heat of Lust, and received by the enlarged
Pores of the Penis, where, by their Pointedness, they shortly effect an Erosion.

The manner of this Imbibing or Suction on the Man's side, is not absurdly
accounted for by the general Relaxation that attends all sensual Pleasures, of
which Coition is perhaps the greatest: Now, as it most exquisitely affects us,
the Parts are relaxed and made more easily susceptible of any Venom to be
transmitted, and that again from her becomes enabled to insinuate and escape
through the Pores by the Pungency of their Salts, and Power they are darted
with; and if the Degree of Relaxation in any Part be in Proportion to the
Pleasure, (as in the agreeable Objects of any other Sense, it is, where though
some Degree of it results to the whole Man, yet something remains peculiar to
the Sense of which it is an Object) then the Instruments of Generation, by
being most relaxed, will be also most fitted on that Account for the Reception
of morbifick Matter.

Hence the Genital Parts should always suffer first, and amorous Men soonest.

And if virulent Matter, thus externally lodged, can act like Cantharides, and
produce a Chancre, Chordee, or Phymosis, then I believe we may also, without
any repugnancy to Reason, think this outward Application of it in Coition
sufficient to produce a Gonorrhaea: The Difficulty against it being only how
this Taint can be transmitted hence to the Prostatae, which will not be so hard
to Imagine, if we consider what has been already said of the Power impelling,
and the Aptitude to receive. We find all Parts of the Body Porous, and by many
Experiments receptive of any proper Matter incumbent on them, conveying and
mixing a Portion with the Humors of the Body, as in Bathing, etc.

In all Translations of Tumors, whether by Revulsion or Derivation, this
Sympathy and Communication of Parts is evident, and particularly in the present
Case, where, on an improper handling, the Virulency will revert into the Blood,
and produce all the Symptoms of a Pox, and indeed all outward Applications to
any Malady deeper than the Skin (without this) would be impertinent: Why then
should it be thought so extraordinary for infectious Matter armed with other
Properties than bare Fluidity, to affect these Glandules at so small a
Distance? Since it must be acknowledged the several Parts of a Member have a
much easier Communication with themselves than with the whole, as we often see
in the quick and ready Translation of a Gonorrhaea to the Groin and Testicles,
and Vice Versa.

The only remaining Objection to this Transmission by the Pores is, that the
greatest Corrosions at the Glans and Praeputium are rarely attended with a
Gonorrhaea, whereas were such Corrosions thus effected, as it would be an
Argument of a stronger Infection, and the Corrosiveness of that Venereal Matter
to be greater, it should as seldom miss. This seems to be from the Contraction,
Pains and Swelling that attend those Ulcers, whereby the Passages to the
Prostatae are straightened and obstructed; but a slighter Degree, creating no such
Impediments, easily passes, and is sussicient to propel that Humor from the
Glands which in a less Proportion is their Nature and Office. From hence we may
learn a Gonorrhaea to be the mildest Species of Infection.

If any one should yet object and think the Mucous Glands of the Urethra more
easily reached than the Prostatae, and so to be the Seat of a Gonorrhaea: I
shall no further insist, but only remark to the Favorers of such an Opinion,
That a Running is not produced by an Ulceration or Corrosion of the Ostiolae of
the Glands terminating there, for such would be an irreparable Loss, and is the
very Cause of some Gleets, being incurable; but it is rather from the
Constituting Vessels of those Glands being rendered weak and flaccid, that were
before vigrous and elastick, parting easily (for that reason) with their
Contents.

From the whole of this Explication we may see a Reason for that Custom in many
Foreign Countries of washing the Privities well after Coition, (to wit) that
they find it preventive of Infection, and perhaps Circumcision was not
instituted by that renowned Lawgiver Moses, or the Impostor Mahomet, nor
practiced by Ancienter Nations, without a View to the Cleanliness of this Part,
and Prevention of foul and loathsome Distempers.

Those who account for a Gonorrhaea thus, do not say a Disuria is from an
Excoriation in the Urethra, but that the Sharpness of the Infection thinning
and carrying off the Mucus from the Membrane that lines it, is made more
sensible of the pungent Salts of Urine passing through; which the would confirm
by the Nature of Patients Complaints, who don't speak of the Heat of Water as a
Pain confined to one particular Spot of the Passage, but diffused, and seems an
equal Vellication of the whole Membrane.

I come now to the second and most useful Part,

The Cure of this Distemper: And First its Description.
AVirulent Gonorrhaea or CLAP, is the Emission of infectious Matter from the
corroded Glandulae Prostatae, or those of the Urethra, accompanied with a
DISURIA; or in other Words, the involuntary Flowing of Matter through the
Urethra, with Pain, Inflammation and Heat of Urine; These are its Pathognomick
Signs, and the Degree they are in, with Respect to Consistence and Color in
the Running (as Yellow, Green, or the like) or Pain in Water, are what we may
take the Measure of Virulency from, and will be found more or less in different
Subjects, according to the Malignity of the infected Person, and Constitution
of the Receiver.

A Disuria is a Necessary Consequence of the Running, it being a Pain from the
Acriminious Salts of Urine wasting through the Parts which that has excoriated.

The Cure I shall lay down under these two Intentions:

First, To conquer and carry off the Malignancy, and

Secondly, To heal and strengthen the Debilitated Parts.

Mercury only is able to answer our first Intention, and effectually to subdue
the Poison of this Distemper: The Reason why it has a Power beyond other
Medicines for this purpose, is its Gravity, and because its constituent Parts
are extreme small, smooth and sphaerical: The latter Qualification fits them
for an admittance into the smallest Passages (even those almost indiscernible
ones of the Glands) and its weight breaks all Coagulations, and fits the
Morbifick Matter for natural Secretions. And whatever slights some may put on
this common Road of proceeding; yet, till better convinced in the Virtues of
the several applauded Specificks that have appeared abroad in the World, I take
leave to defend it, as a Safe Practice: For although a tedious, or an ill Cure,
may now and then happen, it is not justly so much a Charge on the Medicine, as
the Method; when we leave off too soon, or continue it with Purges too long, a
Practice equally Mischievous. But more of this by and by.

I am surprised, that every body, by their Practice, should allow Mercury to be
the only Foundation and Retreat for Cure, in the last and stubbornest Stage of
this Distemper, a Pox, and yet deny its Virtues in a milder Season. It must be
confessed, there are too often seen many ill Effects from this Mineral; and on
a serious Reflection, I cannot but think, most of those deplorable Objects
found in Hospitals, or elsewhere, whose ruined Constitutions are attributed to
the Lues, to be with more Truth and Justice, ascribed to Mercury; but then this
is not the Use, but Abuse of it; an unskilful Management often precipitating
Patients, (and that in a short time) into such miserable Circumstances, as the
Distemper, left to it self, could not in Years (if ever) have produced: From
this Prepossession many take a handle to recommend their infallible Nostrums,
which when good for any thing still have this for their Basis.

The Ingenuity of making Mercury Specifical, will lie in the Measure and Manner
of Administration; that it suit such Degrees of Infection, and such
Constitutions; a Point wherein one Man will excel another, according to their
different Capacities, and Opportunities of Experiment: All other ways are
supported by nothing but a Brass Front. The many successless Attempts of those
who publicly invite Men to Safe and Speedy Cures, have pretty well exposed
their Credit; and People see it to be nothing but a Competition in Cunning, who
shall betray with most success, without the least Candor, or regard to the
Promises they make: nor is it a small Disparagement to Arcana's here, that they
are generally lodged with the Illiterate. I shall further strengthen this
Argument for Mercury, in Opposition to other Specificks, by a short Excursion
on the Practical Scheme; because it has made the loudest Noise of late, and has
been Famous, if not for attracting Poison, yet for attracting the Pence,
Populus vult decipi.

A Compounded Medicine, as is the Practical Scheme's, though it should seldom
miss the Ends it is given for, and so be said to act Electively, yet by being
Compounded, is properly and significatively ranked under the Name of an
Arcanum; which the Elder Brethren have chosen with Judgment, the Term of
Specific being usually applied to single Natural Bodies, such as he has
mentioned ( p. 12.) And though they may be diversely mixed for conveying and using
them with advantage, yet the Term is retained singly to that Body which is said
to be Specifical: As for instance, in the Cortex; whatever Form or Vehicle we
give it in, there is nothing but it self has any Claim to the Title: Therefore
making the Virtue of his Composition to be the Joint Force and Result of all, (
p. 15.) is not only a Misapplication of it, but a Confession, that this
Specificality lies in none of them singly; or if it does, it is as yet a hidden
thing to him. For he goes on, and tells ye ( p. 12.13, 16. and Certificat. p.
22.) Their United Force, like a Loadstone, draws the Contagion to it, and
exactly hits the different Constitutions of any Age, and that from the Recency
of the Distemper, to their being in a deplorable State. And for further Proofs
of these Absurdities, he says ( p. 14.) Persons after having taken the
Specific, will void large quantities of nasty corrupted stinking Water, of
such an unsufferable Stench, they will not be able to bear the smell; and give
but any Dog (that will take it) a Quart of this Urine, and he will in a little
time break out with Pocky Sores; recoverable again with so small a Dose of the
Specific as contains to the bigness of a Pea, whsch will discharge it in such
stinking corrupted Urine, as the Person's was who made it. A plain Confession
it was the Effect of the Medicine, yet serves him for a Conviction of the great
Power of this Remedy: And indeed, granting the Relations true, it must be
allowed (as was the Gamboge the poor Weavers took) to be of Stupendous
Efficacy ( p. 14.)

I shall not wrong this Gentleman, I believe, in supposing his Scheme to be
(like other shorter Schemes that are daily thrust into our Hands) for drawing
in of Customers; he differs only in having altered their Concise way of
Writing, and recommending in many Words what they have done Compendiously. The
admirable Virtues of their Incomparable Noverfailing Anti-venereal PILL.
Through a great part of his Book he insinuates to his Readers such astonishing
Performances from the Specific, as come but little short of Infallibility: It
is a Cure (says he) ( p. 21.) for Nineteen in Twenty. A very small Exception,
yet serves a double End, being both Good News to the Afflicted (Title of a
Quack Bill) and a Salvo for Miscarriages: For should the Reverse of this be,
and the Uncur'd 19 in 20, they might every one singly lament themselves and he
with them as the unhappy excepted Person, and their Certificates must be
wanting, because like his Cures, it would not be allowable to publish their
Names and Abodes. And indeed, he that gives out a Bill of Promises on this
Head, is much more safe from Detection and Reproach than any other; because, to
contest the thing is taking a public Shame, and may be one Reason the
Infallibility of a Cure is oftener and more confidently asserted here than in
any other Case. The Certificates published on these Occasions, (to confirm the
Unbelieving) are few enough to be a concerted Cheat; and if real, is only a
cunning in common with the Fraternity.

The Pictures which escape they wisely keep,
But HIDE all those that perish in the Deep.
Mrs. Avery's Case (poor Gentlewoman) ( p. 22. the Certificate) may be granted
very bad, and the Cure as Extraordinary; yet to show the World something of a
Parallel, and that others Parts of it do not want for Wonders, I refer to the
following Story, transcribed from the Patient's own Lips; abbreviated and drawn
into a Certificate, will run thus:

I T. H. of (...) having been for many Months afflicted with a Swelling in my
Belly, Gripings, great Pains in my Limbs, and in a weak and languishing
Condition, for which I had been a long while under the Prescriptions of several
eminent Physicians, but to such purpose, that I was reduced even to Death's
Door: At last, in a Despondency of Mind, I betook my self to little Dr. Le F...
at the upper end of Three C...Alley: On examining my Case, and what had been
done for it, he shook his Head and said, His Brethren had very much mistook the
Illness, or else they would not have bottomed their Hopes on Medicine Internal
or External; That the Planets were more concerned in this Affair, and had
"United their selectest Influences against me": He bid me be cheery and
confident in him, and only lend him my Servant next Morning at Three of Clock,
with some of my Urine, to Epping Forest. Knowing his Wisdom, I showed all the
Tokens of a glad Compliance my weak State would permit, and begged him, as a
Christian, to use his utmost Skill for my Recovery. He promised he would; and
accordingly took my Man with him as appointed. At his Return he told me My
Business was done: That I should have only one severe Fit of Gripes more, but
be perfectly recovered in a Week. After the Doctor had taken his Leave, my
Curiosity led me to enquire of John, what had been done at the Forest, and he
told me, all he knew was, that he had seen the Doctor bore several Holes in an
old Oak, put my Water in them, and then filled them up with Trunnels again,
muttering withal some Words inwardly which he could not understand. My Heart
ak'd for the Success of this Mystical way of Application a whole day; but
praised be God his Words had Truth to a Tittle: I had next day, or next but
one, the expected Fit; and before the expiration of a Week (as he had foretold)
walked about to Admiration.

What may complete the Author's Praises, and recommend the Cure to the Public,
is his taking but Twelve Guineas for it: The Presents that were afterward
added (though very short of a Requital) were, as I hope to be s -- forced on him.

To the Truth of all which Premises, I freely, and without Fee, do certify,
this 20th, etc. J. T.


But to return from this Digression, I begin the Cure with a strict Regulation
in Living, particularly an Abstinence from spirituous Liquor and salt Food, and
prescribe directly a mercurial Bolus.

Mer. Dull. gr. xij. Cons. Ros. q. s. f. bolus hora somni sumend. purging it off
next Morning with an Infusion of Senna. After the first or second time, I
increase the Mercury in the Bolus, and give stronger Catharticks.

Pil. ex duobus j. rez Jelap. Bals. Peruv. ana gr. ij. Calomel. gr. vj. fiat
Pil. Not. v. mane vorandus.

Vel, Pil. Cochiae s. Calomel. gr. x. Ol. Junip. gr. iij. f. Pil. deaurand.

Vel, Elect. Lenitiv. ij. Mer. dull. gr. x. rez Scammon. Jalap. an. gr. iv. Ol.
Carui g. ij. M. Constantly administering, at the end of their Operation, a
Paregorick Draught.

PURGES are given after Mercurials (I believe) not so much from a Supposition
that their Virtues immediately reach the Part affected, and subdue the Poison
directly, as from a distant View of altering the Habit of Body, and carrying
off those vicious Humors that would else probably take their Course that way,
and heighten the Fury: This Opinion is founded in Practice; where nothing is
commoner than from two Men infected by the same Woman, to see the one cured in
a few Days, when the other perhaps requires Months; which can be from nothing
sooner than their different Habits.

Purges are designed likewise to prevent any ill Effect from too great a
quantity of Mercury remaining at once in the Body.

This may suffice for their Defense in general. There remains another material
Consideration in the Use of them, and that respects the frequency of their
Repetition. And rightly to understand a Proportion in this, we are to consider,
that as the Malignancy of a Gonorrhea, Nature her self, in good Constitutions,
would run off in a due Quantity of time; and that our Administrations are but
her Assistants thereto: The Faults may be equal, in leaving them off too soon,
or continuing them too long; by the former the Infection is not conquered, and
by the latter the Constitution is enervated, and Nature's Efforts weakened
instead of being assisted: In consequence of this I repeat the Mercurial Bolus,
and purge no oftener than Reason tells me their Strength will admit, without a
Hypercatharsis, Fainting or Loathings (which is with some every other Day, with
others twice a Week, or less;) and in the Intermissions give largely of the
following Apozems or Emulsions.

Sem. 4. frig. j. aq. Meant. s. lbij. Sal Tartar j. siat Emulsio Sacchar.
candid. ad gratiam edulcorand.

Amygdal. dull. No. xij Sem. Papav is. Contundantur and sensim affunde aq.
Plantag. vel decoct. Hord. lb ij. Sir. Althae j. f. Emulsio

Decoct. Pectoral. lbij. Spir. Nitri dull. g. xxx. f. Apozema.

Sal Prunel. Sacchar. candid. p. ae M. f. Pulvis sumat ad quantitatem Scrupuli
in Cerevisia tepid. ter in die.

As these, or other Forms of Diuretics, are supposed to ease the Heat of Water
by increasing the Quantity, and so diluting the Salts; so, to this end such an
Injection may be serviceable also as is soft, and can leave something of a
Mucilaginous Substance to lubricate and defend the Urethra.

Solvatur G. Tragacanth. vel Arab. vel Ichthiocol. in sero. Lactis, Colatura
tepide injic.

While we are continuing the use of these, it will be proper to weigh with our
selves, what are the Signs of our first Intention being answered, and
sufficiently authorize us to leave them off: For there is no doubt a Period,
which the Skilful discern, wherein a Change for Healing Balsamic Medicines is
necessary and required, and which as we come short off, or exceed, may be
either way pernicious: For, First, If (while the Signs of Malignancy abide) too
sudden a Check be given to the Running, either by the unseasonable use of
Astringents, or too quick and strong purging in the beginning, which turns to
the same; then it will either revert and taint the whole Mass of Blood, or
produce by a nearer Translation acute Pain, Tumor, and Inflammation of the
Groin or Testicles; which may prove of as unhappy Consequence; particularly in
the last the Pains are agonizing, and attended with Fever, Syncope and Nausea,
and the Membrane wanting Fat, never without danger of Corruption and Gangrene.

Again: If, on the other side, the proper Season is missed of doing it, and
there is too cautious and long an adherence to Mercurials, or irritating
Medicines, whether Catharticks or Diuretics, the Running goes on without end,
and at last brings an irrecoverable Laxity on the Parts, converting a Venereal
to a troublesome Seminal Gleet. To avoid these Extremes, I take the proper
Indications for such an Alteration to be Absence of Pain and Soreness about the
Groin and Testicles, When the Distention of the Yard is gone off, When the Heat
of Urine is considerably abated, and when the Running is of thick and equal
Consistence, changed in Color and lessened in Quantity; for as the contrary of
these are what constitutes its Virulency, so their Remission must be Signs of
Amendment, and a proper Stadium for changing the Method. It is not to be
expected a Running should ever so entirely change as not to leave a Stain,
which some do sillily imagine; no, it will be sufficient that there are
considerable Alterations in the Respects abovementioned; the better those
appear, indeed, the safer shall we be in stopping it; and let the remaining
Matter revert where it will (separate from Signs of Malignancy) it can be of no
more hurt, than the drying of an Issue, or other simple or common Ulcer.

The second Intention is, to dry up the Running, and heal and strengthen the
debilitated Parts. The former part of this Intention I have compassed sometimes
(in Athletick Constitutions) by a single quick Purge; which shows, that a
Cathartick, without any other Property than its stimulating Power increased,
will turn Astringent, and dry up the Liquor of the Glands: But as Circumstances
will prevent this from being the constant Effect of it, and that (like Mr.
Avery's Case) it will be far from happening every Day, I shall select some of
those Preparations I Have most successfully experienced, and range them in their
Order of Healing and Astringency, to sort with the better or worse appearance
of the Indications above; and doubt not but a due Observance to the Season of
their Administration, together with a thick glutinous Diet (which under this
Intention should always be directed) will make them answer as effectually with
others.

Sal Prunel. iij. Pulv. Rhabarb. ij. Troch. de Agaric. Alhandal. an. ij Antim.
Diaphoret. CC ppt. Mer. dull. been levigat, rez Jalap. an. j. Elect. Lenitiv.
ij. Bals. Capivi q. s. sumat ad magnitud. Castaneae omni Mane and Vespere.

Pull. Rhabarb. ij. Sal Prunel. j. Nucis Moschat. j. Bals. Capiv. Peru. ana jss.
sumat omni mane ad duas vel tres Dejectiones promovendas.

Ichthyocoll. Albiss. j. decoq. in aq. Font. xij. Colaturae add aq. Rosar. j.
M. sumat. Coch. ij. (in lacte vaccino dissolut.) quater in die.

Cortic. Peruv. j. decoq. in aq. Font. q.s. ad viij. Colatur. hujus ij. PP i.
aq. Cinam j. M. f. haust. 8va quaque hora sumend.

Terebinth. Venet. s. Vitill. ovi sir. Bals. j. M. e Cyatho vin. alb. sumend.

Bol. Arm. j. Bals. Capiv. iij. capiat un. semis quotidie, semel vel bis alvos
promovet.

Bol. Arm. sang. Dracon. Terr. sigillat. Pull. Rhabarb. tort. an. p ae Tereb.
Venet. q. s. f. Pil. mediocres sumat quinque bis in die.

Pil. Cretaceae B. eodem modo sumend.

Decoct. Guaiac. saepe sumat haust. in qua instillat g. xx. Tinct. Guaiac. vel
Tinct. ex Bals. Peruv. Gilead, etc.

Sacch. Saturn. Vitriol. R. an. s. dissolut. in aq. Ferrariae lb iss. and
filtretur pro injectione.

Aq. Plantag. vj. Tinct. Myrrae j. vel Tinct. Veneris ss. tepide injicitur.

To these we may add the use of the Cold-Bath; it gives a Contraction and
Tensity to the Fibers in general, and therefore must close the Orifices of
these Ducts in particular.

III.
THE other Symptoms of Virulency which Denominate a Person Clapped, and that as
well without as with a Gonorrhaea, are the Chordee, Phymosis; Paraphymosis,
Chancre and Bubo. These I choose to speak of separately in their Cures, because
they require (besides an Internal use of Mercurials) Local Applications.

A Chordee is a painful Contraction of the Fraenum in Erection, caused from an
Inflammation of that Membrane, which on that accounr being thicker, is
consequently shorter, and must excite a Pain when the Erection of the Penis
stretches it.

Dr. Cockburn distinguishes another Chording Pain, arising from a Sore or Ulcer
in the Urethra, as often as it comes to be compressed by an Erection of the
Penis, and infers from it, how far within the Urethra the Seat of a Gonorrhaea
is: But against this I object,

That if an inflated Penis can so painfully compress this Ulcer on all sides,
why should not a greater Compression with the Hand do it without Erection.

Secondly, If a Gonorrhaea be an Ulcer in the Urethra, and the Chording Pain a
Compression on that Ulcer, then they must be inseparable Companions, and no
Gonorrhaea could be without it.

And, Thirdly, I have known the Chordee often continue after a Running has been
stopped, which by this Allegation could not be true; supposing (as we
reasonably may) that where there is no Running there is no Ulcer: The proper
local Remedies to it are Fotus's of Milk wherein Lilly, Elder, or
Marshmallow-Root has been boiled, and a little Sacchar. Saturn. added, or in
their stead the Cataplasma Resolvens.

A Phymosis, is when the Praeputium is difficult to bring backward: A
Paraphymosis, when it choaks at the Neck of the Penis, and will not without
pain or trouble be brought forward over the Glans: In some these are Natural
Difficulties; but here, the effect of Tumor and Inflammation, as those are
again of Shankers.

Shankers are Venereal Ulcers on the Glans Praeputium, or Fraenum: They are,
with the Phymosis (as was observed in the beginning) occasioned when the
Venereal Taint is lodged here, and does by its sharp Qualities, both coagulate
those Liquors that lubricate the Glands, and corrode the Fibers constituting
them: The latter are Shankers, the former Phymosis; for a Phymosis is nothing
but the effecting a Tumor on the Glans and Praeputium at the same time.

To a Phymosis the Injections should be mild.

Aq. Plantag. ij. Troch. alb. Rhas. j. Mer. Potab. gr. vi. to be thrown between
the Glans and the Foreskin with a Syringe, and retained there a little to wash
and cleanse it; a Fomentation should be likewise used, and a Cataplasm of the
Seeds with a little Ol. Libior. in it; or this sollowing:

Mica Panis m. j. Farin. Hord. pull. flor. Cham. ana m. ss. coquantur in lacte
ad consistent. Cataplasm. finita Decoct. add ol. Sambuc. j.

To a Shanker this Lotion. Aq. Plant. Rosar. an. j. Troch. alb. Rhas. ij. in
hac instillat g. xv. sequent. liquor.

Mer. sublimat. ij. dissolut. in sp. vin. ss. and filtretur. Or,

Aq. Calcis j. Mor. sublimat j. solut. and filtretur pro usu.

Un. Basilic. j. Praecipit. rub. j. m. pro Unguento.

Dr. Cockburn's Arcanum. Hydrargyr. Tereb. Venet. an. P. Ae. F. Unguent.

A Malign, or Venereal Bubo is dangerous to repel, and should, from the
beginning, be assisted to Suppuration by Emplasticks, Cataplasms, Cupping, and
the like: An Intention that will be found difficultly to succeed in most, and
when compassed, without great care, will turn fistulous.

I have run over this Section with little more than placing some proper
Prescriptions under the several Heads of Chancre, Phymosis, etc. avoiding any
nicer Disquisition in the choice of them, or Season of their use, not because
they are entirely void of Efficacy, but because I am satisfied neither they, or
any other Arcana will alone answer the purpose: They are all short of the
Eulogiums bestowed on them; and if not impertinent to the Ends proposed, are
yet vexatious and tedious. And since they are so, and have a greater tendency
to a Pox than a Gonorrhaea, its expedient, and I think a very good Practice,
presently to resort to Turbith for a Revulsion, or else by some other
equivalent Merourials to procure a Spitting; there is nothing these Symptoms
better or sooner submit to; for as the Mouth grows sore, there follows a
mitigation, the Matter is diverted, the Shankers heal, and the Parts suddenly
regain their pristine Form and Tension.

Eight or ten Days continuance in a moderate Salivation will ordinarily suffice
to vanquish them; but if the Distemper proves more deeply rooted, requiring one
of stricter Confinement and Regimen, take the following Rules.

SECTION IV.
THE Symptons of the Pox are cuticular Eruptions, Blotches, Ulcers in the
Throat and Palate, Nocturnal Pains of the Head, Shoulders and Shins, Caries,
Night-Sweats, Alopecia's, falling off of the Nails, Gummas, Nodes, Talpas,
Consumption and Marasmus.

How a Clap comes to end in such contumacious and intractable Symptoms, may be
partly attributed to the Malignancy of the Original Infection, partly to the
Predisposition, or ill Habit, whereby the Blood becomes more easily receptive
of that Venom, but most often to an irregular Management of Cure, and use of
Specificks: It exceeds my Design, as well as Capacity, to unriddle further the
Nature of this Venom, in its several Appearances under that general
Denomination of a Pox; having only intended here the short History of a
Salivation, by which the most of them are effectually to be removed.

A Salivation is dangerously undertaken with Aged People, with such as are
lean, or dejected through Trouble or Misfortunes, or much emaciated; but
especially with those whose Lungs are any way distempered, that are Hectical,
Phthysical and Consumptive, because, as this Habit is acquired by the
Glandulous Secretions being increased, Mercury pejorates the Mischief, and the
more so, if such Indisposition has proceeded from a former ill use of it. Dr.
Moulin assures us from Experiments, that Mercury is very prejudicial to the
Lungs, because they want that strong brisk Motion the Muscles have in other
Parts, and by their lax and spongy Texture are extremely unfit for clearing
themselves of so troublesome a Guest: This (says he) we daily see from Persons
often flux'd; who are afterward observed to die of Consumptions, that will not
give way to any Course of Medicine: To which likewise agrees many interspersed
Places in Mr. Martin's Collection of BAWDY Letters.

Mercury ordinarily Operates by a Flux through the Salival Glands, and by the
parvity of its compounding Parts has a peculiar Aptitude thereto: The Benefits
from it seem as much from the uninterrupted Continuance of its Operation, as
any Spec^fick Virtue in the Mercury; for the Blood has leisure by such a length
of time as a Salivation takes up, to separate its noxious and incongruous
Parts, which are daily washed and spewed out by the thin Liquors continually
taken, and consequently the Remainder, after such a Defaecation, becomes more
Homogeneous.

A Salivation is raised by Mercurials and that either Externally or Internally
used; Two or three Purges always precede as preparative, and after that if we
intend it by Unction, make up the following Ointment, and draw on a pair of
Gloves and Stockings after the use of it, to keep the Linen and Bedcloaths
clean.

Argent. Vivum iv. Axuug. Porcin. xij. M. An Ounce of this is to be used at a
time for three days successively, beginning the first Illination on the Wrists
and Ancles only, leaving the Patient to chafe it in with his Hands warmed
before the Fire; the second higher about the Joints of the Knees and Elbows;
and the third yet further up, but cautiously, because the nearer you anoint to
the Abdomen, the more likely the Body will be of being Laxative, and elude its
proper Operation: If these Three In-unctions answer not the purpose, we must
still repeat it, and help forward with a Bolus of Turbith.

This way by Unction I preser, especially in weak Bodies, the other more
certainly ^ausing Nausea, Vomiting, Looseness, Faintness, and the like Accidents
that interrupt (...) Regular Course of Proceeding, and give great uneasiness to
a Patient: But since Unstion has also its Faults, and is Offensive by ^ts Smell
and nastying the Cloths; since many also differ from me in this Preference, and
give it to Mercurials, internally administered; and lastly, since the Rules to
prevent those Symptoms mentioned, will require more Attention in the Internal
than External use of Mercury: I shall choose to finish the Course in that
Method, and for easier Apprehension, divide the Flux into (...) Beginning, a
State, and a Declension.

In the Beginning, or First Attempts to raise a Flux, the only thing to be
feared and guarded against, is a Diarrhaea, which diverts the Operation of the
Mercury from the Salival Glands: This we must take notice is prevented, or
abates and goes off, in proportion as we can procure a Soreness in the Mouth
and Jaws, and increase the Dribling; and therefore a very great Stress lies in
the Manner and Method, as well as in the Administrations themselves, and in a
good ordering the Patient as to Diet and Confinement.

First, We have said two or three Purge^ are to precede: And the Reason of this
is that besides preparing the Body for succeeding Mercurials, they leave an
Astringency that makes a Patient less apt to it after wherefore those of them
that leave more than others of that Property behind best suit the Purpose; as
the Potio Communis Purgativa Sydenham.

Secondly, In administering Mercurials, the Bolus should contain but a small
Dose at first.

Mer. Dull. gr. x. Laud. L. gr. ij. Cons. Ros. q. s. fiat Bolus quaque nocte
sumend. And be increased two or three Grains every Repetition; because large
Doses of it in the beginning exert too much force in the Primae viae, and by
the effect of their own Irritation, are passed off with their Contents; whereas
a small one, without giving such disturbance, leisurely intrudes it self, and
in the Circulation arrives at and wounds the Salival Glands; and when once it
has obtained that Path, the subsequent Doses more easily follow, and suppress
all Fears of a Diversion.

Thirdly, The Diet has its Use toward this End, and should be dry and
astringent; Rice, toasted Cheese, Yolks of Eggs in mull'd Whitewine, a
Harts-horn-Drink, and Roast-meats, in general, are proper Food; minding to
continue the most nourishing of them (the Meats) as long as we can to support
the Strength through; for in the Progress the Throat will be too sore to bear
swallowing any thing but Liquids.

4. Another means conducive to it, will be guarding against Cold, which would
by constipating the Pores make the Body loose Cutis Densitas alvi Laxitas.

These few Rules premised, we may go on with the Mercurial Bolus's for three or
four Nights successively; and if the Spitting in that time is found to have
advanced but slowly, or the Body is laxative, alter it for one of Turb. Min. a
gr. v ad viij, giving an Anodyne Draught at the end of its Operation.

Two or three Turbith Bolus's following the other, and increasing their Dose a
Grain every Repetition ( a v ad viij) may be expected to raise the Flux; but
Constitutions differ, and will be always an Exception to any stated number:
I Have known two Bolus's of Calomel raise a Salivation, and I have seen lbis. of
Mercury by Unction ineffectual. And here it may not be altogether unfit to
mention the opposite Consequences that at some times proceed from the use of
such a Quantity under different Symptoms: I have known nocturnal Pains of the
Head and Shoulders that have been removed by using such a quantity in Unction,
though a Spitting never succeeded; and yet the same persisting when the Case ha^
been Eruptions and stinking putrid Ulcers has not only failed, as to the
Salivation, bu^ rendered the Case deplorable, by increasing their Number and
Quantity of Matter, and consuming the Patient in colliquativ^ Sweats: But in
this, Reason and Experience must be our Guide; we must be abl^ to know when the
Mercury operates kindly, and whether the Patient's Constitution and Courage
will support him through the Course; because now, if the Success i^ doubted, we
may safely divert with Catharticks, which in the increase will be dangerous and
impracticable; for my own part, I have seldom missed, more or less, o^ a
Looseness in the raising a Salivation, and have persisted in the use of
Turbith, when a Patient has had sixteen or eighteen Stools in a Night; but this
has been in robusistrong Bodies, and with this Caution, o^ giving a Respit for
a Day or two, a Ha^lf horn Drink, and an Anodyne Draught.

If in the beginning of a Flux there should be a more than ordinary Pain in the
Jaws and Mouth, and the Saliva running o^ bloody, we are not to be startled at
it, they are the common Attendants of Mercury and reach no further than the
Parts imm^diately affected; a Day's Intermission from Mercurials will palliate,
and in a great measure correct such Uneasinesses; and to prevent their return
and Aggravation, we may perfect the remainder of our Work by Unction, which
does not affect with so much Pain as Mercury received by the Mouth does.

The Spittle at first is thick and clammy; but as it increases in Quantity,
grows thin and serous.

The STATE.
By the State of a Salivation, I mean all that time from a Patient's spitting
about a Quart in 24 Hours, till its height and return to that Quantity again,
which may include a Fortnight or more; and during this, the exactest Regulation
is required to promote the Flux, and avoid the danger of a Diversion. The
beginning has less regard in Regimen, because the Fauces as yet suffer solid
and nourishing Diet to pass and sustain Nature; but in this their Soreness will
admit of nothing but soft Liquors, as thin Broths and Gruels, which as they
afford very little Nourishment, and that the Flux is still greater, a Faintness
and Debility of necessity follows, that will constrain us to stricter Rules.
The Patient must be altogether confined to the Bed; he must be kept between the
Blankets; the Bed well lined; the Room close and warm, and a Julap pro
Languoribus; the Head and Jaws should be covered also with Flannel, it repels
the Effects of Cold, and is Anodyne.

Lastly, The Mouth should be frequently washed with the Liquids they drink, to
cleanse and scour the Glands from Filth, that they may the more freely spue out
their Contents; for this purpose therefore, and also for quenching the
continual Thirst they will be under from a large Spitting, plenty of them must
be in readiness; and they should be used warm, because Cold (in this general
Ulceration of the Mouth) would create great Pain, check the Flux, and hazard
the falling out of the Teeth. If there should be a necessity to check its
Activity, Flos Sulphuris is the Medicine.

I account the Salivation well raised, if I can make it amount to about two
Quarts in a Natural Day, and continue it so for eight or ten; but let the
highest Quantity be what it will, whenever it lessens regnlarly, it signifies
the Mercury to have spent its utmost Force and Power, and puts us on
Considerations for our Third and last Branch, The Recovery, or State of
Declension.

The DECLENSION.
A Flux that has advanced kindly to its Height, will as gradually decline, and
in the close of it calls for Physic and Diet Drink, to expel the Remains and
Recrements of the Mercury: They are not given till the Swelling and Soreness of
the Jaws and Mouth are well abated, and the Draining little; some there will be
while the Mouth continues sore, because, while the Fibers are excoriated, there
will be a proportionable Vellication that will express the Juices within their
Contact; and this might continue an inconvenient length. if the Humors were
not diverted, and the Ulcerations dried in the end, by Enema's, Catharticks and
Gargles.

Pil. Coch. Extr. Rud. ana gr. xv. rez Jalap. gr. iv, Ol. Carui gutt. ij. f.
Pil. no. v. deaurand. ad sex vices repetand. alternis diebus.

Fol. Sennae Alex. j. Zinzib. Sal Tartar. ana j. Infunde tepide per noctem
Colatur. iij. add Ol. Anisi gutt. j. Sir. Rosar. Solutiv. vj. M.

Manna opt. j. dissolv. in lbj. Aq. Strethamens. and superbib. lbiij. Aquae
ejusdem singulis diebus.

Aq. Rosar. Plantag. ana iij. Mell rosar. j. Ol. Vit. gutt. vi. pr^ Gargarism.
ad os eluendum.

Fol. Plantag. Myrtill. in Aq. I lord. decoct. Colatur. viij. add Sir. e Moris
j. M. F. Gargarism.

Diet Drinks are appointed in conjunction with these, and may be continued six
Weeks or two Months. They, together, subdue and carry off the Remnants of the
Mercury, heal the Excoriations of the Mouth, and the Drinks, in particular,
correct the Acidities of the Blood, and procure a gentle Diaphoresis, which
very much avails in finishing a removal of all Pains.

Baccar. Junip. j. Rad. Liquirit. Sem. Faenic. ana j. infunde in Cerevisia
tenuis conq. j. Colaturae, add Sp. Cochlear. ij. pro usu.

Lign. Sassaphras. iij. Sarsae, Guaiac. ana ij. Rad. Liquir. Sem. Coriand.
Anisi, ana j. CC Raz. is. bulliant in lbxvj. Aq. ad Cxij. Colaturae bibat saepe
in die.

Thaeae ex Sassaphras. bibat bis vel ter in die.

Cerevisia e Lignis Doctoris Fuller.

Decoct. Dtaeteticum Sydenham pro P^^^ communc.

Suffumigation is sometimes substituted in room of the preceding Course; and is
said to remove Pa^ns, an dry up running Ulcers, or a Caries, better, and with
more Dispatch.

In the Management of it, the Patient is stripped naked, and placed on a Stool
with a Hole through, under which the Fume is put: He is covered all over with
Blankets, (except the Head, for fear of Suffocation) which are drawn pretty
close about the Neck to keep the Fume in. When Sweat begins to come, he must be
put to Bed, and there well covered for an Hour or two and this repeated six,
seven, or more Days, according to the Urgency of the Symptoms: The Fume is made
always of Cinnabar.

Cinnabar. factitia iis. Thuris, Styracis, ana j. M. F. Pulvis.

Cinnabar. ij. Styrac. Calamit. Nucis Moschat. ana ij. Benzoin iij. cum
Terebinth. E Trochisci.

FINIS.

