THE SINGULAR CASE OF A LADY, WHO HAD THE SMALLPOX DURING PREGNANCY; AND WHO
COMMUNICATED THE SAME DISEASE TO THE FOETUS.

BY W. LYNN, SURGEON.

AS READ AT THE ROYAL SOCIETY IN FEBRUARY 1786.

LONDON: PRINTED BY C. MACRAE, ORANGE STREET.

A SINGULAR CASE.
EVERY circumstance which tends to elucidate any doubtful point in the animal
economy, as it adds to the store of our knowledge, must of course contribute
to settle the practice of physic and surgery upon more certain and rational
principles.

Whether a foetus can receive the infection of the smallpox, or any other
contagious distemper, from its mother in the womb, is a question which appears
not to have been satisfactorily solved. Many eminent physiologists have been
divided in their opinions upon this subject.

In the case published by Mr. John Hunter, in 1777, the point is far from being
ascertained, to the full conviction of that celebrated teacher's own mind;
since, after having related the case, he collects the best authorities on both
sides of the question, and leaves the decision to the reader's own judgment.

It is to settle this matter beyond the possibility of future controversy, that
the following facts are, with all respect and deference, submitted to the
consideration of this learned Society.

In November, 1785, the wife of Mr. Eve, a coachmaker in Oxford-street, being
then in the eighth month of her pregnancy, was seized with rigors, pain in the
back, and other febrile symptoms. In two days time, the disease showed itself
to be the smallpox; and though the pustules were of the distinct sort, yet
they were uncommonly numerous. On the eleventh day they began to turn; and on
the twenty-second day her labor took place, which, according to her reckoning,
was a fortnight before the regular period; that is, when she was advanced in
her pregnancy eight months and two weeks.

The child, at the time of its birth, was covered with distinct pustules all
over its body: they did not appear to be full of matter till three days after;
at which time I took some of the pus upon a lancet, from one of the pustules on
the face. With this lancet I afterward inoculated, on the 2d of December,
1785, a child of Mr. Chaters, in Church-street, Soho, in both arms. On the 7th
the inflammation began to appear in each arm, and continued daily increasing
till the 11th of December, when the child sickened, and was affected with all
the symptoms which usually precede the eruption. On the 12th the sickness and
fever abated, the pustules of the distinct sort of smallpox made their
appearance, and the child having regularly gone through the several stages of
the distemper, was perfectly well in three weeks.

It may be proper to observe, that Mr. Findlay, surgeon, in Sackville Street,
and Mr. Holladay, late surgeon to Sir Edward Hughes, in the East Indies, were
present, both at the taking of the matter, and at the subsequent inoculation of
the child.

As no circumstance can prove the identity of the smallpox more indisputably,
than its being communicated, with the usual symptoms and progression of the
disease, from one subject to another; so it appears to be ascertained from the
above facts, that a child can receive the variolous infection from its mother,
in utero.

REMARKS.
ALTHOUGH the fact of the possibility of the smallpox being communicated from
the mother to the foetus, in utero, be clearly proved in this case, yet there
may still remain some doubt with respect to the mode of communication.

It may be urged, that if we suppose the communication of the disease from the
mother to the child to be effected by means of the circulating fluids, then the
child would never escape the infection, when the mother had the disease;
whereas the contrary appears in the instance adduced by Mr. John Hunter from
Boerhave, of a lady who having gone through the confluent smallpox in the
sixth month of her pregnancy, brought forth afterward, at the regular period,
a child, whose body did not show the least vestige of the disease.

To this it may be answered: It is by no means necessary, supposing the
contagion to be conveyed by the circulating fluids, that there should be no
possibility of the child's escaping the disease, because this assertion proves
too much. For it appears, that there must always be a certain aptitude or
fitness in a body to receive any infection offered to it; and that unless this
fitness or aptitude prevails, the infection will not take place. What this
fitness or aptitude is, we cannot tell; but that it really does exist, is
evident from daily and palpable experience; otherwise, every person exposed to
any contagious disease would never escape. How many are there respecting the
disease in question, who never having had it themselves, are casually or
purposely exposed to infection, and escape it several times, while they shall
catch it upon another occasion, when perhaps they least expected it? Nor is
there any reason which can induce us to suppose, that this aptitude or fitness
for receiving infection is not as necessary to produce the disease, when the
virus is immediately conveyed by the circulating fluids, as when it is
previously to be absorbed: For in the instances alleged, although the virus
had not acted upon the constitution so as to produce the disease, yet we cannot
suppose the whole absorbent system to be entirely inactive, so as that no
particle of matter, capable of infecting, shall be taken up by the body,
repeatedly exposed to it. The action and power of the absorbent system must go
on; and therefore, when a contagious distemper is not produced in any body
exposed to it, this can only be accounted for, from the inaptitude or unfitness
of the constitution to produce it at the time, however mysterious that
inaptitude or unfitness may be.

In the case mentioned by Boerhave, if the foregoing reasoning has been well
founded, we might suppose that there was a want of aptitude in the foetus to
receive the infection, although it was circulating in the fluids of the mother;
or there is another way of considering it, which is, that the child had really
gone through the smallpox in utero, but had been born without any marks. How
many are there who go through the disease, and never bear the least vestige of
it afterward?

In this case, there was full time enough for the child to catch the infection,
go through the several stages of it, and come into the world without a spot;
for the lady having had the disease in the sixth month, implies, that she had
gone through it before the six months were completed; consequently there were
full three months remaining before the child came into the world.

Supposing, therefore, the child to have gone through the disease before the
seventh month was accomplished, it had still upwards of two months to get rid
of any marks remaining from any previous pustules it might have had; and is it
not extremely probable, that the circumstance of the child's being entirely
secluded from the external air, at that period, may have contributed much to
abolish or shorten the duration of these marks? Again; every one knows from
daily experience, that because the mother had a confluent smallpox, there was
no necessity that the child should have one of the same kind.

If it be possible, then, that the child should have had a mild smallpox, it
is on the other hand impossible to ascertain the number of pustules it might
have had. One or two are sufficient to characterise the distemper, and many
persons go through it, both in the natural way and by inoculation, with no
other external mark. Some eminent physicians indeed, among whom is Boerhave,
have been of opinion, that the eruption is not absolutely necessary to
constitute the disease; and that a person may go through the variolous fever
without any apparent eruption, and be as free from future infection as if the
eruption had appeared.

There is nothing, therefore, which militates against the supposition of the
contagion being conveyed from the mother to the foetus in utero, by means of
the circulating fluids; even in those instances adduced of the child having
caught the distemper in the womb of its mother, who had previously experienced
it, and therefore was not herself susceptible of it. Can we suppose the disease
to be conveyed to the child any way, then, through the mother? A subject may
absorb, and convey an infection to another, of which it is not itself
susceptible; and in this case, the mother becomes the vehicle of a poison,
which cannot possibly have any effect upon herself.

But, if the smallpox was conveyed to the child in this case, through the medium
of the circulating fluids, which indeed appears to be the only way by which it
could be conveyed, it follows, that other contagious diseases may be
communicated from the mother to the foetus in utero, through the same channel;
and therefore, the possibility of the like event extends to the Venereal
Disease.

ST. MARTIN'S LANE, August 1786.
FINIS.

