AN ESSAY UPON PRINTS; CONTAINING Remarks upon the Principles of picturesque
Beauty, THE Different Kinds of Prints, AND THE Characters of the most noted
Masters; ILLUSTRATED BY Criticisms upon particular Pieces; To which are added,
Some Cautions that may be useful in collecting Prints.

Artificumque manus inter se, operumque labores Miramur. Aen. I. 459. LONDON:
Printed for J. ROBSON, Bookseller to the Princess Dowager of Wales, at the
Feathers, in New Bond Street.

M DCC LXVIII.

THE PREFACE. ^^bert Durer. -- The King of Bavaria has (...) 3000 florins for
the erection at Nurem^^^^ of a monument to Albert Durer. It will ^^mmenced in
the spring.
NOtwithstanding the following work, a few additions excepted, has lain by the
author at least fifteen years, it is very far from being so perfect, as he
could have wished: any new lights therefore, and information, he will be glad
to receive, through the hands of his bookseller. In many things he fears he may
have passed wrong judgments; and in some points, he has not had all the means
of information, which he could have desired: for as he has taken nothing upon
trust, with regard to the characters of masters, he sometimes wanted the
opportunity he wished for, of consulting their works.

Since his work was printed, the author has seen a Dictionary of engravers,
ancient and modern, in three volumes, published by F. BASAN, engraver at Paris;
which seems to be accurate; and might in some points have been of service to
him. It contains a very numerous catalogue of engravers, the more eminent of
whom only are taken notice of in the following pages. Of modern prints the
author has purposely said little; declining generally to give his opinion of
living artists.

He thought it necessary to introduce his work by a few observations on the
principles of painting, as far as those principles can be applied to prints. As
these observations are not always new, he has endeavored, at least, to make
them concise.

In his account of artists he has paid some attention to chronology; but has,
in many cases, purposely neglected it, with a view of bringing those masters
together, whose manners are alike.

The chapter containing criticisms on particular prints, is an addition to his
original plan. He was advised to insert something of this kind, as an
illustration of his principles.

N. B. When the figures on the right side are spoken of, those are meant, which
are opposite to the spectator's right: and so of the left.

Explanation of Terms.
Composition, in its large sense, means a picture in general: in its limited
one, the art of grouping figures, and combining the parts of a picture. In this
latter sense it is synonymous with disposition. Design, in its strict sense,
applied chiefly to drawing: in its more enlarged one, defined page 3. In its
most enlarged one, sometimes taken for a picture in general. A whole: The idea
of one object, which a picture should give in its comprehensive view.
Expression: its strict meaning defined page 24: but it often means the force,
by which objects of any kind are represented. Effect arises chiefly from the
management of light; but the word is sometimes applied to the general view of a
picture. Spirit, in its strict sense, defined p. 34. but it is sometimes taken
in a more enlarged one, and means the general effect of a masterly performance.
Manner, synonymous with execution. Picturesque: a term expressive of that
peculiar kind of beauty, which is agreeable in a picture. Picturesque grace: an
agreeable form given, in a picture, to a clownish figure. Repose, or quietness
applied to a picture, when the whole is harmonious; when nothing glares either
in the light, shade, or coloring. To keep down, take down, or bring down,
signify throwing a degree of shade upon a glaring light. A middle tint, a
medium between a strong light, and strong shade: the phrase is not at all
expressive of color. Catching lights: strong lights, which strike upon some
particular parts of an object, the rest of which is in shadow. Studies, the
scetched ideas of a painter, not wrought into a whole. Freedom, the result of
quick execution. Extremities, hands and feet. Air, expresses chiefly the
graceful action of the head; but often means a graceful attitude. Contrast, the
opposition of one part to another.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The principles of painting considered, as far as they relate to
prints. CHAP. II. Observations on the different kinds of prints. CHAP. III.
Characters of the most noted masters. CHAP. IV. Remarks on particular prints.
CHAP. V. Cautions in collecting prints.
CHAPTER I. The principles of Painting considered, so far as they relate to
Prints.
A Painting, or picture, is distinguished from a print only by the coloring,
and the manner of execution. In other respects, the foundation of beauty is the
same in both; and we consider a print, as we do a picture, in a double light,
with regard to a whole, and with regard to its parts. It may have an agreeable
effect as a whole, and yet be very culpable in its parts. It may be likewise
the reverse. A man may make a good appearance upon the whole; though his limbs,
examined separately, may be wanting in exact proportion. His limbs, on the
other hand, may be exactly formed, and yet his person, upon the whole,
disgusting.

To make a print agreeable as a whole, a just observance of those rules is
necessary, which relate to design, disposition, keeping, and the distribution
of light: to make it agreeable in its parts, of those which relate to drawing,
expression, grace, and perspective.

By design, (a term, which painters sometimes use in a more limited sense) I
mean the general conduct of the piece as a representation of such a particular
story. It answers, in an historical relation of a fact, to a judicious choice
of circumstances, and includes a proper time, proper characters, the most
affecting manner of introducing those characters, and proper appendages.

With regard to a proper time, the painter is assisted by good old dramatic
rules; which inform him, that one point of time only should be taken -- the
most affecting in the action; and that no other part of the story should
interfere with it. Thus in the death of ANANIAS, if the instant of his falling
down be chosen, no anachronism should be introduced; every part of the piece
should correspond; each character should be under the strongest impression of
astonishment, and horror; those passions being yet unallayed by any cooler
passions succeding.

With regard to characters, the painter must suit them to his piece by
attending to historical truth, if his subject be history; or to heathen
mythology, if it be fabulous.

He must farther introduce them properly. They should be ordered in such an
advantageous manner, that the principal figures, those which are most concerned
in the action, should catch the eye first, and engage it most. This is an
essential ingredient in a well-told story. In the first place, they should be
the least embarrassed of the group. This alone gives them distinction. But they
may be farther distinguished, sometimes by a broad light; sometimes, though but
rarely, and when the subject requires it, by a strong shadow, in the midst of a
light; sometimes by a remarkable action, or expression; and sometimes by a
combination of two or three of these modes of distinction.

The last thing included in design is the use of proper appendages. By
appendages are meant animals, landscape, buildings, and in general, what ever is
introduced into the piece by way of ornament. Every thing of this kind should
correspond with the subject, and rank in a proper subordination to it. BASSAN
would sometimes paint a scripture-story; and his method was, to crowd his
foreground with cattle, well painted indeed, but wholly foreign to his subject;
while you seek for his principal figures, and at length perhaps with difficulty
find them in some remote corner of his picture. We often see a landscape well
adorned with a story in miniature. The landscape here is principal; but at the
same time the figures, which tell the story, though subordinate to the landscape,
are the principal figures. BASSAN'S practice was different. In his pictures
neither the landscape, nor the story is principal. His cattle are the ornament
of his pieces. To introduce a story then is absurd.

When all these rules are observed, when a proper point of time is chosen; when
characters corresponding with the subject are introduced, and these ordered so
judiciously as to point out the story in the strongest manner; and lastly, when
all the appendages, and under-parts of the piece are suitable, and subservient
to the subject, then the story is well told, and of course the design is
perfect.

The second thing to be considered with regard to a whole, is disposition. By
this word is meant the art of grouping the figures, and of combining the
several parts of a picture. Design considers how each part, separately taken,
concurs in producing a whole -- a whole, arising from the unity of the subject,
not the effect of the object. For the figures in a piece may be so ordered, as
to tell the story in an affecting manner, which is as far as design goes, and
yet may want that agreeable combination, which is necessary to please the eye.
To produce such a combination is the business of disposition. In the cartoon of
St. PAUL preaching at Athens, the design is perfect; and the characters, in
particular, are so ordered, as to tell the story in a very affecting manner:
yet the several parts of the picture are far from being agreably combined. If
RUBENS had had the disposition of the materials of this picture, and the
management of the lights, it is effect as a whole had been very different.

Having thus distinguished between design and disposition, I shall explain the
latter a little farther.

It is an obvious principle, that one object at a time is enough to engage
either the senses or the intellect. Hence the necessity of unity or a whole in
painting. The eye, upon a complex view, must be able to comprehend the picture
as one object, or it cannot be satisfied. It may be pleased indeed by feeding
on the parts separately; but a picture, which can please no otherwise; is as
poor a production, as a machine, the springs and wheels of which are finished
with nicety, but are unable to act in concert, and effect the intended movement.

Now disposition, or the art of grouping and combining the figures, and several
parts of a picture is an essential, which contributes greatly to produce a
whole in painting. When the parts are scattered, they have no dependence on
each other; they are still only parts: but by an agreeable grouping, they are
massed together, and become a whole.

In disposing figures great artifice is necessary to make each group open
itself in such a manner, as to set off advantageously the several figures, of
which it is composed. The action at least of each figure should appear.

No group can be agreeable without contrast. By contrast is meant the
opposition of one part to another. A sameness in attitude, action, or
expression, among figures in the same group, will always disgust the eye. In
the cartoon of St. PAUL preaching at Athens, the contrast among the figures is
incomparably fine; and the want of it, in the death of ANANIAS, makes the group
of the apostles a disagreeable one.

Nor indeeed is contrast required only among the figures of the same group, but
also among the groups themselves, and among all the parts, of which the piece
is composed. In the beautiful gate of the temple, the figures of the principal
group are very well contrasted; but the adjoining group is disposed almost in
the same manner; which, together with the formal pillars, introduce a
disagreable regularity into the picture.

The judicious painter, however, whether he group, combine, or contrast, will
always avoid the appearance of artifice. The several parts of his picture will
be so suited to each other, that his art will seem the result of chance. In the
sacrifice at Lystra, the head of the ox is bowed down, with a design, no doubt,
to group the figures around it more harmoniously; but their action is so well
suited to the posture of the ox, and the whole managed with so much 'judgment,
that although the figures are disposed with the utmost art, they appear with all
the ease of nature. The remaining part of the group is an instance of the
reverse, in which a number of heads appear manifestly stuck in to fill up
vacuities.

But farther, as a whole, or unity, is an essential of beauty, that disposition
is certainly the most perfect, which admits but of one group. All subjects,
however, will not allow this close observance of unity. When this is the case,
the several groups must again be combined, chiefly by a proper distribution of
light, so as constitute a whole.

But as the whole will soon be lost, if the constituent parts become numerous,
it follows, that many groups must not be admitted. Judicious painters have
thought three the utmost number, that can be allowed. Some subjects indeed, as
battles, and triumphs, necessarily require a great number of figures, and of
course various combinations of groups. In the management of such subjects, the
greatest art is necessary to preserve a whole. Confusion in the figures must be
expressed without confusion in the picture. A writer should treat his subject
clearly, though he write upon obscurity.

With regard to disposition, I shall only add, that the shape or form of the
group should also be considered. The triangular form MICHAEL ANGELO thought the
most beautiful. And indeed there is a lightness in it, which no other form can
receive. The group of the apostles, in the cartoon of giving the keys, and the
same group, in the death of Ananias, are both exceedingly heavy, and this
heaviness arises from nothing more than from the form of a parallelogram,
within the lines of which these groups are contained. The triangular form too
is capable of the most variety: for the vertical angle of a group so disposed
may either be acute, or obtuse, in any degree. Or a segment only of a triangle
may be taken, which still increases the variety. The cartoons afford few
instances of beauty in the forms of groups. In the works of Salvator Rosa we
frequently find them.

The painter, when he has chosen his subject, should always scetch out some
beautiful form of grouping, which may best suit it; within which bounds he
should, as nearly as may be, without affectation, confine his figures. What I
mean, is, that the form of the group should never be left at random.

A third thing to be considered in a picture, with regard to a whole, is
keeping. This word implies the different degrees of strength and faintness,
which objects receive from nearness and distance. A nice observance of the
gradual fading of light and shade contributes greatly toward the production of
a whole. Without it, the distant parts, instead of being connected with the
objects at hand, appear like foreign objects, wildly introduced, and
unconnected. Diminished in size only, they put you in mind of Lilliput and
Brobdignag united in one scene. Keeping is generally found in great perfection
in DELLA BELLA'S prints; and the want of it as conspicuously in TEMPESTA'S.

Nearly allied to keeping is the doctrine of harmony, which equally contributes
toward the production of a whole. In painting, the practice of this doctrine
has amazing force. A judicious arrangement of according tints will strike even
the unpracticed eye. The effect of every picture, in a great measure, depends
on one principal and master-tint, which prevails over the whole. Sometimes the
purple tint is chosen: sometimes the mellow, brown one; and in some subjects
the greenish hue is most proper. Of this ruling tint, whatever it is, every
object in the picture should in a degree participate. This theory is founded on
principles of truth, and produces a fine effect from the harmony, in which it
unites every object. -- But although harmony shows its effect chiefly in
painting, yet in some measure the effect of prints may be assisted by it.
Unless they are harmonized by the same tone of shadow, if I may so express
myself, there will always appear a great deficiency in them. By the same tone
of shadow, I mean not only the same manner of execution, but an uniform degree
of strength. We often meet with hard touches in a print, which, standing alone,
are unharmonious; but when every contiguous part is touched up to that tone,
the whole is in unison. -- Keeping then proportions a proper degree of strength
to the near and distant parts, in respect to each other. Harmony goes a step
farther, and keeps each part quiet, with respect to itself, and the whole. I
shall only add, that in scetches, and rough etchings no harmony is expected: it
is enough, if keeping be observed. Harmony is looked for only in finished
compositions. If you would see the want of it in the strongest light, examine a
worn-print, harshly retouched by some bungler.

The last thing, which contributes to produce a whole, is a proper distribution
of light. This, in a print especially, is most essential. An harmony in the
coloring may, in some measure, supply its place in painting; but a print has
no succidaneum. Were the design, disposition, and keeping ever so perfect,
beautiful, and just, without this essential, instead of a whole, we should have
only a piece of patch-work. Nay, such is the power of light, that by an
artificial management of it we may even harmonize a bad disposition.

The general rule, which regards the distribution of light, is, that it should
be spread in large masses. This gives us the idea of a whole. Every grand
object catches the light only upon one large surface. Where the light is
spotted, we have the idea of several objects; or at least of an incoherent one,
if the object be single; which the eye surveys with difficulty. It is thus in
painting. When we see, upon a comprehensive view, large masses of light and
shade, we have, of course, the idea of a whole -- of unity in that picture. But
where the light is scattered, we have the idea of several objects, or at least
of one broken and confused. TITIAN'S known illustration of this point by a
bunch of grapes is beautiful, and explanatory. When the light falls upon the
whole bunch together (one side being illumined, and the other dark) we have the
representation of those large masses, which constitute a whole. But when the
grapes are stripped from the bunch, and scattered upon a table (the light
shining upon each separately) a whole is no longer preserved.

Having thus considered those essentials of a print, which produce a whole, it
remains to consider those, which relate to the parts -- drawing, expression,
grace, and perspective. With regard to these, let it be first observed, that,
in order, they are inferior to the other. The production of a whole is the
great effect, that should be aimed at in a picture: a picture without a whole
is properly only a study: and those things, which produce a whole are of course
the principal foundation of beauty.

By drawing we mean the exactness of the out-line. Without a competent
knowledge of this there can be no just representation of nature. Every thing
will be distorted, and offensive to the eye. Bad drawing therefore is that
disgusting object, which Non homines, non dii, non concessere columnae.

Drawing, however, may be very tolerable, though it fall short in a certain
degree, of absolute perfection. The defect will only be observed by the most
critical and anatomical eye: and I may venture to say, that drawing is ranked
too high, when the niceties of it are considered in preference to those
essentials, which constitute a whole.

Expression is the life and soul of painting. It implies a just representation
of passion, and of character: of passion, by exhibiting every emotion of the
mind, as outwardly discovered by any peculiarity of gesture; or the extention,
and contraction of the features: of character, by representing the different
manners of men, as arising from their particular tempers, or professions. The
cartoons are full of examples of the first kind of expression; and with regard
to the second, commonly called manners-painting, it would be invidious not to
mention our countryman HOGARTH; whose works contain a variety of characters,
represented with more force than most men can conceive them.

Grace consists in such a disposition of the parts of a figure, as forms it
into an agreeable attitude. It depends on contrast and ease. Contrast, when
applied to a single figure, means the same, as when applied to a group; the
opposition of one part to another. It may be considered with reference to the
body, the limbs, and the head; the graceful attitude arising sometimes from a
contrast in one, sometimes in another, and sometimes in all. With reference to
the body, contrast consists in giving it an easy turn, opposing concave parts
to unequal. Of this, St. PAUL in the sacrifice at Lystra is an instance. -- With
reference to the limbs, it consists in the opposition between extention and
contraction. MICHAEL ANGELO'S illustration by a triangle, or pyramid, may here
likewise again be introduced; this form giving grace and beauty to a single
figure, as well as to a group. Only here a greater liberty may be allowed. In
grouping, the triangle must always rest upon its base; but in a single figure,
it may be inverted, and stand upon its apex. Thus if the lower parts of the
figure be extended, the upper parts should be contracted; but the same
beautiful form is given by extending the arms, and drawing the feet to a point.
-- Lastly, contrast often arises from the air of the head; which is given by a
turn of the neck from the line of the body. The cartoons abound with examples
of this kind of grace. It is very remarkable in the figure of St. JOHN healing
the cripple; and the same cartoon affords eight or nine more instances. I say
the less on this subject, as it has been so well explained by the ingenious
author of the Analysis of Beauty.

Thus contrast is the foundation of grace; but it must ever be remembered, that
contrast should be accompanied with ease. The body should be turned, not
twisted; every constrained posture avoided; and every motion such, as nature,
which loves ease, would dictate.

What has been said on this head relates equally to all figures; those drawn
from low, as well as those from high life. And here I would distinguish between
picturesque grace, and that grace which arises from dignity of character. Of
the former kind, which is the kind here treated of, all figures should partake:
you find it in BERGHEM'S clowns, and in CALLOT'S beggars: but it belongs to
expression to mark those characteristics, which distinguish the latter.

I shall only observe farther, that when the piece consists of many figures,
the contrast of each single figure should be subordinate to the contrast of the
whole. It will be improper therefore, in many cases, to practice the rules,
which have been just laid down. They ought, however to be a general direction
to the painter; and at least to be observed in the principal figures. -- If a
single figure be introduced, as in portrait, the pyramidal form cannot well be
dispensed with. The figure partakes then of the nature of a group.

Perspective is that proportion, with regard to size, which near and distant
objects, with their parts, bear to each other. It answers to keeping: one gives
the out-line; and the other fills it up. Without a competent knowledge of
perspective very absurd things would be introduced: and yet to make a vain show
of it is pedantic. -- Under this head may be reduced fore-shortning. Unless
this be done with the utmost art, it were better omitted: it will otherwise
occasion great aukwardness. RUBENS is famous for fore-shortning; but the effect
is chiefly seen in his paintings; seldom in his prints.

To this summary of the rules, which relate to the whole of a picture, and to
its parts, I shall just add a few observations upon execution; which relates
equally to both.

By execution is meant that manner of working, by which each artist produces
his effect. Artists may differ in their execution or manner, and yet all excel.
CALLOT, for instance, uses a strong, firm stroke; SALVATOR, a slight, and loose
one; while REMBRANDT executes in a manner different from them both, by
scratches seemingly at random.

Every artist is in some degree a mannerist; that is, he executes in a manner
peculiar to himself. But the word mannerist has generally a closer sense.
Nature should be the standard of imitation; and every object should be
executed, as nearly as possible, in her manner. Thus SALVATOR'S figures, DU
JARDIN'S animals, and WATERLO'S landskips, are all strongly impressed with the
character of nature. Other masters again, deviating from this standard, instead
of nature, have recourse only to their own ideas. They have gotten a general
idea of a man, a horse, or a tree; and to these ideas they apply upon all
occasions. Instead therefore of representing that endless variety, which nature
exhibits on every subject, a sameness runs through all their performances.
Every figure, and every tree bears the same stamp. Such artists are properly
called mannerists. TEMPEST, CALLOT, and TESTA are all mannerists of this kind.
Their ideas are plainly no copies from nature. PERELLE'S landskips too are mere
transcripts of imagination. -- The artist however, who copies nature, if he
make a bad choice (as REMBRANDT often did) is less agreeable, than the
mannerist, who gives us his own elevated ideas, touched with spirit and
character, though not with exact truth. He is the true artist, who copies nature;
but, where he finds her mean, elevates her from his own ideas of beauty. Such
was SALVATOR.

By the spirit and freedom of execution, we mean something, which it is
difficult to explain. A certain heaviness always follows, when the artist is
not sure of his stroke, and cannot execute his idea with precision. The reverse
is the case, when he is certain of it, and gives it boldly. I know not how to
explain better what is meant by spirit. Mere freedom a quick execution will
give; but unless that freedom be attended with precision, the stroke, however
free, will be so unmeaning as to lose its effect.

To these observations, it may not be improper to add a short comparative view
of the peculiar excellences of pictures, and prints, which will show us in what
points the picture has the advantage.

In design and composition the effects of both are equal. The print exhibits
them with as much force and meaning as the picture.

In keeping the picture has the advantage. The haziness of distance cannot well
be expressed by any thing, but the hue of nature, which the pencil is very able
to give. The print endeavors to preserve this haziness; and to give the idea:
but the idea is very imperfect. It is little more than an aid to memory. We
know the appearance exists in nature; and the print furnishes an hint to
recollect it.

In the distribution of light the comparison runs very wide. Here the painter
avails himself of a thousand varied tints, which assist him in this business;
and by which he can harmonize his gradations from light to shade with an almost
infinite variety. An harmonious coloring has in itself indeed the effect of a
proper distribution of light. The engraver, in the mean time, is left to work
out his effect with two materials only, plain white and black. -- In the print
however you can more easily trace the principles of light and shade. The pencil
is the implement of deception; and it requires the eye of a master to
distinguish between the effect of light, and the mere effect of color: but in
the print, even the unpractised eye can readily catch the mass; and follow the
distribution of it through all its variety of middle tints. -- One thing more
may be added on this head: If the picture have no harmony in its coloring, the
tints being all at discord among themselves, which is very often the case in
the works of reputable painters, a good print from such a picture, is more
beautiful than the picture itself. It preserves what is valuable, (upon a
supposition there is any thing valuable in it,) and removes what is offensive.

Thus the comparison runs with regard to those essentials, which relate to a
whole: with regard to drawing, expression, grace, and perspective, we can
pursue it only in the two former: in the two latter, the picture and the print
seem to have equal advantages. -- With regard to perspective indeed, the lines
of the print verging all to one point, may mark the principles of it more
strongly.

Drawing, in a picture, is effected by the contiguity of two different colors:
in a print by a positive line. In the picture, therefore, drawing has more of
nature in it, and more of effect: but the student in anatomy finds more
precision in the print; and can more easily trace the line, and follow it in
all its windings through light and shade. -- In metzotinto indeed the
comparison fails; in which species of prints, drawing is effected nearly as it
is in painting.

With regard to expression, the painter glories in his many advantages. The
passions receive their force almost as much from color, as from the emotion of
feature. Nay lines, without color, have frequently an effect very opposite to
what is intended. Violent expressions, when lineal only, become often
grotesque. The complexion should support the distortion. The bloated eyes of
immoderate grief degenerate into coarse features, unless the pencil add those
high-blown touches, which mark the passion. Ask the engraver, why he could not
give the dying saint of DOMINICHINO his true expression? JAC FREII'S copy of
DOMINICHINO'S St. Jerome.
Why he gave him that ghastly horror, instead of the serene langour of the
original? The engraver may with justice say, he went as far as lines could go;
but he wanted DOMINICHINO'S pencil to give those pallid touches, which alone
could make his lines expressive. -- Age also, and sex, the bloom of youth, and
the wan cheek of sickness, are equally indebted, in representation, for their
most characteristic marks, to the pencil. -- In portrait, the different hues of
hair, and complexion; -- in animal-life the various dies of furrs, and plumage
-- in landscape, the peculiar tints of seasons; of morning, and evening; the
light azure of a summer's sky; the sultry glow of noon; the bluish, or purple
tinge, which the mountain assumes, as it recedes, or approaches; the gray moss
upon the ruin; the variegated greens, and mellow browns of foliage, and broken
ground; in short, the colors of every part of nature, have all amazing force
in strengthening the expression of objects. -- In the room of all this, the
deficient print has only to offer mere form, and the gradations of simple
light. Hence the sweet touches of the pencil of CLAUDE, mark his pictures with
the strongest expressions of nature, and render them invaluable; while his
prints are the dirty shapes of something, which he could not express.

The idea also of distant magnitude the print gives only very imperfectly. It
is expressed chiefly by color. Air, which is naturally blue, is the medium,
through which we see; and every object participates of this blueness. When the
distance is small, the tinge is imperceptible: as it increases, the tinge grows
stronger; and when the object is very remote, it entirely loses its natural
color, and becomes blue. And indeed this is so familiar a criterion of
distance, at least, with those, who live in mountainous countries, that if the
object be visible at all, after it has received the full ether-tinge, if I may
so speak, the sight immediately judges it to be very large. The eye ranging
over the plains of Egypt, and catching the blue point of a pyramid, from the
color concludes the distance; and is struck with the magnitude of an object,
which, through such a space, can exhibit form. -- Here the print fails: this
criterion of distant magnitude, it is unable to give.

The print equally fails, when the medium itself receives a foreign tinge from
a strength of color behind it. The idea of horror impressed by an expanse of
air glowing, in the night, with distant fire, cannot be raised by black and
white. VANDERVELDE has contrived to give us a good idea of the dreadful glare
of a fleet in flames: but it were ridiculous for an engraver to attempt such a
subject; because he cannot express that idea, which principally illustrates his
story.

Transparency is another thing which the print is very unable to express. It is
the united tinge of two colors, one behind the other, each of which, in part,
discovers itself singly. If you employ one color only, you have the idea of
opaqueness. A fine carnation is a white transparent skin, spread over a
multitude of small blood vessels, which blush through it. When the breath
departs, these little fountains of life flow no longer; the bloom fades; and
livid paleness, the color of death, succeeds. -- The happy pencil can mark
both these effects. It can spread the glow of health over the cheek of beauty;
and it can with equal facility express the cold, wan tint of human clay. The
print can express neither; representing, in the same dry manner, the bright
transparency of the one, and the inert opaqueness of the other.

Lastly, the print fails in the expression of polished bodies; which are
indebted for their chief luster to reflected colors. The print indeed goes
farther here, than in the case of transparency. In this it can do very little:
in polished bodies, it can at least give reflected shapes. It can show the
forms of hanging woods upon the edges of the lake; though it is unable to give
the kindred tinge. But in many cases the polished body receives the tinge,
without the shape. Here the engraver is wholly deficient: he knows not how to
stain the gleaming silver with the purple liquor it contains; nor is he able to
give the hero's armor its highest polish from the tinge of the crimson vest,
which covers it.

A single word upon the subject of execution, shall conclude these remarks.
Here the advantage lies wholly on the side of painting. That manner, which can
best give the idea of the surface of an object, is the best; and the lines of
the finest engraving are harsh in comparison of the smooth flow of the pencil.
Metzotinto, though deficient in some respects, is certainly in others the
happyest manner of execution; and the ancient wooden print, in which the middle
tint is used, is undoubtedly in point of execution, beyond either etching or
engraving.

CHAPTER II. Observations on the different Kinds of Prints.
THERE are three kinds of prints, engravings, etchings, and metzotintos. The
characteristic of the first is strength; of the second freedom; and of the
third, softness. All these however may in some degree be found in each.

From the shape of the engraver's tool, each stroke is an angular incision;
which form must of course give the line strength, and firmness, if it be not
very tender. From such a line also, as it is a deliberate one, correctness may
be expected; but no great freedom: for it is a labored line, ploughed through
the metal, and must necessarily, in a degree, want ease.

Unlimited freedom, on the other hand, is the characteristic of etching. The
needle, gliding along the surface of the copper, meets no resistance, and
easily takes any turn, the hand pleases to give it. Etching indeed is mere
drawing; and may be practiced with the same facility. -- But as aquafortis
bites in an equable manner, it cannot give the lines that strength, which they
receive from a pointed graver, cutting into the copper. Besides, it is
difficult to prevent it is biting the plate all over alike. The distant parts
indeed may easily be covered with wax, and the grand effect of the keeping
preserved; but to give each smaller part its proper relief, and to harmonize
the whole, requires so many different degrees of strength, such easy
transitions from one into another, that aquafortis alone is not equal to it.
Here therefore engraving has the advantage, which by a stroke deep, or tender,
at the artists pleasure, can vary strength and faintness in any degree.

As engraving therefore and etching have their respective advantages, and
deficiencies, artists have endeavored to unite their powers, and correct the
faults of each, by joining the freedom of the one, with the strength of the
other. In most of our modern prints, the plate is first etched, and afterward
strengthened, and finished by the engraver. And when this is well done, it has
a happy effect. That flatness, which is the consequence of an equable strength
of shade, is taken off; and the print gains a new effect by the relief given to
those parts, which hang (in the painter's language) upon the parts behind to
them. -- But great art is necessary in this business. We see many a print,
which wanted only a few touches, when it appeared in its etched proof, receive
afterward so many, as to become labored, heavy, and disgustful.

It is a rare thing to meet with a print entirely engraved, which is free from
stiffness. A celebrated master of our own indeed has found the art of giving
freedom to the stroke of a graver; and has displayed great force of execution
upon works by no means worthy of him: as if he were determined to show the
world he could stamp a value upon any thing. -- But such artists are rarely
found. Mere engravers, in general, are little better than mere mechanics.

In etching, we have a greater variety of excellent prints. The case is, it is
so much the same as drawing, that we have the very works themselves of the most
celebrated masters; many of whom have left behind them prints in this way;
which, however slight and incorrect, will always have something masterly, and
of course beautiful in them.

In the muscling of human figures of any considerable size, engraving has
undoubtedly the advantage of etching. The soft and delicate transitions, from
light to shade, which are there required, cannot be so well expressed by the
needle: and in general, large prints require a strength, which etching cannot
give, and are therefore fit objects of engraving.

Etching, on the other hand, is more particularly adapted to scetches, and
slight designs; which, if executed by an engraver, would entirely lose their
freedom; and with it their beauty. Landscape too, in general, is the object of
etching. The foliage of trees, ruins, sky, and indeed every part of landscape
requires the utmost freedom. In finishing an etched landscape with the tool (as
it is called) too much care cannot be taken to prevent heaviness. We remarked
before the nicety of touching upon an etched plate; but in landscape the
business is peculiarly delicate. The fore-grounds may require a few strong
touches, and the boles of such trees as are placed upon them; and here and
there a few harmonizing strokes will add to the effect; but if the engraver
ventures much farther, he has good luck, if he do no mischief.

An engraved plate, unless it be cut very slightly, will cast off five hundred
good impressions. An etched one will not give above two hundred; unless it be
eaten very deep, and then it may perhaps give three hundred. After that, the
plate must be retouched, or the impressions will be faint.

Besides the common method of engraving on copper, we have prints engraved on
pewter, and on wood. The pewter plate gives a coarseness and dirtiness to the
print, which is disagreable. But engraving upon wood is capable of great
beauty. Of this species of engraving more shall elsewhere be said.

Metzotinto is very different from either engraving or etching. In these you
make the shades; in metzotinto, the lights.

Since the time of its invention by Prince RUPERT, as is commonly supposed, the
art of scraping metzotintos is greatly more improved than either of its
sister-arts. Some of the earliest etchings are perhaps the best; and engraving,
since the times of GOLTZIUS and MULLER, has not perhaps made any very great
advances. But metzotinto, compared with its original state, is, at this day,
almost a new art. If we examine some of the modern pieces of workmanship in
this way, the Jewish Rabbi, the portrait of Mrs. LASCELLES, with a child on her
knee, Mr. GARRICK between Tragedy and Comedy, and several other prints by some
of our best metzotinto-scrapers, they almost as much exceed the works of WHITE
and SMITH; as those masters did BECKET and SIMONS. As to Prince RUPERT'S works,
I never saw any, which were certainly known to be his; but I make no doubt they
were executed in the same black, harsh, disagreable manner, which appears so
strong in the masters, who succeeded. The invention however was noble; and the
early masters have the credit of it: but the truth is, the ingenious mechanic
has been called in to the painter's aid, and has invented a manner of laying
ground, wholly unknown to the earlier masters: and they who are acquainted with
metzotinto, know the ground to be a very capital consideration.

The characteristic of metzotinto is softness, which adapts it chiefly to
portrait, or history with a few figures, and these not too small. Nothing,
except paint, can express flesh more naturally, or the flowing of hair, or the
folds of drapery, or the catching lights of armor. In engraving and etching we
must get over the prejudices of cross lines, which exist on no natural bodies:
but metzotinto gives us the strongest representation of a surface. If however
the figures are two crowded, it wants strength to detach the several parts with
a proper relief: and if they are very small, it wants precision, which can only
be given by an outline; or, as in painting, by a different tint. The unevenness
of the ground will occasion bad drawing, and aukwardness -- in the extremities
especially. Some inferior artists have endeavored to remedy this by
terminating their figures with an engraved, or etched line: but they have tried
the experiment with bad success. The strength of the line, and the softness of
the ground, accord ill together. I speak not here of such a judicious mixture
of etching and metzotinto, as WHITE formerly used, and such as our best
metzotinto-scrapers at present use, to give a strength to particular parts; I
speak only of a harsh, and injudicious lineal termination.

Metzotinto excells each of the other species of prints in its capacity of
receiving the most beautiful effects of light and shade: as it can the most
happily unite them by blending them together. -- Of this REMBRANDT seems to
have been aware. He had probably seen some of the first metzotintos; and
admiring the effect, endeavored to produce it in etching by a variety of
intersecting scratches.

You cannot well cast off more than an hundred good impressions from a
metzotinto plate. The rubbing of the hand soon wears it smooth. And yet by
constantly repairing it, it may be made to give four or five hundred with
tolerable strength. The first impressions are not always the best. They are too
black and harsh. You will commonly have the best impressions from the fiftieth
to the seventieth: the harsh edges will be softened down; and yet there will be
spirit and strength enough left.

CHAPTER III. Characters of the most noted Masters.
MASTERS IN HISTORY.
ALBERT DURER, though not the inventor, was one of the first improvers of the art
of engraving. He was a German painter; and at the same time a Man of letters,
and a philosopher. It may be added in his praise, that he was an intimate
friend of the great Erasmus; who revised, it is supposed, some of the pieces
which he published. He was a man of business also; and for many years was the
leading magistrate of Nuremburgh. -- His prints, considered as the first
efforts of a new art, have great merit. Nay, we may add, that it is astonishing
to see a new art, in its first essay, carried to such a length. In some of
those prints, which he executed on copper, the engraving is elegant to a great
degree. His Hell-scene particularly, which was engraved in the year 1513, is as
high-finished a print as ever was engraved, and as happily finished. The labor
he has bestowed upon it, has it is full effect. In his wooden prints too we are
surprised to see, in so early a master, so much meaning, and relief; the heads
so well marked; and every part so well executed. -- This artist seems to have
understood very well the principles of design. His composition too is often
pleasing; and his drawing generally good: but he knows very little of the
management of light; and still less of grace: and yet his ideas are purer, and
more elegant, than we could have supposed from the awkward archetypes, which
his country and education afforded. In a word, he was certainly a Man of a very
extensive genius; and, as Vasari remarks, would have been an extraordinary
artist, if he had had an Italian, instead of a German education. His prints are
very numerous. They were much admired in his own lifetime, and eagerly bought
up; which put his wife, who was a teizing woman, upon urging him to spend more
time upon engraving, than he was inclined to do. He was very rich, and chose
rather to practice his art as an amusement, than as a business. He died in the
year 1527.

The immediate successors, and imitators of ALBERT DURER were LUCAS VAN LEIDEN,
ALDGRAVE, PENS, HISBEN, and some others of less note. Their works are very much
in their master's style; and were the admiration of an age, which had seen
nothing better. The best of ALDGRAVE'S works are two or three small pieces of
the story of Lot.

GOLTZIUS flourished a little after the death of these masters; and carried
engraving to a great height. He was a native of Germany, where he learned his
art; but traveling afterward into Italy, he there improved his ideas. You
plainly discover in him, a mixture of the Flemish and Italian schools. His
forms have sometimes a degree of elegance in them; but, in general the Dutch
master predominates. GOLTZIUS is often happy in design and disposition; and
fails most in the distribution of light. But his chief excellence lies in
execution. He engraves with a noble, firm, expressive line, which has scarce
been excelled by any succeeding masters. There is a variety too in his manner,
which is very pleasing. His print of the circumcision is one of the best of his
works. The story is well told, the groups agreably disposed; and the execution
admirable; but the figures are Dutch; and the whole, through the want of a
proper distribution of shade, is only a glaring mass.

MULLER ingraved very much in the style of GOLTZIUS; and yet with a still
bolder, and firmer stroke. We have no where greater masterpieces in execution,
than the works of this artist exhibit. The baptism of JOHN is perhaps the most
beautiful specimen of bold engraving, that is extant.

ABRAHAM BLOEMART was a Dutch master also, and contemporary with GOLTZIUS. We
are not informed what particular means of improvement he had; but it is certain
he designed in a more elegant taste, than any of his countrymen. His figures
are often graceful; excepting only, that he gives them sometimes an affected
twist; which is still more conspicuous in the fingers: an affectation which we
sometimes also find in the prints of GOLTZIUS. -- The resurrection of LAZARUS
is one of BLOEMART'S master pieces; in which are many faults, and many
beauties; both very characteric.

While the Dutch masters were thus carrying the art of engraving to so great an
height, it was introduced into Italy by ANDREA MANTEGNA; to whom the Italians
ascribe the invention of it. The paintings of this master, though they abound in
noble passages, are formal and disagreable. We have a specimen of them at
Hampton Court in the triumph of JULIUS CAESAR. -- His prints, which are said to
have been engraved on tin-plates, are transscripts from the same ideas. We see
in them the chaste, correct outline, and noble simplicity of the Roman school:
but we are to expect nothing more; not the least attempt toward an agreeable
whole. -- And indeed we shall perhaps find in general, that the masters of the
Roman school were more studious of those essentials of painting, which regard
the parts; and the Flemish masters of those, which regard the whole. The former
therefore drew better figures; the latter made better pictures.

MANTEGNA was succeeded by PARMIGIANO and PALMA, both masters of great
reputation. PARMIGIANO having formed the most accurate taste upon a thorough
study of the works of RAPHAEL and MICHAEL ANGELO, published many of his
figures, rather than designs engraved on wood, which abounded with every kind
of beauty; if we may form a judgment of them from the few which we sometimes
meet with. Whither PARMIGIANO invented the art of engraving upon wood, does not
certainly appear. His pretentions to the invention of etching are less
disputable. In this way he published many slight pieces, which do him great
credit. In the midst of his labors, he was interrupted by a knavish engraver,
who pillaged him of all his plates. Unable to bear the loss, he foreswore his
art, and abandoned himself to chemistry.

PALMA was too much employed as a painter to have much leisure for etching. He
has left however several prints behind him, which are remarkable for the
delicacy of the drawing, and the freedom of the execution. He etches in a very
loose but masterly manner. His prints are scarce; and indeed we seldom meet
with any, that deserve more than the name of scetches.

FRANCIS PARIA seems to have copied the manner of PALMA with great success. But
his prints are still more scarce than his master's; nor have we a sufficient
number of them to enable us to form a judgment of his merit.

But the great improver of the art of engraving upon wood, and who at once
carried it to a degree of perfection, which has not since been exceeded was
ANDREA ANDREANI of Mantua. The works of this master are remarkable for the
freedom, strength, and spirit of the execution; the elegant correctness of the
drawing; and in general for their effect. Few prints come so near the idea of
painting. They have a force, which a pointed tool upon copper cannot reach; and
the wash, of which the middle tint is composed, adds all the softness of
drawing. The works of this master indeed are seldom seen in perfection. They
are scarce; and when we do meet with them, it is a chance if the impressions be
good: and very much of the beauty of these prints depends on the goodness of
the impression. For often the outline is left hard, the middle tint being lost;
and sometimes the middle tint is left without it is proper termination.

Among the ancient Italian masters, we cannot omit MARK ANTONIO, and AUGUSTINE
of Venice. They are both celebrated; and have handed down to us many engravings
from the works of RAPHAEL: but their antiquity, not their merit, seems to have
recommended them. Their execution is harsh, and formal to the last degree; and
if their prints give us any idea of the works of RAPHAEL, we may well wonder,
as PICART observes, how that master got his reputation.

FREDERIC BAROCCHI was born at Urbin, where the genius of RAPHAEL inspired him.
In his early youth he traveled to Rome: and giving himself up to intense
study, he acquired a great name in painting. At his leisure hours he etched a
few prints from his own designs, which are highly finished, and executed with
great softness and delicacy. The Salutation is his capital performance; of
which we seldom meet with any impressions, but those taken from the retouched
plate, which are very harsh.

ANTHONY TEMPESTA was a native of Florence, but resided chiefly at Rome; where
he was much employed as a painter by GREGORY XIII. -- His prints are very
numerous; all from his own designs. Battles and huntings are the subjects, in
which he most delighted. His merit lies in expression, and drawing; in the
grandeur of his ideas, and an imagination exceedingly fertile. His figures are
often elegant, and graceful; and his heads marked with uncommon spirit, and
correctness. His horses, though fleshy and ill-drawn, and evidently never copied
from nature, are however noble animals; and display an endless variety of
beautiful actions. -- His imperfections, at the same time, are very glaring.
His composition is generally bad. Here and there you have a good group; seldom
an agreeable whole. He had not the art of preserving his backgrounds tender; so
that we are not to expect any effect of keeping. His execution is harsh; and he
is totally ignorant of the distribution of light. -- But notwithstanding all
his faults, such is his merit upon the whole, that, as studies at least, his
prints deserve a much higher rank in the cabinets of connoisseurs, than they
generally find.

AUGUSTINE CARRACHE has left a few etchings, which are admired for the delicacy
of the drawing, and the freedom of the execution. But there is great flatness
in them, and want of strength. Etchings indeed in this style are rather meant
as scetches, than finished prints.

GUIDO'S etchings, most of which are small, are esteemed for the simplicity of
the design; the elegance and correctness of the outline; and that grace, for
which this master is so remarkable. The extremities of his figures are
particularly touched with great accuracy. But we have the same spiritless
flatness in the works of GUIDO, which we find in those of his master CARRACHE,
accompanied at the same time with less freedom.

CANTARINI copied the manner of GUIDO, as PARIA did that of PALMA; and so
happily, that it is often difficult to distinguish the works of these two
masters.

CALLOT was little acquainted with any of the grand principles of painting: of
composition, and the management of light he was totally ignorant. But though he
could not make a picture, he was admirably skilled in drawing a figure. His
attitudes are generally graceful, when they are not affected; his expression
strong; his drawing correct; and his execution masterly, though rather labored.
His Fair is a good epitome of his works. Considered as a whole, it is a
confused jumble of ideas; but the parts, separately examined, appear the work
of a master. The same character may be given of his most famous work, the
Miseries of war; in which there is more expression both in action and feature,
than was ever perhaps shown in so small a compass. And yet I know not whether
his Beggars be not the more capital performance. In the Miseries of war, he
aims at composition, in which he rarely succeeds: His Beggars are detached
figures, in which lay his strength. -- I shall only add, that a vein of
drollery and humor runs through all his designs; which sometimes, when he
chooses to indulge it freely, as in the Temptation of St. ANTHONY, displays
itself in a very facetious manner.

COUNT GAUDE contracted a friendship at Rome with ADAM ELSHAMER, from whose
designs he engraved a few prints. GAUDE was a young nobleman upon his travels;
and never practiced engraving as a profession. This would call for indulgence,
if his prints had less merit; but in their way they are beautiful; though on the
whole, formal, and unpleasant. They are highly finished, but void of all
freedom. Moonlights, and torch-lights are the subjects he chiefly chooses; and
his great excellence lies in preserving the effects of these different lights.
His prints are generally small. I know only one, the Flight into Egypt, of a
larger size.

SALVATOR ROSA painted landscape more than history; but his prints are chiefly
historical. He was bred a painter; and perfectly understood his art; if we
except only the management of light, of which he seems to have been ignorant.
The capital landscape of this master at Chiswick is a noble picture. The
contrivance, the composition, the distances, the figures, and all the parts,
and appendages of it are fine: but in point of light it might perhaps have been
improved, if the middle ground, where the figures of the second distance stand,
had been thrown into sunshine. -- In design, and generally in composition,
SALVATOR is very great. His figures, which he drew in exquisite taste, are
graceful, and nobly expressive, beautifully grouped, and varied into the most
agreeable attitudes. With regard indeed to the legs of his figures, it must be
owned, he is a mannerist. They are well drawn; but all cast in one mould. There
is a stiffness too in the backs of his extended hands: the palms are beautiful.
But these are trivial criticisms. -- His manner is flight; so as not to admit
either softness or effect: yet the simplicity and elegance of it are
wonderfully pleasing; and bear that strong characteristic of a master's hand,
-- sibi quivis
Speret idem --


One thing, in his manner of shading, is disagreable. He will often shade a
face half over with long lines; which, in so small, and delicate an object,
gives an unpleasant abruptness. It is treating a face like an egg: no
distinction of feature is observed.

SALVATOR was a man of genius, and of learning; both which he has found
frequent opportunities of displaying in his works. His style is grand; every
object that he introduces is of the heroic kind; and his subjects in general
show an intimacy with ancient history, and mythology.

A roving disposition, to which he is said to have given full scope, seems to
have added a wildness to all his thoughts. We are told, he spent the early part
of his life in a troop of banditti; and that the rocky and desolate scenes, in
which he was accustomed to take refuge, furnished him with those romantic ideas
in landscape, of which he is so exceedingly fond; and in the description of
which he so greatly excells. His Robbers, as his detached figures are commonly
called, are supposed also to have been taken from the life.

REMBRANDT'S excellency, as a painter, lay in coloring, which he possessed in
such perfection, that it almost screens every fault in his pictures. His
prints, deprived of this palliative, have only his inferior qualifications to
recommend them. These are expression, and skill in the management of light,
execution, and sometimes composition. I mention them in the order in which he
seems to have possessed them. His expression has most force in the character of
age. He marks as strongly as the hand of Time itself. He possesses too in a
great degree, that inferior kind of expression, which gives its proper, and
characteristic touch to drapery, fur, metal, and every object he represents. --
His management of light consists chiefly in making a very strong contrast;
which has often a good effect: and yet in many of his prints there is no effect
at all; which gives us reason to think, he either had no principles; or
published such prints before his principles were ascertained. -- His execution
is peculiar to himself. It is rough, or neat, as he meant a scetch, or a
finished piece; but always free, and masterly. It produces it is effect by
strokes intersected in every direction; and comes nearer the idea of painting,
than the execution of any other master.

Never painter was more at a loss than REMBRANDT, for an idea of that species
of grace, which is necessary to support an elevated character. While he keeps
within the sphere of his genius, and contents himself with low subjects, he
deserves any praise. But when he attempts beauty, or dignity, it were
goodnatured to suppose, he means only burlesque and charicature. He is a strong
contrast to SALVATOR. The one drew all his ideas from nature, as she appears
with the utmost grace and elegance. The other caught her in her meanest images;
and transferred those images into the highest characters. Hence SALVATOR exalts
banditti into heroes: REMBRANDT degrades patriarchs into beggars. REMBRANDT
indeed seems to have affected awkwardness. He was a man of humor; and would
laugh at those artists who studied the antique. "I Will show you my antiques," he
would cry; and then he would carry his friends into a room furnished with
head-dresses, draperies, household stuff, and instruments of all kinds: These,
he would add, are worth all your antiques.

His best etching is that, which goes by the name of the
hundred-guildres-print; which is in such esteem, that I have known twenty
guineas given for a good impression of it. In this all his excellencies are
united; and I might add, his imperfections also. Age and wretchedness are
admirably described; but the principal figure is ridiculously mean.

REMBRANDT is said to have left behind him near three hundred prints; none of
which are dated before M,DC,XXVIII; none after M,DC,LIX. They were in such
esteem, even in his own lifetime, that he is said to have retouched some of
them four, or five times.

PETER TESTA studied upon a plan very different from that either of SALVATOR or
REMBRANDT. Those masters drew their ideas from nature: TESTA, from what he
esteemed a superior model -- the antique. Smit with the love of painting, this
artist traveled to Rome in the habit of a pilgrim, destitute of all the means
of improvement, but what mere genius furnished. He had not even interest to
procure a recommendation; nor had he any address to substitute in it is room.
The works of sculpture fell most obviously in his way; and to those he applied
himself with so much industry, copying them over, and again, that he is said to
have gotten them all by heart. Thus qualified he took up the pencil. But he
soon found the school, in which he had studied, a very insufficient one to form
a painter. He had neglected coloring; and his pictures were in no esteem.
Disappointed and mortified he threw aside his pallet, and applied himself to
etching; in which he became a great proficient.

His prints are very valuable. We are seldom indeed to expect a coherency of
design in any of them. An enthusiastic vein runs through most of his
compositions; and it is not an improbable conjecture, that his head was a
little disturbed. He generally crowds into his pieces such a jumble of
inconsistent ideas, that it is difficult sometimes only to guess at what he
aims. He was as little acquainted with the distribution of light, as with the
rules of design: and yet notwithstanding all this, his works contain an
infinite fund of entertainment. There is an exuberance of fancy in him, which,
with all its wildness, is agreeable; his ideas are sublime and noble; his
drawing most elegantly correct; his heads touched with infinite spirit, and
expression; his figures graceful, rather too nearly allied to the antique; his
groups often beautiful; and his execution, in his best etchings, for he is
often unequal to himself, very masterly. Some of his works are etched by CAES.
TESTA.
Perhaps no prints afford more useful studies for a painter.

The procession of SILENUS, if we may guess at so confused a design, may
illustrate all that has been said. The whole is as incoherent, as the parts
are beautiful.

This unfortunate artist was drowned in the Tyber; and it is left uncertain,
whether by accident or design.

SPANIOLET etched a few prints in a very spirited manner. No master understood
better the force of every touch. SILENUS and BACCHUS, and the Martyrdom of St.
BARTHOLOMEW, are the best of his historical prints; and yet these are inferior
to some of his charicaturas, which are admirably executed.

MICHAEL DORIGNY, or OLD DORIGNY, as he is often called to distinguish him from
NICHOLAS, had the misfortune to be the son in law of SIMON VOUET, whose works
he engraved, and whose imperfections he copied. His execution is free, and he
preserves the lights extremely well upon single figures: his drapery too is
natural, and easy: but his drawing is below criticism; in the extremities
especially. In this his master misled him. VOUET excelled in composition; of
which we have many beautiful instances in DORIGNY'S prints.

VILLAMENA was inferior to few engravers. If he be deficient in strength and
effect, there is a delicacy in his manner, which is inimitable. One of his best
prints is a descent from the cross.

But his works are so rare, that we can scarce form an adequate idea of his
merit.

STEPHEN DE LA BELLA was a minute genius. His manner wants strength for any
larger work; but in small objects it appears to advantage: there is great
freedom in it, and uncommon neatness. His figures are touched with spirit; and
sometimes his composition is good: but he seldom discovers any skill in the
management of light; though the defect is less striking, because of the
smallness of the pieces. His Pont Neuf will give us an idea of his works.
Through the bad management of the light, it makes no appearance as a whole;
though the composition, if we except the modern architecture, is tolerable. But
the figures are marked with great beauty; and the distances extremely fine. --
Some of his single heads are very elegant.



LA FAGE'S works consist chiefly of scetches. The great excellency of this
master lay in drawing; in which he was perfectly skilled. However unfinished
his pieces are, they discover him to have been admirably acquainted with
anatomy and proportion. There is very little in him besides, that is valuable;
grace, and expression sometimes; seldom composition: his figures are generally
either too much crowded, or too diffuse. As for light and shade, he seems to
have been totally ignorant of their effect, or he could never have shown so bad
a taste, as to publish his designs without at least a bare expression of the
masses of each. Indeed we have positive proof, as well as negative. Where he
has attempted an effect of light, he has shown only how little he knew of it.

His genius chiefly displays itself in the gambols of nymphs and satyrs; in
routs and revels: but there is so much obscenity in his works of this kind,
that, although otherwise fine, they scarce afford an innocent entertainment.

In some of his prints, in which he has attempted the sublimest characters, he
has given them a wonderful dignity. Some of his figures of Christ are not
inferior to the ideas of RAPHAEL; and in a slight scetch, entitled, Vocation de
Moyse, the Deity is introduced with surprising majesty. -- His best works are
slightly etched from his drawings by ERTINGER; who has done justice to them.

BOLSWERT engraved the works of RUBENS, and in a style worthy of his master.
You see the same free, and animated manner in both. It is said that RUBENS
touched his proofs; and it is probable; the ideas of the painter are so exactly
transfused into the works of the engraver.

PONTIUS too engraved the works of RUBENS; and would have appeared a greater
master, if he had not had such a competitor as BOLSWERT.

SCIAMINOSSI etched a few small plates of the mysteries of the rosary in a
masterly style. There is no great beauty in the composition; but the drawing is
good; the figures are generally graceful; and the heads touched with great
spirit.

ROMAN LE HOOGHE is inimitable in execution. Perhaps no master etches in a
freer and more spirited manner: there is a richness in it likewise, which we
seldom meet with. His figures too are often good; but his composition is
generally faulty: it is crowded, and confused. He knows little of the effect of
light. There is a flutter in him too, which hurts an eye pleased with
simplicity. His prints are very historical. The deluge at Coeverden is finely
described. -- LE HOOGHE was much employed by the authors of his time in
composing frontispieces; some of which are very beautiful.

LUIKEN etches in the manner of LE HOOGHE, but it is a less masterly manner.
His history of the bible is a great work, in which there are many good figures,
and great freedom of execution; but poor composition, much confusion, and
little skill in the distribution of light. This master has also etched a book
of various kinds of capital punishments; amongst which there are many good
prints.

GERRARD LAIRESSE etches in a loose, and unfinished; but free, and masterly
manner. His light is often well distributed; but his shades have not sufficient
strength to give his pieces effect. Though he was a Dutch painter, you see
nothing of the Dutchman in his works. His composition is generally grand and
beautiful, especially where he has only a few figures to manage. His figures
themselves are graceful, and his expression strong. The simple and sublime
ideas, which appear every where in his works, acquired him the title of the
Dutch RAPHAEL; a title which he very well deserves. LAIRESSE may be called an
ethic painter. He commonly inculcates some truth either in morals, or religion;
which he illustrates by a Latin sentence at the bottom of his print. -- It may
be added, that his draperies are particularly excellent.

CASTIGLIONE was an Italian painter of some eminence. He drew human figures
with grace and correctness; yet he generally chose such subjects, as would
admit the introduction of animal life, which often makes the most distinguished
part of his piece.

There is a simplicity in the designs of this master, which is very beautiful.
In composition he excells greatly. Of his elegant groups we have many instances
in a set of prints, etched from his paintings, in a slight, free manner by C.
MACEE; particularly in those of the patriarchal journeyings. He has left us
several of his own etchings also, which are very valuable. The subjects indeed
of some of them are odd, and fantastic; and the composition not equal to some
prints we have from his paintings by other hands; but the execution is greatly
superior. Freedom, strength, and spirit are very eminent in them; and delicacy
likewise, where he chooses to finish highly; of which we have some instances. --
One of his best prints is the entrance of NOAH into the ark. The composition;
the distribution of light; the spirit and expression, with which the animals
are touched; and the freedom of the execution are all admirable.

VANDER MUILEN has given us historical representations of several modern
battles. His prints are generally large, and contain many good figures, and
agreeable groups: but they have no effect, and seldom produce a whole. A
disagreable monotony (as the musical people speak) runs through them all.

OTHO VENIUS has entirely the air of an Italian, though of Dutch parentage. He
had the honor of being the master of the celebrated RUBENS; who chiefly
learned from him his knowledge of light and shade. This artist published a book
of love-emblems, in which the Cupids are engraved with great spirit. His pieces
of fabulous history have less merit.

MELLAN was a whimsical engraver. He shadowed entirely with parallel lines,
which he winds round the muscles of his figures, and the folds of his
draperies, with great variety, and beauty. His manner is soft and delicate, but
void of strength and effect. His compositions of course make no whole, though his
single figures are often elegant. His saints and statues are in general his
best pieces. There is great expression in many of the former: and his drapery
is often incomparable. One of his best prints is inscribed, Per se surgens: and
another very good one with this strange passage from St. AUSTIN, Ego evangelio
non crederem, nisi me catholicae ecclesiae commoveret auctoritas. -- His head
of Christ, effected by a single spiral line, is a masterly, but whimsical
performance.

OSTADE'S etchings, like his pictures, are admirable representations of low
life. They abound in humor and expression, in which lies their great merit.
They have little besides to recommend them. The composition is generally very
indifferent; and the execution no way remarkable. Sometimes, and but seldom,
you see a good effect of light.

CORNELIUS BEGA etches very much in the manner of OSTADE; but with more freedom.

VAN TULDEN has nothing of the Dutch master in his design; which seems formed
upon the study of the antique. It is chaste, elegant, and correct. His manner
is rather firm, and distinct, than free, and spirited. His principal work is
the voyage of ULYSSES in fifty-eight plates; in which we have a great variety
of elegant attitudes, excellent characters of heads, good drawing, and though not
much effect, yet often good grouping. His drapery is heavy.

JOSEPH PARROCELLE painted battles for LEWIS XIV. He etched also several of his
own designs. The best of his works are eight small battles, which are very
scarce. Four of these are of a size larger than the rest; of which two, the
battle, and stripping the slain, are very fine. Of the four smaller, that
entitled vesper is the best. -- His manner is rough, free, and masterly, and
his knowledge of the effect of light considerable. -- His greatest undertaking
was the Life of Christ in a series of plates: but it is a hasty and incorrect
work. Most of the prints are mere scetches; and many of them, even in that
light, are bad; though the freedom of the manner is pleasing in the worst of
them. The best plates are the 14th, 17th, 19th, 22d, 28th, 39th, 41st, 42d, and
43d.

V. LE FEBRE etched many designs from TITIAN and JULIO ROMANO, in a very
miserable manner. His drawing is bad; his drapery frittered; his lights
ill-preserved; and his execution disgusting: and yet we find his works in
capital collections.

BELLANGE'S prints are highly finished, and his execution is not amiss. His
figures also have something in them, which looks like grace; and his light is
tolerably well massed. But his heads are ill-set on; his extremities
incorrectly touched; his figures badly proportioned; and in short, his drawing
in general very bad.

CLAUDE GILLOT was a French painter; but finding himself rivalled, he laid
aside his pencil, and employed himself entirely in etching. His common subjects
are dances and revels, in which he introduces satyrs, nymphs, and fawns. By
giving his sylvans a peculiar cast of eye, he has introduced a new kind of
character. The invention, and fancy of this master are very pleasing; and his
composition is often good. His manner is slight; which is the best apology for
his bad drawing.

WATTEAU has great defects, and, it must be owned, great merit. He abounds in
all that flutter, and affectation, which is so disagreable in the generality of
French painters. But at the same time, we acknowledge, he draws well; gives
grace and delicacy to his figures; and produces often a beautiful effect of
light. I speak chiefly of such of his works, as have been engraved by others.
-- He etched a few slight plates himself with great freedom and elegance. The
best of them are contained in a small book of figures in various dresses and
attitudes.

CORNELIUS SCHUT excells chiefly in execution; sometimes in composition: but he
knows nothing of grace; and has, upon the whole, but little merit.

WILLIAM BAUR etches with great spirit. His largest works are in the historical
way. He has given us many of the sieges, and battles, which wasted Flanders in
the sixteenth century. They may be exact, and probably they are; but they are
rather plans than pictures; and have little to recommend them but historic
truth, and the freedom of the execution. BAUR'S best prints are some characters
he has given us of different nations, in which the peculiarities of each are
very well preserved. His OVID is a poor performance.

COYPEL has left us a few prints of his own etching; the principal of which is
an Ecce homo, touched with great spirit. Several of his own designs he etched
himself, and afterward put into the hands of engravers to finish. It is
probable he over-looked this work; but it is probable also, that we should have
had better prints, if we had received them pure from his own needle. What they
had lost in force, would have been amply made up in spirit.

PICART was one of the most ingenious of the French engravers. His imitations
are among the most entertaining of his works. The cry, in his day, ran wholly
in favor of antiquity: "No modern masters were worth looking at." PICART,
piqued at such prejudice, etched several pieces in imitation of ancient
masters; and so happily, that he almost out-did in their own excellencies, the
artists whom he copied. These prints were much admired, as the works of GUIDO,
REMBRANDT, and others. Having had his joke, he published them under the title
of Impostures innocents. -- PICART'S own manner is highly finished, yet, at
the same time, rich, bold, and spirited. His prints are generally small; and
most of them from the designs of others. One of the best is from that beautiful
composition of POUSSIN, in which Truth is delivered by Time, from Envy.

ARTHUR POND, our countryman, succeeded admirably in this method of imitation;
in which he has etched several very valuable prints; particularly two oval
landskips after SALVATOR -- a monkey in red chalk after CARRACHE -- two or
three ruins after PANINI, and some others equally excellent.

But this method of imitation has been most successfully practiced by Count
CAYLUS, an ingenious French nobleman, whose works in this way are very
voluminous. He has ransacked the French king's cabinet, and has scarce left a
master of any note, from whose drawings he has not given us excellent prints.
Insomuch, that if we had nothing remaining from those masters, but Count
CAYLUS'S works, we should not want a very sufficient idea of them. So versatile
is his genius, that COMTE DE CAYLUS.
with the same ease he presents us with an elegant outline from RAPHAEL, a
rough scetch from REMBRANDT, and a delicate portrait from VANDYKE.

LE CLERC was an excellent engraver; but chiefly in the petite style. He
immortalized ALEXANDER, and LEWIS XIV. in miniature. His genius seldom exceeds
the dimensions of six inches. Within those limits he can draw up twenty
thousand men with great dexterity. No artist except CALLOT and DELLA BELLA
could touch a small figure with so much spirit. He seems to have imitated
CALLOT'S manner, but his stroke is neither so firm, nor so masterly.

PETER BARTOLI etched with freedom; though his manner is not agreeable. His
capital work is LANFRANK'S gallery.

JAC. FREII is an admirable engraver. He unites in a great degree strength, and
softness; and comes as near the force of painting, as an engraver can well do.
He employed himself chiefly in copying; and has given us the strongest ideas of
the works of several of the most eminent masters. He preserves the drawing, and
expression of his original; and often perhaps improves the effect. You see him
in perfection in a noble print from MARATTE, entitled, In conspectu angelorum
psallam tibi.

S. GRIBELIN is a careful, and laborious engraver; of no extensive genius; but
painfully exact. His works are chiefly small; the principal of which are his
copies from the Banqueting House at Whitehall; and from the Cartoons. His
manner is formal; yet he has contrived to preserve the spirit of his original.
We have no copies of the cartoons so good as his. It is a pity he did not
engrave them on a larger scale.

LE BAS etches in a clear, distinct, free manner; and has done great honor to
the works of TENIERS, WOVERMAN, and BERGHEM, from whom he chiefly copied. The
best of his works are after BERGHEM.

BISCHOP'S etching has something very pleasing in it. It is loose, and free;
and yet has strength, and richness. Many of his statues are good figures: the
drawing is sometimes incorrect; but the execution beautiful. Many of the plates
of his drawing-book are very well. His greatest single work is the
representation of JOSEPH in Egypt; in which there are many faults, both in the
drawing and effect; some of which are chargeable upon him, and others upon the
artist from whom he copied; but upon the whole, it is a pleasing print.

FRANCIS PERRIER was the debauched son of a goldsmith in Franche-compte. His
indiscretions forcing him from home, his inclinations led him to Rome. His
manner of traveling thither was whimsical. He joined himself to a blind
beggar, whom he agreed to lead for half his alms. At Rome, he applied to
painting, and made a much greater proficiency than could have been expected
from his dissipated life. He published a large collection of statues, and other
antiquities, which are etched in a very masterly manner. The drawing is often
incorrect; but the attitudes are well chosen, and the execution spirited. Many
of them seem to have been done hastily; but there are marks of genius in them
all.

MAROT, who was architect to K. WILLIAM, has etched some statues likewise in a
very masterly manner. Indeed all his works are admirably executed; but they
consist chiefly of ornaments, in the way of his profession.

FRAN. ROETTIERS etches in a very bold manner, and with a good deal of spirit;
but there is a harshness in his outline, which is disagreable; though the less
so, as his drawing is generally good. Few artists manage a crowd better; or
give it more effect by a proper distribution of light. Of this management we
have some judicious instances in his two capital prints, the Assumption of the
cross, and the crucifixion.

NICHOLAS DORIGNY was bred a lawyer; but not succeeding at the bar, he studied
painting; and afterward applied to engraving. His capital work is the
Transfiguration, which Mr. ADDISON calls the noblest print in the world. It is
unquestionably a noble work; but DORIGNY seems to have exhausted his genius
upon it: for he did nothing afterward worth preserving. His cartoons are very
poor. He engraved them in his old age, and was obliged to employ assistants,
who did not answer his expectation.

MASTERS IN PORTRAIT.
Among the masters in portrait REMBRANDT may take the lead. His heads are
admirable copies from nature; and perhaps the best of his works. There is
infinite expression in them and character.

VAN ULIET followed REMBRANDT'S manner, which he has in many things excelled.
Some of his heads nothing can exceed. The force, which he gives to every
feature, the roundness of the muscle, the spirit of the execution, the strength
of the character, and the effect of the whole, are all admirable.



J. LIEVENS etches in the same style. His heads are executed with great spirit;
and deserve a place in any collection of prints; though they are certainly
inferior to ULIET'S. -- ULIET, and LIEVENS etched some historical prints,
particularly the latter, whose Lazarus, after REMBRANDT, is a noble work; but
their portraits are their best prints.

Among the imitators of REMBRANDT, we should not forget our countryman
WORLIDGE; who has very ingeniously followed the manner of that master; and
sometimes improved upon him. No man understood the drawing of an head better.

Many of VAN DYKE'S etchings do him great credit. They are chiefly to be found
in a collection of the portraits of eminent artists, which VAN DYKE was at the
expense of getting engraved. Several of these he etched himself. They are done
slightly: but bear the character of a master. LUKE VOSTERMAN is one of the
best. It is probable VAN DYKE made the drawings for most of the rest: his
manner is conspicuous in them all. -- A very finished etching of an Ecce homo
passes under the name of this master. It is a good print upon the whole; but
not equal to what we might expect.

We have a few prints of Sir PETER PETER LELY'S etching likewise; but there is
nothing in them that is extraordinary.

R. WHITE was the principal engraver of portraits in CHARLES IId's reign; but
his works are miserable performances. They are said to be good likenesses: they
may be so; but they are wretched prints.

BECKET and SIMONS are names, which scarce deserve to be mentioned. They were
both metzotinto-scrapers, of note, only because they were the best of their
time.

WHITE, the metzotinto scraper, son of the engraver, was an artist of great
merit. He copied after Sir GODFREY KNELLER; whom he teized so much with his
proofs, that it is said Sir GODFREY forbad him his house. His metzotinto's are
very beautiful. BAPTISTE, WING, STURGES, and HOOPER are all admirable prints.
He himself used to say, that old and young PARR were the best portraits he ever
scraped. His manner was peculiar, at the time he used it: though it has since
been adopted by other masters. He first etched his plate, and then scraped it.
Hence his prints preserve a spirit to the last, which few metzotintos do.

SMITH was the pupil of BECKET; but he soon excelled his master. He was
esteemed the best metzotinto-scraper His Royal Highness George Prince of
Denmark.
(...) Eques pinx. I. Smith ^ec. Sold by I. Smith at the Lion and Crown in
Russel street Covent Garden

portrait of Prince George of his time, though perhaps inferior to WHITE. He has
left a very numerous collection of portraits, so numerous, that they are often
bound in two large folios. He copied chiefly from Sir GODFREY; and is said to
have had an apartment in his house. -- Lord SUMMERS was so fond of the works of
this master, that he seldom traveled without carrying them with him in the
seat of his coach. -- Some of his best prints are, two holy families, ANTHONY
LEIGH, MARY MAGDELINE, SCALKEN, an half-length of Lady ELIZABETH CROMWELL, the
Duke of SCHOMBERG on horseback, the countess of SALISBURY, GIBBON the
statuary, and a very fine hawking piece from WYKE. -- After all, it must be
owned, that the best of these metzotintos are inferior to what we have seen
done by the masters of the present age.

MELLAN'S portraits are the most indifferent of his works. They want strength,
spirit, and effect.

PIAZZETA, a Venetian, has lately published a set of heads, in the style of
MELLAN; but in a much finer taste, both as to the composition, and the manner.
Though like MELLAN, he never crosses his stroke; yet he has contrived to give his
heads more force and spirit.

J. MORIN'S heads are engraved in a very peculiar manner. They are pinx: Vanity
I: Smith fec et ex:
stippled with a graver, after the manner of metzotinto, and have a good
effect. They have force; and at the same time, softness. Few portraits, upon
the whole, are better. GUIDO BENTIVOLIUS from VNADYKE is one of the best.

J. LUTMA'S heads are executed in the same way: we are told, with a chissel and
mallet. They are inferior to MORIN'S; but are not without merit.

EDM. MARMION etched a few portraits in the manner of VANDYKE, and probably
from him; in which there is great ease and freedom. He has put his name only to
one of them.

DREVET'S portraits are neat and elegant; but labored to the last degree. They
are copied from RIGAUD, and other French masters; and abound in all that
flutter, and licentious drapery, so opposite to the simple and chaste ideas of
true taste. DREVET chiefly excells in copying RIGAUD'S frippery, lace, silk,
fur, velvet, and other ornamental parts of dress.

RICHARDSON has left us several heads, which he etched for Mr. POPE, and
others of his friends. They are slight; but show the spirit of a master. Mr.
POPE'S profile is the best.

VIRTUE was an excellent antiquarian; but no artist. He copied with painful
exactness; in a dry, disagreeable manner, without force, or freedom. In his
whole collection of heads we can scarce pick out half a dozen, which are good.

Such an artist, in metzotinto, was FABER. He has published nothing extremely
bad; and yet few things worth collecting. Mrs. COLLIER is one of his best
prints; and a very good one. She is leaning against a pillar, on the base of
which is engraved the story of the golden apple.

HOUBRAKEN is a genius; and has given us, in his collection of English
portraits, some pieces of engraving at least equal to any thing of the kind.
Such are his heads of HAMBDEN, SCHOMBERG, the earl of BEDFORD, the duke of
RICHMOND particularly, and some others. At the same time we must own, that he
has intermixed among his works a great number of bad prints. In his best, there
is a wonderful union of softness, and freedom. A more elegant and flowing line
no artist surely ever employed.

Our countryman FRY has left behind him a few very beautiful heads in
metzotinto. They are all copied from nature; have great softness, and spirit;
but want strength. Metzotinto is not adapted to works so large, as the heads he
has published.



MASTERS IN ANIMAL LIFE.
BERGHEM has a genius truly pastoral; and brings before us the most agreeable
scenes of rural life. The simplicity of Arcadian manners is no where better
described than in his works. We have a large collection of prints from his
designs; many etched by himself, and many by other masters. Those by himself
are slight, but masterly. His execution is inimitable. His cattle, which are
always the distinguishing part of his pieces, are well-drawn, admirably
characterized, and generally well-grouped. Few painters excelled more in
composition than BERGHEM; and yet we have more beautiful instances of it in the
prints etched by others, than in those by himself. Among his own etchings a few
small plates of sheep, and goats are exceedingly valued.

J. VISSCHER never appears to more advantage, than when he copies BERGHEM. His
excellent drawing, and the freedom of his execution give a great value to his
prints, which have more the air of originals, than of copies. He is a master
both in etching, and engraving. His slightest etchings, though copies only, are
the works of a master; and when he touches with a graver, he knows how to add
strength and firmness, without destroying freedom and spirit. He might be said
to have done every thing well, if he had not failed in the distribution of
light: it is more than probable, he has not attended to the effect of it in
many of the paintings, which he has copied.

HONDIUS, a native of Rotterdam, passed the greater part of his life in
England. He painted animals chiefly; was free in his manner; extravagant in his
coloring; incorrect in his drawing; ignorant of the effect of light; but
amazingly great in expression. His prints therefore are better, than his
pictures. They possess his chief excellency without his defects. They are
executed indeed with great spirit; and afford such strong instances of animal
fury, as we meet with no where, but in nature itself. His hunted wolf is an
admirable print.

DU JARDIN understood the anatomy of domestic animals perhaps better than any
other master. His drawing is admirably correct; and yet the freedom of the
master is preserved. He copied nature strictly, though not servilely; and has
given us not only the form, but the characteristic peculiarities of each
animal. He never indeed, like HONDIUS, animates his creation with the violence
of savage fury. His genius takes a milder turn. All is quietness, and repose.
His dogs, after their exercise, are stretched at their ease; and the languor of
a meridian sun prevails commonly through all his pieces. His composition is
beautiful; and his execution, though neat, is spirited. -- His works, when bound
together, make a volume of about 50 leaves; among which there is scarce one bad
print.

REUBENS'S huntings are undoubtedly superior, upon the whole, to any thing of
the kind we have. There is more invention in them, and a grander style of
composition than we find any where else. I class them under his name, because
they are engraved by several masters. But all their engravings are poor. They
resemble the paintings they are copied from, as a shadow does the object, which
projects it. There is something of the shape; but all the finishing is lost.
And indeed there is no doubt, but the awkwardnesses, the patch-work, and the
grotesque characters, which every where appear in those prints, are in the
originals bold fore-shortnings, grand effects of light, and noble instances of
expression. -- But it is as difficult to copy the flights of REUBENS, as to
translate those of HOMER. The spirit of each master evaporates in the process.

WOVERMAN'S composition is generally crowded with little ornaments. There is no
simplicity in his works. He wanted a chaste judgment to correct his exuberance.
-- VISSCHER was the first who engraved prints from this artist. He chose only a
few good designs; and executed them masterly. -- MOYREAU undertook him next,
and has published a large collection. He has finished them highly; but with
more softness than spirit. His prints however have a neat appearance, and
exhibit a variety of pleasing representations; cavalcades, marches, huntings,
and encampments.

ROSA of TIVOLI etched in a very finished manner. No one out-did him in
composition, and execution: He is very skilful too in the management of light.
His designs are all pastoral; and yet there is often a mixture of the heroic
style in his composition, which is very pleasing. His prints are scarce; and,
were they not so, would be valuable.

STEPHEN DE LA BELLA may be mentioned among the masters in animal life; though
few of his works in this way deserve any other praise, than what arises from
the elegance of the execution. In general, his animals are neither well drawn,
nor justly characterized. The best of his works in animal life are some heads
of camels and dromedaries.

ANTHONY TEMPESTA has etched several plates of single horses, and of huntings.
He has given great expression to his animals; but his composition is more than
ordinarily bad in these prints: nor is there in any of them the least effect of
light.

J. FYT has etched a few animals; in which you discover the drawing, and
something of that inimitable strength and spirit, with which this master
painted. But he has only done a few detached things in this way; nothing to
show his skill in composition, and the management of light, both which he well
understood.

In curious collections we meet with a few of CUYP'S etchings. The pictures of
this master excel in coloring, composition, drawing, and the expression of
character. His prints have all these excellencies, except the first.

PETER DE LAER has left us several small etchings of horses, and other
animals, well characterized, and executed in a bold and masterly manner. Many
of them are single figures; but when he composes, his composition is generally
good, and his distribution of light seldom much amiss; often very pleasing: his
drawing too is commonly good.

PETER STOOP came from Lisbon with queen Catherine; and was admired in England,
till WYCK'S superior excellence in painting eclipsed him. He has etched a book
of horses, which are very much valued; as there is in general, accuracy in the
drawing, nature in the characters, and spirit in the execution.

REMBRANDT'S lions, which are etched in his usual style, are worthy the notice
of a connoisseur.

BLOTELING'S lions are highly finished; but with more neatness than spirit.

PAUL POTTER etched several plates of cows and horses in a masterly manner. His
manner indeed is better than his drawing; which, in his sheep especially, is
but very indifferent: neither does he characterize them with any accuracy.

BARLOW'S etchings are numerous. His illustration of Esop is his greatest work.
There is something pleasing in the composition, and manner of this master, though
neither is excellent. His drawing too is very indifferent; nor does he
characterize any animal justly. His birds in general are better than his beasts.

FLAMEN has etched several plates of birds, and fishes: the former are bad, the
latter better than any thing of the kind we have.

HOLLAR has given us several plates in animal life; which ought the rather to
be taken notice of, as they are the best of his works. Two or three small
plates of domestic fowls, ducks, wood-cocks, and other game, are very well. His
shells, and butterflies are beautiful: and indeed these are the subjects suited
to his genius; and it is a pity he did not confine himself to them.

I shall close this account with RIDINGER, who is one of the greatest masters
in animal life. He is still living; but as he is so capital in this way, he
must not be omitted. This artist has marked the characters of animals,
especially of the more savage kind, with surprising expression. His works may
be considered as natural history. He carries us into the forest among bears,
and tigers; and, with the exactness of a naturalist, describes their forms,
haunts, and manner of living. -- His composition is generally beautiful, and
his distribution of light good; so that he commonly produces an agreeable
whole. His landscape too is picturesque and romantic, and well adapted to the
subjects he treats. -- On the other hand, his manner is labored and wants
freedom. His human figures are seldom drawn with taste. His horses are
ill-characterized, and worse drawn; and indeed his drawing, in general, is but
slovenly. -- The prints of this master are often real history, and represent
the portraits of particular animals, which had been taken in hunting. We have
sometimes too the story of the chase, in high dutch, at the bottom of the
print. The idea of historical truth adds a relish to the entertainment; and we
survey the animal with new pleasure, which has given diversion to a German
prince for nine hours together. -- The productions of RIDINGER are very
numerous; and the greater part of them good. His huntings in general, and
different methods of catching animals, are the least picturesque of any of his
works. But he meant them rather as didactic prints, than as pictures. Many of
his fables are beautiful, particularly the 3d, the 7th, the 8th, and the 10th.
I cannot forbear adding a particular encomium upon a book of the heads of
wolves, and foxes. -- His most capital prints are two large uprights; one
representing bears devouring a deer; the other wild-boars reposing in a forest.

MASTERS IN LANDSCAPE.
SADLER'S landskips have some merit in composition: they are picturesque and
romantic; but the manner is dry and disagreeable, the light is ill-distributed,
the distances ill-kept; and the figures bad. -- There were three engravers of
this name; but none of them eminent. JOHN engraved a set of prints for the
bible; and many other small plates in the historical way; in which we sometimes
find a graceful figure, and tolerable drawing; but on the whole, no great
merit. EGIDIUS was the engraver of landskips, and is the person here
criticized. RALPH chiefly copied the designs of BASSAN; and engraved in the dry
disagreeable manner of his brother.

REMBRANDT'S landskips have very little to recommend them, besides their
effect; which is often surprising. One of the most admired of them goes under
the name of The three trees.

GASPER POUSSIN etched a few landskips in a very loose, but masterly manner. It
is a pity we have not more of his works.

ABRAHAM BLOEMART understood the beauty of composition, as well in landscape, as
in history. His prints have little force, through the want of a proper
distribution of light. Neither is there much freedom in the execution; but
there is generally great elegance in the design, and great simplicity.

HOLLAR gives us views of particular places, which he copies with great truth,
unornamented, as he found them. If we are satisfied with exact representations,
we have them no where better than in HOLLAR'S works: but if we expect pictures,
we must seek them elsewhere. HOLLAR was an antiquarian, and a draughtsman; but
seems to have been unacquainted with any one principle of painting. Stiffness
to the last degree is his characteristic, and a painful exactness, utterly void
of all taste. His larger views are mere plans. In some of his smaller, at the
expense of infinite pains, something of an effect is sometimes produced. But in
general, we consider him as a repository of curiosities, a record of antiquated
dresses, abolished ceremonies, and edifices now in ruins.

STEPHEN DE LA BELLA'S landskips have little to recommend them, besides their
neatness, and keeping. There is no great beauty in his composition; and the
foliage of his trees resembles bits of sponge. I speak chiefly of his larger
works; for which his manner is not calculated. His great neatness qualifies him
better for miniature.

BOLSWERT'S landskips after REUBENS are composed in a very grand style. Such a
painter and such an engraver could not fail of producing something great. There
is little variety in them; nor any of the more minute beauties arising from
contrasts, catching lights, and such little elegancies; but every thing is
simple, and great. The print, which goes by the name of The wagon, is
particularly, and deservedly admired. Of these prints you generally meet with
good impressions, as the plates are engraved with great strength.

NEULANT has etched a small book of the ruins of Rome, in which there is great
simplicity, and some skill in composition, and the distribution of light: but
the execution is harsh and disagreeable.

We have a few landskips by an earl of Sunderland, in an elegant, loose manner.
One of them, in which is is a Spaniard standing on the foreground, is marked G.
and J. sculpserunt: another J. G.

WATERLO is a name beyond any other in landscape. His subjects are perfectly
rural. Simplicity is their characteristic. We find no great variety in them,
nor stretch of fancy. He selects a few striking objects. A coppice, a corner of
a forest, a winding-road, or a straggling village is generally the extent of his
view: nor does he always introduce an offskip. His composition is generally
good, and his light often well distributed; but his chief merit lies in
execution, in which he is a consummate master. Every object, that he touches,
has the character of nature: but he particularly excells in the foliage of
trees. -- It is a difficult matter to meet with the works of this master in
perfection: the original plates are all retouched, and greatly injured.

SWANEVELT painted landscape at Rome, where he obtained the name of the hermit,
from his solitary walks among the ruins of TIVOLI, and FRESCATI. He etched in
the manner of WATERLO; but with less freedom. His trees, in particular, will
bear no comparison with those of that master. And yet, upon the whole, his
works have great merit. We should think them excellent, if the idea of
WATERLO'S superiority in the same style of etching did not constantly recur.

JAMES ROUSSEAU was the disciple of SWANEVELT. He was a French protestant, and
fled into England from the persecution of Lewis XIV. Here he was patronized by
the duke of MONTAGUE, whose palace, now the British Museum, he contributed to
adorn with his paintings; some of which are very good. The few etchings he has
left are very beautiful. He understood composition, and the distribution of
light; and there is a fine taste in his landskips, if we except perhaps only
that his horizon is often taken too high. Neither can his perspective, at all
times, bear a critical examination; and what is worse, it is often pedantically
introduced. His figures are good in themselves, and generally well placed. --
His manner is rather dry and formal. -- ROUSSEAU, it may be added, was an
excellent man. Having escaped the rage of persecution himself, he made it his
study to lessen the sufferings of his distressed brethren by distributing among
them the greatest part of his gains. Such an anecdote in the life of a painter,
should not be omitted even in so short a review as this.

J. LUTMA has etched a few small landskips in a masterly manner, which
discover some skill in composition, and the management of light.

ISRAEL SYLVESTRE has given us small views (some indeed of a larger size) of
most of the capital ruins, churches, bridges, and castles in Italy and France.
They are exceedingly neat, and touched with great spirit. This master can give
beauty even to the out-lines of a modern building; and, what is more, he gives
it, without injuring the truth: insomuch that I have seen a gentleman just come
from his travels, pick out many of SYLVESTRE'S views, one by one, though he had
never seen them before, merely from his acquaintance with the buildings. To his
praise it may be farther added, that in general he forms his view into an
agreeable whole; and if his light is not always well distributed, there are so
many beauties in his execution, that the eye cannot find fault. His works are
very numerous, and few of them are bad. In trees he excels least.

The etchings of CLAUDE LORRAIN are below his character. We sometimes find good
composition in them; but little else. His execution is bad: there is a
dirtiness in it, which is disgusting: his trees are heavy; his lights seldom
well-massed; and his distances only sometimes observed. -- The truth is,
CLAUDE'S talents lay upon his pallet; and he could do nothing without it.

PERELLE has great merit. His fancy is exceedingly fruitful; and supplies him
with a richness, and variety in his views, which nature seldom exhibits. It is
indeed too exuberant; for he often confounds the eye with too great a
luxuriancy. His manner is his own; and it is hard to say, whether it excells
most in richness, strength, elegance, or freedom. His trees are particularly
beautiful; the foliage is loose, and the ramification easy and graceful. And
yet it must be confessed, that PERELLE is rather a mannerist, than a copier of
nature. His views are all ideal; his trees are of one family; and his light,
though generally well distributed, is sometimes affected: it is introduced as a
spot; and is not properly melted into the neighboring shade by a middle tint.
Catching lights, used sparingly, are beautiful: PERELLE affects them. -- These
remarks are made principally upon the works of old PERELLE, as he is called.
There were three engravers of this name; the grandfather, the father, and the
son. They all engraved in the same style; but the juniors, instead of improving
the the family-taste, degenerated. The grandfather is the best, and the
grandson the worst.

OVERBECK etched a book of Roman ruins; which are in general, good. They are
pretty large, and highly finished. His manner is free, his light often well
distributed, and his composition agreeable.

GENOEL'S landskips are rather free scetches, than finished prints. In that
light they are beautiful. No effect is aimed at: but the free manner, in which
they are touched, is pleasing; and the composition is in general good, though
often crowded.

BOTH'S taste in landscape is elegant. His ideas are grand; his composition
beautiful; and his execution bold, and masterly. His light too is commonly well
distributed; and his figures are excellent. We regret only, that we have so few
of his works.

MARCO RICCI'S works, which are numerous, have little merit. His human figures
indeed are good, and his trees tolerable; but he produces no effect, his manner
is disgusting, his cattle ill-drawn, and his distances ill-preserved.

ZEEMAN was a Dutch painter; and excelled in seacoasts, beaches, and distant
land; which he commonly ornamented with skiffs, and fishing-boats. His
execution is neat, and his distances well kept. Of the distribution of light he
knows nothing; and the fore-grounds of many of his prints are for that reason
particularly bad. But his figures are good, and his skiffs admirable. In his
sea-pieces he introduces larger vessels; but his prints in this style are
commonly awkward; and disagreeable.

VANDIEST left behind him a few rough scetches, which are executed with great
freedom.

GOUPY very happily caught the manner of SALVATOR; and in some things excelled
him. There is a richness in his execution, and a spirit in his trees, which
SALVATOR wants. But his figures are bad. Very gross instances not only of
indelicacy of outline, but even of bad drawing, may be found in his print of
PORSENNA, and in that of DIANA. Landscape is his sort; and his best prints are
those, which go under the titles of the Latrones, the Augurs, Tobit, Hagar, and
its companion.

Our celebrated countryman HOGARTH cannot properly be omitted in a catalogue of
engravers; and yet he ranks in none of the foregoing classes. With this apology
I shall introduce him here.

The works of this master abound in true humor; and satyr, which is generally
well-directed: they are admirable moral lessons, and a fund of entertainment
suited to every taste; a circumstance, which shows them to be just copies of
nature. We may consider them too as valuable repositories of the manners,
customs, and dresses of the present age. What a fund of entertainment would a
collection of this kind afford, drawn from every period of the history of
Britain? -- How far the works of HOGARTH will bear a critical examination, may
be the subject of a little more enquiry.

In design HOGARTH was seldom at a loss. His invention was fertile; and his
judgment accurate. An improper incident is rarely introduced; a proper one
rarely omitted. No one could tell a story better; or make it, in all its
circumstances, more intelligible. His genius, however, it must be owned, was
suited only to low, or familiar subjects. It never soared above common life: to
subjects naturally sublime: or which from antiquity, or other accidents
borrowed dignity, he could not rise.

In composition we see little in him to admire. In many of his prints the
deficiency is so great as plainly to show a want of all principles; it makes us
ready to believe, that when we do meet with a beautiful group, it is the effect
of chance. In one of his minor works, the Idle 'prentice, we seldom see a crowd
more beautifully managed, than in the last print. If the sheriff's officers had
not been placed in a line, and had been brought a little lower in the picture,
so as to have formed a pyramid with the cart, the composition had been
unexceptionable: and yet the first print of this work is such a striking
instance of disagreeable composition, that it is amazing, how an artist, who
had any idea of beautiful forms, could suffer so unmasterly a performance to
leave his hands.

Of the distribution of light HOGARTH had as little knowledge as of
composition. In some of his pieces we see a good effect; as in the Execution
just mentioned; in which if the figures at the right and left corners, had been
kept down a little, the light would have been beautifully distributed on the
foreground, and a fine secondary light spread over part of the crowd: but at
the same time there is so obvious a deficiency in point of effect, in most of
his prints, that it is very evident he had no principles.

Neither was HOGARTH a master in drawing. Of the muscles and anatomy of the
head and hands he had perfect knowledge; but his trunks are often badly
molded, and his limbs ill set on. I tax him with plain bad drawing, I speak
not of the niceties of anatomy, and elegance of out-line: of these indeed he
knew nothing; nor were they of use in that mode of design, which he cultivated:
and yet his figures upon the whole are inspired with so much life, and meaning,
that the eye is kept in good humor, in spite of its inclination to find fault.

The author of the Analysis of beauty, it might be supposed, would have given
us more instances of grace, than we find in the works of HOGARTH; which shows
strongly that theory and practice are not always united. Many opportunities his
subjects naturally afford of introducing graceful attitudes; and yet we have
very few examples of them. With instances of picturesque grace his works abound.

But of his expression, in which the force of his genius lay, we cannot speak
in terms too high. In every mode of it he was truly excellent. The passions he
thoroughly understood; and all the effects which they produce in every part of
the human frame: he had the happy art also of conveying his ideas with the same
precision, with which he conceived them. -- He was excellent too in expressing
any humourous oddity, which we often see stamped upon the human face. All his
heads are cast in the very mould of nature. Hence that endless variety, which
is displayed through his works; and hence it is that the difference arises
between his heads, and the affected charicaturas of those masters, who have
sometimes amused themselves with patching together an assemblage of features
from their own ideas. Such are SPANIOLET'S; which, though admirably executed,
appear plainly to have no archetypes in nature. HOGARTH'S, on the other hand,
are collections of natural curiosities. The Oxford-heads, the physicians-arms,
and some of his other pieces, are expressly of this humourous kind. They are
truly comic; though ill-natured effusions of mirth: more entertaining than
SPANIOLET'S, as they are pure nature; but less innocent, as they contain
ill-directed ridicule. -- But the species of expression, in which this master
perhaps most excels, is that happy art of catching those peculiarities of air,
and gesture, which the ridiculous part of every profession contract from their
peculiar situation; and which for that reason become characteristic of the
whole. His counselors, his undertakers, his lawyers, his usurers are all
conspicuous at sight. In a word, almost every profession may see in his works
that particular species of affectation, which they should most endeavor to
avoid.

The execution of this master is well suited to his subjects, and manner of
treating them. He etches with great spirit; and never gives one unnecessary
stroke. For myself, I greatly more value the works of his own needle; than
those high-finished prints, on which he employed other engravers. For as the
production of an effect is not his talent; and as this is the chief excellence
of high-finishing, his own rough manner is certainly preferable, in which we
have most of the force, and spirit of his expression. The manner in none of his
works pleases me so well, as in a small print of a corner of a playhouse.
There is more spirit in a work of this kind, struck off at once, warm from the
imagination, than in all the cold correctness of an elaborate engraving. If all
his works had been executed in this style, with a few improvements in the
composition, and the management of light, they would certainly have been a much
more valuable collection of prints than they are. The rake's progress, and some
of his other works, are both etched and engraved by himself: they are well
done; but it is plain he meant them as furniture. As works designed for a
critick's eye, they would certainly have been better without the engraving,
except a few touches in a very few places. The want of effect too would have
been less conspicuous, which in his highest finished prints is disagreeably
striking.

CHAPTER IV. Remarks on particular Prints.
THE RESURRECTION OF LAZARUS, BY BLOEMART.
WITH regard to design, this print has great merit. The point of time is very
judiciously chosen. It is a point between the first command, Lazarus come
forth; and the second, Loose him, and let him go. The first astonishment of the
two sisters is now over. The predominant passion is gratitude; which is
discovering itself in praise. One of the attendents is telling the yet
stupefied man, "That is your sister." He himself, collecting his scattered
ideas, directs his gratitude to Christ. Jesus directs it farther, to heaven. So
far the design is good. But what are those idle figures on the right hand, and
on the left? some of them seem no way concerned in the action. Two of the
principal of them are introduced as grave-diggers; but even in that capacity
they were unwanted; for the place, we are told, was a cave, and a stone rolled
upon the mouth. When a painter is employed on a barren subject, he must make up
his groups as he is able: but there is no barrenness here: and the painter
might with propriety have introduced in the room of the grave-diggers, some of
the Pharisaical party maligning the action. Such we are told were on the spot.
They are figures of consequence in the story; and ought not to have been shoved
back, as they are, among the appendages of the piece.

The composition is almost faultless. The principal group is finely disposed.
It Is form is nearly that of a right-angled triangle. The hand of Christ is the
apex. The kneeling figure, and the dark figure looking up make the two other
angles. The group opens in a beautiful manner, and discovers every part. It is
equally beautiful, when considered, as combined with the figures on the left.
It then forms an easy inclined plane, of which the highest figure is the apex,
and the dark figure just mentioned, on the left of Lazarus is the angle at the
base. Such combinations of triangular forms have a fine effect.

The light is very ill-distributed, though the figures are disposed to receive
the most beautiful effect of it. The whole is one glare. It had been better, if
all the figures on the elevated ground, on the right, had been in strong
shadow. The extended arm, the head, and shoulder of the grave-digger might have
received catching lights. A little more light might have been thrown upon the
principal figure; and a little less upon the figure kneeling. The remaining
figures, on the left, should have been kept down. Thus the light would have
centered strongly upon the capital group, and would have faded gradually away.

The single figures are in general good. The principal one indeed is not so
capital as might be wished. The character is not quite pleasing; the right arm
is aukwardly introduced, if not ill-drawn; and the whole disagreably incumbered
with drapery. -- Lazarus is very fine: the drawing, the expression, and grace
of the figure are all good. -- The figure kneeling is not very graceful; but it
contrasts with the group. -- The grave-diggers are both admirable figures. It
is a pity, they should be encumbrances only.

The drawing is good; yet there seems to be something amiss in the pectoral
muscles of the grave-digger on the right. The hands too, in general, of all the
figures, are constrained and awkward. Few of them are in natural action.

The manner is strong, distinct, and expressive. It is mere engraving, without
any etching. The drapery of the kneeling figure is particularly well touched:
as are also the head, and leg of LAZARUS; and the grave-digger on the left.

THE DEATH OF POLYCRATES, BY SALVATOR ROSA.
The story is well told: every part is fully engaged in the subject, and
properly subordinate to it.

The disposition is agreeable. The contrivance of the groups, falling one into
another, is very pleasing: And yet the form would have been more beautiful, if
a ladder, with a figure upon it, a piece of loose drapery, a standard, or some
other object had been placed on the left side of the cross, to have filled up
that formal vacancy, in the shape of a right-angle, and to have made the
pyramid more complete. The groups themselves are simple and elegant. The three
figures on horseback indeed are had. A line of heads is always unpleasing.

We have no idea of keeping. The whole has only one surface; which might have
been prevented by a little more strength on the fore-ground, and a slighter sky.

The light is distributed without any judgment. It might perhaps have been
improved, if the group of the soldier resting upon his shield, had been in
shadow; with a few catching lights. This shadow, passing through the label,
might have extended over great part of the fore-ground above it: by which we
should have had a body of shadow to balance the light of the centre-group. The
lower figures of the equestrian-group might have received a middle tint, with a
few strong touches; the upper figures might have caught the light, to detach
them from the ground.

With regard to the figures taken separately, they are almost unexceptionably
good. You will seldom indeed see so many good figures in any collection of such
a number. The young soldier leaning over his shield; the other figures of that
group; the soldier pointing, in the middle of the picture; and the figure
behind him spreading his hands, are all in the highest degree elegant, and
graceful. The distant figures too are beautiful. The expression, in the whole
body of the spectators, is very striking. Some are more, and some less
affected; but every one in a degree. -- All the figures however are not
faultless. POLYCRATES hangs ungracefully upon his cross: his body is too much
made up of parallel lines, and right angles. His face is strongly marked with
agony: but his legs are disproportioned to his body. -- The three lower figures
of the equestrian-group, are bad. They are properly placed to catch the
abruptness of the centre-group, and finish the pyramidal form; but they might
have had a little more meaning, and a little more grace. -- One of the
equestrian figures also, that nearest the cross, is formal, and disgusting: and
as to an horse, SALVATOR seems not to have had the least idea of the
proportion, and anatomy of that animal.

The scenery is inimitable. The rock broken, and covered with shrubs, at the
top; and afterward spreading into one grand, and simple shade, is in itself a
pleasing object; and affords an excellent back-ground to the figures.

The execution of this print is equal to that of any of SALVATOR'S works. The
passages, in which this master's manner is more particularly characterized,
are, the soldier sitting with the shield, the pointing figure in the middle
group, the head in armor behind it, the distant groups immediately on the
right, and left of the cross; and the scenery in general.

THE TRIUMPH OF SILENUS, BY PETER TESTA.
P. TESTA seems, in this elegant and masterly performance, as far as his
sublime ideas can be comprehended, to intend a satyr upon drunkenness.

The design seems to be perfect. The God is introduced in the middle of the
piece, holding an ivy-crown, and supported by his train, in all the pomp of
unwieldy majesty. Before him dance a band of bacchanalian rioters; while
Intemperance, Debauchery, and unnatural Lusts complete the immoral festival. In
the offskip rises the temple of Priapus, hard by a mountain, dedicated to
lewdness, nymphs and satyrs. -- In the heavens are represented the Moon and
Stars pushing back the Sun; to show that the actions, of which this night was a
witness, dreaded the approach of light.

The disposition has less merit; yet is not unpleasing. The whole group, on the
left of SILENUS, and the several parts of it, are happily disposed. The group
of dancers, on the other side, is crowded, and ill-shapen. It is disagreeable
too for want of contrast. The two principal figures, each standing on one leg,
appear disgusting counter-parts. The whole (I speak only of the terrestrial
groups) is disposed in the form of an easy inclined plane; which partakes as
little as possible of the pyramidal form. It might perhaps have had a better
effect, if an elegant canopy had been holden over SILENUS, which would have
been no improper appendage; and, by bringing the apex of the pyramid over the
principal figure, would have given more variety to the whole. The sameness too
in the disposition of the etherial and the terrestrial figures, which is rather
displeasing, would have been prevented by this slight alteration.

The light, with regard to particular figures is very beautiful. But such a
light, at best, gives you only the idea of a picture examined by a candle.
Every figure, as you hold the candle to it, appears well lighted; but instead
of an effect of light you have only a succession of spots. Indeed the light is
not only ill, but absurdly distributed. The upper part is enlightened by one
sun, and the lower part by another; the direction of the light being different
in each. -- Should we endeavor to amend it, it might be better perhaps to
leave out the Sun; and to represent him, by his symbols, as approaching only.
The sky-figures would of course receive catching lights, and might be left
nearly as they are. The figure of Rain under the Moon should be in shadow. The
bear too, and the lion's head should be kept down. Thus there would be nothing
glaring in the celestial figures. For SILENUS, and his train, they might be
enlightened by a very strong torch-light; which might be carried by the dancing
figures. The light would then fall nearly as it does, upon the principal group.
The other figures should be brought down to a middle tint. This kind of light
would naturally produce a gloom in the back-ground; but there is no occasion to
make it dark, as more torch-light might be supposed.

With regard to the figures taken separately, they are conceived with such
classical purity, and simplicity of taste, so elegant in the drawing, so
graceful in every attitude, and at the same time marked with such manly
expression, that if I were obliged to fix upon any print as an example of all
the beauties, of which single figures are capable of receiving, I should be
tempted to give the preference to this: though at the same time it must be owned,
that some of them give you too much the idea of marble.

The most striking instances of fine drawing are seen in the principal figure;
in the legs of the figure that supports him; and in those of the figure dancing
with the pipes; in the man and woman behind the centaur; in the figure in the
clouds, with his right hand over his knee; in the Apollo; and particularly in
that bold, fore-shortened figure of the sign Capricorn.

Instances of expression we have in the unweildiness of SILENUS. He appears so
dead a weight, so totally unelastic, that every part of him, which is not
supported, sinks with its own gravity. The sensibility too with which his
bloated body, like a quagmire, feels every touch, is strongly expressed in his
countenance. The figure, which supports him, expresses in every muscle the
labor of the action. The dancing figures, if we except that with the thyrsus,
are all strongly characterized. The pushing figures in the sky are marked with
great expression; and above all the threatening Capricorn, who is represented in
the act of drawing a bow.

With regard to grace, every figure, at least every capital one, is agreeable;
if we except only that figure, which lies kicking its legs upon the ground. But
we have the strongest instances of grace in the figure dancing with the pipes,
in the man and woman behind the centaur, (which, it is not improbable, might be
designed for BACCHUS and ARIADNE) and in the boy lying on the ground.

With regard to execution, we rarely see an instance of it in greater
perfection. Every head, every muscle, and every extremity is touched with
infinite spirit. The very appendages are fine; and the stone-pines, which adorn
the back-ground, are marked with such taste and precision, as if landscape had
been this artist's only study.

SMITH'S PORTRAIT OF THE DUKE OF SHOMBERG, FROM KNELLER.
KNELLER, even when he laid himself out to excel, was often but a tawdry
painter. His equestrian portrait of king WILLIAM, at Hampton Court, is a very
unmasterly performance: the composition is bad; the coloring gaudy; the whole
is void of effect, and there is scarce a good figure in it. -- The composition
before us is more pleasing, though the effect is little better. An equestrian
figure, at best, is an awkward subject. The legs of an horse are great
encumbrances in grouping. VANDYKE indeed has managed king CHARLES the First on
horseback with great judgment; and RUBENS too, at Hampton Court, has made a
noble picture of the duke of ALVA, though his horse is very ill-drawn. -- In the
print before us the figure sits with grace and dignity; but the horse is no
Bucephalus: its character is only that of a managedpad. The bush, growing by
the duke's trunchion, is a trifling circumstance; and helps to break into more
parts, a composition already too much broken. -- The execution is throughout
excellent; and though the parts are rather too small for metzotinto, yet SMITH
has given them all their force.

PETHER'S METZOTINTO OF REMBRANDT'S JEWISH RABBI.
The character is that of a stern, haughty man, big with the idea of his own
importance. The rabbi is probably fictitious; but the caracter was certainly
taken from nature. There is great dignity in it; which in a work of REMBRANDT'S
is the more extraordinary. -- The full expression of it is given us in the
print. The unelastic heaviness of age, which is so well described in the
original, is as well preserved in the copy. The three equidistant lights on the
head, on the ornament, and on the hands, are disagreeable: in the print they
could not be removed; but it might have been judicious to have kept down the
two latter a little more. -- With regard to the execution, every part is
scraped with the utmost softness, and delicacy. The muscles are round and
plump; and the insertions of them, which in an old face are very apparent, are
well expressed. Such a variety of middle tints, and melting lights were
difficult to manage; and yet they are managed with great tenderness. The
looseness of the beard is masterly. The hands are exactly those of a fat old
man. The stern eyes are full of life; and the nose and mouth are admirably
touched. The separation of the lips in some parts, and adhesion in others, are
characteristic strokes; and happily preserved. The folds and lightness of the
turban are very elegant. The robe, about the shoulder, is unintelligible, and
ill-managed: but this was the painter's fault. -- In a word, when we examine
this very beautiful metzotinto, we must acknowledge, that no engraving can
equal it in softness, and delicacy.

HONDIUS'S HUNTED WOLF.
The composition, in this little print, is good; and yet there is too much
similitude in the direction of the bodies of the several animals. The shape
also of the group would have been more pleasing, if the vertical angle had been
rather more acute. The group is too much broken also, and wants solidity. The
horizon is taken too high; unless the dimensions of the print had been higher.
The rising-ground, above the wolf's head, had been offskip enough; and yet the
rock, which rises higher, is so beautifully touched; that it would be a pity to
remove it. -- The light is distributed without any judgment. It might have been
improved, if all the interstices among the legs, and heads of the animals had
been kept down; and the shadow made very strong under the fawn, and the wounded
dog. This would have given a bold relief to the figures; and might, without any
other alteration, have produced a good effect. -- The drawing is not faultless.
The legs and body of the wounded dog are but very inaccurate: nor does the
attacking dog stand firm upon his right leg. -- With regard to expression,
HONDIUS has exerted his full force. The expression both of the wounded dog, and
of the wolf, is admirable: but the expression of the attacking dog is a most
bold and masterly copy from nature. His attitude shows every nerve convulsed;
and his head is a masterpiece of animal fury. -- We should add, that the
slaughtered animal is so ill-characterized, that we scarce know what it is. The
execution is equal to the expression. It is neat, and highly finished; but
discovers in every touch the spirit of a master.

THE 5th PLATE OF DU JARDIN'S ANIMALS.
The design, though humble, is simple and beautiful. The two dogs reposing at
noon after the labor of the morning, the impliments of fowling, the fictitious
hedge, and the loopholes through it, all correspond together, and agreeably
tell the little history of the day. -- The composition is beautiful; though it
might have been improved, if another dog, or something equivalent, had been
introduced in the vacancy at the left corner. This would have given the group
of dogs a better form. The nets, and fowling-pieces are judiciously added; and
make an agreeable shape with the dogs. The hedge also adds another pyramidal
form; which would have been more pleasing, if the left corner of the reeds had
been a little higher. -- The light is well distributed; only there is too much
of it. The farther dog might have been taken down a little; and the hinder
parts of the nearer. -- The drawing and expression are pure nature; and the
execution elegant and masterly.

WATERLO'S TOBIAS.
The landscape I mean, is an upright of the largest size, which this master ever
used; near twelve inches in height, by ten. On the near ground stands an oak,
which forms a diagonal through the print. The second distance is composed of a
rising ground, connected with a rock, which is covered with shrubs. The oak,
and the shrubs make a vista, through which you have an extensive view into the
country. The figures, which consist of an angel, Tobias, and a dog, are
descending an hill, which forms the second distance. The print, with the
description, cannot be mistaken. -- The composition is very pleasing. The
trees, on the fore-ground, spreading over the top of the print, and sloping to
a point at the bottom, give the beautiful form of an inverted pyramid; which,
in trees especially, has often a fine effect. To this form the inclined plane,
on which the figures stand, and which is beautifully broken, is a good
contrast. The rock approaches to a perpendicular, and the distance to an
horizontal line. All together make such a combination of beautiful and
contrasting shapes, that the whole is very pleasing. If I should find fault
with any thing, it is the regularity of the rocks. There is no variety in
parrellel lines; and it had been very easy to have broken them. -- The keeping
is very accurate. The second, and third distance are both judiciously managed.
-- The light is beautifully disposed. To prevent heaviness, it is introduced
upon the tree, both at the top and bottom; but it is properly kept down. A mass
of shade succeeds upon the ground of the second distance; and is continued upon
the water. The light breaks, in a blaze, upon the bottom of the rock, and
masses the whole. The trees, shrubs, and upper part of the rock are happily
thrown into a middle tint, to prevent extravagance. Perhaps the effect of the
distant country might have been better, if all the lights upon it had been kept
down, except one easy catching light upon the town, and the rising ground on
which it stands. -- The execution is exceedingly beautiful. No artist had an
happier manner of expressing trees than WATERLO; and the tree before us is one
of his capital works. The shape of it we have already criticized. The bole and
ramification are as beautiful as the shape. The foliage, if I were not afraid
of speaking the language of extravagance, seems the work of enchantment. Such
an union of strength, and lightness is rarely found. The extremities are
touched with infinite tenderness; the strong masses of light are relieved with
shadows equally strong; and yet great ease, and softness are preserved. The
fore-ground is highly enriched; and indeed the whole print, and every part of
it, is full of art, and full of nature.

THE DELUGE AT COEVERDEN, BY ROMAN LE HOOGHE.
This is an historical landscape, a style very different from that of the last.
WATERLO had nothing in view, but to form an agreeable picture. He had all
nature before him; through which his imagination might range. The figures he
introduced, unconnected with his subject, served only to embellish it. Any
other figures would have answered his design as well. But LE HOOGHE was
confined within narrower lines. He had a country to describe, and a story to
tell. The country is the environs of Coeverden, a Dutch town, with a view of
that immense bank, which the bishop of Munster, in the year 1673, threw up, and
fortified at a vast expense, to lay the town under water. The story, is the
ruin of that bank, which was broken through in three places, by the violence of
the waters in a storm. The subject was great, and difficult; and yet the artist
has acquitted himself in a masterly manner. The town of Coeverden fills the
distant view. The country is spread with a deluge; the sky with a tempest; and
the breaches in the bank appear in all their horror. -- The composition, in the
distant, and middle parts, is as pleasing as such an extensive subject can be.
An elevated horizon, which is always disgusting, was necessary here to give a
distinct view of the whole. -- The light too is thrown over the distant parts
in good masses. -- The expression of the figures, of the horses especially, is
very strong: those, which the driver is turning, to avoid the horrid chasm
before him, are impressed with the wildest character of terror: and indeed the
whole scene of distress, and the horrible confusion in every part of it, are
admirably described. -- The execution is not equal to that of many of LE
HOOGHE'S works. The sky is hard; and there is a dryness in the whole. If in any
part the master appears like himself, it is in the figures on the left of the
fore-ground. -- There are other faults in this print. The shape of it is bad. A
little more length would have enlarged the idea; and the town would have stood
better not quite in the middle. -- But what is most faulty, is the
disproportion, and littleness of the fore-ground on the right. The spirit,
which the artist had maintained through the whole description, flags miserably
here. Whereas here he should have closed the whole with some vast, and noble
confusion; which would have given keeping to the distant parts, and struck the
spectator with the strongest images of horror. Instead of this, we are
presented with a few pigs, and calves floundering in the water. The thought
seems borrowed from OVID. In the midst of a world in ruins, Not lupus inter
oves.

HOGARTH'S RAKE'S PROGRESS.
The first print of this capital work is an excellent representation of a young
heir taking possession of a miser's effects. The passion of avarice, which
hoards every thing, without distinction, what is, and what is not valuable, is
admirably described. -- The composition, though not excellent, is not unpleasing.
The principal group, consisting of the young gentleman, the tailor, the
appraiser, the papers, and chest, is agreeably shaped: but the eye is hurt with
the disagreeable regularity of three heads nearly in a line, and at equal
distances. -- The light is not ill-disposed. It falls on the principal figures:
but the effect might have been improved. If the extreme parts of the mass, (the
white apron on one side, and the memorandum-book on the other,) had been in
shade, the repose had been less injured. The detached parts of a group should
rarely catch a strong body of light. -- We have no striking instances of
expression in this print. The principal figure is unmeaning. The only one,
which displays the true vis comica of HOGARTH, is the appraiser fingering the
gold. You enter at once into his character. -- The young woman might have
furnished the artist with an opportunity of presenting a graceful figure; which
would have been more pleasing. The figure he has introduced is by no means an
object of allurement. -- The perspective is accurate; but affected. So many
windows, and open doors may show the author's learning; but they break the
back-ground, and injure the simplicity of it.

The second print introduces our hero into all the dissipation of modish life.
We became first acquainted with him, when a boy of eighteen. He is now of age;
has entirely thrown off the clownish schoolboy; and assumes the man of
fashion. Instead of the country-taylor, who took measure of him for his
father's mourning, he is now attended by French-barbers, French-taylors, poets,
milliners, jockies, bullies, and the whole retinue of a fine gentleman. -- The
expression, in this print, is wonderfully great. The dauntless front of the
bully; the keen eye, and elasticity of the fencing-master, and the simpering
importance of the dancing master are admirably expressed. The last is perhaps
rather a little outre; and it may be added, but very indifferently drawn. The
architect is a strong copy from nature. -- The composition seems to be entirely
subservient to the expression. It appears, as if HOGARTH had scetched in his
memorandum-book all the characters, which he has here introduced; but was at a
loss how to group them; and chose rather to introduce them in detached figures,
as he had scetched them, than to lose any part of the expression by combining
them. -- The light is very ill distributed. It is spread indiscriminately over
the print; and destroys the whole. -- We have no instance of grace in any of
the figures. The principal figure is very deficient. There is no contrast in
the limbs; which is always attended with a degree of ungracefulness. -- The
execution is very good. It is elaborate, and yet free. -- The satyr on operas,
though it may be well-directed, is forced and unnatural.

The third plate carries us still deeper in the history. We meet our hero
engaged in one of his evening-amusements. This print, on the whole, is no very
extraordinary effort of genius. -- The design is good; and may be a very exact
description of the humors of a brothel. -- The composition too is not amiss.
But we have few of those masterly strokes, which distinguish the works of
HOGARTH. The whole is plain history. The lady setting the world on fire, is the
best thought: and there is some humor in furnishing the room with a set of
Caesar's; and not placing them in order. -- The light is ill-managed. By a few
alterations, which are obvious, particularly by throwing the lady dressing,
into the shade, the disposition of it might have been tolerable. But still we
should have had an absurdity to answer, whence comes it? Here is light in
abundance; but no visible source. -- Expression we have very little through the
whole print. The principal figure is the best. The ladies have all the air of
their profession; but no variety of character. HOGARTH'S women are, in general,
very inferior to his men. For which reason I prefer the rake's progress to the
harlot's. The female-face indeed has seldom strength of feature enough to admit
the strong markings of expression.

Very disagreeable accidents often befall gentlemen of pleasure. An event of
this kind is recorded in the fourth print; which is now before us. Our hero
going, in full dress, to pay his compliments at court, on St. David's-day, was
accosted in the rude manner, which is here represented. -- The composition is
good. The form of the group, made up of the figures in action, the chair, and
the lamp-lighter, is pleasing. Only here we have an opportunity of remarking,
that a group is disgusting, when the extremities of it are heavy. A group in
some respect should resemble a tree. The heavier part of the foliage, (the cup,
as the landskip-painter calls it) is always near the middle: the
outside-branches, which are relieved by the sky, are light and airy. An
inattention to this rule has given a heaviness to the group before us. The two
bailiffs, the woman, and the chairman are all huddled together in that part of
the group, which should have been the lightest; while the middle part, where
the hand holds the door, wants strength and consistence. It may be added too,
that the four heads, in the form of a diamond, make an unpleasing shape. All
regular figures should studiously be avoided. -- The light would have been well
distributed, if the bailiff holding the arrest, and the chairman, had been a
little lighter, and the woman darker. The glare of the white apron is
disagreeable. -- We have, in this print, some beautiful instances of
expression. The surprise and terror of the poor gentleman is apparent in every
limb, as far as is consistent with the fear of discomposing his dress. The
insolence of power in one of the bailiffs, and the unfeeling heart in the
other, which can jest with misery, are strongly marked. The self-importance too
of the honest Cambrian is not ill-portrayed; who is chiefly introduced to
settle the chronology of the story. -- In point of grace, we have nothing
striking. HOGARTH might have introduced a degree of it in the female figure; at
least he might have contrived to vary the disagreeable, and heavy form of her
drapery. -- The perspective is good, and makes an agreeable shape. -- I cannot
leave this print without remarking the falling ban-box. Such representations of
quick motion are very absurd; and every moment the absurdity grows stronger.
You cannot deceive the eye. The falling body must appear not to fall. Objects
of that kind are beyond the power of representation.

Difficulties crowd so fast upon our hero, that at the age of twenty-five,
which he seems to have attained in the fifth plate, we find him driven to the
necessity of marrying a woman, whom he detests, for her fortune. The
composition here is very good; and yet we have a disagreeable regularity in the
climax of the three figures, the maid, the bride, and the bridegroom. -- The
light is not ill-distributed. The principal figure too is graceful; and there
is strong expression in the seeming tranquillity of his features. He hides his
contempt of the object before him, as well as he can; and yet he cannot do it.
She too has as much meaning, as can appear through the deformity of her
features. The clergyman's face we are well acquainted with, and also his wig;
though we cannot pretend to say, where we have seen either. The clerk too is an
admirable fellow. -- The perspective is well understood; but the church is too
small; and the wooden post, which seems to have no use, divides the picture
very disagreeably. -- The creed lost, the commandments broken, and the
poor's-box obstructed by a cobweb, are all excellent strokes of satirical
humor.

The fortune, which our adventurer has just received, enables him to make one
push more at the gaming-table. He is exhibited in the sixth print, venting
curses on his folly for having lost his last stake. -- This is upon the whole
perhaps the best print of the set. The horrid scene it describes, was never
more inimitably drawn. The composition is artful, and natural. If the shape of
the whole be not quite pleasing, the figures are so well grouped, and with so
much ease and variety, that you cannot take offense. -- In point of light, it
is more culpable. There is not shade enough among the figures to balance the
glare. If the neck-cloth, and weepers of the gentleman in mourning had been
removed, and his hands thrown into shade, even that alone would have improved
the effect. -- The expression, in almost every figure, is admirable; and the
whole is a strong representation of the human mind in a storm. Three stages of
that species of madness, which atattends gaming, are here described. On the
first shock, all is inward dismay. The ruined gamester is represented leaning
against a wall, with his arms across, lost in an agony of horror. Perhaps never
passion was described with so much force. In a short time this horrible gloom
bursts into a storm of fury: he tears in pieces what comes next him; and
kneeling down, invokes curses upon himself. He next attacks others; every one
in his turn whom he imagines to have been instrumental in his ruin. -- The
eager joy of the winning gamesters, the attention of the usurer, the vehemence
of the watchman, and the profound reverie of the high-wayman are all admirably
marked. There is great coolness too expressed in the little we see of the fat
gentleman at the end of the table. The figure opposing the madman is bad: it
has a drunken appearance; and drunkenness is not the vice of a gaming-table. --
The principal figure is ill drawn. The perspective is formal; and the execution
but indifferent: in heightening his expression HOGARTH has lost his spirit.

The seventh plate, which gives us the view of a jail, has very little in it.
Many of the circumstances, which may well be supposed to increase the misery of
a confined debtor, are well contrived; but the fruitful genius of HOGARTH, I
should think, might have treated the subject in a more copious manner. The
episode of the fainting woman might have given way to many circumstances more
proper to the occasion. This is the same woman, whom the rake discards in the
first print; by whom he is rescued in the fourth; who is present at his
marriage; who follows him into jail; and lastly to Bedlam. The thought is
rather unnatural, and the moral certainly culpable. -- The composition is bad.
The group of the woman fainting, is a round heavy mass: and the other group is
very ill shapen. The light could not be worse managed; and, as the groups are
contrived, can hardly be improved. -- In the principal figure there is great
expression; and the fainting scene is well described. -- A scheme to pay off
the national debt by a man who cannot pay his own; and the attempt of a silly
rake to retrieve his affairs by a work of genius, are admirable strokes of
humor.

The eighth plate brings the fortunes of our hero to a conclusion. It is a very
expressive representation of the most horrid scene, which human nature can
exhibit. -- The composition is not bad. The group, in which the lunatic is
chained, is well managed; and if it had been carried a little further toward
the middle of the picture, and the two women, (who seem very odly introduced)
had been removed, both the composition, and the distribution of light had been
good. -- The drawing of the principal figure is a more accurate piece of
anatomy, than I should have expected from HOGARTH. The expression of this
figure is rather unmeaning; and very inferior to the strong characters of all
the other lunatics. The fertile genius of the artist has introduced as many of
the causes of madness, as he could well have collected; though there is a little
tautology. There are two religionists, and two astronomers. Yet there is
variety in each; and strong expression in all the characters. The
self-satisfaction, and conviction of him, who has discovered the longitude, the
mock majesty of the monarch, the moody melancholy of the lover, and the
superstitious horror of the popish devotee are all admirable. -- The
perspective is simple and proper.

CHAPTER V.
CAUTIONS IN COLLECTING PRINTS.
THE collector of prints may be first cautioned against indulging a desire to
become possessed of all the works of any master. There are no masters whose
works in the gross deserve notice. No man is equal to himself in all his
compositions. I have known a collector of REMBRANDT ready to give any price for
a print or two, which he wanted to complete his collection; though it had been to
REMBRANDT'S credit, if those prints had been suppressed. There is no doubt, but
if one third of the works of this master should be tried by the rules of just
criticism, they would appear of little value. The great prince Eugene, it is
said, was a collector of this kind, and piqued himself upon having in his
possession, all the works of all the masters. His collection was bulky, and
cost fourscore thousand pounds; but when sifted, could not, at that time of
day, be worth so many hundreds.

The collector of prints may secondly be cautioned against a superstitious
veneration for names. A true judge leaves the master out of the question, and
only examines the work. But with a little genius nothing sways like a great
name. It carries a wonderful force; covers glaring faults, and creates
imaginary beauties. That species of criticism is certainly just, which examines
the different manners of different masters, with a view to discover in how many
ways a good effect may be produced, and which produces the best. But to be
curious in finding out a master, in order there to rest the judgment, is a kind
of criticism very paultry, and illiberal. It is judging of the work by the
master, instead of judging of the master by the work. Hence it is, that such
vile prints as the Woman in the cauldron, and Mount Parnassus, obtain credit
among connoisseurs. If you ask wherein their beauty consists? you are informed,
they are engraved by MARK ANTONIO: and if that do not satisfy you, you are
further assured, they are after RAPHAEL. This absurd taste raised an honest
indignation in that ingenious artist PICART; who having shown the world, by his
excellent imitations, how ridiculous it is to pay a blind veneration to names,
tells us, that he had compared some of the engravings of the ancient masters
with the original pictures, and found them very bad copies. He speaks of the
stiffness, which in general runs through them -- of the hair of children, which
resembles pot-hooks -- and of the ignorance of those engravers in anatomy,
drawing, and the distribution of light.

A third caution, which may be of use in collecting prints, is, not to rate
their value by their scarceness. Scarceness will make a valuable print more
valuable: but to make scarceness the standard of a prints value, is to mistake
an accident, for merit. This folly is founded in vanity; and arises from a
desire of possessing what no body else can possess. The want of real merit is
made up by imaginary; and the object is intended to be kept, not looked at. Yet
absurd as this false taste is, nothing is more common; and a trifling genius
may be found, who will give ten guineas for HOLLAR'S shells, which valued
according to their real merit, the scarcity of them being added to the account
are not worth more than as many shillings. -- Instances in abundance might be
collected of the prevalence of this folly. LE CLERC, in his print of
Alexander's Triumph, had given a profile of that prince. The print was shown to
the duke of Orleans, who was pleased with it on the whole, but justly enough
objected to the side-face. The obsequious artist erased it, and engraved a full
one. A few impressions had been taken from the plate in its first state, which
sell among the curious for ten times the price of the impressions taken after
the face was altered. -- CALLOT once pleased with a little plate of his own
etching, made an hole in it, through which he drew a ribbon, and wore it at his
button. The impressions after the hole was made, are very scarce, and amazingly
valuable. -- VANDYKE etched a print of the holy family, in which St. John was
represented laying his hand upon the virgin's shoulder. The print, before it
was published, was shown among his critical friends, some of whom thought the
action of St. John too familiar. The painter was convinced, and removed the
hand. But he was mistaken, when he thought he added value to his print by the
alteration. The impressions, which got abroad with the hand upon the shoulder,
would buy up all the rest, three times over, in any auction in London. -- Many
of REMBRANDT'S prints receive infinite value from little accidental alterations
of this kind. A few impressions were taken from one plate, before a dog was
introduced; from another, before a white horse-tail was turned into a black
one; from a third, before a sign-post was inserted at an alehouse door: and
all the scarce prints from these plates, though altered for the better, are the
prints of value: the rest are common and cheap. -- I shall conclude these
instances with a story of a late celebrated collector of pictures. He was
showing his collection with great satisfaction; and after expatiating upon many
noble works by GUIDO, MARRATTI, and other masters, he turned suddenly to the
gentleman, whom he attended; and, "Now, Sir, said he, I Will show you a real
curiosity: there is a WOVERMAN without a horse in it." -- The circumstance, it
is true, was uncommon; but was unluckily that very circumstance, which made the
picture of little value.

Let the collector of prints be cautioned, fourthly, to beware of buying copies
for originals. Most of the works of the capital masters have been copied; and
many of them so well, that if a person be not versed in prints, he may easily
be deceived. Were the copies really as good as the originals, the name would
signify nothing: but, like translations, they necessarily fall short of the
spirit of the original; and contract a stiffness from the fear of erring. When
seen apart, they look well; but when compared with the originals, the
difference easily appears. Thus CALLOT 's beggars have been so well copied,
that the difference between the originals and the copies would not immediately
strike you; but when you compare them, it is obvious. There is a plain want of
freedom; the characters are less strongly marked; and the extremities are less
accurately touched. -- It is a difficult matter to give rules to assist in
distinguishing the copy from the original. In most cases the engraver's name,
or his mark (which should be well known) will be a sufficient direction. These
the copyist is seldom hardy enough to forge. But in anonymous prints it is
matter of more difficulty. All that can be done is, to attend carefully to the
freedom of the manner, in the extremities especially, in which the copyist is
more liable to fail. When you are pretty well acquainted with the manner of a
master, you cannot well be deceived. When you are not, your best way is to be
directed by those who are.

The last caution I shall give to the collector of prints, is, to take care he
purchase not bad impressions. -- There are three things which make an
impression bad. -- The first is, it is being ill taken off. Some prints seem to
have received the force of the roller at intervals. The impression is double;
and gives that glimmering appearance, which illudes the eye. -- A second thing,
which makes an impression bad, is a worn plate. There is as much difference
between the first and the last impression of the same plate, as between two
different prints. The effect is wholly lost in a faint impression; and you have
nothing left but a vapid design without spirit, and without force. In
metzotinto especially a strong impression is desirable. For the spirit of a
metzotinto quickly evaporates; without which it is the most insipid of all
prints. In engraving and etching there will be always here and there a dark
touch, which long preserves an appearance of spirit: but metzotinto is a flat
surface; and when it begins to wear, it wears all over. Too many of the works
of all the great masters, which are commonly hawked about at auctions, or sold
in shops, are in this wretched state. It is difficult to meet with a good
impression. The SALVATORS, REMBRANDTS, and WATERLOS, which we meet with now,
except here and there, in some choice collection, are seldom better than mere
reverses. You see the form of the print; but the elegant, and masterly touches
are gone; back-grounds and fore-grounds are jumbled together by the confusion
of all distance; and you have rather the shadow of a print left, than the print
itself. -- The last thing which makes a bad impression, is retouching a worn
plate. Sometimes this is performed by the master himself; and then the spirit
of the impression may be still preserved. But most commonly the retouching part
is done by some bungler, into whose hands the plate has fallen; and then it is
most execrable. In a worn plate, at least what you have is good: you have the
remains of something excellent; and if you are versed in the works of the
master, your imagination may be agreeably exercised in making out what is lost.
But when the plate has gone through the hands of a bungler, who has worked it
over with his infamous scratches, the idea of the master is lost; and you have
nothing left, but strong, harsh, and unmeaning lines upon a faint ground; which
is the most disagreeable compound, with which the eye can be presented. Such
prints, and many such there are, though offered us under the name of REMBRANDT,
or WATERLO, are of little value. Those masters would not have owned such works.
-- Yet, as we are often obliged to take up with such impressions, as we can
get; let us rather choose the faint impression, than the retouched one.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 53. line 2. read, behind them. Page 103. line 17. read, punishment. Page
116. line 4. read, the work.
INDEX.
A
Appendages, what. 6 Ananias; cartoon of, criticized. 12, 15 Aquafortis, its
manner of biting copper. 51 Aldgrave. 68 Andreani, Andrea, 76 Antonio, Mark, 77
Augustine of Venice. 77 Anthony, St. temptation of; by Callot. 79 Austin, St. a
motto from him. 109 Augurs, by Goupy. 168 Alva, duke of: by Rubens 199
Alexander, triumph of; by Le Clerc, 240
B
Bassan criticized 6, 153 Beautiful gate; cartoon of, criticized. 12, 27
Baptism of John, by Muller. 70 Bloemart, Abraham, 71, 153, 179 Barocchi,
Frederic, 78, 153 Beggars, Callot's. 79 Bartholomew, St. by Spaniolet. 92
Bella, Stephen de la, 97, 144 Bolswert. 101, 156 Bible, history of; by Luiken.
103, by Sadler, 152 Bega, Cornelius, 110 Bellange, 112 Baur, William, 115
Bartoli, Peter, 120 Bas, Le, 121 Bischop, 122 Becket, 129 Baptiste's head by
White. 130 Bentivoglius, Guido; his head by Morin. 133 Bedford, earl of: his
head by Houbraken. 136 Berghem. 137 Bloteling. 147 Barlow. 147 Bears devouring
a deer, by Ridinger. 151 Boars, a print of, by Ridinger. 151 Both. 165
C
Contrast: its effect. 11 Claude. 41 Circumcision, by Goltzius. 70 Caesar,
triumph of, at Hampton Court. 72 Carrache, Augustine, 80 Cantarini. 78 Callot.
78 Chiswick; a picture there of Salvator's criticized. 81 Cross, descent from,
by Villamena. 97 Coeverden, deluge of; by R. le Hooghe. 212 Castiglione. 105
Christ, life of, by Parrocelle. 111 Coypel, 115 Caylus, count, 118


Clerc, Le, 119 Cromwell, Elizabeth, her head by Smith. 131 Collier, Mrs. her
portrait by Faber. 135 Cuyp, 145 Charles I. by Vandyke. 198 Copies, cautioned
against 243
D
Design defined, and illustrated. 3 Disposition defined, and illustrated. 8
Drawing defined, and illustrated. 23 Distant magnitude expressed better in
painting than in a print. 42 Durer, Albert, 65 Dorigny, Michael, 92 Dorigny,
Nicholas, 125 Dyke, Van, 128 Drevet 134 Diana hunting; by Goupy. 167
E
Expression explained, and illustrated. 24 Execution explained, and
illustrated. 31 Engraving considered. 50, etc. Etching considered. 50, etc.
Elshamer, Adam, 80 Egypt, flight into: by Count Gaude. 80 Ertinger. 101 Ecce
Homo; by Coypel, 115. by Van Dyke, 128. Esop; by Barlow. 147 Eugene, prince:
his collection of prints. 236
F
Flemish school, its character. 73 Fair, Callot's. 78 Fage, La, 99 Febre, V.
le, 112 Freii, Jac. 120 Faber. 135 Fry. 136 Fyt, J. 145 Flamen. 148 Fables, by
Ridinger. 151
G
Grace defined, and illustrated. 25 Garrick, Mr. his portrait. 58 Ground in
metzotinto. 59 Goltzius. 69 Guido. 77 Gaude, count. 80 Gillot, Claude, 113
Gribelin, Sim. 121 Gibbon, his head by Smith, 131 Genoel. 165 Goupy. 167 Group:
the form of one criticized. 223
H
Harmony in painting illustrated 18 Hell-scene by A. Durer. 66 Hisben. 68
Hundred-guilders-print. 87 Hooghe, Roman le. 102 Hooper's head by White. 130
Houbraken, 135 Hamden; his head by Houbraken. 136 Hondius, 139. his hunted
wolf, 203. Hollar, 148, 154. his shells, 250. Huntings; by Reubens, 141. by
Ridinger, 151. Hagar, by Goupy, 168 Hogarth: 168. his rake's progress
criticized, 216.
I
Journeyings, patriarchal: by C. Macee. 106 Impostures innocents; by Picart.
117 Joseph in Egypt, by Bischop. 122 Jardin, Du, 140. one of his etchings
criticized, 206. John, St. a print of, by Vandyke. 241 Impressions. 245
K
Keeping defined, and illustrated. 17
L
Lystra, sacrificeat, cartoon of criticized, 13, 26 Light, distribution of
illustrated. 20 Lascelles, Mrs. her portrait. 58 Lucas Van Leiden. 68 Lot by
Aldgrave. 69 Lazarus by Bloemart. 71 Luiken. 103 Lairesse, Gerard, 104
Lanfrank, his gallery. 120 Lievens, J. 127 Lely, Peter, 128 Leigh, Anthony, his
head by Smith. 131 Lutma, J. 133, 161 Laer, Peter de, 145 Lorrain, Claude, 162
Latrones, by Goupy, 167 Lazarus, resurrection of, by Bloemart.
M
Michael Angelo: his idea of form in grouping. 15 Mannerist: what is meant by
the word. 32 Metzotinto considered. 57 Muller. 70 Mantegna, Andrea, 72 Miseries
of war, Callot's. 79 Moyse, Vocation de, by La Fage. 100 Macee. 106 Muilen,
Vander, 107 Mellan. 108 Marot. 123 Magdaline, Mary, her head by Smith. 131
Mellan. 132 Morin, J. 132


Marmion, Edw. 133 Moyreau. 143 Montague, duke of. 159
N
Neulant. 156 Names, their influence. 237
O
Ostade, 109 Ovid, illustrated by W. Baur. 115 Overbeck. 164 Oxford-heads, by
Hogarth. 174
P
Paul preaching at Athens, the cartoon of criticized. 8, 11 Perspective
defined, and illustrated. 30 Polished bodies expressed better in a picture,
than in a print. 46 Pewter, engraving upon 57 Pens. 68 Parmigiano. 73 Palma. 75
Paria, Francis, 75 Picart, his character of M. Antonio. 77 Pont Neuf, by De la
Bella. 98 Pontius. 101 Parrocelle, Joseph, 111 Picart. 116 Pond, Arthur, 117
Perrier, Francis, 122 Parr's head by White. 130 Piazzetta, 132 Pope, Mr. his
head by Richardson. 134 Potter, Paul, 147 Poussin, Gasper, 153 Perelle. 153
Porsenna, by Goupy, 167 Prentice, idle, by Hogarth. 170 Physicians-arms, by
Hogarth. 174 Playhouse, corner of; by Hogarth, 176 Polycrates, death of; by
Salvator Rosa. 185 Pether: his print of a Jewish rabbi. 200 Parnassus, Mount,
by M. Antonio. 238
R
Rupert, prince, character of his metzotintos. 59 Roman-school, its character,
73 Rosa, Salvator, 16, 80, 185 Robbers Salvator Rosa's. 84 Rembrandt. 84, 126,
147, 153, 236 Rosary, mysteries of; by Sciaminossi. 102 Roettiers, Fr. 124
Rigaud. 134 Richardson. 134 Richmond, duke of, his head by Houbraken. 136
Reubens. 141 Rosa of Tivoli. 143 Ridinger. 149 Rousseau, James, 159 Ricci,
Marco, 166 Rake's progress;
S
Salutation by Barocchi. 78 Spaniolet. 92, 174 Silenus and Bacchus, by
Spaniolet. 92 Sciaminossi. 102 Schut, Cornelius, 114 Simons. 129 Sturges's head
by White. 130 Smith. 130 Scalken; his head by Smith. 131 Salisbury, countess
of, her head by Smith. Schomberg, his head by Houbraken, 136. by Smith, 198.
Stoop, Peter: 146 Sadler. 152 Sunderland, earl of, 157 Swanevelt. 158
Sylvestre, Israel, 161 Silenus, triumph of; by Peter Testa. 190 Scarceness, no
test of merit. 239
T
Titian; his illustration of massing light. 22 Transparency expressed better in
a painting, than in a print 45 Tempesta, Anthony. 79, 144. Testa, Peter, 88,
190 Tulden, Van, 110 Truth delivered from Envy; by Poussin. 117 Tobit, by
Goupy. 168
V
Vasari; his opinion of A. Durer. 67 Vouet, Simon, 92 Villamena. 97 Venius,
Otho. 107 Ulisses, voyage of: by Tulden. 110 Vesper, by Parrocelle. 111 Uliet,
Van, 126 Virtue. 134 Visscher, J. 138, 142 Vandiest. 167
W
Whole in painting; how constituted. 2 Watteau. 113 Worlidge. 127 White, the
engraver. 129 White, the metzotinto scraper. ibid. Wing's head by White. 130
Wyke; a metzotinto from him by Smith. Woverman: 142. story of. 243 Wolves-head,
by Ridinger. 151 Wagon: a print from Rubens. 156 Waterlo: 157. his Tobias,
208. Woman in the cauldron; by M. Antonio. 238
Z
Zeeman. 166

