CHRONOLOGY; OR, THE Historian's Vade-Mecum. WHEREIN EVERY REMARKABLE
OCCURRENCE IN ENGLISH HISTORY, WITH THE Principal EVENTS of other HISTORIES,
both Ancient and Modern, are alphabetically recorded, and the Dates affixed;

TOGETHER WITH A Chronological List of the most EMINENT MEN in all Ages of the
World.

By the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER.

This Work gives a more enlarged View of ENGLISH HISTORY than can be comprised
in the smailer Edition; exhibits the Dates of Creation of all the PEERAGES; the
Invention and Progress of the several ARTS; and also a List of the KINGS of
every Country, etc. and the STATE-OFFICERS, BISHOPS, etc. for many Years back.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

For the LIBRARY and the USE of SCHOOLS.

THE TENTH EDITION, With the Additions of Five Years close reading.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by R. BALDWIN, No. 47, Paternoster
Row; where may be had, Price 1s. 6d. The Pocket Edition

[Price of the Two Volumes ^s. sewed.]

TO THE Rising Generation, TO WHOM THIS WORK IS MORE PARTICULARLY SERVICEABLE,
IT IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY THEIR SINCERE WELLWISHER,

J. TRUSLER,
Cobbam, Surrey, 1782.
PREFACE.
SINCE the first publication of this work, the author has annually enlarged and
improved it. It must occur to every one, that time only, and continual reading,
can add to the collection; which makes every new edition more valuable than the
last. It has been the author's study to examine into the accuracy of dates, and
reconcile the difference of historians, who vary in nothing more than in the
times when events happened, owing to different commencements of the year with
different people. The Jews began the year with the month of March; the
Athenians, with June; the Macedonians, with the 24th of September; the
Christians of Egypt and Ethiopia, with the 29th or 30th of August; the Persians
and Armenians, with the 11th of the same month; but most christians of the
Western world reckon from the 1st of January. Indeed, from the Roman Conquest
to Bid, time seems to have been computed from Christmas day. The Saxon
chronicle begins the year from the birth of our Lord. At the beginning of the
13th century, some computed from the Annunciation, some from the Nativity, some
from the Circumcision, and others from the Passion of our Lord; of course,
there was no fixed rule of computation in Gervase of Canterbury's time. Matt.
Paris, Matt. Westminster, Ralph de Diceto, and Polydore Virgil, place the
Coronation of William I. on Christmas day, 1067. Hence it appears, that they
began the year on that day. Walsingham and Brompton refer it to Christmas day,
1066, which proves, that they did not begin the year till after that day. At
the Reformation, the year was appointed to begin on the 25th of March; but
others say, in 1265; that being supposed by some, to have been the day when the
world was created, and when Christ was conceived: it thus continued till 1752,
when it was brought back to the 1st of January. The Scots, from time
immemorial, observed the 25th of March as the first day of the year, till Nov.
27, 1599; when the 1st of January was ordered, by proclamation, to be the
beginning of the year there.

From these variations in the computation of time, respecting the commencement
of the year, etc. we may account for the difference of dates in the several
historians. It has been the study, therefore, of the Author of this work, as
far as possible, to reconcile them; and he has happily succeeded in a thousand
instances, and in all he is as correct, as a work of this kind (which consists
chiefly of figures) is capable of; he flatters himself, therefore, it will be
found superior to other books of chronology, where no such attention has been
paid. He has industriously thrown out, also, all unimportant matter, and given
the Reader only such occurrences as he must wish to be acquainted with.

This work being found highly proper to be put into the hands of youth,
chronology being one of the chief branches of the belles lettres; to adapt it
for the purpose, this edition is published; wherein the author has given a more
enlarged view of English history, and flatters himself he has thus rendered it
a complete school-book. It is already received at Westminster, Eaton,
Winchester, Marybone, etc. etc. and all other great schools, as well for boys
as for girls.

A small edition of this work, so contrived as not to exceed the size of a
pocket almanac, may be had of all the booksellers, price 1s. 6d.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE events of different reigns, as they arose, may be found, by turning to the
respective kings one after another.

With respect to dates, no notice is taken of the Old Style, but they are
regulated according to the New; thus January 1741/2, is called January, 1742.

As to ages, this rule is observed; if a person at his death had entered only
in his 40th year, he is recorded to have died, aged 39.

Names to which St. is prefixed, if not found by the first letter of the name,
may under the word Saint.

The times in which such writers lived, as were bishops, if not found in
alphabetical order, may be seen by turning to the list of bishops.

Where no distinction of country is made to the peerages, that of England is
implied.

Where references are made to Rem. Occur. it means to those remarkable
occurrences at the beginning of the Second Volume, which could not be so well
thrown into alphabetical order.

This volume serves as a complete Index to all the Histories of England extant,
by referring to the years in which occurrences happened. The years are
generally marked in the margins of the various histories.

Several historical facts will be found, by referring to particular names in
Vol. II.

The author will be very thankful for any corrections, additions, or
improvements left with his publisher, R. BALDWIN.

KINGS of ENGLAND since the HEPTARCHY.
Began to reign. NAMES. 800 Egbert, king of Wessex. 838, Ethelwolf. 857,
Ethelbald. 860, Ethelbert. 866, Ethelred. 872, Alfred. 900, Edward the Elder.
925, Athelstan. 942, Edmund I. 946, Edred. 955, Edwy. 959, Edgar. 975, Edward
the martyr. Simeon, Usurper.
1016, Edmund II.
DANISH KINGS.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1017, Canute the Dane. Harold, Usurper.
1039, Hardicanute.
ENGLISH SAXONS RESTORED.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1041, Edward the Confessor. 1065, Harold.
NORMAN KINGS.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1066, William the Conqueror. 1087, William II. 1100,
Henry I. 1135, Stephen.
The FAMILY of PLANTAGENET, or the SAXON Line restored.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1154, Henry II. 1189, Richard I. 1199, John. 1216,
Henry III. 1272, Edward I. 1307, Edward II. 1327, Edward III. 1377, Richard II.
House of LANCASTER.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1399, Henry IV. 1413, Henry V. 1422, Henry VI.
The House of YORK.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1461, Edward IV. 1483, Edward V. 1485, Richard III.
YORK and LANCASTER united under the House of TUDOR.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1485, Henry VII. 1509, Henry VIII. 1547, Edward VI.
1553, Mary. 1558, Elizabeth.
HOUSE of STUART.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1603, James I. 1625, Charles I.
The COMMONWEALTH* from 1649 to 1660. Cromwell, Usurper.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1649. Charles II. 1685, James II. 1689, William and
Mary. 1702, Anne.
The BRUNSWICK Family.
Began to reign. NAMES. 1714, George I. 1727, George II. 1760, George III.
THE HISTORIAN's VADE-MECUM.
ABBOTS, The, of Reading, Glastenbury, and St. John's, Colchester, hanged and
quartered for denying the King's supremacy, Nov. 1539. Abbotsbury abbey,
Dorsetshire, built, 1026. Aberconway castle, Carnarvonshire, built, 1284.
Abercorn, Scots earldom of, created 1606. (name Hamilton.) Aberdeen, Scots
earldom of, created 1682. (name Gordon.) Aberdeen, University of, founded,
1477; King's College founded, 1500; Marechal College founded, by George Earl of
Marechal, 1593. Abergavenny, barony of, created 1295. (name Nevil.) Aberystwith
castle, built in Henry the First's reign; burnt, 1142. Abingdon abbey, built by
Ethelwold, bishop of Sherborn, 958. Abingdom, Berks, incorporated in the reign
of Philip and Mary. Abingdon, Earldom of, created 1682. (name Bertie.)
Aborigines, or people of Latium, a kingdom of Italy, founded 1330 before
Christ. See Latium. Aboyne, Scots earldom, created 1660. (name Gordon.).
Abraham called, which began the 430 years of sojourning, 1921; entertained
three angels, 1897; offered up his son Isaac, then 25 years old, 1871; died
1821 before Christ, aged 175. Absalom rebelled against his father David, but
defeated and killed by Joab, 1023 before Christ. Abstinents, a sect, who
abstained from wine, flesh, and marriage, and taught that the Holy Ghost was
created, arose under Tatien, 170. Academies, The principal in Europe, were
founded as follow: Berlin, Royal Society, founded by Frederic I. King of
Prussia, 1700. A literary society was incorporated with it, 1744. Bologna,
Italy, for physic, mathematics, 1690; arts and sciences, 1714. Breast, miltary,
1682. Caen, Normandy, of belles lettres, 1705. Copenhagen, of polite arts,
1753. Cortona, Etruscan, for antiquities, 1726. Dublin, of arts, 1750. Erfurt,
Thuringia, of sciences, 1755. Florence, of belles lettres, by Latini, 1272, De
la Crusca, 1582. Germany, naturae curiosi, 1652. Haerlem, Holland, of sciences,
1760. Lisbon, royal historical, by John V. 1722. London, royal, of arts, Dec.
10, 1768. See Society. Lions, of sciences and belles lettres, 1700; the royal
societies of physic, mathematics, and arts, were united to it, 1758. Madrid,
for painting, sculpture, and architecture, 1753. Mantua, of the Vigilanti, for
sciences, 1704. Marseilles, for belles lettres, history, and criticism, 1726.
Milan, for sciences, 1719. Nismes, royal, 1682. Padua, of the Ricovrati, for
poetry, about 1610.
Academies. Paris, of the Sorbonne, for divinity, by Robert Sorbonne, 1256; of
St. Luke, for painting 1391, (see Rome below); of Verona, at first for music,
1543; for French, eloquence, and poetry, by Louis XIII. 1635; royal, of
inscriptions and belles lettres, by Louis XIV. 1663; of painting and sculpture,
by ditto, 1664; of architecture, by ditto, 1671; royal, of surgery, 1731; of
agriculture, 1761. Parma, of the Innominati, 1550; of Cremona, 1560, which was
renewed under the name of Desuniti, 1607. Perousa, of the Insensati, 1561; of
Filirgiti, or lovers of industry, 1574. From this academy, the city of Forli
has sent forth many eminent men; it was much improved, 1652. Petersburgh, of
sciences, by Peter I. 1724. Pome, of the Umoristi, for Italian comic poetry,
1611; of the Fantascici, 1625; of the Infecondi, 1653; the French school, for
painting, by Louis XIV. 1665; it was united with St. Luke's, at Paris, 1675,
from whence pupils are occasionally sent to it. English, erected May 6, 1752.
Stockholm, royal, of sciences, 1750; of belles lettres, 1753. Toulon, military,
1682. Warsaw, Poland, of languages, history, and chronology, 1753. See Society.
Acapulco ship, a Spanish galleon, worth 313,000 l. taken in the South Seas by
Anson, and brought home, June 14, 1744. Accidents, Dreadful. The amphitheatre
at Fidena fell in and killed 50,000 people, 26. The ruins are now seen at
Castle Giubileo. At Bedford, on the day of the assizes, 18 persons were killed,
and many hurt, by the fall of a staircase, 1438. At the assizes at Oxford, the
high sheriff and 300 persons caught the gaol distemper and died, 1577.
Accidents. The town of Pleurs in Italy was buried by a slice of the Alps
falling, and all the inhabitants, near 2200, perished, 1618. A town in the same
neighborhood was buried in the like manner in the 13th century. A magazine of
powder blew up at Gravelins, in Flanders, and killed upwards of 3000 people,
May 29, 1654. A fire happened in a barn at Burwell, Cambridgeshire, at a
puppet-shew, when 150 persons lost their lives, 1724. The roof of the church at
Fearn, in Scotland, fell in during service and killed 60 persons, Oct 19, 1742.
The Lord Mayor, one alderman, two judges, the greatest part of the jury, and a
number of spectators, caught the gaol distemper at the Old Bailey, London, and
died, May 1750. At the fireworks exhibited at Paris, in honor of the Dauphin's
marriage, the passages being stopped up occasioned such a crowd, that the
people, seized with a panic, trampled upon one another till they lay in heaps;
a scaffold erected over the river also broke down, and hundreds were drowned:
near 1000 persons lost their lives, April 21, 1770. A grocer having stowed some
gunpowder under a room at Chester, where a puppet-show was exhibited, the
powder took fire by accident, while the room was full; 40 persons were killed,
and near 70 wounded, Nov. 5, 1772. The London East Indiaman run down by the
Russel man of war, when she sunk, and 110 persons perished, Dec. 28, 1778. See
Amsterdam, Cadiz, Vespers.
Achaia, formerly Greece and Epirus, now belonging to the Turks, peopled by
Achaeus 1080 before Christ. Acra, or Ptolemais, the seat of the kings of
Jerusalem, taken by the Crusaders, 1191. Acts of the apostles written in 63.
Adamites, The, were a sect established by Prodicus, 130, who taught, that
original sin being washed away by baptism, man ought to go naked, as a proof of
innocence; his disciples, therefore, of both sexes, prayed naked, and gave
themselves up to the grossest brutality. The Adamites, or Multipliers, were
another sect that rose under Tanchelin at Antwerp, 1124: he taught his
followers to go naked, like Adam and Eve, and from the words increase and
multiply, condemned virginity, and recommended the free use of the sex.
Admiral, Lord high, held by commission, since Nov. 1709. Admiralty court,
instituted 1347; incorporated 1772. Adria, the famous city that gave its name
to the gulf, is now a pitiful half-drowned village. Adrian, the emperor,
visited Britain 117, and built a strong rampart 80 miles long, between Tyne and
the Frith of Solway, 138. Adultery punished in the Heptarchy, by whipping the
offender naked through the streets, if the husband desired it; by cutting off
the nose and ears, 1031. An act passed for making this and incest capital for
the first offense, and fornication capital for the second, May 14, 1650. Advent
first appointed to be observed by Pope Felix III. 487. Aediles first created at
Rome 971 before Christ. See Rome. Affirmation, Quaker's, accepted by act of
parliament as an oath, it being one of their principles not to swear, Feb. 13,
1702. African company first charter granted, 1673; completed, 1695. See
Slave Trade. Aganoclites, fanatics, that never prayed but while dancing, arose
701. Agaric, The styptic power of, discovered by Brossard, a Frenchman, 1750.
Agathocles, king of Sicily, massacred the wives and children of his soldiers
for having put two of his sons to death, 307 before Christ. Age of the world.
The 1st is reckoned from the creation to the flood, or from the time of Adam to
that of Noah; the 2d, from Noah to Abraham; the 3d, from Abraham to Moses; the
4th, from Moses to Solomon; the 5th, from Solomon to Cyrus; the 6th, from Cyrus
to Christ. See Era, Epoch, Time. Agrarian law, introduced at Rome 486 before
Christ. Agriculture, invented by Triptolemy, about 1600 before Christ.
Macrobius says, it was taught the Aborigines by Saturn. See Saturn. Ailesbury,
Earldom of, created 1776. (name Brudenell.) Aineguilla, in New Spain, mines
discovered there, 1770. Air-guns invented, 1656. Air-pump, invented by
Othoguerike, a German, 1672. Aix-la-Chapelle built by Charlemagne, 795.
Albemarle, Earldom of, created 1696. (name Keppel.) Albigines were a sect of
reformers, about Albigeois in Languedoc, in the 12th century, that opposed the
discipline and ceremonies of the church of Rome. Alcantara, Bridge of, over the
Tagus, built by the emperor Trajan about 98. Aldborough of Upper Ormond, Irish
earldom, created 1777. (name Stratford.) Aldermen first appointed, 882.
Alderney. See Jersey. Alexander III. Pope, compelled Henry II. king of England,
and the king of France, to hold his stirrups while he mounted his horse, 1182.
He instituted the ceremony of marrying the sea at Venice. Alexandria in Egypt,
built by Alexander in 17 days; the walls were six miles in circuit, 335; taken
by Caesar, 46 before Christ; taken by Diocletian, 296; by the Persians, 615; by
the Saracens, 640. Alf helm murdered, by order of Edric, 1009. Alfred, fourth
son of Ethelwolf, born 849 at Wantage, Berks; succeeded his brother, Ethelred
I. on the throne of England, 872; took London from the Danes, besieged
Rochester, and drove them to their ships, 882; he divided England into counties
and hundreds, built the university of Oxford, took a survey of England, and
formed a body of laws, which, though now lost, is generally esteemed the origin
of Common Law. He was thrice married: by his first queen he had two sons and a
daughter, by his second, two sons and five daughters, and by his third, two
sons and two daughters. He died 900, and was succeeded by his second son,
Edward the Elder. See Knighthood. Alfred, son of Ethelred II. his eyes were put
out, 600 of his train murdered at Guildford by earl Godwin's vassals, and he
led to a monastery at Ely, 1036, where he died soon after. Algebra first known
in Europe, 1494; letters in Algebraic calculation, made use of by Fran. Vieta,
1590. Algiers was formerly the country Numidia, as united under Massinissa and
Jugurtha. It beam a Roman province 44 before Christ; afterward it became
independent, till the inhabitants invited Barbarossa, the pirate, to assist
them against the Spaniards who, however, seized it, 1516. Some time after it
became the property of the Turks. See Jugurtha. Allen, Irish viscount, Title
of, created 1717. (name Allen.) Allington castle, Kent, built about 1154.
All Saints, Festival of, instituted, 835. All Souls, Festival of, established,
998. All Souls college, Oxford, founded by Chichely, archbishop of Canterbury,
1437. (40 fellows.) See Codrington. Alum brought to perfection, 1609, and here
established. Alnewick abbey, Northumberland, founded 1147. Alphabet, The Ionic,
consisting of 24 letters, adopted by the Athenians 399 before Christ. Before
this, the Attic alphabet, consisting of 16 letters, was in use. Alps. See
Accidents. Alresford, Hampshire, totally destroyed by fire, 1660; twice since.
Altamont, Irish earldom of, created 1771. (name Brown.) Altars, instituted by
Pope Sixtus I. about 117; first christian one erected in Britain, 634; first
consecrated by pope Sylvester, 1334. Amazons, The, made an irruption into
Attica, about 1209 before Christ; a queen of, visited Alexander the Great and
cohabited with him 13 days, in hopes of having issue by him, but she died soon
after her return home, about 330 before Christ. Ambassadors first protected
here by law, March 1709. Amberley castle, Sussex, built, 1374. Ambersbury
nunnery, Wilts, built 976. America first discovered by Columbus, 1492; South
America completely, by Vesp. Americanus, a Florentine, 1497; North America, by
John Cabot, a Venetian, 1497; settled in James the First's reign; pacquet-boats
first established there between Old and New Spain, with the liberty of trading,
1764; free trade opened between Old and New Spain, by the Streights of
Magellan, 1774; several viceroys appointed in Spanish America, 1776; thirteen
colonies united and declared themselves independent of the English crown, July
4, 1776. Amherst of Holmesdale, Barony of, created 1776. (name Amherst.)
Amicable Society, Sergeants Inn, chartered, 1706. Amphitheatre at Rome, planned
by Augustus, and built by Vespasian. Amsterdam opera house burnt, 7 persons
lost, 1772. Anabaptist meeting house, The first, established in London, 1640.
Anabaptists first appeared under Storck and Muntzer in Germany, 1525; appeared
in England, 1549. They reject infant baptism, and baptize by immersion at years
of discretion. See Independents, Muncer. Four Dutchmen burnt for heresy 1538;
some imprisoned for a plot against Oliver Cromwell, 1657; an insurrection of
them under Venner, Jan. 6, 1661. Analy, Irish barony, created 1766. (name
Gore.) Ananias, and his wife Sapphira, struck dead, 33. Anathema, The first,
brought into the church, 387. Anatomy restored by Jacobus Carpensis, 1550; of
plants made known by Grew, 1680. Ancaster, Dukedom of, created 1715. (name
Bertie.) Anchorets, Order of, instituted, 1255. Anchors of ships invented, 578.
Andronicus Livius, the Latin comic poet, his first piece was represented 240
before Christ. This is the epoch of Latin poetry. Anglesey, the Mona of the
Romans, reduced by Julius Agricola, 76. Angria the pirate, and his family,
seized, 1750. He had built a fort on the coast of Malabar. Ann, daughter of Sir
Thomas Boleyn, by a daughter of the duke of Norfolk, a arried to Henry VIII.
Nov. 1532; crowned, June 1, 1533; tried by order of the king on a charge of
incest with her brother, and, though not guilty, convicted and beheaded, May
14, 1536, aged 29. Ann of Cleves, Henry VIIIth's fourth wife, died at Chelsea,
July 15, 1557. Ann, queen, second daughter of James II. by Anne Hyde, born Feb.
6, 1665; married to the prince of Denmark, 1683; lost her son George duke of
Gloucester by a fever, July 29, 1700, aged 11; succeeded her brother-in-law,
William III. on the throne, March 8, 1702; settled the first fruits and tenths
on the poor clergy, 1704; crowned, April 23 following; died, August 1, 1714, of
a fever and lethargy, aged 49, and was succeeded by her second cousin, George
I. elector of Hanover. Annandale, Scots marquisate of, created 1701. (name
Johnston.) Annunciation of the Virgin Mary, five years before the vulgar date
of the Christian era. Day first observed, 350. Anointing, first used at the
coronation of Alfred, 872. Edgar was the first anointed king in Scotland, 1097.
Anthems first introduced, 386. Antigallican privateer's prize detained at
Cadiz, 1757. Antigua settled by the English, 1666; an attempt was made to
settle it 34 years before. Antinomians, The, teach that the law is of no use
under the gospel dispensation, and say, that good works do not further, nor
evil works hinder, salvation; that a child of God cannot sin, etc. Antioch, in
Syria, built by Seleucus after the battle of Ipsus, 300 before Christ; 100,000
people of, killed by the Jews in one day, 145 before Christ. Antiochus, son of
the illustrious Antiochus, massacred 80,000 of the people of Jerusalem for
revolting, 170; put Eleazer and the seven brothers, known by the name of the
Maccabees, to death, 168; died in the greatest torments, 164 before Christ.
Antiochus, son of Seleucus, fell sick, the cause of which his physician
discovered to be a violent passion for his mother-in-law, on which Seleucus
resigned his wife and part of his kingdom to his son, 204 before Christ.
Antrim, Irish ealdom of, created 1620. (name Macdonnel.) Antwerp, a rising of
the Protestants there, 1571. Apocalypse excluded from the sacred canon, by the
churches to which it is addressed, in the council of Laodicea, about 360;
received again by that of Trent, 1545. Apocrypha, History of, ends 135 before
Christ. Apollo, Temple of, founded, 434 before Christ. Apothecaries exempted
from civil offices, 1712. Apparitors first instituted, about 1234. Appeals
first made from England to the Pope, 1138; forbidden, 1532. Appian way from
Rome to Capua, made by Appius, 312 before Christ. App^e-trees, Two kinds of,
brought from Syria and Africa into Italy, 9 before Christ. Apricots and
Artichokes brought into England, 1578. Aqaitaine annexed to the crown of
France, 1370; title of Duke of, claimed by the crown of England ever since it
was conquered by Henry V. 1418. Arabians made no figure in history till 622;
when they took the name of Saracens; which see. Arbuthnot, Scots viscount,
title of, created 1641. (name Arbuthnot.) Archangel, The passage to, discovered
by the English, 1553, but not traded to till about 1569. Archdeacon, The first
appointed in England, was by Lanfranc, Abp. of Canterbury, about 1075. Archer
of Umberslade, Barony of, created 1747. (name Archer.) Archery introduced by
the Saxons, in the time of Vortigern; dropped immediately after the conquest, but
revived by the Crusaders, they having felt the effects of it from the Saracens,
who, probably, derived it from the Parthians. See Bow, Yew-trees. It Is
singular, that all the statutes for the encouragement of archery, are since the
invention of gunpowder and firearms. Ardchattan priory, Scotland, founded
1230. Arden, Irish barony, created 1770. (name Perceval) Areopagus, The famous
senate of, established at Athens in the reign of Cecrops, 1509 before Christ.
See Athens, Cecrops. Argonautic expedition. See Ilium. Argos, The kingdom of,
began under Inachus, 1856 before Christ, i. e. 1080 years before the first
Olympiad. Argyle, Marquis of, beheaded in Scotland, for rebelling against
England, May 27, 1661. Argyle, Earl of, invaded Scotland with about 2500 men,
May, 1685; defeated and executed at Edinburgh June 30 following. Argyle, Scots
dukedom of, created 1701. (name Campbell.) Arians arose from their leader
Arius, who died 336. They disbelieve the Trinity, deny the divinity of Christ,
and reject the Athanasian creed. The doctrine of, the ruling religion in the
west, 493; exploded in Spain, 589. Aristodemus, king of the Messenians, killed
his own daughter to save his country, about 715 before Christ, and about six
years after killed himself upon her grave. Arithmetic, first brought into
Europe from Arabia, 991; decimal, invented by Regiomontanus. Armada, the
Spanish; 130 ships, with 50,000 men, destined to invade England, arrived in the
channel, July, 1588, but was broken by a storm. Armagh, founded by St. Patrick,
472; constituted an Archbishopric, together with Dublin, Cashel, and Tuam, by
Cardinal Papyro, 1142. Armenia, part of the Median empire till 224 before
Christ; now subject to the Turks and Persians. Arminianism, taught by Vorstius,
the disciple of Arminius, 1611. The Arminians or Remonstrants teach, that
difference in sentiment neither hinders nor procures salvation. They contend
for universal redemption; declaring salvation possible to all, on a compliance
with that condition on which the whole of salvation depends. They in general
espouse the doctrines of the church of England. Arms. See Muskets, Guns,
Swords. Arms, French, first quartered with the English, 1358. Arms, coats of,
came into vogue in the reign of Richard I. and hereditary in families about
1192. They took their rise from the knights painting their banners with
different figures, to distinguish them in the crusades. See Heraldry. Army,
first standing one in modern times, established by Charles VII. of France,
1445. Introduced here by Charles I. 1638; declared illegal, together with royal
guards, 1679. See Troops, Yeomen. Arran, Irish earldom of, created 1762. (name
Gore.) Arras, taken by the French from the Spaniards, Aug. 1654. Array, First
commission of, to raise a militia, issued, 1422. Arfacidae, assassins, near
Tire, cut off by the Tartars, 1257. Arthur, Henry the Seventh's eldest son,
born Sept. 20, 1486; married to Gatharine, the king of Spain's fourth daughter,
Nov. 12, 1501; died April 2, 1502. Artichokes. See Apricots. Articles of
religion, 42 published by the clergy without consent of parliament, 1552; the
42 reduced to 39, Jan. 1563; received the authority of parliament, 1571; royal
declaration prefixed to them, first published, 1628; 104 drawn up by archbishop
Usher for Ireland, 1615; established and received, 1634. Artificers and
manufacturers prohibited from leaving England, 1736. Artillery first brought
into the field by Bart. Coglione. See Guns. Artillery Company instituted for
weekly military exercises, 1610. Arundel of Wardour, barony of, created 1605.
(name Arundel.) Arundel castle, Sussex, built by the Saxons; town chartered by
queen Elizabeth. Arundel, Earldom of, held by prescription; of course the
oldest in the realm. Arundelian tables, containing the chronology of ancient
history, from 1582 to 355 before Christ, said to have been sculptured 264
before Christ; found in the isle of Paros, about 1610; purchased by Lord
Arundel, and given to the university of Oxford. Ascension day established about
68. Ascue, Ann, burnt for heresy (denying the real presence) 1546. She was
first racked at the Tower, in the presence of the Lord Chancellor, who,
throwing off his gown, drew the rack himself so severely, that he almost tore
her body asunder. Ashbrook, Irish viscount, title of, created 1751. (name
Flower.) Ashburnham, Earldom of, created 1730. (name Ashburnham.)
Ashby-de-la-Zouch castle, Leicester, built long before 1399; demolished 1648.
Ashdown church built, 1020. Ash Wednesday, Fast of, instituted by pope Felix
III. 487. Asparagus first introduced into England, 1602. Assassination plot,
for killing king William in his way from Richmond, discovered, Feb. 1696.
Assassinations were countenanced in France and Scotland, during the 14th, 15th,
and 16th centuries, and not abolished till near the close of the 17th. See Rem.
Occur. anno 1407, 1414, and Murder. Assize, Judges of. See Circuits.
Assurance-office, charter granted to the London and the Royal, 1716. See
Insurance. Assyria, Kingdom of, began under Ninus, called Assure, 2084 before
Christ, lasted about 1264 years, ended with Sardanapalus. Out of its ruins were
formed the Assyrians of Babylon, those of Nineveh, and the kingdom of the
Medes. Conquered by the Turks, 1637. Aston, Scots barony of, created 1628.
(name Aston.) Astronomy, first studied by the Moors, and brought into Europe,
1201; modern, taken up by Copernicus. Books of astronomy and geometry all
destroyed, as infected with magic, 5 Edward VI. 1552. Athelstan made king of
Kent, by his father Ethelwolf, 848; died about 853. Athelstan, the natural son
and successor of Edward the Elder, crowned king of England at Kingston, 925;
but opposed by one of Edward's sons, by his second queen; invaded Scotland, and
brought Constantine to subjection, 936; reduced the Welsh, 939; and Exeter and
Scilly, 940; died at Gloucester, 941, and was succeeded by his brother, Edmund
I. son of Edward, by his last queen. Athens, one of the twelve cities in
Attica, founded by the Cecrops, 1571; kingdom of, ended in Codrus, on which
they were governed by Archons, Medon being the first, 1070; governed by annual
archons, of which Creons was the first, 684; city taken by Xerxes, 480; fell
into the hands of the Romans 87 before Christ The Venetians got possession of
it, 1204; the Turks, 1687. Athlone, Irish earldom of, created 1691. (name
Ginkell.) Athole, Scots dukedom of, created 1703. (name Murray.) Attila, with
his Huns, of which he was king, 434; ravaged the Roman empire, 447; died 454.
Attraction, the idea of, first given by Kepler, 1605. Aubern, Wilts, burnt (72
houses), Sept. 12, 1760. Auction, A duty on goods sold by, laid on, 1777.
Audley of Heleigh, Barony of, created 1296. (name Thickness.) Audley, Lord,
beheaded for sodomy, and assisting his footman to ravish his lady, 1631.
Augmentation office established, 1704. Augustine, St. sent by pope Gregory to
convert the Britons, landed in the isle of Thanet, 597; soon after made the
first archbishop of Canterbury; died 604. Augustine's, St. monastery,
Canterbury, founded 605. Augustine friars first appeared in England, about
1250; established by pope Alexander IV. 1256; their church granted to German
Lutherans, 1551. Augustines; their order completed, 1256. Aurelian, Roman
emperor, murdered by Mucanor his general, 275. Aurora frigate lost in her
passage to India, 1771. The crew perished. Aurora Borealis, first seen, 1715;
Electricity of, discovered by Wideburg at Jena, 1769. Austria was the Belgic
Gaul of the Romans; conquered afterward by the Avarians, in about 600.
Austrian family, present one, began in Germany, 1273. Avignon. See Pope.
Aylesford, Earldom of, created 1714. (name Finch.) Aylmer of Balrath, Irish
barony of, created 1718. (name Aylmer.) Aylnmouth castle, Northumberland, built
by Ida, first king of Northumberland. Aylsbury, Berks, incorporated, 1554.
Aysgarth bridge, Yorkshire, built 1539. Azores, The islands of, first seen,
1449.
B.
BABEL, Tower of, began to be built 2247 before Christ, which continued
building 40 years; when God confounded the builders language, and dispersed
them into different nations. Thence arose the difference of languages, the
dispersion of the people, and the forming of empires. From Japhet, the eldest
son of Noah, sprung the inhabitants of the north of Europe and Asia, as well as
those of the west. From Shem, came the people of the east, as also those of
Israel; and from Ham, descended the Canaanites, Philistines, Egyptians, and the
ancient possessors of Africa. See Nimrod. Babington, and 13 others, hanged for
conspiring to assassinate queen Elizabeth, 1586. Babylon, Kingdom of, founded
by Nimrod 2640; revolted from Darius, but was recovered two years after, by a
stratagem of Zopyrus, 512 before Christ. See Cyrus. Baden, Congress at, 1714.
Baeotian war commenced 3^9, ended 366 before Christ. Bagdad built by the Caliph
Almansur, 762. Bagot, of Bagot's Bromley, Barony of, created 1780. (name
Bagot.) Bahama Islands not known to the English till 1667; seized from pirates
and settled, 1718. Baize, The manufactory of, brought over from Flanders and
settled at Colchester, with peculiar parliamentary privileges, 12 Charles II.
1660. Balambangan ceded to the English, 1762. Balbeck built in 14; destroyed by
an earthquake, Dec. 5, 1759. Balcarras, Scots earldom of, created 1651. (name
Lindsay.) Baliol College, Oxford, founded by John Baliol, 1262. (12 fellows.)
Ballenden, Scots barony, created 1661. (name Ballenden.) Balmerino. See
Kilmarnock. Balshazzar saw the hand writing on the wall, 538 before Christ.
Bamborough castle, Northumberland, built by Ina, 559. Banbury, Oxfordshire,
chartered by queen Mary; anew by James I. Band, Lawyers, first introduced by
Judge Finch, under James I. The clergyman's came into use only with the
Puritans, on the fall of episcopacy, under Cromwell. Banff, Scots barony of,
created 1642. (name Ogilvie.) Bangor, of Castleward, Irish visc. created 1780.
(name Ward.) Bangor bishopric founded, and cathedral built, about 516; deanery
erected about 116^. Bank stock, three per cent. ann. created 1726; three per
cent. consol. ditto. 1731; three per cent. red. ditto, 1746; three per cent.
ann. payable at the South Sea house, 1751; three and a half per cent. ann.
ditto, 1758; long ann. ditto, 1761; four per cent. cons. ditto, 1762. Banks
first established by the Lombard Jews in Italy. The name is derived from Banco,
bench, benches being erected in the marketplace for the exchange of money,
etc. The first public bank was at Venice, about 1550; bank of England
established, 1693; their notes, at 20 per cent. discount, 1696; house built,
1732. Old Scotch bank created, 1695; royal ditto, 1727. See Paper Credit.
Banqueting House, Whitehall, now the chapel, built 1607. Banquo, a Scotch
general, invited by Macbeth to a banquet, and there murdered by him, 1050. See
Macbeth. Banns. See Marriage. Bantam, Eight ambassadors of, arrived in England,
1682. Baptism practiced in the Christian church, by immersion, till about 100;
sponsors first instituted in a time of persecution, 130. See Godfathers.
Barbados, first English settlement in the West Indies, 1625; almost totally
destroyed by a hurricane, Oct. 10, 11, 1780. Barbary merchants. See Turkey
company. Barbers, the first profession brought to Rome from Sicily, 299 before
Christ; barbers and surgeons in London made one company, 1540; separated again,
1744. Their poll, by way of sign, is a corruption from a head or poll exhibited
at their doors. See Rem. Occur. 1422. Barcelona is said to have been built by
Hamilcar; (see Hamilcar), reduced by Louis XIV. of France, 1714. Bards, Welsh,
whose province was to celebrate the praises of heroes in songs, at
entertainments; were reformed and regulated by Gryffyth ap Conan, king of
Wales, 1078. See Minstrels, Tale-tellers, Harpers. Barebone parliament, so
called from the name of a principal member of that parliament, made up by
Cromwell. Bark, Jesuits, its virtues discovered by some Indians, 1500; brought
to France by cardinal Lugo, a Jesuit, 1650. Barling abbey, Lincolnshire, built
1132. Barnabites, Foundation of, in France, by a bull of Clement VII. 1533.
Barnewall, of Kingston, Irish viscount, title of, created 1646. (name
Barnewall.) Barnstable, Archdeaconry of, erected before 1143. Barnwell castle,
Northamptonshire, built 1132. Barometers, invented by Toricelli, a Florentine,
1626. Baron, Title of, called by the Saxons, Thane, first given in England by
patent, to Richard II. 1388. Baronets first created, 1611; ditto of Scotland,
May 28, 1625; the revival of their ribbon, 1775. Barons attended parliament in
complete armor in Henry III.'s reign. Barricades, Day of, in French history
is, when the Duke of Guise's entrance was opposed by Henry III. 1558. See
Guise. Barrington of Ardglass, Irish viscount, title of, created 1720. (name
Barrington.) Barristers first appointed by Edward I. in parliament, 1291. See
Inns of Court. Barrymore, Irish earldom of, created 1627. (name Barry.)
Bartholomew monastery, near Smithfield, built, 1100. Bartholomew, St. Island
of, taken from the French, 1746; restored to them, 1763; retaken, 1781.
Bartholomew fair, London, restrained, 1750; abolished, 1755. Barton, a
Scotchman, having obtained a letter of marque against the Scots, turned pirate,
and committed depredations on the English; but lord Surrey's sons sailed out,
fought him, and slew him, 1513. Basingwerk monastery, of the Cistertian order,
Flintshire, founded about 1131. Batchelors at 25 taxed, 1695; 12 l. 10s. for a
duke; a common person, 1s. Bateman, Irish viscount, Title of, created 1725.
(name Bateman) Bathurst of Batlesden, earldom of, created 1772. (name
Bathurst.) Bath, once a Roman colony; springs of, discovered 871 before Christ;
its bishopric founded, 905; archdeaconry erected, 1106; deanery ditto, 1135;
being dissolved, it was added to Wells, 1545, (See Wells); city chartered by
queen Elizabeth, burnt, 1116; again, 1137. Bath, W. Pulteney, Earl of, struck
out of the list of privy counselors, July 1, 1731; died 1764, aged 80. Bath,
Order of the, instituted at the coronation of Henry IV. re-established, 1725.
Battering ram, testudo, and other military instruments, invented by Artemones,
441 before Christ. Battersey-bridge built, 1772. Battle, Trial by. See Combat.
Battle abbey, Sussex, founded where Harold was slain by William I. 1066.
BATTLES before CHRIST. Battle of Actium, in Epirus, an engagement at sea; which
rendered Augustus master of the Roman empire, Sept. 2, 31. See Olympiads. --
Arbela, when Alexander conquered Persia, 331. -- Cannae, when Hannibal defeated
the Romans, killed 40,000, of whom 2,700 were knights, and took 3,0 0
prisoners, 216. -- Chaeronea, 338. -- Eurymedon, 470. -- Ipsus, in which
Ptolemy, Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Cassander, were united against Antigonus,
301. -- Irsus, when Darius was beaten, and lost 100,000 men, 333. -- Leuctra,
when the Thebans beat the Lacedaemonians, and got the dominion of Greece, 373.
Battle of Mantinea, when Epaminondas was slain, 363. -- Marathon, when the
Athenians conquered the Barbarians, 490. -- Pharsalia, when Julius Caesar
defeated Pompey, 47. -- Philippi, when Brutus and Cassius were defeated by
Octavius Caesar, and M. Antony, which terminated the R^an republic, 41. --
River Granicus, when Alexander beat the Persians, 334. -- Salamis, which
delivered Greece from the incursion of the Medes, 480.
BATTLES after CHRIST. Battle of Agincourt, between the French and English,
when Henry V. conquered; 10,000 of the French were killed, and 14,000 taken
prisoners. The English loft only 40, October 25, 1415. The French had four
times as many men as the English. Seven princes and 8000 French gentlemen fell
in the conflict: the Duke of Orleans was taken prisoner, and confined in
England till 1440, when he was ransomed for 120,000 crowns. -- Alban's, St. the
first battle between the houses of York and Lancaster, in which the former was
superior, and, without losing any men, slew above 5000 of their enemies, May
22, 1455. The king of England was wounded and taken. -- Alban's, St. between
the Yorkists, under the earl of Warwick, and the Lancastrians under queen
Margaret, when the queen conquered, and 2500 of the Yorkists were slain, Feb.
2, 1461. -- Albany, America, Near, when Genesis Burgoyne and 3500 men, surrendered
prisoners to the American General Gates, Oct. 15, 1777. -- Alcazar, where
Sebastian, king of Portugal, was killed, 1577. -- Alderton-moor, Yorkshire,
when the royalists routed the parliament forces, June 29, 1643. -- Almanza, in
Spain, when the confederates were defeated by the French and Spaniards, April
25, 1707. -- Alnwick, when the earl of Northumberland, by wounding the king of
Scots in the eye, acquired the name of Piercy, 1092; again; 1174. Battle of
Anjou, where the duke of Clarence, and 1500 English, were slain by the earl of
Buchan, 1421. -- Argentaria, in Alsace, between the Alemanni, German
barbarians, and the Romans under the emperor Gratian, when the former were
beaten, with the loss of 35,000 men out of 40,000, May 378. -- Arques, near
Dieppe, Sept. 22, 1598. -- Ascalon, Judea, when Richard I. defeated Saladin's
army of 300,000 men, 1191. -- Ashdown, between Canute and Edmund, when Edmund
conquered, 1016. -- Aughrim, in Ireland, between the French and English, when
the enemy lost 7000, the English only 600 killed, and 960 wounded, July 12,
1691. -- Banbury, between the rebels and royalists, when the first were
victorious, July 26, 1469. -- Bannockburn, between 30,000 Scots and 200,000
English, when the English were routed, with the loss of 50,000 slain and 30,000
prisoners, June 25, 1314. -- Barham-moor, between the royalists and parliament,
when the former were beaten, March 29, 1643. -- Barnet, between the earl of
Warwick and Edward IV. when the earl was slain, and his army defeated: about
3000 of the vanquished fell, and 1500 of the conquerors, April 14, 1471. --
Near Barnet, Easter Day, between the houses of York and Lancaster, 1468. --
Beauge, between the French under the Dauphin, and the English, when the English
were defeated, duke of Clarence was killed, April 3, and the 1421. See
Clarence. -- Belgrade, between the Germans and the Turks, when the latter were
beaten, with the loss of 40,000 men, 1456; between the Hungarians and the
Turks, when prince Eugene defeated the Turks, July 16, 1717. -- Benburg, in
Ireland, 1646. -- Bergen, between the French and English, under prince
Ferdinand, when the former were defeated with the loss of about 2000 men, April
13, 1759. Battle of Berwick, when the Scots were defeated, Nov. 1378. --
Blackheath, between the rebels and royalists, when the first were beaten, June
22, 1497. See Flammoc. -- Blackwater in Ireland, 1597. -- Blenheim, between the
English and the French, when the latter were defeated, with the loss of near
2^,000 killed, and 13,000 prisoners; the victor ^st only 5000, and 8000 wounded
and take ^risoners, August 3, 1704. -- Bioreheath, between the earl of Sarum
and lord Audley, when Sarum conquered, Sept. 23, 1459. -- Boston, in America,
between the rebels and the royalists, when the former were routed, June 1^,
1775. -- Bosworth, between Richard III. and the earl of Richmond, when Richard
III. fell, Aug. 22, 1485. Richard lost 1200 men out of 13,000, Richmond 100 out
of 5000. -- Bothwell-bridge, between the royalists under the duke of Monmouth,
and rebel Scots, when the latter were routed, 700 of whom were killed, and 1200
taken prisoners, June 22, 1679. -- Bovines, near Lisle, between the king of
France, with 50,000 men, and the emperor Otho, allied with England, with near
200,000 men, when France was victorious, July 25, 1214. -- Boyne, between king
William and king James, when the latter was defeated, with the loss of 1500
men: king William lost about 500, July 1, 1690. -- Bradockdown, between the
parliament forces and royalists, when the former were defeated, 1643. --
Breeches, in Italy, 1735. -- Bunker's-hill. See Boston. -- Camden, S. Carolina,
between 2000 royalists, under Earl Cornwallis, and 6000 rebels, under Genesis
Gates, when the latter were beaten, with the loss of about 300 royalists; 1000
rebels killed and 1500 taken prisoners, Aug. 16, 1780. Battle of Cerisoles in
Piedmont, between the French and Imperialists, when the latter were beaten, and
10,000 slain, April 11, 1544. -- Chalgravefield, Bucks, when Hampden was slain,
June 1643. -- Cherington, between the royalists and the parliament forces, when
the latter, under Sir William Waller, were victorious, spring, 1644. --
Chesterfield, when Baliol king of Scots was taken prisoner, with all the
records, regalia, etc. and brought to London, 1296. -- Chrysopolis, between
Constantine and Licinius, when the latter was defeated, with the slaughter of
25,000 men, 323. -- Cibalis, between Constantine and Licinius, when the latter
was defeated with the loss of 20,000 men, Oct. 8, 314. -- Courtras, France,
between the French under the Comte d'Artois, and the Flemings, rebels, when
20,000 French lost their lives, 1302; again, Oct. 20, 1586. -- Crecy, between
England and France, when the latter was defeated with the loss of near 36,000
men. Many of the principal nobility of France were slain in this action, as
were the kings of Bohemia and Majorca: the Bohemian motto was Ich dien, I
serve; which the prince of Wales, who was instrumental in this victory,
immediately adopted in memorial of it. Very few English were lost, August 26,
1346. -- Crevant, in Burgundy, between France and England, when the latter was
victorious; 3000 Scots in the service of France were slain, June, 1423. --
Cropredy-bridge, between the royalists and the parliament forces, under Sir
William Waller, when the latter were defeated, autumn, 1644. -- Culloden, under
the duke of Cumberland, between the royalists and rebels, when the latter were
defeated; this put an end to the rebellion; April 16, 1746. -- Danes-moor, near
Banbury, between the royalists and rebels, where the former were defeated, and
5000 Welsh were slain; and for which the earl of Pembroke and his brothers were
beheaded, July 26, 1469. Battle of Donavert, when Marlborough defeated the
French and Bavarians, July 2, 1704. -- St. Denis, in France, where Montmorency
routed the Calvinists, 1567; another in 1678. -- Dettingen, between England,
under George II. and France, when the former was successful; the French lost,
killed, wounded, and prisoners, about 5000 men; the English, etc. about 3000.
June 26, 1743. -- Dumblain, between the royalists, under the duke of Argyle,
and the rebels under the earl of Mar, November 12, 1715. -- Dunbar, between
Edward I. and the Scots, when the former subdued Scotland; the Scots lost
20,000 men, April 27, 1296. -- Dunbar, between Cromwell and the Scots, when the
former was victorious, and killed 3000, and took 9000 men, though the Scots
were double the number, Sept. 3, 1650. -- Dunes, between England and Spain,
when the Spaniards were totally defeated, Aug. 1658. -- Dreux, in France, 1562.
-- Durham, between England and Scotland, when the English were headed by queen
Philippa, and David, king of Scots, was taken prisoner, and lost 20,000 men,
Oct. 17, 1346. David was released, after 10 years captivity, for 100,000 marks.
-- Echeren, Near, between the confederates and French, June 16, 1703. --
Edgehill, between the royalists and the parliament forces, when 5000 were slain
on both sides, Oct. 23, 1642. -- Erne-river, between the English and Scots,
when the latter lost above 12,000 men, the former scarcely 30, August 11, 1332.
-- Evesham, between the royalists, under prince Edward, and the rebel barons
under the earl of Leicester, when the former were victorious, and the earl was
slain, August 4, 1265. Battle of Falkirk, when 40,000 Scots were slain, July
22, 1298; again, between the rebels under the pretender, and the I^yalists
under general Hawley, when the latter were defeated, Jan. 17, 1746. -- Fife,
when Cromwell beat the Scots, and took 1200 prisoners, July 1651. -- Floudon,
between the English and the Scots, when the latter were defeated, and the king
of Scots, and most of the Scots nobility were slain, Sept. 9, 1513. --
Fontenoy, between the English under the duke of Cumberland, and the French,
when the former were defeated, with the loss of about 12,000 men on each side,
April 30, 1745. -- Glasgow, 1568. -- Glenlivat, Scotland, between the king's
party and the popish rebels, when the former were defeated, Oct. 3, 1594. --
Glensheil, in Scotland, June 10, 1719. -- Gravelines, 1558. -- Graebenstein,
between the allied army, under prince Ferdinand, and the French, when the
latter were defeated, with the loss of 2550 men, including 162 officers; the
allies lost only 300 men, June 24, 1762. -- Greville, when the English lost 900
men, and were defeated, April 1423. -- Guilford, America, between the royalists
under Lord Cornwallis, and the rebels, when the latter were defeated, March 15,
1781. -- Guostalla, where the king of Sardinia defeated the Imperialists; 15000
were killed, Aug. 19, 1734. -- Hadrianople, between the emperors Constantine
and Licinius, when the former, with 12 horsemen, beat 150,000 men, July 3, 323;
at ditto, between the Goths and Romans, under the emperor Valens, when the
latter were beaten, and Valens killed, Aug. 9, 378. -- Halidon-hill, near
Berwick, between the English, under Edward III. and the Scots under Douglas the
regent, when the latter were defeated with the loss of near 30,000 men, whereas
the English lost only one knight, one esquire, and thirteen private men, July
19, 1333. Battle, near Hambildon, 1. 02. -- Harlaw, in Scotland, 1410. --
Hastings, between the Normans, under William the Conqueror, and the English
under Harold, when Harold was slain, and the kingdom of England became the
reward of the conqueror, Oct. 14, 1066. William had three horses killed under
him, and lost near 15,000 men; the English lost more. -- Herrings, when the
French were defeated, Feb. 12, 1429. -- Hexham, between the houses of York and
Lancaster, when the latter were defeated, May 13, 1464. -- Hockstet, when the
duke of Bavaria was defeated, Sept. 20, 1703. -- Homeldon, on the borders of
England, between the Scots, under Douglas, and the English under the Percys,
when the former were totally routed, 1402. -- Hopton-heath, near Stafford,
between the royalists and parliament, when the latter conquered, March 19,
1643. -- Horncastle, between the parliament forces and royalists, when the
former were victorious, 1643. -- Immae, near Antioch, between Elagabalus and
the emperor Macrinus, when the latter conquered, and became emperor, June 7,
218. -- Islip-bridge, near Oxford, where Cromwell defeated the royalists, April
24, 1645. -- Jarnac, in France, where the duke of Anjou defeated the
Calvinists, March 13, 1569. -- Killicranky, Scotland, when king James's
adherents were defeated, May 26, 1689. -- Kilrush, in Ireland, 1642. --
Knocknoness, in Ireland, Nov. 1647. -- Knocktow, Ireland, 1491. -- Laffield,
between the confederate army, under the duke of Cumberland, and the French,
under marshal Saxe, when the latter conquered; the French lost 10,000, the
confederates only 6000, July 20, 1747. Battle of Landen, where William was
defeated by the French, with great slaughter, July 19, 1693. -- Langside,
Scotland, between Mary queen of Scots and the regent, when the latter was
victorious, and Mary's fate determined, May 13, 1568. -- Lansdown, between the
parliament forces and the royalists, the latter beaten, July 5, 1643. -- Largs,
in Scotland, the Norwegians finally defeated, 1263. -- Leipsic, when the king
of Sweden defeated the Imperialists under Count Tilly, who lost 9000 men, the
Swedes only 3500, 1631. -- Lens, Flanders, between the French under Conde, and
the Spaniards, when the latter were routed, with the loss of 3000 killed, and
6000 prisoners, Aug. 20, 1648. -- Jews, between the barons under the earl of
Leicester, and the royalists under the king, when the former were victorious,
and the king was taken prisoner, May 14, 1264. -- Lincoln, in which Stephen was
taken prisoner, Feb. 2, 1141; again, when the Dauphin of France, who was
invited to the crown by the barons, was defeated by the royalists, May 19,
1217. -- Liorens, between the Spaniards and French, in which the former
sustained a considerable loss, 1645. -- Liscarrol, in Ireland, 1642. -- Long
Island, America, between the king's forces and the rebels, when the former were
victorious, at the expense of 55 killed, and 245 wounded; the rebels had 2200
killed and wounded, and 1100 taken prisoners, August 27, 1776. -- Lutzen, in
which Gustavus, king of Sweden, was killed, and when the Swedes beat the
Imperialists, who lost 10,000 men, Nov. 6, 1633. -- Luzara, in Italy, between
the Imperialists and the French and Spaniards, August 15, 1702. -- Lions,
between the emperor Severus, and Niger and Albinus, when the two latter were
slain, and Severus placed on the throne, 193; 150,000 Romans were engaged in
this battle. Battle of Maidstone, where the rovalists were defeated by the
parliament's forces, May 31, 1648. -- Malplaquet, between the allied army,
under the duke of Marlborough, and the French, under Bousslers, when the former
were victorious, but at the loss of 20,000 men, Sept. 11, 1709. -- Margentheim,
between the duke of Bavaria and Marshall Turenne, 1645. -- Marignan, between
the French under Francis I. and the Swifs, when the latter were beaten, with
the loss of 10,000 men, 1313. -- Marston-moor, between the parliament's forces,
under Cromwell, and the royalists, under prince Rupert, when the former were
victorious, July 2, 1644. -- Minden, between the allies, under prince
Ferdinand, and the French, under Contades, when the latter were defeated, with
the loss of 7000 men; the allies lost only 2000, August 1, 1759. -- Mohatz in
Hungary, when 300,000 Turks defeated the Hungarians, killed their king, and
destroyed 20,000 men, August 29, 1326. -- Moncontour, in France, Oct. 3, 1569.
-- Mortimer's-cross, between the Yorkists, under Edward duke of York, and the
Lancastrians, under the earl of Pembroke, when the latter were defeated, with
the loss of near 4000 men, 1461. -- Muldorf, in Bavaria, between the two rival
emperors of Germany, Lewis V. and Frederic III. when Frederic was defeated and
taken prisoner; 80,000 horse, and a proportionable number of foot, fell on both
sides, Sept. 25, 1322. -- Mulhausen, between the Imperialists, under Charles V.
and the Protestants, under the Elector of Saxony, when the latter was beaten,
taken prisoner, and lost 1200 men, the Imperialists only 50, 1547. -- Mursa, in
Hungary, between Constantius and Maxentius, when the former was beaten, with
the loss of 24,000 men; Constantius lost 30,000, Sept. 28, 351. --
Musseborough, Near, between the English and Scots, when the latter were
defeated, with the loss of 13,000 slain; the English lost only 60, Dec. 10,
1547. Battle of Narva, by Charles XII. of Sweden, over the Muscovites, Dec. 11,
1700. -- Naseby, when Charles I. was defeated by the parliament's forces under
general Fairfax, and lost all his papers, artillery, arms, and 5000 men, June
14, 1645. -- Newark, when the royalists conquered the parliament, and seized
3000 arms, March 22, 1644. -- Newbury, between the parliament's forces and the
royalists, Sept 20, 1643. The former conquered. -- Newbury, between the
parliament's forces and the royalists, when the latter were worsted, Oct. 27,
1644. -- Newcastle, where Charles I.'s army was defeated by the Scots, 1640. --
Newport, when the English and Dutch defeated the Spaniards, and flew 9000 men,
1600. -- Newtown Butlers, in Ireland, 1689. -- Nicopolis, between the Tor^ and
the Germans with these, (...), with the loss of 30,000 men; the Turks lost
60,000, 1420. -- Nisbet, when 10,000 Scots were slain, 1402. -- Normandy, when
the English were defeated, and lost 1500 men, April 1430. -- Northampton,
between York and Lancaster, when the king was defeated by the duke of York, and
made prisoner, with the loss of 10,000 men, July 19, 1460. -- Otterburn,
between the English, under Hotspur, and the Scots, under the earl of Douglas,
when slain, the former was taken prisoner, and the latter July 31, 1388. This
battle was called Chevy-chace. -- Oudenard, between the allies, under the duke
of marlborough, and the French, under the duke of Burgundy, when the latter
were routed, with the loss of 12,000 men, the allies lost only about ^000, June
30, 1708. -- Ourigues, Spain, when five Saracen princes were defeated by
Alphonsus I. earl of Portugal, who took Lisbon, and was proclaimed the first
king of Portugal, 1139. Thence the present arms of Portugal, viz. five moors
heads. Battle of Parma, between France and Germany, when the Imperial commander
Merci was killed, with 10,000 men, June 29, 1734. -- Patay, under Joan of Arc,
when the English were defeated, April, 1429. -- Pavia in Italy, between the
Imperialists, and the French under Francis I. when the French were beaten
(10,000 men killed on both sides), and Francis taken prisoner, Feb. 24, 1525.
-- Penalva, in Spain, between the Spaniards and allies, 1710. -- Pentland-hill,
Scotland, where 500 presbyterians were slain, Nov. 27, 1666. -- Perth, between
the royalists under the earl of Montrose, and the Covenanters, under lord
Elcho, when the former obtained a complete victory, 1645. -- Peterwarden,
between the Hungarians and the Turks, when the Turks were defeated, August 5,
1714. -- Philips-Norton, between the king's troops, who were defeated, and the
duke of Monmouth, June 21, 1685. -- Pinkey, near Edinburgh, between England,
under the protector, and the Scots, when the latter were defeated, with the
loss of 10,000 men, the English lost only 200, Sept 10, 1547. -- Plains of
Abraham at Quebec, when it was taken by Wolf, Sept. 13, 1759. -- Poictiers,
between the English, under the prince of Wales, with 8000 men, and the French,
under king John, with 80,000, when the latter were routed, and the king taken
prisoner, Sept. 19, 1356. The French lost 6000 men, the English scarce any. --
Pontorson, when the English defeated the French, 1427. -- Prague, when the
Elector Palatine was defeated, and obliged to fly to Holland for shelter, 1620.
-- Preston, between the parliament's forces and the royalists, when the latter
were routed, Aug. 17, 1648. Battle of Preston-pans, between the royalists under
Sir John Cope, and the rebels, under the Pretender, when the latter were
victorious, Sept. 21, 1745. -- Pultawa, when Charles XII. was totally defeated
by the Czar, June 27, 1709. -- Quebec, Near, April 28, 1760. -- Quintin, St.
when the duke of Savoy, governor of the Low Countries, defeated France, under
Montmorency, August 10, 1557. -- Raab, in Hungary, where the French defeated
the Turks, 1664. -- Ramilies, between the allies under the duke of Marlborough,
and the French, when the latter were defeated, with the loss of 14,000 men; the
allies lost only 3000, Whitsunday, 1706. -- Rathmines, in Ireland, 1649. --
Rosbach, November 5, 1757. -- Rosbach, between the French, under Charles V. and
the rebellious Flemings, under Barnevelle, when the Flemings were quelled, with
the loss of 40,000 men; the French did not lose 50, 1382. -- Ross, in Ireland,
March, 1643. -- Round-away-down, between the parliament and the royalists, July
13, and Sept. 8, 1643. The royalists conquered. -- Routon-heath, where Charles
I. was defeated, Sept. 26, 1645. -- Salcado, between the Castilians and Moors,
when 45,000 of the latter were slain, and only 20 Castilians, 1340. --
Saragossa, between the allies and the Spaniards, when king Philip was defeated,
Aug. 20, 1710. -- Sedan, in France, where the earl of Soissons defeated the
French army under Marshal Chatillon, but was slain, June, 1641. -- Sedgemoor,
when the duke of Monmouth was totally defeated by the king's troops, July 6,
1685. -- Selby, when the royalists met with a great defeat from the
parliament's forces, April 11, 1644. -- Sfravenstat, when the Poles totally
defeated the Russians, Feb. 12, 1706. -- Shatton, Cornwall, between the
royalists and parliament, when the latter were defeated, May 16, 16 3. Battle
of Shrewsbury, when the nobles were defeated, and young Hotspur slain, July 21,
1403. -- Solway Mo^s, where the Scots were defeated, Nov. 24, 1542. -- Spurs,
or Guinegate, between the English, under Henry VIII. and the French, when the
latter were beaten, August 16, 1513. The Gens-d'armes of France having made
more use of their spurs than their swords, it was called the battle of spurs.
-- Stamford, when Harold defeated the Danes, 1066; again, between the ro^s and
rebels, when the latter were defeated, with the loss of 10,000 men, March,
1470. -- Standard, The, at Northallerton, Aug. 22, 1138. -- Steinkirk, where
king William was defeated with great loss, July 24, 1692. -- Stoke, near
Newark, where Lambert Simnel, the impostor, was taken prisoner, and 4000 of his
party slain, June 6, 1487. -- Strasburg, between the German Barbarians, and the
Romans under Julian, when the former were beaten, with the loss of 6000 men,
August, 357. -- Tangier, between the English and Moors, which lasted 11 days,
Nov. 1679. -- Taunton, between the royalists and parliamentary forces, when the
former lost 1900 prisoners, and 2000 horses, June 10, 1645. -- Tewksbury, when
Henry's queen was defeated, his son taken prisoner, and 3000 men slain, by
Edward. The queen was sent to the Tower, but afterward ransomed by her father,
and the prince murdered in the presence of Edward, May 4, 1471. -- Tirlemont,
when Marlborough defeated the French, July 18, 1705. -- Torgau, November 3,
1760. -- Touton, between the Yorkists, under Edward IV. and the Lancastrians,
under the duke of Somerset, when the latter were defeated, Sunday, March 29,
1461; 36,776 fell on both sides. Battle of Turin, where the French were totally
defeated by prince Eugene, Sept. 7, 1706. -- Tyber, Banks of the, between
Constantine and Maxentius, when the latter was defeated, 312. See Constantine,
Maxentius. -- Verneuil, between the French and English, when the latter
conquered, with the loss of 1600 men. The French lost 4000, Aug. 27, 1424. --
Villa Viciosa, when the allies defeated Philip of Spain, Dec. 12, 1710. --
Wakefield, between the Yorkists, under the duke of York, and the Lancastrians,
under queen Margaret, when the former were defeated with the loss of the duke
of York, and near 3000 men, Dec. 24, 1460. See Salisbury. -- Wakefield, between
the royalists and parliamentary forces, when 1500 men and 27 colors were
taken, and the royalists defeated, May 21, 1643. -- Warburg, when prince
Ferdinand defeated the French, 1760. -- Wigan, Lancashire, where the earl of
Derby, for the king, was defeated by Lilburn, Aug. 25, 1651. -- Winnedale,
between the allies, under Webb, and the French, when the latter were defeated,
with the loss of 6000 men; the allies lost only 912, Sept. 28, 1708. --
Worcester, between the royalists, under Charles II. and the parliamentary
forces, under Cromwell, when the former were defeated, Sept. 3, 1651. -- Zeuta,
Hungary, between the Germans, under prince Eugene, and the Turks, when the
latter were beaten, with the loss of the Grand Vizir, 27 Bassas, and 20,000 men
slain; the Germans did not lose 2000, Sept. 11, 1697. See Xantippus.
Bastwick, Dr. John, his ears cut off in the pillory, with Prynne and Burton,
for a libel against the bishops, 1637. Bavaria became an electorate, 1258;
surrendered to the Imperialists Nov. 10, 1704. Bayonets first used by the
French, 1693. Beards were never more worn in England than in the 10th century;
after the conquest they grew out of fashion; in the reigns of Edward VI. and
Mary, they were much in fashion again. See Rem. Occur. anno 1521. Beaufort,
Dukedom of, created 1682. (name Somerset.) Beaulieu, Barony of, created 1762.
(name Montagu.) Beaumaris, Anglesey, chartered by Edward I. castle built, 1295.
Becket, Thomas, born 1117, made chancellor to Henry II. 1155; made archbishop
of Canterbury, 1162; quarrelled with the king, 1163; impeached for contempt at
court, 1164; retired to France that year; reconciled to the king, July 22,
1170; murdered in the church at Canterbury, Dec. 29, 1171; canonized by
Alexander the Third, 1172; his bones enshrined in gold set with jewels, 1220;
afterward taken up, burnt, and thrown into the air in Henry VIIIth's time.
Bective, Irish earldom of, created 1766. (name Tailor.) Bedford, Dukedom of,
created, 1694. (name Russel.) Bedford priory built, 1000; bridge built, 1224.
Beechift priory, Derbyshire, founded, 1183. Beeston castle, Cheshire, built
between 1180 and 1232. Beer, none in England, till about 1524, though a drink
called ale seems to have been sold as early as 728; an excise on it first
granted, 1644. Begging friars established at Paris, 1587. Beguines, nuns, who
may marry, their order established, 1208. Beheading noblemen first used in
England, 1074. Belfast-bridge built, 1682. Belgae, The, were settled where
Switzerland and Franche Comte are now situated. See England. Belgrade taken by
the Turks, 1690; by the Imperialists, 1717. Behlaven, Scots barony of, created
1647. (name Hamilton.) Bellamont, Irish earldom of, created 1767. (name Coote.)
Belleisle taken from the French, June 7, 1761. Belles Lettres, or polite
learning, revived in Europe by Brunetto Latini, who founded the academy at
Florence for that purpose, 1272. Bellisle, Irish viscount, Title of, created
1468. (name Gore.) Bellmen first appointed in London, 1556. They were to ring
their bells at night, and cry, Take care of your fire and candle, be charitable
to the poor, and pray for the dead. Bells invented by Paulinus, bishop of Nola,
in Campania, about 400; first introduced into churches, as a defense against
thunder and lightning, about 900; first hung up in England at Croyland abbey,
Lincolnshire, 945; used to be baptized in churches, 1030. Belmore of
Castlecoole, Irish barony, created, 1780, (name Corry.) Belvedere, Irish
earldom of, created 1756. (name Rochfort.) Bencoolen taken and settled, 1682.
Benefices. See Patronage. Bennet-college, Cambridge, founded by Henry of
Monmouth, duke of Lancaster, 1351. (12 fellows.) Bergen-op-Zoom, taken by the
French, Sept. 16, 1747. Berkeley, Earldom of, created 1679. (name Berkeley.)
Berkeley of Stratton, Barony of, created 1658. (name Berkeley.) Berkeley
castle, Gloucestershire, began to be built by Henry I. 1108; finished by Henry
II. Berkley, judge, arrested on his seat in the court of King's Bench, and sent
to prison for giving his opinion in favor of ship money, Feb. 10, 1640; fined
10,000 l. 1643. Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, incorporated, 1618. Berlin, a
carriage of that name, invented, 1509. Bermuda islands discovered, 1609;
settled, 1612; almost destroyed by a hurricane, Oct. 11, 1780 Bernard-castle,
Durham, built, 1270. Berners, Barony of, created 1455. (name Wilson.) Berry
Pomeroy castle, Devon, built, 1070. Berwick, Duke of, killed before
Phillipsburg, June 12, 1734. Berwick burnt, 1173; again, by John, 1216; taken
from the Scots, and annexed to England, 1333; taken by the Scots, 1354; by the
English, Jan. 13, 1356; by the Scots, 1378; by the English, 1378; by the Scots,
1384; by the English, 1385; surrendered to Cromwell, Oct. 1648; secured by
general Monk, Oct. 29, 1659. The bridge was built by queen Elizabeth.
Bessborough, Irish earldom of, created 1739. (name Ponsonby.) Bethlemites,
their order established, 1250. Beverley cathedral, Yorkshire, built, 711; town
chartered by queen Elizabeth. Beverston castle, Gloucestershire, built, 1076.
Bewdley, in Worcestershire, chartered, 1707. Beyham abbey, Sussex, of the
Praemonstratensian order, built about 1200. Bible, history of, ceases 340 years
before Christ; septuagint translation made by 72 interpreters, 284; translated
into Saxon, by order of Athelstan; translated into French before 1356; the
vulgate edition was the first printed, 1462; English translation, said to be
made by Trevise of Cornwall, in Richard II.'s time, first allowed, and
permitted in every family, 1539; read in churches, 1549; not translated into
Welsh till 1567; the present one finished, Sept. 1611; no Irish translation
till 1685. See Vulgate, Theodotion. Bigamy, Statute against, passed, 5 Edward
I. 1276. Bildewas abbey, in Shropshire, built 1135. Bill of rights passed, 1
William and Mary, 1689. Billing, Little priory, Northamptonshire, built 1076.
Billingsgate, built 370 before Christ; was the old port of London, 979; made a
free fish-market, 1699; great fire at, Jan. 13, 1715. Bills of exchange
invented by the Jews, to remove their property from places where they were
persecuted, about 1160; act passed to prevent sending money from England any
other way, 4 Richard II. 1381; act passed for regulating the payment of them,
School. See Paper Credit. Bindon abbey, Dorsetshire, built, 1172. Bingham priory,
Norfolk, built, 1206. Birds nests, destroying them forbidden, Deuteronomy. xxii. 6.
Birkhedde priory, Cheshire, founded about 1189. Birth of children taxed, 1695;
of a duke, 30 l. a common person, 2 s. Bishops, translations of them first
instituted by Pope Anterus, 235. Were appointed by the people, 400. Made
barons, 1072. Their precedence settled, 1075. Deprived of the privilege of
sitting as judges in capital offenses, 1388. The first that suffered death in
England by the sentence of the civil power, 1405. Six new ones instituted,
1530. Elected by the king's Conge d'Elire, 1535. Held their sees during
pleasure, 1547. Form of consecration ordained, 1549. Seven deprived for being
married, 1554. Several burnt for not changing their religion, 1555. Fifteen
consecrated at Lambeth, 1559. Expelled Scotland, 1639. Twelve impeached, and
committed for protesting against any law passed in the House of Lords, during
the time the populace prevented their attending parliament, 1641. Their whole
order abolished by parliament, Oct. 9, 1646. Nine restored, and eight new ones
consecrated, Oct. 25, 1660. Regained their seats in the House of Peers, Nov.
30, 1661. Seven committed to the Tower, for not ordering the king's declaration
for liberty of conscience to be read throughout their dioceses, 1688; they were
tried and acquitted. Six suspended for not taking the oaths to king William,
1689; deprived 1690. See Episcopacy.

Bishop's Aukland palace, Durham, rebuilt, 1665. Bithynia, a kingdom of Asia,
conquered by Croesus king of Lydia, 560; by Alexander, 332; bequeathed to the
Romans 40 before Christ. From its ruins rose the Othman Turks, who made Prusa
the seat of their empire, before they possessed. Constantinople, 1327. Black
act passed, 1722. Blackfriars-bridge began, 1760; opened, Nov. 19, 1766;
finished, 1770; cost 152, 840 l. Blackrent, Ireland, established, 1412.
Blackwell-hall purchased by the city of London, 1397; factors incorporated,
1516. Blandford burnt down, June 4, 1731. (300 houses.) Blaney of Monaghan,
Irish barony of, created 1621. (name Blaney.) Blankets first made in England,
1340. Blantyre, Scots barony of, created 1606. (name Stewart.) Blantyre priory,
near the Clyde, Scotland, founded before 12^6. Bliburgh priory, in Suffolk,
founded about the time of Henry I. Blister piasters first made of Canthrides,
by Aretaeus, 60 before Christ. Blood, a disbanded officer of the Protector, who
had been attainted, meditating revenge on the duke of Ormond, lord lieutenant
of Ireland, seized him at night in his coach, and tied him on a horse, with a
design to hang him at Tyburn, had not the duke's servants rescued him, Dec. 6,
1670; attempted to steal the crown out of the Tower, May 9, 1671. This man,
when taken, was not only pardoned, but was pensioned with 500 l. a year. Blood,
circulation of, through the lungs, first made public by Michael Servetus, a
French physician, 1553. Cisalpinus published an account of the general
circulation, of which he had some confused ideas, and improved it afterward by
experiments, 1569; but it was fully confirmed by Harvey, 1628. Blue, Prussian,
discovered at Berlin, 1704. Boadicea, queen of the Iceni, at the head of the
Britains, attacked the Romans, burnt London, massacred 70,000 of its
inhabitants, but soon after being defeated by Suetonius, poisoned herself, 59.
Boats, Flat-bottomed, used by William I. at the Isle of Ely. Bodleian library
Oxford, founded 1598, by Sir Thomas Bodley, who died 1612, aged 68. Boggewein's
voyage performed, 1721. Boh, a fierce Gothic general, the son of Odin, the
mention of whose name spread a panic among his enemies. Hence the use of the
word to frighten children. See Woden. Bohemia, Christianity introduced there by
Methodius, a Greek prelate, 890; kingdom of, began 1086; order of Crosiers
founded, 1234; Elizabeth, queen of, visited England, May 17, 1661; died there
the February following, and was buried at Westminster. See Hungary. Boleyn. See
Ann. Bolingbroke, viscount, title of, created 1711. (name St. John.) Bolton
priory, in Craven, Yorkshire, founded, 1120. Bolton castle, in Yorkshire, where
Mary queen of Scots was confined in 1568, built 1297, after 18 years labor.
Bolton, Dukedom of, created 1689. (name Powlet.) Bombay, given by the
Portugueze to Charles the Second with Tangiers in Africa, and 300,000 l. as a
portion with the Infanta in marriage, 1662. Granted to the India Company by
William III. 1688. See Tangiers. Bombs, invented at Venlo, 1588; mortars some
time after. Bones, art of softening them by a digester, found out by Papin,
1688. Bonner, bishop of London, born about 1512; deprived and committed for
denying the real presence, May 30, 1549; enlarged and restored on the accession
of queen Mary, 1553; employed in persecuting the Protestants, 1555; slighted by
queen Elizabeth, and despised by all men, 1558; died in the Marshalsea, Sept.
5, 1569. Book-keeping, Italian, introduced here by Peele, 1569, from a system
of algebra published by Burgo at Venice. Books, the first supposed to be
written in Job's time; 30,300 burnt by order of Leo, 761; a very large estate
given for one on Cosmography, by king Alfred; were sold from 10 l. to 30 l.
a-piece, about 1400: the first printed one was the vulgate edition of the
bible, 1462; the second was, Cicero de Officiis, 1466. To their scarcity, from
the seventh to the eleventh century, was chiefly owing the universal ignorance
during that period; for after the Saracens had conquered Egypt, in the seventh
century, the communication with that country was broken off, and the papyrias
no longer in use, so that recourse was had to paper, and that being very dear,
books became of great value. See Literature, Paper, Dedications, Gotham.
Borough English, Custom of, an ancient tenure (by which younger sons inherit
family estates) which still subsists in Kent, and some other places; supposed
to have been universal in England before the conquest, and to have originated
from very early times, among the Tartars, when, elder sons emigrating, the
youngest (being less capable of providing for themselves) remained with their
fathers, and were taken care of by them. Borthwick, Scots barony of, created
before 1430. (name Borthwick.) Boston, barony of, created 1761. (name Irby.)
Boston, New England, several killed by the 29th regiment, March 5, 1770;
custom-house removed by parliament, June, 1774. Botany, the study of, revived
at Thuringe, by Fucks, 1565. Bothal castle, Northumberland, standing in Henry
the Second's reign. Bothwell, Earl, supposed to have murdered lord Darnly,
Mary, queen of Scot's husband, 1567, but tried and acquitted; recommended by
the nobility to queen Mary, as a fit husband, April 24, following; seized the
queen near Edinburgh, and carried her to Dunbar the same month, where, it is
said, he ravished her; he, however, obtained a pardon, and a divorce from his
wife; married to Mary, May 15, following. Soon after he retired to the Orkneys,
where he subsisted some time by piracy; then fled to Denmark, where he was
thrown into prison, lost his senses, and died miserably, 1596. Botolph's
priory, Colchester, founded about 1109. Bottle conjuror imposed on the
credulous at the Haymarket playhouse, March 1749. Boulogne, France, besieged,
and taken by Henry VIII. Sept 14, 1544; sold to France for 400,000 crowns,
March 24, 1550. Bounties, a new principle in commerce, first granted on the
exportation of corn, 1688. Bourbon family settled on the throne of Spain, at
the peace of Utrecht, 1713. Bourbon island, settled by the French from
Madagascar, 1672. Bourke of Mayo, Irish viscount, title of, created 1627. (name
Bourke.) Bow, The, is of such antiquity, that it is alluded to in God's
covenant with Noah. Bows castle, Yorkshire, built out of the ruins of a Roman
fortress. Bows and arrows introduced by William I. 1066; were in use with stone
cannon balls, so late as 1640. See Archery, Yew-trees. Boxgrave priory, Sussex,
founded in Henry the First's time. Boil of Marston, Barony of, created 1711.
(name Boil.) Boyne, Irish viscount, title of, created 1717. (name Hamilton.)
Brackenthwaite, in Cumberland, great mischief done there by a water-spout,
Sept. 9, 1760. Bradenstoke priory, Wilts, built, 1076. Bradsole abbey, in Kent,
founded, 1191. Bramber castle, Sussex, built, and the church standing before
the conquest. Branding, or burning in the hand, was done on the left thumb
originally; but queen Elizabeth ordered it to be on the cheek. William III.
afterward ordered it on the thumb again, because the criminal became more
abandened by being more exposed. Brandon, Irish earldom, title of, created
1758. (name Agar.) Brandon, Dukedom of, created 1711. (name Hamilton.)
Brazen-nose college, Oxford, founded by the bishop of Lincoln, etc. 1511. (20
follows.) Brazil, discovered by Pinzon, a Portuguese, 1500; settled by the
Portuguese, 1549; diamond mines discovered, 1770. Bread introduced from Egypt,
where it was taught by Ceres (see Ceres); rist aslize of, made, 1251; first
made of yeast by the English about 1650. Breadalbane, Scotch earldom of,
created 1671. (name Campbell.) Brecknock castle built, 1089; priory built,
1100. Breeches introduced here instead of Trunk hose, 1654. Brehan law, or
fines for murder, etc. abolished in Ireland, 1604. Bremen and Verden, vested in
George II. by the emperor, 1732. Breast, Marine hospital of, burnt, when fifty
galley slaves and many sick perished, Dec. 1, 1776. Bretagne annexed to France
by Charles VIIIth's marrying the heiress of that duchy, 1491. Bribing
parliaments first introduced here, 1554. The emperor sent 400,000 l. for this
purpose; lord chief justice Thorpe hanged for bribery under Edward III. bribery
at elections prohibited, 1^96, 8 William III. See Shoreham. Bricks. See
Building. Bridewell, the palace of king John; rebuilt, 1^22. Bridge-town,
Barbados, burnt, 1668; again, May 14, 1766. Bridgewater, Dukedom of, created
1720. (name Ege^ton.) Bridgewater castle and bridge, Somersetshire, built in
king John's reign. Bridgnorth, Shropshire, and its castle, built by queen
Ethelfleda, in the Heptarchy. Bridle and bit in use so early as the time of
David. See psalm vi. v. 10. Brigantes. See England. Brigentines, an order of
nuns, established, 1370. Brighthelmstone, burnt by the French, 1514;
blockhouse, founded by Henry VIII. about 1539. Brinburn priory, Northumberland,
founded in Henry the First's reign. Bristol, Earldom of, created 1714. (name
Hervey.) Bristol, the suburbs of Redcliffe made part of it, 1247; city
chartered by the 47 Edward III. and made a distinct county; bishopric taken out
of Salisbury, founded, and the deanery erected, 1542; divided into 12 wards,
1581; the city attempted to be fired, 1777. Britain first discovered to be an
island, about 90; wrested from the Roman empire by Carausius, 289; recovered by
Constantius, 296; Cadwaladr was the last king of Britain; he died at Rome, 688.
See England, Julius Caesar, Lear. British herring-fishery instituted, 1750. See
Herrings. Brittany annexed to the crown of France, 1150. Broad pieces called in
and coined into guineas, 1732. Brodie castle, Arran isle, Scotland, founded
before 1306. Bromholme priory, Norfolk, built, 1113. Bromley college, Kent,
founded by Warner, bishop of Rochester; erected in Charles the Second's time.
Brosely burning-well, Shropshire, broke out, 1711. Brothels formerly allowed in
London, under the regalation of the bishop of Winton, as necessary evils, 8
Henry H. 1162; they were situated on the bank side, Southwark; suppressed,
1545; to lerated in France, 1280; Pope Sixtus erected one at Rome, and the
Roman prostitutes paid him a weekly tax, which amounted to 20,000 ducats a
year, 1471. Broughham castle, Westmoreland, built by the Normans. Brownists, or
Independents; which see. Brownlow, of Belton, Barony of, created 1776. (Cust.)
Bruce landed in Ireland with an army, May 25, 1315; soon after crowned at
Dundalk; slain, 1318. Brudenell of Deane, Barony of, created 1780. (name
Bru^enell.) Brunswick, Princess of, married, Jan. 16, 1764. Bryonne, An
interview at, between the kings of France and Spain, when they determined to
extirpate the heretics, July, 1565. Buccleugh, Scots dukedom of, created 1673.
(name Scot.) Buchan, Scots earldom of, created 1469. (name Erskine.) Buckfastre
abbey, Devon, built before the conquest. Buckingham castle built, 918.
Buckingham, duke of, beheaded at Sarum, for taking arms against Richard III.
Nov. 2, 1483. Buckingham, Edward duke of, beheaded for aspiring to the crown,
May 13, 1521. Buckingham, Duke of, impeached for extorting 10,000 l. from the
East India company, 1626; paid his addresses to the queen of France, 1627;
killed at Portsmouth by one Felton, a disappointed officer, who did it, as he
declared, to rid his country of an enemy, Aug. 3, 1628, aged 35.
Buckingham-house settled on the queen in the room of Somerset House, May 1775.
Buckinghamshire, Earldom of, created 1746. (name Hobart.) Buckland priory,
Devon, built, 1266. Buckle. See Shoe. Buckler, round silver one taken out of
the Rhone in France, 1665. Buda taken from the Hungarians by the Turks, who
annexed Hungary to the Ottoman empire, about 1540; retaken from the Turks by
the Imperialists, 1686. Buenos Airs founded, 1535, by Pedro de Mendoza;
rebuilt, 1580. See Rio de la Plata. Bugden palace, Hunts, built, 1480. Building
with stone brought into England by Bennet, a monk, 670; with brick, first
introduced by the Romans into their provinces; first in England, about 886;
introduced here generally by the earl of Arundel, 1600, London being then
almost built with wood, and a very ugly city: the increase of buildings in
London, and within a mile, prohibited, 1607. See Rem. Occur. anno 1580.
Bulgarians defeated by Basilius, emperor of the east, who made 15,000 of them
prisoners, and caused their eyes to be put out, except one man in a hundred, to
whom he left one eye, to serve as leaders to the rest, July 29, 1014. Bulkeley
of Cashel, Irish viscount, title of, created 1643. (name Bulkeley.) Bull, the
first, baited at Stamford, 1209. Bull-sights in Spain succeeded the ancient
tournaments, 1560. See Tilts. Bungay, Suffolk, totally burnt, March 1, 1689.
Burdet, Thomas, beheaded at Tyburn, 1477, for angrily wishing the horns of a
favorite buck, which Edward IV. had killed while hunting in Burdet's park,
were in the belly of the person who advised the king to it. Burgh castle,
Staffordshire, built by the Romans. Burgundy, Duke of, murdered by the Dauphin,
for which he was disinherited the crown, 1419. See Orleans, Duke of, Rem.
Occur. anno 1407, 1414. Burgundy, The dukedom of, erected, 890. Burial places
first consecrated by Pope Calixtus I. about 210; the first Christian one in
Britain, 596. See Churchyard. Burials taxed, 1695; 50 l. for a duke, for a
common person, 4 s. Burnham priory, Bucks, built, 1266. Burning. See Heresy,
Branding. Burning of the dead in practice so early as 1225 before Christ.
Borough chapel, Somerset, standing in Alfred's reign. Burton-abbey,
Staffordshire, founded 1004. Bury-castle, Suffolk, built by Canute. Burying in
woollen enacted, 1678. Bute, Scots earldom of, created 1703. (name Stewart.)
Butley priory, Suffolk, built, 1171. Byland-abbey, Yorkshire, built, 1134.
Byron of Rochdale, barony of, created 1643. (name Byron.) Byron, commodore,
sailed from the Downs to go round the world, June 21, 1764; returned, May 9,
1766. Bysham monastery, Berks, built, 1338. Byzantium founded by Byzas. See
Constantinople.
C.
CABAL, a name given to the cabinet council, from the initials of their names,
1670. Cabinet councils first constituted, April 25, 1670. See Cabal. Cade,
Jack, the head of a rebellious party, killed by Alexander Iden, sheriff of
Kent, 1451. Cadiz, formerly Gade^, built by the Phoenician^ 1000 before Christ;
taken by lord Howard and the earl of Essex, 1596; the new bridge, during the
time it was consecrating, fell, and 200 persons were killed, Feb. 1779. Cadogan
of Oakley, Barony of, created 1718. ((...) Cadogan.) Caerlaveroc castle,
Scotland, rebuilt, 1638. Caernarvon castle began erecting about 1283. Cahier,
Irish barony of, created 1583. (name Butler) Cainites, disciples of Valentin,
appeared, 189; a sect that held Cain, Cora, the people of Sodom, and the
traitor Judas, to be among the number of the blessed. Caithness, Scots earldom
of, created 1556. (name Sinclair.) Calais besieged, and taken by Edward III.
August 4, 1347; ceded by treaty to England, May 8, 1360; taken by the French,
Dec. 1557. Calcutta, In the black hole at, 123 persons perished, out of 146 who
were confined in that dungeon, by order of the nabob. They were suffocated. May
19, 1755. Calder priory, Cumberland, built, 1134. (...), 1699. (...). See
Style. (...), among the Romans, standing alone, was the (...) day of every
month, but if pridie, i. e. the day before, be added to it, it means the last
day of the foregoing morth. Thus pridie Calend. September. is August 31. If any
number be placed with it, it means that day in the former month, which arrives,
so many days as that number specifies, before the month named; thus the tenth
calends of October is the 20th day of September; for, reckoning backwards from
October, September 20 makes the 10th day before October. In March, May, July,
and October, the Calends begin at the 16th day, but in other months at the
14th, which Calends bear the name of the following month, being numbered
backward from the 1st day of the said following months. See Ideas, Nones.
California discovered by Cortez, and taken possession of by Sir Francis Drake,
1578. Califs, Empire of the, who were eastern sovereigns, lost in that of the
Turks. Callico first imported by the East India Company, 1631; none printed
here till 1676. Calshot castle, Hampshire, built by Henry VIII. Cambray, Famous
league of, when almost all Europe took arms against the republic of Venice,
1^08. Cambricks and lawns esteemed a great luxury in dress, 1580. Cambridge,
once a city called Granta, built by Carausius; university chartered, 531;
founded, 915; the town burnt by the Danes, 1010; its castle built, 1067;
chancellor's court established by queen Elizabeth; refused a degree to a
papist, recommended by the king, Feb. 1687. Camden, Barony of, created 1765.
(name Pratt.) Camelford, Cornwall, chartered by queen Mary. Camera Obscura,
Effect of the, first observed by Baptist Porta, a Neapolitan, who died 1515.
Cameron, Dr. Archibald, hanged for taking part in the rebellion of 1745, 1753.
Campania. See Naples. Campden, Glocestershire, incorporated by James I.
Campeachy-bay settled by the English logwood cutters, 1662. Campus Maii, or
Martii, was a confederate assembly of the people, in the reign of Edward the
Confessor, every May day, to defend the country against all enemies. This
custom was derived from the ancient Gauls. Canada discovered, 1499; settled by
the French, 1534; Quebec built by Sam. Champlain, 1608; conquered by the
English, 1759; and ceded to them, 1763. See America. Canary islands discovered
by a Norman, 1405; conquered by the Spaniards, 1491. Candia, the ancient Crete,
once subject to Greece, sold to the Venetians, 1194, who held it till taken by
the Turks, after 22 years siege, 1669. Candlelight first introduced into
churches, 274, from a custom of the first Christians assembling, during the
times of persecution, at nights, in dark and obscure places. Candles of tallow,
so great a luxury, that splinters of wood were burnt, 1298. Canicular year, The
Egyptian, began, which consisted of 1460 years, and took its rise from Sirius,
the dog star, rising with the sun at Heliopolis, July 20, four o'clock, 1325
before Christ. Canning, Elizabeth, amused the town, 1753. See Impostors.
Cannon. See Guns. Canon law, which had its origin from the Roman canon law, in
the time of Constantine the Great, first introduced into England, 1147;
methodized by Gratian, an Italian monk, about 1151; pope Gregory's decretals
published about 1230; the Clementine constitutions authenticated, 1317; the
present canons promulgated, 1635. Canonization, that of St. Uldariens, the
first made by papal authority, 993. Canterbury made a bishopric, 598; St.
Augustine's abbey built, 605; archdeaconry erected, 798; governed by a
prefect, 780; a portreve, 956; provost, 1011; by two bailiffs, in Henry the
Third's reign; by a mayor, 1448; city built, 912 before Christ; the cathedral
burnt by the Danes, 1011; rebuilt and finished, 1038; castle built about 1066;
cathedral burnt again by accident, 1067; rebuilt, 1080; burnt again, Sept. 5,
1174; rebuilt, after ten years labor, 1184; archbishop's great hall, built
about 1210; west gate of the city built about 1387; bishopric made superior to
York, 1073; deanery erected, 1542. See Augustine. Canute, son and successor of
Swenon, king of Denmark, and the first Danish king in England, invaded this
country, 1015; fought several battles with Edmund II. and was chosen king by
the clergy at Southampton, 1016; on the death of Edmund, he took the crown,
1017; made an alliance with Normandy, and married Emma, Ethelred's widow, 1018;
made a voyage to Denmark, attacked Norway, and took possession of that crown,
1028; made Malcolm, king of Scots, do homage to him for Cumberland, 1031; died
at Shaftesbury, 1036; was buried at Winton, left three sons, and was succeeded
by his second son Harold; his eldest son succeeded to the crown of Sweden and
Norway, and his youngest, Hardicanute, to that of Denmark. Cape Breton settled
by the English, 1591. Cape de Verd isles first seen by the Portugueze, 1449;
taken by the English, 1661. Capua. See Naples. Capuchins, Order of, erected,
1528. Carbery, Irish barony of, created 1715. (name Evans.) Cardiff, Barony of,
created 1776. (name Stuart.) Cardigan castle built, 1160. Cardinals were
originally the parish priests at Rome; title began to be used, 308; college of,
founded by pope Paschal I. 817; did not elect the popes till 1160; wore the red
hat (to remind them, that they ought to shed their blood, (...) required, for
religion), and were declared princes of the church, 1222; the cardinals set
fire to the conclave, and separated, and a vacancy in the papal chair for two
years, 1314; Cardinal Caraffa was hanged, by order of Plus IV. 1560; as was
Cardinal Poli, under Leo X.; title of Eminence first given them by pope Urban
VIII. about 1644. See Conclave. Cards. See Piquet. Carew castle, Pembrokeshire,
belonged to the princes of South Wales. Carew, Sir Alexander, beheaded on
Tower Hill, for plotting to surrender Plymouth to the king, Dec. 23, 1645.
Carhampton of Castlehaven, Irish viscount, created 1780. (name Luttrell.)
Caribbee islands discovered, 1595. Carillon, first made at Aloste in Flanders,
1487. Carisbrook-castle, founded about 532, rebuilt about 1610. Carlisle castle
founded, 1092, by William II. who rebuilt the city; bishopric founded out of
York and Durham, and archdeaconry erected, 1133; priory founded, and cathedral
built, by Henry I.; deanery founded, 1542. Carlisle, Earldom of, created 1661.
(name Howard.) Carlow, Irish viscount, Title of, created 1776. (name Dawson.)
Carmarthen chartered by James I. Carmelites pretend to great antiquity; their
order confirmed, 1226. Carmelites barefooted, their order began, 1540;
confirmed, 1580. Carmes, The, established in France, 1254. Carolina discovered
by Ponce de Leon, a Spaniard, 1512; settled by the English from Virginia, 1622;
claimed by Charles II. who granted a charter, 1664; surrendered to the crown,
1728. See America, Charlestown. Caroline, queen to George II. died of a
mortification in her bowels, November 20, 1737, aged 54; Caroline, princess,
her daughter, died, December, 1757. Carp first brought into England, by Leonard
Mascall, 1514. Carrick, Irish earldom of, created 1748. (name Butler.)
Carteret, Captain, set sail with Wallis, to go round the world, July 26, 1766;
returned, February 20, 1769. Carthage, founded by the Tyrians, 1259; built by
queen Dido, about 869; destroyed 104 before Christ. See Tripoli. Carthagena,
Spain, or New Carthage, built by Asdrubal, the Carthaginian general, about 239
before Christ. Carthaginian war with the Romans, ceased 160 before Christ. See
Xantippus. Carthusians, Order of, instituted by St. Bruno, 1086. Cartmel
monastery, Lancashire, founded, 1188. Carving, in marble, invented 772 before
Christ. Carysfort, Irish barony of, created 1752. (name Proby.) Cashel. See
Armagh. Cassia. See Purgatives. Cassilis, Scots earldom of, created 1509. (name
Kennedy.) Castile, King of, murdered by his own brother, 1367, who seated
himself on his throne; Henry IV. deposed, and his brother crowned, 1465.
Castleacre monastery, Yorkshire, founded, 1085. Castleacre priory, built,
Norfolk, 1090. Castle-rising castle, Norfolk, built, 1204. Castle R^hin, in the
Isle of Man, built about 960. Castles, 1100 built in England by the nobles, by
the permission of king Stephen, 1140, etc. to 1154. Castlehaven, Earl of,
beheaded, for inviting people to commit rapes upon his wife, 1631. Castletown
castle, Isle of Man, built, 960. Catalans, a number of discharged soldiers
settled in Greece and became a people, 1302. Cataline's conspiracy to murder
the consuls, 66; killed 62 before Christ. Catalonia, Kingdom of, conquered by
the Goths under Ataulph, 414; by the Saracens, 714; taken from the Moors by
Lewis, son of Charlemagne, 800; united to Spain, 1492. See Spain. Catechism,
short one, drawn up by Poynet, bishop of Winton, and published, 1552. Cathcart,
Scots barony of, created 1436. (name Cathcart.) Catherine, St. an order of nuns
erected, 1373. Catherine, queen to Henry V. died early in 1437. See Tudor.
Catherine, Henry the VIIIth's first wife, died at Kimbolton, Jan. 1536, aged
60. See Arthur, Henry VIII. Catherine Howard, Henry the VIIIth's fourth wise,
beheaded for adultery, with lady Rochford, her confidante, 1542. Catherine Par,
Henry the VIIIth's fifth wife, died 1548. Catherine, Charles the IId's wife,
died, Dec. 21, 1705. Catherine of Medicis, queen of Henry II. of France, born
at Florence, 1519; married, 1533; died, 1589. Catherine-hall, Cambridge,
founded by R. Woodlarke, 1475. (8 fellows.) Catherine-hill chapel, Surrey,
built before 1230. Catherlough, Irish earldom of, created 1763. (name Knight.)
Catholics, the Romish Christians first so called, 38. Catholic king, The title
of, first taken by Ferdinand of Arragon, 1492. Catiline conspiracy, 62; war, 63
before Christ. Cauliflowers first planted in England, 1603. Cavan, Irish
earldom of, created 1647. (name Lambart.) Ceaulin, succeeded his father,
Kenric, as fifth king of Britain; crowned king of the West Saxons, 560;
abdicated his crown, and died in banishment, 592, leaving Ethelbert, king of
Kent, his successor in the monarchy. Celestines, an order of nuns, established,
1274. Censors first erected at Rome, 433 before Christ. Ceodwalla, king of the
West Saxons, subdued the kingdom of Sussex, and annexed it to his dominions,
686. Ceolred, son of Ethelred, 12th king, succeeded his cousin, Kenred, as 14th
king of Britain, 708; killed in battle, 716; buried at Litchfield, left no
child, and succeeded by Ethelbald. Cerdic, a Saxon chieftain, with his son
Kenric, and a lange body of men, arrived in Britain, 495; defeated and killed
Nazanleod, a British prince, with 5000 men, 508; succeeded Ella as third king
of Britain, 514; besieged Bath, 520; crowned king of the West Saxons at Winton,
where he re^ed, 531; di^d 534, and was succeeded in Wessex and the monarchy, by
his eldest son, Kenric. Ceremonies in religious worship said to be institute^,
first by Enos, son of Seth, who died 2864 before Christ, aged 905. Ceremonies,
the master of, Office of, first appointed for the more solemn reception of
ambassadors, 1603. Sir Luke Lewkenor was the first. Cerinthians, who denied
Christ's divinity, began to dogmatize, 99. Cesaria burlt, after twelve years
labor, by August^s Caesar, 7 before Christ. Ceylon discovered, 1506; taken by
the Dutch from the Portugueze, 1656. Chain, The gold, worn round the necks of
judges, a very ancient ornament; it was worn by the judges in Egypt many years
before Christ, probably to remind criminals of their danger. Chain-shot,
invented by admiral De Wit, 1666. Chalcedon, Afia, built by the Thracians, 676
before Christ. Chamber, John a, executed for stirring up the people to rebel,
rather than pay a tax the parliament imposed, 1488. Champion of England, The
office of, first introduced, at the coronation of Richard II. 1377. It has
continued in the Dymock family ever since. Chancery, Court of, established,
605; present one, by William I. The first person qualified for chancellor, by
education, was Sir Thomas More, 1530, the office before being rather that of a
secretary of state than the president of a court of justice; first reference to
a master in, owing to the ignorance of the chancellor, Sir Christopher Hatton,
about 1588. Chandos, Dakedom of, created 1719. (name Brydges.) Chanting adopted
by the church of Rome, about 620; brought into England by Austin the monk.
Chantries, 2374, suppressed in England, 1548. Charing Cross, London, erected as
it now stands, 1678. Chariots, The custom of fighting in, we find in Exodus,
1500 before Christ. Charities. Charitable corporation office established, 1708.
For delivering married women at home, instituted, 1757. Dispensary for the
relief of the infant poor, ditto, 1769. General ditto, for the poor, 1770.
Medical Society, ditto, 1773. Westminster dispensary, ditto, June 6, 1774.
Misericordia, ditto, 1774. Dispensary for inoculation, ditto, 1775. Maritime
school, ditto, 1777. See Hospitals, Societies.
Charity schools instituted to prevent the seduction of the infant poor to
popish seminaries, March 25, 1688. Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, king of
France, by succession, 768; crowned king of Italy, 774; subdued Saxony, 785;
was emperor of the west, by conquest, 800; died also, first emperor of Germany,
813, aged 70. His race ended in the death of Louis V. 987. This king ordered
near 5000 of the heads of the Saxons to be struck off, on their submission to
him, in revenge for having lost 10,000 men in a battle against them just
before, 782. Charlemount, Irish earldom of, created 1764. (name Caulfield.)
Charles V. king of Spain, 1517; elected emperor of Germany, 1519; died in a
monastery, 1558, aged 57. See Tunis. Charles I. second son and successor of
James I. born 1600; arrived at Madrid to marry the Infanta, March 7, 1623;
succeeded his father on the throne, March 27, 1625; married Henrietta, daughter
of France, about the same time; crowned, Feb. 2, 1626; crowned at Edinburgh,
Summer, 1633: went to Scotland, August, 1641; returned, November 25, following;
went to the House of Commons, and there demanded a surrender of five of their
members (Hollis, Sir Arthur Hazlerig, Hamden, Pym, and Strode) whom he accused
of high treason, for opposing him, 1642; apprehensive of danger from the
enraged multitude, he retired to York immediately after; raised his standard
first at Nottingham, August 25, following, and waged war with his parliament;
quitted his broken army at Oxford, traveled in disguise of a servant, and put
himself into the hands of the Scotch at Newark, May 5, 1646, who confined him,
and sold him to the parliament for 400,000 l. August 8, following; the
parliament kept him in custody at Holmsby, from whence he was carried off by
force, to the independent army at Newmarket, by one Joyce, a cornet, June 3,
1647; brought to Hampton Court soon after, from whence he escaped, and fled to
the Isle of Wight, November following, where he was made a close prisoner in
Carisbrook castle, July 29, 1648; soon after he was set at liberty at Newport;
seized again, and confined in Hurst castle, December 1, following; removed to
Windsor, December 23; to St. James's house, January 19, 1649; tried the next
day; condemned the 27th; beheaded at Whitehall the 30th, aged 48, and buried in
St. George's chapel, Windsor. An interregnum followed this reign, till the
restoration of Charles II. 1660. See Cromwell, Oliver. Charles II. son of
Charles I. born, May 29, 1630; made a general, 1645; retired to Paris, 1646;
escaped from St. James's, April 23, 1648; on his father's death, took the title
of King at the Hague; proclaimed king by the Scots, 1649; treated with the
Scots commissioners at Breda, March 1650; sailed for Scotland, June 23,
following; crowned at Scone, January 1, 1651; entered England with 18,000 men,
August 6; gave Cromwell battle at Worcester, and was defeated, September 3;
escaped in a peasant's habit, traveled about in disguise, took ship at
Shoreham, and arrived in Normandy, October 22, following; had a pension of 6000
livres a month settled on him by the king of Spain, 1657; applied to the
English Parliament, April 14, 1060, who agreed with his terms, and restored
him; he was proclaimed king, May 8; arrived at Dover the 26th; and at Whitehall
on his birth day, the 29th, 1660; ten of the Regicides were hanged, October 10,
following; crowned, April 23, 1661; married Catherine, Infanta of Portugal, May
21, 1662; got Sir John Coventry maimed, which gave rise to the Coventry act,
January, 1671; shut up the Exchequer for want of money the same year; received
from France a pension of 100,000 l. a year, 1674; accepted the city freedom,
December 18, 1674; took away the charter of the city, 1683; died, Feb. 6, 1685,
aged 54, of an apoplexy, and was succeeded by his brother, James. See Theists.
Charlestown, Boston, burnt by the royalists, June 17, 1775. Charlestown,
South Carolina, taken, May 12, 1780. Charter House built, 1371; founded by
Thomas Sutton, esquire. 1611. Charters to incorporate towns introduced into Italy
about 1100. This practice became soon after general throughout Europe.
Chastity, a remarkable instance of it. The abbess of Coldingham cut off her
nose and lip, and prevailed on the nuns to follow her example, 886. Chatham,
Earldom of, created 1766. (name Pit.) Chatham dock begun by queen Elizabeth;
chest established, for the relief of wounded and decayed seamen, 1588.
Cheapside cross demolished, May 2, 1643. Chedworth, Ba^y of, created 1741.
(name How.) Chelmsford made a market town by king John. Chelsea college founded
by James I. for theological disputations, 1609; but converted by Charles II. to
its present purpose, and completed, 1690. Chelsea waterworks incorporated,
1722. Cheltenham mineral spring discovered, 1740. Chemistry and distilling
introduced into Europe by the Spanish Moors, 1150; they learnt it of the
Africans, and these of the Egyptians. Cherburg forts destroyed by the English,
August 8, 1758. Cherokee chiefs, seven brought to England, 1730; three ditto,
May, 1762; three more, 1766. Cherries, pears, and grapes, introduced into
England, 1550. Chertsey abbey founded, 664. Chess, The game of, invented, 608
before Christ. Chester, once a Roman colony; cathedral founded, 660; St. John's
church founded, 689; castle built, or repaired by William the First's nephew;
water tower built, 1322; earldom of, annexed to the crown, 1237; erected into a
principality, 1398; bishopric and deanery founded, 1541; annexed to the province
of York, 1542; act passed to enable the city and county to send members to
parliament, 1543; deprived of its privileges, Sept. 17, 1659; the custom of the
Dutton family riding in procession, with the fiddlers of the county at Chester
fair, took its rise in the reign of Richard I. Chesterfield, Earldom of,
created 1628. (name Stanhope.) Chetwynd of Dearhaven, Irish viscount, title of,
created 1717. (name Chetwynd.) Chiaro-obscuro, Art of painting in, first used,
1500. Chichester built by Cissa; bishopric, founded in the Isle of Selsey, 681;
removed to Chichester, 1071. cathedral built, and deanery, precentorship,
chancellorship, and treasurership, erected, 1115; archdeaconry erected, 1120;
city burnt, 1186. Children, the custom of the Chinese exposing them on the
river Canton, is exactly in the same manner as Moses was exposed on the banks
of the Nile, and is a custom of great antiquity in Egypt; forbidden to be sold
by English parents to the Irish, 1015. Chilham castle, Kent, the seat of king
Lucius, 182. Chimnies were not known 1200; tax granted, 1662; 2 s. each, 1689.
China, Dresden, invented by Botticher, a German, 1702. China, Monarchy of,
commenced, 2637 before Christ; but its history does not extend above the Greek
Olympiads. The first dynasty, when prince You reigned, 2207 before Christ;
before this time the Chinese chronology is imperfect. By some, Fohi is supposed
to be the founder of the empire, and its first sovereign, 2247 before Christ.
Literature there revived, and the art of printing invented, 206 before Christ.
The first history of China was published by Sematsian, 97 before Christ. The
country conquered by the Eastern Tartars, when the emperor and his family
killed themselves, 1644. An attempt to establish Christianity there by the
Jesuits, 1692; the missionaries expelled, 1724. See Children.
Chios. See Scio. Chipping-Sudbury, Glocestershire, chartered, 1681;
disfranchised, 1688. Chippingham, Wiltshire, chartered by queen Mary. Chisbury
fort, Wilts, built by Cissa, 547. Chivalry, A court of, held for a trial by
combat, between Lord Rea and David Ramsay, 1623, though it did not end in an
actual engagement: it was always after the lie direct given; another, 1631. See
Knighthood, Combats, Tilts, Justs, Constable. Chocolate first brought from
Mexico, by the Spaniards, 1520. Cholmondeley, Earldom of, created 1706. (name
Cholmondeley.) Chorusses invented at Athens, 508 before Christ. Christ. See
Jesus. Christ-college, Cambridge, founded by Henry the VIIth's mother, 1505.
(15 fellows.) Christ-church college, Oxford, founded by Henry the VIII. 1532.
(101 fellows.) Christian, Name of, first given to the disciples of Christ at
Antioch, 40. Christianity carried into Spain, 36; supposed to be first
established in Britain, 60; by public authority, 181; began in France, 496;
established among the Russians, 989. Christmas established about 68.
Christmas Day ordered to be converted into a fast, 1644. Churches, Consecration
of, instituted, 153; scripture texts first printed on the walls of, by order of
Pope Leo I. 461; dedication of, introduced, 483; first Christian one built at
Babingley, Norfolk, 638; the Latin and Greek churches united about 1004; fifty
new ones ordered by parliament, 1710. Church-music introduced into worship
about 350; the choral service first introduced into England, in the cathedral
of Canterbury, before 677. Church Service changed through England, from the use
of St. Paul to that of Sarum, being composed by Osmond, second bishop of Sarum,
under William I. 1415; ordered to be performed in English, 1559. Churchwardens
and overseers first appointed, 1127. Churchyards first consecrated, about 217.
See Burial. Cicisbei, the appointment of one, first introduced at Genoa.
Cimbri, The war with, 113 before Christ. At a battle between the Cimbri and
Teutones, and the Romans; 80,000 of the latter, with their allies, were killed,
and 7^,000 slaves, 107 before Christ. Cinque ports, The, vested in barons,
1078, for the better security of the coast; first received their privileges,
1216. They were originally five; Winchelsea and Rye have since been added.
Circuits, The six justiciary, established, 1176. Circumcision instituted, 1897
before Christ, when Abraham was 99, and Ishmael 13 years old; the feast of,
first observed among Christians under pope Felix III. 487. Circus, the great
one at Rome, which contained 150,000 persons, built 605 before Christ.
Cirencester-abbey founded, 1117. Cissa, king of Sussex, succeeded his father
Ella, 514; died, 590. Cistercians, or Bernardines, The order of, took its rise,
1075. Cities first incorporated, 1201. Clanbrassil, Irish earldom of, created
1756. (name Hamilton) Cla^ricarde, Irish earldom of, created 1543. (name De
Burgh.) Clanwilliam, Irish earldom, created 1766. (name Meade.) Clarehall,
Cambridge, founded by R. Badew, 1326. (17 fellows.) Clarence, Duke of, regent
of France, son to Henry IV. slain at the battle of Beauge, April 3, 1421.
Clarence, Duke of, brother to Edward IV. condemned for arraigning public
justice, and put to death privately, by being drowned, at his own desire, in a
butt of Malmsey in the Tower, 1478, aged 27. Clarenden, Earldom of, created
1776. (name Villiers.) Clarendon, The parliament of, in which Henry II. checked
the power of the pope and clergy, 1164. Clarendon printing house, Oxford,
founded 1711. Clares, an order of nuns, instituted, 1212. Claudius Caesar, with
an army, landed in Britain, August 43. Cleaveland, Archdeaconry of, erected
about 1170. Clement's Inn, London, established, 1478. See Inns of Court.
Clerbury castle, Shropshire, built by H. Mortimore, in Henry the ^Id's time.
Clergy, styled Clerks, the judges originally being clergymen, and their clerks
and inferior officers of the same order; compelled to a vow of celibacy by
Gregory VII. about 1073; bishop Newton says, in 105; abridged of their power by
the statutes of Clarendon, 1164; again, 1275; ordered to take up arms, under an
apprehension of an invasion from France, 1368. See Gown and Cassock, Band,
Laity, Freeholders, Rem. Occur. annis 1508, 1665. Clergy (which in old French
signified Science), Benefit of, an institution to exempt ecclesiastics from
secular punishment, took place 1351; first statute that took it away, 4 Henry
VII.; generally taken away, by the 23d Henry VIII. Clerkenwell monastery, St.
John's, built, 1098; destroyed by fire, 1381. Clermont, Irish earldom, created
1777. (name Fortescue.) Cleve-abbey, Somersetshire, founded, 1198. Clifden of
Gowran, Irish viscount, created 1780. (name Agar.) Clifton of Leighton, Barony
of, created 1608. (name Bligh.) Clifford, Farony of, created 1299. (name
Southwell.) Clifford of Chudleigh, barony of, created 1672. (name Clifford.)
Clithero castle, Lancashire, built about 1178. Clive of Plassey, Irish barony
of, created 1762. (name Clive.) Cloak, The, a dress of great antiquity; was
much in fashion in James the First's reign. Clocks, called water-clocks, first
used in Rome, 158 before Christ; clocks and dials set up in churches, 613;
clocks made to strike by the Arabians, about 801, and by the Italians, about
1300; a striking clock in Westminster, 1288; but none in England that went
tolerably, till that dated 1540, maker's name N. O. now at Hampton Court
palace; clocks, with pendulums, etc. invented by one Fromantil, a Dutchman,
about 1662; repeating clocks and watches invented by one Barlow, 1676. Till
about 1631, neither clocks nor watches were very general. See Watches.
Clonmore, Irish barony, created 1776. (name Howard.) Cloth manufacture first
established by Edward I.; cloth, coarse, first made at Kendal, 1390. Clover
brought to England by Richard Weston of Sutton-place, Guildford. Clun-castle,
Salop, built, 1140. Clunokvaur-abbey, Caernarvonshire, built, 1616. Coaches
first used in England, 1155. In the hard winter, 1757, the nobility of France,
as they could not ride on horseback, were drawn about in casks. An act passed
to prevent men from riding in coaches, as effeminate, 43 Elizabeth, 1601; began
to ply in the streets of London, 1626; glass ones first brought from Brussels
to Paris, 1660; act for licensing hackney coaches, passed, 1693. See Wheels.
Coalheavers hanged for rioting, July, 1768. Coal-mines discovered in the
neighborhood of Newcastle, about 1300. Coalmeter's office, Westminster,
erected, 1746; ditto, in London, 1767. Coals first used in London in the reign
of Edward I. when the smoke was supposed to corrupt the air so much, that he
forbad the use of them by proclamation, 1273; first brought from Newcastle to
London, 1381; the consumption in London was 600,000 chaldrons in 1773. Coats.
See Dress. Cocceius, John of Bremen, founder of the Cocceians, who held a
visible reign of Christ in this world, after a general conversion of Jews and
Pagans to Christianity; died 1699, aged 66. Cockermouth-castle, built in
William the Ist's reign. Cockersand-abbey, Lancashire, built, 1200.
Cock-fighting, instituted after a victory over the Persians by the Romans, 476
before Christ; introduced at Athens, as a lesson of valor to youth, but it was
afterward abused there, as at present. Cock-lane ghost, Affair of, 1762. See
Impostors. Cocklepark Tower, Northumberland, standing in Edward the First's
reign. Codex of Justinian, published 529. Coffee, introduced into Arabia Felix,
1454; became known at Constantinople, and coffee-houses opened, 1554; brought
to Marseilles, 1644; the art of roasting and making it introduced at London by
a Greek servant, and the first coffee-house opened in George-yard,
Lombard Street, 1652; a duty of 4 d. per gallon laid on all that was made and
sold, 1660; its culture first encouraged in the plantations, 1732. See
coffee-houses. Coffee-houses, ordered to be shut up by proclamation, they being
thought encouragers of sedition, November, 1775. See Coffee. Coif (the
serjeant's) was originally an iron skull-cap, worn by knights under their
helmets: Blackstone says, it was introduced before 1259, to hide the tonsure of
such renegado clerks, as chose to remain as advocates in the secular courts,
notwithstanding their prohibition by canon. Coin first used in Britain, 25
before Christ; of gold and silver, in Scotland, 211; the first sterling coined,
1216. Before this time rents were paid in kind, and there was little trade;
money was found only in the coffers of the barons. Milling the coin introduced,
1662; copper coin first made current here, 1672; a re-coinage of all the light
gold, and ordered to pass by weight, 1773. See Gold, Guineas, Money. C^s first
punished, 1107. Coining, The die at present used for, invented by ^er, 1617;
received into England, 1620. See Coin. Co^chester, once a Roman colony, built
125 before Christ; castle built, 921; archdeaconry crected before 1132. See
Baize. Cold Norton priory, Oxfordshire, built, 1160. Coleman, secretary to the
duke of York, executed, 1678. Col^raine, Irish barony of, created 1762. (name
Hanger.) Collars of SS. the fashion of wearing them introduced, 14^7. College,
Stephen, the Protestant joiner, hanged at Oxford, Aug. 18, 1681, charged with a
design to seize and imprison the king. College of Physicians, London,
incorporated by Henry VIII; ditto, at Edinburgh, 1682. Colossus of Rhodes,
thrown down by an earthquake, 224 before Christ; it weighed 713,000lb. Columba,
St. the first on record that had the gift of second sight, left Ireland to
preach the gospel to the Picts, 565. Columbus, Christopher, the navigator, made
his first voyage, 1492; died, 1526. Colvile, Scots barony of, created 1609.
(name Colvile.) Combats, Judicial, first appointed by the Burgundi, in Gaul,
about 500; though Livy describes a duel in Spain to determine a dispute between
two brothers, in the time of Scipio (See Scipio); the first decision by, in
England, 1096, being brought in by William I. It is law at present, but has
been discontinued since 1638. See Chivalry, Duelling, Rem. Occur. annis 1202,
1446. Combe-abbey, Warwickshire, built, 1150. Combermere-abbey, Cheshire,
built, 1134. Comedy, the first acted at Athens on a scaffold by Susarion and
Dolon, 562 before Christ; those of Terence, first acted, 154 before Christ; the
first regular one performed in England, 1551. Comets appeared in 1104, 1107,
1110, 1256, 1315, 1337, 1371, 1401, 1577, 1618, 1647, 1652, 1661, 1664, 1665,
1666, 1667, two 1680, 1682, 1744, 1769, 1770. The first was discovered and
described by Nicephorus; the true orbits of comets demonstrated by Doetsel,
1680. Commandments, The, given to Moses, 1494 before Christ. Commissioners of
sewers first appointed, and for Lyndsay, 1423. Commode, or lady's tower, a
head-dress introduced, 1687. Common law, The origin of, generally esteemed to
arise from Alfred's body of laws now lost. See Alfred. Common Pleas, Court of,
established by William I. settled in Westminster Hall, 1215. See Courts of
Justice. Common Prayer, published in English, with authority of parliament,
1548. Companies, the twelve, first formed in London, in Richard the Ist's
reign; Skinners incorporated, 1327; Gunsmiths, 1327; Mercers, 1393;
Haberdashers, 1407; Grocers, 1429; Vintners, 1437; Drapers, 1439; Ironmongers
1464; MerchantTaylors, 1460; Clothworkers, 148; Fishmongers, 1536; Salters,
15^8. Compass, Seaman's, invented by Murphy, a Dutchman, 1229; first exhibited
it Venice, 1260; improved by Giora of Napres, 1302; its declination discovered
by Hartman, 1538. Conceptionists, an order of ^uns, established, 1488.
Concerts, public one, in London, took their rise from a musical club, at the
house of one Britton, a small ceal man in Clerkenwell. Handel and Pepusch used
to play there. Conclave, for the election of popes, established at the council
of Lions, 1274. Concordia, New Holland, discovered by the Dutch, 1618
Concubines allowed to the clergy, 1206; denied Christian burial, 1225.
Conference at Hampton Court, between the episcopals and dissenters, to effect
an union, Jan. 14, 1604; at the Savoy, between the bishops and presbyterian
ministers, March 25, 1661. Confirmation took place in the time of Tertullian.
Confession, Auricular, introduced, 1204. Congo, Kingdom of, discovered by Diego
Came, 1484. Congregationalists, the same as independents; which see. Conjunction
of the sun and moon, and all the planets in Libra, Sept. 1186; of Saturn and
Jupiter, 1394. Conic sections, The first idea of, given by Appollonius.
Coningsburg castle, Yorkshire, flourished in 489. Connecticut colony
established by charter, 1662. Conscience, Courts of; the first appointed was
that in London, 1517. Consecration of bishops, the form ordained, 1549.
Conservators of public liberties chosen in England from the barons, to
circumscribe the king's power, 1215. Conservators of the peace first appointed
to determine trespasses and felonies, 1344. This was the first institution of
Justices. Conspiracies; of the Norman barons to shake off the royal authority
of William I. 1074. Of prince Robert, and others, against his father, William
I. 1076. Of the Norman barons against William II. 1086. Of Mortimer, and
others, against Henry II. 1155. Against Thomas a Becket, in which Becket fell,
1170. Of young Henry, and his brothers, against their father, Henry II. in
order to obtain his crown, 1173. Of the barons against the ministry of Henry
III. 1233. Of the barons against Gaveston, the king's favorite, whom they
murdered, 1312. Of the barons against the Spensers, the king's favorites, whom
they got banished, 1321. Of the queen, and others, against Edward II. when the
king fell a sacrifice, 1325. Of the queen, etc. against the earl of Kent, who
fell, 1329. Against the king of Castile, 1367. Of the barons against the earl
of Suffolk, 1386. Of the duke of Gloucester, etc. against the ministers of
Richard II. who were impeached and executed, 1388. Of Gloucester against Richard
II. 1397. Of the duke of Lancaster against Richard II. whom he deposed, 1399.
Of the earl of Northumberland against Henry IV. in which Northumberland fell,
1403. In France against the duke of Burgundy, 1415. Of the duke of York against
Henry VI. 1452. Of the earl of Warwick against Edward IV. when Warwick fell,
1466. Of the queen, etc. against the duke of Clarence, who fell, 1477. Of the
duke of Gloucester against Edward V. and his brother, who were murdered, 1483.
Against Richard III. 1483. Of the earl of Richmond against Richard III. 1485.
Of Simnel against Henry VII. 1487. In favor of Warbeck against Henry VII.
1493. Of the disciples of Wishart against cardinal Beaton, in Scotland, whom
they murdered, 1547. Against the duke of Somerset, who fell, 1549. Of Lady Jane
Gray against queen Mary, 1553. Of queen Elizabeth against Mary, queen of Scots,
1559. In France, against the duke of Guise and cardinal Lorrain, for which 1200
suffered death, 1560. Of Mary, queen of Scots, etc. against the Protestants,
1565. Of lord Darnley, etc. against Rizzio, 1566. Of Mary, queen of Scots, etc.
against lord Darnley, 1567. Of the Scots against their queen, 1567. Of the duke
of Norfolk against queen Elizabeth, 1509, (...) 1751. Against the Huguenets, in
France, 1572. Di^ conspiraci^ (...) Elizabeth, 1584. Parry's against Elizabeth,
for which he suffered, 1584. Wo^'s against James VI, of Scotland, when he
attempted to put the young king into the hands of Elizabeth, 1^85. Bab^'s
against queen Elizabeth, 1586, for w^ch 14 were ^anged. An^her, against ditto,
1594, for which several suffered. Gun owder against James (...) 1604. Roger
Moore's, in Ireland, 1641. Royalists against Cromwell, 1648. Duke of Monmouth's
to assessnate Charles II. 1683. One in Ireland discovered, June 1, 1663. That
of the Fanatics in the North, discovered, Jan. 5, 1664, for which about (...) I
were executed. Of Sir George Berkeley, and others, to assassinate William III.
1696. Layer's against (...) I. 1722 For further particulars ^er to the names of
the parties. See Ren^ellio, Catili^.

Constable, Lord high, the (...) hereditary till 1521; since which it has been
discontinued, except at coronations. His office was to regulate all matters of
chivalry, tilts, and sects of arms on horseback. The name derived from
Connetable, or Comte de l'Etable, an officer in Spain, sim^ar to master of the
hearse, established in the 7th century. Constantinople, founded by the Argives,
658 before Christ; besieged and destroyed, 193; received its present name from
Constantine the Great, who removed there the seat of the eastern empire, 324;
the city was before ca^ed Byzantium, from Byzas the founder; suffered greatly
by fire, pestilence, famine, and a^ earthquake, that overturned its wall and 17
towers, Sept. 27, 416; had first an emperor, 1268; taken from the Greeks by
Mahomet II. who slew the emperor and 60,000 inhabitants, this put an end to the
eastern empire, which began with the reign of Arcadius, 395, and continued 1055
years, 1453. The emperors of Constantinople are the successors of Bajazet. See
Bithynia, Ottoman Empire, Port. Consuls first made at Rome, 507 before Christ;
abolished, 470. Continence. See Polygamy. Conventicies, act passed against
them, 1661. Conveyance, the oldest we have any account of is, that of the cave
of Machpelah, for a burying place, from the sons of ^eth to Abraham, Genesis
23d. Convocation, The houses of, have been suffered to do no business, since
1716. This was dropped to cramp the power of the clergy. Controversy, with the
lower house of, 1721. See Rem. Occur. anno 1665. Conyngham of Mount Charles,
Irish earldom, created 1780. (name Conyngham.) Cook, captain, with Mr. Banks
and Dr. Solander, sailed July 30, 1768, to go round the world; returned,
August, 1771; again, to explore the southern hemisphere, with Mr. Forster, etc.
July 13, 1772; returned July 29, 1775; killed by some savages on another
voyage, 1779; ship returned, 1780. Copenhagen burnt, 1728; 77 streets were
destroyed. Copes instituted, 256. Copper money first used in Scotland and
Ireland, 1340; in France, 1581; the first legal in England, 1609. Copyholds.
There are none in Wales, and few or no manerial rights; there are none also in
Ireland. See Villenage. Copy-right. See Literary Property. Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, swallowed up by the earth, for rebelling against Moses, 1489 before
Christ Cordeliers, their order erected, 1206. Cordova, the first Roman colony
established in Spain, founded by Marcellus; the residence of the Moorish
princes, 759; mosque built, 800; kingdom of destroyed, 1014. See Marcellus,
Vol. II. Corfe-castle, Dorsetshire, built after 941, before 1066; town
incorporated by Elizabeth. Corinth formed into a state, 1184; destroyed by the
Romans, 146 before Christ. Corinthian order. See Callimachus, Vol. 2. Cork,
Ireland, built, 1170; its first charter granted, 1242. Cork, Irish earldom of,
created 1620. (name Boil.) Corn, first permission to export it, 1437. Cornish
language, The, (something like the Welsh, understood in Bretagne) generally
spoken in Cornwall, School; totally lost, 1772. Cornwall, Archdeaconry of,
created before 1098. Cornwallis, earldom of, created 1753. (name Cornwallis.)
Coronation. The first person crowned by the hands of a bishop was Leo, emperor
of the East, 457; it being supposed that the bishop thus expressed the suffrage
of the Deity. Coronation oath first taken by Ethelred II. 979; that now used,
1377; altered, 1689. First coronation sermon, 1041. See Scotland. Coroners were
officers of the realm so early as 925. Coronets; viscounts first received them
from Henry VIII; barons from Charles II. Corporations invented and introduced
by Numa, among the Romans. Corpus Christi college, Oxford, founded by the
bishop of Winton, 1516 (20 fellows.) For that at Cambridge, see Bennet. Corsica
dependent on Genoa till 1730; became free, 1733; elected Theodore king, 173^;
ceded to France by Genoa, 1770. Sold to Germany for about 150,000 l. 1781. See
Theodore. Corsned, Trial by, a species of purgation; being a bit of bread,
consecrated with a form of exorcism, which the supposed criminal was to eat,
taking the sacrament at the same time, and praying that it might destroy him if
guilty. Godwin earl of Kent, abjuring the death of the king's mother, appealed
to his corsned, which stuck in his throat and killed him. See Godwin. Hence the
vulgar phrases, I Will take my sacrament upon it, May this morsel be my last, and
the like. Cottonian library settled for public benefit, 1701. Council, solemn
one at Jerusalem, when the first controversy was discussed, 48; of Antioch,
269; at Arles, when Caecilian was acquitted, 314; at Rome, when Monothelitism
was condemned, 649. Eastern general ones: 1st, of Nice, against Arius, when the
Nicene creed was composed, 325; 2d, of Constantinople, 381; 3d, of Ephesus,
431; 4th, of Chalcedon, 451; 5th, of Constantinople, 553; 6th of ditto, 600.
Western general: 1st, Lateran, 1122; 2d, ditto, 1139; 3d, ditto, 1175; 4th,
ditto, 1215; 5th, ditto, 1517: 1st of Lions, 1255; 2d, ditto, 1274; of Vienna,
1311; of Pisa, 1409; of Constance, 1414; of Basil, 1431; of Florence, 1439; of
Trent, 1545. Count Palatine, a title first given to university prosessors, by
Charles IV emperor of Germany. Counties first sent members to parliament, 1258;
before this the knights met only in their own counties. County-courts
established, 896. Courcy of Kinsale, Irish barony, created before 1583, (name
De Courcy.) Courcy. See De Courcy. Courtenay, Viscount, title of, created 1762.
(name Courtenay.) Courtown, Irish earldom of, created 1762. (name Stopford.)
Courts of Justice, the four in England, took their rise from a court
established in the palace of William the Conqueror. Covent Garden begun by the
earl of Bedford, 1633. Coventry, earldom of, created 1697. (name Coventry.)
Coventry bishopric founded, 656; abbey founded, 1043; lady Godiva rode naked
through the town, 1057. Coventry act passed, 1670; to prevent malicious maiming
or wounding, so called from a like attempt on Sir John Coventry. See Charles
II. Coverham-abbey, Yorkshire, built in the end of the 12th century.
Cowes-castle, Isle of Wight, built, 1540. Cowling-castle, Kent, built about
1401. Cowper, Earldom of, created 1717. (name Cowper.) Cranborn priory,
Dorsetshire, founded, 980. Cranston, Scots barony of, created 1611. (name
Cranston) Craven, of Hamstead-Marshal, barony of, created 1665. (name Craven.)
Crawford, Scots earldom of, created 1368. (name Crawford.) Crayons, art of
fixing them, discovered by Loriot, of Paris, 1748. Creak priory, Norfolk,
built, 1206. Creation of the world, Oct. 13, 4004 before Christ. Credit,
public, so low, that debentures and government bills were at 50 per cent.
discount, 1669. See Paper Credit. Crediton, Devon, an archbishopric till about
1050; burnt (460 houses) 1743; again (39 houses) May 1, 1773. Creed, the Lord's
prayer, and Commandments, translated into the Saxon language by order of
Alfred, 761. Crete inhabited originally by the Idaei, Dactyli and Curetes: It
was little known till the reign of Minos, 1432; was a branch of the Roman
empire, 62 before Christ; taken by the Saracens, 812; became the property of
the Venetians, 1204, and from them was taken by the Turks, 1669.
Crickaith-castle, Caernarvonshire, built, 1200. Crisp, Edward, esquire. of Bury,
cut and mangled, 1729. Croisade, or holy war, between the Christians and
Mahometans, 1095; which in the end cost the lives of 200,000,000 of men,
without the acquisition even of Jerusalem to the church: it was occasioned by
Peter the Hermit, and others, stirring up all ranks of people to relieve the
Christians in the Holy Land, under a notion that the world would soon be at an
end, and of our Lord's return upon earth. A second croisade undertaken by Louis
VII. of France, 1145; a third, under Richard I. of England, 1190; a fourth,
under Philip II. of France, 1204; a fifth, under Louis IX. of France, against
Egypt, 1248; the last, under Louis IX. against Tunis, where Louis lost his
life, 1270. See Millennium, Rem. Occur. anno 1189. Cromwell, Oliver, born at
Huntingdon, April 25, 1599; made a colonel, 1643; made Lord Lieutenant, and
went over to Ireland with his army, July, 1649, which he almost subdued;
returned, May, 1650; made general of the army, June 21 following, having taken
near 7000 prisoners at the battle of Worcester; he sold them for slaves to the
Americans; made protector for life, December 12, 1653; was near being killed,
by falling from a coach-box, October, 1654; elected king, but refused the
title, May 8, 1657; died of the gout in his stomach at Whitehall, September 3,
1658; leaving his son Richard his successor; his carcass hung up at Tyburn,
Dec. 2, 1660. Cromwell, Richard, proclaimed protector on the death of his
father, September 3, 1658; deposed, April 22, 1659; died in England, July 13,
1712, aged 85. See Charles II. Cronstadt built by Peter I. 1704. Crook, Japhet,
his ears cut off in the pillory for forgery, 1731. Cross, The sign of, first
used by Christians, as a mark of distinction, about 110; that of our Savior
found on Mount Calvary, 326. Crossed friars, their order founded, 1169. Crown,
the first Roman that wore one was Tarquin I. 616 before Christ; first used in
England, 872; the triple one, or Tiara, first worn by pope Urban V. 1364;
before, the popes wore only one with two circles. Hormisdas was the first pope
that put a crown to it at all, about 553; Boniface VIII. added the second,
1303. Crownpoint taken by the English, 1759. Croxton-abbey, Staffordshire,
built, 1180. Croyland-abbey, Lincolnshire, founded by Ethelbald, king of
Mercia, 718; destroyed by the Danes, 867; rebuilt, 945. Cry, Irish, which
alarmed all England, 1688. It took its rise from this: Some Irish soldiers
having broke into a countryman's house, a neighbor ran off for London, crying,
as he went, that the Irish had risen, were firing of houses, and destroying
men, women, and children; this, at a time when a revolution was taking place,
occasioned such an alarm, that it soon spread over the whole kingdom, and every
one took up arms, dreading an invasion of the Irish. Cuba, Island of,
discovered, 1494; settled, 1511. Cucumbers. See Melons. Cullen, Irish viscount,
title of, created 1642. (name Cockaine.) Cummer-abbey, Merionethshire, built,
1200. Cup, Sacramental, restored to the laity by parliament, 1547. Curfew bell
established, 1068, which, to prevent fires, obliged people to put out their
fire and candle at eight in the evening, when the bell rung; abolished, 1100.
Curls, Artificial, called heart-breakers, used by the ladies in Charles II.'s
reign. Currant-trees first brought into England from Zante, 1533. Custom
becomes law, where it can be traced back to 1189. Custom-house, London, first
built, 1559; present one, 1718. Customs on exports and imports first collected
in England, about 979; first granted, 1274; farmed for many years for 20,000 l.
till 1590; farmed for 390,00 l. 1666; amounted to 557,752 l. 1688; to 1,260,000
l. in 1743, and are now 2,000,000 l. Cutters, weavers who cut their masters
looms, hanged for rioting, December, 1769. Cyprus was subject to the Greeks,
from 716 till 1191, when it was taken by Richard I. of England; taken by the
Venetians, 1473, and from them by the Turks, 1571. Cyrene, a part of Africa,
now the Desert of Barca.
D
DACRE, Barony of, created 1297. (name Barret.) Dacre-castle, Cumberland, built
before 925. Daicles was the first person crowned at the Olympic games, 752
before Christ. Dalhousie, Scotch earldom of, created 1633. (name Bruce.)
Damien. See Louis XV. Dancing to time invented by the Curetes, who danced in
their armor, 1534 before Christ. Danegelt, a land tax, first established by
Ethelred II. 1002; abolished by Stephen, 1136. Danes, their first descent upon
England, at Portland, 787; their second, in Northumberland, 794, when they were
repelled, and perished by shipwreck. They landed on Shepy island, 832; again,
in Cornwall, and were defeated by Egbert, 836; again, at Charmouth,
Dorsetshire, from 35 ships, and stood their ground, 837; defeated Ethelwolf,
840; landed at the mouth of the Thames, from 350 vessels, and took Canterbury
and London, 851; subdued by Eghelwolf at Okeley, in Surrey, 853; invaded
Northumberland, and seized York, 867; defeated Ethelred, and his brother
Alfred, at Basing and Merton, 871: surprised Warham castle, and took Exeter,
876; took Chippenham, 877; 120 of their ships wrecked at Swanwich, Dorsetshire,
877; 1205 of them killed by Odun, earl of Devon, 878; Alfred entered into
treaty with them, 882; their fleet totally destroyed at Apuldore, by Alfred,
894; invaded Anglesey, 900; submitted to Edward the Elder, 921; invaded
Dorsetshire, 982; landed again in Essex, 991, and were bribed to quit the
kingdom; their fleet defeated, 992; fresh invasions by them near Bristel, and
in Kent, and had 24,000 l. given them to depart, 998; numbers of them
massacred, by order of Ethelred II. November 13, 16002; continued their
ravages, and defeated the English at Ipswich, 1010; took Canterbury, and put
nine out of ten of the inhabitants to death, 1011; settled in Scotland, 1020;
expelled England, 1041; landed again at Sandwich, 1047, and carried off great
plunder to Flanders; joined the Northumbrians, burnt York. and slew 3000
Normans, 1069; invaded England again, but, bribed by William I. quitted it,
1074. Dangerfield, whipped, and his eye struck out for a libel, 1685. Daniel
sent captive to Babylon, 606; interpreted Nebuchadnezzar's dream, 603; cast
into the den of lions, 538; from a vision, predicted the Persian empire under
Alexander, 534 before Christ. Danish fleet wrecked at Swanwich, Dorset, when
120 ships were lost, 877. Dantzick taken by the Swedes in 1734; by the
Prussians, 1773. Darkness at Rome at noon day, 291; ditto at London, so as not
to read, Jan. 12, 1769. Darlington-castle, Devon, built, 1123. Darlington,
Earldom of, created 1754. (name Vane.) Darnley, Lord, great grandson of Henry
VII. both 1547; married Mary, queen of Scots, 1563, and took the title of king
Henry; headed the assassins of David Rizzio, 1566; murdered, by being blown up,
February 10, 1567. See Mary, queen of Scots. Darnley, Irish earldom of, created
1725. (name Bligh.) Dantford priory, Kent, founded, 1372. Dartmouth burnt by
the French, 1355. Dartmouth, Earldom of, created 1770. (name Dawson.) David
succeeded Saul on the throne of Israel, 1055; committed adultery with
Bathsheba, 1035; reproved by Nathan, 1034; married Bathsheba, 1033; died 1015
before Christ, aged 70. Dauphin of France, Lewis, poisoned, Dec. 24, 1415;
John, his brother, that succeeded him, poisoned, April 16, 1416. Dauphiny,
ceded by the Dauphin of Vienna, 1343; anneved to the crown of France, on
condition the king's eldest son should be styled Dauphin, 1349. Davington
nunnery, Kent, built, 1153. Davis's Streights discovered, 1585. Deal-castle,
built by Henry VIII. Dearth, 1094; so great in England and France, that a
quarter of wheat was sold for almost 20 s. as much as 6 l. now, which was
followed by a pestilential fever that carried off multitudes of people, 1193,
1194, 1195; another, 1222; another, with a murrain, 1251; another, when wheat
sold for 40 s. a quarter, as much as 8 l. now, 1315; wheat sold for 3 l. a
bushel, and the poor forced to eat horseflesh and dogs, 1316; another great
one, owing to the rains, with a murrain, 1335; two others, 1348, and 1353;
again, when bread was made in many places of fern roots and ivy berries, 1438.
See Rem. Occur. annis 1315, 1348, 1353. Death, Sudden, confidered in France as
a mark of infamy and proof of damnation, 1280. Debenham, Suffolk, burnt, (38
houses) March, 1744. Debts in France were recoverable by an ordinance issued
1134, which authorized the creditor to seize the effects of a debtor, without
any warrant, and pay himself: but this was corrected by a law, 1351. De Courcy,
the privilege of standing covered before the kings of England, at their first
audience, granted to that family, by John, for John de Courcy's consenting to
combat with the champion of France, 1203. Decemviri, creation of, 450 before
Christ. Dedications to Books, contrived, to get money, about 1600; nine or ten
dedications were then customary to one book. Defender of the faith. See Henry
VIII. Degrees, Academical, first introduced in the university of Paris, from
whence other European universities borrowed their customs, before 1215. See
Doctor. Delawar, Earldom of, created 1761. (name West.) Deloraine, Scots
earldom of, created 1706. (name Scott.) Delphos, Temple of, burnt 548 before
Christ. Deluge, general, threatened in the year of the world, 1536; began
Sunday, December 7, in the year of the world, 1656, i. e. 2348 before Christ,
Noah being then about 600 years old. The ark rested upon Mount Ararat.
Wednesday, May 6, 2347 before Christ: the tops of the mountains appeared,
Sunday, July 19. Noah removed the covering of the ark, Oct. 23; left it,
Friday, Dec. 18, having been in it 377 days. Deluge of Ogyges, from which
Attica lay waste above 200 years, till the coming of Cecrops out of Egypt, 1796
before Christ; Deluge of Decucalion in Thessaly, about 1896 before Christ; an
inundation only, so called from its happening in the reign of Deucalion king of
Lyconia. Demerary and Issequibo in South America, taken from the Dutch by Sir
George Rodney, March 14, 1781. De Montant of Haverden, Irish barony, created
1776. (Maude.) Denbigh-castle built, 1280; abbey built, 1330. Denbigh, Earldom
of, created 1622. (name Fielding.) Denmark, Christian, king of, visited
England, 1523; a succeeding king ditto, 1605; the same again, 1614; Christian
VII. ditto, August, 1768. Denmark, Matilda, queen of, sister to George III. of
England, died at Zell, May 10, 1775, aged 23. Denmark, Prince George of,
husband to queen Anne, visited England, 1669; died of an asthma and dropsy,
Oct. 28, 1708, aged 55. See queen Anne. Denmark, the ancient kingdom of the
Goths, its first king reigned, 714; embraced Christianity, 940. and bishops
first appointed; united with the crown of Norway, 1412, and with Sweden, 1497;
separated from Sweden, when Gustavus Vasa was elected king, 1528; Lutheranism
made a rapid progress about the same time; crown of, made hereditary, and
absolute, 1660; revolution of, January 17, 1772; elephant, order of, instituted
about 1478. See Norway, Copenhagen. Derby, Earldom of, created 1485. (name
Stanley.) Derby, James, earl of, beheaded at Bolton, for opposing Cromwell,
October 15, 1651. Derby, chartered by Charles I. Derwentwater, earl of, and
lord Kenmuir, beheaded on Tower Hill, Feb. 24, 1716, for taking part in the
rebellion of 1715. Desert, Irish viscount, title of, created 1780. (name
Cuffe.) Desmond, Thomas, earl of, beheaded in Ireland, 1463. Desmond, Irish
earldom of, created 1622. (name Fielding.) Deucalion. See Deluge. De Vesei of
Abbeyleix, Irish viscount, created 1^76. (Vesey.) Devizes-castle built, 1136.
Devonshire, dukedom of, created 1694. (name Caven^h.) Dials. See Sun-dial,
Clocks. Diamond, the first, cut by De Berguen, of Bruge^, 1489. Diana, Temple
of, at Ephesus, burnt by the Amazons, about 1182; again, by Erostratus, in
order to perpetuate his name, 356 before Christ; again, by the Goths, in their
third naval invasion, about 256. Dice invented by Palamedes about the time of
the Trojan war. Dictator, the first, at Rome, 497 before Christ. Dieppe, laid
in ashes by the English, July 14, 1694. Digby, Sir Everard, born 1581; hanged
with other conspirators in the powder plot, Jan. 30, 1606. Digby, Barony of,
created 1765. (name Digby) Dinevor, Barony of, created 1780. (name Talbot.)
Dionfield, Derbyshire, chartered, 1670. Dionisius, St. priory, Hants, built by
Henry I. about 1124. It was a priory of black canons. Dispensations first
granted by the pope, 1200. Dispensing power of the crown exerted by James II.
1686; reassumed, to lay an embargo on corn, 1767. Dissenters first separated
from the church of England, 1571; bill for relief of, passed the House of
Commons, May 8, 1772, but rejected by the Lords. Distaff, the art of spinning
with it at the small wheel, first taught to English woman by Bonavisa, an
Italian, 1505. Distilling. See Chemistry. Divorce, there was no such thing in
the republic of Rome for 250 years; the first was 229 before Christ, at which
time the women were so debauched, that 3000 prosecutions were on the roll for
adultery. A bill was presented by the Lord Chancellor to the House of Lords, to
make divorces and separations more easy, 1539, but was dropped. Doctor, The
degree of, first given in England, 1207; in music, first given in our
universities, 1463. Doddington Indiaman wrecked, 250 leagues east of the Cape,
July 17, 1755; 247 perished. Dolwyddelan-castle, Caernarvonshire, built, 500.
Domingo, St. discovered by Columbus, 1492. Dominica discovered by Columbus,
Nov. 3, 1493. Dominicans, their order founded by St. Dominick, a Spaniard,
1215. Dan, The title of, first taken by the kings of Spain in the middle of the
8th century. Donatists, who admitted of no church but the African, arose under
Donatus, 311; afterward united themselves with the Arians, and continued above
300 years. Doncaster, earldom of, created 1662. (name Scot.) Donegall, Irish
earldom of, created 1647. (name Chichester.) Doneraile, Irish barony of,
created 1776. (name Sentleger.) Doomesday book, which contained a survey of the
kingdom, began 1080; finished, 1086. Dorchester, Oxfordshire, chartered by
Charles I.; burnt August, 1613. Dorchester cathedral first built, 636.
Dorislaus, Dr. agent for the parliament at the Hague, murdered by 12 English
cavaliers, royalists, May 3, 1649. Dormer of Wenge, Barony of, created 1615.
(name Dormer.) Dorset, Archdeaconry of, separated from Sarum, 1542. Dorset,
Dukedom of, created 170. (name Sackville.) Dort, Sea broke in at, drowned
100,000 people, April 17, 1446; Synod of, began Nov. 3, 1618; ended April 19,
1619. Douglas, Earl, stabbed by James II. of Scotland, Feb. 22, 1452.
Dover-castle, built by Julius Caesar; the tower of, built, 47; old church
dedicated, 156; town chartered by Edward the Confessor; priory built, 1130;
pier built, 1539. Dover, Dukedom of, created 1708. (name Douglas.) Dower, or
the wife's thirds, a Danish custom, given by Suenon, the father of our Canute
the Great, out of gratitude to the Danish ladies, who sold their jewels to
ransom him when taken prisoner by the Vandals. Down, Irish viscount, title of,
created 1680. (name Dawney.) Dram, The Roman, was equal to about 8 d.
English. Drake, Sir Francis, set sail for his voyage round the world, 1577;
died Jan. 28, 1595, aged 50. Drastics. See Purgatives. Dress. Parti-colored
coats were worn here in Henry I.'s reign; cloth of gold and silver worn, 1376;
none permitted to wear silks or furs in Scotland but persons of rank, 1429. See
Ruffs, Breeches, Perukes, Hats, Shoes, Band, Rem. Occur. annis 1376, 1467,
1558. Drogheda, Irish earldom of, created 1661. (name Moor.) Droitwich,
Worcestershire, chartered by James I. Dronfield, Derbyshire, chartered, 1670.
Druids, An order of men among the Britons, so called for their veneration for
the Oak Dryis. Their religion sprung from that of the Antedeluvians, without
either altar or sacrifice, and continued for a space of 2000 years. They acted
as priests and magistrates. One of them was occasionally investest with the
supreme authority. They were cruelly burnt and destroyed in the Isle of
Anglesey, in defense of their country's right, by Suetonius Paulinus, the Roman
governor, 60. Drunkenness punished with 5 s. fine, or the stocks, 1605. Dublin
city, wall built, about 838; stormed by Dermod, 1171; its first charter
granted, 1173; castle built, 1220; mayor of, first made from a provost, 1407;
its university founded, 1591; students admitted, January, 1594; mayor honored
with the title of lord, 1665; parliament house begun, 1729; finished, 1739;
cost 40,000 l. See Armagh, Hospital, Academies. Ducat, a piece of money so
called, took its name from the dukes in Spain, having a power to coin in the
6th century. Ducie, Barony of, created 1763. (name Morton.) Dudley, Edmund, and
Epsom, ministers to Henry VII. fell a sacrifice to popular resentment in the
reign of Henry VIII and were beheaded, Aug. 28, 1510. Dudley, lord Guildford,
son of Dudley Duke of Northumberland, married lady Jane Gray, grandaughter of
Henry VII. by her mother's side, 1553; condemned and beheaded with her, after
queen Mary's accession, for espousing his wife's claim to the crown, Feb. 12,
1554. See Gray, Northumberland. Dudley, Barony of, created 1307. (name Smith.)
Dudley and Ward, Viscount, title of, created 1763. (name Ward.) Dudley-castle,
Staffordshire, built about 700; priory founded for Cluniac monks, 1161.
Duelling and knight-errantry took their rise from judicial combats; forbidden
in France, in civil matters, 1305; appointed in France, in order to have the
judgment of God in particular cases, as whether one gentleman had been familiar
with the other's wife, 1454; punished in France, 1663; introduced into England,
1587. See Chivalry, Combats. Duke, Title of, first given in England to Edward,
son of Edward III. March 17, 1336; quite extinct, 1572. Dulwich-college,
founded by Alleyn the player, 1619. Dumfries, Scots earldom of, created 1633.
(name Macdoual.) Dunbar, built 1187 before Christ. Dunblain, Scots viscount,
title of, created 1673. (name Osborne.) Dundonald, Scots earldom of, created
1669. (name Cochran.) Dungannon, Irish viscount, title of, created 1766. (name
Trevor.) Dunkirk taken by the English, June 24, 1658; sold to the French for
219,000 l. October 17, 1662; delivered up to England, to be demolished, July 7,
1712; the basin, etc. destroyed under the inspection of English engineers, 1763
and 1764. Dunmore, Scots earldom of, created 1686. (name Murray.) Dunmow
priory, in Essex, built, 1110 Dunnington-castle, Berks, built before Edward II.
Dunoon-castle, Scotland, possessed by the English, 1334. Dunstable priory
founded, 1132. Dunstaffage-castle, Scotland, built before 1307.
Dunstanborough-castle, Northumberland, the seat of one of Henry the II.'s sons;
priory founded, 1280. Durham bishopric first founded, 635; removed from
Lindisfarne to Durham 1000; monastery built, 1073; first cathedral founded, and
archdeaconry erected, 995; present cathedral began building, 1093; finished,
1242; deanery founded, 1541; made a county palatine, 1552; town incorporated,
1576; act passed to enable the city and county to send members to parliament,
1672. Dying woollen cloth, Art of, brought from the Low Countries by Brewer, in
James II.'s reign. Dynasty, or family reign of the shepherd kings; the 17th
began, 1827; the 18th, 1724; the 19th, 1376, which lasted 194 years; the 21st
Egyptian of the Tanites began, 1003; the 22d of the Bubastites began, 874; 23d,
825, 24th, 781; 25th, Ethiopian, 737; 26th, of the Saites, 693 before Christ.
See China. Dysert, Scots earldom of, created 1646. (name Talmash.)
E.
EARL MARSHAL, the first, 1383, in the person of Thomas lord Mowbray, created
duke of Norfolk, in 1397; given to the Howards, 1483. Earl, The dignity of,
first given in England to Alfred, afterward king of England. Earth, proved to
be flatted toward the poles, 1737. Earthen vessels, the art of making them
invented by Epimetheus, 1715 before Christ; earthen ware invented in Italy,
1310. Earthquake, one in Asia that overturned 12 cities, 17. One that swallowed
up Nicomedia and several neighboring cities, 120. One in Macedonia that
swallowed up 150 cities, 357. Terrible one, with an inundation round the
Mediterranean; 50,000 persons were drowned at Alexandria, July 1, 365. One from
the month of September to that of November, which swallowed up several cities
in Europe, 394. One swallowed up several villages in the neighborhood of
Cybyra, 417. One swallowed up several cities in Palestine, 419. One at
Constantinople, attended with fire, pestilence, and famine, that overthrew its
walls and 17 towers, Sept. 17, 446. One that almost destroyed the city of
Antioch, Sept. 14, 458. One at Constantinople, that lasted 40 days, and
overturned several edifices, 480. One at Antioch, that destroyed that and
several other cities, 526. Another at Antioch, that swallowed up 4800
inhabitants, 528. One at Constantinople, 552. One at Rome and Constantinople,
that overthrew many houses, 557.
Earthquakes. One that shook France, Germany, and Italy, and threw down St.
Paul's at Rome, April 801. One throughout all England, followed by a great
scarcity of fruit and a late harvest, 1090. One in Shropshire, 1110. One in
December, 1116. One in September, 1120. One, just as king Henry was about to
embark for Normandy, when flames of fire burst out of certain riffs of the
earth with great violence, Aug. 2, 1134. One that swallowed up the city of
Catania, and more than 15,000 souls, 1137. One that overthrew the church of
Lincoln, and others, 1185. A dreadful one, Feb. 14, 1428. One in Somersetshire,
1249. One at St. Albans, 1250. General one, that threw down St. Michael's on
the hill, without Glastonbury, 1274. The greatest ever known in England, Nov.
14, 1328. Several churches thrown down by one, May 21, 1382. A very dreadful
one, accompanied with thunder and lightning, Sept. 28, 1426. Another, 1661. The
city of Catania destroyed by one, and an eruption of Etna, with the loss of
60,000 inhabitants, 1682. In many parts of England, 1683. One in 1692. One felt
in England, France, and Germany; 100,000 perished by it in Sicily, and the
chief town in Jamaica was destroyed, Sept. 1693. One at China, when near
400,000 persons were lost, 1699. One at Rome, 1703. One at China, 1718. One at
Naples, March 20, 1732, when 2000 persons were destroyed. One in the beginning
of this century, that lay waste the whole country of Peru in a quarter of an
hour, 300 leagues long and 90 wide. One that swallowed Lima and Callao in Peru,
Oct. 28, 1746. Two in London, Feb. 8, and March 8, 1750. One that destroyed
4000 persons at Philippoli in Romania, Feb. 1750. One that destroyed 2000
houses, etc. in the island of Metylene, in the Archipelago, May 27, 1755. One
that destroyed Lisbon and 70,000 inhabitants, Nov. 1, 1755. One in the Azores,
July, 1757. One in Tripoli, 1759. A terrible one in Syria, Oct. 30, 1760.
Dreadful one at Constantinople, that buried 880 persons, May 22, 1766. At
Martinico, August, 1767, where 1600 persons lost their lives. At Altdorf,
Switzerland, September 10, 1774; At Gualtimala, that buried the city, July 6,
1774. A dreadful one at Smyrna, when numbers lost their lives, July 3, 1778.
See Rem. Occur. anno 1179.
Easby-abbey, Yorkshire, built, 1152. Easter established about 68; the cycle or
time of keeping Easter first calculated for 532 years, by Victorius, 463.
East India house erected, 1726. See Indies. East-Loo, Cornwall, incorporated,
1587. East-Retford, Nottinghamshire, chartered anew by James I. Easter Island
discovered, 1722. Eastland Company, who trade to Norway, Sweden, etc. erected,
1585. Ebion, the head of the Ebionites, appeared, 79. He denied the divinity of
Christ, and the virginity of his mother. Eclipse, the first of the moon upon
record, 40 min. after 8 in the evening, March 19, 720 before Christ. The first
observer of their revolutions was Calippus of Athens, who flourished 336 before
Christ. Edda, The, was the religious code of the Runic mythology. Edels,
New-Holland, Land of, discovered by the Dutch, 1619. Edgar Atheling, son of
Edward, the only son of Edmund ^. nephew to Edward the Confessor, and after
him, only heir to the crown of England, but deprived of it by the usurper
Harold II. On the death of Harold, he resigned the crown to William I. He
married a princess of Scotland, and died after 1120, aged 70. From this Edgar
is lineally descended George III. See George III. William I. Henry I. Edgar,
brother and successor of Edwy, began his reign, 959; obliged by Dunstan,
archbishop of Canterbury, not to wear his crown for seven years, for carrying
off Editha, a nun, and ravishing her; stabbed Athelwold, and married his wife,
Elfrida; destroyed the wolves, with which the country was overrun, by
demanding of the Welsh a yearly tribute of wolves heads, 971; obliged eight of
his tributary princes in Wales to row him in a barge on the river Dee, 973;
crowned at Axminster, 973; he was a bigot to monkery, built 47 monasteries, and
left two sons and a daughter; died 975, aged 32; buried at Glastonbury, and was
succeeded by his son, Edward the martyr. Edgecumbe, Viscount, title of, created
1781. (name Edgecombe.) Edinburgh-castle, supposed to be built by Edwin king of
Northumberland, in the 9th century; city taken by the English, 1296; built,
1544; university founded, 1580. Edmund I. brother and successor of Athelstan,
began to reign, 941, aged 18; killed by a ruffian, whom he struck at an
entertainment, 948; buried at Glastenbury, and succeeded by his brother, Edred,
his own children being too young. Edmund II. styled Ironside, on account of his
strength, son of Ethelred II. married the widow of Sigefert, a Danish nobleman,
who was put to death in 1015; succeeded his father on the throne, 1016, aged
27, but was opposed by Canute, who was crowned by the other party. After many
battles, it was a^eed to divide the kingdom between them; but E^nund was soon
after murdered at Oxford by two of his chamberlains, 1017, and Canute, king of
Denmark, succeeded, Edmund's son being then abroad. See Edgar Atheling,
Ethelred II. Edred succeeded his brother, Edmund I. on the throne, 948; died of
a Quinsey, 955; buried at Winton, and was succeeded by his nephew, Edwy, son to
Edmund I. Edward the Elder, second son of Alfred, succeeded his father on the
throne, 900; he encouraged learning, founded the university of Cambridge, and
enlarged his dominions in Wales and Scotland by conquest; died at Faringdon,
925; buried at Winton, and was succeeded by his natural son Athelstan. He left
15 children, sons and daughters; one daughter married Charles king of France,
another Otho, emperor of Germany; another, Louis, king of Provence; another,
Gormon III. king of Denmark. Edward the Martyr, eldest son of Edgar, by a first
marriage, succeeded to his father's crown, 975, aged 15; stabbed by order of
his stepmother, Elfrida, who opposed his succession in favor of her own son,
Ethelred, 979; buried at Shaftesbury, and was succeeded by his brother-in-law,
Ethelred II. Elfrida's son. Edward the Confessor, youngest and 7th son of
Ethelred II. by his second wife Emma, succeeded his half-brother Hardicanute on
the throne, 1041; married Editha, daughter of earl Godwin, 1043; supported
Malcolm, heir to the crown of Scotland, against Macbeth the usurper, 1054 (see
Macbeth). He caused the Saxon laws to be revised and amended, and introduced
the French language and customs into England. He was the first who touched for
the king's evil, 1058; verbally nominated William I. to be his successor; died
January 5, 1066, aged 65; buried in Westminster-abbey, and succeeded by Harold
II. son of Godwin. See Edgar Atheling. Edward I. eldest son of Henry III. born
June 16, 1239; married Eleanor, princess of Castile, 1255; taken prisoner by
the rebel army, 1264; released on ignominious terms, 1265; obtained a complete
victory over the barons at Eversham, August 4, following; wounded in the holy
land by an assassin, 1271; succeeded to his father's crown, November 16, 1272;
landed in England, July 25, 1274; crowned at Westminster, August 19, following;
went and did homage to the king of France, for the duchy of Guienne, 1279;
subdued Wales, 1283; went to France, summer, 1286; returned, August, 1289;
buried his queen, 1291; subdued Scotland and sent king Baliol to the Tower,
1296; married Margaret, sister to the king of France, Sept. 12, 1299; died of a
flux at Burgh in Cumberland, July 7, 1307; was buried at Westminster, and
succeeded by his fourth son Edward II. Edward II. fourth son of Edward I. born
at Caernarvon, Wales, April 25, 1284; he was the first prince of Wales;
succeeded his father, July 7, 1307; went to France, and married Isabella, the
king's daughter, 1308; by mal-administration he brought on a civil war, owing
to his favorites the Spensers (see Spensers); obliged by the barons to vest
the government of the kingdom in 12 persons, March 16, 1308; went to Bulloign
on a pilgrimage, December 13, 1313; resigned the dominion of Guienne to his
son, then aged 13, 1325; dethroned by his queen, January 13, 1327; and was
succeeded by his son, Edward III. murdered at Berkeley-castle, at the instance
of Mortimer, the queen's paramour, by running a red hot iron up his fundament,
September 21, following, and buried in St. Peter's, Gloucester. Edward III.
eldest son of Edward II. born at Windsor, November 15, 1312; succeeded his
father, January 13, 1327; crowned February 1, following; being a minor, the
queen dowager and Mortimer governed 'till 1330; and by their intrigues the earl
of Kent was falsely accused and condemned (see Kent); but the king afterward
confined his mother, and put Mortimer to death (see Mortimer); he next reduced
Scotland, and took the king prisoner; married Philippa, daughter of the earl of
Hainault, January 24, 1328; did homage for Guienne to the king of France at
Amiens, 1337; took the title of king of France; was acknowledged so by the
Flemings, and the old French historians allow his title to be good; quartered
the arms of France, the fleurs de lys, which anciently were spears, and added
the motto, Dieu et mon droit, 1339 (See Motto); challenged the French king to
single combat, 1340; chosen emperor of Germany, which he refused, August, 1348;
fought in single combat with a Frenchman at Calais, and conquered, January 1,
1349; instituted the order of the Garter, the same year; defeated the French at
Poictiers, and took the king and his son prisoners, 1356; buried his mother,
Isabella, 1358; the king of France imprisoned in Hereford castle, 1359 (see
Edward the black prince); Edward embarked with 100,000 men for Calais, Oct. 28
following; raised the siege of Paris, April 1360, when a storm near Chartres
destroyed 1000 men and 6000 horses; king of France ransomed for 3,000,000 of
crowns, July following; the kings of France, England, Scotland, and Cyprus,
entertained by Sir Henry Picard, lord mayor of London, at his own house, Jan.
4, 1365; Edward died of a cingle at Richmond, June 21, 1377; buried at
Westminster, and was succeeded by his grandson, Richard II. son to Edward the
black prince. Edward the black prince (so called from his black hair and his
armor), son of Edward III. born June 15, 1330; married his cousin, Joanna,
countess dowager of Holland, daughter of the earl of Kent, who was beheaded,
1361; made prince of Aquitaine, 1362; brought the king of France prisoner to
England, from the battle of Poictiers, 1336, who was ransomed for 3,000,000 of
crowns; but as his son, one of his hostages, would not continue in England, the
king returned a prisoner, and died in London; made an expedition into Castile,
1367; died 1376. Edward IV. a descendant of the duke of Clarence, Edward III.'s
second son, and fifth cousin of Henry VI. who was descended from the duke of
Lancaster, Edward III.'s third son, born Sept 1442; elected king when Henry VI.
was deposed, Mar. ^, 1461: crowned, June 29, following; privately married lady
Elizabeth Gray, widow of Sir John Gray, of Grafton, Bucks, 1464; the valor of
this prince was, unfortunately for the times, turned against his own subjects;
he was taken prisoner by the Earl of Warwick, March, 1470, but escaped soon
after; expelled the kingdom, 1470, and Henry VI. restored to his crown, after
six years imprisonment; Edward returned, as duke of York, March 25, 1471; beat
the earl of Warwick at Barnet (see Battle of Barnet); was restored, and king
Henry VI. sent to the Tower; died April 9, 1483, at Westminster, and was
succeeded by his son, Edward V. This king understood and loved trade so well,
that he carried it on to his own private use; he used also to preside in the
court of King's Bench, and has done so three days together. See Edward son of
Henry VI. Battle of Tewksbury. Edward, son of Henry VI. murdered by Clarence
and Gloucester, in presence of Edward IV. May 21, 1471, aged 18. See Battle of
Tewksbury. Edward V. son of Edward IV. born 1470; succeeded his father, April
9, 1483, Richard duke of Gloucester, protector; conveyed to the Tower, May,
1483; deposed, June 20 following, and, with his brother, the duke of York,
smothered in the To^er soon after, by order of his uncle, Richard III. who
succeeded him. See Inundation Edward VI. son of Henry VIII. by Jane Seymour,
his third queen, born October 12, 1537; succeeded his father, January 28, 1547,
his uncle the duke of Somerset, protector; crowned, Sunday, Feb. 20 following;
settled the crown on lady Jane Gray, May, 1553; died of a consumption at
Greenwich, July 6, following, and was succeeded by his sister, Mary. See
Somerset, Gray, lady Jane. Edwin, king of Northumberland, the first Christian
king, succeeded R^dwald as eighth monarch of Britain, 624; killed in battle,
633, aged 46; buried at Whitby, Yorkshire, and was succeeded by Oswald, his
nephew, king of Northumberland. Edwy, son to Edmund I. succeeded his uncle,
Edred, 955, aged 17; resigned part of his kingdom, Northumberland and Mercia,
to his brother, Edgar; died of grief, 959; buried at Winton, and was succeeded
by Edgar. Edystone light-house, built in 1690; blown down, 1703; burnt, 1759;
rebuilt, 1760; burnt again, 1770; rebuilt, 1774. Essingham, Earldom of, created
173d. (name Howard.) Egbert, son of Woden, the father of the English monarchy,
began his reign as king of Wesse^, 800; conquered Mercia, 819; and every other
of the seven kingdoms, and became sovereign of all England, south of the
Humber, and called it England, 827; drove the Danes out of Britain, 836; died
838, and was succeeded by his son, Ethelwolf. Egfrid, succeeded his father
Offa, as 17th king of Britain, 798; died the same year, after reigning six
months; buried at St. Alban's, and was succeeded by Kenulf, 13th king of
Mercia. Eglington, Scots earldom of, created 1503. (name Montgomery.)
Eglington, Lord, attempting to take away a man's gun for poaching in his manor,
was shot by him, 1769. Egmont, Irish earldom of, created 1733. (name Perceval.)
Egmont, Count, beheaded at Brussels, 1568, which so enraged the Netherlanders,
so that nothing could appease them, till they had shaken off the Spanish yoke.
Egremont-castle, Cumberland, built, 1070. Egremont, Earldom of, created 1749.
(name Wyndham.) Egypt, The kingdom of, began under Misraim, the son of Ham, the
second son of Noah, 2188 before Christ, and lasted 1663 years; reduced to a
province, 31; conquered by the Turks, 1517. Eldon, Norfolk, burnt (50 houses)
June 4, 1752. Eleanor, the divorced wife of Louis king of France, married Henry
II. 1152; died 1204. Eleanor, queen of Edward I. died on her journey to
Scotland, at Herby, Lincolnshire, 1290, and was buried at Westminster, Eleanor,
queen of Henry III. died in a monastery at Ambresbury, about 1292. Elections.
See Bribery. Electricity, First idea of, given by two globes of brimstone, by
Ottoguericke, 1467; electric shock discovered at Leyden by Cuneus, 1746; that
it would fire spirits first known, 1756. Elegiac verse invented by Callinus of
Ephesus, who flourished about 776 before Christ. Eleusinian mysteries, first
introduced at Athens, by Eumolpus, 1356 before Christ; extinguished soon after
364. Elgin, Scots earldom of, created 1633. (name Bruce.) Elibank, Scots barony
of, created 1643. (name Murray.) Elizabeth, queen of Henry VII. died in
childbed, 1503. Elizabeth, daughter of Henry VIII. by his second queen, Ann
Bulleyn, born, September 7, 1533, and created princess of Wales soon after;
declared illegitimate, 1536; restored by parliament to her right of succession,
1544; that right set aside in favor of lady Jane Gray, 1553; imprisoned in the
Tower, by queen Mary, 1554; ditto at Woodstock, 1554; released at the
intercession of king Philip, April 9, 1555; succeeded her half-sister, Mary, on
the throne, November 17, 1558; crowned at Westminster, January 15, 1559;
succored the Protestants in France, 1568; invited them to England, which gave
birth to sundry manufactures, 1569; excommunicated by the pope for her zeal in
the protestant cause, which caused a rising of the papists, who were soon
suppressed; agreed to marry the duke of Anjou, brother to Charles IX. of
France, but receded, 1581; a conspiracy formed to assassinate her, by one
Ballard, etc. which failed, 1586; died melancholy at Richmond, March 24, 1603;
buried at Westminster, and was succeeded by her third cousin, James VI. of
Scotland. See Mary queen of Scots, Conspiracies. Elizabeth, sister to George
III. born 1740, died 1759. Ell, The ancient (from ulna or arm) which is the
modern yard, established by Henry I. from the length of his own arm. Ella, a
Saxon general, invited by Hengist, and his successor in the monarchy, came over
from Germany, landed at Whitering in Sussex, and established the kingdom of
South Saxony, 477; and was thus first king of Sussex; became second king of
Britain, 480; died, 514, and was succeeded in the monarchy by Cerdic.
Elphinston, Scots barony of, created 1509. (name Elphinston.) Eli^neur, in
Denmark, built two years after Christ. Ely, Irish earldom of, created 1771.
(name Loftus.) Esy cathedral built, 506; monastery destroyed by the Danes, 870;
rebuilt, 1109; bishopric taken out of Lincoln, and founded, 1008; archdeaconry
erected about 1125; deanery erected, 1541. Emanuel college, Cambridge, founded
by Sir Waltor Mildmay, 1584. (14 fellows.) Embden East India Company
established, 1750. Ember weeks established by Pope Urban I. about 222. Emma
died in prison, 1052. See Ethelred II. Canute. Epsom. See Dudley. England,
originally inhabited by the Britons, a branch of the ancient Gauls or Celtae;
the western part, in the time of the Romans, was inhabited by the Belgae; the
northern, by the Brigantes; South Wales by the Silures, and Norfolk and Suffolk
by the Iceni. Invaded by Julius Caesar, 54 before Christ; subdued by Clandius
44, and completely so by Agricola, in 85. The Romans kept possession till 410.
Conquered by the Saxons, 455, who were invited over by the ancient in
habitants, and who divided it into seven kingdoms, called the Heptarchy. See
Heptarchy. Ravaged by the Picts and Scots, 448. See Scots. Erected into a
kingdom by Egbert, by a union of all the kingdoms of the heptarchy, near 400
years after the arrival of the Saxons, 827. Conquered by the Danes, 877;
recovered by Alfred, 880. Divided into counties and hundreds, 886. Invaded by
the Scots, who were defeated by Athelstan, 921. Invaded by the Welsh, 984; by
Sweyn, king of Denmark, 1003; again by Sweyn, and almost subdued by him, 1013.
Invaded and defeated by the Irish, 1069; Irish landed, and were defeated, 1070.
Invaded by Malcolm of Scotland, who burnt several churches, etc. 1071; again,
1091; again, 1093, when Malcolm and his son were killed at Alnwick.
England. Invaded by Robert, duke of Normandy, 1101, by David of Scotland,
1136; again by the Welsh, with success, 1136; by the Scots, 1183. Put under an
interdict by the pope, for John's opposing his nomination to the sea of
Canterbury, 1206; interdict taken off, on John's submission, 1214. All in arms,
1215. Underwent a reformation in government, 1258. Invaded by the French, 1416.
Invaded by Henry, duke of Richmond, August 7, 1485. Put under an interdict on
Henry VIIIth's shaking off the pope's supremacy, 1535. See Egbert, Britain,
Danes, Rebellion, War.
English monarchy began in 449. See Egbert. Engraving on copper invented by
Maso of Florence, 1460; with the hammer invented, 1592; in mezzotinto by
Siegen, and perfected by the prince Robert Paletin, 1648; to represent wash
invented by Barabbe, a Frenchman, 1761; crayon engraving invented at Paris by
Bonnet, 1769. Funiskillin, Irish viscount, title of, created 1776. (name Cole.)
Enoch, the father of Methuselah, translated to heaven, 987 of the world, aged
365; i. e. 3017 before Christ. Enos. See Ceremonies. Entailing estates
introduced by statute, 1307. Entertainment, Places of, about London, first
licenced, 1752. Ephesus. See Diana. Epiphany, Feast of, introduced, 813.
Epirus, Kingdom of, first known in history by the great warlike achievements
of Pyrrhus, about 950 before Christ; a second Pytrhus was renowned for his wars
against the Romans, 280 before Christ. (See Pyrrhus.) Epirus became a republic,
240, but was subdued by the Romans 167 before Christ. It was finally conquered
by Mahomet II. 1466, and is now part of the Ottoman empire. Episcopacy
introduced before 100; abolished in Scotland, 1638; ditto in England, 1645;
restored in England, 1660; ditto in Scotland, 1661, which continued to the
reign of William III. Epsom mineral spring, the first of the purging kind in
England, discovered, about 1630. Era, or fixed period, from whence certain
people or nations counted their years: that of Nabonassar, 747 before Christ;
Philippic, or death of Alexander, 324 before Christ; of contracts, or
Seleucidae, 312 before Christ; Christian, 4; of Dioclesian, or era of martyrs,
284; of Hegira, or slight of Mahomet, 622; Persian, or of Yezdegird, 632; era
of Christ began to be introduced into history, 784. See Age, Hegira,
Nabonassar, Jesus, Time, Seleucus. Ercombert, youngest son of Eadbald, by Emma,
began his reign in Kent, 640; died, 665. Erne, Irish viscount, created 1780.
(name Creighton.) Errol, Scots enrldom of, created 1452. (name Hay.) Esau, son
of Isaac and Rebecca, born 1836 before Christ, Rebecca having been barren 20
years See Jacob. Esher Place, Surrey, built, 1414. Eskdale chapel, Penance at,
performed on Ascension Eve annually, in commemoration of the murder of a monk,
1159. Esquire, or gentleman, The addition of, to a man's name was rare before
1413. Esse^, Hongary, abandoned by the Turks, 1687. Essex, Arendeaconry of,
erected before 1142. Essex, Devereux, Earl of, struck by queen Elizabeth for
his insorent behavior in council, 1598; sent to Ireland, 1599, to subdue
O'Neale's rebellion, but returning without the queen's leave, he was confined
and degraded, 1600; and beheaded for stirring up the people to arms, Feb. 25,
1601. Essex, Thomas, Cromwell, created earl of, 1540; condemned for high
treason, without a trial, and beheaded, July 28, the same year. Essex, Earldom
of, created 1661. (name Capel.) Essex, Earl of, and lord Russel, committed to
the Tower, for engaging in Monmouth's conspiracy, where lord Essex cut his own
throat, June 21, 1683. See Russel. Estates; act passed for entailing them,
1307. See Tail. Etching invented by Carpi, and Italian, 1496; with aquafortis
found out, 1535. Ethelbald I. king of Mercia, succeeded Ceolred as 15th king of
Britain, 716; killed by his subject, near Tamworth, and buried at Repton,
Derbyshire, 757; and was succeeded by his nephew, Offa. Ethelbald II. son and
successor of Ethelwolf, married his mother-in-law, the princess of France;
began to reign, in Wessex, 857; reigned two years and a half, and died, 860;
buried at Sarum, and was succeeded by his brother, Ethelbert II. See Ethelwolf.
Ethelbert II. succeeded his father Ethelwolf in Kent, 857, and his brother, in
Wessex, 860; died, 866, and was succeeded, in the whole kingdom, by his
brother, Ethelred. See Ethelwolf. Ethelbert, fifth king of Kent, succeeded
Ceaulin as fixth king of Britain, 592; married Berta, daughter of Chilperic,
king of France, 594, by whom he was prevailed on to turn Christian, and permit
St. Augustine to settle at Canterbury; he had a second wife, who married his
son after his death; died, 616, and was succeeded by Redwald, king of the East
Angles. Ethelred, succeeded his brother, Wulfer, as 12th king of Britain, 674;
his queen, Ostrid, murdered by some Mercian nobles, 697; resigned his crown,
704; turned monk, and died abbot of Bradney, 716: and was succeeded by his
nephew, Kenred. Ethelred I. succeeded his brothers, Ethelbald and Ethelbert,
866; died of a wound received in battle against the Danes, 872; left two sons
and a daughter, and was succeeded by his brother, Alfred. Ethelred II succeeded
his brother, Edward the Martyr, and was anointed king by Dunstan, at Kingston
upon Thames, aged 12, 979; married Emma, sister to Richard II. duke of
Normandy, 1001; (hence the connection with the Norman family, that afterward
seated William the Conqueror on this throne:) sled from Suenon, king of
Denmark, who invaded England, into Normandy, 1013, when Suenon was proclaimed
king; and soon after dying, his son Canute was proclaimed, March, 1014; but was
soon after obliged to fly to Denmark; on this Ethelred, being invited back,
returned; Canute also returned, and obliged his son, retire to the north, 1015;
died April 23, 1016; was buried in St. Paul's, and succeeded by his son, Edmund
Ironside. Ethelwolf, bishop of Winton, succeeded his father, Egbert, as king,
838; died 857, and left his kingdom divided between his two eldest sons,
Ethelbald, and Ethelbert II. This prince established the annual tribute to the
pope, called Peter Pence, for the support of the English college at Rome.
Eton-college founded by Henry VI. 1441; rebuilt, 1569. Etruria, The country of,
now Tuscany. See Tuscany. Etruscans. See Tuscany. Eunuchs are mentioned, Deuteronomy.
xxiii. 1. and are of high antiquity both in Asia and Egypt. The first was made
by order of Semiramis. See Semiramis. Eustatia, St. Island of, taken from the
Dutch, Feb. 1781. Eutychians, heretics, arose 447, under Eutyches of
Constantinople. They denied that Christ's body was truly human. Evesham-abbey,
Worcestershire, built, 701; abbots Tower built, about 1520; town chartered by
James I. Ewelm palace, Oxfordshire, built, 1424. Exchange, Bills of. See Bills.
Exchange, Royal, first finished at the expense of Sir Thomas Gresham, 1569;
called Royal, by queen Elizabeth, January 29, 1571; rebuilt and opened,
September 28, 1669. Exchequer Chamber, Court of, erected by Edward III. 1359;
improved by Elizabeth, 1584. Exchequer, Court of, instituted on the model of
the Transmarine Exchequer in Normandy, 1074; Exchequer stopped payment from
Jan. 2, 1673, to May following. See Courts of Juslice. Excise-office formed,
1643. Excise scheme defeated, April II, 1733. Exeter-castle built, about 680;
city taken by Sweyn, king of Denmark, and destroyed, 1003; bishopric composed
of those of Devonshire and Cornwall, 1046; cathedral built, 1060; city
rebelled, 1067, and was by William the Conqueror subdued; incorporated by John;
precentorship created, about 1080; archdeaconry before 1083; treasurership;
about 1133; deanery and chancellorship, 1223; cathed^al begun, 1130; finished,
1485. Exeter-college, Oxford, founded by the bishop of Exeter, 1316. (25
fellows.) Exeter, Duke of, degraded from his title, and put to death for
conspiring against Henry IV. 1400. Exeter, Marquis of, lord Montague, and Sir
Nicholas Carew, beheaded (for conspiring against Henry VIII.) Dec. 21, 1538.
Exeter, Earldom of, created 1605. (name Cecil.) Expedition, Grand secret,
designed to make a descent on the coast of France, but after it had sailed, so
much time was wasted in councils of war, that France got intelligence of it,
and it returned, without executing its purpose, Sept. 1757. Explanation, Irish
act of, passed 1665. Eye, Suffolk, incorporated by king John. Eynsham-abbey,
Oxfordshire, built, 1005. Air, Justices in, the office instituted by Henry II.
1184; the last instance of their holding a court in any of the forests, is
believed to have been during the reign of Charles II. any of Eyrecourt, Irish
barony, created 1768. (name Air.)
F.
FABII, 300 Romans of that name killed by the Veientes, 477 before Christ.
Fairfax of Emley, Irish viscount, title of, created 1628. (name Fairfax.)
Fairfax of Cameron, Scots barony, created 1627, (name Fairfax.) Fairs and
markets first instituted in England by Alfred, about 886. The first fairs took
their rise from wakes, when the number of people then assembled, brought
together a variety of traders annually on those days. From these holidays they
were called feriae, or fairs. See Wakes. Falconry, the amusement of the great
in the 11th century. Falkland, Scots viscount, title of, created 1620. (name
Carey.) Falkland's Isles first discovered by Vespucci, 1502; settled by the
French, at the expense of Bougainvilie, Feb. 1764. Falmouth, viscount, title
of, created 1720. (name Boscawen.) Famine; the beginning of that which lasted
seven years, 1708 before Christ: an extraordinary one at Rome, when many
persons threw themselves into the Tiber, 440 before Christ; so dreadful a one
in Italy, that parents were reduced to the cruel necessity of eating their own
children, 450; one in 976; another, 1005; another, 1087; another, 1193;
another, 1251; another, 1315; another, 1318; another, 1335; another, 1348;
another, 1389; another, 1438. See Rem. Occur. annis 1315, 1348, 1353. Fans,
muffs, masks, and false hair, first devised by the harlots in Italy, and
brought into England from France, 1572. Farley-castle, Somersetshire, built
before 1342. Farnham-castle, Surrey, built by Henry, king Stephen's brother.
Farnham, Irish viscount, created 1780. (name Maxwell.) Fasts established, 138.
Fauconberg, earldom of, created 1756. (name Bellasise.) Faux, Guy, etc.
executed for a plot, called the gunpowder plot, intended to blow up King,
Lords, and Commons, while sitting in the parliament house, January 31, 1606.
Fencing-schools in London prohibited, as introductory to duels, 1285. Fenwick,
Sir John, beheaded early in 1697, for conspiring against the life of William
III. Ferrar, bishop of St. David's, burnt at Carmarthen for his religion, 1555.
Ferrers, Earldom of, created 1711. (name Shirley.) Ferrers of Chartley, Barony
of, created 1298. (name Townshend.) Ferrers, Earl of, hanged at Tyburn for
shooting his servant, 1760. See Dacres, Stourton. Feudal law introduced, 1070.
This was dividing the kingdom into baronies, giving them to certain persons,
and requiring those persons to furnish the king with money, and a stated number
of soldiers. It was discountenanced in France by Louis XI. about 1470; restored
and limited by Henry VII. 1495; abolished by statute 12 Charles II. 1662. See
Villenage. Feversham, of some note, 811; abbey built, 1147; Davington nunnery
founded, 1153; town first chartered by Henry III.; Maison Dieux, founded by
Henry III.; school erected, 1582; Mr. Arden murdered, 1550; running at old
wives Lees, established, 1628. Fez, Kingdom of, anciently Mauritania. See
Mozocco. Fife, Irish earldom of, created 1759. (name Duff) Figures, in
arithmetic, introduced into Europe by the Saracens, from Arabia, 991; till then
letters were used. Fines originated from the mercenary disposition of the
courts, all punishments anciently, before the use of money, being corporal.
Finlater, Scots earldom of, created 1637. (name Ogilvie.) Fire. Vide
Prometheus. Fire engines to draw water invented, 1663; those to extinguish fire
invented by Heyden, a Dutchman, 1699. Fireships first introduced in the
English navy, 1588. Fires, Great, in London; one that burnt down 13,200 houses,
etc. Sept. 2, 1666; it was supposed to be set on fire by the papists. The
monument was erected in memory of it. At Battle-bridge, August 12, 1749 In St.
Catherine's, 1673, 1681, and 1743. In Cornhill, 1743, 1759, and 1765. In Gray's
Inn, Feb. 7, 1680. In Inner Temple, 1717. At Limehouse, Dec. 1716. In Lincoln's
Inn square, June 27, 1752. At Rotherhithe, June 1, 1765. In Southwark, 600
houses, 1676. In the Temple, Jan. 26, 1679. In Thames Street, Jan. 24, 1715. In
Threadneedle-street, May, 1772. At Wapping, 1682.
First Fruits and tenths, a tax paid by the clergy, granted by the queen for
the augmentation of small livings, Feb. 7, 1704; office established, 1543. Fish
brought to London by land carriage, 1761. Fisher, bishop of Rochester, born
1458; beheaded, (for denying the king's supremacy) June 22, 1535. Fishery,
Herring, incorporated, Oct. 11, 1750. Fitzgerald, with five of his uncles,
Irish rebels, executed at Tyburn, Feb. 3, 1537. Fitzharris hanged for a libel
against the king, 1681. Fitzwilliam, Irish earldom of, created 1716. (name
Fitzwilliam.) Fitzwilliam, viscount, title of, created 1629. (name
Fitzwilliam.) Fitzwilliam, Barony of, created 1746. (name Fitzwilliam.)
Five-mile act passed, October 31, 1665. This act obliged nonconformist
teachers, who refused to take the non-resistance oath, not to come within five
miles of any corporation where they had preached, since the act of oblivion,
unless they were traveling, under the penalty of 50 l. Flag. See Salute.
Flagellants, who taught whipping necessary to salvation, arose 1260. Flammoc, a
Cornish lawyer, headed an insurrection, because they would not pay a tax;
marched to London, was defeated in a battle at Blackheath, and executed, 1497.
Flanders. See Low Countries. Fleet-market opened, September 50, 1737. Fleets,
East and West India, taken by the combined fleets of France and Spain, August
9, 1780. Flint-castle built, and the town chartered by Edward I. 1275.
Florence, the order of St. Stephen instituted, 1561. Florida discovered, 1512;
ceded to the British crown, 1763. See America, Rem. Occur. anno 1597. Flowers,
art of preserving them in sand, discovered by Boeler of Strasburg, 1633. Flute,
The, invented by Hyagnis of Phrygia, 1506 before Christ. Fluxions, or
differential method, first published by Leibnitz, 1684. Foley, of
Kidderminster, Barony of, created 1776. (name Foley.) Fonts instituted, 167.
Food, Animal, permitted by God, 2357 before Christ. Fools, Festival of, held in
the cathedral at Paris, January 1, and continued for 240 years, when all forts
of absurdities and indecencies were committed by the ecclesiastics, during the
^lebration of the mass, 1198; it originated at Constantinople, at the Greek
church, about 990. Forbes, Scots barony, created before 1421. (name Forbes.)
Forbisher's Streights discovered, 1578. Ford-abbey, Devonshire, built, 1142.
Forest, New, made, 1081, by William I. who for that purpose destroyed 36
parishes, and depopulated the country 30 miles round. Forgery, made capital,
1734. Fornication. See Adultery. Forest, John, burnt in Smithfield, for
denying the supremacy, May 22, 1538, aged 42. Fort St. David, India, bought by
the East India Company, 1686. Fortescue, of Castle Hill, Barony of, created
1746. (name Fortescue.) Fortescue. of Credan, Irish barony, created 1746. (name
Aland.) Fortification, First treatise on, published by Albert Durer, 1527.
Fortrose, Irish viscount, title of, created 1766. (name Macken^ie.)
Fotheringhay-castle, Northamptonshire, built, 1408. Fountain's-abbey,
Yorkshire, founded, 1204. Fowey, Cornwall, made a borough, 13 of Eliz.
Framingham-castle, Suffolk, erected in the time of the Sax^ns. France, the
country of the ancient Gauls; a colony of the Bei^e, from Germany, were
permitted to settle i^ it, 200 before Christ. Conqu^red by the Romans, 25
before Christ. The Goths, Vandals, Alans, and Suevi, and afterward the
Burgundi divided it amongst them, from 400 to 486. The Franks, from whom the
French are derived, occupled part of Brabant, 130 years before the reign of
Clovis. This is the only state in Europe that can boast a perpetual succession
from the conquerors of the Western empire. Its first king was Pharamond, who
began to reign in 418; Clovis was the first Christian king, 481. It was peopled
by the natives of Germany, who crossed the Rhine to invade the Gauls. The
assemblies called the States General first met, 1302, and continued to 1614.
The English crown lost all its possessions in France, between 1341 and 1359.
Scotch guards were ever about the king, from the reign of St. Louis, to that of
Henry II. It continued through 41 reigns of France from Charlemagne. King of,
taken prisoner by the English, 1356. See Edward the black prince. The taillon
tax established, 1549. The French began to date from the birth of Christ, 1618;
before they reckoned from the creation. Queen, Mother of, visited England,
1638. Law's banking scheme, something like the South Sea bubble in England,
took place, 1716; destroyed, 1720. Francis I. taken prisoner by the
Imperialists, and carried into Spain, August, 1525 (See Battle of Pavia);
killed at a tilting match, 1559. Orders; of the Crosiers instituted, 1211; the
Star, by king John, 1352; St. Michael, by Louis XI. 1469; Holy Ghost, by Henry
III. 1579; Mount Carmel, by Henry IV. 1607; St. Louis, by Louis XIV. 1693. See
Gaul, Bretagne, Most Christian King, Louis XV. Paris, Debts, Charlemagne,
Catholic, Franks, Sixteen.

Francis, St. founded the Franciscan friars, 1215; died 1227, aged 46. Franking
of Letters first claimed, 1660; commenced, 1734. Before the year 1764, when the
act passed to alter the mode of franking, the franked letters amounted annually
to 170,700 l. Franks, The, arose from a confederacy of the inhabitants of the
Lower Rhine and Weser, about 240. Freeholds. See Villenage. Free Masons,
Society of, took its rise from a set of foreigners, who called themselves Free
Masons, from none being acquainted with the secrets of their order, but such as
they admitted free among them. Their principal secret was constructing of
roofs, like that of King's College chapel, Cambridge, which they built. They
are said to have introduced the art of building with stone in England, about
670; others say, the institution is as early as the building of Solomon's
temple. Frithestoke priory, Devon, built, 1222. Frost, so great, that the
Danube was quite frozen over, 558; Mediterranean so frozen, that carriages were
used on the Adriatic sea, 859; again, 1234; one of 15 weeks, 1407; the Baltic
was frozen over, 1426; again, 1459, so that people traveled on the ice from
Denmark to Lubec, Wismar, Rostock, and Stralsund; great one in England, from
Nov. 24, to February 10, 1434; one Christmas, 1683; again, 1709; again, 1739
for nine weeks. Fryth, John, Rev. burnt for heresy in Smithfield, July 4, 1533.
Fulham-bridge built, 1727. Fulling, The art of, invented by Nicias, in the Time
of the Romans. Furness-abbey, Lancashire, founded, 1127. Funds, a Florentine
institution of, 1344, first settled and adopted at the Revolution, 1689. See
National Debt, Bank Stock. Furniture was very heavy, and could not be readily
moved, 1216.
G.
GAGE of Firle, Barony of, created 1780. (name Gage.) Gainsborough, earldom of,
created 1682. (name Noel.) Galleys, first used with three rowers to each oar,
786 before Christ. They came from Corinth. Galloway, Scots earldom of, created
1623. (name Stewart.) Galway college, Ireland, founded by Edward VI. 1551.
Galway, Irish viscount, title of, created 17^7. (name Moncton.) Game, first act
for preserving it passed, 1496; present one, 1753. The game laws are peculiar
to the northern parts of Europe; they were never thought of by the Greeks or
Romans. They were first occasioned by falconry, and therefore the heron is
deemed game, it being the noblest bird the falcon could fly at. In Charles I.'s
time, no person shot flying, it was reckoned unfair: what is now called
poaching was the gentleman's recreation. See Birds-nests. Gaming, Excessive,
introduced into England by the Saxons; the loser was often a slave to the
winner, and sold like other merchandise. The Turks never play for money. Gamut
invented by Gui L'Aretin, 1025, and the six notes, ut, re, etc. fixed by one
Meurs, of Paris, from the first syllables of the several lines of a Latin hymn
to St. John, 1133. See Music. Gardening, The era of, in queen Elizabeth's
time. Gardens, vide Remarkable Occurrences, 1509. Garnet, Tho. a Jesuit, hanged
at Tyburn for refusing to take the oath of allegiance, June 25, 1608. Garter,
Order of, instituted, April 23, 1340; altered, 1552. Some say it owes its
origin to Richard I. its splendour to Edward III. The duke of Richmond was the
first knight that wore the ribbon over his shoulder, the Duchess of Portsmouth
his mother, having thus put it on, and introduced him to his father, Charles
II. who was so pleased with the conceit, that he commanded the knights to wear
it so in future, April, 1681; before it was worn round the neck, as old
pictures show. Garter king at arms, created by Henry V. Gate, Custom of,
attending at the Prince's. See Port. Gateshide monastery, Durham, founded
before 653. Gauging contrived, 1570. Gaul, Ancient, comprehended all modern
France, Alsace and Lorraine, Savoy, Switzerland, the four Electorates of the
Rhine, Liege, Luxemburgh, Hainault, Flanders, and Brabant; successfully invaded
by the Barbarians, 407. Gaunt, John of, third son of Edward III. married the
daughter of the king of Castile, and took the title of king, 1371. His children
by Catherine, before marriage, were made legitimate by act of parliament.
Gauze, a manufacture known to, and of great value among, the Romans, 14.
Gavelkind. See Tainistry. Gaveston, the favorite of Edward II. put to death by
the barons, July 1, 1312. Gazettes, so called from a small Italian piece of
money, Gazetta, given to read them; introduced in Venice, 1600; in France,
1631; in Leipsig, 1715; in Amsterdam, 1732; at the Hague, 1735; at Cologne,
1756; courier of the Lower Rhine, 1764; the English gazette first published at
Oxford, Nov. 7, 1665. See Newspapers. Gelding cattle not in use in Scotland
till after 1378. Genesis, The book of, contains a period of 2369 years, ending
with the death of Joseph. Geneva, its republic founded, 1535. Genevieve,
Congregation of, commenced, 1618. Genoa formerly inhabited by the Ligurians;
its republic founded, about 63 before Christ; the present one, 950; the first
duke of, chosen, 1337; republic restored to its liberties by Doria, Sept. 12,
1528; an attempt to seize it by conspiracy, under Fiesco, which would have
succeeded, had not Fiesco been accidentally killed, 1547; bank failed, 1750.
See Doria. Gentleman. See Esquire. Geofrey, third son of Henry II. killed in a
tournament at Paris, 1183. Geofrey, bishop of Norwich, put to death, 1210.
George I. second cousin of queen Anne. The succession settled on his mother
1700; created duke of Cambridge, etc. October 5, 1706; ascended the throne,
August 1, 1714; landed at Greenwich, Sept. 18, following; quarrelled with the
prince of Wales for his resenting the king's nomination of the duke of
Newcastle's standing sponsor for the prince's son, Nov. 1718; reconciled to the
prince, June, 1720; died at Osnaburg, Sunday, June 11, 1727, of a paralytic
disorder, aged 67; and was succeeded by his son George II. See Hanover,
princess Sophia of. George II son of George I. by Sophia, daughter of the duke
of Zell, succeeded to the crown, June 15, 1727; quarrelled with the prince of
Wales for concealing the princess's pregnancy from him, 1737; reconciled to
him, 1742; died suddenly, Oct. 25, 1760, at Kensington, aged 77; buried, Nov.
11, at Westminster, and was succeeded by his grandson George III. See Caroline.
George III. son of Frederic prince of Wales, born June 4, 1738; succeeded his
grandfather, Geo. II. October 26, 1760; made the judges independent, March,
1761; married Charlotte, daughter of the duke of Mecklenburgh, Sept. 8, 1761;
crowned, September 22, following. The present family being descended from James
I.'s daughter, who was married to the king of Bohemia, and James I. being the
direct lineal descendant of Malcolm king of Scots, by Margaret, the sister of
Edgar Atheling, and Edgar Atheling being lineally descended from the immediate
heir of Egbert king of the West Saxons, though excluded from the throne by the
usurper Harold II. it follows, that George III. is truly descended from the
ancient Saxon kings. See Hanover, princess Sophia of, Henry I. Edgar Atheling.
Georgia, Colony of, established by charter, 1732; settled, 1733; expedition
against St. Augusti^e, 1740. Germain, Lord George Suckville, tried for
disobedience of orders under prince Ferdinand, August 15, 17^0, and found
guilty. Germany, from Germann, or warlike man, being anciently divided into
several independent state, made no figure in history till 25 before Christ,
when the people withstood the power of the Romans, and expelled them in 290.
The greatest part conquered by the Huns from China, 432, but not totally
subdued till Charlemagne became master of the whole, 802. He was the first
emperor, and added the second head to the eagle for his arms, to denote that
the empires of Rome and Germany were in him united. It was called Allemania,
from Alleman, i. e. in German, 'Every Man,' denoting that all nations were
welcome there. Dukes being at this time made governors of those provinces they
claimed a right to; hence came most of the sovereign princes of Germany. Lewis
I. Charlemagne's son, was the first king that made this empire independent,
814. It continued united to the crown of France, till 841. Charles III. was the
first that added the year of our Lord to the year of his reign, 879. Conrade I.
was the first elected emperor, 912. The electors, according to some, reduced to
seven, 999. To bring in their sons successors, the emperors, in their
lifetime. positically got them elected king of the Romans, which was a part of
the sovereignty; the first emperor so elected, 1054. The elective power
originated by the emperors getting their last will, wherein they nominated
their successors, confirmed before their deaths by the princes and great men.
The emperor Philip murdered, 1208. Nine electors first appointed to choose an
emperor, 1258. Lewis V. made the empire independent on the Holy See, August 8,
1338. Golden Ball, relating to the election of the emperors, established by
Charles IV. of Germany, 1357. To get his son elected king of the Romans,
Charles IV. gave each elector 100,000 ducats, and was forced to mortgage
several cities to raise the money, 1376; the descendants of the mortgagees
continue still in the possession of them. Charles V. born, 1500; visited
England, 1522; resigned his crown to his brother, 1556, and turned monk, 1558.
A reformation took place in the empire, 16^8. The peace of Carlowitz, when the
bounds of the German and eastern empires were settled, 1689. Orders. Of St.
Anthony, in Hainolt, founded, 1382; of St. Hubert, in Juliers, 1473; of St.
Michael, 1618. See Maximilian, Pope, Hanover, Academies, Vienna, Henry IV. Rem.
Occur. anno 996.
Gervis-abbey, Yorkshire, founded, 1145. Ghent founded by Julius Caesar.
Gibraltar taken by Sir George Rooke, July 24, 1704; besieged by the Spaniards,
February 27, 1727; again, May, 1731; again, 1781; nearly destroyed by a storm,
February 3, 1766. Gilding with leaf gold invented, 1273. Gillingwood,
Yorkshire, burnt down, December 11, 1750. Gin act passed, July 24, 1737.
Gypsies, or Egyptians, called in France Bohemiens, in Italy Zingani, a peculiar
race of people; made their appearance first in Germany, about 1517; banished
from France, 1560; from Spain, 1591, and all parts of Europe; the first statute
that passed against them here was in 1530. Gladiators, the combats of them
abolished, in the reign of Honorius, 404. Glandore, Irish earldom, created
1776. (name Crosbie.) Glasgow university founded, 1450; cathedral founded,
1136; castle, great tower of, built, 1426; theater burnt, May 6, 1780. Glasgow,
Scots earldom of, created 1703. (name Boil.) Glass, Art of making, brought to
England from France, 674; cast plate, blown plate, art of, discovered by
chance, 1164; first made here into bottles, etc. 1557; first plate-glass
manufactory at Lambeth, introduced from Venice by the duke of Buckingham, 1674;
made from minium and flint by Zisher, at Wittemberg, 1758; an additional duty
laid on 1777. See Windows. Glass, Painting on, in use long before the
reformation. Glastenbury church, the first Christian church in Britain, built,
as supposed, by Joseph of Arimathea, about 60; rebuilt, 1120; town chartered,
1705. Gleaston-castle, Lancashire, built, 1340. Glencairn, Scots earldom of,
created 1488. (name Cunninghame) Gleraw^ey, Irish viscount, title of, created
1766. (name Anne^ly.) Gloucester, once a Roman colony, built by Arviragus, 47;
abbey sounded, 700; burnt, 1102; again, 1122; city incorporated by Henry III.;
made a bishopric and city, 1541; last charter granted, 1672. Gloucester, Duke
of, uncle to Richard II. smothered at Calais between two featherbeds, Feb. 28,
1397. Gloucester, Humphry, duke of, third son to Henry IV. and uncle to Henry
VI. imprisoned and murdered by the queen's party, Feb. 28, 1447. Gloucester,
Richard, duke of, brother to Edward IV. murdered Edward, prince of Wales, 14^1;
put the duke of Clarence ^o death, Feb. 18, 1478; made protector of England,
1483; ordered his two nephews, Edward V. and his brother, to be murdered; and
elected king, June 20, following. See Richard III. Gloucester, duke of, son to
queen Anne, died of a fever, July 29, 1700, aged 11. Gloria Patri added to the
Psalms, by pope Damasus, about 366. Gloves, embroidered and perfumed,
introduced here by Edward Earl of Oxford in Elizabeth's reign. Gnostics, a
philosophising sect of Christians, that ridiculed the history of Moses, etc.
arose in the 2d century, flourished in the 3d, and were suppressed in the 4th
or 5th. The Manichaeans were a branch of this sect. Godfathers and godmothers
forbidden to marry, 721. See Baptism. Godmanchester, Hants, chartered by James
I. Godolphin, of Helston, Barony of, created 1735. (name Godolphin.) Godstow
nunnery, Oxfordshire, first consecrated, 1138. Godwin, Earl, invaded England,
1052, and murdered Alfred; choked at table with the king, in protesting his
innocence, 1053. See Corsned. Gold first coined in England, 1257; act for
weighing gold coin took place, June 15, 1774. See Sovereign, Money, Coin.
Golden Angel, Order of, founded before 486; restored, 1191. Good-Hope, Cape of,
discovered by the Portugueze, 1487; first doubled, by Vasea-di-Gama, 1497;
ditto by the English, 1591; taken by the Dutch from the Portugueze, 1033.
Goodwin sands, formed by the ^ea overslowing 4000 acres of earl Goodwin's in
Kent, 11^0. Gordian knot, The, a knot of the thongs in the wagon of Gordius,
who was elected king of Ph^gia, from driving a wagon, and which he afterward^
deposited in the temple of Jupiter. Wh^ever loosed this knot, whose end, were
not discoverable, the oracle declared should be emperor of Persia. Alexander
the Great cut away the knot ^ll he found the ends, and thus, in a military
(...), interpreted the oracle, 330 before Christ. Gordon, Scots dukedom of,
created 1634. (name Gordon.) Goree island taken by the English, 1663; retaken
by the Dutch, 1665; subdued by the French, 1677; taken by the English, 1758;
restored to the Frenc^, 1763. Gosford of Market-hill, Irish barony, created
1776. (Aches^n.) Gospel, person ordered to stand, when read, by pope
Anastasi^s, 399. Gotham, History of the wise men of, was, in the reign of Henry
VIII. accounted a book of wit, and alluded to certain sports and customs, by
which the people of Gotham in Lincolnshire held their lands. The histories of
Reynard the Fox, Tom Thumb, etc. were then in great estimation. Goths, The, who
inhabited all the country from the Baltic to the Euxine seas; first mentioned
as invading the Romans, 250; waged war with them, 3^6; from which time may be
derived the fall of the Roman empire. The whole nation, a million in number,
through fear of the Huns, removed with the leave of the emperor Valens, to the
waste lands in Thrace, 376. Rebelled against the Romans, 377, and were quelled;
being afterward attacked by Valen^, Goths. the Roman army was cut to pieces,
and the emperor killed. See Hadrianople, battle of. The Gothic Youths
massacred, 378. The Goths capitulated with, and submitted to, the Romans, Oct.
3, 382. Embraced Christianity, 400. Pillaged Rome, and massacred the
inhabitants, 410. Slew 300,000 inhabitants of Milan, 539. See Huns, Milan,
Rome, empire of.
Gower, earldom of, created 1746. (name Gower) Gown and Cassock, present one,
not worn before the reign of Charles II. Gowrie, Earl of, beheaded for
conspiring against James VI. of Scotland, 1584; the earl, his son, and
Alexander Ruthven, his brother, conspired against the life of James VI. of
Scotland, at Perth, and had nearly effected their design, but were slain in the
attempt, August 5, 1600. Grace Dieu nunnery, Leicester, built, 1151. Grafton,
Dukedom of, created 1675. (name Fitzroy.) Graham of Belford, Earldom of,
created 1722. (name Graham.) Graham, Sir David, beheaded for conspiring against
James VI. of Scotland, Jan. 1593. Grammarians, first regular ones, flourished
276 before Christ. Granada, Kingdom of, conquered by the Moors, 715; the last
Moorish prince was Abouabdoulah, who was conquered by the Castilians, 1492.
Granard, Irish earldom of, created 1684. (name Forbes.) Grand Cairo built by
the Saracens, 969. Grandier burnt at Loudon, France, for witchcraft, 1634.
Grandison, Irish earldom of, created 1767. (name Mason.) Grange, The lord of,
governor of Edinburgh, hanged with others, 1573. Grantham, Barony of, created
1761. (name Robinson.) Granville, Earldom of, created 1714. (name Carteret.)
Grapes. See Cherries, Vines. Gravesend, chartered by queen Elizabeth; burnt
1727. Gravity, The laws of, discovered by Galileo. Gray, Scots barony, created
1347. (name Gray.) Gray's-Inn, London, built, 1687. See Inns of Court. Grecian
monarchy, commenced by Alexander the Great's victory over Darius, the last
Persian monarch, 329 before Christ; empire began under Nicephorus, emperor of
the East, 811; ended, 1453. Greek marks of accent first used by Aristophanes
Byzantius, about 200 before Christ; study of Greek introduced here by William
Groceyn, 1491. Greeks, The, descended from Hellen, son of Deacalion and Pyrrha.
See Deucalion. Green-castle, Caernarvonshire, built, 1138. Green, Saxon, Color
of, discovered by Barth, 1744. Greenland was discovered in the reign of James
I. Company established, 1694. Greenwich, Barony of, created 1767. (name
Townshend.) Greenwich hospital endowed, 1694; burnt Jan. 2, 1779. Gregg
executed, 1708. Grenades taken by the French, 1779; suffered greatly in a
storm, Oct. 10, 1780. Gresham college, founded by Sir Thomas Gresham, 1581, who
died 1579; taken down, 1770. Gray Friars, their order founded, 1222. Gray, Lady
Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Richard Wideville, and the dowager duchess of
Bedford, on the death of Sir John Gray, married Edward IV. 1464; consented to
marry Richard III. 1484. Gray, Lady Jane, great granddaughter of Hen. VII. and
second cousin to Elizabeth; married to lord Guilford Dudley, 1553; proclaimed
queen of England on the death of Edward VI. July 9, the same year; but resigned
the crown to Mary, ten days after; beheaded for high treason, in the Tower,
February 12, 1554, aged 17. See Dudley, Lord. Gray, Marquisate of, created
1740. (name York.) Griffin, prince of Wales, who had been taken and confined in
the Tower, attempting to escape by the window, fell, and broke his neck, 1244.
Grimston, Irish viscount, title of, created 1719. (name Grimston.) Grister, the
Austrian governor, shot by William Tell, which laid the foundation of Swiss
liberty, 1375. The Swiss state was then a province of Germany, and governed by
praefects, but the Cantons having been treated with great rigor by the
emperor, Ury, Schweitz and Underwalt threw off their yoke, and entered into a
confederacy to support their freedom for ten years; this led the way to others
doing the same. Gristmills, the invention of the Irish, 214. Groats and half
groats were the largest silver coin, 1351. Gronville and Caius college,
Cambridge, founded by De Gronville, 1348. (26 fellows.) Grosvenor, of Eaton,
Barony of, created 1761. (name Grosvenor.) Guardaloupe, discovered by Columbus,
1493; taken from the French by the English, 1759; almost destroyed by a
hurricane, when great numbers perished, Oct. 11, 1780. Guelfs and Gibbelins,
party names, from Hiewelf and Hiegibelin, names of towns, two watch-words given
by opposite armies, during the civil wars in Germany, 1140; began in Italy,
1154; the Guelfs were for the pope, the Gibbelins for the emperor: 100,000
Guelfs were slain in Italy in opposition to the empire of Germany, 1319.
Guernsey reduced, 1339. See Jersey. Guienne. The French made themselves masters
of all this province, except Calais; after its being in the possession of the
English 300 years, April 1451. Guildhall, London, built 1410. Guildford castle,
built before the Conquest; town chartered by Henry I. and VII. free school
established, 1551; canal to Weybridge began, 1650, on which were erected the
first looks in England Guildford, Earldom of, created 1752. (name North.)
Guinea fowls. See Turkeys. Guineas current for 30 s. 1688; reduced to 21 s.
1717. See Coin. Gunpowder, found out by one Swartz of Cologne, 1400; some say
the Chinese knew the secret long before; first made in England, 1561.
Gunpowder-plot discovered, November 5, 1605. See Faux. Guns, Small, invented by
Swartz, a German, about 1378; brought into use by the Venetians, 1382; great
ones, first used at the battle of Cressy, 1346; first used in England at the
siege of Berwick, 1405; first cast in England, 1544; used in shipping by the
Venetians, about 1539; before they were only used to batter Walls. See
Artillery. Gyrwi, or Garrow monastery, Durham, founded, about 684. Gysburg
priory, Yorkshire, founded 1119.
H.
HABEAS Corpus act passed, May 27, 1679: bill ordered to suspend it, 1722.
Hackendown banks, Kent, formed, 853. Haddington, Scots earldom of, created
1619. (name Hamilton.) Hadley-castle, Essex, built before Henry III. Haghmon
priory, Salop, built, 1100. Hales abbey, Glocestershire, built, 1246.
Hales-Owen abbey, Shropshire, of the Praemonstratensian order, founded by John,
1204. Halkerton, Scots barony, created 1647. (name Falconer.) Hallifax, woollen
manufactory established there in Henry VIIth's time. Halling-house, Kent, built
before 1183. Hamburgh company incorporated in England, 1569. Hamilton
cathedral, Scotland, founded, 1451. Hamilton, Scots dukedom of, created 1643.
(name Hamilton.) Hamilton, Duke of, earl of Holland, and lord Capel, beheaded
for taking part with Charles I. in the civil wars, March 9, 1649. Hamilton,
Duke of, and lord Mohun, killed in a duel in Hyde-Park Nov. 15, 1712. Hamilton,
of Hameldon, Barony of, created 1776. (name Campbell.) Hampden, Viscount, title
of, created 1776. (name Hampden.) Hampton Court palace finished by cardinal
Wolsey, and given by him to Henry VIII. 1525. Hanbury's charities, Church
Langton, established March 14, 1765. Hand-in-hand fire office erected, 1697.
Hanover, which had hitherto been but a village, obtained the privileges of a
city, 1178; made the 9th electorate, 1692: treaty with France, etc. 1725.
Hanover, Princess Sophia of, mother to George I. youngest daughter of
Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia, who was the daughter of James I. of course first
cousin to James II. declared heir to the crown of England, 1700; died of an
apoplexy, June 8, 1714, aged 83. Hans towns, England's quarrel with, ended
1473. Hanseatic league, a commercial combination of the cities round the
Baltic, took place about 1190; it continued till about 1300. Hence the
Hans-towns. It at one time comprised 68 cities. Harborough, Earldom of, created
1719. (name Sherard.) Harcourt, Earldom of, created 1749. (name Harcourt.)
Hardicanute, king of Denmark, third son of Canute, by Emma, seized the crown of
England on the death of his brother, Harold I. 1039; died suddenly, at the
marriage feast of a Danish lord, at Lambeth, 1041; buried at New Winchester,
and was succeeded by his half-brother, Edward the Confessor, Ethelred's first
son by Emma, Alfred's brother. Hardwicke, Earldom of, created 1754. (name
York.) Harfleur taken from the French by Henry V. 1415. Harlach-castle,
Merionethshire, rebuilt, 877. Harley, Robert, earl of Oxford, born 1661;
stabbed, while at the council board, by Guiscard, a French refugee, who was
brought there for examination on a charge of high treason, March 8, 1711; died
1724. Harold I. second and natural son of Canute, succeeded his father on the
throne, 1036; by force of arms, and in order to extirpate the English royal
family, he forged a letter from Emma to her two sons Alfred and Edward, who had
fled to Normandy, inviting them to England to take the crown; when here, he
ordered Alfred's eyes to be put out; but Edward escaped, and was afterward
king; died April 14, 1039; buried at St. Clement Danes, London, and was
succeeded by his younger brother, Hardicanute, king of Denmark. Harold II. son
of earl Godwin, took possession of the throne on the death of Edward the
Confessor, Jan. 1066; defeated his brother Tosti, and the king of Norway, who
had invaded his dominions at Standford, Sept. 25, ditto; was killed by the
Normans at the battle of Hastings, October 14, following; and succeeded by
William, duke of Normandy, the Conqueror. Harpers and the Bards, who always
preceded the onsets of the Welsh in battle, abolithed by Edward I.'s conquest
of Wales. See Bards. Harpies were supposed to be locusts only. Harrington,
Earldom of, created 1741. (name Stanhope.) Harrison received 20,000 l. for his
time-piece, 1764. Harrowby, Barony of, created 1776. (name Ryder.) Harrowgate
mineral spring discovered, 1571. Harwich, Barony of, created 1756. (name Hill.)
Harwich chartered by James I. Harwood nunnery, Bedfordshire, built, 1150.
Hastings-castle, Kent, built before 1100. Hastings, Sussex, incorporated at
early as Edward the Confessor; burnt by the French, 1377. Hastings, Lord, put
to death in the Tower, by order of Richard duke of Gloucester, for plotting
against him, June 13, 1483. Hat (the man's) invented at Paris by a Swiss, 1404;
first worn in England in Henry VIIth's time; first manufactured at London by
Spaniards, 1510; before this, both men and women generally wore close-knit
woollen caps. High-crowned hats worn by the men in Elizabeth's reign. Hautboy,
The, supposed to be invented by Mercury. Havannah taken, Aug. 13, 1762. Havard
college, New England, incorporated May 31, 1650, burnt and rebuilt, 1764.
Haverfordwest-castle, built in the reign of William III. Havre de Grace put
into the Hands of the English, by the French protestants, 1562.
Hawarden-castle, Flintshire, built before 1281; demolished, 1648. Hawke of
Towton, Barony of, created 1776. (name Hawke.) Hawkers and pedlars, act for
licensing them passed, 1697. Hawley of Donamore, Irish barony, created 1646.
(name Hawley.) Haxey, in Axholm, Lincolnshire, burnt (50 houses) March 4, 1744.
Hay, of Pedwarden, Barony of, created 1711. (name Hay) Haymarket.
Charing Cross, London, established for the sale of Hay, 1664. Headboroughs. See
Tithing. Healths, the custom of drinking them, in fashion so early as 1134
before Christ. Hearth-money, the origin of the window-tax, established, 1662;
abolished, 1689. Hebrew points first invented, 475. Hegira, the era of the
Arabians and Mahometans commenced, 622. It owed its origin to the flight of
Mahomet, who, being persecuted at Mecca, returned to Medina, July 26, 622.
Helcaesaites, who taught that we might verbally renounce the faith, so we kept
it in the heart, appeared, 250. Helena, The island of, taken by the English,
1673. Helioscope, invented by Christ. Scheiner, 1625. Hellfire clubs
suppressed by order of council, 1724. There were three. The members assumed the
names of the patriarchs, prophets, and martyrs, in derision, and ridiculed the
Trinity, and other christian doctrines. Hell-kettles, Durham. See Rem. occur.
anno 1179. Helston, Cornwall, incorporated, 27th Elizabeth. Hemsted, Herts,
incorporated by Henry VIII. Hengist and Horsa, two brothers, heads of the
Saxons who came into Britain, landed in the isle of Thanet with 5000 men, 449;
Hengist murdered 300 English noblemen, whom he had invited to a festival at
Stonehenge, 475; died 480, after reigning king of Kent 31 years, and was
succeeded in the monarchy by Ella. Hengist was the founder of the English
monarchy, and was succeeded by Ella. Horsa was slain in battle at Ailsford,
soon after his arrival in England. Henrietta, Charles I.'s queen, died in
France, 1669. Henry I. third son of William I. succeeding his brother William
H. was crowned, Aug. 5, 1100; married Matilda, daughter of Malcolm III. king of
Scots, by the sister of Edgar Atheling, thus restoring the Saxon family, 1100;
made peace with his elder brother Robert duke of Normandy, who invaded his
kingdom, and claimed the crown, 1101; invaded Normandy, 1105; conquered it,
1106, and took his brother prisoner, who died a prisoner 28 years after in
Cardiff castle; betrothed his daughter Maude to the emp. of Germany, 1109;
invaded the Welsh, 1114; challenged by Lewis le Gros, king of France, 1117;
buried his queen, 1118; wounded at the attack at Andeley in France, 1119; his
only son, aged 18, shipwrecked and lost, when coming from Barfleur, 1120;
married Adelais, daughter of the duke of Lovaine, 1121; gave his daughter, on
the death of the emperor, to the duke of Anjou's son, 1127; surfeited himself
at Lions near Rome, with eating lampreys, and died Dec. 1, 1135, aged 68; was
buried at Reading, Berks, and succeeded by his nephew Stephen, son of his
sister Adela, by the earl of Blois. See Maude, Normandy, duke of. Henry II. the
first of the Piantageners, grandson of Henry I. by his daughter Maude, born
1133; intrigued with Rosamond, 1149; again, 1153; succeeded his cousin Stephen,
in exclusion of Stephen's son, Oct. 1154; arrived in England, Dec. 8; crowned
with his queen Eleanor at London, Dec. 10; dispossessed his brother Geoffrey of
Anjou, 1156; crowned again at Lincoln, 1158; married his son Henry to the king
of France's daughter, both infants, 1159; crowned at Worcester the same year;
quelled the rebellion at Maine, 1166; determined his son Henry should associate
with him in the royalty, and crowned him, 1170; invaded Ireland, and conquered
it, 1172; did penance, and was lashed by the Monks, at Becket's tomb, to make
atonement for his murder, July 8, 1174; took the king of Scots prisoner, and
made him give up the independency of his crown, the same year; reduced all the
rebels in England, ditto; named his fourth son, John, then 11 years old, king
of Ireland, 1177; buried his son Henry, June 11, 1183; agreed with Philip of
France to go to the holy war, 1188; died abroad, with grief, at the altar,
cursing his sons for rebelling against him, July 6, 1189, and was succeeded by
his second son, Richard I. This prince possessed Guienne, Poitou, Xantongue,
Auvergne, Limousin, Perigord, Angoumois, Anjou, Maine, Touraine, Normandy and
Bretagne in France. See Eleanor, Maude, Clarendon. Henry III. son of John, born
Oct. 1, 1207; succeeded his father, and was crowned at Gloucester, by his
father's adherents, Oct. 28, 1216; made peace with Lewis of France, 1217;
received homage from the king of Scotland, at Northampton, 1218; crowned again
at Westminster, after Christmas, 1219; quelled the insurrections of the
mutinous barons, 1222; barons threaten to elect another king, but were subdued,
1233; married Eleanor, daughter of the count of Provence, Jan. 24, 1236; had an
interview with the king of Scots, at York, 1237; obliged by the barons to
submit to certain regulations in government, 1238; pledged his plate and
jewels, when he gave his daughter, Margaret, in marriage to the king of Scots,
1252: resigned Guienne, Ireland, and Wales, to his son Edw. 1254; accepted the
Sicilian crown from the pope, for his son Edm. 1255; obliged by the barons to
resign his sovereign power, and sell Normandy and Anjou to the French, 1258;
shut himself up in the Tower, for fear of the barons, 1261; taken prisoner with
his son and brother Richard, king of the Romans, at the battle of Jews, 1264;
wounded in the shoulder at the battle of Evesham, while in the custody of the
earl of Leicester, when the barons were defeated, 1265; died with age at St.
Edmundsbury, Nov. 16, 1272, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Edward I. See
Evesham, battle of. Henry IV. duke of Lancaster, grandson of Edward III. born
1367; succeeded his first cousin Richard II. and crowned Oct. 13, 1399;
conspired against by Richard's party, Jan. 5, 1400; challenged by the duke of
Orleans, in revenge for the death of Richard, which ended in abusive language,
1403; married Joanna, widow of the duke of Bretagne, Feb. 1404; conspired
against by the earl of Northumberland, 1404; imprisoned James I. of Scotland,
who landed in Norfolk in his way to France, December, 1406; died in the
Jerusalem chamber, Westminster, March 20, 1413; was buried at Canterbury, and
succeeded by his son Henry V. by his first wife, daughter of the earl of
Hereford. Henry V. eldest son of Henry IV. born 1388; committed to prison, when
prince of Wales, for striking chief justice Gascoigne on the bench, before whom
one of his companions was indicted for a riot, 1412; succeeded his father on
the throne, April 9, 1413; conspired against, in favor of the earl of March,
his third cousin, a descendant from the duke of Clarence, Edward IIId's second
son, 1415; landed at Havre de Grace, with 56,000 men, and took Harsteur August
following, and fought the battle of Azincourt, Oct. 25, 1415; invaded Normandy,
August 1417; renewed his claim to the crown of France; entrusted with the
government of France, and declared heir to the crown, the Dauphin having been
disinherited for the murder of the duke of Burgundy, May 21, 1420; married the
princess Catherine of France, May 30, 1420; pledged his crown, jewels, etc. for
20,000 l. 1421; died of a fistula, at Roan, Aug. 31, 1422, was buried at
Westminster, and succeeded by his son Henry VI. Henry VI. only son of Henry V.
born at Windsor, Dec. 6, 1421; succeeded his father on the throne, Aug. 31,
1422, Humphry, duke of Gloucester, regent; proclaimed king of France, but
opposed by the disinherited Dauphin, who had near 15,000 Scots in his army,
ditto; crowned at Westminster, Nov. 6, 1429; crowned at Paris, Dec. 17, 1430;
the French made themselves masters of Paris, after it had been possessed by the
English 17 years, 1436; married to Margaret of Anjou, Nov. 1444; conspired
against by Richard duke of York, nephew to the late earl of March, and
descended from the second son of Edward III. 1450; taken prisoner by the duke
of York at the battle of St. Alban's, May, 1455; made the duke of York
protector, Nov. 1455; resumed the government, Feb. 1456; taken prisoner again,
at the battle of Northampton, by the earl of Warwick, 1460, when it was settled
that the duke of York should succeed to the throne after the death of Henry;
deposed by Edward IV. son of the duke of York, the duke being slain at the
battle of Wakefield (which see), March 5, 1461; escaped to Scotland soon after;
returned to England, 1463, and was taken in Lancashire, and sent to the Tower;
restored to his throne, 1470; taken prisoner again by Edward, April 11, 1471;
died in the Tower (supposed to be murdered by the duke of Gloucester) May
following, buried at Windsor, and was succeeded by his fifth cousin, Edward IV.
See York, Edward IV. Margaret. Henry VII. earl of Richmond, grandson of Owen
Tudor, descended from the duke of Lancaster, Edward III.'s third son,
succeeded, by conquest, his fifth cousin, Richard III. whom he killed in
battle, and who was descended from the duke of York, Edward III.'s second son,
August 22, 1485; crowned Oct. 30 following; married Elizabeth, Edward IV.'s
daughter, and heiress of the house of York, Jan. 18, 1486, and thus settled the
contest between the two families; lost his queen in childbed, Feb. 11, 1503;
gave his eldest daughter, Margaret, in marriage to James IV. of Scotland,
December 1503; died consumptive at Richmond, April 22, 1509, aged 51; buried at
Westminster, and was succeeded by his 2d son, Henry VIII. See Arthur, Gaunt.
Henry VII.'s chapel, its first stone laid, January 18, 1503. Henry VIII. the
first king of England, that was styled Dread Sovereign, second son of Henry
VII. born June 28, 1491; compelled by his father to marry his brother Arthur's
widow, Catherine, June 3, 1509; succeeded his father on the throne, June 24
following; invaded France in person, 1513; was a competitor with Charles V. for
the empire, 1519; had an interview with Francis I. of France, at Ardres, June
7, and with Charles V. emperor of Germany at Gravelines, July 10, 1520;
received from the pope the title of Defender of the Faith, for having written a
book against Luther, 1521; in leaping a ditch with a pole, he pitched head
foremost into some clay, and without help would have been suffocated, 1527;
gave up the claim of the English monarchs to the crown of France for a pension
of 50,000 crowns to him and his successors, Aug. 18, 1527; styled by the
clergy, head of the church, 1531; divorced from queen Catherine, and married
Anne Bulleyn, a maid of honor, May 23, 1533; excommunicated by pope Paul, for
beheading Sir Thomas More, and others, for refusing to take the oath of
supremacy to the king. Aug. 30, 1536; put Anne to death, on a charge of
adultery and incest, and married Jane Seymour, a maid of honor, May 20, 1536;
lost this queen in childbed, when Edward VI. was born, Oct. 24, 1537; disputed
publicly in Westminster Hall, on religious matters, with John Lambert, 1538;
married Anne, sister to the duke Cleves, December, 1539; divorced from her, on
a plea of a pre-contract, July 10, 1540; married Catherine Howard, the duke of
Norfolk's niece, Aug. 8, following; put her to death for adultery, February 12,
1543; married Catherine Parr, widow of Lord Latimer, daughter of Sir Thomas
Parr, July 12, following; died, Jan. 28, 1547; was buried at Windsor, and
succeeded by his son Edward VI. He was the most learned king we ever had; he
drew many of the statutes himself. See Reformation, Titles Royal. Henry III.
king of France, murdered, Aug. 1, 1589, aged 38. Henry IV. emperor of Germany,
dethroned by his son, and reduced almost to want bread, 1106. Henry IV. king of
France, made a prisoner three three years for countenancing the massacre at
Paris, 1572; killed by Ravillac, May 14, 1610. Henry, prince of Wales, eldest
son of James I. died of a lax, Nov. 6, 1612, aged 18. Heptarchy, the Saxon,
commenced in the sixth century, and continued till 800, when Egbert reigned
alone. 1. Kingdom of Kent, containing only that county. It began 457, and ended
834. 2. The South Saxons, containing Sussex and Surrey. It began 491; ended
about 600. 3. The West Saxons, containing Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorsetshire,
Wiltshire, Hampshire, and Berkshire. It began, 519; ended, 1066. 4. The East
Saxons, containing Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hertfordshire. It began 527;
ended 747. 5. Northumberland, containing Lancashire, Yorkshire, the bishopric
of Durham, Cumberland, Northumberland, and part of Scotland, as far as
Edinburgh Frith. It began 547; ended about 792. 6. The East Angles, containing
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire. It began 575; ended 793. 7. Mercia,
containing Glocestershire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire,
Leicestershire, Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire Lincolnshire, Huntingdonshire,
Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire,
Nottinghamshire, Cheshire, and part of Hertfordshire. It began, 582; ended,
874. N. B. The Saxons, notwithstanding this division of the kingdom, were
subject to one monarch, who was called king of Britain: the monarchy was not
then hereditary, but that person succeeded who had the greatest power. Hengist
was the first Saxon monarch. See Hengist.
Heraldry, the marks to distinguish different colors, invented by the
Chevalier de la Colombierre, 1639. See Arms. Heralds College, instituted in
England, 1340; office built by the first earl of Derby for his residence; given
up to the crown, 1552; incorporated by Edward VI. Hereinian forest, The, in the
time of Caesar, covered all Germany; it was 60 days Journey in length, and 9
days in breadth; Schwarts-wald, or the black forest is part of it. Herculaneum,
first suffered by an earthquake, Feb. 5, 63; totally overwhelmed with Pompeium,
by an eruption of Mount Vesuvius, Nov. 1, 79, in the first year of the emperor
Titus. Hercules, The fable of, taken by the Greeks, as supposed, from the
history of Sampson. Hereford founded in the Heptarchy; made a bishopric, 680;
archdeaconry erected about 1100; cathedral built, 1107; deaury, chancellorship,
and treasurership erected, about 1140; precentorship, 1150. Hereford, Viscount,
title of, created 1549. (name Devereux.) Heresy. The cruel statute for burning
heretics passed, 1401; and William Sawtree, rector of St. Osyth's, London, was
the first that suffered; repealed, 1677. Heretable jurisdiction^ in Scotland
abolished, 1747; they were valued at 164,232 l. Heriots, and military services,
established by the Saxons. Hermione, a Spanish galleon, taken, March 21, 1762.
Hermits, their order established, 1157. See Monastery. Herod began to reign in
Judea, 55; put his wife, Mariamne, to death, and his mother-in-law Alexandria,
28; began to rebuild the temple of Jerusalem, 18; his two sons put to death by
order of the Jewish council, 6; died Nov. 25, 4 before Christ, that is, four
years before the common era. See Jesus. Heron. See Game. Herrings, the first
invention of preserving them, by pickling, discovered about 1390, which gave
rise to the herring fishery. See British Herring. Hertford, rebuilt 913,
incorporated by James I. Hertford College, Oxford, founded by Dr. Newton, 1740.
(4 fellows.) Hertford, Earldom of, created 1750. (name Conway.)
Hertlebury-castle, Worcestershire, built, 1268. Hesse, Landgrave of, visited
England, 1611; troops brought over, 1756. Hessian troops arrived in England,
1758. Hever-castle, Kent, built, 1340. Hicks's Hall, London, erected, 1612.
Hieracians. See Hierax, Vol. II. High and low church, two distinct parties,
occasioned by the prosecution of Sacheverell for seditious sermons, 1710; his
abettors were called High Church, his opponents Low Church. See Sacheverell.
High Treason. See Rem. Occur. annis 1531, 1540. Higham Ferrars college,
Northamptonshire, built, 1422. Hillsborough, Irish earldom of, created 1751.
(name Hill.) Hinchinbrook priory, Hunts, built, 1074. Hindon, Wilts, burnt (150
houses) July 2, 1754. Hindostan. See Mogul empire. Hispaniola, Columbus first
landed at, when he discovered America, 1498. Hitchen, Herts, burnt (20 houses)
Sept. 11, 1762. Holdenby-house, Northamptonshire, built, 1585. Holderness,
Earldom of, created 1682. (name D'Arcy.) Holland priory, Lancashire, founded,
1319. Holland. See United Provinces. Holland, Barony of, created 1762. (name
Fox.) Holm Cultram abbey, Cumberland, built, 1115. Holstein given up by Russia
to the Danes, Nov. 16, 1773. Holt mineral spring discovered, 1728. Holy-cross
church, Tipperary, Ireland, built by O'Brien, king of Limerick, in 1169. Holy
Ghost, Descent of, May 24, 33. Holy Ghost chapel, Hampshire, built early in
Henry VIII.'s reign. Holyhead church, built before 1291. Holyrood-house abbey,
Edinburgh, founded by David I. 1128. Holy Water, first used in churches, 120.
Homage. See Kissing. Home, Scots earldom of, created 1604. (name Home.)
Homilies drawn up by archbishop Cranmer, 1547. Honey, Discovery of the use of,
attributed to Bacchus as a succedaneum for wine. See Mead. Honiton, Devonshire,
chartered 19th Edward I.; burnt (140 houses) July 19, 1747. Hoods, Ladies, came
into fashion at the end of Charles II's reign. Hops introduced into England,
1524; the parliament petitioned against them, as a wicked weed, 1528. Hopton,
Scots earldom of, created 1703. (name Hope.) Horatii and Curiatii, Combat
between the, 667 before Christ. Horsa slain by Vortimer, at the battle of
Eglesford, 455. See Hengist. Horse-guards instituted, 1550. HOSPITALS in
ENGLAND. Asylum instituted, 1758. Bethlehem founded by Edward VI. 1553; present
building erected, 1676. Bridewell, before a palace, founded by Edward VI. 1553,
and given to the city. British Lying-in instituted, Nov. 1749. Brownlow street,
Lyingin, founded, 1749. Christ's founded by Edward VI. 1552. Foundling
incorporated, 1739. French protestants, ditto, 1718. Guy's ditto, 1722. Lock
instituted, 1746. London ditto, 1740; incorporated, 1758. London Lying-in,
founded, March 30, 1750. London Workhouse ditto, 1611. Magdalen instituted,
1758. Middlesex ditto, 1745. St. Bartholomew's founded, by Henry VIII. 1539.
St. George's instituted, Oct. 19 1733. St. Luke's founded, 1751. St. Thomas's
ditto, by Edward 6, 1553 Sick and wounded Seamen's incorporated, June 24, 1747.
Small Pox instituted, Sept. 26, 174^. Westminster Infirmary, ditto, 1720.
Westminster Lying-in ditto, 1765.
HOSPITALS in IRELAND. Blue Coat, incorporated 1670. Charitable Infirmary
opened, 1728. Charitable Loan instituted, 1757. Dublin Hospital opened, 1762.
Dublin Workhouse established, 1728. Incurables opened, 1753. Kilmainham
incorporated, 1683. Lock Hospital instituted, 1755. Lying-in established, 1745;
incorporated, 1757. Mercers incorporated, 1750. St. Nichlas's opened, 1753. St.
Patrick's founded, 1745; incorporated, 1746. Smith's School incorporated, 1669.
Stevens's Hospital, ditto, 1730. Venereal opened, 1758. See Charities, Society.
Hospitality, in the middle ages, was a duty enforced by statutes; the laws of
the Slavi ordained, that the movables of an inhospitable person should be
confiscated, and his house burnt; they even allowed landlords to steal for the
support of their guests. Hotham, Sir John, and his son, beheaded, 1645.
Hotspur, Henry Percy, duke of Northumberland's son, called so, from his great
courage, slain at the battle of Shrewsbury, July 21, 1403. He conspired against
Henry IV. to dethrone him. Howard, Sir Edward, son of earl Surrey, attacked
Prejeant, a French admiral, off Breast, and was defeated and slain, April 25,
1513. Howden church, Yorkshire, built before 1266. How, Irish viscount, title
of, created 1701. (name How.) Howth, Irish earldom, created 1767. (name St.
Lawrence.) Hudson's Bay, discovered by captain Hudson, 1610; company's charter
granted, 1670. Hugh de Beauvois, with 40,000 foreigners, coming over from
Calais, to assist John against the barons, perished in a storm, 1215.
Huguenots, Protestants first called so in France, from a German word,
signifying 'allied by oath,' 1560; massacre of them at Paris, August 24, 1572.
See League. Hull, Yorkshire, incorporated by Henry VI.; citadel built, 1681.
Hume of Berwick, Barony of, created 1776. (name Campbell.) Hundreds, Division
of, a Danish institution, first made in England by king Alfred. See Tithing.
Hungary, the Pannonia of the ancients, was subject to the Romans, 11 before
Christ; conquered by the Huns under Attila, when the kingdom of began, 433;
annexed to Germany, under Charlemagne, but became independent, 920; the Turks
contended with the Germans for it, from 1540 to 1739, when, by the treaty of
Belgrade, it was ceded to the latter; conquered by the Abares in the 6th
century, and by the Turks or Magiars, 889, the immediate ancestors of the
modern Hungarians (see Huns); Lewis, king of, killed in battle against the
Turks, 1526; kingdom united with Bohemia, 1612. See Naples. Huns, savage
inhabitants of that part of Siberia, now occupied by the Mongous, commenced,
1210; their kingdom founded, 230; at war with the Chinese, 201; kingdom taken
and divided, 43 before Christ; embraced Christianity, 416; conquered Scythia
and Germany, about 460; the kingdom destroyed soon after the death of Attila,
453. See Attila. Hunting, an invention of the Thebans. Huntingdon, Earldom of,
created 1529. (name Hastings.) Huntingdon-castle built, 921. Huntly, Earl of,
trod to death in a battle against the earl of Murray, Oct. 28, 1562. Hurricane.
See Storm, Tempest. Hurst-castle, Hants, built by Henry VIII. about 1539.
Hurstmonceux-castle, Sussex, built before 1066. Husbandry. See Agriculture,
Bacchus. Hyde abbey, near Winchester, founded, 1130. Hydrostatics first taught
by Archimedes, 200 before Christ. Hylton-castle, Durham, built, 930. Hyndford,
Scots earldom of, created 1701. (name Carmichael.)
I.
IAMBIC Verse. See Archilochus, Vol. II. Iceni. See England. Iconoclasters, or
Image-breakers, a sect that appeared about 722, supported by the emperor Leo I.
They destroyed both pagan and christian images, which caused great
insurrections and divisions among the christians, from 740 to 780, when images
were again erected in churches, and the worship of them confirmed by the Roman
church. Ides, with the Romans, were 8 days in every month, so called being the
8 days succeeding the Nones. In March, May, July and October, these 8 days
begin at the 8th day of the month, and continue to the 15th; in other months,
they begin the 6th day, and last to the 13th. The last of these days only is
called 'The Ides,' the first being called 'The Eighth Ides,' the 2d day the
7th, the 3d the 6th, and so on; i. e. the 8th, 7th, and 6th days before the
Ides. Thus the Ides of any month implies the 15th or 13th of that month. See
Nones, Calends. Idolatry introduced by Ninus, king of Assyria; first abolished,
from Kent, by Ercombert, who began his reign, 640. Ilchester, Earldom of,
created 1756. (name Fox.) Ilium, built 1359 before Christ; 64 years before the
voyage of the Argonautae. See Troy. Images and relics, Worship of, commenced,
448; tried to be abolished by the emperor Leo Isauricus, 727; images moved out
of churches, 1548. See Iconoclasters. Impeachment, the first of a chancellor,
and the first by the commons, 1386. Impostors. One Aldebert, in the 8th
century, pretending to have a letter from Jesus Christ, which fell from heaven,
at Jerusalem, seduced multitudes to follow him into woods and deserts, and to
live in imitation of John the Baptist. Two men were crucified for giving out
that they were both of them the Messiah; and two women were executed for
pretending one to be the Virgin Mary, the other, Mary Magdalen, 1221. Gonsalvo
Martin, burnt by the Inquisition in Spain, for pretending to be the angel
Michael, 1360. Elizabeth Barton, called the Holy Maid of Kent, was spirited up,
by the Popish party, to obstruct the Reformation, foretelling the speedy death
of Henry VIII. if he divorced Catherine, and married Ann Boleyn; she and her
confederates were hanged at Tyburn, 1534. In the first year of queen Mary's
reign, after her marriage with Philip, Elizabeth Croft, a girl of 18 years of
age, was secreted in a wall, and with a whistle, made for the purpose, uttered
many seditious speeches against the queen and prince, for which she was
sentenced to stand on a scaffold, at St. Paul's Cross, during sermon time,
1553; she was called the Spirit of the Wall. George David, a waterman's son, at
Ghent, called himself a nephew of God, said he was sent into the world to adopt
children for heaven; he denied the resurrection; preached against marriage, in
favor of a community of women, and taught that the body only could be defiled
by sin; he had many followers, and died at Basle, in Switzerland, 1566. One
Hachet personated our Savior, and was executed for blasphemy, 1592. A Friar,
of the order of St. Bazil, pretended to be the son of the Czar of Muscovy, whom
the usurper Boris had put to death; but, according to his account, another
child had been substituted in his place: supported by Poland, he was invited by
the Russians to the throne, and the reigning Czar Fedor, and all his family,
were put into his hands, whom he cruelly put to death; but his imposition was
discovered, and he was assassinated in his palace 1606. James Naylor, a quaker,
whipped, and his tongue burnt through on the pillory, by an order of the House
of Commons, for personating our Savior, December 4, 1656. Mr. Mompesson, a
magistrate of Tedworth, Wilts, having punished an idle fellow, who beat a drum
about the country, under the authority of a feigned pass, and taken away his
drum, which he deposited in his own house, his house was beset for 2 or 3 years
with a continual drumming; the drummer was tried at Salisbury for a wizard, and
transported, 1661. Greatrakes, the Irish impostor, pretending to cure all
diseases, by stroking the patient, occasioned very warm disputes in Ireland,
1665, and in England, where it fell into disrepute, in 1666, on his examination
before the Royal Society. Sabbati Levi, a Jew of Smyrna, amused the Turks and
Jews a long time at Constantinople, by personating our Savior, 1666. Dr. Titus
Oats, an infamous clergyman, and others, made discovery of an intended plot of
the Papists to kill the king, and introduce popery, Sept. 6, 1678; they swore
away the lives of many Roman Catholic clergymen; Oats was whipped, 1685, and
sentenced to be imprisoned for life; but was afterward pardoned, and pensioned
by king William, 1689. One Fuller, a prisoner in the King's Bench, for debt,
forged a sham plot against William III. for which he was fined and pilloried,
1691. Young, a prisoner in Newgate, forged the hands of the earls of
Marlborough, Salisbury, and other nobility, for a pretended association for
restoring king James; the lords were imprisoned; but the imposture being
detected, Young was fined 1000 l. and pilloried, 1692. Three French refugees
pretended to be prophets, and declared, that Dr. Emms would rise out of the
grave, 1706. See prophets. Mary Tofts, of Godalming, Surry, pretended that she
bred rabbits within her, and so imposed on Mr. John Howard, of Guildford, and
Mr. St. Andre, surgeon to the king, as to prevail on them to espouse her cause,
1726. Elizabeth Canning, whose story is well known, convicted of perjury, and
transported, 1753. The story of the Cock-lane Ghost, by William Parsons, his
wife, and daughter, 1762; the parents were pilloried and imprisoned. See
Warbeck, Simnell.
Impropriations. Before the destruction of the monasteries, by Henry VIII.
1539, many livings were in their possession; the great tithes they kept
themselves, allowing the small tithes to the vicar or substitute that served
the church. On the suppression of the monasteries, Henry VIII. disposed of
these great tithe: among his favorites. Hence they came into lay hands.
I^c^i^uin, Irish earldom of, created 1654. (name O'Bryen.) Independents, such
as hold the independency of the church, or that each congregation may govern
themselves in religious matters. Preshyterians and Anabaptists are now agreed
with them; the anabaptists always were. Their first meeting house founded in
England was that by Mr. Henry Jacobs, about 1616. India stock sold from 360 to
500 per cent. 1683. Indictions, were revolutions of 15 years, by which the
Romans reckoned time; they are still preserved in the pope's bulls. See
Olympiads. Indies, East, first discovered by the Romans; discovered by the
Portuguese, 1487; conquered in 1500, and settled by them in 1506. The first
settlement was Goa. The English company established, 1600; their stock
consisting of 72,000 l. they fitted out four ships, and meeting with success,
have continued ever since. A new company established, School; the old one
re-established, 1700; agreed to give government 400,000 l. a year, for five
years, so they might continue unmolested, Feb. 1769; India bill passed, 1773;
Dutch East India company established, 1594; East India company at Copenhagen
established, 1612. See Judges. Indostan. See Mogul Empire. Indulgences, money
first given for them in the 12th century. Pope Clement V. was the first that
made a public sale of them, about 1313. Injections, Ana omical, first made by
Ruisch, 1726. Inns of Court instituted as a university to teach the law, soon
after the Court of Common Pleas was fixed in Westminster Hall. (see Common
Pleas) The degrees were Barristers and Sergeants. See Lincoln's Inn, Temple,
etc. Inoculation first tried on criminals, 1721. Inquisition, Popish, begun by
pope Gregory IX. 1204; established at Toulouse, 1229; committed to the
direction of the Dominicans, 1233; 133 heretics were burnt, in Champagne, in
France, in the presence of 18 bishops, 1239; its first establishment in Spain,
1482. See Jews. Institutions. See Charities, Hospitals, Societies. Insurance of
ships first practiced in the reign of Caesar, about 45; in general custom
throughout Europe, 1194; Insurance Offices first set up in London, 1667.
Insurrection of the poor in many parts of England, owing to the dearness of
provisions, 1766. See Riot, Rebellion. Interdicts, National, were an
improvement on the custom of the ecclesiastic censures on whole families, which
took their rise about 320. Interest of money, 45 per cent. 1307; established by
law at 10 per cent. 1546; 9 l. 16 s. 1604; 8 l. 1622; 6 l. 1660; reduced to 5
l. per cent. 1714. Interim, a provisional regulation in favor of the
Lutherans, relating to the articles of faith necessary to be believed, 'till
the decision of a general council, published by Charles V. of Germany, 1548.
Inundation. There happened such a flood in Gloucestershire, that all the
country was overflowed by the Severn, and several persons were drowned in their
beds, 1483. The waters did not abate for ten days, which hindered the duke of
Buckingham's passing that river into Wales, to join the Welchmen who were risen
against the king, and occasioned his misfortune and death. One at Newcastle on
Tyne, when upwards of 120 persons were drowned, 1633. One in Gascoyne, when the
water spouted from the sides of an adjacent mountain, in jets, 1678. One in
Yorkshire, in which a rock visibly opened, and water was thrown into the air,
to the height of an ordinary church steeple, 1686. Philos. Trans. One in the
north of England, Nov. 1771. See Dort, Petersburgh, Zealand.
Invasion, vide England and Ireland. Iphigenia, The fable of the sacrifice of,
taken by the Greeks, as supposed from the history of Jephtha. Ipswich west-gate
built, 1430; college built, 1524; town incorporated by Charles II. Ireland,
originally called Ierne, Hibernia, and Scotia. The first conquest of this
island was the Milesian. Ith landed here from Galicia in Spain, and died of the
wounds he received from the natives, 1071 before Christ, when the island was
divided as at present. From 323, to 103 before Christ, there were but two kings
but what were killed by their successors. King Cormac O'Con wrote a book called
'Advice to Kings,' about 254. Ulster was colonized by the Scots, who in the 3d
century covered the island. Began to receive the Christian faith, about 430.
Invaded by Fitz-Stephen, near Wexford, May, 1170, who settled there the first
colony of British inhabitants in that town. Conquered by Henry II. who
appointed first a viceroy, 1172; all the Irish were ordered home, 1423; the
kings of England were called lords of Ireland, till 1542; when Henry VIII. took
the title of king. Erected into a kingdom by a bull from pope Paul IV. 1555.
Invaded by the Spaniards, 1582. Again, by ditto, at Baltimore, 1601. All the
principal woods cut down by order of Cromwell; linen trade opened, Dec. 23,
1779. See Hospital, Dublin, Society.
Iron discovered by the burning of Mount Ida, 1432 before Christ; first cast in
England at Backstead, Sussex, by Ralph Page and Peter Baude, 1544; Iron was not
drawn by mills (an invention of Germany) till 1563. See Iron Mills. Iron-mask,
a state prisoner in France, so called from an iron mask that he had fixed on
his face, to conceal him, with steel springs, to admit of his feeding; was
supposed to have been some prince, and was treated as such; a discovery of
himself would have occasioned his death: he died 1704, after 43 years
confinement. Iron Mills, first erected in England, by Godfrey Box, of Liege,
1590. See Iron. Irrelagh Friary, Ireland, founded 1440, rebuilt 1602. Isaiah
began to prophecy 786; put to death by Hezekiah 696 before Christ. Israel, the
seat of the kingdom transferred from Tirzah to Samaria, by Omri, 924; kingdom
of, finished by the taking of Samaria (by Salmanaser) 721 before Christ. See
Judah. Israelites departure out of Egypt, Tuesday, May 5, 1491; fed with manna
from Heaven, Thursday, June 4, the same year; passed over Jordan, with Joshua,
Friday, April 30, 1451 before Christ. Isthmian games; or, combats in the
Isthmus of Athens, instituted by Sysiphus, king of Corinth, in honor of
Neptune, 15 years after the rape of Ganymede, 1326 before Christ. Italy, the
order of Crosiers there founded, before 1169. Several cities bought their
present immunities of the emperor of Germany; Lucca gave 12,0^0 crowns;
Florence, Genoa, and Bologna, 6000 each, 1286.
J.
JACOB, the patriarch, went to Haran, to his uncle Laban, 1759; returned into
the land of Canaan, 1739; went with his family into Egypt, 1706; died 1689
before Christ, aged 147. Jacobites, a party called by that name, from the
revolution to 1746, viz. those who expressed their wishes to restore the family
of James II. Jail distemper. See Accidents. Jamaica discovered, by Columbus,
1494; settled by the Spaniards, 1509; taken from the Spaniards by Admiral Penn,
May 7, 1655; terrible earthquake at, June 7, 16^2; dreadful hurricane, August
20, 1722; another, Sept. 1, 1734; another, October, 1744; another dreadful one,
August 10, 1751; again, with an earthquake, when Savannah le Mar was overflowed
by the sea, and destroyed, Oct. 2, 1780. James I. king of Scotland, succeeded
his father John, 1423; his father being at war with the English, he was taken
by them, and remained a prisoner till 1424, when he was released, (on paying L.
40,000, and consenting to marry Joanno, granddaughter to Edward III.) by John
duke of Bedford, regent, during the minority of Henry VI. to whom he paid
homage for his crown: murdered in his bed by assassins, by order of his uncle,
the earl of Athol, Feb. 19, 1437, whom he had punished for mal-administration,
during his imprisonment. He was succeeded by his son James II. James II. king
of Scotland, son of James I. succeeded his father 1437, being then 7 years old:
killed at the siege of Roxburgh, by the bursting of a cannon, 1460, aged 29,
and was succeeded by his son James III. James III. of Scotland, son of James
II. aged 7 years, succeeded his father 1460; seduced by astrology, to which he
was addicted, he arrested his two brothers John and Alexander, caused John to
b^ assassinated; Alexander escaped, raised an army against him, and took him
prisoner, but generously set him at liberty; his subjects however rebelled
against him for his tyranny, and he fell by them in battle 1488; he was
succeeded by his son James IV. James IV. of Scotland, son of James III. aged
16, succeeded his father 1488; married Margaret, daughter of Henry VII. of
England, December, 1503; subdued his rebellious subjects, but afterwar^s
assisting Louis XII. of France, against Henry VIII. of England; he was killed
at the battle of Floudon-field, 1531, aged 41, and succeeded by his son James
V. James IV. always wore a chain round his body, in penance for his father's
murder. James V. of Scotland, son of James IV. succeeded his father 1531, then
only 18 months old, his mother Margaret being regent; when of age, he assisted
Francis I. of France, against Charles V. and married Francis's eldest daughter
1535; buried his queen 1537, and marred Mary, of Lorraine, daughter of Claude,
duke of Guise, and widow of Louis d'Orleans, by whom he had only one child.
Mary, born 8 days before his death, which happened Dec. 13. 1542; he was
succeeded by this daughter. See Mary, Queen of Scots. James VI. of Scotland,
and I. of England, son of Mary, queen of Scots, granddaughter of Margaret,
Henry VIIIth's sister, by Lord Darnley, born at Edinburgh, June 19, 1566;
crowned king of Scotland, on his mother's being deposed, the earl of Murray
regent, July 29, 1567; took the reins of government, 1578; went to Norway,
October 22, and married Ann, princess of Denmark, Nov. 24, 1589; returned to
Scotland, May 1, 1590; seized by the earl of Bothwell, 1593; was near being
murdered by Gowrie, and his brother, at Perth, August 5, 1600; succeeded
Elizabeth on the throne of England, March 24, 1603; arrived in London, May 7,
following; conspired against, in favor of Arabella Stuart, his second cousin,
July following; styled himself king of Great Britain, 1606; created his son
Henry prince of Wales, May 1610; created 90 baronets to raise money, May 1611;
created his son Charles prince of Wales, on the death of his son Henry, Nov.
1616; went into Scotland, March 4, 1617; returned Sept. following; lost his
queen in a dropsy, March 1, 1619, aged 45; tore a protestation out of the
Journals of the House of Commons, December 11, 1621; died of an ague at
Theobald's, March 27, 1625; and was succeeded by his second son, Charles I..
See Gunpowder-plot; Henry, James's son; Mary, queen of Scots; Gowrie; Hanover
Princess of. James II. brother of Charles II. born October 30, 1633; entered
into the Spanish service, 1658; married Ann Hyde, the lord chancellor's
daughter, Sept. 3, 1660; made lord high admiral, 1664; lost his wife, March 31,
1671, aged 30; married the princess of Modena, Nov. 21, 1673; a bill passed the
House of Commons to exclude him from the succession, 1680; succeeded Charles
II. on the throne, Feb. 6, 1685; crowned April 23, following; received the
Pope's Nuncio, 1687; fled, on the prince of Orange's being invited over, Dec.
12, 1688; seized at Feversham, and brought back to Whitehall, December 16; left
England, by order of prince William, Dec. 23, 1688; and was succeeded by his
daughter Mary, and William III. her husband; landed with an army at Kinsale in
Ireland, March 22, 1689; returned to France, June, 1690; died at St. Germain's,
August 6, 1701. See Monmouth; Orange, prince of; William III. Pretender; Rem.
Occur. anno 1688. James's palace, St. built 1530. See Park. Jane Sevmour, Henry
the VIIIth's third wife, died in childbed with Edward VI. Oct. 1537. Japan,
Empire of, founded by Jerotimo, 1188; first discovered by the Portuguese, 1549;
christianity proscribed there, 1586. Jarrow monastery. See Gyrwi. Java, 30,000
of the Chinese massacred at, by the Dutch, 1740. Jericho, walls of, fell, 1454.
Jeroboam set up two golden calves at Dan and Bethel, to prevent his subjects
going to worship at Jerusalem, 975 before Christ. Jersey, earldom of, created,
1697. (name Villiers.) Jersey, Guernsey, Sark, and Alderney, were appendages of
the duchy of Normandy, and united to the crown of England, by the first princes
of the Norman line. Jerusalem, Templ^ of, built, 1094; city taken by
Nebuchadnezzar, after a siege of 18 months, June 9, 587; the second temple
finished, under Darius, March 10, 515 before Christ; destroyed by Titus, August
31, 70; pillaged by the Persians, and 90,000 inhabitants killed, 613; taken by
the Saracens, 637; taken by Godfrey of Boulogne, who was there elected king of
it, July 5, 1100; finally conquered by Saladin, 1187; now subject to the Turks.
Jester's court, abolished in France by Louis XIV^ in Germany, 1719. Jesuits,
society of, established by Ignatius Loyola, 1536; expelled England, 1604;
Venice, 1606; France, 1764; Spain, 1767; and Naples, 1768; suppressed by the
Pope, 1773. Jesus Christ was born, Monday, Dec. 25, in the year of the world,
4005; in that of Rome, 752, four years before the common era; his first
ministry in 30; baptized by John, 30; celebrated his last passover, and
instituted the sacrament in it^ stead, Thursday, April 2; crucified, April 3,
at three in the afternoon; rose, April 5; ascended. Thursday, May 14; all in
33, or in 29, allowing his birth to have happened 4 years before the common
era. Jesus college, Oxford, founded by queen Elizabeth, 1571. (19 fellows.)
Jesus college, Cambridge, founded by the bishop of Ely, 1496. (16 fellows.)
Jewels. Agnes Sorel was the first woman that wore any, 1434. Jews, the seventy
years captivity of, began 606 before Christ. Those about Cyrene, headed by one
Andrae, murdered near 200,000 Greeks and Romans; they eat their entrails, and
covered themselves with the skins of those whom they assassinated, 115. Five
hundred and eighty thousand of them destroyed by the Romans, 135. The first
known in England, were invited over by William I. 1067. Twelve thousand slain
in Germany, by those of the Crusade, 1096. They, thinking to invoke the Divine
clemency, at the solemnization of the passover at Paris, sacrificed a young lad
of twelve years old, the son of a rich tradesman, by first whipping his flesh
from his bones, and then crucifying him; for which cruelty the criminals were
executed, and the rest were banished the kingdom, 1180. From this circumstance,
the Jews have been ever since held in detestation. Massacred, Sept. 3, 1189, at
the coronation of Richard I. In Henry IIId's reign, they all wore badges on
their upper garments. Seven were condemned to pay the king 20,000 marks, or
suffer perpetual imprisonment, for circumcising a Christian child, at Norwich,
and and attempting to crucify him, 1235. Two hundred and two were apprehended
for crucifying a child at Lincoln, 18 of whom were hanged, the rest heavily
fined, 1255. Seven hundred were slain in London, because a Jew would have
forced a Christian to pay him more than two shillings per week for the loan of
twenty, 1262. Every Jew who lent money upon usury, was commanded to wear a
plate upon his breast, signifying that he was a usurer, or to quit the realm,
1274. Two hundred and sixty-seven were hanged and quartered, for clipping,
1277. The same year, the Jews crucified a child at Northampton, for which 50
were drawn at horses tails, and hanged. All the Jews synagogues were ordered to
be destroyed, 1282. All the Jews in England were apprehended in one day, their
goods and chattels consiscated to the king, and they, to the number of 15,060,
banished the realm, having only sustenance money allowed, 1287. They remained
banished 364 years, till Oliver Cromwell restored them. A general massacre of
them at Verdun, by the peasants, who, from a pretended prophecy, conceived the
Holy Land was to be recovered from the Infidels by them; 500 of these Jews took
shelter in a castle, and defended themselves to the last extremity; when, for
want of other weapons, they threw their children at the enemy, and then killed
each other, 1317. Driven out of France, 1394. Ditto out of Spain, to the number
of 150,000, 1492; they retired to Africa, Portugal, and France. It was against
them that the inquisition was there first established. There was not a Jew in
this Island from 1610, to 1624. Act passed here to naturalize them, 1753;
repealed, on the petition of all the cities in England, 1754. Four executed,
for murdering Mrs. Hutchins's servant, Dec. 9, 1771. See Massacre,
Naturalization Bill, Rem. Occur. anno 800.
John, fourth son of Henry II. born at Oxford, 1166; married his cousin Avisa,
daughter of the earl of Gloucester, 1189; aimed at the crown during his brother
Richard's confinement, 1193; excluded from the succession, 1194; pardoned by
his brother Richard I. 1195, and appointed by him his successor, 1199, in
exclusion of Arthur, son of his next brother Geoffrey; crowned May 27, 1199;
divorced Avisa, on a plea of being too near of kin, and married Isabella,
daughter of the count of Angoselme, contracted to the comte de la March, whom,
on the death of John, she married, 1200; crowned again with his queen, 1200;
and again at Canterbury, 1201; went to Paris soon after, besieged Mirabel,
vanquished his nephew Arthur, and took him prisoner, August 2, 1203, and caused
him to be murdered, then about 20 years old; cited to Paris, to answer for the
crime, but did not attend, of course was deprived of his dominions in France;
crowned again in England the same year; the kingdom put under an interdict, for
his opposing the Pope's nomination to the sea of Canterbury, 1208;
excommunicated for nonsubmission, 1209; landed with an army in Ireland, June 8,
1210, and quelled the revolt; deposed by the Pope, 1212, and the king of France
employed to put the sentence in execution; submitted, and surrendered his crown
to the Pope's legate, May 25, 1213, and was absolved, July 20, following;
resigned the crown again to the Pope, and the interdict was taken off, 1214;
compelled to sign Magna Charta, at Runny Mead, 1215; the barons offered the
crown to Louis, the king of France's son, who accepted it, 1215; Louis landed
in England with a large army, 1216; John retired with his crown, etc. from Lynn
to Lincolnshire, and lost all his treasure and baggage, as he passed through
the marshes; sickened at this, and died of a fever at Newark-castle, October
28, 1216; was buried in Worcester-cathedral, and succeeded by Henry III. his
son, by his first wife. See Henry II; De Courcy; Louis. John of Gaunt's house,
near Lincoln, built, 1397. John's, St. college, Cambridge, founded by Henry
VIIth's mother, 1508. (50 fellows.) John's, St. college, Oxford, founded by Sir
Thomas White, 1557. (50 fellows.) Johnson, Reverend Samuel, degraded and
whipped from Newgate to Tyburn, for a libel, Dec. 1, 1686. Jona monastery, in
the Hebrides, Scotland, built by St. Columba. Jongleurs, The, in France, were
those who sung the pieces of the Troubadours; but the professions were
sometimes united. See Troubadours. Joseph sold, 1728; tempted by P^tiphar's
wife, 1718; governor of Egypt, 1715; sent for his father Jacob, 1706; bought
all the lands of Egypt, and let them out at a fifth part of their produce,
1702; died in Egypt, 1635 before Christ, aged 110. Joseph and Mary, with Jesus,
returned to Nazareth, in 3 before the common era. Juan Fernandes, discovered
by the English, 1709. Jubilee among the Christians at the end of every century,
instituted by pope Boniface VIII. 1300: this was celebrated afterward every 50
years, by order of Clement VI. Urban VI. reduced it to every 33d year, and Paul
II. to every 25 years, at which period it is now sixed. One was held in
England, 1376, being the 50th year of Edw. III.'s reign. Cloths of gold and
silver were then worn. Juda and Israel, The kingdoms of, divided 795 before
Christ. See Israel. Judges appointed, 1176; appointed for life, 1762; sent to
India, 1773. Vide Circuits. Jugurtha, War with, 111 before Christ. Julius
Agricola, a Roman general, totally subdued Britain, 78. Julius Caesar, emperor
of Rome, born July 10, 100; invaded Britain, landing at Deal, August 26, 55;
killed in the senate house, March 15, 44 before Christ, after having fought 50
battles, slain above 1,192,000 men, and taken, by assault, 1000 towns. Jury.
Trial by 12 judges introduced first into Denmark, by Regnerus, who began to
reign 820; the institution borrowed here by Ethelred, and juries established,
as at present, 979; the custom of keeping them from food, till after their
verdict, took its rise from the fear of bribery, it being customary for the
plaintiff and defendant to feast them. Justices of peace first instituted,
1344; their power enlarged and settled as at present, 1590. See Conservators.
Justs. There were royal ones in Smithfield, between the earl of H^inault, and
certain Hanoverians, challengers, and the earl of Somerset, and an equal number
of Englishmen, defendants, 1408; the victory was on the Englishmen's side.
K.
KAMSCHATKA discovered by the Russians, 1739. Kelly, Scots earldom of, created
1619. (name Erskine.) Kendal, Westmoreland, incorporated by James I.
Kenelworth-castle built, 1120; priory built about 1122. Kenred succeeded his
uncle Ethelred, as 13th king of Britain, 704; reigned and turned monk, 708, and
was succeeded by his cousin, Ceolred, son of Ethelred, last king but one.
Kenric succeeded his father Cerdic, as 4th king of Britain; crowned king of the
West Saxons, 534; died 560, and was succeeded in the monarchy by his elder son
Ceaulin. Kensington, Irish barony, created 1776. (Edwardes.) Kent, Earl of,
brother to Edward II. beheaded March 19, 1330, for conspiring against Edw. III.
See Edward III. Kent, The maid of. See Impostors. Kenulf, king of Mercia,
succeeded Egfrid as 18th king of Britain, 798; built Winchcomb monastery,
Glocestershire; died 819; buried at Winchcomb, and succeeded by Egbert, king of
Wessex. Keppel, Hon. Admiral, tried for not doing his utmost to destroy the
French fleet, July 27, 1778, and honorably acquitted. Ker of Wakefield,
Earldom of, created 1722. (name Ker.) Kerry, Irish earldom of, created 1722.
(name Fitz-Maurice.) Kent, the tanner, hanged at Norwich, for rebelling, 1549.
See Rebellion. Ket's Coity-house, Kent, erected over the grave of Catigern,
445. Kew-bridge built, 1759. Kildare, Earl of, and his five uncles, executed in
London, for attempting to raise a rebellion in Ireland, Feb. 3. 1537. Kilkenny,
The statute of, passed, 1364. Kilmarnock and Balmerino, Lords, beheaded on
Tower Hill, August, 1746, for taking part in the rebellion of 1745. Kilmorey,
Irish viscount, Title of, created 1625. (name Needham.) King of Oakham, Barony
of, created 1723. (name King.) Kingdoms, Origin of, by Nimrod. See Babylon.
King's speech, The first, delivered, 1107, by Hen. I. King's college,
Cambridge, founded by Henry VI. 1441. (58 fellows.) King's evil was supposed to
be cured by a touch of the kings of England; the first who touched for it was
Edward the Confessor, 1058; his sanctity procured belief, and his successors
continued it as part of their grandeur. It was dropped by George I. King's
Lynn, Norfolk, Bailiffs of, first made mayors, 1204. Kingston, Duchess of,
tried for bigamy, and convicted, April 22, 1776. Kingston, Irish earldom of,
created 1768. (name King.) Kingston on Thames chartered by king John. Kingston,
Dukedom of, created 1715. (name Pierpont.) Kinnaird, Scots barony of, created
1682. (name Kinnaird.) Kinnoul, Scots earldom of, created 1633. (name Hay.)
Kinsale fort, Ireland, erected in Charles II.'s reign. Kircudbright, Scots
barony, created 1633. (name Maclellan.) Kirkby and Wade, sea-captains, shot at
Plymouth for desertion, April 14, 1703. Kirkham priory, Yorkshire, built, 1122.
Kirkstall abbey, Yorkshire, built, 1147. Kirkstead abbey, Lincolnshire, built,
1139. Kissing the Pope's toe, took its rise from the custom of kneeling to
sovereigns, introduced by Diocletian; thence also the custom of a vassal's
kneeling to his lord, in homage. Kit-cat club, a society of noblemen and
gentlemen, about 30 in number, established 1703, for the purpose of promoting
the protestant succession in the house of Hanover: the club took its name from
one Christopher Kat, a pastry-cook, who lived near the tavern where they met in
King Street, Westminster, and who served them. Knee ordered to be bent at the
name of Jesus, 1275. Kneeling to sovereigns. See kissing. Knight-errantry. See
Duelling. Knighthood, (derived from ancient chivalry, which took place on the
Continent, when in a state of anarchy, for the defense of the women) a military
institution of the Romans, who after their union with the Sabines, created
three centuries of knights, about 750 before Christ; first instituted in
England 540; during the heptarchy, it was conferred by the priest at the altar,
after confession and consecration of the sword. The first knight made by the
sovereign was Athelstan, by Alfred, 900: the custom of ecclesiastics conferring
this honor was suppressed, 1100; all persons possessing an annual income of
ten pounds, were obliged to be knighted, or pay a fine, 38 Hen. III. 1254. See
Rem. Occur. anno 1508. In France, it was an association to protect the women
from the violence of marauders, and was instituted about 1050. Knights of St.
John of Jerusalem. See Malta. Knights Hospitalers. See Malta, Knights Templars.
Knights Banneret, Title of, first given by Conan who commanded the Roman
legions in England, 38^. Knights Templars, a religious order instituted, 1119;
flourished in England during the reign of Henry II; all of them arrested in
France, in one day; they were charged with great crimes and great riches; 59 of
them were burnt alive at Paris, Oct. 13, 1307; their order destroyed by Philip
of France, 1311, and their wealth given to the knight hospitalers, which see;
abolished throughout Europe, 1312. See Knighthood, Teutonic. Knitting, an
invention introduced from Spain, early in Elizabeth's reign. Knives first made
in England, 1563. This was the first branch of cutlery made here. Known-men, a
name given to the Lollards, by Smith, bishop of Lincoln, 1500. See Lollards.
L.
LACOCK nunnery, Wilts, built, 1233. Lacteals, The, discovered by chance, in
opening a dog, by Asellius, July 23, 1622; in birds, fish, etc. by Mr. Hewson,
surgeon of London, 1770. Vide Thoracic Duct. Ladies first introduced at court
by the queen of Louis XII. about 1500; much later in England. Ladrone and
Philippine Islands; the first European discoverer of them was Ferdinand
Magellus, 1520. Laity and clergy, Distinction of, established before 150.
Lakenheath, Norfolk, infinite damage done there by a sand-flood, 1667. Lamb,
Dr. murdered in the streets of London, 1628. Lambert, burnt in Smithfield,
1538. Lambeth palace built, 1184; college and chapel founded by Hubert,
archbishop of Canterbury, about 1196. Lancaster castle built by Edward III.;
town incorporated by king John. Lancaster, Plantagenet, Earl of, grandson to
Hen. III. beheaded 1321, for conspiring against the Spencers, favorites of his
first cousin Edward II. Lancaster, Duchy court of, London, erected 1370; made a
county Palatine, 1376. Lancastrian family, The first king of, was Henry IV. See
York, the Crown. Land let in general for 1 s. an acre throughout England, 1544.
Rental of England, including land, houses, and mines, was computed at six
millions. about 1600; 12 years purchase was then the value of land. About 1690,
the rental amounted to 14 millions, and land was worth 18 years purchase. It
rose to 35 years purchase in 1778, but fell in 1779 to 24 years. Landaff
bishopric, founded about 490; cathedral built, 982; chancellorship and
precentorship erected about 1200. Landcheap. See Malden. Land Tax collected
very early in tenths, fifteenths, scutages, etc. but settled as it now stands,
1692; established on places, 1760. See Military services. Lanercost priory, of
the Augustine order, Cumberland, founded, 1169. Lanerk-castle, Scotland,
founded by Robert Bruce, 1314. Lanesborough, Irish earldom of, created 1756.
(name Butler.) Langdale of Home, barony of, created 1657. (name Langdale)
Langford, Irish viscount, title of, created 1766, (name Rowley.) Languard fort,
Essex, built by James I. Languedoc, The parliament of, erected by Charles VII.
1441. Lantherns, the invention of king Alfred, 890. Lantphey court,
Pembrokeshire, built before 1335. La Ramie, hanged at Paris, for personating
the son of Charles IX. 1596. Latin ceased to be spoken in Italy, about 581; in
France, in the 9th contury; abolished in processes at law, 1731. Latins, The,
reduced to the subjection of the Romans, 339 before Christ. Latium, City of,
built by Latinus, king of the Latins, 904 before Christ. See Aborigines.
Lauderdale, Scots earldom of, created 1623. (name Maitland.) Launceston castle,
Cornwall, built by the Romans; town built about 900; incorporated 1555.
Laureate. See Poet. Law Burrows, in Scotland, an ancient security to keep the
peace. Laws, and a tribunal of justice first established in the kingdom of
Argos, by Phoroneus, son of Inachus, 1808 before Christ (see Inachus). Roman
law collected by Theodosius the younger, 438; the code completed under
Justinian, about 533; the Saxon code by Ina, 709; Alfred's body of laws made,
890; those of Edward the Confessor composed, 1065; Oleron, or maritime laws,
made by Richard I. when at the isle of Oleron. See Canon, Molmutian. Lawyers
excluded parliament in Henry IVth's time, See Parliament. Layer, counselor,
hanged for enlisting men into the Pretender's service, March 17, 1722. Lazaro,
St. order of, instituted, 1119; confirmed, 1255. Lazarus, raised from the dead,
33; died Dec. 17, 63. Leadenhall, built as a storehouse for the poor, 1446.
League of the beggars (for so were the Protestants called) to oppose the
inquisition in Flanders, 1560; of the Huguenots, or French Protestants in
France, which occasioned a civil war, 1576; in Scotland, against episcopacy,
1638. Lear, king of Britain, began to reign in 900. He built the city of
Leicester, where he was buried, 840 before Christ, leaving his youngest
daughter Cordelia, queen, who after reigning five years, being taken prisoner
by her sister, slew herself. Leather, a duty first laid on it, 1339. Ledbury
hospital, Hereford, founded 1232; refounded by queen Elizabeth, 1580. Le
Despenser, barony of, created 1231. (name Leeds castle, founded about 857;
built 1071; rebuilt in the 11th century; chartered by Charles I. anew by
Charles II. Leeds, dukedom of, created 1694. (name Osborne.) Lees priory Essex,
built, 1306. Leiburn castle, Kent, built about 1190. Leicester, built by Lear,
( vide Lear) abbey built, 1143; town incorporated by king John. Leigh of
Stoneleigh, barony of, created 1643. (name Leigh) Leinster, Irish dukedom of,
created 1766. (name Fitzgerald.) Leinster, viscount, title of, created 1745.
(name Fitzgerald) Lenox, Scots dukedom of, created 1675. (name Lenox.) Lent,
the fast of, instituted 140; first established here in Kent, by Ercombert, 640.
Leo. See Pope. Leominster, Herefordshire, chartered by queen Mary. Lesbos, Isle
of, began to be peopled about 1045 before Christ. Leskard, Cornwall,
incorporated 1580. Lestwithiel, Cornwall, incorporated by 33 Edw. I. Letters
invented by Memnon the Egyptian, 1822; first brought by Cadmus from Phoenicia
to Greece, and afterward introduced among the savages of Europe, about 1500
before Christ; carried by the Europeans to America about 1500. See Memnon.
Letters of Slanes, are a discharge in old Scots law given to a murderer, by the
relations of the person murdered, on his paying a certain fine. Levant trade
commenced 1511; scon dwindled, but revived, 1510. See Turkey Company. Leven and
Melvile, Scots earldom of, created 1641. (name Lesley.) Lewellin, the last
prince of the Welsh, defeated, and slain by the English, and his head put on
the Tower of London, 1284. Jews priory founded, and castle built, 1078;
archdeaconry erected, 1180. Leyden jubilee instituted, 1675. See Universities.
Liberty of the subject. See Rem. Occur. anno 1679. Library, first public one
founded at Athens, by Hipparchus, 526 before Christ; first private library, the
property of Aristotle, 334 before Christ; first large one at Rome, built by
Theophrastus; Alexandrian, consisting of 400,000 valuable books, burnt, 47
before Christ; the Vatican at Rome, founded 1446. Lie, The great affront of
giving the, arose from the words 'Thou lie,' in the oath taken by the
defendant in judicial combats before engaging, when charged with any crime by
the plaintiff. See Combats. Lifford, Irish viscount, created 1780. (name
Hewit.) Light and colors, Theory of, given by Sir Isaac Newton, 1666.
Lightning, etc. so dreadful as to throw down several churches, Feb. 1222. It
thundered 15 days together, with rain and floods, that destroyed the fruits of
the earth, 1233. As the king and queen were talking together in their
bedchamber, a flash of lightning passed by them, and killed two of their
servants who were waiting on them, but did them no hurt, 1285. Destroyed many
men and beasts, and burnt many houses, etc. 1360. St. Paul's steeple, and that
of Waltham cross, were fired by lightning, Candlemas-day, 1443. Vide Rem.
Occurrences, 1703.
Lights in churches first introduced about 50. The original institution was at
the religious assemblies of Christians, to avoid the scandal occasioned by
their meeting in the dark, at night, during the times of persecution. Lights of
the Zodiac, first observed by an Englishman, 1659. Ligonier of Clo^mell, Irish
earldom, created 1776. (name Ligonier.) Ligurians. See Genoa. Lilleshul priory,
Salop, built, 1104. Limburg, Barony of, added to Prussia, 1713. Limerick, siege
of, 1691. Lincluden abbey, Scotland, founded in the reign of Malcolm IV. who
died 1165. Lincoln once a Roman colony; castle built by the Romans; cathedral
built, 1070; bishopric formed by uniting Sidnachester and Dorchester, 1086;
deanery, archdeaconry, chancellorship, and precentorship erected, 109;
subdeanery, ditto, 1140; city burnt, 1123; Newportgate a Roman building.
Lincoln college, Oxford, founded by the bishop of Lincoln, 1427. (12 fellows.)
Lincoln's inn, London, the palace of the bishop of Chichester, about 1226;
converted into an inn about 1310. See Inns of Court. Lindisfarne monastery,
Northumberland, founded before 651; present one built, 1104. It was formerly a
bishop's see, till removed to Chester. Lindores, Scots barony, created 1600.
(name Lesley.) Linen first made in England, by Flemish weavers, 1253; till then
woollen shirts were worn, as now by the Mountaineers in Wales: linen weavers, a
company of, from the Netherlands, established in London, 1368; staining of
linen first known here, 1579; linen trade, Ireland, began by Lord Wentworth,
1634; British linen company erected, 1746. Lisbon custom-house burnt, May 31,
1766. See earthquake, Academies. Lisburne, Irish earldom, created, 1776. (name
Vaughan.) Lisle, Irish barony, created 1758. (name Lysaght.) Litanies first
used in churches, 443; the first in English, 1343. Litchfield bishopric founded
by Oswy, king of Mercia, 656; united with Coventry, 1086; precentorship
erected, 1130; treasurership and deanery, ditto, 1140; chancellorship, ditto,
1222; cathedral built, 667; rebuilt, 1148. Literary property, statute in favor
of, passed, 1710; adjudged not perpetual, 1774. Literature was so little known
from the 9th to almost the 14th century, that few men of eminence in church and
state could either read or write. See Signing, Books. Liturgy first read in
Scotland, July 23, 1637. Liverpool castle built, and town chartered by king
John. Llanstephen castle, Caermarthonshire, built, 1138. Llanvylliny,
Montgomeryshire, chartered by Edw. III. Loadstone, virtues of, known in France
before 1180. Locusts, swarms of them settled on the ground about London, and
consumed the vegetables, 1748. Logarithms, for the use of seamen, invented by
baron Neper, a Scotchman. See Neper. Lollards (a term of reproach equal to that
of fanatics) were those who diffented from the church o England, before she
renounced popery. They sprung from William Lollard, who began to propagate his
opinions, 1315, and was burnt at Cologne, 1351; after his death the disciples
of Wickliffe were called Lollards; proscribed by parliament, 1406; many
Lollards executed about 1414. See Oldcastle. Lombardy, Kingdom of, began 573.
The Lombards were a detachment of Alcmans from Brandenburg, invited into Italy
by Justinian, to serve against the Goths. As a reward for their services, the
emperor gave them part of Upper Pannonia, now a part of Lower Austria, 548,
from whence they passed into Italy, and their chief was proclaimed king by his
army at Milan, 570. This kingdom made considerable conquests 'till 771, when
Desiderius, their last king, was taken by Charlemagne, and their territories
annexed to the German empire. London, formerly called Augusta, founded by the
Romans, 49; walled, and a palace built, 368; made a bishopric in 653; deanery
erected before the conquest; archdeaconry before 1136; chancellorship, 1150;
treasurership, 1160; precentorship, 1203; city repaired by Alfred, 885; burnt
to the ground, about 912; nearly destroyed by fire, 1077; again, 1130; the
chief magistrate, in William I^'s time, was called Port-reeve; Richard I.
ordained two bailiffs, but King John changed them to a mayor; obtained their
first free charter for electing their own magistrates, 1208; common hunt first
appointed, 1226; most of the houses were thatched, 1246; all built with wood,
1300; privileges of taken away, but restored on submission, 1386; aldermen
elected annually till 1394; charter declared forfeited, 1683; taken away, 1688;
charter given again, 1689; gates of the city taken down, 1760; the common
council ordered to wear blue silk gowns at court, Sept. 14, 1761; discontinued
the practice, 1775; Newgate taken down, 1776; city remonstrated, on the king's
paying no attention to their petition for a redress of grievances, and was
censured, 1770. See Building; and Rem. Occur. annis 1558, 1580. London bridge
built about 1098; built new with timber, 1165; finished with stone after 33
years labor, 1209; built with stone, 1212; houses took fire at both ends, the
people thinking to suppress it, were hemmed in, and leaping over into boats and
barges, several sunk, and 300 persons were drowned, 1214; its waterworks
invented and begun, 1582; a great fire on it, Feb. 11, 1632; houses taken down,
1756; temporary bridge burnt, April 11, 1758. London Stone, Cannon-street,
first placed there by the Romans, 15 before Christ. Londonderry, 210,000 acres
there granted to the city of London, 1610; town besieged, April 20, 1689.
Longbeard, William Fitz-Osborn, a lawyer, so called, hanged at Tyburn, for
stirring up the people to sedition, 1197. Longford, Irish brony, created 1756.
(name Pakenham.) Longitude. Harrison's time-keeper invented, 1763; Le Roi, of
Paris, invented a watch that keeps time better, 1766. Lord High Steward, the
first appointed for a coronation, was Thomas, second son of Henry IV.; the
first for a trial of a peer, was Edward earl of Devon, on the arraignment of
John earl of Huntingdon, in the same reign. Lord Steward of the Household, so
called since 1540; before he was styled grand master of the household. Lord
lieutenants of counties instituted, July 24, 1549. Lord Mayor's show, London,
the first, 1453. Lords, House of. See Parliament, Peers. Lorraigne given by the
emperor Lotharius to his second son, as an independent duchy, about 851; it
continued under its princes till 1670, when it was seized by Louis XIV. of
France, and annexed to that crown, though the empty title is retained by
another. Lothian, Scots marquisate, created 1701. (name Kerr.) Lotteries,
Public, first established in England, 1569. Loudon, Scots earldom of, created
1633. (name Campbell.) Loughborough, Barony of, created 1780. (name
Wedderburne.) Louis XV. king of France, stabbed by Damien, but not mortally,
January 5, 1757. Louis, son of Philip II. of France, laid claim to the crown of
England, from the pope's nomination, and landed with an army in the isle of
Thanet, May 23, 1216. See John, king. Louisbourg taken by the English, June
1745; given up to the French, 1749; retaken July 22, 1758. Louisiania
discovered by the French, 1633; settled by them, 1718; ceded to England, east
of the Mississippi, 1763. Louth park abbey, Lincolnshire, built, 1139.
Love Feasts established in the first century. Lovel and Holland, barony of,
created 1762. (name Percevall) Low Countries, the country of the ancient
Belgae, conquered by Julius Caesar, 47 before Christ; passed into the hands of
France, 412; governed by earls, subject to that crown, from 864 to 1369; by
marriage they then came into the House of Austria, but were yielded to Spain,
1556; shook off the Spanish yoke, 1572, and by the treaty of Vi^a, were annexed
to the German empire, 1725. That part now held by Faance was annexed to France,
1748. Lowth, Irish carldom of, created 1759. (name Birmingham.) Lubeck, City
of, burnt to ashes, 1209; again 1276. Lucan of Castlebar, Irish barony, created
1776. (name Bingham.) Lucca, its republic founded, 300; purchased its
independency of the Emperor for 10,000 crowns. Lucern brought into the
Palatinate, about 1575; into England soon after. Ludlow, Irish earldom of,
created 1760. (name Ludlow.) Ludlow-castle, Salop, built soon after the
conquest. Lulworth-castle, Dorset, built 1610. Lumley, Irish viscount, title
of, created 1628. (name Saunderson.) Lungs, vesicles of, discovered by
Malpighi, 1681. Lupercalia, The festival of, whose origin had preceded the
foundation of Rome, was continued in February, till the reign of pope Gelasius,
who abolished it about 480. The rites of this festival were expressive of an
early state of society, before the invention of arts and agriculture.
Lutgershall-castie, Wilts, built before 1199. Lydia, an ancient kingdom, under
a long dynasty of kings, the last of whom was the rich Croesus, who was
conquered by Cyrus, 544. It continued part of the Persian empire 'till that was
conquered by Alexander, and about 283 it became part of the new kingdom of
Pergamos, till Attalus bequeathed it to the Romans, 133 before Christ. It was
at last taken from the eastern empire by the Turks, 1326. Lyme-castle, Kent,
built long before 1379. Lyme-regis, Dorsetshire, chartered by Edward I. Lions,
France, founded by Lucius Plan^us, 43 before Christ. See Academies. Lyons-inn,
London, established, 1420. See Inns of Court.
M.
MACARTNEY of Lissanoure, Irish barony, created 1776. (name Macartney.)
Maccabees, Government of Judea under, which continued 126 years, 163 before
Christ. See Antiochus. Macclesfield, Earldom of, created 1721. (name Parker.)
Macdonald of Slate, Irish barony, created 1776. (name Macdonald.) Macedon,
Kingdom of, began under Caranus, 814; ended by the defeat of Perseus, and
became a Roman province, 168 before Christ. (name Macdonald.) Mackrell allowed
to be cried through London on Sundays, School. Macmahone, Lord, hanged for
treason, 1644. Madagascar, first seen by the Portugueze, 1506. Madeira, Islands
of, discovered by the Portugueze, 1419. Madrass peopled, and Fort St. George
built by the English, 1620. Madrid built 936 before Christ. See Academies.
Magdalen college, Cambridge, founded by the duke of Buckingham, 1516. (16
fellows.) Magdalen college, Oxford, founded by the bishop of Winton, 1549. (40
fellows.) Magic lanthorn, first constructed by Roger Bacon, 1260. Magna Charta,
(a body of laws, the great barrier of English liberty) granted by king John to
England, June 19, 1215; to Ireland, Nov. 12, 1216. Magnifying glasses, round,
invented by Roger Bacon, 1252. Maiden rents. See Rem. Occur. 1057. Maidenhead
incorporated by Edward III. Maidstone, Kent, St. Mary and All Saints college,
founded, 1396; town incorporated by queen Elizabeth. Maintenance in litigation
condemned by the Mosaic law, Exodus xxiii. 3. Maire, Le, Streights of,
discovered, 1616, by le Maire, a Dutchman, who died 1622. Majesty, The title
of, first given to Louis XI. of France: before this time, kings were satisfied
with the appellation of Highness, or Grace; first given in England to Henry
VIII. See Titles. Majorca reduced by the Spaniards, 1715. Malacca, gold mines
discovered there, 1731. See Summatra. Malaga, Spain, built by the Phoenicians.
See Cadiz. Malden, Essex, built 28 before Christ, rebuilt 919; the custom of
Landcheap settled, by a grant from the bishop of London, 1403. Malmsbury abbey
founded in 642; castle built, 1134. Maloes, St. English attempt upon it, June
8, 1758. Malt tax established, 1697; increased, 1760; new modelled, 1766.
Malta, Knights of, alias Knights Hospitallers, alias Knights of St. John, of
Jerusalem; the foundation of that order laid by opening a house for the
reception of pilgrims at Jerusalem, 1048; became a regular monastic order,
1099, and a military order, 1118; took Rhodes, and were called Knights of
Rhodes, 1310; being expelled from thence by the Turks, the emperor Charles V.
gave them the island of Malta, 1523, and they were called Knights of Malta;
expelled England, 1540; did great exploits against the Insidels, 1595;
conspiracy at Malta, to destroy the whole order, for which 125 Turkish slaves
suffered death, June 26, 1749. See Rhodes. Malton, Irish earldom of, created
1750. (name Wentworth.) Man, Isle of, formerly subject to Norway, then to John
and Henry III. of England, and afterward to Scotland; conquered by Henry IV.
and by him given to the earl of Northumberland, on whose attainder it was
granted to Sir John de Stanley, 1406; in this family it continued till 1594,
when it was seized by the queen; granted to William earl of Derby, 1608; fell
by inheritance to the duke of Athol, 1735; christianity first established there
by Sts. Patrick and Andrew, about 440; episcopal see established, 447;
conquered from the Scots, by Montacute earl of Sarum, 1314, to whom Edward III.
gave the title of king of Man; first Tynwald meeting, about 1418; the
proprietors first called Lords of Man, 1521 (before they were kings); the
bishopric annexed to the province of York, 1541; island of, annexed to the
crown of England, having been purchased of the duke of Athol for 70,000l. 1765.
Manchester, Dukedom of, created 1719. (name Montague.) Manchester navigation
opened, June 17, 1761. Manicheans, a sect in Persia, who believe two deities,
one good, one bad; arose under Manes, 275. See Gnostics. Manilla, an island in
the East Indies, taken by the English from the Spaniards, July 27, 1757. Manna.
See Purgatives. Manno, T. burnt in Smithfield for heresy, 1512. Manorbeer
castle, Pembrokeshire, built about the time of William II. Manors. See
Villenage. Mansfield, of Nottingham, Earldom of, created 1776. (name Murray.)
Mansion House, London, founded Oct. 23, 1739; inhabited 1752. Mantua
independent till 1^03, when it was seized by the house of Austria; order of the
Rede^mer instituted, 16^3. See Academies. Maps and globe, invented by
Anaximander; mapand sea charts first brought to England by Barth^ lemew
Columbus, 1499. Marble, art of staining it, known before 1644. Marches, in
Wales, were districts in which great mischiefs were committed in the fourteenth
century. One George Boarn, a famous Moss-trooper, cosfessed that he had
murdered seven Englishmen, and ravished forty women. Marcheta, Custom of. See
(...). Occur. anno 1057 Marchmont, Scots earldom, created 1697. (name Hume.)
Margaret of D'Anjou, daughter of the king of Naples, queen to Henry VI. with
her son, taken prisoner at the battle of Tewkibury, May 4, 1471. See Henry VI.
Gloucester. Marigalante, Isle of, discovered by Columbus, 1493; settled by the
French, 1691. Marise, William, a nobleman's son, drawn, hanged and quartered,
for piracy, 1241; the first punishment of that kind. Markets. See Fairs. Marl,
The use of, in husbandry, was known to the people of this island before Pliny.
Marlborough, Dukedom of, created 1702. (name Spencer.) Marlborough, Statutes
of, enacted Nov. 18, 1267. Marleyhill, Hereford, removed itself, 1573. Marloe,
Christopher, dram. writer, killed by his rival, 1593. Marquis, Title of, first
given to Vere, earl of Oxford, called marquis of Dublin, 1386. Marriage, The
first institution of, by ceremony, is ascribed to Cecrops, king of Athens, 1556
before Christ; celebration of it in churches first ordained by Pope Innocent
III. about 1200; before which, the only ceremony was that of a man's leading
his bride home to his house; in Lent forbidden, 364; forbidden the priests,
1015; addresses of love to married women were customary about 1150; publication
of banns instituted, about 1210; seven bishops deprived for being married,
1554; act passed for solemnizing it by justices of the peace, 1653; last
marriage act passed, June, 1753. See Rem. Occur. anno 1571. Marseilles is said
to have been a town 500 before Christ. See Academies. Marshals first instituted
in France, 1436. Marshalsea, a Palace Court, erected 1630. Martinico, taken by
the English, together with St. Lucia, St. Vincent, and the Grenada Islands,
February, 1762; Pierre town burnt (700 houses), October, 1752. Mary, mother of
Christ, died in 45, aged 60; feast of, instituted 695; feast of her nativity
first observed in France, 1007. Mary, Queen, daughter of Henry VIII. by his
first wife, born 1516; declared illegitimate on account of the illegality of
her father's marriage, 1536; restored by parliament to her right of succession,
1544; that right set aside in favor of lady Jane Gray, June, 1553; succeeded
however her half brother Edward VI. July 19, 1553; crowned September 30,
following; her legitimacy confirmed by parliament, Oct. following; married
Philip, prince of Spain, son of Charles V Jan. 19. 1554; Philip allowed to take
the title of king during her life, Sept. 29, following; died of a dropsy, Nov.
17, 1558, and was succeeded by her half sister Elizabeth. See Gray, Lady Jane,
Philip II. Mary, queen of Scots, grandaughter of Margaret, Henry VIIIth's
sister, born Dec. 1542; succeeded her father at eight days old, the earl of
Arran guardian; married to the dauphin Francis, son of Henry II. of France,
April 24, 1558; buried her husband, then king, 1560; refused a passage through
England on her return to Scotland, 1561; made her public entry into Edinburgh,
Sept. 1, 1561; lord Leicester proposed to her in marriage by queen Elizabeth,
1564; married her cousin-german, lord Darnley, 1565; is said to have murdered
her husband, Feb, 10, 1567, for putting Rizzio to death, (see Rizzio); murried
the earl of Bothwell, May 15, for which her subjects rebelled and deposed her,
July 20, following; crowning her son James VI. then 13 months old, the earl of
Murray regent; (see Murray); escaped from the castle of Lochlevin, May 2, where
she was confined, and fled to England, May 16, 1563, her cause examined into at
a conference at York, Oct. 4, 1568; imprisoned in Tutbury-castle, Jan. 1569;
conspired against the life of Elizabeth, 1586; removed to Fotheringay-castle
the same year, and sentenced to die, October 25, following; for the French
ambassador having bribed an assassin to murder Elizabeth, the people demanded
Mary's death, and she was beheaded at Fotheringay-castle, Feb. 8, 1587; buried
at Peterborough, but removed by her son James I. to Westminster, 1612. See
Elizabeth, Bothwell, Darnley, Scotland. Mary, William IIId's queen, daughter of
James II. by Ann Hyde, born April 30, 1662; married to the prince of Orange,
Oct. 23, 1677; on her father's abdicating the crown, proclaimed, with her
husband, queen of England, Feb. 13, 1689; died of the smallpox, Dec. 28, 1694,
leaving her husband on the throne, and was buried at Westminster. See William
III. Orange, Prince of. Maryland settled by lord Baltimore, 1633. See America.
Masks. See Fans. Masque de fer. See Iron-mask. Mass, Prostration at the
elevation of, ordained 1201. See Rem. Occur. anno 1688. Massachuset's bay
colony, old charter granted, 1627; royal patent, 1628; first settlement at
Salem, 1629; government removed to New England, 1630; division of into four
townships, 1643; present colony established by the consolidation of four
others, 1691. Massacre at Alexandria, of many thousand citizens, by order of
Antoninus, 213. Of Thessalonica, when upwards of 7000 persons, invited into the
Circus, were put to the sword by order of Theodosius, 390. Of 35,000 persons at
Constantinople, 532. Of the Jews (some few pressing into Westminster Hall, at
Richard 1st's coronation, were put to death by the people, and a false alarm
being given, that the king had ordered a general ma^sacre of them, the people
in many parts of England, from an aversion to them, flew all they met; in York,
500 who had taken shelter in the castle, killed themselves, rather than fall
into the hands of the people), 1189. Of the Huguenots, or French protestants,
at Paris, by order of Charles IX. when 70,000 were destroyed, June 12, 1418. Of
the Swedish nobility, at a feast, by order of Christian II. 1520. At Paris,
when the king led the way, and slew near 10,000 protestants, August 24, 1572.
Of the Christians, in Croatia, by the Turks, when 65,000 were slain, 1592. Of
the English factory, by the Dutch, at Amboyna, 1623, in order to dispossess
them of the Spice Islands. Of the Irish, at the island of Magee, when 40,000
English protestants were killed in the rebellion under Sir Phel. O'Niel, Oct.
1641. Of the Macdonalds, at Glencoe, in Scotland, for not surrendering in time,
according to King William's proclamation, though without the king's knowledge,
1692. See Mithridates, Jews, Protestants, Vespers Sicilian.
Massarene, Irish earldom of, created 1756. (name Skeffington.) Massey of
Duntryleague, Irish barony, created 1776. (name Massey.) Mathematics first
taught to the Jews and Egyptians by Abraham, 1950 before Christ. Matilda,
daughter of Eustace, count of Boulogne, Stephen's queen, crowned Easter Day,
1136; died May 3, 1151, at Henningham-castle. Essex, and buried in a monastery
at Feversham. Matthews and Lestock, admirals, suffered the French and Spanish
squadrons from Toulon, to escape, February, 1746. Matthews, John, hanged for a
treasonous libel, 1716. Matthias, St. Feast of, instituted, 1091. Maude,
daughter to Henry I. married to Henry V. emperor of Germany, 1109; afterward
to Geoffrey, eldest son of the count of Anjou, 1127, by whom he had Henry II.;
her right to succeed her father sworn to by the barons, 1127; set aside from
the succession, in favor of her first cousin Stephen, 1136; expelled with her
husband from the government of Normandy, 1136; landed in England with an army,
and claimed her right to the crown, Sept. 1139; crowned, but soon after
defeated at Winchester, 1141, and escaped to Gloucester in a bier; fled from a
window in Oxford-castle by a rope, in the winter, 1142; retired to France,
Lent, 1147; came-to England, and made a lasting peace with Stephen, 1153; died
abroad, Sept. 10, 1167, aged 67. See Stephen. Plantagenet. Maunday Thursday,
ceremony instituted in Edward IIId's jubilee year, by Pope Innocent VI. 1362.
Mauritania. See Fez. Mauritius island, discovered by the Dutch, 1598.
Mausoleum. See Artemisia, Vol. II. Maxentius defeated by Constantine, and
drowned in the Tyber, which occasioned a great change almost throughout the
world, 333. See Constantine. Maximilian I. emperor of Germany, enlisted as a
captain under Henry VIII. when he invaded France, 1513; died, 1519, aged 60.
Maxtoke priory, Warwickshire, built, 1337; castle built, 1346. May-games much
in fashion, 1515; soon after grew into disuse, owing to a riot at such a time.
Maynard, of Wicklow, Irish barony of, created 1620. (name Maynard.) Maynard, of
Estaines, Earldom of, created 1766. (name Maynard.) Mayors and bailiffs of
corporations were Port-reeves in the time of the Saxons Mead, a liquor of
luxury, 1642. See Honey. Meal-tub plot, (so called from the place where some
papers concerning it were found) 1679. It was a sham plot to accuse Oats of
perjury and sodomy, and to charge some great men with conspiring against the
life of the king. Dangerfield was the principal actor: but it came to nothing.
See Oats. Measures, vide Weights. Meat ordered to be sold by weight, 1532.
Mead, Irish earldom of, created 1627. (name Brabazon.) Media, was once a
province of the Assyrian empire; it revolted 711; became independent, and
conquered Persia; but Cyrus having vanquished Darius, the Mede, 536 before
Christ, it was from this time united with the Persian empire, and shared its
fate. Mediterranean. See Rhodians, Phrygians, Pelasgi. Medway. See Rem. Occur.
anno 1113. Melcomb Regis, Dorsetshire, chartered by James I. Melefount abbey,
Ireland, founded by O'Carrol, prince of Orgial, 1142. Melons, cucumbers, and
many other like productions were in Edward IIld's time, and afterward dropped,
till the reign of Henry VIII.; for during the wars between York and Lancaster,
nothing of this kind could be attended to. Memory, the art of assisting it, by
getting by heart, invented by Simonides, 503 before Christ. Mennonites, who
taught that Christ did not partake of the nature of his mother, arose under
Menno, 1645. Mercer's chapel, London, built, 1187. Merchant adventurer's
company incorporated, 1272. Merchant Taylor's company first called so by Henry
VII. who was of that company, as were several kings of England, and great part
of the nobility, 1503; school, London, founded, 1568. Merchants, an attempt was
made to exclude them from s^ing in the House of Commons, 1711. Mercury
discovered to be a specific in venereal cases, by Carpus, an Italian surgeon,
who flourished about 1522. Merioneth, Archdeaconry of, erected before 1280.
Merry Andrew, The character of, arose from Andrew Board, a droll physician, who
used to attend markets, and harangue the people, 1547. Merton priory founded,
1117. Merton college, Oxford, founded by Merton, bishop of Rochester, 1274. (24
fellows.) Messalians, The sect of, arose, 363. Messenian war with the
Lacedaemonians, the first, 743, lasted 19 years; second, 685 before Christ,
lasted 14 years; it ended in the conquest of the Messenians, who rather than
submit to the Lacedemonian yoke, flew to Sicily. Messina, in Sicily, built by
the Messenians, 667 before Christ. See Messenian War. Methodism took its rise,
1734. See Whitfield. Methuselah, the longest liver, died a little before the
flood, in 1656 of the world, aged 969. Mettingham college and castle, Suffolk,
built, 1335. Mexborough, Irish earldom of, created 1766. (name Savile.) Mexico
conquered by Spain, 1521. See Montezuma. Microscopes first used in Germany,
1621; with two glasses, invented by Drebbel, 1624; solar invented by Lieberkuk,
1740. Middleham castle, Yorkshire, built about 1190. Middlesex, Archdeaconry
of, erected, before 1138. Middleton monastery, Dorset, built by Athelstan, 926.
Middleton, Irish viscount, title of, created 1717. (name Brodrick) Middleton,
Barony of, created 1711. (name Willoughby.) Milan, anciently Liguria, the
residence of the Roman empire, 303; conquered by the Goths in the fifth
century, who were dispossessed by the Lombards, 572; subdued by the emperor
Charlemagne, 800; afterward it became independent; the French expelled from it
by Charles V. of Germany, about 1525, who gave it to his son Philip II.; taken
by the Imperialists, 1706; recovered by France and Spain, 1743, but restored to
Austria, on Naples and Sicily being ceded to Spain, 1748. See Goths, Academies.
Milbourne, of Kilmore, Irish viscount, created 1780. (name Lamb.) Milford,
Irish barony, created 1776. (name Philipps.) Military services, for lands,
established by the Saxons; escuage, or money first paid in lieu of them, under
Henry II. which gave rise to the subsidies, granted by parliament and the
present landtax. See Feudal Law. Militia, introduced into Ireland, by K. Cormac
O'Con, about 254; Fingal was the general; a national one first settled by king
Alfred, and continued till James I.; revived under Charles II.; the last
militia bill passed, 1757; improved, 1764. Millennium, Doctrine of, (which
supposed the world would end at the expiration of the seven thousandth year
from the creation, and that the last thousand years Christ and the saints would
reign upon the earth,) universally inculcated during the third century; it was
propagated by Papias. Milltown, Irish earldom of, created 1763. (name Leeson)
Milton, Barony of, created 1762. (name Damer.) Milton, Irish barony, created
1753. (name Damer.) Milton-abbas abbey founded, 933. Minehead, Somersetshire,
chartered by queen Eliz. Minerva's temple, at Athens, burnt, 406 before Christ.
Minims, their order instituted, 1440. Ministers, Presbyterian, 2000 resigned
their livings, rather than submit to the act of uniformity, which obliged them
to conform to the church of England, 1662. Minerea conquered by general
Stanhope, August, 1708; surrendered to the French, June, 1756; given up to
England, 1763. Minster Monastery, Shepey Isle, instituted, when Ercombert was
king of Kent. Minstrels, in history, were, originally, pipers appointed by
lords of manors, to divert their copyholders whilst they were at work for them,
as is the custom now in the Highlands of Scotland; they probably owed their
origin to the Gleemen, or Harpers of the Saxons; they continued till about
1500. Female harpers were not uncommon in Britain, 680. See Bards, Harpers.
Mint, London, established 1066. See Privileged Places. Minutia, the vestal, on
suspicion of unchastity, burnt alive, 337 before Christ. Mirrors, the first
were made in silver by Praxiteles. Mississippi scheme, in France, ceased, 1720;
trade began, Nov. 28, 1716. Mitford castle, Northumberland, built soon after
the Conquest. Mithridates, king of Pontus, ordered all the Romans (80,000) that
were in Asia, to be put to death, 88 before Christ. Modena erected into a
duchy, 1451. Modern history. See Professorship. Mogul empire. The first
conqueror was Jenghis Khan, a Tartarian prince, who died 1226; Timur Bek became
Great Mogul, by conquest, 1399; the dynasty continued in his family till the
conquest of Tamerlane, in the 15th century, whose descendants have kept the
throne ever since; but Kouli Khan, the famous Sophi of Persia, considerably
diminished the power of the Moguls, carried away immense treasures from Delhi,
and since that event many of the Nabobs have made themselves independent. See
Kouli Khan. Mohocks, a set of disorderly people, who went about London streets
at night, and took pleasure in wounding and dissiguring the men, and indecently
exposing the women, 1711; one hundred pounds reward was offered, by royal
proclamation, for apprehending any one of them. Moira, Irish earldom of,
created 1762. (name Rawdon.) Molesworth, of Swords, Irish viscount, title of,
created 1716. (name Molesworth.) Molesworth, Lady, and her three children,
burnt, 1764, by her house being set on fire. Molinists. See Quietists.
Molmutian laws, were those made by Dunvallo Molmutius, the sixteenth king of
Britain, who began his reign above 400 before Christ, and were famous in this
kingdom till the time of William the Conqueror, who was the first king that
established laws in Britain. Mona of the Romans, The, was the isle of Anglesey.
Monarchy, The first universal, ended, and the MedoPersian, or second, began,
538 before Christ. Monastery, The first, founded, where the sister of St.
Anthony retired, 270. The early converts to a monastic life, lived in caves and
deserted places, till regular monasteries were founded. See Priories, Monkery.
Money, Gold and Silver, first coined, by Phydon, tyrant of Argos, 894 before
Christ. See Gold, Silver, Shillings, Copper, Coins, Sovereign, Pound. Money; no
declaratory statute to prevent its being raised for the king's use, without the
express consent of the States, till 23 Edward I.: from 1065 to 1189, 1 l. was
equal to 15 l. now. Monk, the first is said to have been Paul of Thebais, who
fled into the deserts, to avoid the Decian persecution, about 250. See
Monastery, Monkery. Monkery, pretty well established about 330; it began in
Egypt and Persia; in Egypt alone there were 96,000 monks. St. Anthony was the
first example of a monastic life, 305, and established the first monastery on
Mount Colzim, near the Red Sea. Athanasius introduced the monastic life into
Rome, 3^1. See Monastery, Monk. Monntouth, James, duke of, natural son of
Charles II. by Luty Walters; his illegitimacy declared by the king, 1679;
conspired against the king, and pardoned, but ordered to depart the kingdom,
1683; invaded England, at Lyme, Dorsetshire, June 11; proclaimed king, at
Taunton, June 20; defeated near Bridgewater, and taken, July 5; beheaded on
Tower Hill, July 15, aged 35, all in 1685. Monson, of Burton, Barony of,
created 1728. (Monson.) Montacute priery, Somersetshire, built, 1070. Montagu,
Dukedom of, created 1766. (Montagu.) Montagu, viscount, Title of, created 1554.
(Brown.) Monothelites (who taught, that in Jesus Christ there was but one
operation, or will), arose under Theodore, 540. Montem. The triennial custom of
the Eton scholars parading to Salt-hill, and distributing salt, originated in
the early days of Monkish superstition, when the friars used to sell there
consecrated salt, for medical purposes. Montfort, Barony of, created 1741.
(name Bromley.) Montgomery castie rebuilt, 1093; town chartered by Henry III.
Months, their names given them by Charlemagne, emperor of Germany. Montrose,
Scots dukedom of, created 1707. (Graham.) Montrose, Marquis of, hanged at
Edinburgh, for taking part with Char. I. May 21, 1650, aged 37. Montserrat, in
the West Indies, d^covered by Columbus, 1493. Monument, London, begun 1671;
finished 1677. Moorfields, London, made into walks, 1614; planted, 1740. Moors.
The, driven out of Spain, by an edict of Philip III. after they had continued
there 900 years, 1620, for attempting to free themselves from the inquisition;
they were in number above 900,000. Moravians, or Unitas Fratrum, appeared in
Bohemia, 1457; in England, 1737. They are a respectable episcopal church; their
doctrines not contrary to the articles of the church of England. See
Zinzendorf. Morea taken from the Venetians, 1715. Morley, Lord, tried at
Westminster Hall, for murder, 1666. Mornington, Irish earldom of, created 1760.
(name Wellesley.) Morocco, Empire of, anciently Mauritania, first known, 1008;
possessed by the Romans, 25 before Christ, and reduced by them to a province,
50; from this time it underwent various revolutions, till the establishment of
the Almoravides; the second emperor of this family built the capital Morocco;
about 1116, Abdalla, the leader of a sect of Mahometans, founded the dynasty of
Almahides, which ended in the last sovereign's total defeat in Spain, 1212; at
this period, Fez and Tremecen, then provinces of the empire, shook off their
dependence. Morocco was afterward seized by the king of Fez, but the
descendants of Mahomet, about 1550, subdued and united the three kingdoms
again, and formed what is called at present the empire of Morocco.
Morpeth-castle, Northumberland, built in Edward IIId's reign. Mortality, great
one, 1094; again, among men, cattle, and fowis, 1111; among youth, 1398; among
men at Oxford, 1471; at York, when 11,000 persons died, August, 1691. Mortars,
vide Bombs. Mortimer, Roger, earl of March, intrigued with Edward IId's queen,
1325; hanged at Tyburn for it, 1330. Mortmain-act passed, May 20, 1736.
Morton-castle, Scotland, demolished by David II. Morton, Scots earldom of,
created 1458. (name Douglas.) Moscow burnt, 30,000 houses were destroyed, 1739;
again, 2000 houses, July 25, 1773. See Russia. Moses born, 1571; sent the 10
plagues of Egypt, 1491; Ceparted from Egypt with upwards of 60,000 Israelites,
which completed the 430 years of sojourning, the same year, 1491; about the
same time brought water out of the rock; saw the burning bush the same year;
received the tables of stone on Mount Sinai, May 4, 1491; wrote the Pentateuch
in the land of Moab, 1452; died 1451 before Christ. Most christian king, Title
of, first given to Louis XI. of France, by Paul II. 1469; others say, the title
may be traced as far back as Pepin, Charlemagne's father. Mote's bulwark,
Dover, built, about 1539. Motto, Royal, Dieu et mon droit, first used by
Richard I. on his obtaining a victory over the French at Gysors, 1193; not we,
says he,, but "God and our right" has conquered; the Bohemian crest, viz. three
ostrich feathers, and the motto, Ich dien, i. e. "I serve," first adopted by
Edward the black prince, at the battle of Cressy, in memorial of the victory,
the king of Bohemia being slain in the action, 1346; Semper eadem ordered by
the queen to be used as her motto, Dec. 14, 1702. Mount Cashel, Irish earldom
of, created 1780. (name Moore.) Mount Morres, Irish viscount, Title of, created
1763. (name Morres.) Mount St. Michael, in the bay of Avranches, The abbey of,
built by Richard II. duke of Normandy, 966; completed under William the
Conqueror, 1070. Mountaineers, viz. the Arabs, Tartars, Highlanders, etc.
though just to a proverb among themselves, not having the same opportunity of
receiving civilized laws, are great pilferers. Mountgarret, Irish viscount,
Title of, created 1550. (name Butler.) Mountrath, Irish earldom of, created
1660. (name Coote.) Mourning, in white, then the general custom, last in use in
Spain, 1495. Muffs. See Fans. Muggletonians sprung from L. Muggleton, a
journeyman tailor, 1657; they have some particular notions respecting the
authority of scripture, and the state of the dead. Mughouse-riot, in
Salisbury-court, Fleet Street, for which five persons were hanged, July 23,
1716. Mulberry trees first planted in England, 1609. Mulgrave, Irish barony of,
created 1767. (name Phipps.) Murderers were punished, during the Heptarchy,
only by fines; the Persians never punished the first offense; were allowed
benefit of clergy, 1503; and in Henry VIIIth's time, in Wales, murders were
compounded for, and still are so in Saxony; in Italy, murder is passed by with
some degree of impunity, as also in Spain and Portugal, and the criminal is
allowed to plead, that the deceased was his enemy; in Turkey, the next of kin
may compound, death not being thought a sufficient atonement. See Rem. Occur.
anni^s 1407, 1414. Murray, Earl of, regent of Scotland, assassinated, by
Hamilton, of Bothwellhaugh, 1570. Murray, Alexander, esquire. fled from
imprisonment of the House of Commons, 1751. Muscovy. See Peter. Museum, The,
established, 1753. See Sloane. Music invented by Jubal, i. e. he reduced
shepherds songs to some principles, 1800; vocal chorusses invented, 508 before
Christ; notes invented by Gui D'Arezzo, 1025; coanterpoint brought to
perfection by Pala^rini, about 1515; the Italian style of composition
introduced, about 1616. See Gamut, Church music. Muskerry, Irish barony,
created 1780. (name Tilson Deane.) Muslin first worn here, 1670. Muskets
introduced into our army generally, and bows and arrows laid aside, 1521. Mures
are supposed to have originated in the East, that they might not speak when
serving at table; it being held impious, says Quintus Curtius, to speak at
meals. Mycene, Kingdom of, began under Perseus, 1313 before Chr^t. Myth^y,
Ancient, took its rise, about 1458 before Christ.
N.
NAAS, Irish viscount, created 1776. (name Bourke.) Nantz, Edict of, passed by
Henry IV. by which protestants enjoyed toleration in France, 1598; revoked by
Louis XIV. 1635; by this bad policy 50,000 French protestants left France and
came to England; some thousands settled in Spitalfields, London, and carried on
the silk manufactory, where their descendants still remain; others brought over
the art of making crystal glasses, for watches and pictures; and others
brought jewelry to the greatest perfection. Napier, Scots barony of, created
1627. (name Napier) Naples, anciently Capua and Campania, Kingdom of, began,
1020; given by the Pope to the com^e D'Anjou, in exclusion of the right heir
Conradi^ who was taken prisoner, and beheaded, aged 16, 1266; Charles, king of
Naples, being invited by the Hungarians, to the crown of Hungary, was, when
there, crowned; murdered by order of the queen Regent, in her presence, who,
for this, was soon after taken out of her carriage, and drowned in the river
Boseth, 1386; Alphonsus, of Arragon, united Sicily to it, and the kings have
been since called King of the Two Sicilies, 1442; taken from the French, and
annexed to Spain, 1504; continued with the Spaniards, till 1706, when it was
taken by the Emperor; conquered by the Spaniards again, 1734, and settled on
Don Carlos, the king of Spain's son, 1736; he resigned it to his third son
Ferdinand, 1759; order of the crescent founded, 1464. The king of Naples now
succeeds always to the crown of Spain. See Universities. National debt. The
first instance of debt contracted on parliamentary security occurs in Henry
VIth's reign; the present debt commenced, and was 5 millions, 1697; was 46
millions, in 1714; 64 millions, in 1747; 74 millions, in 1757; 110 millions, in
1762; 127 millions, in 1772; and upwards of 200 millions, in 1780. See Bank
Stock, Funds. Naturalization-bill passed, 1753; repealed, 1754. Navarre
conquered by Ferdinand, and annexed to Spain, 1512, given up to France, 1590.
See Spain. Naval engagements. See Sea Fight. Navigation, Art of, owes its
origin to the Phoenicians more than 1500 before Christ; act of passed, 1651,
which prevents any merchandise being imported into England but in English
ships, except it be in the ships of that European country, of which the
merchandise is the growth or manufacture. See River Lee. Navy of England, first
established by king Alfred; Edgar had a fleet of 400 sail, 937; king John, a
fleet of 500; Edward III. one of 700; but Henry VII. was the first that began
to build a royal navy; in the reign of Elizabeth, ships of war were commanded
by the nobility; navy board established, 1625; navy office sounded, Dec. 4,
1644. See Ships, Salute. Naworth-castle, Cumberland, built, before 1394.
Naylor, the quaker, whipped and pilloried. See Impostor^. Nazarenes, a sect of
Jews, converts to christianity, disappeared the beginning of the 4th century.
Neath-castle, Glamorganshire, built, 1090; abbey built, 1150. Nebuchadnezzar,
king of Assyria, 606; died 562 before Christ, aged 42. Neckcloths, of lace,
came in fashion in Charles IId's reign, and continued in the two following
reigns. Necromancy was so much encouraged by Catherine of Medicis, mother of
Henry III. of France, that there were supposed to be 30,000 in that kingdom
addicted to this study, 1. 72. See Witchcraft. Needles first made in London, by
a negro, from Spain, in the reign of Mary; but he dying without teaching the
art, it was lost till 1566, when it was taught by Elias Grorose, a German.
Negrees adjudged to be free, whilst in this country, 1772; declared free in
Scotland, Jan. 15, 1778. See Slaves. Nemaean games, instituted by Adrastus,
1226 before Christ. Neper's bones, invented by lord Neper, of Scotland, who
died, 1617, aged 67. Nero, emperor of Rome, murdered his mother, in 55; slew
himself, 68, aged 32. Nether-hall, Essex, built, before 1280. Netley-abbey,
Hants, built, 1239. Nettleville, of Douth, Irish viscount, title of, created
1622. (name Nettleville.) Newark castle, Nottinghamshire, built, 1140. Newark
on Trent, chartered by Edward IV.; anew by Charles II. Newark priory, Surrey,
built, between 1189 and 1199. Newark, Scots barony, created 1660. (name
Lesley.) Newborough, Irish barony, created 1776. (name Wynn.) Newborough, Scots
earldom of, created 1660. (name Radcliff.) Newcastle, Dukedom of, created 1756.
(name Clinton.) Newcastle on Tyne, founded, and castle built by Robert, son to
William the Conqueror, 1080; Blackfriars founded, 1251; burnt by accident,
1349. Newcastle under Line, its castle built in Henry IIId's reign.
New-college, Oxford, founded by William, bishop of Winton, 1375. (70 follows.)
New England, first discovered by captain Gosnoll, 1602; settled by the Plymouth
Company, 1614; the patent purchased by the English Brownists from Holland, who
built New Plymouth, 1620; Salem built, 1628; and Boston, 1630. See America,
Havard. New-Exchange, Strand, London, taken down, 1737. Newfoundland discovered
by Cabot, about 1500, began to be settled by the English, 1520; the fishery
began to flourish, 1577, though England had then the least share of it; but
about 1625, Devonshire alone employed 150 ships, and 8000 persons, at
Newfoundland, for six months in the year; in 1676 the value of the fish and oil
was computed at 386,400 l. See America. Newhaven, of Carrick Main, Irish
barony, created 1776. (name Main.) New-Holland discovered, 1628. New-inn
society established, 1485. See Inns of Court. New Jersey relinquished by the
Dutch, and granted to the duke of York, 1674; settled, 1682; proprietary
government surrendered, 1702. Newport Isle of Wight, chartered by James I.
New-river brought to London by Sir Hugh Middleton, 1614. See Water. New-Spain,
or Mexico, discovered, 1518. Newspapers, it is said, owe their origin to the
Journal des Savans, a French paper, first published in 1665, though one was
printed in England, under the title of the "Public Intelligencer," by Sir Roger
L'Estrange, 1663, which he dropped, on the publication of the first London
Gazette; newspapers and pamphlets prohibited by royal proclamation, 1680. See
Gazette. Newsted abbey, Nottinghamshire, built, 1160. New York first settled by
the Dutch, who were dispossessed by the English, 1664; granted to the duke of
York, and settled, 1665; divided into twelve counties, 1691. See America.
New-Zealand, in the South Seas, first discovered by Abel J. Tasman, 1642;
visited next by Captain Cook, 1769. Niagara taken by the English from the
French, 1759. Nicene creed, first appointed to be read by Pope Marcus, 336.
Nicka, a Gothic demon, who was supposed to inhabit the water, and strangle
persons that were drowning. Hence "Old Nick." Nicolaites, The, appeared, 68;
they denied the divinity of Christ, and taught, that all things, even women,
should be common among christians. Nightmare, derived from Mara, a spectre of
the night, in Runic Theology, in time of the Goths, which was supposed to seize
persons in their sleep, and deprived them of speech and motion. Nineveh,
Foundation of, laid, 2233; taken, after three years siege, by Arbaces, which
finished the kingdom of Assyria; Sardanapalus burnt himself to death, and the
kingdom was subdivided, 820 before Christ; destroyed by the Medes, 612. Ninus.
See Assyria. Nithsdale, Lord, escaped from the Tower, Feb. 23, 1716. Noah
directed to build the ark, 1536 of the world, 120 years before the flood; died
1998 before Christ, aged 949. Nobility, Patents of, were first granted by
Philip I. of France, to persons having no estates, 1095, which was followed by
other kings. Non-conformists: the Puritans took this name after the act of
Uniformity passed, when 2000 ministers left the established church, not choosing
to conform to the 39 articles. See Puritans. Nones, The, of every month, are
the 7th of March, May, July, and October, and the 5th of all the other months.
By the Roman account, the Nones in the aforementioned months are the 6 days
next following the first day, or the Calends; and of the other months, the 4
days next after the first. The last of these days is properly called the Nones,
for the others are reckoned backwards, as distant from them, and accounted the
third, fourth, or fifth Nones, etc. They received their name from their
beginning the 9th day before the Ides. See Ides, Calends. Norbertines, Order
of, instituted by St. Norbet, 1120. Norfolk, Archdeaconry of, erected, before
1124. Norfolk, Dukedom of, created 1483. (name Howard.) Norfolk, Thomas, duke
of, beheaded, May 8, 1572, for conspiring to marry the queen of Scots, and
depose Elizabeth. Norham-castle, Durham, built, 1100; the feast of Sr.
Cuthbert's translation first observed there, 1104. Normandy invaded on all
hands, 1117. Vide Rollo. Normandy, Robert, duke of, died, prisoner in Cardiff
castle; 1133. See Henry I. Normandy erected into a dukedom, 876; ceded to
France by Henry III. May 20, 1259. Normans massacred at Durham, 1069.
Northampton, earldom of, created 1618. (name Compton.) Northampton, St.
Sepulchre's church, built by the knights Templars; archdeaconry of, erected,
1092; town burnt, Sept. 3, 1675. Northamptonshire navigation opened, Aug. 7,
1761. Northesk, Scots earldom of, created 1647. (name Carnegie.) Northington,
earldom of, created 1761. (name Henley.) Northumberland, Dukedom of, created
1766. (name Percy.) See Alnwick, Battle of. Northumberland, Dudley, duke of,
son of Edmund Dudley, father-in-law to lady Jane Gray, beheaded 1553, aged 51,
for attempting to put lady Jane on the throne. See Dudley, Edmund.
Northumberland, Earl of, killed by the mob, in an insurrection, 1488.
Northumberland, Earl of, beheaded at York, for heading a party in favor of
Mary, queen of Scots, against Elizabeth, 1572. Northumberland, Earl of, brother
to the above, being confined in the Tower, on a charge of taking part against
Elizabeth, shot himself, 1585. Norton priory, Cheshire, built, 1210. Norway,
the ancient Scandinavia, including Sweden, united with Denmark, by the princess
of Denmark's marrying the king of Norway, and afterward becoming, by
succession, queen of Denmark; the first king, 998. Vide Denmark. Norwich, burnt
by Sweyn, king of Denmark, 1004; cathedral finished. 1088; bishopric formed by
uniting Elmham and Dunwich, 1091; worsted manufactory established there, 1340;
chief magistrate first styled mayor, 1419; deanery erected, 1538. Notaries
public, originally appointed by the fathers of the christian church, to collect
the acts or memoirs of martyrs in the first century; since changed into a
commercial employ. Nottingham built, 924; castle built, 1068; town burnt to
ashes, 1140; archdeaconry erected, about 1174. Nova Scotia charter granted, and
settled by the Scotch, under Sir William Alexander, 1621; it was afterward in
the possession of the French, but ceded to England, 1748; peopled from England,
1749. See America. Nova Zembla discovered by captain Hugh Willoughby, 1553.
Nugent, Irish earldom, created 1776. (name Nugent.) Numantine war, between the
Romans and Numantines, commenced, 141 before Christ. Numidia. See Algiers.
Nuneaton nunnery, Warwickshire, built, 1170. Nunnery; the first founded in
France was near Poictiers, by the sister of St. Martin, 360; the first English
one, erected at Folkstone, by king Eadbald, 630. Nutley abbey, Bucks, built,
1162. Nuyt's land, New Holland, discovered by the Dutch, 1627.
O.
OADES, the quaker, riot against him, by his sons, 1718. Oak sawdust found to
be useful in tanning, 1765. Oakham-castle, Rutland, built, about 1060. Oats,
Dr. Titus, whipped, 1685. See Impostors. Oath, in civil cases of high
antiquity. See Exodus xxii, 10.; swearing on the gospels first used, 528; oath
first administered here in judicial proceedings, by the Saxons, about 600; that
of a judge settled, 1344; that of supremacy ratified by parliament, 1535; the
words "so help me God and all saints," concluded an oath, till 1550; present
oath of allegiance first framed and administered, 1606, the ancient oath having
continued near 600 years; that of abjuration first required, 1701. See
Affirmation, Coronation. Occasional conformity, bill thrown out by the lords,
1703. Odiam-castle, Hants, built, before 1199. Offa succeeded his uncle
Ethelbald I. as 16th king of Britain, 757; he was born lame, deaf, and blind,
which continued till he arrived at manhood; built St. Albans Monastery; died at
Offley, 798; buried at Bedford, and succeeded by his son Egfrid. Offa's dyke
made, 774. Offerings first instituted by pope Pelagius II. 588. Oil was the
staple commodity of Attica, and a jar of oil was the prize at the Panathanean
games. Okehampton castle, Devon, built, before 1060. Old Testament, history of,
ceased, 430 before Christ. Old Nick. See Nicka. Oleron. See Laws. Olives, first
planted in Italy, 562 before Christ. Olveston priory, Lincolnshire, built,
1160. Olympiads. These were games instituted at Olympia, by Pelops, in honor
of Jupiter, 1307; they were revived by the Greeks, (who computed time by them,
celebrating them every 4th year) about 400 years after the destruction of Troy,
and continued till the reign of Theodosius the Great, when a new mode of
reckoning began, by indictions, or from the victory of Augustus Caesar at
Actium, when he became emperor of the Romans; the first Olympiads began July
23, 776; Coraebus being then the Olympic victor; 2d, 772; 3d, 768; 4th, 764;
5th, 760; 7th, 752; 10th, 740; 13th, 728; 15th, 720; 16th, 716; 17th, 712;
21st, 696; 23d, 688; 24th, 684; 25th, 680; 27th, 672; 28th, 668; 29th, 664;
39th, 624; 43d, 608; 46th, 566; 55th, 560; 56th, 556; 59th, 544; 60th, 540;
61st, 536 before Christ; the last ended about 440. Olympic games. See
Olympiads, Daicles. Ongley, of Oldwarden, Irish barony, created 1776. (name
Ongley.) Onslow, Barony of, created 1716. (name Onslow.) Operas. See Theater.
Ophites, a sect that held the serpent that tempted Eve to be a God, appeared,
187. Oracles, Sibylline, were prophecies of certain Sibyls, to which great
respect was paid, early in the history of Rome; their authority continued
almost as long as Paganism. Honorius, emperor of the West, gave the finishing
stroke to this Roman idolatry, by throwing the oracles into the fire, 394.
Orange, William I. prince of, assassinated, June 30, 1584. Orange, Title of,
first in the Nassau family, by the marriage of Claude de Chalons, the prince of
Orange's sister, with the count of Nassau, 1530; prince of, son of James IId's
sister, born Nov. 4, 1650; created stadtholder, July 3, 1672; married the
princess Mary of England, 1677; was applied to by England, for assistance
against his uncle, James II. 1688; landed at Torbay, in England, with an army,
November 5, 1688; took on him the government, at the invitation of the lords;
declared king of England, February 13, 1689. See Will. III.; Mary, his queen.
Orange, Prince of, married Anne, George IId's daughter, March 14, 1734. Oransey
abbey, Scotland, founded by St. Columba, about 567. Orbits of the planets,
first settled by Doerfel, a Saxon clergyman, 1681. Ordeal, by fire and water,
Trial of, known to the ancient Greeks; in use among the Saxons; abolished by
Henry III. 1261; that by fire was confined to the upper class of people; that
of water, to the lower; hence the expression of "going through fire and water
to serve another;" these being allowed to be performed by deputy. Orford,
Earldom of, created 1741. (name Walpole.) Orford castle, Suffolk, built about
1066; town chartered by Henry III. Organs first introduced into churches, by
Pope Vitalian I. 683; into the Western churches, 826. Oriel college, Oxford,
founded by Edward II. 1337. (18 fellows.) Orkney islands, sold by the king of
Denmark to James III. of Scotland, 1468. Orkney, Scots earldom of, created
1695. (name O'Brien.) Orleans, Duke of, assassinated at Paris, by order of the
duke of Burgundy, Nov. 23, 1407; the duke of Burgundy was afterward murdered
himself. See Burgundy, Rem. occur. annis 1407, 1414. Orleans, The siege of,
May, 1428; again, 1563, when the duke of Guise was killed. Orrery, The,
invented by Charles earl of Orrery, which see. Osborne, Barony of, created
1776. (name Osborne.) Osnaburgh, Bishopric of, founded by Charlemagne, 780.
Osiris and Isis, (i. e.) the sun and moon, The ancient Egyptian religion of,
though venerable in its origin, was a mixture of ridiculous superstition in the
time of Cyrus; became contemptible under the Ptolemys, and fell with the
Romans. Ostend attempted to be taken by the French, but the scheme miscarried
with great loss to them, owing to the minister having been d^ceived by his
agents, 1658; India company chartered, 1722; suppressed by the treaty at
Vienna, 1731; made a free port, June 15, 1781. Ostentation. See Rem. Occur.
anno 1250. Ostrogoths; their kingdom began in Italy, 476; ended, 554. Oswald,
third king of Northumberland, succeeded his uncle Edwin, as ninth king of
Britain, 633; slain in battle, 642, and was succeeded by his half-^rother Oswy,
fourth king of Northumberland. Oswy succeeded his half-brother Oswald, as tenth
king of Britain, 642; died, 670, and was succeeded by Wulfer, king of Mercia.
Osyth's (St.) monastery built, 1120. Otaheite, or George IIId's island, in the
South Sea, discovered June 18, 1767, by captain Wallis; it is supposed to be
the same as the Spaniard Quiros touched at in 1606. Ottery priory, Devon,
built, 1060. Ottoman, or Turkish empire, founded by Constantinople, by Othman
I. on the total destruction of the empire of the Eastern Greeks, 1300. Ouin,
Peter, conspired to kill the king of France, 1598. Overbury, Sir Thomas,
poisoned by an envenomed clyster, in the Tower, at the instigation of lord
Rochester, for opposing his marriage uith the countess of Essex, Sept. 15,
1613, aged about 32. Oxford university, derived its first origin so early as
about 1180 before Christ; founded by Alfred, 886; its castle built, 1071;
archdeaconry erected, 1092; Beaumont palace finished, about 1128; chancellor's
court established, 1244; bishopric taken from Lincoln and founded, 1541; first
public lecture in Ara^ic read there, 1636; new theater built, 1669; a terrible
fire at, 1644; again, 1671. See Rem. Occur. anno 1340. Oxford, Earldom of,
created 1711. (name Harley.)
P.
PADUA built, 1269 before Christ. See Evander, Academies, Universities.
Paganism finally overthrown in the Roman empire, in the reign of Theodosius,
between 388 and 395. Paget, of Beudefert, Barony of, created 1550. (Paget.)
Pain's castle, Radnorshire, rebuilt by Henry III. Painting, The art of, first
introduced at Rome, from Hetruria, 291 before Christ; the first excellent
pictures were brought from Corinth to Rome, 146 before Christ; painting in oil
invented at Bruges, by Van Eick, 1410; the first picture was an Ecce Homo,
1455. See Anthony of Messina, Chiaroobscuro. Paisley monastery, Scotland,
founded, 1160; five persons burnt there for witchcraft, 1697. Palace court. See
Marshalsea. Palatine, Prince, of the Rhine, visited England, 1612, and married
Henry VIIth's daughter. Palatines; 7000 families of these poor protestants were
driven, by the French, from their habitations on the banks of the Rhine, and
came to England; they were encamped on Blackheath and Camberwell Common; a
brief was granted, to collect alms for them; 500 families went, under the
protection of government, to Ireland, and the rest were sent out to New York
and Hudson's Bay: but not being well received by the people there, they were to
Pensylvania, where they settled, 1709. See Pensylvania. Palmerston, Irish
viscount, title of, created 1722. (name Temple.) Palmyra, a city of great
opulence, before 273, now a wretched village; its ruins first discovered by an
English traveller, about 1699. Pandects, or a system of laws, a copy of
Justinian's, accidentally discovered at Amalphi, in Italy, 1137, which was so
much admired as to favor the revival of the Roman law. Panmure, Irish earldom
of, created 1743. (Maule.) Pannonia. See Hungary. Pantheon, at Rome, built by
Agrippina, 25 before Christ. Pantomime dancers introduced on the Roman stage,
by Bathyles and Pylades, 22 before Christ; at that period, pantomimes were
considered as the first degree of difficult acting, speaking by gesture; but
modern times have degraded them into farces. Papal usurpation took place, 607.
Paper credit established at the Revolution. See Banks, Bills of Exchange,
Credit. Paper first invented in the time of Alexander the Great; made of
cotton, 1000, when books became cheaper, and learning increased; made of linen,
about 1300; the manufactory first established here at Dar^ford, 1588. Paraguay
discovered by the Spaniards, 1515. Parchment, for writing on, the invention of
king Attalus of Pergamus, about 198 before Christ; hence its latin name
pergamina charta: till this time they wrote on the bark of trees. Pardon,
General, first proclaimed at coronations, 1327. Paris made the capital of
France, 510; the city of, consumed by fire, 588; barricadoes of, 1588, to
oppose the entry of the duke of Guise; again, August 27, 1648, in opposition to
the regency; first parliament there, 1302; old parliament recalled, Nov. 25,
1774. See France, Academies. Parishes first marked out in England, 643. See
Patronage. Park, St. James's, received its name from Hen. VIII. when it was a
wild wet field; improved and planted by Charles II. and the game of Mall was
there played by the nobility, 1668; improved by George III. 1775. See St.
James's Palace. Park, ground first enclosed for one at Woodstock, 1123; though
Spelman says, they are of higher antiquity; they were certainly in use in the
Eastern countries. Parliaments, or general councils, coeval with the kingdom
itself; but the parliament, as it now stands, was instituted 1215. No speaker
appointed till 1259; others say Peter de la Mare was the first chosen, 1377.
The epoch of the house of commons, in England, January 20, 1265; of lords and
commons expressly mentioned, 1337. They met at Eltham; the building is now a
barn. In Henry IVth's time, lawyers were excluded parliament, the king
apprehending opposition from them; that parliament was therefore called
indoctum. The journals of the lords began in the reign of Henry VIII. 1509;
those of the commons, not till that of Edward VI. First parliament in Ireland,
by general representation, 1613. That in England, remarkable for the epoch, in
which were first regularly formed the parties of Court and Country, June 16,
1621. The long one met, 1640, and passed an act for abolishing the house of
lords, March 19, 1649, but was violently dissolved by Cromwell, April 20, 1653;
a part however met again, May 8, 1659, and was called the Rump. Bill passed for
triennial ones, Nov. 1694. The first British one met, Oct. 24, 1707. Act passed
for septennial ones, 1716. See ^eers, Privilege, Barebone, Lawyers, Provisions,
Rump, Praise-god, Rem. Occur. anno 1679.
Parry, Dr. William, a Roman-catholic gentleman, notwithstanding he had been
pardoned for a capital crime, determined, under the authority of the pope, to
assassinate queen Elizabeth; but the design was discovered, and he was
executed, 1585. Parthenian games first instituted, 1262 before Christ. Parthia,
a small territory between Hyrcania and Medea, now part of Korasan, in Persia;
rescued by Arsaces, its first king, from Antiochus, king of Syria, 250 before
Christ; Artabanus, the last king, was dethroned by Artaxerxes, a Persian, 226.
See Arsaces, Artabanus, Persian Empire. Partition treaty, The first, signed,
School. Pasquinade took its rise from the public, at Rome, pasting their sarcasms
on an ancient statue, standing at a corner of one of the streets, originally
the trunk of a carved gladiator, but nicknamed Pasquin, from being found near
the house of one Pasquin, a professed wag, who with his neighbor Marforio,
used to divert himself at the public expense. Passover instituted, Monday, May
4, 1491 before Chr. Patronage of churches took place, 402; such lords of
manors, as erected churches in their royalties, were allowed the nomination of
the rector, subject to his examination by the bishop; tithes, before this time,
were paid to the diocesan, to be distributed among the clergy of the diocese in
general; but on the erection of a church, the lord had a power of appropriating
the tithes in his manor to the support of that church, whether the lands lay
all contiguous or not; hence the intermixture of parishes. Paul, St. converted,
33; caught up into the 3d heaven, 44; visited Athens and Corinth, 50; wrote his
first epistle to the Corinthians, and that to the Galatians, 51; returned to
Ephesus, 52; wrote his first epistle to the Thessalonians, 52; his second 53;
put into bonds, and brought to Rome, 55; wrote his second epistle to the
Corinthians, and that to the Romans, 58; those to the Philippians, Ephesians,
Colossians, and to Philemon, 62; that to the Hebrews, 63; his first to Timothy,
and that to Titus, 65; his second to Timothy, 66; died, June 29, 67. See Peter.
Paul's, St. London, was built by Ethelbert, king of Kent, on the foundation of
an old temple of Diana, 596; burnt, 964; rebuilt and consecrated, 1240, having
been 150 years building; rebuilt, having been burnt down, 1631; first stone of
the present building laid, 1675; finished, 1710, at 1,000,000l. expense.
Paul's, St. school. See Colet. Paulists, a race of robbers, who lest Brazil,
and formed a republic in South America, about 1590. Pauper act first passed by
Henry VII. See Poor. Paving act, for London, passed, 1761. Pawnbroker, The
first, established at Perouse, 1457. Peace. See War. Pears. See Cherries. Peele
castle, in the isle of Man, built, before 1245. Peele castle, Lancashire,
built, 1140. Peerage, State of, in 1603, viz. 1 marquis, 16 earls, 2 viscounts,
and 40 barons; peerage bill rejected by parliament, 1719. Peers were often
executed, without trial, long after magna charta; created by patent in the
reign of Richard II; lord Beauchamp, of Holt, was the first, who was afterward
put to death for high treason, 1382; their eldest sons first permitted to fit
in the house of commons, 1550. See Parliament, Peerage, Rem. Occur. annis 1477,
1585, 1649. Pelasgi, the descendants of Peleg, became a maritime power, and
were the second that ruled the Mediterranean, 1057 before Christ. See
Mediterranean. Pelham of Laughton, Barony of, created 1756. (name Pelham.)
Peloponesian war, between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, which continued 27
years, began 431 before Christ, and ended in the ruin of the Athenian republic.
Pelsart's voyage performed, 1628. Pembroke, Earl of, chosen protector of
England, Nov. 11, 1216; died May following. Pembroke, Earl of, and his brother,
beheaded by the rebels, 1469. Pembroke-hall, Cambridge, founded by the countess
of Pembroke, 1343. (17 fellows.) Pembroke college, Oxford, founded by Thomas
Tesdale, etc. 1620. (14 fellows) Pembroke, Earldom of, created 1551. (name
Herbert.) Penal laws were enacted, about 1381, in consequence of tenants
threwing off their services to their lords, which occasioned the insurrection
of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, (who set fire to the jury courts), and the
opposition to John a Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. Penance first inflicted as a
punishment, 157. Pendragon castle, West^oreland, destr^yed, 1341; repaired,
1660. Penitents, an order of nuns, founded, 1494. Penmon castle, Anglesea,
built, 540. Penrith castle, Cumberland, built, as supposed, on the ruins of a
Roman fortress. Penryn, Cornwall, incorporated, 1619. Pensioners, Band of,
established, 1590. Pensylvania relinquished by the Dutch, and granted to the
duke of York, 1664; settled, 1674; sold by him to the Penn family, 1682; this
colony flourished particularly, by near 7000 families settling here from the
banks of the Rhine, who invited over some thousands of German and Swiss
Protestants. See Palatines, America. Pentateuch, or the five books of Moses.
See Moses. Pentecost established, about 68. Persecution by the Jews, the first
in 33; second, 44. First general of the christians, under Nero, 64; second
ditto, under Domitian, 93; third ditto, under Trajan, 107; fourth ditto, under
M. Aurelius, 164; fifth ditto, under Severus, 202; sixth ditto, under
Maximinus, 235; seventh ditto, under Decius, 250; eighth ditto, under Valerian,
257; ninth ditto, under Aurelian, 272; tenth ditto, under Dioclesian, 302;
eleventh ditto, by the Arians, under Constantius, 337; twelfth ditto, under
Julian the apostate, 361. Persian empire began under Cyrus, on his conquering
Medea, (which see) 536; ended in the conquest of Darius, about 330; a new
empire, called the Parthian, was, however, formed upon its ruins, by the the
Persians under Arbaces, 250 before Christ, but took its original name under
Artaxerxes, 229; the Saracens, however, in 651, put an end to that empire, and
Persia became a prey to the Tartars, and a province of Hindostan, till the
emperor Kouli Khan once more raised it to a powerful kingdom. Emperor
assassinated by his relations, 1747. See Parthia, Rem. Occur. anno 424. Persian
trade began, 1569; opened, through Russia, 1741. Peru first known, 1532, and
conquered by Spain. See New Spain. Peruke, The first, made at Paris, 1620; worn
here soon after 1660. Pestilence, so severe a one in France and Germany, that
it killed almost all the inhabitants, 825; another, that raged in Germany from
June to December, 1679; in Vienna alone it destroyed 49,487 persons. See
Dearth. Rem. Occur. annis 1315, 1348, 1353. Peter, St. baptized Cornelius, and
established a bishopric at Antioch, 37; established the sea of Rome, 41;
imprisoned the same year; wrote his first epistle, 60; his second, 66; died,
67; feast of Peter and Paul ordained, 813. Peter the Great began to reign in
Russia, 1696; came over here, and worked as a common shipwright, in Deptford
yard, to get the art of shipbuilding, School; died, 1725, aged 53. Peter III.
czar of Muscovy, deposed and murdered. July 16, 1762. Peterborough founded,
633; monastery built, 659; cathedral built, 1200; bishopric taken from Lincoln
and founded, and deanery erected, 1541; city chartered by Henry VIII; burnt,
1117. Peterborough, Earldom of, created 1627. (name Mordaunt.) Peterpence, a
tribute of one penny per house, given to Rome by Inas, king of the West Saxons,
720; usually collected on the feast of St. Peter, being August 1; it was
prohibited by Edward III. and abolished in 1533, but revived 1552; totally
abolished, 1558. See Ethelwolf. Peter's, St. college, Cambridge, founded by
Hugo de Balsham, 1257. (22 fellows.) Petersburgh, city of, founded, 1703;
burnt, (2000 houses) August 12, 1736; hurricane at, that occasioned a dreadful
inundation, Sept. 14, 1777. See Academies. Petersfield, Hants, incorporated by
queen Elizabeth. Petre, of Writtle, barony of, created 1603. (name Petre.)
Pevensey castle, Sussex, of great antiquity; apparently a Roman building.
Pharos of Alexandria, built, 282 before Christ. Pheasants brought into Europe
by the Argonautes, 1250 before Christ. Phenicians, The, established colonies in
Spain, about 1000 before Christ. See Spain, Cadiz. Philadelphia taken by the
king's troops, Sept. 26, 1777. Philip II. king of Spain, son of the emperor
Charles V. born about 1526, married Mary queen of England; was crowned king of
Naples and Sicily, on the resignation of his father, 1554, and was allowed to
be called king of England during her life; the crown of Spain resigned to him
by his father, 1555; lost the 17 provinces of Flanders which belonged to Spain,
7 of which form the republic of Holland; the other ten are subject to France
and Austria, 1579; united Portugal to Spain, 1580 (see Portugal); landed 600
men in Ireland to assist the Catholics, who were driven off, 1581; died, 1598.
Philippa, Edward IIId's queen, died at Windsor, August 15, 1369, and was buried
at Westminster. Philippine islands. See Ladrone. Philipsburgh; the Spaniards
became masters of it, 1633; the French, 1634; the Imperialists, 1635; the
French again, 1644; the Imperialists, 1676; the French, 1734. Phipps, Captain
(now lord Mulgrave), sent to explore the North pole, 1773 Phocaean, or sacred
war, 357 before Christ. Phosphorus, Artificial fire of, discovered by Brand,
1675. Phrygia Minor, became part of the Lydian empire under Croesus, and shared
its fate, about 560 before Christ, Phrygians, The, were the fifth who acquired
the maritime power of the Mediterranean, and held it 25 years, 893 before
Christ. See Mediterranean. Physic garden, the first cultivated in England, by
John Gerrard, surgeon of London, 1567; that at Oxford, endowed by the earl of
Danby, 1652; that at Cambridge began, 1763. Physic, The practice of, was
confined to Ecclesiastics, from about 1206 to about 1500. Physicians, College
of, founded, 1519. Picton castle, Pembrokeshire, built, before 1066. Picts
first mentioned in history, 284; kingdom of, began in Scotland, 823; extirpated
by the Scots, 840. Picts wall, between England and Scotland, built, 123. Pilate
made governor of Judea, 27; slew himself, 40. Pin-money, derived from a very
ancient tax in France, for providing the queen with pins. Pins first used in
England, 1543; before which the ladies used skewers. Pipes of lead for
conveying water, The casting of, invented by the reverend Robert Brock, 1539.
Piquet, and several other games on cards, invented by Jaquemin, for the
amusement of Charles VI. of France, about 1390; cards were little known before.
Pistols first used by the cavalry, 1544. Pitt's Streights, in the East Indies,
discovercd, April 30, 1760. Placemen. See Rem. Occur. anno 1679. Plague, almost
the whole world visited by one, 767 before Christ. In Rome, which carried off
10,000 persons in a day, 78. A terrible one all over Europe, Asia, and Africa,
that lasted near 50 years, 557. In England, that carried off 34,000, 772. In
Scotland, wherein died 40,000, 954. In England, 1247. Again, 1347. In Germany,
which cut off 90,000 people, 1348. In Paris and England, very dreadful, when
57,374 died in England, 1362. Again, 1379. In England, which killed 30,000 in
London, 1407. Again, when more were destroyed than in 15 years war before,
1477. Again, when 30,000 died in London, 1499. Again, in England, when half the
people died, 1517. Again, 1548. Again, 1594. Again, which carried off in London
30,578 persons, 1604. At Constantinople, when 200,000 persons died, 1611.
Again, at London, whereof died 35,417, 1625. At Lions, in France, where died
60,000, 1632. Again, at London, which destroyed 68,000, 1665. At Marseilles,
fatal to 18,000 persons, 1720. At Bassora, in Persia, when 80,000 persons died,
1773.
Plagues, Ten, of Egypt, 1494 before Christ. Plantagenet, Geofrey, earl of
Anjou, married the empress Maud, 1127; invaded Normandy, 1137. See Maude.
Plaster of Paris, The method of taking a likeness in, discovered by Andrew
Verocchio, 1470. Plate. See Silver-handled. Platonism. See Pletho, Vol. II.
Playhouse bill passed, obliging pieces to be inspected before performed, 1737.
See Theater. Pleadings introduced, 786; changed from French to English, as a
favor from Edward III. to his people, in the 50th, or jubilee year, 1362;
there was an ordinance of Cromwell's for the same, and that the entries should
be in English. Plough, Use of, brought from India by Bacchus. Plunket, Oliver,
popish archbishop of Armagh, hanged at Tyburn, with Edward Fitzharris, July 1,
1681; the first for a conspiracy, carried on with France, for an insurrection
in Ireland, the latter for a libel against the king. Plural number, We, instead
of I, first used by John, 1199, to communicate part of the merit to the council
who gave their advice; it continued till the accession of George III.
Pluralities. See Pope. Plymouth burnt by the French fleet, 1377. Plymouth,
Earldom of, created 1612. (name Windsor.) Poaching. See Game. Poet Laureat; the
first mention of one is in Edward IVth's reign, though the present office under
this title is derived from the king's versifier, of whom we hear in 1251.
Poetry. Orpheus is the earliest author, and by many deemed the inventor, 1249
before Christ; Archilochus introduced iambic verse, 700 before Christ. See
Andronicus Livius, Thoulouse. Poland, once the country of the Vandals, who left
it to invade the Roman empire; it was made a duchy, 694; kingdom of, began, by
favor of Otho III. emperor of Germany, under Boleslaus, 999; Red Russia added
to it, 1059; Pomerania, that had been separated 180 years, again united with
it, 1465; embraced christianity, 965; order of the white eagle instituted,
1705; Augustus vacated his throne, 1707; endeavored to recover it, 1709;
pacification treaty, 1717; king o, carried off by the confederates, and
wounded, Nov. 3, 1771; seized and divided between Prussia, Russia, and Germany,
1773. So late as the 13th century, the Poles retained the custom of killing old
men when past their labor, and such children as were born imperfect. This
crown is elective. See Sobieski, Warsaw, Protestants. Poligamy; the first
public law against it in the empire of Rome, was about 393; allowed to be
agreeable to scripture by our first reformers; the custom of lending wives was
general in the first ages of christianity; continency and abstinence from
marriage was held the surest way to heaven among the fooleries of the 6th
century. See Gnostics. Politicians, the term first used in France, 1569.
Poll-tax first levied by act of parliament, 1380; reimposed, according to the
station and riches of the person, 1513. Pomfret, Earldom of, created 1721.
(name Fermor.) Pondicherry taken from the French, 1761. Ponsonby, of Sysonby,
Barony, created 1739. (name Ponsonby.) Pontefract castle, Yorkshire, built,
1069; town chartered by Richard III. Pontus, The kingdom of, shook off the
Macedonian yoke, 300; grew renowned under the dynasty of Mithridates, till the
Romans subdued it, 64 before Christ; a new empire of the Greeks was founded at
Trebisond, in Pontus, 1204, which continued till destroyed by the Turks, in
1459. Pool, Dorsetshire, chartered, before the 14th of Edward III. Poor, first
English statute respecting them, 1496; they subsisted on private benevolence
till Henry VIIIth; present laws formed on the 39th and 43d of Elizabeth. See
Pauper Act, Rem. Occur. anno 1571. Pope, The title of, formerly given to all
bishops, but Boniface III. 606, procured the emperor Phocas to confine it to
the bishops of Rome, and now their power began; Hygenus was the first bishop of
Rome that took the title, 138. Leo I. elected, May 10, 440; died, 461. The
pope's supremacy over the christian church first established by Boniface III.
607. The custom of kissing the pope's toe introduced, 708. The pope's temporal
grandeur commenced, 755. Sergius II. was the first pope that changed his name
on his election, 844. John XIX. a layman, made pope, by dint of money, 1024.
The first pope that kept an army was Leo IX. 1054. Pope Gregory obliged Henry
IV. emperor of Germany, to stand three days, in the depth of winter,
barefooted, at his castle-gate, to implore his pardon, 1077. The pope's
authority first introduced into England, 1079; abrogated by parliament, 1534.
The pope demanded an annual sum from every cathedral and monastery in
Christendom, but refused, 1226; collected the tenths of the whole kingdom of
England, 1226. Residence of the popes removed to Avignon, where it continued 70
years, 1308. Their demand on England refused by parliament, 1363. Leo X. made a
cardinal at 14 years old; elected pope, March 11, 1513, aged 36; died, 1521.
Clement VII. began to reign, who brought pluralities to their consummation,
making his nephew Hippolito, Cardinal de Medicis, commendatory universal,
granting to him all the vacant benefices in the world for six months, and
appointing him usufructuary from the first day of his possession, 1523. Rome
sacked, and Clement imprisoned, 1527. The word Pope struck out of all English
books, 1541. Sixtus Quintus elected pope, 1585, died, 1590. The power of the
popes declined, about 1600. See Urbin VI. Jubilee, Crown.
Popery, Acts against, repealed, May 28, 1778. See Riot. Pork religiously
forbidden to the Jews and Arabs, as having been exceedingly scarce, owing to
the want of food for hogs in Arabia and Palestine, and it being the flesh of an
animal that perspires but little, and impedes the perspiration of other meats;
of course, pernicious in hot climates, where the leprosy, a cutaneous disorder,
was prevalent. Portchester, Barony of, created 1780. (name Herbert.)
Portchester castle, Hampshire, said to be built, 380 before Christ. Port, the
court of the grand Signior, so called, from the custom of great men attending
at the prince's gate, a custom introduced by Cyrus I. 535 before Christ.
Porteus, Captain, hanged by the mob at Edinburgh, Sept. 7, 1736. He commanded a
guard attending the execution of a smuggler, and being hissed by the populace,
without the previous formalities of law, he ordered his men to fire, which
killed several; for this he was tried and condemned; but being pardoned, the
mob broke open the prison, and hanged him; for which Edinburgh was fined 2000l.
Portland, Dukedom of, created, 1716. (name Bentinck.) Portland Isle castle
built by Henry VIII. Portmore, Scots earldom of, created 1703. (name Collier.)
Portobello taken from the Spaniards by admiral Vernon, Nov. 22, 1739.
Port-reeves. See Mayors. Porto Rico discovered, 1497. Portsmouth burnt, 1265;
again, by the French, 1377; dock burnt, 1760; again, July 27, 1770; again, Dec.
1776. Portsmouth, Earldom of, created 1743. (name Wallop.) Portugal, formerly
called Lusitania, with the rest of Spain, became subject to the Moors, 713, and
continued so till conquered by Alphonso, 1093; who became the first king, 1139;
taken by the Spaniards, 1580; revolted from Spain, and the duke of Braganza sat
on the throne, under Philip IV. of Spain, and IIId of Portugal, 1640; king of,
shot at, Sept. 3. 1758, for which several of the nobility suffered, and the
Jesuits were expelled; orders, of Avis founded, 1147; of Christ instituted,
1319; of St. James founded, 1310, and confirmed, 1640. See Ourigues, Battle of.
Post, method of carrying letters, invented by the university of Paris, about
1470; general postoffice established, 1643; as at present, Dec. 27, 1660; took
place in Scotland, 1695; penny post established, 1683. See Franking. Postchaise
tax passed, 1779; improved, 1780. Posthorses first established in the time of
the Romans; established in Germany, 1641. Potatoes first brought from America
by Sir Francis Drake, 1586; introduced into Ireland, 1610; into England, 1650.
Poulet, Earldom of, created 1706. (name Poulet.) Pound, The, sterling, in the
time of the Saxons, consisted as now of 240 pence, which 240 pence weighed a
pound. Powderham castle, Devon, built, 970. Powdering the hair took its rise
from some of the ballad-singers at the fair of St. Germain, whitening their
heads to make themselves ridiculous, 1614. Powerscourt, Irish viscount, Title
of, created 1743; (name Wingfield.) Powis castle, Montgomeryshire, built, about
1110. Powis, Earldom of, created 1748. (name Herbert.) Poyning's law (so
called, from its passing during the deputyship of Sir Edward Poynings), passed
at Drogheda, 1495; granting a power to the crown of originating every act, and
leaving the Irish senate a power only of refusing upon recognition. Praetorian
guards finally abolished at Rome, 312. Pragmatic sanction, for limiting the
power of the popes, re-establishing the liberty of the church, and settling the
German empire in the house of Austria, first took place, 1439; ratified by
England and other powers, 1740. Prague founded by the emperor Charles IV. of
Germany, 1361. Praise-God Barebones, a parliament so called, from the name of
one of the members, met July 4, 1653. This parliament consisted of 144 members,
summoned by Cromwell, who were to sit 15 months, and then to choose a fresh
parliament themselves. Praying toward the East ordered by the pope, 532;
praying for the dead, first introduced into the christian church, about 590.
Preambles of the acts of parliaments, before Henry VI. were not always the
foundations of those acts. Predestination established by Lucidus, a priest of
Gaul, 470. Presbyterian meeting house, the first in England, established at
Wandsworth, Surry, Nov. 20, 1572, by the Puritans; presbyterianism set up in
Scotland, 1638. See Episcopacy, Ministers. Press, The last act for restraining
the liberty of, expired, 1694, since which it has been free; though from the
first introduction of printing till that time, government exercised the power
of licensing books. Pressing supported by custom, as far back as records can be
found, the king being entitled to every man's service; but it is a hardship
which necessity only can justify; 1000 men were pressed for land service, 1596,
and it was then held to be legal; the first commission to press seamen, 29
Edward III. 1355. See Rem. Occur. anno 1544. Preston Guild established, 1172;
town chartered, 1684. Pretender, Edward, The, son of James II. of England, born
June 10, 1688; married, 1719; died, 1766; Charles, son of the former, born,
March 20, 1720. Primogeniture, Right of, came in with the feudal law, 1070.
Prince George ship of war burnt off Lisbon, April 3, 1758; 485 persons
perished. Prince of Wales, Title of, first given to the king's eldest son,
1286. Printing, Chinese mode of, on tablets, invented, 930; first performed
with wooden blocks, and almost immediately after with separate wooden types, by
L. Koster, at Harlaem, 1430; with metal types, by John Geinsfleich his brother,
Guttenburgh of Mentz, and Faust, 1144; Peter Schaeffer found the method of
casting types, 1452; printing introduced at Oxford, with wooden types, by Fr.
Corsellis, from Harlaem, 1459; brought into England, by William Caxton, a
mercer, of London, 1471, who had a press in Westminster till 1494, when he
died; Aldus Mauntius cast the Hebrew, Greek, and Italic characters; the first
Greek book printed, 1476; Hebrew book ditto, 1478; the number of master
printers in London and Westminster limited by the Star Chamber, 1638. See
Press, Faust. Priories, 110, suppressed by order of council, 1414; totally
suppressed by Henry VIII. 1539. See Monastery, Rem. Occur. anno 700. Prisoners
of war, the custom of enslaving them, totally abolished in the 13th century.
Privilege of parliament, respecting their servants' debts, relinquished, 1770.
Privileged places in London for debtors, as the Mint in White-friars,
abolished, 1^96. Privy council instituted by Alfred, about 896. See Cabal.
Proceedings at law. Ours are very similar to those made use of by the
Egyptians, many years before Christ. Professorships of history, divinity, and
all sciences that do not require experimental explanation, seem to have been
instituted in the universities, etc. on account of the scarcity of books at
that period; those of modern language and modern history established by George
I. 1724. Promissory notes made assignable by act of parliament, 1705. Prophets,
Several French, offered to submit to death, saying, they would rise again
before the people. They were put in the pillory, 1706. Prostration at the
elevation of the mass first enjoined, 1201. Protectorate. That of the earl of
Pembroke, began Oct. 1216; ended, by his death, the same year. Of the duke of
Bedford, began 1422; ended, by his death. Sept. 1435. Of the duke of
Gloucester, began April, 1483; ended, by his assuming the royal dignity, June,
1483. Of Somerset, began 1547; ended, by his resignation, 1549. Of Oliver
Cromwell, began December, 1653; ended, by his death, 1658. Of Richard Cromwell,
began 1658; ended, by his resignation, April, 1659.
Protestantism, first tolerated in Germany, 1624; ditto in Bohemia, 1707.
Protestants, Name of, began, from the diet of Spires, when several of the
German states protested against a decree of the diet, to support the doctrines
of the church of Rome, April 19, 1530; bloody execution of, at Thorn, 1724,
when great numbers were put to death, under a pretended legal sentence of the
chancellor of Poland, for being concerned in a tumult, occasioned by a Popish
procession. Provisions of Oxford passed, in which was the first sketch of a
house of commons, 1258. Prussia, anciently possessed by the Venedi, whose kings
were descended from Arthirius, first king of the Hiruli, on the Baltic, 320
before Christ. The Venedi were conquered by the Borussi, who inhabited the
Riphaeen mountains. Thence the country was called Burussia, or Prussia, which
was subdued by the Mercian knights, sent by the emperor Frederic II. 1215;
weary of the extortions of their governors, they revolted to Jagello, king of
Poland, 1219. The grand master of the Teutonic order conquered the Poles, and
kept possession till 1700, when he was made a king; order of the black eagle
instituted, 1701; order of merit ditto, 1730; king of, visited England, 1744.
See Berlin, Limburg, Poland. Public houses, a power of licensing them, first
granted to Sir Giles Montpesson, and Sir Francis Michel, for their own
emolument, 1621. Pulvis fulminans, first known to Roger Bacon, 1290. Pumps
first invented, 1425. Punic war. The first commenced, 264; the second, 218; the
third, 149 before Christ. Purgatives, of the mild kind, particularly cassia,
manna, and senna, first discovered by a Greek physician, 1245. Drastics had
done great harm in medicine before. Purgatory invented, 250; introduced, 511.
Purification of the blessed Virgin, Feast of, established, 552. Puritans,
protestants who fled to Germany in queen Mary's reign, and returned in that of
Elizabeth. They were called Puritans by way of reproach, for attempting a purer
form of worship than even the protestants had made use of; yet still they did
not separate from them, but remained in communion, and submitted to episcopacy.
See Presbyterian. Purple, discovery of it, about 500 before Christ. Purple,
The, given to the cardinals by Paul II. 1465. Pygmies, were a race of men four
feet and a half high, formerly in Lapland. Pythian games instituted at Delphos
in honor of Apollo, about 626 before Christ.
Q.
QUADRANTS, Solar, introduced at Rome, 290 before Christ. Quadruple alliance
between Germany, France, Holland, and Great Britain concluded, July 22, 1718.
Quakers, Sect of, founded by George Fox, 1664; sixty transported to America by
order of council, 1664. Notwithstanding their affirmation was adopted by act of
parliament for an oath, in 1696; the election of John Archdale, chosen a member
of parliament, was made void, for his refusing to take the oaths, School.
Qualification act for members of parliament, passed 1711. Quebec taken from the
French, September 13, 1759, when general Wolf was slain. See Canada. Queen's
college, Cambridge, founded by Henry VIth's queen, 1548. (19 fellows.) Queen's
college, Oxford, founded by R. Eglesfield, 1340. (16 fellows.) Queensbury,
Scots dukedom of, created 1684. (name Douglas.) Quicksilver, its use in
refining silver discovered, 1540. Quietists, or Molinists, a sect who taught
that future happiness consisted in the annihilation of the functions of the
soul, arose under Molinos, a priest of Saragossa, 1685.
R.
RAAB, Hungary, taken by the Turks, 1594; retaken, 1598. Raay, Scots barony,
created 1628. (name Mackay.) Rabbit-woman, The affair of, 1726. See Impostors.
Raby castle, Durham, built, 1020. Radnor chartered by queen Elizabeth. Radnor,
Earldom of, created 1765. (name Bouverie.) Raid of Ruthven, The, when James I.
was seized by the nobles of Scotland, August 22, 1582. Rainbow, Theory of,
given by Dedominis, 1611. Raine's charity took place, to give marriage portions
to four women annually, 1758. Ramsey abbey, in Hunts, built, 969; 100 houses
burnt, May 21, 1763. Ranas, in Enzie, Scotland, burned down, May 7, 1759.
Ranelagh, Irish viscount, Title of, created 1628. (name Jones.) Ransoms,
formerly paid by prisoners, were appropriated, by great men, to build their
castles, 1423. They were generally taxed at a year's income. Ranza castle,
Arran Isle, Scotland, built, before 1380. Ravishing of women made a capital
offense, 1279. Ratcliffe, Mr. beheaded, Dec. 8, 1746, for taking part in the
rebellion. Ratisbon built, 1187 before Christ. Ravensworth, Barony of, created
1747. (Liddel.) Reading abbey, Berks, built, 1121. Rebellion, of the English,
against William II. in favor of his brother Robert, 1088; extinguished 1090.
Of the Welsh, who defeated the Normans and English, 1095. In England, in favor
of the empress Maude, 1139; ended, 1153. Of the Barons, April, 1215;
compromised by the grant of Magna Charta, June 15 following. Of ditto, 1262;
ended, 1267. Under Wat Tyler, 1381, which took its rise from some tax-gatherers
ill-treating the daughter of a blacksmith in Essex, (when collecting the
poll-tax) who knocked out the tax-gatherer's brains with his hammer. The action
was applauded, the neighborhood joined in the sedition, and the flame spread
in an instant over the whole country. See Tyler, Penal Laws. In Ireland, when
Roger earl of March, the viceroy, and presumptive heir to the crown, was slain,
1399. See Richard II. Against Richard, 1399; ended with the death of the king.
See Richard II. Of the English and Welsh, 1400; ended, 1407. Under the earl of
Northumberland, who was defeated at Bramham-moor, and slain, 1408. Of Jack
Cade, in favor of the duke of York, June 1, 1450. See Cade. In favor of the
house of York, 1452, which ended in the imprisonment of Henry VI. and seating
Edward IV. of York, on the throne, 1464. See Henry VI; Edward IV. Of the
English, in Yorkshire, owing to some encroachments respecting St. Leonard's
hospital, in York, 1469. Under Warwick and Clarence, 1470, which ended with the
expulsion of Edward IV. and the restoration of Henry VI. the same year. See
Edward IV. Under Edward IV. 1471, which ended with the death of Henry VI. See
Henry VI. Of the earl of Richmond, against Richard III. 1485, which ended with
the death of Richard. See Richard III; Henry VII. Under Lamb. Simnel, who
pretended to be Richard IIId's nephew, 1487, which ended the same year, in
discovering that Simnel was a baker's son: he was pardoned. See Simnel. Under
Perkin Warbeck, 1492, which ended in the execution of Warbeck, 1499. See
Warbeck. Under Flammoc, 1497, owing to taxes, which ended with the battle of
Blackheath. See Blackheath. Of the English, on account of destroying the
monasteries, 1536; ended the same year. Of ditto, in the West, owing to
enclosures and oppressions of the gentry, June, 1549; suppressed the same year.
Of ditto, in Norfolk, headed by Ket the tanner, but soon suppressed, August,
1549. See Ket. In favor of lady Jane Gray, against queen Mary, 1553, which
ended in the death of lady Jane. See Gray Lady Jane, and Mary. Of Sir Thomas
Wiat, against the queen's marriage with Philip of Spain, etc. 1554. Of the
Roman Catholics against queen Elizabeth, 1559; suppressed the same year. Of the
Irish, under the earl of Tyrone, 1599; suppressed 1601. Under the earl of
Essex, against Elizabeth, 1600, which ended in his death, 1601. See Elizabeth;
Essex. Against Charles I. 1639; ended with his death, 1649. See Charles I. Of
the Irish, under Roger More, Sir Phelim O'Niel, etc. against the English in
Ireland, 1641; ended 1651. Under the duke of Monmouth, 1685, which ended in his
death. See Monmouth. Of the Scotch, under the old Pretender, 1715; quelled
1716. Of the Scotch, under the young Pretender, 1745; quelled 1746. Of the
Americans, on account of taxes, 1775. See Tea, Conspiracies, York Archbishop of.
Recolets, The, established in France, 1584. Reculver abbey, Kent, built, 669.
Redwald, succeeded Ethelbert, as 7th king of Britain, 616; established Edwin on
the throne of Northumberland, 617; died, 624; and was succeeded in the monarchy
by Edwin. Reformation, The, first set on foot by John Wickliffe, 1370 (see
Wickliffe); begun in England by Henry VIIIth's casting off the Pope's
supremacy, and introducing the Protestant religion into this country, 1534;
completed by Edward VI. 1547. See Rem. Occur. anno 1351. Registers, Parochial,
first appointed, 1538; of deeds, etc. in Yorkshire, 1703. Relics. See Images.
Religious houses dissolved by Henry VIII. 1537. Remonstrants. See Arminianism.
Restoration, or the restoring of Charles II. to the crown of England, after an
Interregnum of eleven years, 1660. Revolution in Great Britain took place, by
the prince of Orange's taking possession of the throne, Nov. 5, 1688. Rhode
Island, New England, settled, 1637, 1644; charter granted, 1662; vacated by
order, 1684; reassumed, 1689. Rhodes, an island of the Turks, peopled from
Crete, 916; the republic however not completed till 480; the city built, 432
before Christ; taken by the Saracens, and the Colossus sold, which weighed
720,000lb. 652; taken from the Turks, 1308; retaken by them, from the knights
of Jerusalem, 1523. See Malta, Chares. Rhodians, The, were the fourth who
acquired the maritime power of the Mediterranean, and held it for 23 years, 916
before Christ. See Mediterranean. Rhudland castle, Flintshire, rebuilt, soon
after 1063. Rice first noticed in South Carolina, growing naturally, 1702.
Richard I. for his valor called Caeur de Lion, second son of Henry II. born at
Oxford, 1157; invested with the duchy of Guienne and Poictou, in his father's
lifetime; prevailed on by his mother to rebel against his father, 1173;
submitted to him, 1183; excommunicated by the pope's legate, for being the
chief spring of discord, and interrupting the Crusade, 1189; a new breach with
his father the same year; succeeded him on the throne, Sept. 3, ditto; set out
on the Crusade, and joined Philip of France on the plains of Vezelay, June 19,
1190; took Messina the end of the year; married Berengaria, daughter of the
king of Navarre, she being with him, May 12, 1191; defeated the Cyprians, and
took their king prisoner, 1191; taken prisoner near Vienna, on his return home,
by the duke of Austria, who confined him, and loaded him with irons, Dec. 20,
1192; ransomed for 300,000l. Feb. 4, 1194; returned to England, March 20,
following, and crowned again; invaded France the next month; wounded in the
shoulder with an arrow at the castle of Chaluz, near Limoges, of which he died,
April 6, 1199, and was succeeded by his brother John. See Henry II. Richard II.
son to Edward the Black Prince, born at Bourdeaux, Jan. 6, 1367; made guardian
of the kingdom, August 30, 1372; created prince of Wales, 1376; succeeded his
grandfather, Edward III. on the throne, June 21, 1377, crowned July 16
following; married Anne, sister to the empress of Germany, Jan. 14, 1382;
dethroned, 1387; resumed the government, 1389; buried his queen, August 3,
1394; affianced to Isabella, daughter of France, then only seven years old,
autumn, 1396; on the death of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, seized the
Lancastrian estate, 1399; went to Ireland the same year to revenge the death of
his cousin, the earl of March, heir to the crown, there slain in opposing a
rebellion; in the mean time, Henry, the duke of Lancaster's son, came over to
England in July, and raised an army to recover his estate, and was joined by
all the people: on Richard's return, he was taken prisoner by Henry, and sent
to the Tower, Sept. 1, 1399; resigned his crown to Henry, Sept. 28, following,
and was succeeded by this Henry IV. duke of Lancaster, grandson to Edward III.
Richard was condemned to perpetual imprisonment, October 16; but on a
conspiracy to restore him, was murdered by eight assassins, January, 1400, in
Pomfret castle, and buried at Langley, but removed to Westminster; 16 of the
conspirators were executed. See Merkes. Richard III. brother to Edward IV.
married Ann Nevil, the widow of Edward, Henry VIth's son, (whom he had
murdered; see Edward) 1471; elected king, on his nephew, Edward Vth's being
deposed, June 20, 1483; crowned July 6, following; again at York, Sept. 8;
buried his son Edward, April, 1484; poisoned his queen the same year; his
dominions invaded by his fifth cousin, Henry, earl of Richmond, who gave him
battle at Bosworth, where Richard was slain, August 22, 1485, aged 32; he was
buried at Leicester, and succeeded by the victor Henry VII. Many circumstances
have come out to prove, that Richard was a genteel well-made man, and a good
king. See Gray, Edward, Henry VIth's son, Henry VII. Gloucester, Duke of,
Edward V. Richborough castle, Kent, built in the time of the Romans. Richmond
castle, Yorkshire, built in William Ist's reign. Richmond palace, Surrey, built
by Henry VII. (and called Richmond from his title) on the spot where the old
Sheen palace stood, 1498; park, ditto, enclosed by Charles I.; bridge began
building, August 23, 1774. Richmond, Dukedom of, created 1675. (name Lenox.)
Ridley, bishop of London, burnt at Oxford, for heresy, October 16, 1555.
Rights, Bill of, passed, 1628, which secured to the subject the privileges of
Magna Charta. Rio de la Plata first entered by Diaz de Solis, 1515; a Viceroy
appointed there by Spain, 1776. See Buenos Airs. Riot act passed 1 George I.
1714, owing to the riots between the Whig and Tory mobs, called Ormond and
Newcastle, when great mischief was done. Riot in St. George's Field, May 10,
1768, on account of Wilkes's imprisonment: that under the name of the
Protestant Association, when 20,000 persons attended lord George Gordon to the
House of Commons, to petition for a repeal of the bill that took off the
restrictions on the Roman catholics; the mob burnt 4 prisons, several Romish
chapels, 72 houses, June 2, 1780, for which many were hanged, besides near 70
killed by the soldiers in suppressing them. Rippon monastery, in Yorkshire,
built, 677; town chartered by James J. Rivaulx abbey, Yorkshire, built, 1132.
River Lee, Herts; act passed to make it navigable; the first for an inland
river, 1425. River, New, brought to London, 1614. Rivers, Earl of, father to
Edward IVth's queen, beheaded by the mutineers in Northamptonshire, a few days
after the battle of Banbury, 1469. Rivers, Earl of, maternal uncle to Edward V.
beheaded at Pontefract, by order of Richard duke of Gloucester, for taking arms
in defense of his nephew the young king, June 13, 1483. Rivers, of
Stratfield-say, Barony of, created 1776, (name Pit.) Rizzio, a musician, the
favorite and paramour of Mary, queen of Scots, murdered in the queen's
presence, by her husband, lord Darnly, and his party, March 9, 1366. Robert,
eldest son of William I. succeeded his father in the duchy of Normandy, 1087;
mortgaged his duchy to William II. for 10,000 marks to enable him to go on the
Crusade, 1096; in his absence his younger brother, Henry, mounted the English
throne, vacant by the death of William II. 1100; invited by the English to take
their crown, and came over with an army for that purpose; but when in sight of
his brother's forces, he resigned his pretensions to him for a pension of 3000
marks, 1101; taken prisoner by his brother Henry, when he conquered Normandy,
1106; confined in Cardiff castle, where he died, 1134, after 27 years
imprisonment. See Henry I. William I. and II. Robin Hood and little John, great
robbers, in 1189; Robin Hood died, 1247. They infested Sherwood forest, and
thence made incursions into many parts of England for booty. Roch abbey,
Yorkshire, founded, 1147. Rochelle, France, besieged by the duke of Anjou,
before which he lost near 24,000 men, 1573. Rochester walled in, and the priory
and church began building, about 600; first bishop was Justus, 604; castle
built by William the Conqueror, about 1070; bridge built, 1392; cathedral
rebuilt, 1080; archdeaconry erected, about 1089; deanery, about 1541; city
burnt, 1137. Rochford, Earldom of, created 1695. (name Nassau de Zuleistein.)
Rockingham castle, Northamptonshire, built, 1070. Rockingham, Marquisate of,
created 17^6. (name Watson Wentworth.) Roden, Irish earldom of, created 1771.
(name Jocelyn.) Rokeby, of Armagh, Irish barony, created 1777. (name Robinson.)
Rollo, first duke of Normandy, conquered that country from the crown of France,
876. Rollo, Scots barony, created 1630. (name Rollo.) Roll's chapel, London,
founded by Henry III. 1233, for the purpose of ordaining any Jewish Rabbis who
might be converted to christianity, and who were maintained and lodged in the
Rolls buildings. On the banishment of the Jews, the chief house and chapel was
annexed. by patent, to the keeper of the Rolls. All public records, from Rich.
III. are kept in this chapel; those before that time are in the Tower. Romances
and French poetry derived their origin from the Crusades. Romans, The^ quitted
Britain for good, 426. See Julius Caesar, Xantippus, Cimbri. Roman empire, The,
comprehended Spain, Portugal, France, Savoy, Switzerland, England, the four
Electorates of the Rhine, Liege, Luxemburgh, Hainault, Flanders, Brabant,
Italy, Naples, the Mediterranean Isles, Bavaria, Austria, lower Hungary,
Sclavonia, Turkey, Thrace, Macedonia, Greece, Asia Minor, Syria, Phoenicia,
Palestine, and the Western parts of Africa, above 2000 miles in breadth, and
3000 in length. Till the first Punic war (which see), the Romans never carried
their arms beyond Italy, nor encountered their enemies by sea. Pompey and
Caesar, contending for supreme power over the Commonwealth, produced a dreadful
civil war, 59 before Christ. The republic changed to an empire, and Augustus
made the first emperor, 27 before Christ. The annual revenue of the empire was
then about 40 millions of our money. The empire was bought by auction, by
Didius Julianus, 193. About 222 it began to sink under its own weight; the
Barbarians from the North began their irruptions, and the Goths had an annual
tribute not to molest it. Divided into four parts, between two emperors,
Dioclesian and Constantius, the basis of its dissolution, 292. Divided again
into Eastern and Western, 379. The Western empire totally destroyed and sunk
into the kingdom of Italy, under Odoacer, 476. Constantine, that founded
Constantinople, was the first christian emperor. Theodosius was the first that
embraced the Trinity, 380. See Rome, Dioclesian, Paganism, Goths, Vandals.
Roman highways made in Britain, 415. Rome, City of, founded April 20, 753
before Christ, in the year of the world 3251, in the 4th year of the 6th
Olimpiad. (Sir Isaac Newton says 627 before Christ.) Romulus was the first
king. The Romans seized the Sabine women at a public exhibition, and detained
them for wives, 750 before Christ. See Sabines. The Romans and Albans
contending for superiority, chose three champions on each side to decide it,
viz. the Horatii and Curatii; the Horatii conquering, Alba submitted, and was
united to Rome, 669 before Christ. The Circus, containing 150,000 people,
built, 605 before Christ. Tarquin's son having ravished Lucretia, the Tarquins
were expelled; the monarchy abolished; and its consular government began, viz.
a republic, under the direction of two consuls, 500 before Christ. The populace
discontented, retired to the Mons Sacer, but returned December 10, at the
persuasion of Menenius Agrippas, when a dictator was first appointed, 493
before Christ. Number of inhabitants able to bear arms, were 132,419 men, 459;
in 294, the number was 270,000; 338,214, in 159; 320,000, in 50 before Christ.
Decemviri appointed to form laws, which were completed 451 before Christ.
Sacked by Brennus, 390 before Christ. The Tribunes, Aediles, etc. divested of
all power, 450 before Christ. See Tribunes, Aediles. Censors created, 443
before Christ. Patrician Tribunes chosen instead of consuls, 421; consulship
restored, 418 before Christ. Three Quaestors elected, 410 before Christ. Roman
soldiers first paid, 406 before Christ. City burnt by the Gauls, 388 before
Christ. Praetor, one first appointed, 365 before Christ. Silver money, called
Moneta, from the temple where it was coined, first made, about 269 before
Christ. Capitol and temple of Janus built, 207 before Christ. After a siege of
three years, the Romans took Carthage and destroyed it, 146 before Christ. See
Carthage. Marius made his triumphal entry with the spoils of Numidia, and
graced by Jugurtha its king, and his two sons, in chains, 103 before Christ.
See Teutones. The capitol burnt, 83 before Christ; rebuilt by Domitian. The
city was 50 of our miles round, and contained 6,900,000 people, 48. The
Carthusian church and part of the baths built in Diocletian's reign. The seat
of the empire removed from Rome to Constantinople, by Constantine, 330. Rome
taken and plundered by the Goths, 410; by the Vandals, 455; by the Heruli, 476;
recovered for Justinian by Belisarius, 537; retaken by the Goths, 547;
re-conquered by the emperor, 553; revolted from the Greek emperors, became
free, and was governed by a senate, 726. See Belisarius. The senate and people
acknowledged Charlemagne, king of France, as emperor of the West, who
surrendered the city to the Pope, reserving the sovereignty, 800; the Popes
afterward made themselves and the city independent. Its territories are, at
this day, the ecclesiastical states. St. Peter's built by Pope Julius II. who
died, 1512. Bramante was the architect. Orders founded as follow: Holy Ghost,
1198; St. George, 1498; St. Peter, 1520; St. Paul, 1540; Loretta, 1587; St.
Mary, 1618. See Roman Empire, Goths, Vandals, Praetorian, Academies. Rem.
Occur. annis 331 before Christ, 48, 74, 195, 291, 389, 1540.
Romney, Barony of, created 1716. (name Marsham.) Rosamond, mistress to Henry
II. 1172; shut up at Woodstock, 1189; died soon after. Rose, White and red,
were distinctions given to the houses of York and Lancaster. Roseberry, Scots
earldom of, created 1703. (name Primrose.) Rose-trees first planted in England,
1522. Rostrum, or pulpit of the Tribunes, so called from the Romans adorning
those stands with the beaks of ships, 338 before Christ. Rothes, Scots earldom
of, created 1457. (name Pepys.) Rothesay castle, Bute Isle, Scotland, built
before 1263. Rouen, City of, taken, when the king of Navarre was slain, 1562.
Rougemont castle, Exon, said to be built by Julius Caesar. Roxana, widow of
Alexander the Great, and her son Alexander, killed by Cassander, 311 before
Christ. Roxburgh, Scots dukedom of, created 1707. (Ker.) Royston,
Cambridgeshire, burnt (36 houses), Aug. 23, 1747. Ruffs were first worn in the
reign of Edward VI.; invented by a Spanish or Italian lady, to hide a wen, In
the reign of Elizabeth, some wore their swords so long, and ruffs so large,
that the queen appointed officers to break every man's sword, and clip all
ruffs beyond a certain length. Rumsey abbey, Hants, built, 972. Rump parliament
met, 1659; so called from an allusion to the Rump of a fowl, it consisting only
of a few of the old parliament. Russel, Lord William, son of the earl of
Bedford, beheaded in Lincoln's End Fields, for being concerned in the Rye-house
plot (which see), July 21, 1683, aged 44. Russia, anciently Sarmatia, and
inhabited by the Scythians. Christianity introduced there, 955; not renowned
till the natives attempted to take Constantinople, 864; conquered by the Crim
Tartars, 1240; and governed by lords tributary to them, till 1300; the
non-payment of the tribute occasioned wars, which ended in their independency,
1462. The first Czar, 1553; about this time they conquered Siberia; the Tartars
surprised Moscow, and killed 30,000 inhabitants, 1571; established as an
empire, 1721; a revolution in favor of Elizabeth, 1740; another, in favor of
the present empress, 1762; the emperor John, an infant, deposed, 1741; put to
death, 1763; the punishment of the Knout abolished, 1752; order of St. Andrew
instituted, School; St. Alexander, 1700; St. Catherine, ditto, 1715. See Peter
the Great, Peter III. Russia company established in England, 1555. Ruthven,
Scots barony, created 1651. (Ruthven.) Rutland, Dukedom of, created 1703.
(Manners.) Rye first sent members to parliament, 1368; burnt by the French,
1377; harbor opened, July 14, 1762. Rye-house plot (a plot to assassinate
Charles II. at a place called Rye-house, in his way to Newmarket), prevented,
by the king's house at Newmarket accidentally taking fire, which hastened him
away eight days before the plot was to take place, March 22; discovered, June
12, 1683. See Russell.
S.
SABBATARIANS kept the seventh day holy instead of the first; Sabbatarian
Baptist, a mixture of the Baptist and Sabbatarian. Sabbatical year, The first,
1444 before Christ. Sabines, The rape of the, by the Romans, to people their
new kingdom, 750 before Christ. See Rome. Sacheverel, Reverend Dr. silenced for
three years, March 23, 1700, for inveighing against administration in a sermon
at St. Paul's; died, 1724. See High Church. Sackville of Drayton, Viscount,
created 1782. (name Germain.) Sacramentarians, a sect that first (after John
Scott, who flourished in 878), opposed the doctrine of the real presence,
appeared under Berenger, 1048. (See Berenger) The Berengarians afterward
taught the free use of the female sex, married or not. Sacred first added to
the king's title, 1603. Sacrifice, the first offered to God, by Abel, 3875
before Christ. This kind of worship being typical, ceased with the sacrifice of
Christ. Saddles in use, 304. See Side-Saddles. Saffron-Walden, first chartered
by Edward VI. Saffron plant brought to England in Edward IIId's reign.
Sail-cloth first manufactured here, 1599. Sailors first registered in France,
about 1670. St. Agatha monastery, near Richmond, Yorkshire, founded, 1151. St.
Albans, Dukedom of, created 1683. (name Beauclerk.) St. Alban's monastery built
by Offa, king of Mercia. (See Offa.) Town chartered by Edward VI. St. Andrew's
university founded, 1412; St. Leonard's college founded, 1524; united to St.
Salvator's, 1736; New college, founded, 1536. St. Asaph bishopric founded,
about 560; archdeaconry erected, before 1127; deanery, before 1239. St.
Christopher's settled by the French and English, 1626. St. David's an
archbishopric, 519; removed from Caerleon, 577; became a suffragan, 1148;
archdeaconry erected, before 1128; cathedral built, 1180; precentorship
founded, 1225; treasurership, 1259; chancellorship, 1287; palace built, 1335.
St. Edmund's Bury monastery, Suffolk, built, 1028. St. George of Hatley, Irish
barony, created 1763, (name St. George.) St. Germans priory, Cornwall, built,
937; town incorporated by 5th of Elizabeth. St. Helena first taken possession
of by the English, 1600; taken by the Dutch, 1673; retaken by the English the
same year. St. Ives, Cornwall, incorporated, 1641. St. James's palace, formerly
an hospital, made a palace by Henry VIII. 1531. St. John of Bletsoe, Barony of,
created 1558. (name St. John.) St. Michael, Feast of, instituted by Pope Felix
III, 487. St. Michael's Mount monastery, Cornwall, erected 1030. St. Simon and
St. Jude, Feast of, instituted, 1091. Saints, Tutelar. St. George of England,
St. Andrew of Scotland, St Patrick of Ireland, St. David of Wales, St. Dennis
of France, St. James of Spain. See George St. Spain, Patrick St. Salic law, by
which women were excluded from inheriting, confirmed in the reign of Pharamond
of France, 424. Salisbury, Richard Neville, earl of, wounded, and taken
prisoner at the battle of Wakefield, and beheaded at Pontefract, 1461.
Salisbury, Countess of, niece to Richard III. the last of the Plantagenets,
beheaded, for taking part with cardinal Pole, against the reformation, May 27,
1540. Salisbury, Earldom of, created 1605. (name Cecil.) Salisbury bishopric
formed, by uniting those of Sherborne and Wilton, 1071; deanery erected, about
1091; cathedral finished, 1258; town chartered by Henry III; hospital for
clergymen's widows founded, 1683. See Church Service. Salt duties formed, June
15, 1702. Salt mines, Staffordshire, discovered 1670. Saltash, Cornwall,
incorporated by 35th Charles II. Salton, Scots viscount, Title of, created
1445. (name Fraser.) Saltwood castle, Kent, first built by the Romans. Salute,
Naval; that of other nations lowering the topsail to a British ship of war,
first enjoined by king Arthur; it has continued ever since. Samnite war ended,
272 before Christ, having continued 71 years. Sampson pulled down the temple of
Dagon, and destroyed 3000 Philistines, 1117 before Christ, having been the
avenger of Israel 20 years. Sanctuaries, or places privileged for the safety of
offenders, were first granted by king Lucius, to our churches and their
precincts. (See Lucius). St John's, of Beverley, Yorkshire, was thus privileged
in the time of the Saxons; St. Buriens, in Cornwall, also, by Athelstan, 935;
Westminster, by Edward the Confessor; and St. Martin's le Grand, London, 1529;
abolished, 1534; totally, 1548. Sandal castle, Yorkshire, built, 1317. Sandford
castle, Dorsetshire, built, 1540. Sandgate castle, Kent, built, 1540. Sandown
castle, near Deal, erected by Henry VIII. Sandwich, Earldom of, created 1660,
(name Mountague.) Sandwich built, 957; seaport destroyed by an earthquake,
1580. Sandys, of Ombersley, Barony of, created 1743. (name Sandys.) Saracens
conquered Spain, 713; 70,000 slain i^ battle by Ramirus king of Spain, 844;
empire of, finished, by Bagdad's being taken by the Tartars, 1258. Sardinia
conquered by the Spaniards, 1303, in whose possession it was till 1708, when it
was taken by an English fleet, and given to the duke of Savoy, with the title
of king. The first king was Victor, who abdicated the throne, in favor of his
son, 1730, and died in a prison, 1732. See Savoy. Sardis, City of, burnt by the
Athenians, 504 before Christ. Sark island conquered by the English in queen
Elizabeth's reign. See Jersey. Sarum. See Church Service. Satellites first
discovered by Galileo, 1608. Saturn, Temple of, founded, and the festivals
called Saturnalia, instituted at Rome, Dec. 497 before Christ See Saturnalia.
Saturn; four of its satellites discovered by Simon Mayer, 1609; ring discovered
by Huygens, 1634; the fifth Satellite discovered by Huygens, 1655. Saturnalia
festivals instituted at Rome, in December, 407 before Christ. The source and
origin of the Christmas festivals. Savoy, part of Gallia Narbonensis, which
submitted to the Romans, 118 before Christ. The Alcman^ seized it in 395; the
Franks, 496. It shared the revolutions of Switzerland till 1040, when Conrad,
emperor of Germany, gave it to Hubert, with the title of Earl. Amadeus VIII.
earl of Savoy, solicited Sigismund, emperor of Germany, to erect his dominions
into a duchy, which he did at Cambray, Feb. 19, 1417. The late duke having
taken Sicily in 1713, by the assistance of the English, was made king of that
country, but, by the peace of Utrecht, changed it for Sardinia, 1714. The
dukedom of Savoy is now the king of Sardinia's second title. Order of
Annunciade instituted, about 1355; of St. Maurice, ditto, 1572. See Sardinia.
Sawley abbey, Yorkshire, built, 1147. Sawmills first erected near London, 1633,
but afterward demolished. Saxo Grammaticus wrote the Danish history, 1170.
Saxons, The ancient, were pirates, and inhabited three small islands at the
mouth of the Elbe, and some part of the shores of the Baltic; arrived in
England, 449, having been invited over by the Britons; for they applied to Rome
for aid against the Scots, and were refused. Say and Sele, Barony of, created
1624. (name Twisleton.) Scaevola, Mutius, burnt his right hand before Porsenna,
for having accidentally killed his secretary, when he designed to have slain
him; 508 before Christ. Scales, Lord, murdered by a ferryman, August 19, 1460.
Scales were first hung in such a manner, that the buyer, in the reign of Henry
III. had an advantage of 10 or 12lb. in the 112lb. Scandinavia; that part of
Europe now Sweden, Denmark, and Norway. Scarborough castle built, 1140;
rebuilt, 1170. Scarborough, Earldom of, created 1690. (name Lumley.) Scarlet,
Art of dying, invented, 1000; color said to be first found by Drabel, about
1624. Scarsdale, Barony, created 1761. (name Curzon.) Scenes first introduced
into theaters, 1533. Schomberg, Duke of, a Dutch general, came over with
William III. landed in Ireland with an army, August 13, 1689; killed at the
battle of the Boyne, 1690. Scio, anciently Chios, sold by the Greek emperor to
Geona; in the possession of the Turks, 1566. Scot. See Sacramentarians. Scotch
money the same as in England, till 1354. Scotland, anciently Caledonia, History
of, began, 328 before Christ, when Fergus I. was sent over by the people of
Ireland; received the Christian faith, about 203; united under one monarchy by
Keneth II. the 6^th king, and called Scotland, 838; divided into baronies,
1032; invaded by the king of Norway, near Loch Lomond, 1263; on the death of
Alexander III. was disputed by 12 candidates, who submitted their claims to the
arbitration of Edward I. of England, 1285, which gave him an opportunity to
conquer it; it was not entirely recovered by the Scots till 1314; its regalia
and crown taken and brought to England, with the coronation chair, now in
Westminster abbey, 1296; first general assembly of the church held, Dec. 20,
1560; earl of Murray regent, 1567; earl of Lenox regent, July 12, 1570; earl of
Mar regent, Sept. 6, 1571; earl of Morton regent, Nov. 24, 1572. See Union,
Mary Queen of Scots, James I. etc. Murray, Lenox, Morton, Scots. Scots (which,
in Celtic, implies vagrants), and Picts, two tribes, divided Britain, as early
as the reign of Constantine; the Scots inhabited the hills, the Picts the
plains. See England. Scribes and Pharisees, Sect of, commenced 31 before
Christ. Sculpture supposed to be invented, about 1900 before Christ. See
Carving. Scutage, the first tax levied in England, to pay an army, 1159.
Scythians, The, were the ancient people of Tartary. Sea Fight, with the French,
when 200 of their ships were taken, laden with wine, 1297. On the coast of
Britain, between the English, under Sir Thomas Knevet, and the French, under
Primauget, when both the admirals ships were burnt, 1512. Between the English,
under Sir Edward Howard, and the French under Prejeant, when the former were
beaten, and Howard slain, April 25, 1513. Off Calais, between the English and
the Spanish Armada, 1588. The Spaniards beaten, with the loss of 17 ships, and
5000 men. In Dover road, between the English, under Blake, and the Dutch, under
Tromp, June 29, 1652; the English beaten, and 6 ships lost. Near Portland, with
the Dutch, under the same admirals, when the Dutch were beaten, with the loss
of 11 ships of war, and 30 merchant ships, Feb. 18, 1653. Again, near the coast
of Flanders, when the Dutch were beaten, and lost 17 ships, June 2, 1653.
Again, to the loss of the Dutch, when Tromp was killed, and 30 ships lost, July
29, 1653. Off Cadiz, between the English, under Blake, and the Spaniards, when
2 galleons were taken, worth two million pieces of eight, Sept. 1656. One
hundred and thirty sail of Dutch merchantmen were taken by the duke of York,
before war was declared, Nov. 1664. Between the English, under the duke of
York, and the Dutch, under Obdam, when the English conquered, and the Dutch
lost 19 ships, the English only one, June 3, 1665. Between the English, under
the duke of Albemarle, and the Dutch and French joined, which lasted four days,
June 1, 1666. At the mouth of the Thames, between the English, under prince
Rupert, and the Dutch, under Ruyter, So sail each, when the former were
victorious; the Dutch lost 24 men of war, and 3 admirals killed, July 25, 1666.
Dutch fleet sailed up the Medway, almost as far as Chatham, and destroyed great
part of the English fleet. June 11, 1667. Near Martinico, with the French, when
their ships were burnt, June 25, 1667. Twelve Algerine pirates destroyed by Sir
Edward Spragg, 1671. At Solebay, between the English and French joined, under
the duke of York and Marshal D'Etrees, and the Dutch, under Ruyter, when the
Dutch retired, May 28, 1672. Again, on the coast of Holland, between the
combined fleets, under prince Rupert and D'Etrees, and the Dutch, under Ruyter,
May 28, 1763. Again, under the same commanders, June 4, 1673. At the mouth of
the Texel, under the same commanders, Aug. 11, 1673. English and Dutch, under
lord Torrington, beat by the French, off Beachy head, June 30, 1690. French
beat, off La Hogue, by Rook, May 19, 1692. They lost 21 of their largest ships
of war. Off St. Vincent, when the English and Dutch were beaten by the French,
June 16, 1693. Spaniards and French beat, with the loss 20 ships, by the Dutch
and English, under Sir George Rook, near Vigo, Aug. 15, 1702. Off Carthagena,
between the French and English, under admiral Benbow, Aug. 19, 1702. Between
the French and English, when the former were defeated, Aug. 24, 1704. At
Gibraltar, when the French lost 5 men of war, Nov. 5, 1704. Off the Lizard,
when the English were defeated, Oct. 9, 1707. Near Carthagena, when admiral
Wager destroyed a fleet, May 28, 1708. Spanish fleet destroyed, by Sir George
Byng, off Cape Passaro, in the Mediterranean, Aug. 11, 1718. Off Toulon,
between the combined fleets of France and Spain, and the English, under admiral
Matthews, Feb. 9, 1744. Off Cape Finisterre, when the French fleet was taken by
admiral Anson, May 3, 1747. The Alcide and Ly^, French ships, taken by Capt.
How, off Newfoundland, June, 1755. De la Clue, French admiral, defeated by
Boscawen, off Ceuta, 1759. Off Belleisle, between the English, under Hawke, and
the French, under Conflans, when the latter were beaten, Nov. 1759. On Lake
Champlain, between the English and Americans, when the latter were beaten, Oct.
11 and 13, 1776. Off Breast, between the English, under Keppel, and the French,
under the duke of Chartres, when the latter were beaten off, July 27, 1778. Off
Cape St. Vincent, between 18 sail of English, under Sir George Rodney, and 13
sail of Spanish ships, under Langara, when the latter were beaten; 5 sail of
the line taken, one blown up, and two destroyed, Jan. 16, 1780. Off Martinico,
between the English, under Sir George Rodney, with 21 sail, and the French,
under Comte de Guichen, with 25 sail, when the French were beaten, April 17,
1780. The English had 120 killed, 153 wounded. Off ditto, between ditto, May 15
and 19, 1780, when the English had 68 killed, and 293 wounded. At St. Jago,
between the English, under Commodore Johnson, and the French, under Mons. de
Suff^ein, when the latter were beaten, April 16, 1781. Off Martinico, between
the English, under Sir Samuel Hood, and the French, under De Grass, April 29,
1781. Off Dogger Bank, between the English, under Parker, and the Dutch, under
Zoutman, when near 400 were killed on each side. The Dutch had one ship sunk,
August 5, 1781. Off Cape Henry, near Cheasapeak Bay, in America, between the
English, under Graves, and the French, under Du Barras, Sept. 5, 1781.
Sealing of writings is very ancient. (See 1 Kings, 21, Daniel 6, Esther 8,
Jer. 21.) First introduced here, 1085. See Seals. Seals not much in use with
the Saxons, but they signed parchments with the cross; (the illiterate do so
now); impressions of lead being affixed. There was a seal of king Edward's at
Westminster, about 1188. Coats of arms were not introduced into seals, till
1218. (see sealing of writings, signing a deed.) Great seal of England first
used to crown grants, etc. 1050. Secretary of states office began, 1530. Sedan
chairs introduced by the duke of Buckingham, about 1581. Sefton, Irish earldom
of, created 1771. (name Molyneux) Sejanus, the wicked minister of Tiberius, put
to death, for aspiring to the empire, 31. Seleucia, 40 miles from Babylon,
built by Seleucus, 293 before Christ. See Seleucus. Seleucus became master of
Babylon, 312 before Christ, from which time is reckoned the Jewish era of the
Seleucidae, or contracts. See Seleucia, Era. Self murder was sashionable in the
reign of Tiberius, numbers putting themselves to death, to avoid the
persecution of the emperors, from 20 to 34. Selkirk, Scots earldom of, created
1646. (name Douglas.) Semiramis, queen of Assyria, put to death, by order of
her son, 1173 before Christ. Semple, Scots viscount, Title of, created 1488.
(name Semple.) Seneca, the Stoic philosoper, uncle to Lucan, and preceptor to
Nero, born at Cordova; put to death, by order of Nero, 64, aged 63. Senegal
taken by the English, from the French, May 1, 1758. Sengenneth castle,
Glamorganshire, supposed to be built by Edward I. Sennacherib, 185,000 of the
army of, slain by an angel in one night, 710 before Christ. Sepulcher St. Order
of, instituted, before 1104. Serapis and Isis, The temple of, demolished, by
order of the Roman senate, 52 before Christ; but after the death of Caesar it
was restored, at the public expense. Serene Highness, from serenitas,
originally an Eastern title, given to the emperors, savouring of the indolence
inspired by the climate. Such also were the ancient titles of Mansuetudo and
Tranquillitas. Sergeant. See Inns of Court. Sermons penned in a canting style,
about 1662. Servant act passed, laying a tax on men servants, 1777; improved,
1781. Sessions, Lords of, in Scotland, first appointed by James V. of Scotland,
1532. Sesterce, The Roman, equal to a little more than twopence English; the
larger sesterce was equal to eight guineas and a half. Sethians, a sect who
held Seth to be the true Christ, arose, 190. Settlement, Irish act of, passed,
1662; repealed, 1689. Severn, The, turned from its channel, by a great piece of
land moving from its place, and crossing the current, near Bildewas bridge,
Shropshire, May 27, 1773. Sewdley castle, Gloucestershire, built, 1442. Sewin's
Land, New Holland, discovered by the Dutch, 1622. Seymour, Sir Thomas, lord
high admiral, who married Catherine Parr, Henry VIIIth's widow, and brother to
the protector, beheaded on Tower Hill, for caballing against his brother, March
20, 1549. Shaftesbury, Dorsetshire, built by Alfred, 897; incorporated by
Elizabeth. Shafterbury, Earldom of, created 1672. (name Cooper.) Shannon, Irish
earldom of, created 1756. (name Boil.) Shap monastery, Westmoreland, founded,
about 1189. Sharp, archbishop of St. Andrew's, Scotland, born, 1618; shot in
his coach, by the presbyterians, July 9, 1679. Sheffield, of Dunamore, Irish
barony, created 1780. (name Holroyd.) Shelburne, Irish earldom of, created
1753. (name Petty.) Shepherd, James, a coachmaker's apprentice, hanged for
plotting to take away the life of George I. March, 1717. Sherard of Letrim,
Irish barony, created 1727. (name Sherard. Sherborne, Dorsetshire, made a
bishop's see, from Winchester, by Ina, 705; united to Wilton, 1071; both
translated to Old Sarum soon after, thence to Salisbury, 1218; castle built,
1107, church rebuilt between 1459 and 1504. Sheriffs of counties first
nominated by William the Corqueror, 1079; the present mode of appointing them
has been followed since about 1461. Anciently, in England, ladies were
sheriffs. In 1414, on account of the wars, there were not respectable persons
enough to serve the office. Fifty sheriffs of London appointed in one day; 35
of whom paid their fines, July 2, 1734. Shillings first coined in England,
1505; among the English Saxons, a shilling implied 5 d. afterward 16 d. and
often 20 d. Ship. The first seen in Greece, arrived at Rhodes from Egypt, 1485
before Christ; the first double decked one built in England was of 1000 tons
burden, by order of Henry VII. 1509; it was called the Great Harry, and cost
14,000 l.; before this, 24 gun ships were the largest in our navy, and these
had no port-holes, the guns being on the upper decks only. Port-holes and other
improvements were invented by Decharges, a French builder at Breast. See Navy.
Shipbroke, Irish earldom, created 1777. (name Vernon.) Ship Money, a tax to
equip a fleet, first levied, 1007; demanded by Charles I. 1632, which gave rise
to all his troubles; declared illegal, 164^. Shoes of the present fashion first
worn here, 1633; the buckle not used till Charles IId's reign. See Rem. Occur.
anno 1467. Shoplifting act passed 11 William IIId, 1699. Shore, Jane, mistress
to Edward IV. did penance at St. Paul's for adultery, 1483. Shoreham, Borough
of, disfranchised, for bribery, 1770. Shoulderknots were worn in Charles IId's
reign. Shrewsbury monastery founded, 1033; castle built, 1084; archdeaconry of,
erected, about 1140; town burnt (50 houses), April 1, 1774. Shrewsbury, Earldom
of, created 1442. (name Talbot.) Shrove Tuesday was observed as a festival,
before 1440. Shuldham, Irish barony, created 1776. (Shuldham.) Sicily. First
peopled from Italy, 1292 before Christ The ancient inhabitants of this island
were the Sicani and Etruscans. A prince of Arragon took possession of this
isle, and thus formed a kingdom of it, distinct from Naples, 1286. See Phal^
Agathocles. Side-saddles first used in England, 1388. See Saddles. Signals at
sea contrived by James II. when duke of York, 1665; afterward improved by the
French commander Tourville, and admiral Balchen, who was lost in the victory.
Signing a deed, The term of, was used instead of subscribing, from the general
state of ignorance in the 9th century, when kings and persons of great eminence
not being able to write their names, signed their charters, etc. with the
cross. Silesia ceded to Prussia, by the treaty of Breslaw, 1742. Silesia loan
subscribed, 1734. Silk, Raw, first made by a people of China, called Seres, 150
before Christ; first brought from India, 274; a pound, at this time, was worth
a pound of gold; the manufactory of, introduced into Europe from India, by some
monks, 551; first ^ern in dress, 1455; first silk manufacture in France, 1521;
first worn by the clergy in England, 1534; broad silk manufactured from raw
silk in England, 1620; brought to perfection by the French refugees in London,
1687. Silk-throwing mill invented and fixed at Derby, by Sir Thomas Loombe,
1719. Silkworms eggs first brought into Europe, 527. Silver first coined in
Rome, 269 before Christ. Silver-handled knives, spoons, and cups, a great
luxury, and but little plate of any sort, 1298. Silures. See England. Simnel,
Lambert, a baker's son, was made to personate the earl of Warwick, Richard
IIId's nephew: he went over to Ireland, and there so imposed on the people,
that he was crowned king, under the title of Edward VI. 1486; but the king
ordering Warwick, who was then a prisoner in the Tower, to be publicly shown,
the imposture was discovered; but not till Simnel had invaded England with an
armed force, which he did, and gave the king battle at Stoke, 1487, where
Simnel was taken prisoner; he was too contemptible to excite Henry's
resentment, he therefore pardoned him, and made him one of his scullions.
Simon, St and St. Jude, Feast of, instituted, 1091. Singing established in
churches, 67. Sion abbey, Middlesex, built, 1414. Sion college founded by Dr.
Thomas White, 1623; incorporated, 1664. Sir-names, The use of, introduced by
the Normans, to distinguish families; first used among the nobility, 1200; many
of the most common, such as Johnson, Thompson, Wilson, Dickson, etc. were taken
by the Flemings, who were naturalized here, 1435. Sisters of the society of
Jesus, an order, chiefly to attend the sick, established in France, 1626.
Sixteen, Faction of, at Paris, arose in 1587. Skipton castle, Yorkshire, built,
soon after the conquest. Slanes. See Letters of Slanes. Slaves, The laws of,
settled by Ina, king of the West Saxons, 692; slave trade, epoch of the, with
the Pertuguese, 1443; with the English, 1562. See African Company, Negroes.
Sleepers, Seven, their fabulous resurrection placed, in 425. These were seven
young men, who, in the times of Paganism, were supposed to have been shut up in
a cavern in Africa, by order of the emperor Decius, and to have slept 187
years, till the cave was accidentally opened in the days of Christianity, when
the sleepers were reported not to be sensible of having slept more than a few
hours. Many very respectable writers suppose this story to be true. Slingsby,
Sir Henry, governor of Hull, with Dr. Huet, beheaded on Tower Hill, for
conspiring against Oliver Cromwell, June 8, 1658. Smerwick haven, Ireland,
fortified, 1578. Smyrna built, by the people of Cumae, 1050 before Christ;
destroyed by an earthquake, 1040; again, 1688. Sneezing. The custom of saluting
those who sneeze very ancient, even in the time of Aristotle. Snow for eleven
days, 1672. Society, American philosophical, instituted, Jan. 2, 1769.
Amicable, English, charter^d, 1706. Antiquarian incorporated, Nov. 2, 1751.
Artists, ditto, Feb. 26, 1764. Arts and sciences instituted, 1753. Clergymens
widows, Ireland, established, 1749. Dublin society incorporated, 1750. Humane,
England, instituted, 1774. Irish working schools incorporated, Oct. 1733.
Marine, England, established, 1756. Promotion of christian knowledge
established, 1699. Propagation of the gospel incorporated, 1701. Ditto,
New England, ditto, Feb. 7, 1662. Reformation of manners formed, School. Royal
instituted, Dec. 30, 1660; incorporated, 1663. Royal accademy established, Dec.
10, 1768. Seamens widows incorporated, Oct. 13. 1732. See Charities, Hospitals,
Academies.
Socinus, founder of the Socinians, who deny the divinity of our Savior, 1555;
born, 1525; died, 1562. Sodom burnt, 1897 before Christ; Lot aged 64. Sodomy is
said to have been brought into England by the Lombards. See Lombardy. Sodor and
Man bishopric founded, 447. See Man. Solar year found to consist of 365 days, 5
hours, and 49 minutes, by Dionysius, of Alexandria, 285; introduced by Julius
Caesar, 45 before Christ. Soldiers forbidden, by act of Parliament, to be
quartered in private houses, Sept. 1679. Solomon born, 1033; succeeded his
father David on the throne, 1015; laid the foundation of his temple, May 21,
1012; finished it, 1005; dedicated it, Friday Oct. 30, 1000; finished his
palace, 991; wrote his Ecclesiastes, 981; died 975 before Christ. Solomon's
islands discovered by Alvarez de Mendoca, 1527. Solon, who gave laws to Athens,
and the seven wise men, flourished in Greece, 620; Solon died, 558 before
Christ, aged 80. Solway Moss, Cumberland, began to flow, Nov. 15, 1771. Summers
isles discovered, 1503; named and settled, 1609. Somerset, Dukedom of, created
1546. (Seymour.) Somerset, Henry Beaufort, duke of, beheaded at Hexham, May 15,
1464, for joining Henry VIth's queen against Edward IV; his son beheaded at
Tewkesbury for the same offense, May 6, 1471. Somerset, Edward, duke of,
maternal uncle to Edward VI. chosen protector, 1547; deprived, for taking the
whole administration of affairs into his own hands, and sent to the Tower,
1549; pardoned, 1550; committed again, 1551, for a plot against the life of
Dudley duke of Northumberland, who succeeded him in the protectorate; beheaded,
Jan. 22, 1552. Somerton castle, near Newark, Lincolnshire, built, 1305.
Somerville, Scots barony of, created 1436. (name Somerville.) Sondes, Barony
of, created 1760. (name Watson.) Sorbonne. See Academies. Southam,
Warwickshire, burnt (40 houses), March 25, 1742. Southampton, Barony of,
created 1780. (Fitzroy.) Southampton old town destroyed, 1338; Watergate built
soon after; east gate and walls built, 1338; west gate, ditto, 1532. South Sea
company began, 1710; act passed, May 6, 1716; its bubble, 1720, when, by an
artifice, 100 l. Stock rose, in July, to 1000 l. Every person of property
became Stock-jobbers, and many thousands were ruined. Southwark annexed to
London, 1550; the monastery, St. Savior's, built, 1098; fair abolished, 1762.
Southwell mins^er, Neots, founded, 630. Southwell palace, Newark, Notts, built,
1518. Southwell, of Castle Mattress, Irish viscount, created 1776. (name
Southwell.) Sovereign, a piece of English gold coin, value 20 s. 1532; value 24
s. 1550; value 30 s. 1552. Spain was first civilized by the Phoenicians, who
possessed great part of it; these called in the Carthaginians; it was
afterward invaded by the Rhodians; the Carthaginians however made new
conquests, 239; and after the destruction of ancient Tire, became the most
powerful in this country. Conquered by the Romans, 206 before Christ. Grenada
and Andalusia was the Boetica of the Romans, and the rest of Spain the province
of Tarragona. The several provinces now subject to the crown, were once
independent kingdoms. The Goths and Vandals overturned the Roman power, 409,
and continued possession of it, till it was conquered by the Moors, in 712. The
Moors kept possession, till the small kingdoms were swallowed up in Castile and
Arragon, 1492. Primacy of Toledo founded, 680. St. James, the Tutelar saint of
Spain, since the finding of the apostle's body, in the 9th century. Holy
brotherhood instituted, 1260. Kingdom of, founded, by the union of the two
crowns of Castile and Arragon, the queen of Castile having married the king of
Arragon, 1504, who assumed the title of Catholic Majesty. By the conquests of
Navarre and Grenada, Ferdinand put a complete end to the dominion of the Moors
in this country, 1512. Escurial began building, 1562. Fuero Juzgo code of laws
enacted by Chindasvindus, 612; that called Les usages, formed by the count of
Barcelona, 1060; Fuero de Castilla, by Alphonso IX. 1211; Fuero real, by
Alfonso X. 1254; Siete partidas, by Alfonso XI. 1347; Recopilacion, by Philip
II. 1567; Nueva ditto, by Philip IV. 1665; Novissima ditto, by Philip V. 1723;
who resigned his crown to his son, Dec. 1724; on his son's death he reassumed
it. Orders: -- of Calatrava, instituted, 1154; confirmed, 1164; of St. Jago,
instituted, about 1175; of Alcantara, 1176; of Truxillo, 1227; military order
of Montesa, by James II. of Arragon, 1317; of St. George, 1318; of La Scama,
1420; Golden Fleece, by Philip, duke of Burgundy, 1429. See Milan, Naples,
Vandals, Moors, Hamilcar, Catalonia, Valencia, Grenada, Inquisition, Cordova,
America, Rem. Occur. anno, 1760.
Spain, New. See America. Spalatro, in Dalmatia, The cathedral church of, part
of the palace of Dioclesian, who retired there, 305. See Dioclesian. Sparta
founded by Spartus, son of Phoroneus, king of Argos, 1718; its name changed to
that of Lacedemon, 1488; became a Roman province, 71 before Christ; but now
belongs to the Turks. Speaker of the House of Commons. See Parliament.
Spectacles invented by Spina, 1299. Spencer, Earldom of, created 1765. (name
Spencer.) Spensers. Father, son, and grandson, noblemen. -- The father hanged
at Bristol by the rebellious barons, aged 90, Oct. 1326; the son, favorite to
Edward II. hanged at Hereford, by the same party, Nov. 24, following; the
grandson beheaded at Bristol, for conspiring against Henry IV. 1400. Sphere,
The, invented by Archimedes. Spinning-wheel invented at Brunswick, by Jurgen,
1530. See Distaff. Sponsors. See Baptism. Sports allowed on Sunday evenings,
1617; Charles I. published a book on this occasion, 1633; which was burnt by
the hangman, 1643. Spurs in use, before 1400. Stadium, The Roman, was equal to
a furlong, the 8th of a mile. Stadtholdership made hereditary in the Orange
family, 1747. Stafford, Sir Humph. for rebelling against Henry VII. beheaded at
Tyburn, 1486. Stafford castle built by William the Conqueror. Stair, Scots
earldom of, created 1633. (name Dalrymple.) Stamford, Earldom of, created 1628.
(name Gray.) Stamford, Lincolnshire, once a city and university; castle built,
922; chartered by Edward IV. Stamp duties instituted, June 28, 1693; increased,
1756; again, 1776; began in Ireland, March 25, 1771; stamp act, America,
repealed, March 18, 1766. Standing while the gospel is read, ordained, 406.
Stanhope, Earldom of, created 1718. (name Stanhope.) Stanley, Lord chamberlain,
who put the crown on Henry VIIth's head at Bosworth, and others, beheaded, Feb.
15, 1495, as abettors of Warbeck's imposture. See Warbeck. Staples-inn, London,
established, 1415. See Inns of Court. Stapleton, bishop of Exon, murdered in
London, by an insurrection of the people, for siding with the court, 1326. S^ar
castle, Scilly, built, 1593. Star chamber, Court of (when causes were tried by
the privy council), instituted, 1487; abolished, 1641. The number of judges of
this court was from 26 to 42; the lord chancellor presided, and had the casting
voice. Starching of linen first brought into England by Mrs. Dinghen, of
Flanders, 1554. Stationers company, their first charter, 1556; second, 1558.
Statuary. Daedalus was the first among the Greeks, about 1200 before Christ;
the art perfected by Phidias. Statutes, The, first printed, and in English,
1483; prefixing titles to them first took place, 1487. See Preambles. Stawel,
Barony of, created 1690. (name Leg.) Steam engine, for raising water, etc.
invented, 1618. Stephen, King, third son of Adela, daughter of William the
Conqueror, by Stephen, earl of Blois, succeeded his uncle Henry I. and crowned
Dec. 1135, in the absence of Maude; reduced Normandy, 1137; summoned by his
brother, the bishop of Winton, to appear before a synod at Westminster, August,
1139; defeated, and taken prisoner at Lincoln, by the earl of Gloucester,
Maude's brother, 1141, and put in irons, in Bristol prison, but released, on an
exchange for Gloucester, who was taken at Winchester; made peace with Henry,
Maude's son, 1153; died of the piles, Oct. 25, 1154, aged, 49; was buried at
Feversham, and succeeded by his second cousin, Henry II. duke of Normandy, son
of Maude, by the earl of Anjou. See Matilda, Maude. Stephens, Mrs. rewarded for
her medicine for the stone, 1738. Stews, Public. See Brothels. Stirling, Scots
earldom of, created 1633. (name Alexander.) Stockholm, City of, began to be
built, 1253; burnt (1000 houses), 1751; again (250 houses), August 31, 1759.
See Sweden, Academies. Stocking-frame invented by the reverend Mr. Lee, about
1589. Stockings, Silk, first worn by the French king, 1543; first worn in
England by queen Elizabeth, 1561; the fashion of rolling them over the knees
left off in France, 1716. Stonehenge, supposed to be built by Amb. Aurelius,
461. Stoney Stratford burnt (50 houses), April 19, 1736; again (150 houses),
May 6, 1742. Stops not invented till the 15th century; the colon not being used
till 1580; the semicolon not till 1599. Storm in several parts of England, wind
S. W. especially at Winchelscomb, Glouceste shire, where the steeple of the
church was thrown down by thunder and lightning, and the crucifix, with the
image of the virgin broken to pieces, Oct. 5, 1091. During the above, a thick
smoke darkened the sky. Another, wind S. W. that threw down 500 houses in
London, and unroofed Bow church, Oct. 17, 1091. At Old Sarum, the steeple and
many houses were blown down. One, that blew down the chimney of the chamber
where the queen and her children lay, at Windfor, and her whole apartments were
shaken and torn. Oaks in the park were torn up by the roots, and all was
accompanied with such thunder and lightning, as had not been known in the
memory of man, 1251. At Christmas, a westerly wind overthrew several houses and
public buildings, tore up trees by the roots, etc. 1330. When king Edward was
on his march within two leagues of Chartres, a most dreadful hurricane ^ose,
with thunder and lightning, and hailstones so large, as killed instantly 6000
of his horses, and 1000 of his best troops, 1359. A hurricane threw down many
houses, destroyed cattle, and rooted up trees, 1380; this was preceded with a
great mortality, especially among youth, and after that a famine. A gust of
wind blew off the leads of the Gray Friar's church, London, and almost beat
down the whole side of a street called the Old Exchange, Nov. 25, 1438. The day
Oliver Cromwell died, there arose one so dreadful, that it extended all over
Europe, and seemed to threaten a wre^k of nature, 1658. One, 1662. So dreadful
a one, as frightened the whole kingdom: the houses in London shook, and many
fell. The water rose to a great height in Westminsterhall, and London bridge
was choked up with wrecks; ten ships of war were lost, and 1500 seamen. The
damage at London was computed at one million sterling, Nov. 26, 27, 1703. One,
1716. One, Nov. 1, 1740. One at Charlestown, South Carolina, that overflowed
the town, and almost destroyed it and the neighborhood, Sept. 15, 1752. An
uncommonly dreadful one at Malta, that killed and wounded near 200 persons,
Oct. 29, 1757. One at the Havannah, when 96 public edifices, and 4048 houses
were destroyed, and 1000 persons lost their lives, Oct. 25, 1768. Very dreadful
one in the Caribbee islands, Aug. 31, 1772. One in the North of England, when
three of the Dublin pacquets foundered at sea, Oct. 19, 1775. Another violent
one, off the coast of Holland, Nov. 14, 1775. One, in the West Indies, that did
incredible mischief to St. Lucia, Barbados, and other West Indian Islands,
Oct. 10, 11, 1780. See Jamaica, Tempest.
Stormont, Scots viscount, Title of, created 1621. (name Murray.) Stourton,
Barony of, created 1448. (name Stourton.) Stow, Archdeaconry of, erected, about
1213. Strabane, Irish viscount, Title of, created 1701. (name Hamilton.)
Strafford, Thomas, earl of, fell a sacrifice to unpopularity, and was beheaded,
May 12, 1641, aged 48. Strange, Barony of, created 1299. (name Murray.)
Strangford, Irish viscount, Title of, created 1628. (name Smythe.) Stratflour
abbey, Cardiganshire, built, 1164; rebuilt, 1238. Stratford upon Avon
incorporated by Edward VI; burnt, August 1, 1614; monastery built, in 1700;
Jubilee, Sept. 6, 1769. Strathmore, Scots earldom of, created 1606. (name
Lion.) Straw used for the king's bed, 1234. Straw, Jack. See Penal Laws.
Streatham, Surry, Mineral spring of, discovered, about 1659. Struensee and
Brandt, Counts, beheaded at Copenhagen, April 18, 1772, for intriguing with
their queen. Stucco work, an invention of the ancients, and brought to
perfection by the Romans, revived, 1550. Sturgeon. The custom of presenting to
the king such as are caught in the Thames, is supposed to arise from its being
a royal fish, and the Thames sturgeon being the king's property. Style altered
at Rome, by adding January and February to the other ten months, and making the
year consist of 365 days, 709; again, by Augustus Caesar's ordering leap-year
to be but once in four years, and the month Sextilis to be called Augustus, 8
before Christ; the year began to be reckoned from Lady Day, 1265; style altered
again, at Rome, by taking 12 days off the calendar, 1582; the Gregorian style
received at Paris, by taking off 10 days, Dec. 15, 1582; again, at London, by
taking 11 days off the calendar, September 2, 1752. The Russians still adhere
to the Julian year. See the Preface. Succession, The bill of, passed, that
excludes Roman Catholics from the throne, 1689; settled on the house of
Hanover, June 12, 1700. Sudbury, archbishop of Canterbury, beheaded by the
rebels on Tower Hill, June 14, 1381. Sudbury, Archdeaconry of, erected, about
1126. Suetonius, Paulinus, in the reign of Nero, invaded the isle of Anglesea,
the Mona of the Romans, and burnt the Druids, 59; defeated Boadicea, queen of
the Iceni, who headed the Britons, burnt London, then a flourishing Roman
colony, and slew 70,000 Britons the same year. See Boadicea. Suevi, anciently
the people of Lusace, in Upper Saxony; took the name of Visigoths, on settling
in Spain, to distinguish themselves from the Ostrogoths, established in Italy,
419. Suffolk, Archdeaconry of, created, before 1127. Suffolk, Earldom of,
created 1603. (name Howard.) Suffolk, William de la Pole, duke of, whose son
was the first husband of Henry VIIth's mother, murdered in his passage to
France, for being an enemy to his country, May 2, 1450. Suffolk, Edm. de la
Pole, nephew to Richard III. beheaded, 1513, for conspiring against Henry VII.
Suffolk, Duke of, father to lady Jane Gray, beheaded, for attempting to set his
daughter on the throne, Feb. 17, 1554. Sugar was first discovered in the East
Indies; no mention of it till 625; first ^ought into Europe, about 1150; an
attempt was made to grow it in Italy, but not succeeding, the Spaniards and
Portuguese carried it to America, about 1510; first resined in England, 1659.
Sumatra and Malacca discovered by the Portugueze, 1511; visited by the
Spaniards, 1521. Sun stood still at the command of Joshua, 1454 before Christ;
spots of, first discovered by Christopher Scheiner, 1611; total eclipse of,
April 22, 1715; a spot, more than thrice the earth's size, passed its center,
April 21, 1766. Sun-dials invented, 558; the first erected at Rome, when time
was divided first into hours, 293 before Christ. Sundridge, Barony of, created
1766. (name Campbell.) Sun^fire-office first projected, 1707. Superior courts
established in France, Feb. 22, 1771. Superstition triumphant through the whole
Christian world, about 1000. Supremacy. The first prince that shook off the
yoke of Rome, and settled the supremacy in himself was Henry VIII. 1533. See
Oath. Surat, India, built, 1660; taken, 1759. Surgeons exempted from serving on
juries, out of respect, 1513. This gave rise to the opinion, that they were
excepted against, on account of the barbarity of their profession. See Barbers.
Surinam an English settlement, from 1654; exchanged with the Dutch for that of
New York, 1667. Surplice first worn by Pagan priests, brought into the church
of Rome by pope Adrian, 796. Surry, Hen. Howard, earl of, beheaded on
Towerhill, Jan. 19, 1547, on a false charge of aspiring to the crown; the duke
of Norfolk, his father, was also condemned, but the death of Henry VIII. saved
him. Sussex, Earldom of, created 1717. (Yelverton.) Sutherland, Scots earldom
of, created 1457. (name Sutherland.) Sutton-Colfield, Warwickshire, chartered
by Henry VIII. Survey of England made, by order of Alfred; again, by William
the Conqueror, 1080. Swansea castle, Glamorganshire, built, about 1113.
Sweating sickness, a native of Great Britain. It first began, 1485, in Henry
VIIth's army, when he landed at Milford Haven. It raged in London from
September 21 to the end of October. Happened again, 1506; again, so that in
some towns half the people died; in others, a third, 1517, it carried off the
patient in three hours; again, 1528, when people died in six hours; again,
1529; again, 1551. Sweden, anciently Scandinavia; kingdom of began, 481; united
to the crown of Denmark and Norway in 1394, till 1525, when Gustavus Vasa
expelled the Danes, and till which time the crown was elective; christianity
introduced there, 829; no nobility there before 1500; nobility massacred, Nov.
8, 1510; Lutheranism established there by Gustavus Vasa, about 1525, popery
abolished, and the crown declared hereditary, 1544; Christina, queen of, born,
1626; began her reign, 1632; founded the order of Amarante, 1645; resigned the
crown, 1654; died at Rome, 1689; Charles XII. began his reign, 1700; king of,
made prisoner by the Turks at Bender, after three years protection there, 1713;
conspiracy for altering the government, when counts Brahe and Horn were
beheaded, 1756; revolution in the government of, and made absolute, August 13,
1772; order of Seraphims founded, 1334; of Brician, 1366; of Amarante, 1645.
See Gustavus Adolphus, Stockholm. Sweyn, king or Denmark, invaded England, and
drove Ethelred II. out, 1013; he was proclaimed king of England, but died Feb.
2, 1014, at Gainsborough, and was buried at York. Switzerland inhabited
formerly by the Helvetii, who were subdued by Caefar, 57 before Christ; it
remained subject to the Romans, till again conquered by the Al^mans from
Germany, 395; these were driven out by Clovis I. of France, 496; became part of
the kingdom of Burgundy, 888; given by the last king of Burgundy to the emperor
of Germany, 1032, to which it belonged, till the Swiss Cantons were formed,
1307; their form of government made perpetual by themselves, 1315, and ratified
by other powers, 1649; Swiss soldiers first in the pay of France. 1480; order
of the Bear founded, 1213; six of the Cantons are protestants, the rest Roman
catholics. See Grisler. Swords consecrated by Pope Sergius V. 1009. See Ruffs.
Sybils, certain women, who foretold future events, flourished, about 715 before
Christ. See Oracles. Sydney college, Cambridge, founded by F. Sydney, countess
of Sussex, 1598. (13 fellows.) Sydney of Leix, Irish barony, created 1768.
(name Cosby.) Sympathetic powder, for stopping the blood, discovered by Sir K.
Digby. Vide Digby. Synagogue, The great, consisting of 120 elders, first
appointed, at the return from the Babylonish captivity, 537 before Christ.
Synod, The famous, when deputies were sent from all the reformed churches in
Europe to Dort, in Holland, to adjust the difference between the doctrines of
Luther, Calvin, and Arminius, 1618. Syracuse, The city of, founded by Archias,
a descendant of Hercules, about 761; taken by Marcellus, 212 before Christ.
Syria was a powerful nation, about 900, and continued so, till the king of
Assyria took Damascus, and made the people subject to his empire, 740;
conquered by Alexander the Great, 322, and became again independent, about 312,
till it was made a province of Rome by Pompey, 65 before Christ; conquered by
the Saracens, 640; by the Turks, 1517. Sysigambis, mother of Darius, on hearing
of the death of Alexander, starved herself, 320 before Christ.
T.
TAAFFE of Corren, Irish viscount, Title of, created, 1628. (name Taaffe.)
Tabernacle of the Lord's supper, Feast of, instituted by Moses at Shiloh, 1443
before Christ. Tail, Creating estates in, act passed for, 1279. See Estates.
Tainistry and Gavelkind, Ireland, abolished, 1604. By the custom of gavelkind,
upon the death of any one, his land was divided among all the males of his
family, legitimate or not; and after partition made, if any of the family died,
his portion was not shared out among his sons, but the chieftain, or tainist,
made a new partition at his discretion, of the lands of the deceased among the
surviving brothers. It was introduced into England in the time of the Saxons.
Talbot, Earldom of, created 1761. (name Talbot.) Talent, The Euboic or
Phcenician, was equal to about 400l. sterling; the Egyptian, about 20l.
sterling. Tale-tellers, a species of poetical historians, in the North of
Ireland, employed to lull people asleep with romantic stories, supposed to
descend from the Irish bards, who flourished 558. Talmud, The, made, 117 before
Christ. Tamorisk plant brought first here from Germany by archbishop Grindal,
1560. Tamworth castle, Warwickshire, built, 914; town chartered by queen
Elizabeth. Tangiers given by Portugal to Charles II. as a dowry with the
Infanta, 1662; destroyed, by order of Charles II. the expense being too great
to keep it up, October, 1683. See Bombay. Tankerville, Earldom of, created
1714. (name Bennet.) Tapestry invented by Sir Francis Crane, 1255; first
manufactory of the kind here established, 1620. Tara, The psalter of, a
register established in Ireland, 769 before Christ; wherein was recorded every
event in the kingdom. Tartary. The first Cham was Jenghes Khan, 1206, whose
descendants held the empire till 1582, when the Mungls revolted to the Manchew
Tartars, in China. The Eluths became a separate state about 1400. Tar-water,
Virtues of, first discoved by bish^p Berkley, 1744. Tasman's voyage into the
South Seas, performed, 1642. Tatien. See Abstinents. Taunton, Somersetshire,
Archdeaconry of, erected, 1106; precentorship ditto, 1135; Town charter given
by Charles I; taken away and re-chartered by Charles II. Tavistock-monastery
built, 961. Taxes, The origin of, is from those levied by Solon at Athens, 540
before Christ. The first paid in money here were in 1067, though subsidies in
kind continued till 1377. See Scutage. Tea first brought into Europe by the
Dutch EastIndia company, early in the 17th century; a quantity of it brought
from Holland by lord Arlington and lord Ossory, 1666. It from this time became
universal, and sold for 60s. per lb. Americans refused to receive it with a
duty on it, 1773, which occasioned the civil war. Telescope invented by Zach.
Jansen, a spectacle-maker, at Middleburgh, 1590; the first reflecting one made
on Newton's principles, 1692. Temeswaer taken by the Imperialists, 1716.
Tempest. See Rem. Occur. annis 1381, 1541, 1649, and Storm. Temple, Earldom of,
created 1749. (name Temple.) Temple, London, founded by the Knights Templars,
1185; church founded, 1185; present one built, 1240; Hall, middle Temple,
rebuilt, 1572. See Inns of Court. Temples first erected to the gods by the
Egyptians; the Chinese have them at present, so have the people of Peru.
Templetown, Irish barony, created 1776. (name Upton.) Tenby castle,
Pembrokeshire, built, 1079. Tenterden, Kent, chartered by queen Elizabeth.
Terceras isles discovered by the Spaniards, 1583. Terms and vacations in law
introduced from Normandy, 1079; the long vacation being adapted to the time of
the vintage. Terra firma conquered by Spain, 1514. Test act passed against the
Papists, (which obliges all persons that hold offices under government to take
the sacrament, according to the church of England), and resented by the duke of
York, 1673. Testudo. See Battering Ram. Teutones and Ambrones, 200,000 of them
killed, and 80,000 taken prisoners by the Romans, under Marius, near Aiz, 100
before Christ. See Cimbri. Teutonic knights, in Germany, their order originated
at Jerusalem, 1099; was confirmed by Pope Celestin III. 1191. Tewkesbury
monastery built, 715. Teynham, Barony of, created 1616. (name Roper.) Thames
rose so high at Westminster, that the lawyers were brought out of the hall in
boats, 1235; again, 1736; conservation of, given to the mayors of London, 1489;
its channel was so shallow in the summer, that a man might ride over it near
London bridge, 1592; made navigable to Oxford, 1624; ebbed and flowed twice in
three hours, 1658; again, three times in four hours, March 22, 1682; again,
twice in three hours, Nov. 24, 1777. See Tide, Transportation, Rem. Occur. anno
1113. Thane, a Scotch title, altered by Malcolm III. to that of earl, 1057.
Thanet, Earldom of, created 1628. (name Tufton.) Thavies Inn, London,
established 1549. See Inns of Court. Theatins, their order founded, 1524;
established at Paris, 1644. Theater; that of Bacchus at Athens, the first ever
erected, built by Philos, 420 before Christ. The ruins still exist. The first
royal license for one here was to Shakespere, etc. 1603, to act plays at the
Globe, Bankside, or in any part of England; but long before his time, miracles
were represented in the open fields, where the devil appeared in person on the
Stage, shearing the bristles of hogs: thence the old proverb, "Great cry and
little wool." Plays were opposed by the Puritans, 1633, and suspended till
1660, when Charles II. licensed two companies, Killegrew's and Davenant's; the
first at the Bull, Vere-street, Clare-market, which in a year or two was
removed to Drury Lane, as now; the other in Dorset-gardens. Tiil this time,
boys performed womens' parts. Sir William Davenant introduced operas, and both
companies united, 1684, and continued together till 1694; when, from the
reduced salaries given to the performers, the principal of them under Betterton
obtained a license, and withdrew to Lincoln's End theater in the summer, 1695.
See Comedy, Tragedy, Playhouse Bill.
Theban war, 1225 before Christ. Thebes founded, 1571; citadel built by Cadmus,
1493; flourished as a republic, 820; destroyed by Alexander, with the slaughter
of 120,000 persons, when he left only Pindar the poet's house standing, 335;
rebuilt by Cassander, 315 before Christ. Theft, in the time of Homer, was
rather an honor to a man's character; Lycurgus, in his body of laws,
encouraged it; first made capital under Edmund the Saxon; confirmed by Henry I.
See Hospitality. Theists, a sect that came in with the Restoration (of which
the king was one), and taught a union with all men who believed in one God, but
who rejected public worship, etc. and declared, that this religion was older
than that given by God to the Hebrews. Theobalds, king James's palace, near
Waltham abbey, what remained of it, pulled down, 1763. Thermometers invented by
Corn. Drebbel, a Hollander, 1620; improved by Reaumur, 1730; and since improved
by Farenheit, a German. Thetford monastery founded, 1070; town incorporated by
queen Elizabeth. Thistle, Order of the, founded, 812; ribband exchanged from
blue to green, 1703. Thomas, St. Feast of, commenced, 1130. Thomond, Irish
earldom of, created 1756. (name O'Brien.) Thoracic duct discovered in a horse,
by Eustachius, 1563; in the human body, by Oliver Rudbeck, a Swedish anatomist,
Thomas Bartholine, of Copenhagen, and Dr. Joliffe, of England, 1653. Vide
Lacteals. Thorn. Vide Protestants. Thornbury castle, Gloucestershire, built,
before 1511; town chartered, 1670. Thorney abbey built, 970. Thornton college,
Lincolnshire, built, 1174. Thorp, speaker of the House of Commons, and lord
Scales, governor of the Tower, murdered by the London mob, 1460, in the
disturbances respecting Henry VI. Thoulouse, France, City of, founded, about
615 before Christ. A dreadful tribunal established there to extirpate heretics,
1229; dissolved, 1645. The Troubadours, or Rhetoricians of, had their origin
about 1150, and consisted of a fraternity of poets, whose art was extended
throughout Europe, and gave rise to the Italian and Spanish poetry. See
Troubadours. The flower sports instituted, 1323. See Rem. Occur. anno 1250.
Thrace, a considerable part of ancient Greece, annexed to Macedon, by Philip
and Alexander, about 355, till conquered by the Romans 168. Byzantium was its
capital, on the ruins of which, Constantinople was built. Taken by the Turks,
1453. Throgmorton, Francis, executed, for conspiring against queen Elizabeth,
in favor of Mary, queen of Scots, 1583. Thurlow of Ashfield, Barony of,
created 1778. (name Thurlow.) Thurot, Captain, attempting to invade Ireland,
killed by Capt. Elliot, Feb. 1760. Ticonderoga taken by the English, 1759. Tide
ebbed and flowed three times in one hour at Lyme, in Dorset, May 31, 1682. See
Thames. Tides, Theory of, first given by Kepler, 1598. Tiles first used in
England, 1246. Tilts and tournaments instituted by Henry I. of Germany, 919;
forbidden by the council of Rheims, 1131; in fashion here in the 11th and 12th
centuries; abolished in France, 1560, Henry IId having been killed in one; and
with these fell the ancient spirit of chivalry. See Justs, Bullfights. Time was
anciently divided into three portions, "obscure, fabulous, and historical." The
first includes the space from the creation to the deluge of Deucalion; profane
history has no historian in that portion; the second began with that deluge,
and continued to the Olympiads; during which time, the history of events is
very uncertain; the third portion took place with the Olympiads; first computed
from the Christian era, 516; in history, 748. See Deluge, Olympiads, and the
Preface. Tin mines first discovered in Germany, 1240; till then, those in
England were the only ones in Europe. Tindale, William, hanged at Augsburgh,
for translating the scriptures, 1536. Tintern abbey, Monmouthshire, founded,
1131. Titchfield house, Hants, built in Hen. VIIIth's reign. Tithes given first
by Moses to the tribe of Levi, 1490 before Christ; established in England by
Ethelwolf, 844; established in France under Charlemagne; established by law, by
the Lateran council, 1215. See Patronage. Tithing, a district inhabited by ten
freeholders, who were responsible to the king for the conduct of any one among
them, first settled by Alfred; the principal man in each tithing was called the
headborough; ten tithings formed a hundred. See Hundreds. Titles, First
creation to, by patents, 1344; titles royal, -- the following is the succession
in which the royal titles swelled in England. Henry IV. had the title of
"Grace" conferred on him; Henry VI. that of "Excellent Grace;" Edward IV. that
of "High and Mighty Prince;" Henry VII. "Highness;" Henry VIII. "Majesty" (and
was the first and last that was styled "Dread Sovereign"); and James I. that of
"Sacred," or "Most Excellent Majesty." That of "Majesty" was first given to
Louis XI. of France; before, it was the title only of Emperors: the kings of
Arragon, Castile, and Portugal had the title only of "Highness;" those of
England, "Your Grace;" these of France, "Your Despotism." See Majesty. Tiverton
castle, Devonshire, built, 1110; town incorporated, 1615; burnt, 1598; again,
1612; again, 1731, 200 houses. Tobacco, Plant of, found by the Spaniards in the
island of Jucatan, 1520; introduced into France, by Nicot, 1560; first brought
into England, by Ralph Lane, 1583; planted in many parts of England, till
prohibited by an act of Charles IId; allowed to be cultivated in Ireland, 1779.
Tobago taken by the French, June 2, 1781. Tobit born, 749; cured by his son of
blindness, 690; died, 645 before Christ. Toleration act passed, 1689, which
exempts the dissenters from suffering the penalties of former acts. See Popery.
Toll instituted in England for mending the highways, in Edward IIId's reign.
See Turnpikes. Tonnage and poundage granted to the kings of England for life,
1465. Torphichen, Scots barony, created 1563. (name Sandilands.) Torrington,
viscount, Title of, created 1721. (name Byng.) Torrington, Devonshire,
incorporated by Mary I. Tory. See Whig. Torture was occasionally used in
England so late as 1558, and in Scotland till 1690; abolished in Sweden, 1773.
It is continued in most countries in Europe, except Prussia. See Ascue Ann.
Totton, Exon, Archdeaconry of, erected, before 1143. Tournaments. See Tilts,
Justs. Tourniquet, The, invented by one Morell, at the s^ge of Besancon, 1674;
Petit of France invented the screw tourniquet. 1718. Tower of London began to
be built, 1078. Townshend, viscount, Title of, created 1682. (name Townshend.)
Tracton of Tracton abbey, Irish barony, created 1780. (name Dennis.) Tracy of
Rathccole, Irish viscount, Title of, created 1624. (name Tracy.) Trade and
plantation office formed, Nov. 7, 1660. Tragedy, First, acted at Athens on a
wagon, by Thespis, 535 before Christ. Trajan's pillar set up at Rome, 114.
Transfiguration, Festival of, first observed, 700. Transfusion of blood first
practiced in France, by drinking it, 1483; the idea of conveying it into the
blood by the veins, communicated by Wreen, an Oxonian, 1659; first tried at
Paris, 1667, but soon after exploded. Transportation first inflicted as a
punishment by 39th Elizabeth, c. 4. Before this act passed, executions were
very numerous. Hollingshed says, that 72,000 criminals were executed in Henry
VIIIth's reign. The act passed to make felons work on the Thames, 1776.
Transubstantiation introduced as an article of faith, about 840; opposed by the
English church, about 1000. Transylvania given to the house of Austria, 1699.
Traquair, Scots earldom of, created 1633. (name Stewart.) Treason punished in
England, by banishment only, till after Henry I. Treaties, Commercial, the
first made by England with any foreign nation, was with the Flemings, 1272; the
second, with Portugal and Spain, 13^8. Tregoney, Cornwall, incorporated, 1620.
Trematon castle, Cornwall, built, before 1066. Tresilian, Sir R. chief justice,
and others, hanged at Tyburn, 1388, for giving the king advice contrary to the
opinion of the Gloucester Faction. Tribunes of the people, Two, instituted at
Rome, 495; military ones, with consular power, created, 445 before Christ. See
Rome. Tribute of wolves heads paid in England, 971; paid by the English to the
Danes in one year 48,000l. 979. See Edgar. Trinidad discovered, 1498; taken by
Sir Walter Raleigh, 1595; by the French, 1676. Trinitarians, Order of,
instituted, 1198. Trinitarians, Barefooted, in Spain, instituted, 1594.
Trinity, The word, first applied to the persons of the Godhead, by Theophilus,
of Antioch, about 150. Trinity college, Cambridge, founded by Henry VIII. 1546.
(60 fellows.) Trinity college, Oxford, founded by Sir Thomas Pope, 1555. (12
fellows.) Trinity hall, Cambridge, founded by the bishop of Norwich, 1350. (12
fellows.) Trinity house, London, founded by Sir Thomas Spert, 1515;
incorporated by Henry VIII; confirmed, 1685. Trinity Sunday, Feast of,
instituted by Pope Gregory IV. about 828; appointed to be held on the present
day, by John, 1334. Tripoli and Tunis were formerly the republic of Carthage.
Carthage stood nearly where Tunis stand now. Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli are
called the piratical states of Barbary. Tunis is subject to Morocco; the other
two, to the Turks. Tritheites, a sect who believed three Gods, arose under
Philoponos, 560. Trojan war commenced, 1193 before Christ. See Helen. Troops,
Disciplined, first mentioned to be kept in Edgar's reign. See Yeomen.
Troubadours (i. e. inventors), poets that inhabited the southern parts of
France, in the 12th and 13th centuries. See Thoulouse, Jongleurs. Troy, Kingdom
of, began by Scamander, from Crete, 1546; city built, 1255; burnt, June 11,
1184 before Christ, when an end was put to the kingdom. Trumpets first sounded
before English kings, by order of Offa, 790; speaking ditto invented by
Kirchier, a Jesuit, 1652. Tuam. See Armagh. Tulip roots first brought into
England, from Vienna, 1578. Tunbridge castle, built, 1090; priory built, 1094.
Tunis besieged by Louis IX. of France, 1270. It remained under African kings,
till taken by Barbarossa, under Solomon the Magnificent: Barbarossa expelled by
Charles V. but it was recovered by the Turks, under Selim II. since which, it
has been tributary to the Grand Signior; taken, with great slaughter, by the
emperor Charles V. when 10,000 christian slaves were set at liberty, 1535; the
Dey of, first appointed, 1570. See Tripoli. Tupholme priory, near Lincoln,
built, 1160. Turkey company incorporated, 1579. This company arose out of the
ruins of the Barbary merchants, who were incorporated by Henry VII. It first
traded with Venice; then with Turkey; furnishing England that way with East
India commodities. Vide Levant. Turkeys and Guinea fowls, brought into England,
1524. Turkish empire, Foundation of, began, about 998; Ottoman was the first
emperor at Constantinople, 1268. Turks, a nation of adventurers from Tartary,
took Persia, 1065; first entered Europe, 1352. See Bithynia. Turnpikes, or
toll-gates, first in England, 1350. See Toll. Tuscan war commenced with the
Romans, 312 before Christ. Tuscany, the ancient seat of the Etruscans, belonged
to Germany, till 1240; order of St. Stephen instituted by the first duke, 1561;
title of Grand Duke conferred by Pope Pius V. 1570. Tutbury, Staffordshire,
Bull-running at, instituted, about 1374. Tuxford, Nottinghamshire, burnt down,
1702. Tweedale, Scots marquisate of, created 1694. (Hay.) Tychfield abbey,
Hants, built, 1232. Tyler, Wat (a fellow who took that name, and headed an
insurrection), killed in Smithfield, while in conference with the king, by
Walworth, mayor of London, 1381. See Rebellion, Penal Laws. Tylney, of
Castlemaine, Irish earldom of, created 1731. (name Tylney.) Tynemouth priory
and castle, Northumberland, standing, 700. Tyrawley, Irish barony of, created
1706. (O'Hara.) Tyrconnel, Irish earldom of, created 1761. (name Carpenter.)
Tire rebuilt under Ninus; taken by Nebuchadnezzar, after a siege of 13 years;
God gave him Egypt for his wages, 572; it became subject to the Romans, 64
before Christ, but is now in possession of the Turks. Vide Assyria. Tyrone,
Irish earldom of, created 1746. (Beresford.)
U.
UBIANS, The, were allies of the Romans, and in the reign of Tiberius XIV.
inhabited the country, now the electorate of Cologne. Ubiquarians, a sect, that
believe the body of Christ to be every where, arose under Brentius, 1540.
Ulverscroft priory, Leicestershire, built, 1167. Unction, Extreme, practiced in
the first century, became general, 450. Uniformity, Act of, took place, 1662,
which obliges all the clergy to subscribe the 39 articles, and use the same
form of worship. Uniforms, Military, the first introduced in France, by Louis
XIV. Union fire-office established, 1715. Union of the two kingdoms, England
and Scotland, attempted, 1604; again, 1670; took place, May 1, 1707, and the
island called Great Britain. Unitarians, who denied the Trinity, and conceived
Christ to be a mere man, arose under Servetus, 1553. United Provinces were
formerly subject to Spain, whose yoke they shook off, 1579, and became a
republic; acknowledged independent, 1609. There is no power here to pardon, if
there be no Stadtholder. See Indies, Philip II. Egmont. University college,
Oxford, founded by king Alfred, 872. (12 fellows.) Universities allowed to send
members to parliament, by James I. (See Degrees.) The several in Europe
founded, as follow: Aberdeen, Scotland, 1477. Alba Julia, Transylvania, 1629.
Altorf, Franconia, 1581. Andrews, St. Scotland, 1411. Anjou, 1349. Avignon,
France, 1388. Basle, Switzerland, 1459. Besancon, France, 1564. Bolog^a, Italy,
423. Bourges, France, 1464. Caduris, France, 1320. Caen, ditto, 1452.
Cambridge, 915. Cambridge, New England, projected, 1630. Cologn, Germany, 1389.
Compostella, Spain, 1517. Conimbria, Portugal, 1306. Constantinople, 425.
Copenhagen, 1497. Cordova, Spain, 968. Cracow, Poland, 700; enlarged, 1402.
Dijon, France, 1722. Dillingen, Swabia, 1564. Dola, France, 1426. Douay, ditto,
1562. Dresden, Saxony, 1694. Dublin, 1591. Edinburgh, 1580. Erfurt, Thuringia,
1392. Evora, Portugal, 1451. Ferrara, Italy, 1316. Florence, ditto, 1438.
Francker, Friesland, 1585. Francfort on Oder, 1506. Friberg, Germany, 1460.
Geneva, 1365. Glasgow, Scotland, 1450. Gottingen, Hanover, 1734. Grenada,
Spain, 15^7. Gripswald, 1547. Groningen, Holland, 1614. Heidelburg, Germany,
1346. Helmstadt, Brunsw. Wolf. 157. Jena, Thuringia, 1548. Ingoldstadt,
Bavaria, 1573 Koningsburg, Prussia, 1544 Leyden, Holland, 1575. Leipsic,
Saxony, 1409. Louvain, Flanders, 926; enlarged, 1427. Lions, 830. Marpurg,
Hesse Cassel, 1526. Mechlin, Flanders, 1440. Mentz, 1482. Montpelier, 1196.
Moscow, 1754. Munster, 1491. Naples, 1216. Orleans, France, 1312. Oxford, 886.
Paderborn, 1617. Padua, Italy, 1221. Papia, 791; enlarged, 1361. Paris, 792.
Perusia, Italy, 1290. Petersburgh, 1747. Pisa, Italy, 1339; enlarged, 1542.
Poictiers, France, 1430. Prague, Bohemia, 1361. Regmont, Prussia, 1544. Rheims,
France, 1145; enlarged, 1560. Rostoc, Mecklenberg, 1419. Salamanca, Spain,
1249. Saragossa, Arragon, 1474. Seville, Spain, 1517. Strasburg, Germany, 1538
Thoulouse, France, 809. Toledo, Spain, 1518. Tubingen, Wirtemberg, 1477. Turin,
1412. Valence, Dauphiny, 1475 Venice, 1592. Vienna, 1236. Upsal, Sweden, 1477.
Utrecht, Holland, 1636. Wittemburg, Saxony 1502 Wurtsburg, Franconia, 1403.
Urine, The inhabitants of London, etc. commanded by proclamation, to preserve
it throughout the year, for the purpose of making saltpetre, 1626. Ursulins, an
order of nuns, established, 1198.
V.
VAILS to servants abolished among people of fashion, 1764. Valencia conquered
by the Moors, under Abdallah Ciz, and lost by them, 1094; ^elinquished to the
Moors again, by the king of Castile; soon after taken again, by James I. of
Arragon, 1238; and, with Arragon, united in Spain, 1492. See Spain. Valentia,
Irish viscount, Title of, created 1621. (name Annesley.) Valet was a term
anciently applied to the king's eldest son. Hence the valet, or knave, follows
the king and queen in a pack of cards. Valle Crucis abbey, Denbighshire, built,
1200. Vandals, The, inhabited Germany, and embraced christianity, 400; began
their kingdom in Spain, 411; invaded and conquered the Roman territories in
Africa, under Genseric, 430; sacked and pillaged Rome, June 15, 455. Vane, Sir
Henry, beheaded, for taking a lead in the republican parties in the civil wars,
June 14, 1662. He was the last who suffered in this cause. Vane, Irish
viscount, Title of, created 1720. (name Vane.) Vegetables were imported from
the Netherlands, about 1509, there being no kitchen-gardens in England. Before
this time, sugar was eaten with meat, to correct its putrescency. Venables's
expedition to America, Dec. 4, 1654. Venality. The suffrages of parliament do
not appear to have been influenced by secret pensions, till the reign of
Charles II. Venereal disease, The, was first brought from America into Spain,
in the fleet of Columbus; it was thence carried to Italy, and broke out in the
French army, in Naples, 1493; others say, it is of older date, and was known by
another name. Venice. The first inhabitants of this country were the Veneti;
conquered by the Gauls, and made a kingdom, about 356; conquered for the Romans
by Marcellus, 221 before Christ. The islands, on which the city stands, began
to be inhabited by Italians, about 421; the first house was erected on the
morass, by Entinopus, who fled from the Goths; the people of Padua took refuge
there also, and were assisted by Entinopus in building the 80 houses, which
formed the first city, 413; first governed by a Doge, 697; but its republic was
not independent till 803; reduced to ashes, 1101; nearly destroyed by the
league of Cambray, 1509; the conspiracy on which Otway's play is founded, 1618;
its university founded, 1592; order of St. Mark founded, 830; revived, 1562; of
Calza, instituted, 1368; restored, 1562. See Alexander III. Venner, a
wine-cooper, ringleader of the enthusiasts, called the 5th monarchy-men, in the
Interregnum, executed, with others, Jan. 20, 1661. Ventilators invented by the
Rev. Dr. Hales. See Hales, Vol II. Venus, her transit over the sun, June 3,
1769. Vere, Barony of, created 1730. (name Beauclerk.) Verney, Irish earldom
of, created 1742. (name Verney.) Vernon of Kinderton, Barony of, created 1762.
(name Vernon.) Versailles, Palace of, finished, 1687. Vespers, Sicilian, when
the people of Sicily massacred all the French throughout the island, on
Easter Day, 1282; the first bell at Vespers being the signal. -- Fatal one at
Blackfriars, London, Oct. 16, 1623; when 100 persons were killed, at the house
of the French ambassador, by the floor of a room giving way where a Jesuit was
preaching. Vestments, worn at the altar, adopted by pope Stephen I. 257.
Vesuvius, Eruptions of, 79; 203; 272; ejected flames that were seen at
Constantionople, they obscured the sun at noon day, and ravaged all Campania,
472; 512; 685; 993; 1036; 1043; 1048; 1136; 1506; (1538, that at Puzzole); 4000
persons lost their lives, and a large tract of land destroyed, 1631; 1660;
1682; 1694; 1701; 1704; 1712; 1717; 1730; 1737; 1751; 1754; 1760; 1766; 1767;
1770; 1771; 1779. Victory ship of war. See Balchen. Victualling office
instituted, Dec. 10, 1663. Vienna besieged by the Turks, July, 1683. Vigo,
Galleons, taken by the English, Oct. 12, 1702. Villenage commenced soon after
the conquest, when all who came over with William I. were rewarded according to
their deserts. To honorable men he gave lordships, manors, lands, etc. and all
the inhabitants there dwelling, whose property was thenceforth at the will of
the lord, and they were called his bondmen; hence the rise of manors. For
certain indulgences from the lord, certain quit-rents, heriots, fines, etc.
were paid; hence the rise of copyhold tenures, viz. holding estates by a copy
only of the lord's Court-roll; such estates as the lord thought proper to make
free, were named Freeholds. In 1574, queen Elizabeth commissioned lord Burleigh
and sir Walter Mildmay to enquire into the property of her bondmen in Cornwall,
Devon, Somersetshire, and Gioucestershire, and made such as were born bondmen
compound for their freedom. See Feudal Law. Vincent, St. taken by the French,
1779. Vines grew wild in Sicily in Homer's time. Violins not known in England
till Charles IId's time. There were fiddles before; of course, fiddlers were not
violin players. Virginia discovered by Cabot, 1497; first settlement, 1585;
second, 1587; third, broke up, 1589; two colonies settled by patent, 1606;
planted, 1608; second charter, 1610; third, 1612; reverted to the crown, 1626.
This was the first British settlement in North America. See America. Virginius
killed his daughter, that she might not fall a sacrifice to the lust of
Claudius, 449 before Christ. Viscount, Title of, first given in England to John
Beaumont, by Henry VI. 1440; but of older date in Ireland and France.
Visigoths. See Suevi. Vision, True theory of, first given by Kepler. Volsci,
The, after a war of 70 years, were obliged by Camillus to submit to the Romans,
389 before Christ. Vortigern made king of Britain, 447; forced to make his son
Vortimer a partner in his government, 455; Vortimer died, 475; Vortigern
deposed by Ambrosius, 475; burnt, with his queen, in a castle in Wales, 485.
Vortimer. See Vortigern. Votes of the House of Commons first printed, 1681.
Vulgate edition of the bible discovered, 218. See Bible.
W.
WADHAM college, Oxford, founded by N. Wadham, Esquire. 1613. (15 fellows.) Wakes,
or vigils, were instituted as festivals on the days of dedication of the
churches, or on those saints' days to whom the buildings were devoted, and
commenced on the evenings preceding those days. The first institution was
religious, but now is degenerated into a day of festivity. See Fairs.
Waldgrave, Earldom of, created 1729. (Waldgrave.) Wales. The first king was
Edwall, 690; conquered and divided by William I. among the conquerors 1091;
Griffith, the last king, died, 1137; the sovereign, from that time, was a
prince only, Owen was the first, 1137; completely conquered and annexed to the
crown of England, 1283; an act passed, to admit it to a communication of our
laws, and to enable it to send members to parliament, 1535; it sent 100. See
Lewellin, Edward II. England, Copyholds, Marches. Wallace, Sir William, regent
of Scotland, hanged and quartered, as a traitor to Edward I. 1305. Wallingford,
Berks, incorporated by James I. The castle had a collegiate church, which was
dissolved in 1549. Wallis, Capt, set sail to go round the world, July 26, 1766;
returned, May 20, 1768. Walls. One built by Adrian, between Newcastle and
Carlisle, 121; one under Antoninus, between Clyde and Forth, 138; one by
Severus, where Adrian's was, 210; one by Probus, 200 miles long, from the Rhine
to the Danube, 276; one by Carausius, between Clyde and Forth, in Scotland,
290; one by Theodosius, in the same place, 36^; one with stone, between
Tinmouth and Solway Frith, 426. These walls were built to defend the Roman
colonies from the Caledonians. Walmer castle, Kent, built, 1539. Walpole of
Woolterton, Barony of, created 1756. (name Walpole.) Walfingham, Barony of,
created 1780. (name De Gray.) Walfingham priory, Norfolk, built, 1070. Waltham,
Irish barony, created 1762. (name Olmius.) Waltham High Cross monastery built,
1025. Waltham, Hants, Bishop's house, built, long before 1404; demolished in
the civil wars. Walton bridge, built by Samuel Dicker, Esquire. 1750. Wandesford,
Irish earldom of, created 1758. (name Wandesford.) Wapentakes, a Northern name
for hundreds (which see.) War, Civil, between the emperors Constantine the
Great and Maxentius, 312; Philips's war with the Indians, North America, 1675;
no war between England and Denmark since their invasion, in the time of the
Saxons. War, among many others, with Scotland, 1068. Peace with ditto, 1091. --
with France, 1113. War with France, 1116. Peace with ditto, 1118. -- with
Scotland, 1139. War with France, 1161. Peace with France, 1186. War with
France, with success, 1194. Peace with ditto, 1195. War with France, 1201. --
ended, 1216. -- with ditto, 1224. War ended, 1243. -- with France, 1294. --
with Scotland, 1296. Peace with France, 1299. -- with Scotland, Mar. 30, 1323.
War with Scotland, 1327. -- ended, 1328. -- with Scotland, 1333. -- with
France, 1339. Peace with France, May 8, 1360. War with France, 1368. -- with
Scotland, 1400. Peace with France, May 31, 1420. War with France, 1422. Peace
with France, Oct. 1471. War with France, Oct. 6, 1492. Peace with ditto, Nov.
3, 1492. -- with Scotland, 1502. War with France, Feb. 4. 1512. -- with
Scotland, 1513. Peace with France, Aug. 7, 1514. War with ditto, 1522. -- with
Scotland, 1522. Peace with France, 1527. -- with Scotland, 1542. War with
Scotland directly after. Peace with France and Scotland, June 7, 1546. War with
Scotland, 1547. -- with France, 1549. Peace with both, Mar. 6, 1550. War with
France, June 7, 1557. -- with Scotland, 1557. Peace with France, April 2, 1559.
-- with Scotland, 1560. War with France, 1562. Peace with ditto, 1564. War with
Scotland, 1570. -- with Spain, 1588. Peace with Spain, Aug. 18, 1604. War with
Spain, 1624. -- with France, 1627. Peace with Spain and France, April 14, 1629.
War with the Dutch, 1651. Peace with ditto, Apr. 5, 1654. War with Spain, 1655.
Peace with ditto, Sept. 10, 1660. War with France, Jan. 26, 1666. -- with
Denmark, Oct. 19 following. Peace of Breda with the French, Danes, and Dutch,
August 24, 1667. -- with Spain, Feb. 13, 1668. War with the Algerines, Sept. 6,
1669. Peace with ditto, Nov. 19, 1671. War with the Dutch, Mar. 1672. Peace
with the Dutch, Feb. 28, 1674. War with France, May 7, 1689. Peace of Ryswick,
General, Sep. 20, 1697. War with France, May 4, 1702. Peace of Utrecht, July
13, 1713. War with Spain, Dec. 1718. Peace with ditto, 1721. War with Spain,
Oct. 19, 1739. -- with France, Mar. 31, 1744. Peace with France, etc. Oct 18,
1748. War with France, 1756. -- with Spain, Jan. 4, 1762. Peace with France and
Spain, Feb. 10, 1763. War with France, 1778. -- with Spain, 1779. -- with
Holland, Dec. 21, 1780. See Rebellion. Warbeck, Perkin, the son of a renegado
Jew, to whom Edward IV. had stood godfather, was persuaded by Margaret, duchess
of Burgundy, sister to Richard III. to personate her nephew Richard, Edward
Vth's brother, which he did first in Ireland, where he landed, 1492; the
imposture discovered by Henry VII. 1493; made an attempt to land in Kent with
600 men, when 150 were taken prisoners, and executed, 1495; recommended by the
king of France to James IV. of Scotland, who gave him his kinswoman, lord
Huntley's daughter, in marriage, the same year; James IV. invaded England in
his favor, 14^6; left Scotland, and went to Bodmin, in Cornwall, where 3000
joined him, and he took the title of Richard IV. 1497; taken prisoner by Henry
VII. 1498; set in the stocks at Westminster and Cheapside, and sent to the
Tower, 1499; plotted with the earl of Warwick to escape out of the Tower, by
murdering the lieutenant, for which he was hanged at Tyburn, 1499. See Henry
VII; Warwick, earl of. Ward. See Dudley. Ward, John, Esquire. expelled the House of
Commons, for forgery, May 16, 1726. Wardrobe, Great, established, 1485.
Wareham, Dorset, Dreadful fire at (130 houses burnt), July 26, 1762. Warrants,
General, declared illegal, Oct. 21, 1765. Warreston, Lord, hanged at
Edinburgh, July 24, 1663. Warwick, Earldom of, created 1746. (name Greville.)
Warwick, Earl of, made sole governor of king Henry VI. 1427; died, 1440.
Warwick, Richard Neville, earl of, called the Kingmaker, conspired against
Edward IV. 1466; slain at the battle of Barnet. Warwick, Edward Plantagenet
(the last of the name and house of York), earl of, son to the duke of Clarence,
and nephew to Richard III. beheaded on Tower Hill, for pl^tting, as was said,
with Warbeck, to escape out of the Tower, Nov. 21, 1499. See Warbeck. Warwick,
Guy, earl of, the romance composed after the Crusades, to which it alluded.
Warwick, supposed to be founded about 20, castle built, before 91^; city burnt,
1694. Washington, General, made, by the Congress, dictator of the American
colonies, 1777. Watches are supposed to be invented by Peter Hele, at
Nuremberg. 1490; though Robert king of Scotland had one, about 1310; this is in
the possession of George III. first used in astronomical observations by
Purbach, 1500; first brought into England from Germany, 1597; in Lever's museum
there is one dated 1541; with pendulums, invented by Hugens, of Zulichem, 1657;
spring pocket watches, the invention of Hook, 1658; repeaters invented, 1676.
See Clocks. Water conveyed to London, by leaden pipes, after 50 years labor,
1285. See New River. Waterford, Ireland, built, 1162; besieged, August, 1171;
incorporated, 1463. Waterford, Irish earldom of, created 1661. (Talbot.)
Watermills to grind corn, invented by Bellisarius, 529. Waverley abbey, Surry,
built, 1128. We, used by kings. See Plural Number. Weavers, Spitalfields, A
rising of the, May, 1765. Weights and measures invented by Phydon, tyrant of
Argos, 894 before Christ; fixed in England, 1257. Weights originally taken from
grains of wheat, the lowest of which is called, "a grain." Wells of Dungannon,
Irish barony, created 1780. (name Knox.) Wells, Sir Robert, beheaded, for
taking arms against Edward IV. March, 1470. Wellingborough, Northamptonshire,
800 houses burnt, July 28, 1738. Wells cathedral built, 704; bishopric erected,
905; archdeaconry, ditto, 1106; deanery, chancellorship, sub-deanery, and
treasurership erected, 1135. See Bath. Wenlock monastery, Salop, founded, 680;
abbey built, 1081. Wenman of Tuam, Irish viscount, Title of, created 1628.
(name Wenman.) Wentworth, viscount, Title of, created 1762. (Noel.) West Cowes
castle built, about 1539. West Indies discovered by Columbus; St. Salvador was
the first land he made, Oct. 11, 1492. West Loo, Cornwall, incorporated, 1574.
West Malling abbey, Kent, founded, 1090. Westbury, Wilts, chartered by Henry
IV. Westcote of Balamare, Irish barony, created 1776. (name Lyttelton.)
Westenhanger-house, Kent, built, before 1246. Westham abbey, Essex, founded,
1134; water works company chartered, 21 George II. Westmeath, Irish earldom of,
created 1621. (name Nugent.) Westminster made a bishopric, by Henry VIII. 1541.
It continued only nine years. Westminster abbey built by Sebert, king of Essex,
on the spot where the temple of Apollo had once stood, about 600; its monastery
consecrated by Edward the Confessor, 1065; rebuilt and consecreated, 1269;
turned into a collegiate church, 1560. See Westminster. Westminster bridge
begun, Jan. 1739; opened, November 17, 17^0; cost 389,500l. Westminster
fire-office erected, 1717. Westminster hall built, about 1098; courts of law
established there by king John; rebuilt, 1399. Westminster school founded,
1070; again, by queen Elizabeth, 1560. Westmorland, Earldom of, created 1624.
(Fane.) Wetherhall priory, Cumberland, built, 1086. Weymouth castle built, by
Henry VIII. about 1539. Weymouth, viscount, Title of, created 1682. (name
Thynne.) Whale fishery carried on for the oil only, 1578, the use of whale-bone
not being then known; taken up by the English, 1598. See Greenland. Whalley
abbey, Lancashire, built, 1187. Wheels, Duty laid on, March 25, 1747;
increased, 1776. Whig and Tory, The epoch of, 1680. The first was a name of
reproach given by the court party to their antagonists for resembling the
principles of the Whigs, or fanatical conventiclers in Scotland; and the other
was given by the country party to that of the court, comparing them to the
Tories, or Popish robbers in Ireland. See Parliament. Whirlwind. One known by
the term Typhones, passed down Ashley river, South Carolina, and fell on the
shipping in Rebellion-road with such fury, as to lay bare the channel of the
river, fink five vessels, and damage many others, May 4, 1774. Whitby
monastery, in Yorkshire, founded, 1075. The custom of setting a hedge in the
river on Ascension eve had its origin, 1159; certain abbey lands are there held
by this, it being enjoined by the monk of Whitby, as a penance on three persons
who occasioned his death, by wounding him. Whitehall palace, great part burnt,
April, 1690; totally consumed, Jan. 5, School. Whitehall preachers appointed,
March, 1724. Whitsunday. See Pentecost. Wight, Isle of, conquered by Vespasian,
23; taken by the French, July 13, 1377. Wigmore castle, Herefordshire, built,
1074. Wigton, Scots earldom of, created 1605. (Fleming.) Wildfire invented by
Callinicus, a Greek, 680; gunpowder was not then part of its composition.
William I. natural son of Richard, duke of Normandy, by a tanner's daughter of
Falaise, became duke of Normandy, and was promised by Edw. The Confessor to be
appointed, in his will, successor to the crown of Engl. 1051; claimed the crown
of Harold after Edward's death, who refused it, 1066; invaded England at
Pevense^, Sussex, with a large army, Oct. 1066; flew Harold, and conquered this
kingdom at the battle of Hastings: Edgar Atheling, nephew to Edward the
Confessor, the only their to the crown, resigned it to him, December following,
and he was crowned Dec. 25; returned to Normandy, but hastened back to England,
December, 1067; crowned his wife Matilda, 1068; invaded Scotland, 1072;
subverted the English constitution, 1074; wounded by his rebel son, Robert, at
Gerberot, in Normandy, 1079; buried his queen, 1083; invaded France, 1088; soon
after this, he fell from his horse, and contracted a rupture, of which he died,
at Hermentrude near Roan, Sept. 1088, aged 63; was buried at Caen, and
succeeded in Normandy by his eldest son, Robert, and in England by his second
son, William II. See Robert, duke of Normandy. William II. called Rusus, from
his red hair, second son of William I. succeeded his father, and crowned Sept.
27, 1088; invaded Normandy, with success, 1090; subdued Wales, 1093; killed
with an arrow accidentally by Sir Walter Tyrrel, as he was hunting in the new
forest, August, 1100, aged 40; buried at Winton, and succeeded by his brother,
Henry I. See Robert, duke of Normandy. William III. crowned with his queen,
April 11, 1689; landed at Carrickfergus to oppose king James, June 14, 1690;
wounded in the shoulder, while reconnoitring the enemy at the Boyne; defeated
K. James at the battle of the Boyne; returned to England, Sept. 6, 1690; plot
laid for assassinating him, Feb. 1696; fell from his horse, and broke his
collar bone, Feb. 21; 1702; died Mar. 8, aged 51; buried April 12 following,
and was succeeded by his wife's sister, Anne. See Orange, Prince of; Mary,
Queen. Willoughby de Broke, Barony of, created 1492. (name Verney.) Willoughby
of Eresby, Barony of, created 1780. (name Burrell.) Willoughby of Parham,
Barony of, created 1546. (name Willoughby.) Wills are of very high antiquity
(see Genesis, c. 48); Solon introduced them at Athens (see Solon). There are
many regulations respecting wills in the Koran; the Romans had this power, so
had the native Mexicans, of course, it prevailed at least in three parts of the
globe; lands were devisable by will before the Conquest; privilege of making
wills, granted by Henry I. in 1100. Winchcomb monastery, Gloucestersh. founded,
800. Winchelscomb, Gloucestershire. See Storm. Winchelsea, Earldom of, created
1628. (Finch.) Winchelsea old town swallowed up by the sea, 1250; the present
town built in Edward Ist's time; Gray friars monastery built, before Edward
III. castle built by Henry VIII. chartered, 1543. Winchester. The first
cathedral founded by Kingil, king of the West Saxons, who began to reign, 612;
bishopric founded, 636; city burnt, 1102; archdeaconry erected, before 1114;
present cathedral began, about 1073; finished, 1366; college founded, 1387.
Wind guns invented, 1648. Windmills invented, 1299. Window tax established,
1695. See Hearth Money. Windows, of some kind, were glazed, so early as the
third century, if not before, though the fashion was not introduced here, till
by Bennet, 680, nor did it become general, till 1180. See Glass. Winds, their
names given them by Charlemagne, emperor of Germany. Windfor incorporated by 5
Edward I. castle built by Edward III. Wine, the art of making it, brought from
India, by Bacchus; none produced in France in the time of the Romans; sold by
apothecaries as a cordial, 1300; licenses for vending it established, 1661. See
Bacchus. Winefred's, St. well, as ancient as 660. Wingfreld castle, Suffolk,
built, before 1066. Winterton, Irish earldom of, created 1766. (name Turnour.)
Wire invented by Rudolph, of Nuremberg, 1410. Wire mills invented by the
Germans, 1563. Before, it was drawn by Hand. See Iron. Wirtemberg, Earldom of,
erected into a duchy, 1496. Witcherast. Six hundred condemned as wizards, and
most of them burnt, in France, 1609. Grandier, parish priest of Loudun, France,
burnt, on the supposition of having bewitched a whole convent of nuns, 1634.
Twenty old women in Bretagne, France, put to death, for this supposed crime,
1654. Nine old women were burnt at Kalisk, in Poland, charged with having
bewitched, and rendered unfruitful, the lands belonging to a gentleman in that
palatinate, 1775. See Necromancy.
Witham, Essex, built, by Edward the elder, 913. Wizard. See Witchcrast. Woburn
abbey, in Bedfordshire, founded, 1145; town burnt, 1724. Wolsey, the son of a
butcher at Ipswich, being a clergyman, became chaplain and favorite of Henry
VII; appointed minister to Henry VIII. 1513; made archbishop of York, 1514;
cardinal and chancellor, 1515; legate, 1518; indicted for obtaining Bulls from
Rome, without the king's consent, Oct. 9, 1529; the seals taken from him, Oct.
18; stripped of all his places, Nov. following, but pardoned; arrested, for
corresponding with the Pope, at his house in Yorkshire, and died on the road as
they were bringing him to London, Nov. 28, 1530, aged 59. He was the first
clergyman in England that wore silk and gold. Wolsey's college, Ipswich,
founded, 1529. Wolverhampton cathedral founded, 996. Wood cuts (a kind of
engraving), invented by Rust, a German, 1^60. Wood's patent, for coining
halfpence for Ireland and America, granted, Jan. 1723. Woodstock, Oxford, a
royal seat in the days of Alfred. Wool manufactured in England, 1185; not in
any quantity, till 1331, when weaving it was first introduced; manufactory
prohibited in Ireland, School. See Blaize, Burying. Worcester built, 255;
bishopric founded by Ethelred king of Mercia, and taken out of Litchfield, 679;
Edgar's tower uilt, 975; cathedral built, 1055; Archdeaconry erected, 1089;
deanery ditto, 1542. Worcester college, Oxon, founded by Sir Thomas Cooks,
1713. (8 fellows.) Worksop abbey, Notts, built, 1103. Worms, Edict of, by which
Luther was proscribed as a heretic, 1521. Worshipping images first introduced
into England, 763. Writing said to be originally taught to the Latins, by
Europa, daughter of Agenor, king of Phoenicia, 1252 before Christ. Wulfer, king
of Mercia, put two of his sons to death for heresy, 659; succeeded Oswy as 11th
king of Britain, 670; died, 674; buried at Peterborough, and succeeded by his
brother Ethelred, king of Mercia. Wyat, Sir Thomas, executed for rebellion,
1554. Wycombe, Barony of, created 1760. (name Petty.) Wymondham monastery,
Norfolk, founded, 1105.
Y.
YARD. See Ell. Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, incorporated by James I. Yarmouth,
Norfolk, chartered by Henry I. Year books begun in Edward IId's time. Yeomen of
the guards, 50, first instituted, 1486, being the first permanent military band
instituted in England. See Troops. Yew-trees encouraged in churchyards, (as
being fenced from cattle), for the making of bows, 1482. Hence their generality
in churchyards. York, Richard, duke of, father to Edward IV. made protector of
the kingdom, March 27, 1454; took Henry VI. prisoner at St. Albans, 1455;
declared right heir to the crown, 1460; slain at the battle of Wakefield, 1460.
York, The crown restored to the family of, in Edward IV; the houses of York and
Lancaster united in Henry VIII. See Lancaster. York built, 1223 before Christ;
made an archbishopric, about 625; city and cathedral burnt by the Danes, 1069;
deanery, chancellorship, precentership, treasurership, and archdeaconry of the
West Riding erected, about 1090; archdeaconry of the East Riding ditto, about
1130; subdeanery ditto, 1329; monastery founded, 1072; cathedral rebuilt, about
1075; St. Mary's abbey built, 1088; city burnt again, with 39 churches, 1179;
Ouse bridge rebuilt, 1566. York, Archbishop of, who headed a rebellion in the
North, taken and executed, which was the first instance of a clergyman's
suffering by the civil laws, July, 1406. York buildings water company, London,
incorporated, 1691.
Z.
ZANZALEENS, or Jacobites, a sect in Syria, that arose under Zanzale in 535,
and taught, that water baptism is of no efficacy; that it is necessary to be
baptized with fire, and the application of a red hot iron. Zealand, The sea
broke the dykes at, and overflowed large tracts of land, 1530; again 1568, when
almost all Friesland was covered with water, 72 villages overflowed, and above
20,000 person; lost their lives. Zodiac, Signs of, invented by Anaximander.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

