THE ABSOLUTE AND INDISPENSIBLE DUTY OF CHRISTIANS, IN THIS CRITICAL JUNCTURE,
CONSIDERED AND ENFORCED, IN AN AFFECTIONATE ADDRESS.

BY W. MASON.

ARM YOURSELVES, 1 PET. iv. 1. IT IS HIGH TIME, ROMANS xiii. 11. QUIT YOURSELVES
LIKE MEN, BE STRONG, 1 COR, xiii. 9. LONDON: Printed and sold by M. LEWIS, No.
1, Paternoster-Row; J. MATHEWS, in the Strand; and T. FISHER, at Rochester.
1775.

[Price Twopence, or One Shilling and Sixpence per Dozen.]

THE ABSOLUTE AND INDISPENSIBLE DUTY of CHRISTIANS, etc.
BRETHREN and FELLOW CHRISTIANS,
1. SO I would call and love ALL and every one, without the least regard to
name, sect or party, who believe the sacred truths of the bible, hope in the
precious promises of God in Christ, and obey his holy commands in love. This
faith, hope, love and obedience, constitute the true Christian. If any of these
be wanting, the Christian character is desective. The Christian dares no more
to cavil against, and wilfully disobey any one command of God, than he dates to
call in question, any of the sacred truths of God. For faith binds, hope
confirms, and love constrains to universal obedience to God's laws. Therefore,
the Christian esteems his bible as the warrant for his faith, the ground of his
hope, and the rule of his conduct. And there is no one station of life, but the
word of God commands how we should act in it: no one circumstance in life, but
it directs how we should behave under it. Therefore, obedience to the revealed
will of God, and a concern for his glory, is, and ever will be, esteemed by all
Christians, the primary and chief object of their attention and regard.

2. To such, I would humbly address some few words, respecting their conduct in
the present day, when the voice of the multitude is heard on high, crying out
for LIBERTY. Upon you, O Christians, would I call, in scripture language, ARM
YOURSELVES -- IT IS HIGH TIME -- QUIT YOURSELVES LIKE MEN.

Arm yourselves, in your own defense, with the word of truth and righteousness,
on the right ^and and on the left, so as not to sin against your God. Arm
yourselves, with the same mind which that word requires of you, and expects
from you, so as to obey and please God. It is high time, when the voice of
licentiousness is heard, and a liberty to violate the precepts of your God
abounds, for you to be zealous for his glory, and to beware, lest you follow
the multitude to do evil. Quit yourselves like men, who fear God, and act under
the influence of his holy commands.

3. Would you exercise yourselves, to have a conscience void of offense, both
toward God and man, respecting your conduct in the present day? beware of your
spirit and temper. See that both be under the rule and direction of God's word.
It is at our peril to disobey the plain, positive, and express commands of our
God. The bible is our best rule in politics. No other scheme of politics shall
I presume to meddle with or recommend. That teaches, that requires us to be
religious politicians, so as at all times, in all places, and under all
circumstances, from obedient hearts to our God, with loyalty and affection to
his Majesty, to shout with united voices, GOD SAVE THE KING! This is the spirit
and temper which the bible inspires.

4. Consider, our love of, and loyalty to our King, arises from the
consideration that God has set him over us. Love and loyalty to him, are not
imposed on us by the authority of fallible men only, but chiefly, from the
positive commands of our Almighty God. Therefore, love and loyalty to the King,
is our absolute and indispensible duty. And a spirit and temper contrary to
this, is not only inconsistent with the faith of a Christian, but also a
violation of the express commands of our God. Had I not seen and heard, with
deep concern, and heart felt sorrow, such a spirit and temper exalted in those
whom I love, and from whom I hoped better things, I should have been silent on
this subject, and not have troubled you with this ADDRESS. But, seeing things
are so, is there not a cause? bear with me in love, I befeech you. Be not
offended with me, I pray you. I would willingly offend no one. I desire to
follow peace with all men. But, duty to my God, allegiance to my King, and a
real concern for your good, unitedly constrain me thus to address, and
earnestly entreat you, calmly to consider what is required of us, what is
expected from us, as our duty, both in respect to our GOD, and our KING. I am
inclined to think, and willing to hope, that the failing of Christians herein,
arises from want of due consideration, and close attention to the express
commands of God in his holy word. For, we are most solemnly enjoined,

To honor the King.
To pray for the King.
To be subject to the King.
5. Let us, therefore, my fellow christians, as in the presence of God, before
whom we must shortly appear, and to whom we must all account, Consider these
points.

1st, HONOR THE KING, 1 Pet. ii. 17. As this command stands closely connected
with another, FEAR GOD, does it not therefore instantly strike our minds with
this idea? if we fear God we shall honor the King: If the King is not honored
of us, God is not feared by us. There is a close and inseparable connection
between these commands. Both are enforced under the sanction of the same
authority, the word of God. If we are influenced by the former, we shall obey
the latter. What God has joined together, let no man dare to put asunder.

6. But who was King when this command was given to the primitive Christians to
honor him? Even NERO, that wicked tyrant, that cruel persecutor, that
inveterate enemy to Christians. What! honor such a wretch! Did you ever hear
or read of such an objection, from the mouth of any one of the primitive
Christians? Can you produce one single instance, of any one of the apostles, or
first Christians, speaking evil of dignities, or refusing to honor them,
however cruelly they were treated by them? Nay, was it not their constant
doctrine and practice, Render honor to whom honor is due? Romans xiii. 7.
Therefore, this command to honor such a King as Nero was, is a blow at the
heart, a stab to the vitals, a deathwound to every objection against obeying
this command, "Honor the King."

7. But, be the King what he may, our duty to God is the same. Think of him as
you please, yet this dissolves not your obligation to obey God's command. God
has not sent an angel to reign over us, but a man of like passions with
ourselves. I love and honor the King for his princely virtues and amiable
qualities. It is neither your duty nor mine to think, speak, or hear of any
faults he may be accused, lest we get disaffected to him. Let us look at home,
mend our own, and we shall be much better employed. For it is adding to the
number of our sins, to disobey God, by not honoring the King. Let us,
therefore, do our duty, obey God's command, honor our King, and so shall we
please our God. Let us think well, and speak well of him asone whom God has
chosen, exalted, and set over us. For, he says, "By ME kings reign." Prove.
viii. 15. Consider that word.

8. When the apostle exhorts, "Children obey your parents," he adds, in the
Lord. Ephesians. vi. 1. As it is the mind and will of the Lord, the command of the
Lord, well pleasing in his sight, and makes for his glory, therefore should be
done for his sake. So let us honor the King in the Lord. Obey our Lord, by
honoring the King, as it is his mind and will, is his command, is well
pleasing in his sight, is to his glory, and should be done for the Lord's sake.
So Peter exhorts, "Submit to the King for the Lord's sake." 1 Pet. ii. 13. This
is to honor the King in faith, as believing him to be set over us in the Lord.
And this faith works by love, and will lead us to honor the King in love.

9. Love, covers the multitude of faults. Love thinks no evil, speaks no
evil, hears no evil against the King. Love puts the best constructions upon
the behavior, hides faults with its vail, and casts a mantle of kindness over
failings. Like the painter (I think Apelles) who drew the picture of Alexander
with his finger upon the scar on his face: so love has a finger to hide scars
and blemishes, and cover failings and infirmities. Does the Lord command us,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself? What love then is due from us to our
King? such love as will carry out our affections toward him, so as that we
shall think no ill, speak no ill, hear no ill against him, and totally
disregard all disloyal reports concerning him. Love will restrain us from doing
any thing to grieve his royal heart, or cause the crown to sit heavy on his
sacred head. Yea, love will make us active in doing every thing in our power to
honor the King, consistent with the duty we owe him, the allegiance we are
bound in to him, and the honor we are commended by our God to give him. Vain
and specious only, are all professions of love, honor and reverence to the
King, while we entertain groundless suspicions of him, and pursue such steps as
tend to disturb his peace, or perplex his government. But the enquiry of an
obedient heart to our God, and of a loving loyal heart to our King, will be,
what shall be done to the man whom the KING OF KINGS delights to honor? our
duty, as Christians, binds us, our love, as Christians, constrains us thus to
honor our King. And, therefore, of you, my brethren and fellow christians, may
I not in the apostle's words demand? show me your faith by your works. Make it
manifest that you do believe in God, by your obedience to this his sacred
command, HONOR THE KING. If you do, you will,

10. Secondly, Pray for the King. We are solemnly enjoined, by God's sacred
word, to pray for Kings, and for all who are in authority. 1 Timothy ii. 2. This I
am positively sure of, were there more praying for the King, there would be
less evil speaking against the King: and were there more faith in God's word,
there would be more obedience to his will and command, in more cordially
honoring, and heartily praying for the King. In doing this, we not only obey
God's word, but we honor THE KING OF KINGS, by carrying our King's cause,
presenting his person and interest, and the concerns of his kingdom at the
throne of God's grace, referring all these matters to him, seeking every
blessing and direction from him, and leaving all events with him. O this
praying for the King, would not only expel the rancorous seeds of rebellion,
which are so rife in our corrupt natures; but would also, more heartily
conciliate our affections to the King, and heighten our esteem of him. There is
a mighty power in prayer, to charm away all evil thoughts of the person we pray
for, and to beget love to him, and esteem of him. All who try the experiment,
prove the truth of the doctrine. Do not you neglect it.

11. But, adds the apostle, as a cogent reason for this duty, -- "That we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For, this is good
and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior." 1 Timothy ii. 2. 3. I am not
addressing those who live in the total neglect of prayer. It is not to be
expected, that those who do not pray for themselves, will either pray for the
king, or any one else. From such, I expect nothing but the contemptuous sneer,
and the indignant frown, for all I have said upon the christian's duty. This I
can bear. Such I can pity. Because, they see not their own mercies, but slight
and despise God's sacred truths, and solemn commands. Yet, even such I should
be sorry, designedly to offend. But, it is YOU, my fellow christians, to whom I
appeal: YOU, who love and delight to do that which is good and acceptable in
the sight of God our Savior, and desire to lead a quiet and peaceable life, in
all godliness and honesty. YOU, cannot but see, how closely connected your duty
of praying for the king, and for all in authority is, with the enjoyment of
these great blessings and precious mercies, quietness, peace, godliness, and
honesty. Whence, those tumults, discords, distractions, disaffection to
government, ungodliness and dishonesty, which are so displeasing to God our
Savior? do they not subsist, and will they not increase among us, while the
duty of praying for the king, and for all in authority, is neglected by us?
But, the man of prayer, will pray them away from his heart, and will live them
down in his life. For all such, will,

12. Thirdly, Submit to the king. For, we are commanded, "Let every soul be
subject unto the higher powers." Romans xiii. 1. Here is a positive, and
comprehensive precept. No one can plead exemption from it. It is enforced with
the most powerful reason, why every one should obey it. -- "For, there is no
power, but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God." And this precept
is backed with a most severe threatening. -- "Whosoever, therefore, resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they who resist shall receive to
themselves DAMNATION." Pray, now, do not rise in anger, rebel in wrath, and cry
out in fury, "I cannot bear this; away with it, this is the obsolete, long
since exploded doctrine, of passive obedience and non-resistance, which neither
we, nor our forefathers couldbear!" Baptize it by what hard name you please:
call it, scandalum magnatum if you will; Still, this will not destroy its
divine authority, dissolve your obligation to obey it, nor reverse the sentence
of wrath denounced against those who disobey it.

13. As to passive obedience, and non-resistance, as a mere human doctrine,
taught and contended for by any man, I know nothing about it. I never read one
page of human composition for, or against it, nor do I think, ever shall. But,
if you please, this divine precept, shall pass under your title, passive
obedience and non-resistance. Is there any thing so very formidable, so very
dreadful to a christian's ear, or a christian's heart, to be passively obedient
to God's holy word, to be non-resistant to all his sacred commands? Why, then,
this tragical outcry, against submission to the king, subjection to the higher
powers? Sure I am, it carries this sanction from the mouths and pens of all
God's holy prophets and apostles, SO WE TAUGHT. It bears this impress from the
tongues of all primitive christians, AND SO WE BELIEVED. And, it is enjoined
us, by the most powerful, most endearing, and most engaging motive -- "Submit
yourselves to every ordinance of man, whether it be to the King as Supreme: Or
unto governors which are sent by him for -- THE LORD'S SAKE." 1 Pet. ii. 13. 14.

14. For the Lord's sake. Christians, how do your hearts feel, at the urging
this plea, and advancing this motive, for your submission to the King, and
subjection to the higher powers? can you resist it? dare you reject it? where
then is your faith in, and love to your Lord? you are called to a duty, which
however irksome to flesh and blood, however contrary to human pride and carnal
reasonings, however opposed by men of corrupt minds, who know not God, and
reject his revealed word; yet to YOU it comes enforced with this most solemn,
this most prevailing reason, for, THE LORD'S SAKE: As though the apostle had
said, for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ, whom you believe in as your
Savior, who taught you to render unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's,
for the honor of the profession you make of him, by the obedience you owe to
him, for the sake of the glory you are bound to give him, for the hope you have
in him, the expectation you have from him, and, as you will answer it at the
last day, when you shall be judged by him, act agreeable to your character, as
bearing his name, and be obedient to his laws, by submitting yourselves unto
the King for his sake, and being subject unto the higher powers, for the honor
and glory of him.

15. Surely, you will not evade the force of this, and object and say, as a
deep sighted politician, and self-denying christian, once did, when I was
urging this doctrine: "True, the first christians, were in an infantile state,
few in number, and weak in power, therefore, for them to be thus subject, and
submit themselves, was wise and politic; but, now the case is altered: As we
have power and strength sufficient to right ourselves, we ought to use them in
our own cause." I admire his cunning, while I marvel how any who profess to be
Christians, and to believe the bible, can reason thus. A small interpolation
would just adapt the ancient scripture to his modern taste: for, when Paul
says, "Let every soul be subject to the higher powers," it is only to add,
until they have sufficient power to resist them, and cast off submission to
them. Is not this to trifle with the sosolemn, invariable commands of a holy,
jealous, sin-avenging God? Who that fears God, would dare act thus by the 5th
commandment, and cast off all duty to his parents, because he is of years to
help himself?

16. But, the apostle adds, "Wherefore, ye must needs be subject, not only for
wrath, but also for conscience sake." Romans xiii. 6. That adage, "conscience
makes cowards of us all," in some sortholds good inrespect to the Christian's
conduct: Conscience makes the Christian a coward in any service which is
contrary to the will and commands of his God. But, a good conscience toward
God, inspires him with the truest courage, the greatest fortitude, and the
boldest magnanimity in his service. Therefore the Christian cannot, dare not
commence a traitor to his King, and a rebel against his government, for he
knows he would thereby subject himself to the wrath of the higher powers, and
expose himself to the punishment of the wholesome and penal laws enacted
against such conduct. But, besides this fear of wrath, he has a higher and more
noble principle, from which he acts, in submitting to his King, and being
subject to the higher powers, even for conscience sake; conscience toward God.
To honor and obey the King, to pray for him, to submit to him, and to be
subject to the higher powers under him, all this to the Christian is a
conscientious matter. Therefore he must needs be subject. The peace of his
conscience is at stake. To act contrary to God's will, would not only deprive
him of God's peace in his conscience, but bring the sense of guilt, the fear of
wrath, and the terror of condemnation upon him. See then, the close connection
there is, between obeying the will of God, in submitting to the King, and
enjoying peace of conscience from God.

17. Now, here we see what is true patriotism, Bible, Christian patriotism. A
true patriot fears God, and is obedient to his commands: He honors the King,
prays for the King, and submits to the King, not only for fear of wrath, but
also for conscience sake; conscience toward God. Because, this is the command
and will of God. All such are true patriots, real lovers of their country, and
all such are worthy of reverence and honor. But all patriotism without this,
is mere farce and specious pretense: Bombast, great swelling words of vanity,
by which they allure, says St. Peter. 2 Pet. ii. 18. Such patriotism is begun
without principle, is carried on without the fear of God, and will end in shame
and confusion. To talk of such being true patriots, real lovers of their
country, who do not fear God and honor the King, but are open enemies to God,
by wicked works, reminds us of Satan transforming himself into an angel of
light.

18. As our bible gives us the character of true patriots, real lovers of their
country, so it also laysdown a full description of mock, and pretended ones,
that we may beware of them, be armed against them, and not be beguiled by them.
Says St. Peter, "They walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness," and
despise government, presumptuous are they, and self-willed. They are not afraid
to speak evil of dignities. -- While they promise them liberty, they themselves
are the servants of corruption. 2 Pet. 10. -- 19. With this St. Jude agrees. He
scruples not to call them, filthy dreamers, who defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Jude 8. Fine patriots! Fine lovers of
their country are such! Should such persons stand forth, and assume the name of
patriots, and, with the foul breath of slander, strive to incense and inflame
the minds of his Majesty's subjects against him, it is high time to be on our
guard: To arm ourselves with the word of God against their nefarious designs;
and to quit ourselves like men, like Christians who fear God, and honor the
King. It is our wisdom not to be beguiled by them. It is our duty to beware of
them, lest we catch the infectious, the wide spreading poison from them, of
despising dominion, and speaking evil of dignities. For, this is equally as
contrary to the word of God, as greatly displeasing to God, and as highly
unbecoming us as Christians, as any of the other sins enumerated.

19. Talk they of liberty! O, ye sons of liberty, ye warm contenders for
freedom, I join hand and heart with you, carry your cause as high as you will,
and extend it as far as you please, only, let it be bounded by this sacred
barrier, the law of God, and a good conscience. Beyond this, what Christian
dare go? for, all beyond this, is not Christian liberty, but lawless
licentiousness: from which we ought most heartily to pray, Good Lord, deliver
us! And may he give us grace to obey the King cheerfully and willingly, for
conscience sake; that, neither our sinful passions nor our private interests
may disappoint his cares for the public good. May he possess the hearts of his
people, that they may never be wanting in honor to his person, and dutiful
submission to his authority. And, seeing the commands of, fear God, honor the
King, are so closely joined, and so inseparably connected, therefore, while
with a holy fear of God, and with exultation of heart in him, we shout with the
people of old, "THE LORD HE IS THE GOD. THE LORD HE IS THE GOD," May we add
with the same breath, in loyalty and affection, GOD SAVE THE KING! GOD SAVE THE
KING! and let all the people say, AMEN.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE present prospect of our affairs, is truly melancholy, affecting and
alarming. Does not this call loudly upon us to obey this command of God? "Let
all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put
away from you, with all malice, and be ye kind to one another, tender hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven you," Ephesians.
iv. 31, 32. Ah, my brethren! sure I am, this would be more pleasing to our God
and Savior, than all that unchristian, party strife, and fiery contention
about politics, which so unhappily prevails among us. Surely, instead of
imputing our troubles to this, and the other cause, it rather behooves us to
consider our sins, mourn over our sins, humble ourselves under the mighty hand
of God for our sins, and forsake our sins, which are so highly provoking to
God, for which he has a controversy with us, and which are the real ground of
our national calamities, and the true cause of all our present distresses. "The
Lord's voice cries unto the city, -- hear ye the rod and who has appointed
it," Micah vi. 9.

It is devoutly to bewished, that a day may be set apart by authority, for a
general fast, in which we might unitedly humble ourselves before God, turn to
him, and seek him with our whole hearts, confess and bewail our sins in his
sight, cry mightily unto him to avert impending, deserved judgments from us,
direct to some speedy method of abolishing the present unhappy differences
between us and our colonies, so as to prevent the farther effusion of blood,
the dire ravages of war, and conciliate, not only, all matters in dispute
between us, but also our hearty affection to each other. O how earnestly is
this to be coveted! Is any thing too hard for the Lord? No; therefore in the
faith of this, we ought constantly, and fervently to pray for the
accomplishment of this happy event. "For, who knows, if the Lord will return
and repent, and leave a blessing behind him?" Joel ii. 14.

FINIS.

