THE ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, AND THE INEQUALITY
OF THE LAND TAX, CONSIDERED CONJOINTLY.

BY J. BRAND, Cl. M. A.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. EVANS, NO. 32, PATERNOSTER-ROW.

M.DCC.XCIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Tract is part of a general Essay on the Change of the Representation of
the People, so much agitated of late. The whole was designed, at first, not to
have been extended beyond the limits of a short pamphlet: but, as I advanced, I
found that it would so much exceed those bounds, that the Publication must have
been delayed, until the chance of its utility (if it would have possessed any)
would have been nearly lost. I have therefore considered one great division of
the subject only, retaining so much of the general matter as may serve for an
introduction to it; and one purpose of this Advertisement is, to account for
the appearance that this Tract carries, of being a detached part only of a
subject of considerable extent.

Some Abbreviations, which are made use of in this Work, are here explained.
They are chiefly of the titles of books quoted.

Davenant. -- Whitworth's Davenant, Edition, 1781.

Smith. -- Dr. Adam Smith, on the Wealth of Nations, edit. 3d, 8vo. 1784.

Chalmers. -- Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Great Britain, etc. by
George Chalmers, 4to. 1782.

Sinclair. -- Sir John Sinclair's History of the Public Revenue, 4to. second
edit. 1790.

Lock. -- Locke's Works, folio edition, 1722.

ms. -- These letters following any number, denote the integer part thereof to
be millions: thus 8 ms. is to be read 8 millions; and 8^253 ms. either
decimally, as 8 millions 253 thousandths, or as an integer, 8,253,000. This
abbreviation has been adopted, because, in such great numbers, the last three
places of figures have not been calculated, as being absolutely unimportant in
the present subject.

THE ALTERATION, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
A MEASURE of such importance as an alteration of the constitution of the Third
Estate, certainly requires to be examined in every point of view, before it be
carried into execution. It may be considered as to its general or local
consequence: the first as affecting the whole kingdom; the second, the larger
district of it.

It will affect the kingdom in general, by producing a change in the present
proportion of power, in the executive and legislative departments of the State.
For its advocates hold out, that it will diminish considerably that possessed
by the Crown, and at the same time reduce that of the Peers; while the strength
of the popular branch of the Legislature is to receive some considerable
increase. It is not (that I know of) so much as pretended, that the effective
powers of the King, and the House of Lords, are to be decreased in the same
proportion: it seems on the contrary, that the greater cession is to be
demanded of the Crown. Hence the power of the Upper House will become
relatively greater, compared with that of the Sovereign; and relatively much
less, compared with the increased power of the Commons; or a total change will
take place, in the present proportion of power of the three Estates.

The effect of this change upon the whole kingdom, taken as a whole, I do not
intend at present to enter into; but to examine its consequences to a
particular district of great magnitude and importance, the southern and eastern
counties; and solely with respect to the tax upon land.

This part of the kingdom comprehends the counties of Middlesex, Surry,
Hertford, Bedford, Cambridge, Kent, Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, Berks, Buckingham,
and Oxford. With respect to the metropolis, these may be called the home
district or counties; and the remainder of England and Wales, the remote
district or division.

To the former of these districts, I consider the present proposed alteration
of the constitution of the Lower House, as a measure attended with great
danger: because, as near as its termination is, it is not very probable that
the present century will elapse, or at least be long elapsed, before the amount
of the land tax will be augmented: and though the representatives of the landed
property of the remote district, have now a very considerable majority, over
those of the home counties in the Lower House; yet, by the most sober plans of
this alteration which I have seen, it will in future be doubled. Now the
burden of the tax on the latter, is much greater than that on the former; and
thus all relief to this great existing disproportion, will be rendered
impossible; the present assessment will be made the basis of the additions to
the charges of this tax which must in future take place: and the difference of
the actual and proportional payment of the remote district, already very great,
will receive a further augmentation. Now (all consideration of the metropolis
being constantly left out of the question) the direct consequence of this must
be, that the superior celerity with which the remote district has been
advancing in opulence, during the course of the present century (aided, beside
its natural advantages, by the existing inequality of the land tax) will become
greater by a second artificial acceleration, which will arise from this second
defalcation of their payment to the public charge: and the relative decline of
the home district, will be precipitated in the same degree.

One consequence of this may be here laid down: it directly follows from a
supposition of its truth, that, if it should be granted that a change of
constitution of the House of Commons is otherwise expedient (a supposition
which, though not attacked here, is not to be taken as hereby admitted) still
it ought not to take place, until its dangerous consequences be guarded
against! which are, not only that of perpetuating an old system of the grossest
inequality of the public burdens of the two divisions of the kingdom; but also
that of aggravating its oppressive disparity by new augmentations. This must be
guarded against, previous to intrusting the remote counties with double their
present majority of members in the House of Commons: until that be done, a
prudential justice, a regard for a fair equality, if these things have any
existence more than in name, demand the measure to be postponed. And hence it
follows, not only that the present is not the proper season to effect this
alteration; but that such a period has not yet occurred since the Revolution;
and that it is a happy circumstance, that no attempt to carry it into execution
has hitherto succeeded. This is the legitimate consequence of the argument, the
summary of which is laid down above: its several branches are now to be entered
into, particularly and separately.

But it has often been urged by the inhabitants of the remote district, that
the expediency and justice of the continuation of the present assessment, have
been established upon good and solid reasons: and they may be inclined to
allege, that this argument ought to be treated as a dilatory plea only,
against a necessary reform: and that the bringing it forward at this juncture,
points out the propriety of carrying this great constitutional measure into
immediate execution, even for the quiet of the home division; who, when they
see the absolute impossibility of succeeding in their unjust and impolitic
pretensions, will silently abandon them: and the imaginary grievance, the real
discontent it has always fostered, and all their chimerical expectations, will
sink into oblivion together. As the general argument may thus be attempted to
be answered; this objection, and the consequences drawn from it, will be
anticipated by treating the subject in the following order.

1st. An account will be given of the cause of the inequality of this taxation.

2d. The arguments in favor of its continuance will be all stated; and such as
do not find a more natural place under a following head, will be here answered.

3d. The circumstances will be laid down which tend to prove, that the amount
of the Land Tax must be increased.

4th. The measure of the disproportion of the charge upon the two districts,
will be determined; and its effect assigned.

5th. The number of county members, to be added to those of the home and remote
divisions, will be shown; according to the plans of this change, brought
forward in 1785 and 1790: and thence the great addition of power which would be
so acquired by the remote district, in the Lower House, will be proved. These
discussions will necessarily lead to a variety of arithmetical operations: the
data on which they are founded, the circumstances affecting their authority,
and the processes themselves, will all be referred to the Appendix: the results
only of these operations will be noticed in each Section; to preserve the
history or train of reasoning in it, clear and uninterruped by arithmetical
operations; which, however necessary on the subject, produce nearly the same
effect, mixed with arguments of the former kind, as digressions to collateral,
or even to foreign matter. Davenant, vol. 1. p. 47.


What is to be said on each of these heads, will be the subject of a separate
Section.

SECTION I. On the Cause of the Inequality of the Land Tax.
THE origin of the disproportion of the charge of the modern Land Tax upon the
home and remote district, is to be sound in a very early period of our history;
when the south-west counties were exposed to the descents of the French, and
the western and northern, to the predatory incursions of the Welsh and Scotch.
These hostilities exposed them to frequent and considerable losses; and they
could contribute very little to the charge of the general defense, after they
had provided for their own. Hence it appears, in the old accounts of the
Exchequer, that the northern and western counties were always favored in their
charge to the ancient subsidies. And during the reign of Mary the First, the
whole counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmoreland, the towns of
Berwick and Newcastle, and the Bishopric of Durham, were exempted from the
payment of these grants, on account of their vicinity to the Scotch. Sinclair,
part 1. page 122.


In the 17th and 18th of Charles the First an assessment of L 400,000 was
levied upon Land, according to the proportion of the old subsidies Davenant,
vol. 1. p. 48.
. During the civil war, the Excise had been the great resource of the
Parliament: but when the royal party was subdued, a Land Tax by monthly
assessments was extended over the whole kingdom Ibid. p. 34.
; the proportions of the old subsidies were adhered to as before Ibid, p. 48.
. It has been generally said, that, by these assesments, the heaviest charges
fell upon such districts as had formed associations in defense of Parliament:
and this has been supposed to be the origin of the inequality of the modern
Land Tax: but most counties in England having been at some time or other
associated during the war, and by ordinances of the Lords and Commons at
Westminster, Ibid, p. 34.
this supposition must be given up.

One cause of continuing the former proportions of this charge, was, that while
the remote district had been much harrassed by the hostile armies of both
parties, the home counties, better covered by the forces of the Parliament, had
enjoyed a greater degree of security. Hence arose a necessity of some temporary
indulgence to the former; which was very commodiously, but perhaps not very
politically conferred upon them, by continuing the old proportion of taxation.
Ibid, p. 34.
This mode of raising money by monthly assessments, formed part of the constant
revenue of the State, until the Restoration: the remote counties however were
indebted for this indulgence, in some measure, to the number and vigilance of
the members they returned to the House, as well as to the consideration of their
past sufferings Davenant, vol. 1. p. 34.
.

These assessments were the basis, on which the payments of the several parts
of the kingdom to the modern Land Tax were determined; and to which they are
"exactly" Ibid. p. 48.
proportioned. This fact, for which we have cotemporary testimony, is in part
the source of the popular error on this subject. Thus the disproportion of the
assessments of the commonwealth was the proximate, and that of the old
subsidies the remote, cause of the present inequality of the Land Tax.

The plan of converting the monthly assessments upon land, into a pound rate,
was first brought forward in that singular Convention, which received the name
of Praise-God Barebones Parliament. They resolved that the supply for the
maintenance of the army should be so raised; but the assessment was broken up,
before that resolution received the form of an ordinance or law Ludlow's
Memoirs, vol. 2. p. 472. Vivay in Switzerland, School.
. That this new system either was then, or afterward became popular, is
evident from its being carried into execution, the first year after the
Revolution; for new schemes for raising money, which had not acquired an
antecedent popularity, would not at such a time have been embraced. Two
supplies by a tax on land were granted in that year; the first at one shilling,
and the second at two shillings, in the pound. Their aggregate produce was
L1,566,627: and at four shillings in the pound, the sum collected would have
been L2,088,836. The real produce of the tax at that rate in the year 1693, was
L1,977,713 Davenant, vol. 1. p. 278.
. There appears therefore to have been a deficiency of L111,123 in the latter
payment, which is thus accounted for: to the first, the inhabitants of the home
district had assessed themselves more nearly to the true value of their
estates: they afterward " Davenant, vol. 1. p. 278.
learned of their neighbors, to favor themselves in the levying of this tax."
If any species of fraud admitted of defense, it might be said, that they did
not sufficiently profit of the example they had before them.

The assessment of 1693 continues, with very little change, to be the standard
of the present time: though a certain part of this reduced amount has been
rendered only nominal, in a very singular manner, by the subsequent extension
of the tax to salaries and fees of office; which was certainly intended to
produce an augmentation of the revenue: its effect has however been contrary;
for the entire salary is paid out of the Exchequer Molesworth, sixth Report of
Commissioners, vol. 1. p. 115.
; and the tax on each officer goes in aid of the sum, at which the place where
he resides was before assessed; a relief where probably it is not wanted. Thus
this tax is in no case an increase of the income of the public; and in some
instances it actually diminishes it; for when the salary is small, the officer
is repaid out of the receipts of his own department Sinclair, Part the third,
p. 168.
: thus the Treasury pays part of the tax of all those places, where officers
with small salaries reside; and the neat revenue of the State becomes actually
diminished. What the loss thus generated may amount to, I am unable to assign:
the effective payment of every county will therefore be taken constantly to be
the same as in the year 1693.

When this inequality originally took place, several reasonings were made use
of in defense of it, but of unequal validity. It was urged, that the owners of
land in the remote district, could not pay an equal sum in the pound out of
their rents; because their returns and markets were not so quick; and they
tasted not that benefit of trade and greatness of London, in the same degree as
the home counties. Davenant, vol. 1. p. 61.
It may very well be granted that, at the imposition of the Land Tax, the
production of a farm of 100 acres in the remote district, sold for less money,
than that of another of an equal size in the home division; in consequence of
which, the rent of the latter was greater then that of the former; and
therefore that an equal tax could not equitably be imposed upon equal
quantities of land in each: but it by no means follows, that from equal rents,
equally well paid, (which is for the present to be supposed) equal sums ought
not to be contributed to the public charge; whatever the local circumstances,
or the natural properties of the soil out of which they result, may be. For
there is the same reason to admit a deduction upon account of one of these
accidents inseparably attached to the estate, as upon account of the other. The
landlord who derives an income of L.100 a year, from a farm with a good soil,
situated near an inferior market, is in the same circumstances with respect to
his ability to pay taxes, as another who receives the same rent from a farm,
containing the same number of acres; whose soil is inferior, but which is
situated in the vicinity of a good market: and if the latter were to plead for
an abatement of a tax, confessedly proportioned to his income, because it was
derived from a tract of sandy country, we should smile at such a plea, on such
an occasion.

But another argument was urged, at the time of the imposition of the land tax,
in defense of the original disproportion of the charge upon the two districts;
which, if the fact it rests upon be admitted, proves beyond dispute, that the
remote district stood then in need of considerable relief in some shape or
other: and that fact is established upon the fullest evidence. The landlords of
the remote district alleged, that they were not able to pay the same pound
rate, because their rents were not so well paid: Davenant, vol. 1. p. 61.
that is, losses of rent were more common among them, than in the home
division. Davenant, from whom this is extracted, when writing in favor of the
equalization of the tax, gives this as part of the plea of the remote district;
and does not dispute the fact. This tacit admission of it is a kind of
historical evidence in its favor. He also informs us, that in the year 1665 it
was evident that money was scarce in the northern and western counties;
Davenant, vol. 1. p. 61.
a circumstance which must have caused many delays and failures, in the payment
of rent; and it will be seen presently, that the relative depression of the
landed interest in those parts of the kingdom, had increased between that time
and the Revolution. That failures in the payment of rent were then frequent in
the western counties particularly, and that the farmers were in great distress
there, seems apparent from the testimony of Mr. Lock. Lock, vol. 1. p. 13.
Considerations on Interest. This essay was written about the year 1672, and
published in 1691; as appears from the letter prefixed to it: in the latter
year it received some enlargements. The passage relates to one of the two
years; and in either case, it is applicable to one of the two statements here
given.


But these accounts perhaps, without more substantial support, would not be
sufficient at this time absolutely to confirm the fact, on which the remote
district then claimed the indulgence of the State: and we might be inclined to
detract something from their credit, upon account of that degree of doubt, with
which such complaints ought in general to be received: but it is proved from
the price of estates in 1666, that the rents were then very badly paid in the
remote district: and on the same evidence it is to be shown, that from that
year the security of payment to the landlord, was relatively more and more
declining until 1688; as appears from the increasing ratio of disparity of the
value of equal incomes, and the increasing difference of the interest of money
made by purchases in the two districts, at each of those terms.

In the year 1666, the mean value of land, in the home district, was 19 years
purchase; Between 18 and 20 years. Davenant, v. 1. p. 359.
or an estate of L.526: 6 s. a year, was in value L.10,000; and the interest of
money made by such purchase, was L.5^2631 per cent.

The mean value of land, in the remote district, was at the same time 15 years
purchase; Ibid. between 14 and 16 years.
and the price of an estate of equal rent, L.7894: 14 s. and the interest of
the purchase money, L.6^6666 per cent.

Hence the proportion of the values of two estates, of equal rents, in the two
districts, was at that time as 10,000 to 7894; the difference of their selling
prices, 4 years purchase, or L.2105; and the difference of the interest of the
purchase-money, L1^4035 per cent.

Nothing but a general and great insecurity in the payment of rents, could have
caused such important differences, or raised the interest, made by purchasing
land, above the legal rate on private securities; for the rent of land is the
most favorite species of income. Now to those who then bought estates with an
intention to reside upon them, if the rents had been equally well paid, L.526 a
year, in the further district, must have been of much greater real value than
the same sum in the home division, on account of the cheapness of markets. The
situation would likewise have been recommended by another circumstance: the
strength of the royal party laid here; and if we consider their character as
contradistinguished to that of their opponents, those who were desirous of
mixing with a country life, the pleasures of the liveliest society it affords,
would certainly have thought this district, at least, as eligible as the other.
The fashion for men of fortune to throng to the capital, was even then greatly
increased, though not nearly so prevalent as it now is; and they had found the
means of remitting their rents thither. The receivers of the land tax, in the
remote counties, formerly justified keeping large balances in their hands, upon
account of "the difficulty of procuring remittances from London:" but, at the
same time, the collectors of the Excise found no difficulty in procuring bills,
and could have remitted more money by the same method; the length of their term
of payment, varrying with the distance of the place. Molesworth's Reports of
the Commissioners, v. 1. p. 11, 12. This pretended difficulty is the occasion
of the remark in the text: the remote district had already made some
considerable advances, to rival the home division in its foreign commerce; and
paper credit, before the Revolution, was very extensive, as will be seen
further on; very little difficulty, therefore, could have existed on this head.
In this respect an income from one part of the kingdom was nearly as
convenient as from another. On the whole of these circumstances, it appears,
that equal rents, equally secure, should at least, at this period, have been of
equal value in the two divisions; and that nothing but a great hazard of
failure of payment, could have been the cause of the difference stated above.
For there was at that time, in the home district, a greater plenty of money
than securities; Davenant, v. 1. p. 359.
and if it had not been for this reason, it would have found its way to the
market where the best income was to be obtained for it; that is, where the
interest, by purchase of land, exceeded the legal rate on private loans, by per
cent. It was seen before, that in the year 1665, money was very scarce in the
northern and western counties: Davenant, vol. 1. p. 359.
and here it is shown, that, in the remainder of the kingdom, there was more
than could be employed.

At the Revolution, the average price of land, in the home counties, was 26
years purchase; Between 26 and 27 years. Ibid. vol. 1. p. 361.
and the interest of money so made, L.3^7735 per cent. Hence the value of an
estate of L.377: 7 s. a year, was L.10,000 in the remote district; the value of
land was 17 years purchase; Between 17 and 18 years. Ibid.
the interest made by money so employed, was L.5^7142 per cent. and the value
of an estate of L.377: 7 s. was L.6603: 14 s. This rapid rise (7 years
purchase, in 22 years) was caused by a singular fall of the rate of interest,
which will be further noticed below.

If the security of the payment of rent, in the remote district, had not
decreased from 1666 to 1688, the value of an estate, the price of which, in the
home counties, was in the latter year L.10,000, would, in the remainder of the
kingdom, have continued to be L.7894: 14 s. It had fallen to L.6603: 14 s.
therefore the increasing insecurity of the rents of that part of the country,
had diminished the value of landed perpetuities in the proportion of 7894^7, to
6603^7; or in that of 10,000 to 8364.

The increase of the insecurity of the landed income, in the rest of the
kingdom, may be exhibited in another point of view; by assigning the proportion
of its effect to sink the price of estates, to that of the cotemporary fall of
interest, intimated above, to raise them. If the hazard of the payment of rent,
in both districts, had been the same in the second town as in the first, the
increase of the year's purchase, in each, would have been proportioned: hence,
in the same time that the value of the land of the home counties, increased
from 19 to 26 years purchase, in the remote counties it would have been
augmented, in like manner, from 15 to (20.921) 21 years purchase. On the other
hand, if the insecurity of the payment of rent had increased in the same
proportion as the rate of interest fell, or the year's purchase of the landed
income rose, whose degree of security was constant, which is here taken as
having been the fact in the home counties; then the number of years purchase
would have remained fixed; or fifteen times the rent have been the value of
land in the remote district in 1666 and 1688. Again, which is a third case, if
the hazard had increased, but with less celerity than the rate of interest
fell, the value of land would have been somewhere between the two limits of 21
and 15 years purchase; whose difference is six years. Now in effect this case
obtained, these lands had risen to be in value 17 years purchase, exhibiting an
increase of 2 years: it has been proved, that the undiminished effect of the
fall of interest, would have increased their value by 6 years purchase: a part
of its efficacy, therefore, and which would (if it had operated unopposed) have
raised them 3 years purchase more, was counter-balanced by some depressing
cause; which, if acting alone, would have sunk them by that amount: and no
adequate cause can be assigned, except the increased hazard of the payment of
rent. Hence, if the total efficacy of the fall of interest to raise the value
of land, which took place in these 22 years, be conceived to be divided into 12
equal parts, the effect of 7 such parts will be found to have been annihilated
by the increasing hazard of the payment of rent, or the forces of these
opposite causes to have been in that proportion; and the value of the estate to
have been increased by the 5 parts only which remained uncounterbalanced.

The value of land in the remote district in the year 1666, was only 4 years
purchase below that of the rest of the kingdom: the difference had increased to
9 years in the year 1688: the difference of interest made by purchases, which
in the first term was (L.1.4035) L.1 per cent. nearly, had, in the second,
become augmented to (L.1.9407) nearly 2 per cent. The remote district was,
therefore, relatively to the home district, in a state of rapid decline, at the
time the land tax was imposed; and the same is true, even of the value of land,
though it exhibits a small absolute rise.

It may not be here superfluous to explain, by an instance, the terms absolute
rise and relative fall; and how both may be understood to be applied to the
same thing, at the same point of time: for this distinction is always material
when the magnitudes which two or more subjects, increasing with different
degrees of celerity, attain, when compared at the beginning and end of a term
of time. Therefore let there be supposed to be two bodies, absolutely without
weight; whereof the first is projected upwards, with two degrees of velocity,
to continue uniformly the same; and let the second be in like manner projected
at the same instant, with one degree of celerity: now all consideration of
weight, with respect to both, being out of the question; at the end of a
certain time, the second will be below the first by a given distance; and at
the end of double that time, by double that distance. Here the second body, at
all times, will have ascended absolutely; yet its distance below the first will
be always such, as it would have been if the first had remained at rest, and
the second been projected in the opposite direction, with one degree of uniform
velocity, as before; therefore, considered with respect to the place of the
first, it is said to have been, at all times, relatively falling.

Some account of the cause of the increasing insecurity of the payment of the
rent of the remote district, may be given upon the authority of Mr. Lock. He
describes the artifices by which the purchasers of the product of the farmer
had, at the time of his writing his Tract upon Interest, been able to impose
their own prices upon him, and compel him, beside, to allow them long terms of
credit, and the incapacity of paying their rents, to which the farmers were
thereby reduced: and he concludes, If any one doubt of this, let him enquire
how many farmers of the west are broke and run away since Michaelmas last.
Lock, vol. 2. p. 13.
From the whole of what he has said upon this subject, it is evident that the
same account is applicable, though perhaps in a lower degree, to the northern
counties.

Hitherto we have considered only the argument in defense of the original
disproportion of the land tax, drawn from the declining circumstances of the
remote district, at the time of its imposition; but the following state of the
home division gave no inconsiderable addition to its weight: and of this there
is the strongest evidence, in the singular fall of the rate of interest upon
loans, mentioned above; by which the value of lands, in the home counties, was
in 22 years raised 7 years purchase. In considering this fall, every thing
which relates to the fluctuations of the rate in that term, which were
themselves very remarkable, will be omitted. Some years before the time of Mr.
Locke's writing his Essay on Interest, the scarcity of money made it, in
England, really worth more than L.6 per cent. Ibid. p. 5.
but so early as the year 1681, such a decrease of the current interest had
taken place, that the East India Company borrowed considerable sums of money at
L.3 per cent. Houghton, who has preserved this fact, adds, that although he had
secured the interest of one of the officers of the House, to obtain that rate
for a friend, he failed of success; and that money was then currently lent at
L4, 4, and 5 per cent. Houghton's Husbandry and Trade improved, vol. 4. p. 152.
At the time of the Revolution, according to Davenant, Davenant, vol. 1. p. 361.
the greater part of the loans upon landed security, were at the two former
rates.

This fall of interest is to be attributed, among other very accelerating
causes, to the increase of our currency, at that time, by paper credit; which
has been erroneously supposed by some not to have existed, or at least to have
been in a very circumscribed state before the Revolution. The shutting up of
the Exchequer, in the year 1672, occasioned the failure of many bankers; and by
laying open their accounts, show the extent which paper credit had then
obtained. The circulating notes of one of them, on his single security,
exceeded L.1,000,000; Lock, vol. 2. p. 5.
but in 1688, it was so much further increased, that by its means our rents and
taxes were paid, and the bulk of trade here at home, carried on almost without
the species of money: Davenant, vol. 1. p. 151.
and Davenant, from whom this extract is taken, further describes the state
into which it fell during the war of the Revolution, approaching to that of a
total annihilation; and the first symptoms of its revival, as such, after the
peace of Riswyck.

I have entered, with some detail, into this proof of the very flourishing
situation of the home counties, and of the relative and increasing decline of
the remote division, at the time of the imposition of the land tax; because it
is strongly connected to that inequality of the assessments which has been
perpetuated to this day; and it shows that they stood in need of some relief,
though the remainder of the kingdom has cause to regret, that no other method
was followed in affording assistance to them, than that which has been
eventually so unfortunate to themselves. In the course of these researches, two
popular errors, in the history of our national wealth, appear likewise to be
done away: the one respecting the high rate of interest; the other, the extent
of paper credit before the year 1688.

In these observations on the causes of the inequality of the land tax, I have
been obliged to go so far with this sketch of a comparative history of the
state of the landed interests, in the two districts, that there is but little
required to bring it to its ultimate period; and therefore it shall be here
given. The distant counties seem to have recovered a total equality with the
rest of the kingdom, as early as the accession of George the Second. Guthrie
informs us, that in the year 1727, the value of the northern counties of the
kingdom began to be better understood than formerly. Guthrie's Geography, ed.
1785, p. 367. 8vo.
In the year 1729, the price of the land of England had increased to 25 years
purchase: this is given by Anderson, a diligent collector of facts, as the
general value of the whole kingdom. To 25 and 26 years purchase. Chalmers, p.
138.
No distinction is here made of the prices of estates in the two districts; and
no traces of their disparity, at any subsequent time, have occured to me; I
therefore conclude, that at this period a total equality had taken place
between them. The national average price of land, in 1688, had been 19 years
purchase nearly: it follows that this average had increased, in the interval
between the two last-mentioned years, by 6 years purchase; but that the value
of land, in the home counties, having been 26 rents, had fallen one, while the
remote district had risen in price, from 17 to 25, or 8 years purchase.

It remains only to account for this variation of the state of the two
divisions: the inequality of the land tax certainly much quickened the progress
of the remote district, first to attain a level with the home counties; and
afterward, in many circumstances, a superiority above them; but before it was
imposed, there were some natural causes in operation, which would have
ultimately produced even the last of these effects, although its period had not
been accelerated by an artificial cause in constant action; the oppression of
the remainder of the kingdom with a double land tax. So early as the 1636, the
home counties had begun to grub up their woods and dispark their parks;
Davenant, vol. 1. p. 46.
and carried that practice to a great extent. But the quantity of wood has been
much more diminished since; and they are become in a manner tributary to the
remote district for fuel. The coal trade, though by no means arrived at its
present magnitude, was increasing with rapidity at the time the Land Tax was
first raised: insomuch, that in the year 1695, it was found, that the quantity
of coal consumed in London, had been trebled of late years. Manufactures are
attracted from one country to another by the cheapness of firing: and
accordingly it was then laid down as a fact, "that of late years likewise" the
north and west had acquired a greater proportion of trade, than the home
counties.

SECTION II. The Arguments in favor of the Inequality of the Land Tax, stated
and considered.
THE advocates for the continuance of the present proportion of the charge of
the two districts to the Land tax, argue thus: Its original establishment was
necessary; for if was founded on the difference of their abilities to
contribute to the public expenses: the historical evidence on which this rests
admits of no dispute. At present, the national interest, and the national
justice, both urge its continuance; and the arguments for it, derived from each
of these topics, are so cogent, that they deserve to be separately stated.

How strongly considerations of public interest and expedience, recommend the
continuance of the old valuation, is thus made evident. No material increase of
the charge of the tax upon the remote counties, can take place, without a
corresponding advance of rent; which must be followed, by a proportional
increase of the price of the farmers products: and as that district includes by
much the largest part of the kingdom, a general increase of its rent will
produce ultimately a general advance of the prices of the first necessaries of
life.

But the effect of such an innovation will not terminate here. The claim upon
which it is to be introduced, rests upon this principle; that the taxes upon
rent ought always to vary with its amount, and be proportioned thereto. Hence
every increase of rent, in every district, must constantly be accompanied with
a proportional advance of the payment of the land to the State. A maxim of
taxation, which, whatever specious pretenses may be set up in its favor, has
always produced the worst effects, in those counties where it has been carried
into practice: in some of them, it has received the name of the Taille: and
wherever it has been adopted, the spirit of improvement in agriculture has not
only been extinguished; but, in many instances, the art itself has gone
backward. Thus the equalization of the tax will prevent the increase of
product, which might otherwise counterbalance its effect upon prices.

But the measure of the evils which will result from the subversion of the old
system, appears only of its proper magnitude in its secondary consequences; or
when those primary effects of it, already pointed out, come to operate in
conjunction by preventing the increase of productions, physically necessary to
the subsistence of mankind, it puts a stop to the increase of population; and
by its tendency to raise their prices, it perpetually takes something more and
more away, from the comfort and happiness of the lower closs of people; which
their numerous privations, brought on by the charges of the State, have already
too much diminished. The greatest object of a moral policy (and nature and
virtue admit of no other) is to augment the number of a nation, and to increase
their comforts, in the utmost practicable degree. Now the effects of this
novelty are directly repugnant to these great ends; and we cannot forbear
adding how even that empty and delusive, but perhaps ostensible pretense to
justice, on which it rests as a foundation, has been lately in some degree done
away. Every one must be convinced, that the house-tax is a land tax disguised
under another name: by its imposition, this charge upon the remote district has
been effectively increased since the first valuation; and at the same time
brought nearer to that proportionality, incessantly demanded with so much
clamor, and so little reason.

These are the arguments, to the consideration of which, the remainder of this
Section will be confined; but there is another constantly produced on this
subject, upon which the greatest stress is often affected to be laid: that all
purchasers of estates in the remote district, for a long series of years, have
paid an increased price for them; in confidence that the present proportion of
assessments should be continued to all future periods; and that it would he
injustice to take from them, what they have paid a valuable consideration for.
This argument will be more fully stated in the Fourth Section, and an answer to
it given: no further notice will therefore be taken of it here. The
consideration of those which precede it, is now to be entered upon.

They set out with a tacit defense of the continuance of the inequality, from a
necessity which arose, from the peculiar circumstances of the home district, at
the juncture when it was suffered to take place. That they stood then in need
of some relief, is not to be disputed: and possibly the justice of that claim
has been fortified with a new proof, in the preceding Section. Admitting it
therefore in its full extent, it does not follow, that such relief ought
originally to have been extended to them, in a mode contrary to the first
principles of taxation; nor (even that point being gratuitously given up) that
the relief ought to have been prolonged, beyond the necessity on which it was
founded. Now all traces of the preexisting depression of the remote district,
had been obliterated so early as the year 1729; and the necessity, and the
inequality, ought to have terminated together.

The second plea urged is, that as the equalization of the tax will increase
its charge, throughout the greater part of the kingdom, it must effectively
increase the national rent itself; and consequently, the prices of the first
necessaries of life.

In answer to this, I shall endeavor to show, that it will neither effect rent
nor prices. That it will not effect rent of land follows, first, from the
nature of the subject itself; which is clearly laid down by Dr. Adam Smith, in
his work on the Wealth of Nations. Smith, v. 1. p, 223.
He informs us, that rent is always the largest part of the value of the
product of land, that can be taken from the farmer; allowing him the ordinary
profits of stock, after defraying his expenses. Now this being admitted, in the
latitude in which he has put it, that is, as a general principle; the rent must
be already arrived at this height in the remote counties: no further rise
therefore can take place, merely in consequence of the increase of the
landlord's outgoing charges. For it will not create an ability in the tenant to
pay him a greater sum; that ability being no more affected, by the increase of
the landlord's payment to the public, than by an equal diminution of his income
by any other means; as, by the alienation of part of his estate, equal in rent
to the addititious part of the tax, in consequence of his former extravagance.
In either case, his wishes and efforts to enjoy the same neat income as before,
will be equal; and the influence of his endeavors with his tenant, to raise
his rent, because his income is reduced, will be equally efficacious. It is
only an increase of the farmers product, or of the prices of that product, or
both conjointly, which can raise the rent of any district. When that rent, and
the value of the product, are once adjusted to each other, the increase of the
latter must always precede that of the former; as the cause must always precede
its effect.

But let it now be supposed, contrary to what has been shown to follow from the
nature of the subject, that the rents of the remote district will be raised;
and that the farmers will attempt to raise their prices, to reimburse
themselves. There will be nothing in this advance, immediately to effect the
rents or prices of the home district. Now the two divisions of the kingdom have
many common markets, foreign countries, the metropolis; and all those markets,
in the interior parts of the kingdom, situated on their common boundary line;
and some miles within it, on each side. The farmers of the remote district
carry their products, now, to all those markets, as equal competitors to those
on the other side of the boundary. But if they raise their prices, they will be
no longer able to support that competition; or at least their vent will be
greatly diminished. In either case they will be forced to keep a greater
quantity of their commodities at home, than formerly: and their home demand not
being increased, the prices of their home market, instead of being supported at
the new rate, must fall below that which took place before. Now an increase of
rents can never subsist, with more circumscribed markets, and with declining
prices: hence no advance can be put upon their rents, which shall disable them
to go into the markets common to the two districts, at the same prices as their
competitors: the interest of the landlords themselves must prevent it; or in
other words, they cannot raise their prices above the rate which would have
taken place, if there had been no advance of rent.

But, beside the gratuitous admission of the possibility of the rent being
increased in the remote district, in consequence of the equalization of the
tax; let it lastly be conceded, that the farmers will not be prevented from
raising their prices, by the competition of those of the home division: and let
us enquire, what increase of the rate of their markets may now be expected to
take place.

To equalize the tax upon the two districts, the remote counties must have
their rate increased one shilling and d. in the pound rent; or, L 5:340:9 per
cent. App. Art. 9.. 1.
On such an advance taking place, when an estate is to be let, it follows from
what is conceded, that the treaty, or (as it is called by those who have
written on prices and commodities) the alteration, will run thus. The landlord
will say: The decrease of my income by the new tax, is one shilling and d. in
the pound; and you must increase the rent in the same proportion. To this the
tenant will reply: The markets are not advanced; nor will the land become more
productive by virtue of the increase of the tax. The amount of my
disbursements, the annual interest of my capital, the value of my labor, and
of my superintendance, will continue undiminished: and I must make the same
profit for the immediate subsistence, and the future provision for myself and
my family, as before. I therefore cannot consent to any advance, demanded upon
that account. We have seen before, the nullity of the landlord's pretensions,
and the validity of the reasons against them, urged by the tenant. But let it
be admitted now that what is alleged on either side has equal force: hence the
alteration will terminate, by the landlord's receding from half his additional
demand, and the tenant submiting to pay the additional tax, or to increase the
rent 6d. in the pound; that is (L2.67) L2:11:10 per cent. App. Art. 9. 2.
Let the effect of this, on the general price of provisions, be now enquired
after.

It will be admitted without hesitation, that the price of the farmer's yearly
product, if any variation be made in it, will, after this advance of rent,
continue to bear the same proportion to his total annual disbursements, that
was found to take place in the year 1774. These disbursements are divisible
into two classes: the first increasing immediately, by the increase of his rent
operating alone; and the second, comprehending wages, the wages of labor,
seedcorn, and some other particulars; by the effect of an increase of prices of
necessaries already established; and following upon such increase, either
immediately, or at the end of a term more or less remote. An increase of
disbursements of the latter kind, cannot impress a beginning of movement upon
the market, or produce an initial rise of prices; because an effect cannot
generate its cause. But if the farmer's out-going expenses of this second
class, be increased in consequence of a preceding rise of markets, occasioned
by an advance of rent; this may lay him under a necessity of making a ^urther
augmentation of his prices, or generate a second addition to their rates. But
this secondary addition cannot take place, until the first in order (the cause
on which its existence depends) is established in the market. The point to be
proved therefore, is, that such initial advance cannot take place.

The expenses of the first class, whose increase is, or may very probably be,
immediately consequent upon the increase of rent, are the parish charges, and
the tithe: now let the former rent of the tenant have been L19^200, App. Art.
9. 2.
according to the average proportion, found to obtain throughout the kingdom;
the sum of this rent and those two charges, would have been L21^436: App. Art.
9. 2.
and that sum will be now increased in the same proportion the rent is
increased; that is, L2^67 App. Art. 9. 2.
percent as above, or by L0^572. App. Art. 9. 2.
And all the farmer's annual disbursements, including the maintenance of his
family; which before amounted, according to the same average, to L60^331; will
now be augmented to L60^903; and the selling value of his total product must be
increased in the same proportion. That value had before amounted to L72^826;
and it must now become L73^516; that is, it will be augmented 18s. and 11d. per
cent. The effect of this may be shown on the price of wheat, the article of his
product the most necessary to general subsistence. Wheat at this time, is about
44s. the quarter; its price, with this augmentation upon it, will be L2. 2 s. 5
d1/250. App. Art. 9.. 3.


If all the farmers in the remote district were tenants at will, according to
the supposition on which we are now tacitly reasoning; each of them would have
his rent increased, in the first year of the increase of the tax, according to
the proportion here given; and the assigned advance might justly indeed be made
general through the whole district. It seems however too minute to produce any
effect in the market; as the loss to the farmer would be the increase of the
expense of production only; equal to about one third of the increase of the
price above stated; and therefore less than two pence the quarter of wheat.

But it is only a part of the whole body of farmers, whose terms will expire,
and whose rents can be thus raised, in that first, or any succeeding year: a
circumstance which must be taken into the account. And therefore it is to be
observed, that lands are let for different terms. Although there are some
farmers who are tenants at will, by much the greater part of the land is under
lease or article for a term certain; as for 7, 10, 12, 14, or even 21 years.
Let it be supposed that the term of all the contracts for the remote counties,
is, on an average, seven years, upon the equality of chance; the term of one
farmer of seven will expire in any assigned year. Now the farmer whose rent is
raised at the Michaelmas immediately following the augmentating of the tax, is
justly entitled to sell his commodities at the advanced rate stated above: but
the remaining six farmers of every set of seven will be as well able to sell at
the old prices as before. Let us now take as an instance one of these sets,
supposing the rents of all the farmers equal, and seek what effect the advance
of the prices of the single individual will have in market. Now it is evident
it will be the same, as if we suppose the rent of the single man above
mentioned is seven times its former amount; but that it is raised only the same
sum as before. Now the quantity of his product being in the proportion of seven
to one, he will be completely reimbursed, by one seventh of the former rate of
his advance on his prices; that is, by 3/7 of a penny on the quarter of wheat;
or 2 s. 8 d. per cent. on the selling price of all his commodities.

This is the rate of advance, averaged upon the whole district; which will
reimburse the general body of the farmers, at the old rate of profit, for the
additional charge, the advance of rent in the first year will bring upon them:
and it is too minute, for them to take any measures in that year to obtain it.
If even the advance of rent had at this time fallen at once on the whole body,
there is little probability that it would have disturbed the rates of the
markets: and that increase of charge falling on one seventh of their whole
number only, in the first year of the augmentation of the tax, its effect is so
far insensible, that it seems to leave no tendency to an advance of prices
behind it. Things once fixed, completely resist a smaller degree of force
tending to a change. They in some measure resemble heavy bodies at rest; which
require a power of a certain magnitude to be applied to them, which must exceed
what is sufficient to counterbalance friction, or a kind of adhesion to their
situation, before they can be put into motion. If the increase of the rent had
taken place all at once, it would most probably have passed off, without any
effect on the market prices; but its whole power upon them will be divided into
seven parts, each taking place at distant intervals. And in this case, we may
fairly recur to the former illustration, and say: If we admit that a certain
force, when applied to a body all at once, may be capable of overcoming this
resistance of cohesion; and to produce a small, but almost imperceptible
movement in it; yet if this moving power be divided into many parts, and each
applied in succession, the effect of each will be successively lost, before the
application of the next, and no movement ultimately produced.

The next objection in order, is, that if the tax be from time to time
augmented, it will degenerate into that specious of imposition upon land, which
is called abroad the Taille, which has, in every country where it has been
adopted, been found to obstruct all increase of the quantity of land brought
into cultivation, and those improvements which augment the product of land
already cultivated. Thus, by preventing the multiplication of the necessaries
of life, it deprives the lower class of people of a liberal support; and even,
by a diminution of its numbers, makes a waste of human life.

In opposition to this, it must be proved that every plan for augmenting the
land tax, does not terminate in such a system; and to do this, it is necessary
to lay down the following preliminary division of the subject. The effect of
the rise of the tax may be different, as it takes place after improvement of
the annual value of land, either immediately, or at the end of some definitive
term of time. It may also differ, when land is to be improved by the capital of
the tenant, or that of the landlord. The combination of these circumstances,
affords four distinct cases for our consideration.

Let us first examine the two cases, where the rise of the tax immediately
accompanies the advance, of the improving value of the land; not entering at
present into any consideration of the means of carrying such a measure into
execution. The greater part of the improvements of the value of land is,
effected at the expense of the tenant: this therefore is the case first
considered. In order to be induced to undertake it, he must have a lease at a
fixed rent, for a considerable term of years. But here the landlord may have
frequently a temporary interest against such improvements, and consequently
against granting all such leases, of the same duration as the term of the
contract, and of no small magnitude. This will be a great check upon long and
improving leases: for while the value of the estate is increasing, the tax will
be perpetually increasing; and the landlord's gross rent remaining fixed during
the whole term, his neat income will be perpetually decreasing. We know how a
small present interest can counterbalance a great advantage, if remote. But the
immediate interest here treated of, is not a small one. When the improvements
of the tenant are spirited and judicious, and he has a long term before him
(the only thing which can call forth such vigorous and beneficial exertions
from him), the annual value of the land may come to be doubled, or more than
doubled, during its subsistence; and the tax increasing with that value, cause
a very sensible diminution of the landlord's neat income. And sometimes he may
even find himself in considerable embarrassments, throughout the whole
remainder of the term, after these improvements shall have become fully
effective: and it is the interest of the tenant to make them so, as soon as
possible. In this case, the landlord will not always find the present
uneasiness of his situation, counterbalanced by the reflection that he, or
perhaps his heirs, will, at a remote period, reap a great advantage by an
advance of rent. If the increase of the tax should therefore follow, directly
upon the increase of the annual value of land, such leases, it may be presumed,
would be less frequently granted.

When the landlord is at the expense of the improvement, he is not exposed to
the hazard of these inconveniences. At his contract for a lease for any term
of years, he will obtain an increase of rent, in proportion to the speculated
value of his improvements: this will consist of the annual interest of the
capital he advances; an annual profit upon it, of the nature of a commercial
profit; and the amount of the expected increase of the tax. These points he
must have a reasonable prospect to secure; or he must act without a motive, or
on the abstract consideration of public good only. But in this case, the
landlord would certainly be less disposed to improve, when the sovereign, who
contributes nothing to the expense, was to share in the profit of the
improvement. Hence the progress of cultivation, as far as it depends upon the
capital of the land-owner, might receive some little check, but by no means so
considerable as that pointed in the first case.

But admitting that augmenting tax, immediately upon every increase of the
annual value of land, may be attended with some consequences that are
ineligible, and some difficulties in execution; it does not thence follow, that
a territorial valuation, once established, should remain invariable to the end
of time; especially, if in its origin it was oppressive and unequal: or,
according to what has been laid down by some on this head, that such valuations
should not be revised, above once in a century at most; although it is to be
cursorily observed here, that even admiting the last principle, a century is so
nearly elapsed since the establishment of the tax, that the home district may
now rest its claim to equalization upon it.

It remains now to consider, whether, if the increase of the land tax should
follow that of the rent, at any assignable term or distance of time, it would
produce the bad effects inseparably attached to that levy called a Taille. This
inquiry likewise involves two cases: but before they be separately gone into,
the supposition on which they both of them depend, that such an increase of the
land tax is practicable, must be examined. The proof that a measure is
practicable, ought certainly to precede the consideration of its expedience.

If ever there should be an attempt made, to introduce a permanent
correspondence between the tax and the value of the land, the opposition to it
will endeavor to make a vigorous stand upon this point; and such erroneous
opinions have, by some anticipation, been inculcated respecting it, that many
of those most essentially interested in its defense have sometimes seemed
disposed to give it up. I shall therefore begin this examination, with a maxim
drawn from the code of political morality. If men would but dedicate half that
exercise of the understanding, to reduce what is just to a practicable form,
which they apply to support institutions which rest upon no proper basis of
principle; employing all the indirect policy, and perplexed patchwork of
expedients, to make them rub on without any violent shock or obstruction; they
would generally find their work neither difficult, nor its event doubtful. What
is just, has in its own nature a strong tendency to become practicable; and
almost to find the way to become effective itself. It wants but few helps and
previous arrangements; and those, a very moderate degree of circumspection will
easily suggest. Temper it only with so much indulgence to the personal
interests which seem attacked by it, as you well can without defeating its end
(and that power is seldom greatly circumscribed), and you must succeed. The
narrow and awkward ground, which you force those who oppose you to take, and
the shame of making a persevering and decided stand upon it, half disarms them
to your hands.

That adjustments of the advance of the tax to the advance of the rent, may be
reduced into practice, has been fully shown by Dr. Adam Smith; Smith, v. 3. p.
64.
and how the latter may be always discovered. But to anticipate all objections
to the gradual increase of the tax, the rent of the last past lease or contract
might be made the value taxed in every year; not the present existing rent,
which seems so far to diminish the temptation and facility of fraud, as almost
to annihilate it. By this mode many objections to the registers of leases, for
the purpose of determining rates and charges upon land, are anticipated. It
diminishes the temptations of falsification, incident to some other plans. Two
men may combine together to make a false entry, where a true one would be
followed with an immediate increase of some annual payment, to be made by
either or both: but if the increase of charge be remote; as, for instance, if
it be not to take place until the end of a lease now entered upon; the
temptation to a fraudulent entry will be almost annihilated. Where a present or
almost immediate sacrifice of property is called for, a fraud may be committed;
but if it be not actually to be made, in less than seven, or perhaps ten years,
after the account is given in, men will readily consent to it. They will seldom
venture upon a piece of knavery, when they know it must be so long before they
can expect to reap the beneficial effects of it. Beside the interval between
the registry and the commencement of the next contract, when the increase of
the tax is to take place, must be long; and the chances of the discovery of the
fraud, multiplied in proportion. If the parish rates were to follow the
valuation of the land tax thus adjusted, it would take off a similar
discouragement to improvements in agriculture, that of being followed up
immediately with an increase of charges of another kind. And no fraud would
thus probably find its way, either into the rates, or into the register; for
such a fraud would not diminish the charges of the person committing it: and it
would expose him to great resentment from his neighbors; as sacrificing their
future interest, without any advantage to himself. Besides, every contributor
in a parish would for his own sake be a vigilant guard over all the rest: the
probable number of frauds woule be greatly diminished; and the chances of the
discovery of each, greatly increased: and the parish rates would either keep
errors out of the public register, or afford several valuable corrections to
it. This mode of increasing the tax has likewise another good property. Dr. A.
Smith (v. 3. p. 257) has observed, that every tax ought to be levied at the
time, and in the manner, that is most convenient for the contributors to pay
it. Now this maxim, which primarily refers the original imposition of a tax,
holds likewise of all its subsequent augmentations. For, according to this
arrangement, the tax will always come to be increased, at a time when the
landlord has enjoyed the augmentation of the rent, on which the addition is to
be assessed, without deduction, for the complete term of one lease; and at a
time likewise, when he has probably secured a second augmentation of rent, by a
second contract: for, as the average value of land is constantly increasing, an
increase of rent will be mostly obtained at every new letting.
In what manner a similar and equivalent indulgence is to be extended to those
who occupy their own lands, has been explained by the same writer. Smith, v. 3.
p. 268.


It appears that, under these modifications, the tax may be made to increase
with the ability of the contributors, without great difficulty. The inquiry is
now to be resumed, whether being constantly so augmented, it will nor be
followed with the bad effects of a Taille: and here let it be first supposed,
as before, that the improvement is to be made by the tenant; and that it is a
great and spirited operation, requiring the advance of a large capital. For if
it be found that the gradual advance of the tax, as described above, will be no
obstruction to a greater improvement, it cannot be requisite to show in
particular, that it will be no impediment to others, upon a less extensive
scale. The general circumstances of such undertakings, as far as they affect
the question, are these: the land is to be taken, as having been let before at
a moderate rent, according to its former condition: its advance to the
in-coming tenant will be either nothing, or very small, on account of the great
expense he must incur in the proposed improvements he will also take ^are to
secure himself a sufficient term; to pay him the insurance of his hazard, and
to enable him to reap the profit of his spirited industry. Now during this
term, which must be considerable, if any small advance of the rent had been
acceded to by him in the beginning of it; the tax will be assessed to its
former, not its present amount, according to the leading principle of its
augmentation, described above. At the end of the term there will be a second
contract; when the estate will be let to the full of its improved value, or
nearly so. And during its subsistence the tax will become increased, in
proportion to the augmentation of the rent, by the first lease only; which
advance, it was shown, could not be very considerable. And at this rate the
valuation will remain fixed, during the whole of the second term: and
ultimately, at the end thereof, or at the beginning of the third lease, the tax
will be raised to correspond to the second rent, or the improved value of the
land.

Let us now search, what there is in these circumstances to hinder an
improvement, which would take place if the tax were fixed. If, contrary to the
plan here traced out, the great augmentation of the tax were to take place,
immediately with that of the rent, at the expiration of the improving lease;
the farmer would not have been originally deterred from accepting it, by the
consideration that an addition would be made to his landlord's outgoing
charges, at the instant his present connection with him was to terminate. He
will know that at the end of the lease, if he think so long beforehand of
treating again for the farm, that the landlord will get as much for the
improved value of it, as he will be able to pay, or nearly so; and that he can
get no more. And as that future addition to his rent must depend upon other
circumstances, he will not at all consider, how one eighth or one tenth of it
will be drawn out of his landlord's strong box, at the end of fourteen or
twenty-one years to come.

Yet it is here admitted, that the great improvement of the value will be taxed
immediately at the termination of the first letting; whereas, according to the
mode supposed to be followed, that material augmentation of the tax
corresponding to it, will not take place until the end of the second lease. The
increase at the end of the first, being proportioned to the first augmentation
of the rent, which must have been either small or nothing, on account of the
expense of the farmer at his first improvement; the augmentation of the tax
corresponding to that improvement, will only commence with the third lease. Now
no man will carry his speculations to a futurity so remote, as, previous to
entering on a contract for a farm susceptible of such improvement, to consider
on what terms he could obtain a third lease; or what his landlord's assessment
to the taxes would be increased to at the end of that length of time, to which
the second will extend. As to the small advance to be made at the beginning of
the second term, if any, it has been already seen, that a much greater would
then produce no effect.

It remains to be examined, how far the increase of the tax, thus modified,
will be a check upon the spirit of improvement in the landlords. And let it be
supposed here, that the augmentation of the tax will ultimately be an eighth or
a tenth of the increase of the annual value of the land. In fact, the average
effective tax of the kingdom does not exceed a fifteenth of the rent; when its
nominal rate is four shillings in the pound. When the tenant improves his land
upon a long lease, he knows he shall, at the end of the term, be obliged to pay
an advance of rent equal to that of the value of the land, or very nearly so:
yet this does not now hinder him from making such improvements, at his own
expense. When it is done by the landlord, he obtains immediately an increase of
rent in consequence of it, equal to the value of the improvement: and the tax
will take from him, but an eighth or tenth of the augmentation of that annual
value, at the end of the same term, at which the whole would be taken by the
rise of rent, from the improving farmer. Hence, if giving up the whole of the
augmented value, at the expiration of the lease, do not hinder the farmer's
improvement; one eighth, or one tenth, being taken from the addition to the
landlord's rent at the same term, will produce no effect.

It has been urged by one writer, that the house-tax is in its nature a
land tax; and consequently, having been laid upon the remote district long
after the imposition of the former, its original degree of inequality no longer
subsists. He might have proceeded to confirm his acute conclusion, with the
mathematical axiom -- That if, to unequal magnitudes, equal magnitudes be
added, the quantities so increased, will approach nearer to the ratio of
equality, than the two first. I will not expose to posthumous censures, the
well-earned reputation of a man eminent in his own laborious branch of science;
in which he rendered to the public the greatest services, by quoting him by
name, or referring to the books from which such an imbecility is copied. The
answer is contained in a few words: the house-tax is general, and at the same
rate throughout the whole kingdom, including the home district; and therefore
the payment of it does not exempt any other district from paying its equitable
proportion to any other tax.

SECTION III. On the Probability that the Amount of the Land Tax must be
increased at a very near Period.
THE foundation on which the result of all inquiry into the probability of the
future increase of the charge of the land tax, ought to rest, must be found in
its general nature, and the existing circumstances of the State. In the
consideration of the nature of a land tax, some principles will be laid down,
tending to show that it is, caeteris paribus, to be preferred, perhaps, to all
others. The natural limitation of those principles will also be afterward
added, though not necessary to the points to be proved: for general principles,
which differ from universals, by being limited by an internal necessity, or
external circumstances, are frequently set up as such, or abusively confounded
with them; but they ought never to be brought forward, without duly specifying
the point at which they cease to be applicable, unless it is well known or
self-evident.

Taxes are established, as well for the purpose of political regulation, as
effective revenue: such as at once answer both these ends, are the best. Now a
land tax is an effective and sumptuary tax, and unequalled in the degree in
which it possesses these two properties: for no plan for collecting a revenue,
from the great incomes derived from monied capitals, or the annual fund of
expenditure of the more opulent traders, has been hitherto carried into
execution with success.

It is observed, by a political writer of the first estimation, that as
productive capital is the source of industry, so revenue is the source of
idleness. Smith's Wealth of Nations, v. 2. p. 12.
The glitter, the magnificence, and sometimes the dissipation of the opulent
proprietor of land, becomes the example of those who derive great incomes from
other sources; and they seem to undergo something like the reverse of
improvement in the transplanting. The greatest number of these copyists, like
those who propose splendid, but faulty originals, as models, exhibit their
faults, at second-hand, something increased; and the effects of the other
parts, not a little diminished. If the luxuries of this class could be reached
by a tax, the moral benefits to society would be great; and, perhaps, no
permanently useful institution of policy ever existed, which did not draw that
consequence after it. But to drop the consideration of what seems, but perhaps
only seems, unattainable; we may observe, that drawing an effective revenue
from land, attacks this progress of luxury at its very source, and greatly
retards, though it cannot totally counteract it. There is a consequence of this
which deserves attention.

In the natural history of human society we find, that when it has once
attained to a state of manly elegance, it passes on next to refinement; and
ultimately to a vitiated and effeminate voluptuousness. Whatever is noble and
excellent must decline in each step of this fatal progress; and even whatever
tends to accelerate the transactions of society, from the first to the second
of these states, must be numbered among the greatest evils; whatever retards
it, among the greatest benefits to mankind. It is like a medicine which would
prolong the continuance of youth and manhood, and suspend the approach of the
imbecility and miseries of old age. And I add, that a sober philosophy may
prepare such a tincture for society, though not for the individual: though
there is nothing more deleterious, than the preparations which pretend to these
properties, which are to be found in the laboratories of some great modern
chemists.

The luxuries of a wealthy society are the cause of this progress. It is always
the object of that of today, to pass the bounds of that of yesterday: and
whatever checks it in its course, at least retards the celerity with which
society is gliding down this descent; and lengthens out the existence of its
arts, its manners, and its morals.

The tendency of a tax on land to produce this beneficial effect, is evident:
by absorbing a just part of the income of the proprietor, it diminishes the
strength of the primary cause of these successive degeneracies in the state of
society. It is to be observed on the other hand, that whatever makes his
capacity of expense increase, with greater celerity than his rent, will
anticipitate the terms of those changes, and consequently be pernicious: the
circumstance here taken as a supposition only, will be afterward found to exist.

There are further considerations which show the rent of land to be a more
proper subject of taxation than most others: and one is, that to make a due
proportion of the public charges fall upon it, leaves the quantity of comfort
and enjoyment, remaining to society after such a tax, the greatest possible; as
no way has been discovered to come at the great monied incomes; which,
therefore, are not here to be considered: for the deduction of the same
proportional part from the incomes of any two men, are here supposed equally to
diminish their capacity of acquiring the customary comforts of their situation.
A tax exclusively falling upon land, affects only a class of men which is, upon
the average, extremely opulent: but in case the same money were levied by a
general tax, the lower orders of the people would have been obliged to pay
their share to it, and their comfort would have been diminished, in the
proportion which the annual sum so taken from them bears to their annual
income: but as it is now paid by the opulent proprietors of land, their
enjoyments will be diminished, only in the proportion the same sum bears to
their great annual income; that is, indefinitely less; or the comfort enjoyed
by the whole society, considered as an aggregate, remain much greater. It is
evident likewise, that it tends to render the enjoyments of the separate
classes of society more equal.

A tax on land tends also to render the inequalities of rank and fortune less
glaringly offensive to those whom civil society, by the operation of its very
nature, has subjected to numerous and afflicting privations of the enjoyments
of life. For if we suppose the present land tax taken off, a greater and more
parading display of the disparity of the circumstances and ranks of the classes
of civil society, would take place: and the irksome sense of it in the inferior
orders, must be aggravated in proportion; a sense, which enters perhaps for no
inconsiderable part of the calamities of that class, whose feelings of their
own state will always be numbered among the objects most worthy of respect, by
a wise and benevolent legislature.

But it may be made evident, that the landlords cannot be charged with more
than a certain part of the public burdens, by a tax on their estates, without
the injury extending beyond themselves, and affecting the interests of society.
They contribute to the general taxes; to many they pay as much, and to many,
more than their relative proportion: there are some likewise to which their
contributions, for certain causes, are less. But, upon the balance, their other
taxes will be found to be at least in proportion to their total incomes; and
the land tax to be purely an additional charge, exceeding that proportion I
thought I had been alone in this opinion, but find myself preceded in it by Sir
Nathaniel Gould and Baron Maseres..
; and such payments neither can or ought to be carried beyond a certain extent.

For the ability of paying these addititious charges, must be confined to that
class of the landed men, whose circumstances are so easy, that they can
commodiously subsist upon their incomes: and let it be admitted, that this may
be extended so low, as to take in that order of men, which Mr. King, in
arranging the nation into classes, denominated freeholders of the better sort;
whose income from land, at this time, upon an average, may somewhat exceed
L.180 a year; and which was valued by him, in 1688, at L.91: and let it be
admitted, that the incomes of the different classes of society bear the same
proportion now, each to each and to the whole, which he found to take place in
1688. If this amount be divided into a thousand equal parts, the income of the
more opulent landlords is 218 App. Art. 8. 2.
; of the laboring people, 207 App. Art. 8. 2.
; and of the remainder of the society, including the mercantile and monied
interests, 574 App. Art. 8. 2.
such parts. The income of the lower class, as exhibited here, falls short of,
rather than exceeds, its present proportion, according to some accounts which
have fallen into my hands. It is nearly in the proportion shown above, or 218
thousandth parts of the whole which they pay by the general taxes. That
denomination is here given to the remainder of our taxes, which are payable by
the people in general, including the proportion of land, and not by the latter
exclusively.

Now the total amount of the general taxes is L.15^162 ms. App. Art. 8. 3.
: and the part thereof paid by the great landed proprietors, proportioned to
their income, is L.3^312 ms. App. Art. 8. 3.
Moreover, the total land tax being L.1^962 ms. its proportional charge on this
class is L.1^434 ms. Ibid. 4.
and their total payment to all taxes L.4^746 ms. Ibid. 4.
exceeding their proportional charge, in the ratio of 14,330 to 10,000 Ibid. 4.
.

This excess is greater in the home district, less in the remote, than the
average here assigned; and if the land tax were equalized, the whole class of
the land-owners would contribute to the expense of the State, in the same
proportion as those of the home district pay at present. The sum of the taxes,
on the income of land, would become five shillings and five-pence in the pound;
and on all other incomes, on an average, three shillings and threepence and
one third: Section IV. Table.
or the former would be to the latter, as five to three.

But by carrying this system too far, the opulence of this class will become
more reduced than is consistent with the general interest of society. When
every man is taxed according to his income, the proportional power of every
class, which depends very much on the existing division of property, remains
unaltered. Now the inequality of its present division is natural, as far as
human society, of which it is the necessary consequence, is natural: hence that
proportion of power in the different classes is natural; and a diminution of
that of the upper-class of too great magnitude, places society in an unnatural
situation, and draws a long train of calamities after it. For hereby the spirit
of subordination is undermined, and almost annihilated; and its place must be
supplied by something else, to preserve public order as before: as much
restraint as is thus taken off from the individual, must be added again by the
coercion of new and stricter laws; the increase of which is always inimical to
personal liberty at least. The rigours of the municipal laws in republics, and
some ill-constructed mixed governments, furnish us with striking examples of
this. It has arisen from their being obliged to diminish the natural influence
of ranks by artificial restraints, as being inimical to the principle on which
they are founded.

But it is not hereby meant to be maintained, that the opulent land-holders
ought not to pay any addititious tax; and particularly, that the amount of the
tax cannot be now increased, until it bears the same proportion to their rent,
which took place in the beginning of this century; actual experience having
proved the contrary: or that the landlords of one part of the kingdom cannot
bear the same proportional charge as those of the other.

These reasonings, showing that the tax may justly be increased, are nearly of
the same force to prove that it will; unless an inability of the contributors
can be admitted, or that the State will not, for a considerable period to come,
want such an augmentation of revenue. For whoever has considered the progress
of taxation in this century, and a great part of the last, will admit, that to
prove the one, is nearly to prove the other. But leaving these general topics,
more particular considerations are now to be brought forward, in support of
this position.

Since the year 1700, the taxes paid by the other classes of society have
increased in burden, though not in the same degree as in charge; because their
annual income, in the same period, have greatly increased. For if their income
had remained fixed during this term, and the taxes paid by them been trebled,
their burdens would have been trebled: but if this income be conceived, in the
same time, to have become doubled; at the end of it, every equal charge would
have been borne with twice the facility; and their burdens, instead of
increasing in the proportion of three to one, would have been augmented only in
that of three to two, or become only half as much again. This illustrates,
though it does not give an accurate measure of the increase of the burden of
all taxes, exclusive of that on land, on all the contributors during the
present century.

On the other hand, if the taxes had remained fixed, and the income of the
contributors had been doubled, their burdens would have been reduced one half.

It is in this mode, though not in the same degree, that the advances of rent
has been perpetually diminishing the burden of the land tax. The average
increase of actual rent has been nearly three-fourths per cent. annually, from
the year 1700 (the first term for which an average land tax, for peace and war,
or its periodical average can be assigned) to the year 1792. Or, more
accurately, every pound rent had, in that term, been increased to L.1^9745 App.
Art. 6. 9.
. And if the tax had increased in the same proportion, its burden would have
perpetually remained fixed. Now, in the year 1700, the periodical average of
the tax (that of the city of London being excluded) was L.1.3148ms. App. Art.
6. 8.
and thus augmented it would have become L.2.596ms. Ibid.. 9.
Its amount at 4s. in the pound, the nominal rate of the preceding peace, is L.
1.675ms. Ibid. 10.
therefore, if an addition of L.921,000 Ibid. 10.
were now made to the tax, it would only bring the burden of the contributors
back to an equality with that of the year 1700. And here it is to be observed,
that this addition is far less than the present defalcation of the remote
district. See Section 4.


But as the burdens of the other classes of society have continued increasing,
and that with a very considerable degree of celerity; they have a right to
demand from the proprietors of land, that, by their particular tax, they would
again contribute to the increased public expense, at least in the old
proportion to their incomes; and that some remedy should at length, though
late, be applied to a system of taxation, by which, while the proportion of
their own burden to the expense of the State is perpetually increased, that of
the land tax of the opulent country gentry is perpetually diminishing: and they
will add, that the experience of the beginning of the century pointed our that
the land could very well bear the burden then laid upon it. Justice and policy
redemand it; and there seems a considerable probability that the demand must be
attended to.

For an additional argument for it, of great weight, is to be drawn from the
progress of the debt, and the necessity of putting a stop to it. This will be
fully laid open in the proof of the following proposition: that the
equalization of the land tax will be very nearly an adequate remedy to this
evil, and put it absolutely in our reach, with a small additional exertion. To
demonstrate which, it becomes necessary to determine the amount of a sinking
fund, which will effect this great purpose.

Our present efforts to put a stop to the increase of the debt, although very
inadequate, greatly exceed whatever were made at any former term; and form no
weak presumptive proof, that we may expect from the spirit of the times, and it
may be justly added of the Administration, that when it is seen with what
facility this first step to security can be obtained, it will not be neglected.

We are now to proceed to the investigation above mentioned. Omitting
fractions, it may be taken, that the average length of a term of war is eight,
and of peace ten years App. Art. 6. 6.
. Nor ought it to be assumed, that in future the duration of peace will exceed
that of war, in a greater proportion. In subjects of such consequence to a
State, it is best to err on the safest side; and we are to give way to no
delusive imaginations, that the future course of things will be better than
what we have experienced in the last 100 years; for it is so far back that
these averages extend. The present semi-chaotic state of Europe will not permit
us to indulge in such agreeable but visionary expectations: and in a few months
we have seen a new and great republic rise, the vices of whose internal
constitution are such, that foreign wars will become necessary to it, to obtain
some respite from internal commotion. This is very clearly illustrated, by the
consequences which always attended the heterogeneous and discordant
constitution of the republic of the Romans; a much more moral people. A state
of hostilities, almost continual, was the only remedy to the discord of peace:
it was by foreign wars only that they enjoyed, at any time, the delusive
appearance of a hollow truce at home, with no principle of union within; the
State fell to pieces, when there was no external force to compress its
repulsive parts together: it fell, for want of an enemy; and the tyranny of a
despot succeeded the alternate tyrannies of the great and the mob. The new
republic has the same disorders, but in a more malignant degree; and it
possesses only the same terrible means, to patch up the blotches and ulcers,
which its radically vitiated constitution will be perpetually producing and
reproducing.

These considerations will not give us leave, especially at present, to think
the chances of the duration of peace to be increased, or tending to increase.
Eighteen years is therefore here assigned, as the length of a period of one war
and one peace taken together; as the distance from any assigned year of peace,
to the same year in the next peace: and let it be supposed, that a term of
peace, now existing, will continue five years; it will be followed by a war of
eight years, of which the extraordinary expense will be taken at eighty
millions. The five first years of the following peace will complete the period:
and if the debt, at the beginning and end of that period, be equal; or the
capital paid off in the two halves of the terms of peace, be equal to the new
capital generated by the intermediate war; the progress of the debt will be
completely stopped, and no more.

The fund applicable to the discharge of the debt, which will effect this
purpose, may be called the adequate fund, to distinguish it from such as suffer
the debt to continue to increase; and also those whose product is so great, as
to afford a remission of taxes under certain regulations.

If an adequate fund were to be this applied to the restraining the progress of
the debt, directly at the commencement of a term of peace, taken to continue
ten years, or another immediately at the commencement of a war, whose duration
would be eight years, it is evident their amounts must differ. The fund which
would be necessary in the middle of a term of peace, as being nearly the mean
of these charges, is the most proper for our present purpose: its amount and
operations are therefore to be here shown The determination of the amounts of
sinking funds, which shall operate in any assigned manner, forms a chapter of
modern political arithmetic, which should have been long since completed. Its
title, I believe, is now written for the first time, and a section of it is
given in the text, which is more fully explained in the last article of the
Appendix: and to this, if I have time, I shall add a summary of the contents of
the other parts of this subject.
.

The mean rate of interest in the stock market, during each year of the two
half terms of peace, is taken at 4 per cent. or the value of the consolidated 3
per cent. L.75 App. Art. 11. 5.
per cent. their neat average for nine years, ending with the year 1791, was
L.70.52 App. Art. 11. 5.
.

Now if, five years before the actual commencement of a war, the State be
possessed of a sinking fund, amounting to L.3.485ms. Ib. 9.
such a fund, under the most probable conditions which can be assigned, will
be, what is here called, an adequate fund. For first, this sum annually applied
to the reduction of the 3 per cent. capital, will be augmented at the rate of 4
per cent. annually; and will, in five years, have furnished L.18.876ms. Ib. 9.
in money, for that purpose; by which a capital of L.25.168ms. Ib. 9.
will be bought up, and the fund, at the end of the first peace, amount to
L.4.2399ms. Ib. 9.


A term of war of eight years is now to be supposed to follow: in which let it
be admitted, that the extraordinary expenses will amount to L.80 ms.; that the
average price of the 3 per cent. stock will be L.56^64; App. Art. 11. 6.
and its rate of interest, L.5^295 Ib. 10.
per cent. And the system of the management of the land in war, which has
lately been established, being supposed to be uniformly followed; its annual
product is to be subscribed by the commissioners of the land, to the loan of
each year; for which they are to receive an annuity, raised by new taxes; the
perpetuity of which shall be equal to the perpetuity of the omnium, obtained by
the lenders of equal sums of money; that is, Ib. 10.
L.5 per cent. Thus L.41^471 ms. App. Art. 1. 11.
(being the produce in money of the fund so augmented, in eight years) will be
advanced by the Commissioners, for the service of the war: and at the
commencement of the peace, its annual amount becomes augmented to L.6^593 ms.
Ib. 13.


The sum necessary for the support of the war is taken at L.80 ms: and as
L.41^471 ms. is the sum furnished by the public Commissioners, the loans of the
private creditors must amount to L.38^528 ms Ib. 12.
: and this will generate a new capital of L.72^771 ms. Ib. 12.
in the 3 per cents.

In the first two years of the following peace, the product of the fund being
annually increased, at the rate of 4 per cent, will be in money L.35^710 Ib. 13.
; which will have extinguished a capital of L.47^613 ms. Ib. 13.
, in the 3 per cents.

In the last five years of the foregoing peace, it has been seen that a capital
of L.25^168 ms. had been in like manner paid off by the fund; and in the first
and second terms taken together, a capital of (L.25^168 ms. x L.47^613 ms.)
L.72^781 ms. App. Art. 11. 12. There is here a minute difference of the
capitals generated and paid off: it is caused by neglecting totally all places
of figures after the fifth; which, in operations of this sort, are
comparatively of no consequence.
or it pays off, in one complete period, the new debt generated therein: and
the capital of the debt, at its termination, is precisely equal to its amount
at the beginning. The fund, therefore, becomes what is here called an adequate
fund.

An equalization of the land tax, which would produce a million and a small
fraction annually, in addition to our present surplus, would be a very good
approach to such a fund: and it may be carried into execution, without making
the tax perpetual, by vesting a further part of the old sinking fund in the
commissioners, equal to the increase of the tax; and voting the latter,
annually, to the current services, to make up the deficiency in the provision
for them, which will arise from this appropriation: nothing is hereby altered
of the constitutional nature of a land tax; as it continues to be voted
annually, and to be applied to current services only. It is thus indeed to be
considered, as indirectly applied to the augmentation of the fund: and in this
sense, its augmentation thereby is to be always here understood.

The amount of an adequate surplus fund being L.3^485 ms. a year, the existing
fund, which very little exceeds 1 million, must be admitted to be totally
inadequate; and if the consideration of our present safety does not impose upon
us a necessity of augmenting it instantly, the time in which that necessity
shall speak in a more imperative tone, is not far distant; but the same
exertions, at both periods, will not produce equal relief in equal times: the
ultimate burdens of the State, and the time they must continue, are increased
by every delay of effectual measures.

This state of our affairs, therefore, calls for every just and practicable
addition to be made to our income; and an augmentation to the land tax
evidently comes under that description.

Whatever shows that such a sacrifice, on the part of those who ought to make
it, is less than at first sight it appears, is an argument which enforces the
claim upon them: it adds the whole of its proper weight to the consideration of
necessity; and thus increases the probability that it must take place, though
indirectly, not in a minute degree. It may be therefore proper to be shown,
that, upon a supposition that an adequate fund be established, part of which
shall be effectively formed by an augmentation of this tax, it will effect the
total value of the estates out of which it issues, and the neat annual income
of the proprietors, much less than at first sight it may appear to do.

That the selling price of estates will be hereby very little, if at all,
decreased, is thus shown: although their neat rents be at first diminished,
yet, by the operation of such a fund, the rate of interest must be much
reduced; and the year's purchase of neat landed income will be increased in the
same proportion. Hence, the reduction of the market value of such estates will
be ultimately inconsiderable: and it much concerns those persons, on whom the
augmentation of the charge of the tax will fall, well to examine, whether by
the application of such a fund, and the consequent fall of interest, more may
not be gotten than lost upon this head. Sir John Barnard, in his celebrated
essay on the reduction of the interest of the Debt, in the last four lines of
it, where he would have advanced nothing which in his own opinion did not stand
upon the best foundation, applied this argument in support of a point which
seems to involve a much more decided opposition to popular belief, than that
stated above. Considerations, etc. Osborne, 1750, p. 34.


It may be said, that the increase of the tax is an uncompensated reduction of
the neat income of the landlord: but the very act of giving up a small part of
it impresses a very strong tendency upon the remainder to increase; for that
increase will always be the consequence of improvements of the soil, or
augmentation of demand; and both these must follow, in a certain degree, the
fall of the rate of interest. The price of improvement of land is the interest
of the money sunk in it: and whether it be effected by the capital of the
farmer or the landlord; when it becomes cheaper, the landlords will be able to
draw into their own pockets a greater proportion of the annual value of these
improvements, supposing the number of such undertakings not augmented; but the
increased facility of them will likewise augment their numbers. Again, from the
same common source of prosperity, the traders and commercial men will become
able to be better customers for the products of the soil, or an augmentation of
demand for them take place; the second pre-disposing cause of an increase of
rent: the joint effects of both may very soon restore to the landlord no small
part of what the tax initially takes from him; or he may ultimately, and at no
very distant period, find his temporary sacrifice entirely repaid; and when the
urgent necessities of the State call for it, it may be expected, that the
voice, even of a self-interest, very slightly counterbalanced by any better
principle, would be almost silent against it.

But should the tax be increased, without augmenting the appropriated sinking
fund, there will be no tendency in its effects to reimburse the landlord for
the diminution of his income: and a resource, almost sufficient to ward off all
the new difficulties the debt will involve us in, and in time to free us from
the old, will be lost to us for ever, and leave nothing which a well-grounded
hope can substitute in its place.

Nor can it be said, that the addition to the tax thus applied, is locked up
from the service of the public, when any exigence requires it. The new system
of the application of the sinking fund preserves to the State the command of
its own money at all times, and under such conditions, that its alienation
increases its efficacy. Thus a defect of its original institution is converted
into an advantage. The present surplus retards the increase of debt, but does
not put a stop to it; and, without the establishment of an adequate fund, the
annual charges of the State must continue to increase to the most oppressive
magnitude, by the increase of the public annuities. The best and readiest
source of augmentation for the fund is that of the land tax; and the justest
mode of effecting that, is by equalization: that measure would place us in the
immediate reach of the great object here treated of; for if it be once
obtained, the tax which would pay the interest of the loan of a single year of
war, will make the fund adequate. The amount of the fund is something less than
3 millions. The sum of the surplus and the augmentation of the land tax, is
very nearly L.2.700 ms. and since this Section has been chiefly written, an
addition of L.500,000 has been obtained to the revenue, from the East India
Company: an equalization of the tax would therefore bring us very nearly into
the situation stated.

If the present war should not be attended with any great deficiency of the
revenue, such a fund would very soon be rendered adequate, by the addition of
an annuity of 1l. per cent. on all loans, to its amount.




The justice of the claims of the rest of the nation upon the land-owners, for
an increase of the amount of the tax; the magnitude of that evil to which it
will provide almost an adequate remedy; and the urgent necessity for such a
remedy; afford presumptions which rise almost into proof, that the time when it
will take place is not very remote: what they want of absolute evidence, will
perhaps be nearly supplied by the following considerations.

The average nominal rate of the tax, in four successive terms of peace, ending
with that of 1763, was 31.955 App. Art. 6. 1. Table.
pence; and of the four last terms of war, 4s. in the pound: and we may look on
the established proportion of its charge in war and peace to be as the numbers
48, and 31.955, respectively. Thus its nominal rate, during the present peace,
having been uniformly 4s. in the pound, in the next war it will exceed six
shillings by a small fraction, and the addition to its annual charge become
L.1.011,381: and it may be observed here, as on a former occasion, that it will
be seen in the next Section, that if the whole of this addition be levied,
exclusively, upon the remote district, it will still contribute to this tax
less than its proportional charge.

Besides these arguments, deduced from the nature of a land tax, the equity of
the measure, and the state of our finances, to show that an augmentation of
amount is very probable; several authorities to establish the same point might
be doubtless found by any person who should search for them. At the conclusion
of the late war, and during the term at the beginning of the present peace, in
which a settled gloom seemed to hang over us, some sober and temperate men
began to declare their opinions of the necessity of its augmentation. Baron
Maseres, who certainly applied himself with much ability and attention to
investigate the effects of the sinking fund, on several capitals of our
heterogeneous mass of debt, concludes his researches, by affirming, that it
would become necessary to increase the land tax, if the revenue should fall
short two millions of what the exigencies of the State might require; and he
takes it for granted, that such an addition to our income would be wanted.
Maseres, 1783. page 448.
'There is reason,' says this writer, to apprehend, that it will be necessary
not only to continue the land tax at 4s. in the pound, but even to increase it
to double its present quantity, or to four millions a year. This he wrote
during the war; but, as he did not publish the work in which it is contained
until after the conclusion of the peace, if his sentiments had been changed, he
would have corrected the passage.
It is here evidently seen to what quarter men, well versed in these subjects,
look forward themselves, and direct the attention of the trading and monied
interest, for the next augmentation of public revenue.

Though the opinion of Baron Maseres, that the amount of the land tax will
probably be doubled, when a new necessity shall call for an increase of the
public revenue, may be disputed; yet a less augmentation would severally affect
the interests of the home counties: and whenever again we shall be engaged in a
war, a great addition must be made to it. The opinions long since advanced by
men of eminence will then form the general sentiment, and be carried into
effect: and it is probable, that if the present valuation be continued, the
nominal rate will be about six shillings in the pound, for the reason given
above. I know very well, that there is much ridicule frequently attached to the
supposition, that plans of speculative men, buried in the dust of a library,
will ever influence the important transactions of the political world, or
produce events on which the fate of great classes of men, or even great
nations, shall depend; and that to consider, and be prepared beforehand, as to
what part we shall act, when we see such scenes to be approaching, is something
even beneath the folly and dotage of timidity. It would be easy to multiply
examples, to show, that the confidence which gives birth to such maxims, has
been very frequently ill-founded: and the astonishing events of the last 20
years will not lend it any great support; at least, it will not be derived from
the revolutions of America, of France, or of Poland.

In Davenant's Essay on Foreign Trade and Plantations, he has preserved the
heads of a plan which fell into his hands, for the general government of the
colonies which were then planted.

Five of the articles it contained, were as follows: Whitworth's Davenant, v.
2. p. 40.


That the colonies of Boston, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, the Jerseys,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and Carolina, shall appoint deputies, to meet
annually, or oftener.

That this meeting be called the Congress, and be held in the most central
colony -- New York.

The Congress is, among other things, to be empowered to decide in all
differences between province and province;

To consider of ways and means to support the union and safety of the provinces
against their common enemies;

To allot and proportion the quota of men and money of each province, to be
furnished against the common enemy. The powers reserved to the Crown, were to
appoint a high commissioner to preside in Congress, and a commander in chief of
its troops. That body was to consist of 20 members, two from each colony; a
very numerous assembly, as the whole continent did not "contain quite 200,000
persons of English parentage." Upon the same scale, the first Congress which
sat, would have perhaps contained 250 members.


The seizure of the church property in France, which has terminated in the ruin
and exile of the greater part of the Gallican clergy, presenting to every
country in Europe, but perhaps more particularly to this, the melancholy
spectacle of numbers of men, respectable for their virtues, their literature,
their rank, fallen, and as it were fallen in a day, from eminence, from
affluence, and from a liberal competency, into a state so hopeless, and so
helpless, all its circumstances considered (the commiseration they inspire us
with being excepted), that no other class of men can perhaps be involved in the
like calamity. This seizure is the transcript of a plan, brought forward in the
assembly of the States at Pontoise, in the minority of Charles IX. The
original, destined to be the source of so much iniquity and misery, is
preserved to us, in the 27th book of the history of that excellent magistrate
De Thou. A long-continued war, and the prodigality of the Court, had exhausted
the treasury, and involved the Crown in great debts. The assembly went into the
subject of ways and means, to discharge them: the resumption of profuse grants
and pensions was not forgotten; but the capital resource was the seizure of
ecclesiastical property. Thuani Hist. lib. 27, tom. 2. p. 9. Hoffmannus
Francofurti, 1614.
The revenues resulting from the secular jurisdictions of the clergy were to be
confiscated; and many things were proposed, detrimental to the sacred order;
one fourth of every benefice of 500 livres, a third of every benefice of 1000,
and one half, if it amounted to 3000 livres of yearly income, was to be taken
away, and paid into the treasury. If the annual produce was 12,000 livres, 3000
only were to be left to the former possessor: the remainder was given to the
king. The rents of all the convents of the Carthusians, the Maturins, the
Celestins, the Miniens, and of all the nunneries, were to be seized to the
king's use, reserving to their members sufficient sustenance. All the real
estates of the bishops and canons were to be sold, with an exception of the
chateau, or capital mansion, in which they resided: this sale, it was computed,
would raise 1,200,000 livres. CXX Librarum Myriadas. This is copied literally:
it appeared to me suspicious; and, upon examination I found it false. At the
death of Francis II. it was found that he had left upon the nation a debt of
42,000,000 livres. The words quoted from De Thou make its amount 1,200,000
livres only. Entretiens d'Eraste, par M. l'Abbe Fillasier, 1774, p. 916.
The interest of one third part of the purchase money was to have been reserved
to the late proprietors of such estates; which would have been as productive as
their former rents: the remainder was to have been applied to discharge the
crown debts: thus the royal income would have been increased, and the nation
for ever freed from those taxes with which they were then so much oppressed.

Even while I am writing, the new partition of Poland adds one more to these
memorable instances. King Stanislaus, in a tract on the liberum veto, and the
anarchy of the country, has this remarkable prediction. We shall be the prey of
some famous conqueror, or perhaps the neighboring powers will come to an
agreement for the partition of our states. La Voix du Citoyen, p. 19, 1749.
Voyez Theater de Voltaire, tom. 6. p. 145.


The remote sources of some great institutions, which have been useful, or of a
more dubious nature, might be here added: but it is not our present business to
multiply historical anecdotes of any determinate description.

The remote sources of some great institutions, which have been useful, or of a
more dubious nature, might be here added: but it is not our present business to
multiply historical anecdotes of any determinate description.

SECTION IV. On the Measure of the Disproportion of the Charge of the Land Tax,
on the Home and Remote Districts, and its Consequences.
IN the first Section it was stated, that the kingdom is, with respect to the
land tax, to be considered as separated into two great divisions; the home
district comprehending the 11 home counties, with that of Middlesex, all
consideration of London being here excluded; and the remainder of England and
Wales, called the remote district. It is generally known, that the land tax
upon the home district much exceeds its due proportion, as determined by the
annual rent of each. The measure of that excess is first to be made the subject
of consideration.

The proportion of the contents, or number of acres of each district, is very
nearly known: but, if the value or fee simple Accurately speaking, estates of
equal value only should be charged with equal taxes, not those of equal income.
Hence a rent proportioned to the fee simple of a district, not the actual
income thereof, will be the measure of its taxability: but this distinction
(which had been apparently adopted by Mr. King) is much less necessary upon
this subject than I had at first imagined. It will be found, however, to have
been observed throughout this Essay. Though distinctions with but little
difference ought not generally to be made, yet, when they are once interwoven
in a tract, there may be much trouble in blotting out all the traces of them;
and it will on the whole be only a negative correction.
of each be taken as its contents, that of the remote district will be stated
too high. Again, the number of houses in each, at the Revolution, is known with
sufficient accuracy: and the remote division has relatively increased in
population ever since, to a great degree. It has likewise, in the same term,
increased in manufactures with a much greater celerity than the home division.
If therefore the taxable value of the districts be computed from the proportion
of their population in 1688, that of the remote district will be considerably
less than the truth. In the first case, there will be an error of excess in its
value, and in the second, of defect: and it is here assumed, that these errors
counterbalance each other: hence it is determined, that the value of the home
is to that of the remote district, as 10,000 to 31,814. App. Art. 1. 13. And it
is evident, that this is the proportion of their taxable income.
The proportion of their values is all that is here required to be found, as it
serves the same purposes, in the present inquiry, as their absolute amounts, if
known.

By other independent methods it is found, that this proportion is sufficiently
near the truth; and they afford collateral support to it.

Davenant, in his essay on Ways and Means, written in 1695, lays it down, that
the remote counties were then to be esteemed and valued as three fourths of the
kingdom. In the first Section it is fully shown how much their value has
relatively increased since: it is matter of common notoriety. If therefore,
when the rent of the home division is taken as 10,000, that of this district be
taken as 31,814, the latter may seem rather to be less than greater than the
truth. The land tax paid by the home district (London excluded) is L.652,275:
App. Art. 1. 17.
and according to the proportion here given, the remote district ought to pay
L.2,075,100: App. Art. 1. 17.
the real payment thereof is L.1,038,184, App. Art. 1. 17.
which falls short of its equitable and just contribution, L.1,036,916. App.
Art. 1. 17.
This defalcation may be stated in another point of view: thus its proportional
payment Davenant, v. 1. p. 46.
being L.10,000, its effective charge is L.5002 only: and for every sum of
L.10,000 thus paid, the just charge amounts to L.19,989.

We shall now inquire, what is the effective charge of this tax in the pound,
upon the actual income of real estates, in the two districts, when the nominal
charge on each is four shillings.

The income of such estates is of two kinds; rent of superior condition, as
rent of land; or of inferior condition, as that of buildings and mines. The sum
of each of these is ordinarily stated as the national rent; and may properly be
called a mixed rent, on account of the nature of the subjects out of which it
arises. The market values of all the estates of two districts of considerable
extent may not be as their incomes, the rate of interest being in each the
same; because one may contain a greater proportion of rents of the inferior
condition than the other. Hence the ability of such a division of a country to
contribute to a land tax, will not always be in the precise proportion of its
mixed income, but of its selling price: or, which is the same thing, it will be
as the annual rent of supeior condition, which might be purchased for that
price. To determine the proportion of the ability of the landlords of a
district to pay any tax, its mixed income ought to be so reduced; a
transformation which is employed in other parts of this inquiry: but we are now
to find the proportion the actual tax bears to the actual income, that is, the
mixed income; the law by which it is imposed, bearing no respect to the nature
of the subject out of which any rent arises.

Excluding London, the mixed rent of both districts, in 1792, amounted to
L.25.525 ms.; and that of the home district, to L.6.104 ms. And the land tax on
this part of the kingdom being L.652,200, the charge in the pound was 2 s. 1
2/4 d. very nearly. The rent in the remote district was L.19.421, its land tax
L.1.038,100, and the rate in the pound 1 s. 0 d. very nearly, or half the
former only. The average of the whole kingdom, without London, is 1 s. 3 d.
Table showing the rates of the total taxes, the land tax, and the general taxes
in the pound, on the income from real estates.

Rent Total Taxes Rate Land Tax Rate General Taxes Rate Home District L. ms.
6.104 L. ms. 1.6525 L.0.27072 d. 64.972 s. 5:5 L. ms. 0.6522 L.0.10685 d.
25.644 s. 2:1 L. ms. 1.0003 L.0.16386 Remote District 19.421 4.2205 L0.21731 d.
52. 152 s. 4:41/7 1.0381 L.005345 d. 12.823 s. 1:0 3.1824 L0.16386 Both
Districts 25.525 5.8730 L.0.23007 d. 55.216 s. 4:7 1.6904 L0.6622 d. 15.892 s.
1:3 4.1827 L0.16385 d. 39.364 s. 3:3

Here the rates of the taxes in the pound are given in decimals of a pound, in
pence, and decimals of a penny, and again in shillings, pence, and the nearest
vulgar fractions; each way of expressing it having its convenience for
different purposes. See Appendix, No. 7.




Beside the peculiar tax paid by the landlords, a part of all other taxes is
paid out of their income or rents; and as these do, or may, affect all income
in general, from whatever source derived, they are here called general taxes.
Now the part paid out of the rents of the two districts, is to their whole
charge, as that rent to the whole national income: hence the amount of these
general taxes being L.15.162 ms. App. Art. 7. 3.
, their charge upon the provincial proprietors of land is L.4.1827 ms. or 3 s.
3 d. Preceding Table.
in the pound rent.

Hence the charge of all taxes in the home district is 5 s. 5 d. Preceding
Table.
in the pound; and in the remote division 4 s. 41/7 d. Preceding Table.
: therefore, by the inequality of the assessment of the land tax, the burden
of the home district exceeds its true proportion, in the ratio of 5 to 4. It is
also somewhat greater than that proportion of their income which political
arithmeticians have laid down as a limit of what a country can pay in taxes, in
the the time of peace, without ceasing to increase in riches. The fourth penny
of their annual income. Davenant, v. 14 p. 253.


The payments of the rents of the home district to all taxes is L.1.6525 ms.
App. Art. 7, 8.
; and the equitable payments of the remote district, in proportion to its
value, would be L.5.2572 ms.: Ib. 10.
its actual payment is L.4.2205 App. Art. 7, 8.
ms. which falls short of its due contribution, by L.1.0367 ms. Ib. 10.
nearly the same sum as before assigned; and their proportional is to their
real charge, as 12.456 is to 10.000. Ib. 9.


The consequence of this disparity, to the kingdom in general, and the home
district in particular, offer themselves next to our examination. The first
branch of these considerations will be entered upon by the proof of the
following proposition.

If the remote district had constantly contributed in their just proportion to
this tax, and the sum by which it would have been thereby increased, had been
applied to the purchase of 3 per cent. stock; it would at this time have
extinguished a capital, nearly double that of the present redeemable debt,
after a due and even liberal allowance had been made for the difficulties that
part of the kingdom labored under, at the Revolution, and perhaps for some
following years.

The average nominal rate of the tax, since its first establishment, has been
3s. and 3 ^/8d. in the pound, very nearly; Pence, 39.114.
and its annual average product in England, L.1.6116. Now, its actual charge to
the remote counties is to that on the whole kingdom, as 1.0381 to 1.9777.
Davenant, v. 1. p. 39 (Table).
Therefore, the annual average charge upon them has been L.845.930: but that
actual charge is to the proportional charge, as 10.000 to 19,989. The amount of
the latter would have therefore been L.1.690,990. The difference of these two
payments, or L.845.060 is the fund, which would thus have been applicable to
the reduction of the 3 per cent. capital.

The term of its operation is next to be fixed; and in assigning it, due
allowance is to be made for the distress under which it has been seen that the
remote district labored at the Revolution, and for some years after. It was
above shown, that in the year 1729, all traces of the former depression of the
value of estates in the district had become obliterated, or 36 years after the
imposition of the tax: but at the very beginning of the term, the payment of
the remote counties was greatly below their abilities of contributing to the
public charges: and it may be taken, that their estates rose to an equality of
value with those of the home district, by equal degrees, in equal times: and if
their first payment, which was so inadequate, had been fully proportioned to
their ability at that time, by the nature of their progressive recovery, as
above described; if they had paid the full tax the last half of the term, or 18
years, and their initial assessments without increase, for the first half
thereof; a due allowance would have been made for their temporary distress: but
in the circumstances which took place, this allowance is much more than
adequate. From the whole term of a century, therefore, the period during which
the land tax has existed, 18 years is to be deducted; and the remainder, 82
years, is the period in which the fund of L. 845,060 (to have been gained by
the equalization of the tax) would have been applicable to the extinction of
the debt.

The third factor to be assigned, is the rate of interest at which the fund
would have operated in successive periodical publications. We have the price of
the 3 per cent. stocks from the year 1731 inclusive, to this time; and taking,
as before, the average interest of the stock market, during the present peace,
at L. 4, that of the last 62 years was L.3^562 per cent.: during the first 20
years of this term, that rate was still higher; but the permanent rate here
assumed is L. 3 per cent. It is to be noted, that hereby the amount of the fund
for the whole term will not be inconsiderably less than the truth; the interest
at which it would have accumulated in the first 20, and the last 10 years,
having exceeded L. 3 per cent.

The amount of an annuity of L. 1 in 82 years, at L.3 per cent. is L.451^20;
and of an annuity of L.845,060, L.381^29 ms. And interest being at L.3, or the
value of the 3 per cents. L.855/7; that sum of money would have extinguished a
capital of L.444^83 ms. of such stock.

Nor can it be said, from the experience of the fate of our sinking fund, that
such an additional sum, if put under the like appropriation, would not have
been applied for that purpose; for, during the present century, the mean annual
expenses, and the charge of the peace establishment, have increased very nearly
in the same proportion. And this seems to be derived from a necessity, imposed
upon every member of the European republic of States, which will not submit to
be degraded below its former relative rank therein; which is founded on great
advances in strength and opulence, which most of them have made in the present
age. By an unfortunate system of policy, the nation has never provided an
increasing revenue for this increasing charge; and thus the product of the
sinking fund has at length been almost totally absorbed by the increasing
charge of the peace establishment. The errors, and perhaps the delinquence of
Administrations, may at some periods have contributed toward it; but this
impolitic national parsimony, much more: nor are the marks of criminal
profuseness, which appear upon the face of the public accounts, so frequent in
the middle and at the conclusion of the last hundred years, as at the
beginning: and perhaps no reason can be assigned, to show, that, if the amount
of the sinking fund had been L.850,000 a year more, this surplus would have
been gratuitously flung away; and if only one half of it had escaped from the
influence of peculation and mismanagement, our present debt would have been
nearly annihilated.

But the inequality of the land tax has likewise contributed its share to
another great evil: it was not without its effect, and that perhaps a very
considerable one, in producing the civil war of the colonies, and dismembering
the empire: for it cannot be doubted, that a suspicion of the equity with which
the British Parliament would exercise the power of taxation, was one of the
leading causes which brought on the resistance, which terminated in that great
revolution. And if no other American made up his opinion on this head, from the
disparity of the land tax of England, Dr. Franklin at least did. He always used
to quote the continuance of the land tax, upon its present very unequal
footing, as a proof of the very little regard that was had to justice and
common-sense, in our national deliberations. Maseres, on Life Annuities, p. 450.
This argument must have full weight with those who think the colonists would
have concurred in any mode of contributing to the expenses of the united
empire; which they were assured, from the established character of equity in
the legislation, would not have been attended with practical oppression and
inequality: for they would not have hazarded a civil war, for abstract
principles, when they had a sufficient moral probability, grounded on their
confidence of the long unimpeachable justice of that assembly, in whom the
power would be, that these abstract principles would never produce an
additional burden to them in their operation; and, on the other hand,
temperaments would have been easily discovered, and conceded to with the same
facility, to have obtained their contributions, without any contravention to
those principles.

The effects of this inequality, upon the home district in particular, are now
to be stated. Here it will not be sufficient to examine simply the force by
which these counties are depressed: for its consequences depend, not only on
its magnitude, but on the strength of the subject on which it operates:
therefore, after discussing the general effects of the disparity, other
circumstances are to be pointed out, which, operating in conjunction with them,
tend greatly to increase the relative depression of the district.

Beside the absolute definition of the property of the the home district, by
the disproportionate assessment of the tax, as a secondary consequence, it
produces an effective, and a very important balance of payment, against the
less, and in favor of the greater division of the kingdom.

When money is brought by taxes into the treasury, much of it again returns
into the country, for several purposes; to pay the interest of the public
creditors; for the subsistence of troops, the purchase of stores and
commodities; and on diverse other accounts. Now it may very well be admitted,
sums so returned into the two districts, are as the landed capital of each: the
sum of these disbursements in both will evidently exceed L.1^6903 ms. App. Art.
4.
, the amount of the provincial tax: but first let it be considered as exactly
equal thereto, being distributed to both in the proportion laid down. The share
of the remote division will be L.1.2860 ms. App. Art. 4.
; and that of the home district, L.404,300. App. Art. 4.
The former sum exceeds the remittance of that district to the treasury, on
account of the land tax, by L.247,970 App. Art. 4.
; and the latter falls short of the tax on the home division, by the same sum:
or it is an effective balance, increasing annually the money of one district,
and decreasing that of the other.

Now let the annual disbursement of government exceed the sum assigned, by any
given amount: such excess must be derived from the general taxes, which are
equally levied in both districts; and the money returning to each, according to
what is above laid down, will be proportional to its landed capital, or its
prior charge to those taxes, but less than the amount thereof; because all the
expenses of government are not internal. Hence, considered by itself, this
second reflux of money cannot generate a balance in favor of either of them:
it is only a proportional restoration of part of the money of both. It
therefore cannot diminish the wrong balance assigned above.

Such balances may exist between province and province, as well as between
independent kingdoms, and, in like manner, must be ultimately paid by the
precious metals. That we may judge of its consesequence, let its amount be
compared with that part of our annual gain by foreign trade, which presents
itself first to every one's imagination, who thinks upon the increase of
national opulence: I mean that part of the precious metals gained by the
general balance of trade, which forms the annual increment of our national
stock of coin. That we have, on an average of many years, an annual resting
balance of this kind, notwithstanding the great diminution of corn which must
be occasioned by our wars, and the more latent causes of decrease, will not, I
think, at this time, be brought into dispute. Now the larger this sum is stated
to be, the less will the comparative loss of the home district appear, from the
adverse balance above pointed out. In 1750, Mr. Andrew Hook published his
Essay on the National Debt and Capital; which is mentioned by Sir John Sinclair
Sir J. Sinclair's History of the Revenue, v. 2. p. 118. We may see likewise, by
Postlethwayt's Dictionary, that it was a work held in much consideration, when
first written.
as an "admirable" work. The great foundation on which all his computations are
built, is the annual increment of the national coin: this he states at
L.164,772 Hooke's Essay, p. 6. In this he seems to have exceeded the truth. It
appears from a passage in Dr. A. Smith's Wealth of Nations (which I have not
time to search for), that this amount may somewhat exceed L.130,000 a year.
yearly. Thus the balance against the home district, generated by the
inequality of land tax, exceeds the part of our foreign balance of trade, by
which the coin of the kingdom is increased, by L.83,198, being more than one
half thereof.

This annual increment of the coin of L.164,000 a year, is the basis on which
the increment of our currency is founded; which is the sum of our circulating
paper and coin; for a part of this new coin being withdrawn, and locked up in
the chest of the banker, enables him to increase the currency by three or four
times its amount in paper: and thus the market for all our commodities is
supplied with the representative signs of real value, although both their
quantities and their nominal prices are perpetually augmenting. This apparently
minute annual increment of the national stock of coin, is the stream that has
led the national capital, in every stage of its progressive growth; and it is
sufficient to have increased it to that magnitude it has attained. The
inequality of the land tax, which has generated a balance against the home
district of L.247,000 a year, must have greatly retarded it in its course of
prosperity, during the whole term it has operated: although the counties
included in it, should be admitted to have derived an equal, or perhaps a
superior sum, annually from some other quarter; for even in this latter case, a
part of that annual superlucration of the district, equal to this balance,
would be annihilated by it, or would be rendered what has been called a lucrum
cessans; which is always in effect equal to a damnum emergens.

In the process to determine the adverse balance against the home counties, by
the inequality of the tax, it has been shown, that its amount upon the
provinces, when its nominal rate is 4s. in the pound (a charge now become
permanent) is L.1.6903 ms.: of which sum, the proportional share of the remote
district is L.1.2863 ms.; and of the home district, L.404,300. I shall here so
far make a digression, as to draw a corollary from this, connected with the
general subject, though not with the particular matter of this Section.

Hence a method is easily deduced, to equalize the burden of the tax, and
still retain the old valuation of the districts, and this may be done by
adopting a counter-inequality This is not the decisive counter-inequality of
Dr. Franklin, to be described hereafter: though I borrow the term from him, he
annexed a much more effective notion to it.
of the nominal rates at which the two districts are assessed, so adjusted as
to be reciprocal to the inequality of the valuation; by which the payment of
each district is rendered proportional to its value. The new rates are found
thus: the product of the tax on both remaining fixed at its present amount, the
proportional contribution of the remote district is L.1.286 ms.: now, at the
nominal rate of 4s. in the pound, the sum raised therein is L.1.0381 ms; and at
the nominal rate of (59.455d. =4s. 11d.) 5s. in the pound, the total collected
by the division would amount to that proportional payment.

Again, at the nominal rate of 4s. in the pound, the sum of L.652,270 is raised
in the home counties; the valuation of which being continued, and that reduced
to (29.752 pence or 2s. 5d.) half-a-crown in the pound, the amount of the tax
would be reduced to L.404,333; its proportional part of the total now paid by
both.

This seems to hold out a very easy mode of doing an act of substantial justice
to the oppressed district; and, at the same time, of avoiding the natural
difficulties, and the artificial obstructions which might be flung in the way
of a new valuation: but the gross inequality being thus removed, the great mass
of interest, which opposes the introduction of a more perfect system of levying
this tax, would be much reduced, if it did not fall with it: and in a little
time, every subordinate inequality would follow the fate of the great one,
which at present covers and protects them all.

To return to the immediate subject of the Section: The burden of this
disparity on the home district has been considered in some material points of
view; but if all of them had been exhausted, only one half the inquiry is
finished. The measure of the power which is to support that burden, remains to
be sought after; and this power may be considered either absolutely or
relatively.

Now there are some natural circumstances respecting the two districts, whose
primary and secondary effects necessarily give a great superiority to the
remote division: it includes the coal countries; the direct and primary
consequence of which (the wood in the home district being reduced to almost
nothing) is to form another balance of payment in their favor. But the
secondary effects of this natural inequality of the districts, in respect to
firing, extend much further: it lays the manufactures of the one under great
disadvantages; and gives a superior facility to the extension of those of the
other: in the home district it has the most hurtful effect on the morals and
industry of the laborers in agriculture: and while, from the increase of its
coal trade, and that of its manufactures, the shipping of the remote division
has received a great augmentation, that of the home district has suffered a
cotemporary decline; and each in a degree which, prior to actual experience,
would have been held far to exceed any bounds of probable expectation. This
source of superiority, derived from nature on the one side, and of relative
depression on the other, are the most cogent arguments against suffering the
continuance of any other disparities, generated by artificial and inequitable
systems of policy; such as the continuation of a tax of double burden upon the
district, in the less fortunate natural state.

But I must consider more in particular each of these circumstances, which add
to the weight of this unjust burden: their importance to the general argument
is such, that they are not to be passed over in a bare summary enumeration.

With respect to the balance against the home district by the coal trade, it
may be said, that if their wood be cleared off the soil, it is because they
find their gain more by reducing it into cultivation: hence they are able to
pay for their coal, and afterward derive a greater profit from their land than
before. To this it must be answered, that the whole advantage it might reap, if
they could obtain their firing out of the bowels of their own soil, is
diminished by the price of the coal remitted out of the district; and that land
brought into cultivation in the other division occasions no drain of money for
firing: on the contrary, they keep that whole sum at home; and their capital is
perpetually increasing, by the expense of their neighbors in this article, for
the price of the coal and its freight.

The expense of this fuel to the consumers in the home counties, consists of
the following parts: its value at the pit; a duty of "more than sixty per
cent." on that value Smith, v. 3. p. 338 and 339.
; the freight; mercantile profit; and inland carriage. Firing is necessary for
the comfortable subsistence of many different sorts of workmen, who work within
doors Smith, v. 3. p. 338 and 339.
: and manufacturers have always gradually migrated into countries where fuel is
cheapest, when there has been no great disparity of other circumstances. To
this cause the depression of many branches of the manufactures of the home
district is to be ascribed, which formerly flourished there: and that part of
the kingdom may have long occasion to regret the loss of the bill brought into
the lower house by the present minister, a few years ago, laying a tax on coal
at the pit's mouth. If it had been withdrawn on being carried coastwise, it
would have formed an equalizing and protecting duty, and given some remedy to
its natural disadvantages.

If this difference of situation affect the subsistence of one class of the
laboring poor in the home district -- the manufacturers, and attack the very
existence of the manufactures themselves; it produces effects no less fatal to
the morals and industry of another -- the workmen in husbandry. Before wood was
almost extirpated there, the labourer could purchase firing; or, as it was of
little value, much was given him: its scarcity has diminished very much, if not
annihilated, this supply from the liberality or sufferance of his superiors;
and its price renders him more ready to steal, than able to buy. He goes out in
the night in search of it; and opportunities frequently present themselves to
him, at the same time, of making other depredations: and the wood-stealer is
thus tempted to become, and frequently does become, a robber of a still more
dangerous character. This is one great inductive cause of that profligacy which
the poor are arrived at in the home district; and from which I conclude, that
cheapness of firing has greatly tended to preserve those of the remote
division. It is well known how much the flourishing state of a country depends
upon the morals of the lower class: and in the home district there is every
cause in action to bring them into a state of degeneracy which can operate in
the remainder of the kingdom, with almost an additional necessity imposed upon
them, by the dearness of fuel, of beginning the practice of night stealing.

The last disparity of the two divisions to be treated, is in the quantity of
their shipping; that of the home district having decreased with great rapidity,
while that of the other has been constantly and greatly augmenting.

This is to be shown from the tonnage of English ships cleared outward, in the
year 1750 and 1772. two terms sufficiently remote; and the only terms for which
I have been able to discover proper data, to found any comparison upon. And it
will be afterward shown, by general reasoning, that the conclusions to be
derived from them, will very well apply to the present purpose.

The shipping of the out-ports, are here only to be taken into the account;
excluding that of the port of London. And the materials for their comparison,
obliges us to divide the tonnage into two parts; not corresponding to the two
districts, but approaching to such correspondence as near as may be. The first
division contains the four greater out-ports of White-haven, Liverpool,
Newcastle, and Bristol; the second, the remaining ports of the kingdom, being
all the smaller out-ports: after that account is so stated, it will be shown
that all its consequences may be strictly applied to the smaller home ports;
that is, all the ports of the home district, exclusive of London: and moreover,
that they would hold good a fortiori, if the account could be more exactly
drawn out; or that the decrease of the shipping of the home district, estimated
both absolutely and proportionally, would by such more accurate account appear
to be greater than that here to be exhibited.

The absolute decrease of the shipping of the smaller ports, is first to be
shown. There were cleared outward, from all of them taken together, in the year
1750, 264,073 App. Art. 10. 4. Mr. Chalmers takes the total tonnage of English
shipping, at more than the number of tons cleared outward in a year. See note,
App. Art. 10. 2.
tons of English shipping; and in 1772, 156,499 App. Art. 10. 4. Mr. Chalmers
takes the total tonnage of English shipping, at more than the number of tons
cleared outward in a year. See note, App. Art. 10. 2.
tons only: they had therefore decreased 107,574 tons, App. Art. 10. 4. Mr.
Chalmers takes the total tonnage of English shipping, at more than the number
of tons cleared outward in a year. See note, App. Art. 10. 2.
in twenty-two years. To apply this loss to a proper measure, familiarised to
the conception of every man, as far as it can be, by being frequently made the
subject of conversation: in the very same term of twenty-two years, the tonnage
of English vessels annually cleared outward, increased 107,063 tons. Thus if
these ports had been able to preserve their shipping, without augmenting it a
single ton, the increase of our vessels for commerce, and our naval force
(great as it actually was) would have been doubled: and half the augmentation
of our marine strength, from the prosperity of the five great ports, was
annihilated by the decline of the smaller taken conjointly.

Having stated the absolute loss, the celerity of this decline is now to be
fixed. Taking therefore the tonnage of the smaller out-ports in 1750, as 1000;
that of 1772 will be found to be as 5926: App. Art. 10. 4.
or they had lost of their whole shipping in twenty-two years. The prosperity
of the four great out-ports, and the severe reverse of situation of the
remainder and smaller, exhibit an unparalleled and afflicting contrast. The
tonnage of the former increased in the same time from 199,338 to 361,604 tons;
or by 162,066 tons; in the proportion of 10,000 to 18,122: Ibid. Art. 10. 4.
while the most distressed commercial State in Europe did not, in the same
period experience any calamity, to be put in competition with the decline of
the latter. It argues something deleterious and fatal, either natural or
artificial, or both, to their commerce, depressing it during the whole of the
term.

Although no extracts of registers can be here produced, to show upon which of
the smaller ports the whole of this calamity fell, yet every general reason
points out, that the total of it is exclusively to be carried to the account of
those of the home district; the increase of shipping of some of the smaller
ports of the other division, at least counterbalancing, probably much exceeding
some decrease, which might be experienced by others: because those causes, then
known to exist in this kingdom, adequate to the production of so great an evil,
or even capable of restraining a course of prosperity, were limited in their
operation to the home district exclusively. For although that district, beside
its disproportionate charge to the State by the land tax, is further exhausted
by paying an annual balance to the other counties, which this first oppression
draws after it, as its necessary consequence (a balance which considerably
exceeds the annual increment of the national coin) there is superadded to this,
a second and much greater, on account of coal: and the scarcity of fuel, which
has thus rendered the home district tributary to the rest of the kingdom, is a
circumstance, which has generated much depravity in the village poor; laid a
new tax upon the productions of agriculture; and tended, not a little, to
retard its improvements, and the increase of its products. And to the effect of
the same cause is further to be added, that by promoting the migration of some
of our manufacturers, and restraining the extent of others, it has produced the
same melancholy consequences on the laboring inhabitants of our greater towns
and cities, as on those of the villages; increasing the pressure of their
necessities; and, by perpetual intermissions of employment, relaxing their
habits of industry, and giving birth to, or increasing those of the worst
nature.

In this account are to be found, proximate as well as remote causes of
destruction of commerce, and the consequent decrease of shipping: these having
existed exclusively in the home district, the whole of their effect must have
taken place there. And it appears highly probable, that the account above
given, does not show the whole of their loss in shipping: for, from their
natural and artificial advantages, it seems absolutely necessary to admit, that
the smaller ports of the remote division taken collectively have made some
increase to their tonnage; counterbalancing in part the decrease of the others.
This rate of augmentation may certainly be taken equal to that of the average
increase of the national shipping, as retarded by the losses of the home
district; for their advantages are above the general average; and it may with
the greatest moderation be assumed, that as the four great out-ports, all
situated in the remote district, have in twenty-two years increased in tonnage,
in the proportion of 18122, to 10000, App. Art. 10. 4.
so that of the other ports alike situated, and partaking the same common
advantages, have, in the same time, increased in the proportion of 11755 to
10000 (which is the average rate of increase of the tonnage of the whole
kingdom) or with something less than one fourth of the celerity of the former.

But if it be contended that even this rate is too much, let the tonnage of
these smaller ports, taken collectively, be now admitted to have increased with
any celerity, less that here mentioned: the augment it has received must be
something; and the decrease of the tonnage of all the smaller ports of the
kingdom, taken together, will have been diminished by that increase: therefore
the decrease of that of the other ports, that is, those of the home district,
will be equal to the total decrease of this tonnage, 107,574 tons, with that
small augment added to it. The decrease of their shipping therefore, as above
represented, is less than the truth: whence it follows, that the celerity of
its decline is much less than the truth. For in 1750, the tonnage cleared
outward from the small home ports, must have been less than 264,073 tons, App.
Art. 10. 4.
the total for both districts: its decrease also exceeded 107,574 tons. Hence,
by the nature of proportion, it must have decreased from the year 1750 to 1772,
with a greater celerity, than that defined by the ratio of 264,073 tons, to
156,499 tons, or of 10000 to 5926. App. Art. 10. 4.


If the shipping of smaller remote ports be supposed to have been stationary,
neither increasing nor diminishing; the decrease of the annual tonnage of the
smaller home ports will remain as first stated: but, from the nature of
proportion, the celerity of their decline, as given above, will be below its
true magnitude.

There is one case indeed, in which the celerity of the decline of the shipping
of the home district, will be accurately defined by that proportion, that is,
if one equal decrease had taken place, at the same time, in the remote
division. But this supposition is extremely improbable; for it may be presumed,
that, in the history of commerce, there is not to be found an instance of a
great district, which had once acquired a considerable quantity of shipping, if
it had not lost its industry, or did not labor under any particular
circumstances of adversity, where that shipping was found to have been
decreasing, in long terms of time. It has always been progressive throughout
Europe in general, where the existence of such causes to retard it have not
been extremely evident.

Laying now aside, all further consideration of the absolute quantity of its
decrease; it is to be observed, that the celerity of the decline of the
shipping of the smaller home ports, can be exaggerated by the estimate given
above, upon one supposition only: and that is, that a more rapid decline has
taken place in the smaller ports of the other, in a time when every cause of
superiority was operating in their favor: an assumption too absurd to be
considered.

It is concluded hence, that the decrease of the shipping of the smaller home
ports, and the celerity of its decline, great as it is represented above,
rather falls short of, than exceeds the truth; and that, although this point is
established only upon general reasoning, which is certainly inferior in
conclusiveness to the proof arising from actual registers of tonnage, yet these
general reasons have great cogency, are founded upon well-known facts; and
there appears nothing of the like kind to be set against them, to balance them;
and they can only be set aside, by the production of copies of the entries of
such registers.

It may be said, that the state of the shipping of England may have been very
much altered, between the year 1772 and this time; and that the smaller home
ports may have recovered in a great part their relative proportion. Now, on an
average of three years, ending in 1774, the tonnage of all our ships in foreign
commerce was 979,263 tons; Chalmers's Opinions on interesting Subjects. 1784.
p. 99.
and in the like term, ending in 1783, 933,785 tons. This shows a decrease of
45,478 tons; Chalmers's Opinions on interesting Subjects. 1784. p. 99.
and exhibits no appearance of an increase of shipping in any part of the
kingdom: and the probable presumption is, that it would not have sprung up in a
time of general decline, in a district which every thing tends to depress: and
if such be the fact, it can be proved by the evidence of the registers alone.
It is beside to be added, that those causes which produced the decrease of
shipping from 1750 to 1772, must have been since removed, before its progress
could have been even stopped; and a much greater change must have taken place,
before their antecedent effect could have been in any degree recovered. Of
either of these great revolutions, no single vestige has occurred to me.

The proportional payment of the home district to the and-tax is, L2^075,100:
App. Art. 1. 17.
and its effective payment being L1,038,184, App. Art. 1. 17.
the defalcation amounts to L1,036,916. App. Art. 1. 17.
I therefore now proceed to show, that it is possessed of the full ability to
make up that deficiency.

This might be in general terms inferred, from the great increase of the
commerce of that part of the kingdom, just before instanced; but it may be more
directly proved, from particular and independent evidence, that, after such
augmentation of the tax, their burden would not be equal to that of their
actual contribution to it at its first imposition; on the contrary, that a
further addition of L99,400 a year to this proportional payment, must be made
to bring it to such equality; and, as they were able to support the original
charge, and rapidly emerge from a state of comparative depression into that of
a decided superiority over the remainder of the kingdom, that they are
possessed of the full ability now, to make good their defalcation to the
proportional payment.

The burden of a tax upon all income of the same condition, as before defined,
is the proportion the annual charge of the tax bears to the annual amount of
the income: thus a double sum taken from a double income, and a treble sum from
a treble income, constitute equal burdens; and so on, for any other
equimultiples of tax and income.

In 1693, the land tax, amounting annually to L 1,038,184, was laid on this
district. In sixteen years of the first twenty, the charge was the same, or at
4 s. in the pound: for three years at 3 s; and the remaining year at 2 s. At
the Revolution, or five years before its commencement, the remote district was
in a state of relative decline; which appears even to have been advancing upon
it, with great celerity. Yet the progress of this decline became retarded; it
stopped entirely; "the state of manufactures began to shift;" Guthrie's
Geography, edit. 1785. p. 367.
the lands in the other parts of the kingdom had fallen not very
inconsiderably; and those of the remote district advanced to a perfect equality
in value with them, so early as the sixteenth year after the expiration of the
first twenty. It is to be concluded therefore, that during that term of twenty
years, the burden of the land tax did not exceed the measure of that ability,
which the district then possessed; and that the same burden would at present
be attended with no oppression to them.

Our inquiry therefore must be directed to discover, what charge, in the year
1793, would be equal in burden to the actual payment of the division, in the
year 1693.

The taxability of any income is (every thing else being alike) as its selling
value. From a revenue of L1000 a year in land, or what is called here, income
of superior condition, a larger sum may be drawn in taxes, than from the same
rent in buildings, or income of inferior condition. Or if an income of the
latter kind be reduced in the proportion which its proper number of years
purchase bears to that of an estate in land, the resulting amount will be part
thereof, which appears to be justly the subject of taxation. Thus having given
the national rent of land, and of estates of inferior condition; the whole may
be reduced into an income, all the equal parts of which shall be of equal
value, and equitably pay the same rate in the pound to a tax. The value of
these rents in 1688, and 1774, are severally given. It appears from their
amount, that the national rent, during those eighty-six years, increased very
nearly per cent. App. Art. 2. 4.
annually: and supposing it to have continued to be augmented at this rate,
until the year 1793, the taxable national rents of 1693 and 1793 were L12^451
ms. App. Art. 2. 4.
and L26^085 App. Art. 2. 4.
ms. respectively

The wealth of the remote, has evidently increased with greater celerity, than
that of the home district; and consequently the advance of the rent thereof
exceeded the average rate of the whole kingdom. But let it be admitted to have
increased at an equal rate only; it follows, that the taxable income of estates
of this division, has increased, from the year 1693 to 1793, in the proportion
of 26^085 to 12^451; or in that of L0,174,500, to L1,038,184. But this latter
sum was the amount of the payment of the remote division to the land tax in
1693: now the experience of that time demonstrated, that it was able to bear
such a burden, for nearly twenty years successively, and, during that term, to
recover in a great measure from very depressed circumstances, and make large
steps in the road by which it has since led to a high degree of prosperity: and
the former sum, L2,174,500, being the payment of equal burden, the inhabitants
of that part of the country are now equally well able to bear it. Their
proportional payment was before shown to be L2,075,100, which falls short of
the tax of equal burden, by L99,400 App. Art. 2. 5.
a year. Reasons of very great validity must be produced by the possessors of
land in the remote district, to oppose to the claims of their countrymen for
redress or equalization: and I will here put the defensive argument, in which
they seem to repose the most confidence, in as good a light as I am able to
place it.

From the original imposition of the Land Tax (and a whole century has now
elapsed since that time) all contracts for estates in this district, have been
made in full confidence, that this proportion of payment would be perpetual. It
is not a few individuals whose interest are sacrificed to this innovation but
the whole body of purchasers of land, for that whole term; who in number
perhaps exceed three fourths of the cotemporary purchasers in the kingdom. All
these, by one act, will be stripped of a property for which they have paid a
fair value, and in which they thought themselves secured by the public faith.
It has certainly been tacitly given; but it has been ratified as often as the
present and original proportion has been re-enacted, which has been an annual
practice of the same continuation as the tax. And hence the State is become as
firmly pledged, by these repeated acts, as by the most express promise: for a
legal right, the most absolute and plenary, both to benefits and exemptions,
may be founded on long continued customs; and every good system of laws,
recognizes such customs as a foundation of civil right: all invasions upon them
have always been diligently repressed in the common courts, where the maxim,
quieta non sunt movenda, has constantly been had in reverence. But this custom
is of a higher nature: it is the custom of the legislature; and the custom of
parliament is the law of parliament, which is paramount to all its ordinary
acts, and a fundamental part of the Constitution; limiting even that power,
which limits every thing else.

To this it is answered, that the facts alleged are not true: and admitting
their truth, the conclusion must then rest entirely upon some other
assumptions, used in conjunction with them in the course of the argument, which
are totally repugnant to the first principles of society.

It is laid down as a fact in this argument, that all purchasers since the
establishment of the tax, have been made in full confidence that no
equalization would in future take place. To this it is replied, that the
expectation of the purchasers on this head, could not amount to such a
confidence. Our ancestors in the home district, before the imposition of the
tax, made their respective purchases, without any compensation for a perpetual
charge upon their purchased income, of double the magnitude which the new
land-owners of the remote counties will have to pay, after the equalization has
taken place. I repeat the words, of double the magnitude; for the question
being here of purchased income only, by the equalization they will lose a part
of such income, equal to one half only of that taken away from our ancestors,
at the original imposition of the tax: and this is the whole purchased income,
the tax after, equalization will take from them; the part thereof paid by them
at present not being purchased income. For at the treaty for the sale of the
estate to each individual, its amount was deducted out of its income, and no
money paid for it; and their expectation, that the whole of their purchased
income would be liable to no tax, must have been weakened, by their knowledge
that the State had formerly taken from the persons they represent, the same
quantity of purchased income which is now required for the equalization; and
from the proprietors of the home district, the double of that quantity. Their
expectation therefore of continuing to enjoy the whole of their purchased
income untaxed, must be less than that entertained by our ancestors, prior to
their having experienced such an assessment; and even the expectation the
latter might form, must have fallen very short of the measure of full
confidence, pretended to by the purchasers of the home district; as, in the
course of more than fifty years before the land tax took place, occasional aids
of great amount, under other names, had frequently been levied upon land. The
confidence therefore under which they pretend to have purchased must have been
diminished, by the experience of the former failure of a confidence, better
founded, in the case of the home district. It therefore could not be what they
style it, a full confidence. And it may be added (though it depends upon a
principle to be proved hereafter) that they must always have suspected, that
the inequality of the land tax must ultimately be remedied; because, in
counties where the greater outlines of a moral policy are upon the whole well
preserved, no exemption flagrantly abusive can subsist to all perpetuity: and
that such forms of government, by their own internal vigor, ultimately purge
off all real feculencies.

But if we examine this full confidence which has perpetually existed, a little
more closely, we shall come to its true nature: it is a new species of full
confidence, which has subsisted under a constant expectation, entertained in
both parts of the kingdom, that it would ultimately fail. The subject of Baron
Maseres's work on annuities, makes him a very good authority on this head; he
has beside paid considerable attention to it: by him we are informed, that the
persons who have been lightly taxed, have always feared; and those who have
been heavily taxed, have always hoped, that the Parliament would, one day or
other, have sufficient regard to justice to correct this gross inequality.
Maseres, vol. 2. p. 449.
It follows that the purchasers of estates in the remote district did not, at
the time of purchasing, regard that part of their income which an equalization
would take from them, as a certain and perpetual annuity; but as a contingent
income only, which must cease on the happening of a certain event, which was so
probable in their opinion, as to be the object of constant fear. Now nobody can
imagine, that the same number of years purchase would be paid for an income or
part of an income, which it was always feared might be taken from the
purchaser, as for an absolute perpetuity; there must have been some difference
in the purchase-money. Now this difference allowed to the buyer, was the value
of the increase against the contingency happening; or, the income ceasing by
the equalization of the tax. And this is effectively the same thing, as if the
purchaser had paid down the whole value of that income; out of which a sum
equal to the then reputed value of the hazard, had been repaid to him by the
seller, as a proper equivalent to the loss of it, when it should happen: all
such purchasers in the remote district, have therefore the consideration for
this addition to the tax in hand; or it has been paid to those of whom they are
the representatives; whole virtual engagements, binding the income, they must
abide by: and it must be admitted, that these purchasers, either by themselves
or their representatives, have one with another been permitted to enjoy this
contingent annuity, a much longer term than they could have expected; for if no
second sale of the same estate had taken place, during the whole century the
disparity has subsisted, the purchaser and those claiming under him, will,
according to the equality of chance, have been in possession of this beneficial
contingency fifty years; and taking repeated sales into the question, the term
may probably have been about thirty-five, or forty years.

But let it be now supposed, that all these contracts for the purchase of land,
were actually as improvidently made as they were stated to be: join to this the
well-known fact, that Parliament has adhered, during a whole century, to the
same proportion of assessment: yet this will not serve as a foundation, to
prove such a custom as is alleged; granting all that is laid down in law books
upon the validity of custom: for it is an established maxim of the law, malus
usus abolendus est; Blackstone's Com. v. 1. p. 76. 1783.
an inequitable custom must be abolished. The Act of 1693 established the
inequality, and such an act it is itself, among the enumerated proofs that
custom is invalid; since the statute itself is a proof of a time when such
custom did not exist: Blackstone's Com. p. 77.
and the like may be said of the 99 subsequent acts, every one of which is a
full and distinct proof of its nonexistence at the time it was passed; and
this is the total support their claim of custom derives from the original
proportion of assessment having been 99 times re-enacted: beside, if, at any
time during the whole period, the faith of Parliament had been expressly
pledged to the remote district, for the continuance of their exemption, and not
tacitly and by implication, it would have destroyed the analogy set up between
this custom and a legal custom, as it would have shown it to have been not
compulsory; Ibid. p.
an essential property of a legal custom, but voluntary.

As the continuance of the immunity contended for, fails of all support from
its analogy to a legal custom; its only remaining defense must rest upon the
principles of natural equity.

Let us therefore examine, how far it can be reconciled to the first principles
on which human society is formed, and on which it continues to be kept
together. These are always clearly discoverable, by the fiction of a number of
wise and well-disposed individuals, who were before independent of each other,
meeting to form a compact to enter into society; and all disguise of their
sentiments and circumstances being out of the question, by the description of
the individuals forming such a meeting, the want of each individual, for the
protection of all the rest, and his desire to obtain it, would be really and
apparently equal; and every one would readily and honestly engage to contribute
to the protection of all the rest, by prestations, bearing the same proportion
to his ability, or constituting equal burdens to him; By prestations are to be
understood, renders of personal service, or of commodities, or both jointly; or
of their representative signs.
for there exists no ground, in the case described, why less or more than that
proportion should be either required or accepted of, or engaged for by any one.

That the burdens of every member of the same community be equal, is therefore
the first principle on which human society is founded; and that compact is
violated, when any one refuses to take his proportioned share in the aggregate
burden: it is of moral obligation as long as he enjoys the protection of the
society or nation; and such obligation, a series of infractions of no length,
although it may very well suit the iniquity of self-interest to call it a
custom, can invalidate: moral obligations cannot be prescribed against. No
absolute and declared act of any legislature can cancel the first article of
this primitive convention. Parliament, therefore, is not competent to pledge
the national faith, even by an express law, that the tax should not be
equalized; and it will not, I suppose, be pleaded, that that august assembly
could tacitly contract such an engagement on the part of the nation, when an
express declaratory law to that purpose would, in itself, be null and void.

Upon the grounds of the objection, advanced by the remote district, against an
equalization of the tax, it might be likewise proved, that such tax ought never
to be laid in countries where it has not been laid before; and where it has,
that it should be immediately repealed: for, prior to the introduction of such
a tax, every purchaser of an estate would have paid the full market value of
its clear income, and of every part thereof; and the tax will take from him an
income he has purchased under the full security of enjoying it; a security more
complete, and much higher in degree, than the land-owners of the remote
district can entertain. This being an absolute injustice, such a tax ought not
to be introduced; and where it is already established, the evil ought to be
remedied as fast as possible; and, with very little trouble, it might be shown
upon the same ground, that every other tax ought to be repealed.

There is a very numerous class of proprietors in the remote district, who
possess estates which have been in their families for the whole ^erm of the
existence of the tax; during which, a double charge has fallen upon the income
of those of the home counties. If the former were to rest the continuance of
this inequality upon their own interest, they would want even a verbal
pretension to resist the claims made upon them. Injustice does not like,
however, to go quite barefaced; she will rather make use of any flimsy tatter,
almost transparent, to veil herself with. Some of the old hereditary
proprietors, it may be presumed, t^ke up the argument here considered for this
reason; others join them who never examine what they have constantly heard
repeated, and what their self interest makes them wish to be true; and many who
examine no old opinions at all: these unite to give this miserable shadow of a
pretense for the continuance of oppression and injustice, weight and currency;
and together with those whose claims to indulgence they avow themselves to
defend, they form a great majority of the landlords of the remote counties;
that is, of three quarters of England. Yet if this argument, in its best form,
were proposed to any sensible man, who was not previously acquainted with it,
and with the interests and prejudices which combine to support it, and he was
told at the same time, that it was the language held by a large party of
well-informed men in England, he would be apt to suspect the veracity of the
relation.

Hitherto the difference of the charge of the land tax of the home district,
and that of the whole of the remote division, has been considered; it remains
only to draw a comparison of the former, with a part of the latter, the county
of York. The actual and proportional payment of that county to the land tax,
and its rate in the pound, are the only points to be considered.

Following the process laid down at the beginning of this Section, it appears
that the rent of the home district is to that of the county of York, as 10,000
to 4034; the actual payment of the home distrct, to the land tax, is L.652,275;
and the proportional payment of the county, L.263,120; its actual payment is
L.91,620; and the defalcation, L.171,500. App. Art. 3.


This proportional charge is to the actual payment, as 10,000 to 3481; and for
every L.10,000 paid by the county to this tax, the proportional charge is L.
28,719: the tax upon the home counties is 2 s. and 1 1/^ d. and upon the county
of York 8 d. and 9/10 Ibid.
in the pound.

SECTION V. On the Addition to be made to the Number of the Representatives of
the Home and Remote Districts, according to the Plans for the Alteration of the
Constitution of the House of Commons, proposed in 1785 and 1790.
IN considering the consequence of the plans for a change of the election of
the Commons, I confine myself to those brought forward in the years 1785 and
1790: as it is probable, from the great celebrity of their movers, that on a
future occasion either one or the other will be revived; or some third scheme
brought forward, compounded from both. The first was introduced into the House
by Mr. Pit, in the year 1785; the second, by Mr. Flood, in 1790, whose name
certainly retains great weight, with those who now call for this great
alteration in the Constitution; and of the outline of which Mr. Fox declared,
that it was the best he had ever heard suggested upon the subject. New Annual
Register, 1790. History, p. 94.


I shall begin with a very short analysis of each of these plans.

That of Mr. Pit New Annual Register, 1785. History, p: 82, 3.
consisted of three parts, as follows -- The suppression of some smaller
boroughs, which ultimately were to have been about fifty in number: this was to
have been done by the purchase of the right of election of single boroughs,
whenever the consent of two thirds of the electors was obtained for its
surrender.

The first set of boroughs to have been disfranchised, was in number
thirty-six: and seventy-two members were to be added to the representatives for
counties, in such proportion to each, as the wisdom of Parliament might
prescribe: and copyholders were to have been admitted to the right of voting,
in all the counties.

After this part of the plan had been fully executed, the rights of election of
other boroughs were to have been bought up, and transferred to large towns at
present unrepresented. As it was supposed, that the new members would
ultimately amount to about a hundred; the number of the second class of
boroughs to have been suppressed, would have been nearly fourteen; and in
populous towns, where the number of electors are very few, that franchise was
to have been extended to all the inhabitants.

By this plan, the number of members in the House of Commons would have
remained unaltered; strict regard being had to the article of the Union on this
subject.

That of Mr. Flood New Annual Register, 1790. History, p. 94.
consisted of a single article only -- That a hundred new members should be
added to the House, to be elected by the householders of the counties.

By the first, if executed in its full extent, about fifty boroughs would have
been suppressed: by the second, they are all supposed to continue in the
possession of their franchise. According to the former, some greater towns, now
unrepresented, were to have the privilege of returning members to Parliament;
the number of these members would have been about twenty-eight: by the latter,
no new grant of this kind was made. And lastly, by the scheme of 1785, the
members of counties were to have been increased by seventy-two; and by a
hundred, by the plan of 1790: but by both, the right of voting is extended to
electors of new descriptions; and the number of members who would have obtained
seats upon absolutely new appointments, by the first, is the same as that which
would have been added to the House by the second of these schemes of alteration.

The several parts of each of them, and the circumstances connected with them,
which tend to affect the balance of power in the representation of the two
districts, are now to be made the subject of disquisition.

The continuance or the suppression of the elective franchises of the boroughs,
will produce some difference in the effects of the alteration of the Lower
House, upon this balance. It will therefore be shown that there is no
probability that in future such suppression will take place; for it is by no
means certain that it would have been affected, if the Bill of 1785 had been
passed into its original form: but it is more clearly evinced by the following
argument. It will be opposed by all those who wish to uphold the present
constitution of the House; and they will be supported in their opposition
(judging from what is past) by the most effective advocates for a change.

And first, it is by no means certain that the elective franchises of certain
boroughs would have been bought up and suppressed, if the Bill of Mr. Pit in
1785 had passed into a law.

For, prior to the suppression of any borough, the Bill made it requisite that
two thirds of the electors should signify, in a prescribed manner, their assent
to resign their elective franchises. This act indeed would become binding upon
the whole; and they were to receive a compensation for their surrender, which
would, upon an average, have amounted to L27,777 to each borough. One million
was to have been allotted, for the suppression of 36 boroughs. New Annual
Register, 1785. Hist. p. 82.


But we cannot but perceive there was, by this plan, much left to chance in the
suppression of the boroughs It was postponed to an indefinite period; and Mr.
Pit admitted, that the operation of the scheme would not have been immediate,
at least in its fullest extent. It was declared however, that the benefit of
the plan was expected to be felt, before the expiration of the Parliament then
newly assembled. When Mr. Flood proposed his plan in 1790, he observed on this
head, that the purchase must be slow and uncertain, and that the worst
boroughs, those of Government, would never resign.

There is a very great party in the House, who support the boroughs as part of
the existing Constitution: and when their suppression is again moved (judging
from what is past), we may pronounce, they will be joined by a very effective
body of the advocates for a change; namely, those who shall follow on this
subject the former sentiments of Mr. Fox; and (as we are not to presume on a
change of opinion in any man, till we have some evidence of it) by that great
leader of Opposition himself. The outline of Mr. Flood's plan has been given
before he proposed the admission of one hundred new members for counties into
the House, to be elected in a manner he described, and to leave the boroughs in
their present state. Mr. Fox owned that he thought its outlines the best he had
ever heard suggested upon the subject. New Annual Register, 1790. Hist. p. 94.


But nothing could tend to give more stability and permanence to them, than the
effect of some of the principles laid down by him upon this subject, in 1785.
He contended that the franchise election was a public trust, and not a
property; which therefore the public had a right to resume, without any
pecuniary consideration. If it be admitted that the principle contains an
abstract truth, no abstract proposition can be laid down, tending to raise a
stronger barrier against all attempts to get rid of the boroughs. It precludes
all treaty between the electors, and all other persons interested in the
thirty-six boroughs, and the State; and by alarming all the rest, it must have
united them in a much firmer combination in the general defense. He likewise
laid a further difficulty in the way of the measure; arguing on the principles
of those who consider the right of voting for a representative as a property,
he did not hesitate to declare, that he would never agree to the purchasing
from the majority of the electors, the property of the whole. New Annual
Register, 1785. Hist. p. 85, 86.
In requiring a perfect unanimity of the whole body of the electors of a
borough, the difficulty of obtaining a voluntary resignation of their elective
powers, was increased to the utmost; and when in the same debate he honored
with his particular approbation, that principle which, by a diminution of
members for boroughs, tended to increase the proportion of knights of the
shire, New Annual Register, 1785. Hist. p. 85, 86.
one is a loss to conceive, by what practical means he could give it effect;
nor, unless he looked upon it as a political impossibility, can this decided
praise which he has given to the abstract principle, be reconciled to his
declaring afterward the outlines of a plan from which it was expressly
excluded, the best he had ever heard suggested upon the subject.

The name of Mr. Flood itself, independent of this approbation, will influence
many in favor of this distinguishing part of his scheme; and a great class of
the supporters of the change, become supporters of the continuance of the
elective franchise of the boroughs.

The qualified system, however, which he endeavored to introduce, bore a
nearer resemblance to that of the late Lord Chatham, than he seemed disposed to
admit. The plan of that nobleman, was to make an addition to the county
representatives; leaving the rotten boroughs, as he expressed it, to drop off
by time. Mr. Flood proposed, that the new representatives of counties should be
elected by the resident householders: the second article of Lord Chatham's
plan, the leaving the boroughs in their present state, he professed to retain;
and observes upon Mr. Pitt's scheme, that to disfranchise them might be
arbitrary; but that to buy them out, would be to build reform, not on purity,
but corruption. New Annual Register, 1790. Hist. p. 93.


From this account of the two debates on the change of the representation, it
does not seem certain, from what passed at the first, that the suppression of
the smaller boroughs would have been carried into execution, if the addition of
county members had been consented to; and in the second, this part of the plan
was not only deserted, but treated with no very indirect censure.

In the further support of this conclusion, I shall bring forward the authority
of another of the greater patrons of this revolution in the third estate; who
is to be understood as delivering the sentiments of that great body of men, who
have taken the lead in this measure, and who have placed him at their head. The
evidence here to be produced, is that of the Rev. Mr. Wyvill, late chairman of
the committee of the Yorkshire association. In his Defense of the Reformers of
England, pages 15, 62, 80, 82, 90, 95, when he speaks of the boroughs, he is
totally silent as to the suppression of any: every thing that he says relating
to them, is confined to the liberation of the electors from the state of
influence, or even of subjection, under which he states them to be brought by
certain individuals: and to these he likewise strongly urges, the absolute
necessity of resigning their usurpations; the abolition of which he represents
as the ultimate object of popular pursuit. This amounts to an absolute
disavowal of all the plans for their disfranchisement. It also might be
inferred that such a thorough measure would not meet his concurrence, or that
of the party of which he is the head, from the principle he lays down, that men
do not attempt to correct, what they wish to destroy. He had given great
praise, indeed, to the plan brought forward by Mr. Pit in 1785: but what he
has said on each subject, ought to be so construed, that his declarations on
both may be made to stand together. This praise is general; and such praise may
always be supposed to be attended with the reserve of some particulars, which a
writer does not stop to specify, or intentionally declines it: his approbation
is therefore to be understood, to extend to the other parts of Mr. Pitt's plan,
exclusive of the disfranchisement of boroughs; and so taken, the appearance of
contradiction stated here is done away.

It results from the whole of this, that no serious attempt will be probably
made, for the suppression of any of the smaller boroughs: it is rather to be
expected, that, at a future period, a compromise may be offered between the
spirit of alteration and borough influence, perhaps by laying them a little
more open; that something may be gained to the former, and something preserved
to the latter.

The measures to be pursued with respect to the boroughs, are not without their
consequence, in determining what share of power each of the districts will have
in the House of Commons, after a change of its constitution shall have been
affected; as will be shown in its proper place. What they will probably in
future be, has been therefore here examined upon the authorities of leaders of
parties. It will be likewise shown further on, that the plan of laying open the
boroughs, as far as it has any effect on this future balance of power, will
operate against the home district.

It follows likewise from what has been already advanced, that the home
district ought so to act, whenever this measure shall be attempted a third
time, as if no more was intended to be carried, than what was moved for the
second; namely, an addition to the number of county members only.

A second great alteration in the constitution of the House, by the plan of
1785, was giving the franchise of election to some populous towns at present
not represented: it was calculated that the number of members so to be
admitted, would amount to about twenty-eight. Now the remote district having
increased in manufactures and population, with much greater celerity than the
home counties; the number of towns in the former, risen into the required
degree of consequence, bear a greater proportion to its magnitude, than those
of the latter; and instances perhaps are there only to be sound, of market
towns rising into the magnitude of great cities, and villages into that of
populous towns. Hence the number of new members to be thus added to the remote
district, shall exceed that of the home district, more than in the proportion
of its magnitude, or that of 314 to 100, the ratio of their landed capital. The
nearest approach to this proportion, in integer numbers, is by allotting seven
members to the smaller district, and twenty-one to the larger; which thus would
acquire a majority of fourteen. But the number of votes thus acquired by the
remote district, is less than the proportion assigned above points out; and it
has been shown that it ought to be greater: and more probably, the least
acquisition of the latter might be taken at twenty-three, and of the former at
five; or the remote district acquire a new addition to its majority in the
House, on all territorial questions, of eighteen voices.

The last alteration these plans hold out, is that of adding to the number of
the county members; and in this they both concur. By the plan of Mr. Pit this
addition was to have been of seventy-two; which were to have been allotted in
such proportion to each county, "as the wisdom of Parliament might prescribe."
New Annual Register, 1785. Hist. p. 82.
It may be here taken, that the addition to be made to the number of members
returned by each county, would be such, as to make its share in the
representation proportioned as nearly as possible to its weight and importance
in the scale of the general landed interest; that is, to the total value of
such county itself. And the present number of county members being ninety-two,
and that of the proposed addition seventy-two; the representatives of the
landed interest would thus amount to one hundred and sixty-four.

Now the value of the home and remote district being to each other as 10,000
and 31,814 respectively; the balance of power of those divisions in the Lower
House, according to the present system, and the proposed plan of alteration
here considered, is shown in the following comparative statement. App. Art. 5.
1.


Number of Members. Present Plan of 1785 Expressed in the nearest whole numbers.
Additions by the latter. Home District 24 39 15 Remote District 68 125 57
Majority of latter 44 86 42

By this plan the majority of the representatives of the landed interest of the
home division, would be increased from forty-four to eighty-six, or very nearly
doubled.

But this majority would have received a further accession of strength, by a
disproportionate addition of new members for great towns, if that part of the
plan of 1785 had ever been carried into execution. For the majority of the
members of the whole district would have received a further increase of
fourteen votes, or have now become fifty-six in the whole: for the latter would
have brought an augmentation of power to the landed interest of its proper
district; though perhaps not quite so certain and effective, as an equal
addition of representatives of counties.

We shall find that the consequences of Mr. Flood's plan would have been in
this respect very nearly the same: and at the first view, there is the
appearance of total coincidence between both. He proposed that the number of
representatives should be increased one hundred, and that they should be
elected by the householders of the counties. These are inhabitants of market
towns and villages, the latter are chiefly landlords and tenants, with a few
little tradesmen; the former contain a greater number of tradesmen and
artificers in tolerable circumstances; but whose business chiefly depends upon
the neighboring farmers or gentry. Here we see nothing but landed proprietors
and electors of the two other descriptions, either immediately or mediately
dependent upon them. The new class of members, in both the great districts of
the kingdom, will be returned by the landed interest; and be in all respects as
much representatives of that interest, as if the votes by which they are
appointed had been given by men of landed property only. Hence, if this scheme
be carried into execution, the number of representatives of the landed interest
being increased by one hundred, will become one hundred and ninety-two: and the
number of members of both the great divisions of the kingdom, by the new
arrangement, are to be taken as being made proportional to the value of estates
in each; according to the supposition laid down, when the corresponding part of
the scheme of 1785 was under consideration: and the comparative statement of
the new and old representations of the two districts, may be exhibited as
follows. App. Art. 5. 2.


Number of Members by Present system. Plan of 1790 Additions by latter. Remote
District 68 146 78 Home District 24 46 22 Majority of former 44 100 56

By this plan the majority of the representatives of the landed interest of the
remote district, would be considerably more than doubled.

This decrease of power of the landed interest of the home district in the
Commons, is an unbalanced loss, to be repaired by no probable circumstance. If
the power of sending members to parliament, had been taken from, or resigned by
a number of the smaller boroughs; part of those which would have been
suppressed, would undoubtedly have been situated in the remote district; and
thus this decrease of power would have been in some degree, though
inadequately, counterbalanced. But that idea, which never appears to have been
cordially taken up by the greater patrons of the change, was soon avowedly
deserted, and even condemed. And if it be now to be purposed, that any
alteration should take place in them, it will only be in the number and
description of their electors. But whether measures for this purpose are to be
embraced, or not, the consequences to result from the increase of the majority
of the county members of the remote district, will remain the same as if no
change were made in such bodies or borough election; for there is nothing in
such alteration to counterbalance this increased majority: if it have any
feeble effect in this case, it will act in concurrence with it.

On account of the consequences which the continuance of the smaller boroughs
will be attended with, the probability of it has been considered at some
length. I therefore add this further observation only upon the subject: those
who are, from principle alone, friends to this alteration of the Constitution,
will consent to their continuance under some modifications, to diminish the
opposition they must otherwise meet, and those of the remote district, who are
patrons of it from local interests alone, or jointly with other motives, will
concur with the former. And this is additional evidence, that a total
disfranchisement of the smaller boroughs will not be attempted. But let it be
now admitted that it actually takes place; and let its consequence, in
conjunction with an increase of the members for counties, upon the proportion
of power to the landed interest of the home district, in the Lower House, be
now examined.

It has been before observed, that it must be supposed, that some or many of
the boroughs to be suppressed are situated in the remote district: thus some
counterbalance to the increase of its majority will take place; although it
cannot be doubted, that if a number of boroughs were suppressed in that
district, and their members added to the counties, its landed interest in the
House would be very much strengthened; and its influence, in every thing
relating to charges upon land, very much increased. For the landed estates of
county members, upon an average, very considerably exceed those of the
representatives of boroughs: they are therefore far more interested in all
charges upon their own land; and they will not only join with more unanimity in
opposing them, but they will individually exert their personal abilities with
more energy, and employ their more extensive interest with a more earnest
diligence, to the same end. But let it be admitted that any number of them
could be found, disposed to sacrifice their immediate pecuniary interest to
public justice or expediency; they have another object, at least of equal
magnitude, to surmount: the private interest of all their constituents is
directly against the increase of charge upon land, with whom, taken in the
aggregate, it is always public virtue, not to give up a partial or total
exemption from any general chage; to resist the imposition of a new, or the
extension of an old tax. It is a kind of local patriotism: and the honors of
this patriotism are acquired in villages, by cheating the hundred for the good
of the parish; in the hundred, by cheating the province; in the province, by
defrauding the nation; and in a nation, by robbing the world in general. And if
any individual belonging to one of these societies, endeavor to counteract
these objects of public utitity, he is looked upon as a betrayer of the public
interest, and a traitor. Hence, if a county member of the remote district were
to give his vote for the equalization of the land tax, he might not only lose
his seat, but retire under no small load of popular odium. Many individuals may
be found, who have that regard for the general State, that they will submit to
burdens, which they have the most probable expectations of being able to
evade: a sentiment which hardly ever discovers itself in great bodies of men.
Among the reasons to be given for this, is, that here the blame of injustice
rests upon the whole, and no part of it separately attaches itself to any one
in particular.

And as charges on land are less expensive in general upon the representatives
of boroughs, their property in land, upon an average, not being nearly so large
as that of members for counties; so their constituents of the foRmer are less
interested in such charges than those of the latter. It will even frequently
happen, that they are totally uninterested in the tax of the lands in their
neighborhood: or as, by the imposition of such taxes, they may expect to avoid
future additions to their own, their interest may be contrary to that of the
district in which the borough is situated. The members of many boroughs are
therefore quite uninfluenced by the landed interest of the circumjacent
country, as far as respects the security of their seats: and even where a
member is effectively nominated by a single opulent landed man, it is much more
probable that he will leave him to act by his own discretion, on this head,
than that he will so be left, in this case, by the landlords of a whole county;
for individuals are much more frequently determined by disinterested motives,
than numerous bodies of men.

It follows from this, that if a number of boroughs disfranchised, and their
members added to the landed interest, increasing the number sent by both
districts, so as to render them proportional to their values, the superiority
of the remote district in the House will be very considerably increased.

And if the privilege of voting for the members of the smaller boroughs be
extended to the land-owners of the circumjacent counties, the representatives
of every such borough, will be more influenced by the landed interest than
before: and if all such boroughs be so laid open, the remote district will
acquire some further degree of superiority in the Legislature; which may not be
inconsiderable, and without danger to the home counties.

What has been already said leads to a question, the examination of which
cannot properly be here declined; that is, how far the consequences resulting
from this alteration, have or have not been among the motives for the singular
zeal and perseverance with which this object has been pursued, of late years,
in certain parts of the kingdom.

In the first place, it may here be observed, that it seems impossible that it
could at any time have been the general motive of any great combination of men,
in any part of the kingdom; for in that case the expected effect of the measure
must have been as extensively known, as the motive was general: and its very
publicity would have rendered its success impossible, by alarming the home
district against it, whose concurrence in it its advocates might not only wish,
but otherwise expect to obtain. Beside, the arguments by which it would be
defended, whatever superficial appearance of plausibility they might be dressed
out with, would appear to be nothing but the mockery of injustice. It cannot
therefore have possibly been the motive of the great exertions of communities
at large.

Again, the consequence pointed out cannot have been the motive of numerous
committees in any part of England, to have taken up such a measure; for if it
had been so, it would have become matter of general notoriety: nor is it to me
credible, there can be indiscriminately taken in any part of England, out of
any political party, a numerous assembly of men of property and education, as
many of the committees for this purpose have been, to whom any man, or set of
men, would venture to propose the pursuit of such an end as has been described,
by such means.

Yet it appears extremely probable, that the effect of this alteration to
perpetuate the inequality of the land tax, did not escape the attention of all
persons who were interested in it: however, it might pass totally unheeded, by
a great body of those who actively concurred with them, and even of their
ostensible leaders; and of these persons some might have contributed to give
movement to this business, and to support that unwearied spirit with which it
has been persevered in. And the general cicumstances of the case, the county
where, and the peculiar time when, the measures to carry this plan into
execution were first set on foot, are, taken together, no inconsiderable
evidence of this; at least it renders the contrary very difficult to conceive.
Such was the persuasion at least which impressed itself upon me, if a writer
may state his individual conviction, about the time of the intermission of the
long persevering struggle of the party formed to effect this change in the
constitution of Parliament, after the check it received by the defeat of 1785.

The first county which took up the alteration of the Commons with zeal and
system, was that of York; and indeed it is the only one which can be said to
have done so. This measure was entered upon, at a general meeting of the
freeholders, in the year 1779. How far the county was interested in this as a
defensive measure, is evident by a comparison of its actual and proportional
charges to the land tax. When the nominal rate of that tax is 4 s. in the
pound, its actual charge on the home district is 2 s. and 1 d; App. Art. 3.
and on the county of York to 8 ^/^^ d. its actual payment to the tax, at the
same nominal rate, is L.91,620: but its charge on every tract of the home
counties, equal in rent, amounts on an average to L.263,120. Sec. 4. table.
It is evident therefore, upon an equalization of the land tax, the charge upon
the county of York would be very greatly increased; and that it is much more
deeply interested against a parliamentary reform of this abuse, than any other
county in England.

Therefore the probability here contended for, receives all the support which
can possibly be derived from the consideration of the place where the measure
originated. The evidence deducible from the time and circumstance of its being
so taken up, and of the great effort made some years after to carry it into
execution, is now to be brought forward.

It has been shown before, that apprehensions had always been entertained in
the favored counties, that an equalization of the tax was an event which would
one day take place; and these apprehensions were greatly increased in 1779, the
time when the association of the county of York was set on foot. Now, in a
former Section of this tract, many circumstances have been produced, to prove
that a considerable addition must be made to the land tax, at a near period:
they were mostly written, when the conclusion of a very prosperous peace was
not esteemed to be so near, as in fact it was found to be: the necessity of
that augmentation could not appear less in degree, or more remote in distance,
during the despondency and misfortunes of the war of the colonies, when enemy
was superadded to enemy, and when the county of York formed its association.
And every such appearance of necessity to increase the tax, must increase the
apprehension entertained by the favored counties, and by that of York in
particular: their comparative exemption is approaching with speed to its end.

But there were other causes then existing, peculiar to that juncture, to alarm
the foresight of self-interest, and put it upon its guard. Circumstances
sufficient to make an impression upon every mind, had recently and strongly
tended to draw the inequality of the tax to public attention. It has been seen
before, that the resistance of the colonies to the claims of taxation, was
defended by Dr. Franklin (who might then have been properly called their
minister in England) by the injustice of the English Parliament, shown by this
inequality; that this injustice he frequently inveighed against. Maseres on
Life-Annuities, p. 450. This truly great man used always to quote the
continuance of the land tax, upon its present very unequal footing, as a proof
of the little regard that was had to justice and common sense in our national
deliberations. When it was objected to him, that the correction of this
inequality would be unjust to those who had purchased land, upon a supposition
of its continuance, he replied with some quickness: Unjust! yes, it would be
unjust; for it would be doing but half of what strict justice requires; which
would be, to create a counter-inequality in the assessment of the land tax,
whereby the lands which had been heavily taxed, should hereafter be taxed
lightly; and those which had been lightly taxed, should hereafter be taxed
heavily, for the space of about fourscore years; or for a time, which should be
equal to the time during which the present inequality has been permitted to
continue.
Truths derive effective weight, and receive general currency, from the
greatness of the occasion on which they are laid down, and the great
consequences they are seen to draw after them; and whatever gives a subsequent
addition to the celebrity of the man who employs them with such effect, tends
more strongly at the instant to concentrate the general attentention to them,
and to excite alarm in those whose interests they oppose. And in the beginning
of 1778, it was known that he had completed the dismemberment of the empire, by
his treaty with France; and in the next, the association of this county was
formed. From the political sentiments of the majority of its members, he had
many admirers, and probably personal friends, among them: and no doubt can be
entertained, that his sentiments on this subject were sufficiently understood
to several. As therefore it was a period in which there was greater reason to
expect a formidable attempt, on their relative immunity from the tax, than at
any other preceding it; the strongest probability indicates that there must
have been some persons who urged on the association, as an adequate defensive
measure against it.

If the circumstances which took place when this country made its great effort
in 1785, be examined; the same conclusion results from them. Dr. Price, writing
in the beginning of 1784, informs us that in 1783 there had existed an excess
of annual expenses of the nation above the receipt, of L.1,393,204: part of
this he states to have been temporary; and he estimates the reduced deficit at
L.823,642. Postscript to State of Public Debt; dated March 22, 1784. Cadell, p.
11, 12.
We may suppose this state of the revenue to have been known and given full
credit to, by many members of that association; of which his able defender, the
Rev. Mr. Wyvill, had long continued the head, Baron Maseres, one of the first
calculators of the age, and the friend of Dr. Price, in his very important work
treating on revenues and debt, had the year before affirmed that there was
reason to apprehend that on the return of peace it would be necessary to add
two millions a year to the land tax; to make good the payment of the interest
of the debt, and acquire a surplus of a million or twelve hundred thousand
pounds, to be applied to its reduction; On Life-Annuities, p. 448. He dates the
passage here extracted, April, 1782.
that is, in case, upon the return of peace, we shall have a deficiency of
revenue, nearly of the same amount which was actually found to exist. The State
was then in the very situation he described; in speaking of which he had added,
that it was highly fit to correct the inequality of the land tax.

If the revenue had not recovered from this state of deficiency, recourse must
have been had to some very effective tax, or set of taxes; and there was
sufficient probability, that it must have been to the land tax, to alarm those
who were interested in it.

This alarm must have been greatly increased, by the singular decline of public
credit, in the following year 1784; for the price of stock in that year, so far
from holding out any expectation of an amendment in our situation, seemed to
indicate, that additional calamities were coming upon us with rapidity, and
that nothing less than the most ready and effectual aids could support us. That
year was marked, by the average price of the 3 per cents stocks having fallen
to the lowest point of depression, which had ever been known in the whole
period of their existence: they had sunk nearly L.9 per cent. below the average
of the preceding unfortunate war; their mean neat value, in that year, having
been L.56.09 App. Art. 11. 4 and 5.
per cent. only, even below the lowest year of that term: and in March 1785,
their price in the market had been reduced to L.54 New Annual Register, Pub.
Papers, p. 240.
per cent.

Such was the situation of our finances, and the apparent necessity of
obtaining a great augmentation of revenue from some quarter by a very
productive tax, in the year 1784, and the beginning of 1785; when the Yorkshire
association exerted all its efforts, to bring about what is called a reform.
Now this measure being adapted to the purpose of continuing their comparative
exemption from the land tax, like a means to an end; being pushed with great
energy, by the county most interested in flinging obstructions in the way of
real reform, that of substantial injustice; and their strongest exertions
having been twice made, at a crisis when the most alarming danger threatened
that exemption; these circumstances combined render it credible, that there are
persons, not ignorant of the consequences of an alteration of the constitution
of the House of Commons here described, mixed with the general body of the
friends of that plan in the remote district, and who are not without influence
in the direction of their measures.

And there is nothing discoverable which diminishes the degree of this
probability, in the general inaction of this party in the remote district,
during the six years of great prosperity, following the rejection of the Bill
of 1785, which seemed to have removed the danger to an indefinite distance; nor
in the resumption of their operations, with some little change of mode, during
the spring of last year, when a war upon the Continent was become certain, in
which there were grounds to conjecture, that we might be sooner or later
involved; whereby their former danger might return upon them, and perhaps
increased in degree.

I shall now address a few observations to both the districts, drawn from what
has preceded. To the inhabitants of the home counties in general, it may be
said, that, as Nature has given you disadvantages to struggle with, your
attention ought to be vigilantly employed, that no addition be made to them
that can be prevented: Nature, in giving coal-mines to your countrymen, has
rendered you tributary to them. This unfortunate disparity in physical
circumstances, has diminished many of your manufactures, and perhaps
annihilated some: and on account of the expense of fuel, you are less able to
support the competition of foreigners, in those articles of export trade which
remain to you. The superiority you once possessed over the rest of the kingdom
in foreign commerce, has been lost above a century: these misfortunes are
derived from natural circumstances; they will probably be as permanent as their
cause, and the inhabitants of the home counties must acquiesce under them.

The same however cannot be said of that which is now to be stated: the
shipping in your ports has been so decreased, that it requires half the
augmentation of that of the rest of the kingdom, to make up the loss; and this
shows, not only a relative, but an absolute decline: and it does not seem, that
any natural cause can be produced for it. It is a loss of which perhaps no
second instance can be found to have taken place on the same extent of coast,
in any part of Europe. In natural advantages, in skits, in capital, the
maritime parts of this district are superior to many, if not to most of these
equal tracts. This indicates the existence of some artificial cause, by which
this depression must have been greatly increased, if not absolutely genera^ed:
and the only apparent cause of it, is the inequality of the land tax, which not
only distresses these counties by its direct operation, but, by a circuitous
effect, transfers annually a great balance in specie into the more flourishing
division of the kingdom, in addition to the large yearly sum, necessarily
remitted thither for firing. In the present state of the representation, the
latter cause of the depression of the home counties, does not seem absolutely
out of the reach of remedy: I appeal to the apprehensions always entertained by
the remote district, on the subject of an equalization of the tax, as a proof
of it. But their uniform determination to employ all their force to oppose it,
has been evident, from the days of Davenant, to the present time. By an
alteration of the constitution of the third estate, their majority of
representatives of the landed interest will be doubled: and if at this time,
under any pretense, they be assisted by you in measures which will effect it,
you add to the will to oppress you, in order to exonerate themselves, a power
to do it, which you will never be able to resist; and deprive yourselves of
every future hope of palliating your natural disadvantages, which, though you
may be unable to conquer, your vigilance, if duly exerted, may diminish.

With those among ourselves who call this alteration a reform, I would argue
thus: -- An equality of representation, or a nearer approach to it, if
desirable, is certainly desirable for some end. It is to be considered as a
means, and not as a final object, which is desirable of itself, without
looking any further. If it be not an end or final object, what is the end or
object meant to be obtained by it? You will answer, that the public charges may
be rendered the least possible; that they be imposed, with perfect equality,
upon every one of equal ability, and proportionally upon persons of different
abilities. But it is evident the change for which you are such strenuous
advocates, will give new powers which may be employed to subvert these very
ends: these new powers will be by you entrusted to men, whom experience shows
to have been always leagued together, to prevent your ends being carried into
effect; and when you have doubled their power to defeat them, by your patriotic
exertions, you certainly will have made no alteration in their sentiments,
except that which an increase of strength always inspires. The self deceits of
interest gild over many a piece of base metal, until it passes for fine gold
from the crucible, even in the opinion of the operator himself. Some
semi-voluntary deception like this, I believe, may have taken place in this
business in the remote counties: this is an every-day human infirmity, which
may be some apology for them; but what shall be the apology for you,
sacrificing your own ends, in the pursuit of means utterly subversive of them,
and of your immediate interest?

By these plans, some members are indeed added to the home counties: but with
your own hands, you put a weight so much greater into the opposite scale, that
you effectively annihilate the power of the former. And what is the interest of
that power you labor to anihilate? To destroy a gross system of inequality and
disproportion, the very professed end of your exertions. What will be the use
made of the power you labor so heartily to render superior to all opposition?
To apply the increase of strength you confer on it, to perpetuate in practice
and effect, principles diametrically opposite to your avowed object; and that
upon a large and an increasing scale. This must be the consequence of your
ultimate success, if you do not make the equalization of the tax, a previous
condition to your concurrence in what you call a reform.

This attachment to proportion and certain beauties of abstract form, induces
you to endeavor to augment the number of the county members, and that of the
great towns: and so far, the master builders of constitutions in the remote
district, will assist you, but at no inconsiderable expense; for the land tax
must be increased; and you must pay double your proportion to the augmentation,
as you do to the present tax. You wish, in addition, to disfranchise the maller
boroughs; here other reformers will conteract you, and your magnificent design
remain incomplete. And this conduct of yours, to make no small concession in
its favor, very much resembles that of many of the Ialian Nobility, at the
revival of architecture, who began magnificent palaces, which they were totally
unable to complete; but almost every one of them, and their descendants, has
ever since had the gratification of starving, in a building full of proportion
and beauty, as far as they were able to run it up, but not quite covered in.

What is further to be said, will be addressed to the zealous advocates for a
revolution in the House of Commons, belonging to the remote district; and first
(as far as the subject will permit such a distinction to be preserved) to those
who push on the measure, only on account of some analogy they suppose they
discern in it to the spirit of the Constitution; who, I am confident, compose
almost the whole of the party, though this description does not absolutely
extend to all.

The success of your efforts will terminate, in flinging into your hands a
majority of the landed interest in the House, of double its present amount. It
will then be absolutely in your power, to continue to compel the home counties
to pay in the double of the proportion you are charged at to the land tax, and
to assess them at the same rate, in all the augmentations which must be
hereafter made to it. Experience has taught you, that you may with facility run
into this abuse: and if we refer to the whole course of that of the last
century, we shall find the disorder to have been hereditary, and endemial; and
you should wish at once to get rid of it out of the country. Injustice is a
more deformed local disease, than an Alpine goitre. Now this abuse you can
(previous to the great concessions you solicit being made to you) put it out of
your power to commit: and you will still be able to attain, by the grant, every
end you profess to seek; and by thus removing all suspicion of a latent
self-interest mixing with it, you will remove no inconsiderable obstacle to the
acquisition of your object. But if you refuse previously to place this
injustice out of your reach, in order to give facility to the acquisition of
your object, which in your opinion is great; and no less than to carry the
finest system of government a nation ever had the happiness to live under, to a
height of perfection and excellence even far above what it ever knew; if, to
this end, you refuse to sacrifice this power of abuse; you clearly prefer the
second to the first. What distance there may be between such conduct, and that
of those whose original motive was the abuse, and not the use of these
additional powers, I shall not attempt to determine: it may be admitted to be
considerable, but it is not enough.

Beside, it is to be observed, that there is a repugnancy between the ultimate
effect of this majority, and the principle upon which it is declared to be
sought; which is, that representation, and contribution, and the ability to
contribute, should be proportional: now that effect will be, to render the
assessment by which the home district is double-taxed, permanent; and to double
the majority of representatives, which that part of the landed interest now
has, which evades half its payments to the public charge. You demand that a
strict proportion should be established between representation and property;
and yet refuse to establish it, between property and constitution. We have
heard much of test laws; and those who will not comply with them, are legally
excluded from power: the admission of this proposition in practice in its full
effect, is a test you must comply with, before you can legally be admitted to
an increase of power; and it is required by a law, the authority of which you
will not venture to dispute; it is the law of wisdom and of justice. To put on
an appearance of public principle, solely to serve for a cover to the injustice
of self-interest, is political hypocrisy of the worst kind; and to those who
shall come to discern the oppressive consequences of this measure to the home
district, after they have taken it up, and yet persevere in it, must be added,
that even to permit ourselves to be biassed by the seductions of the same
motive, to persevere in reducing a system into execution, whose effects are
discovered to be contrary to the better ends which induced us at first to
embrace it, cannot escape without the like reprehension, however mitigated in
degree.

It has been repeatedly observed, that if the principle of the old assessment
be continued, the charge of the home district above its proportion must
increase with every increase of the tax; and that the effect of the new system
will be to render this increasing oppression inevitable. The great majority of
its patrons in the remote counties, I make no doubt, will join with every one,
who reveres the spirit of our own Constitution, in condeming much of the
general system of the old government of France, and much of the detail of its
administration. Yet such abuses as these, that system was adequate to the
correction of, and effected it. They did not call it reform, even under that
government, bad as it was, to invent a new mode of fortification to cover old
oppressions, and to be able to extend them. In France as well as in England,
parts of the provinces were aggrieved, by being assessed above their proportion
to the land tax. It is not the absolute amounts of the tax in the two kingdoms
which are here compared, but their proportionality to the values of lands taxed
only.
Mr. Neckar has given us the mode, in which a remedy was applied to these
inequalities. I think it was put in practice in Upper Guyenne: a valuation was
made of the lands, a number of districts, which were generally admitted to be
taxed at the average rate: and as the first step to an equalization, it was
permitted to any district, the inhabitants of which supposed their lands to be
taxed one third more than that rate, to have them surveyed at their own
expense; and if the measure of the excess was found to be of that magnitude,
the whole of it was remitted, and the deficiency of the tax made up, by a small
additional levy upon the province. The greater inequalities being thus
remedied, the same redress was extended, as a second step in the operation, to
all those divisions whose charge exceeded their due proportion by one fourth:
and lastly, all those places were relieved in the same mode, who thought the
amount of the abatement they would be entitled to, equal to the expense of a
survey and valuation. Neckar, English translation, v. 2. p. 249, from an
abridged account.
A comparison of the measure of these inequalities with that of the English
land tax, will not be an improper addition to this account. Now the average
excess of the charge of the home district in England, is much greater than the
limit of the highest class of unequal assessments in this province: for the
average real rate of the tax in this kingdom, is here the proper standard of
comparison, and corresponds to the fixed charge found in France by the first
valuation which was made the standard of comparison there. Now that average in
England is (one shilling and three pence three farthings) 15.892 pence in the
pound See Section 4. ta^le.
; and one third of this rate, is (5 d.) 5.297 pence, corresponding to the
smaller limit of the disparity of charge of the most oppressed class of the
landlords in this part of France. But the measure of that disparity in the home
district of England, is (9 d.) 9.752 pence in the pound: therefore the mean
excess of charge of that district, is to the lower limit of the most oppressed
district, in this part of France, as 9.752 to 5.297, or as 18,410 to 10,000; or
something more than nine to five. In this transaction the French adopted the
idea of a graduated scale, on which they marked the different measures of
oppression, arising from the inequality of the land tax, with the purpose of
applying a remedy to each successively, according to its degree. And, in its
construction, it resembled in principle that of a thermometer; for the fixed
point, or that of absolute equality of contribution, was the zero from which
the comparative degrees of oppression or injustice began to be estimated. We
have seen that, in the home district of England, its mean degree would fall
nearly twice as high, as the lower limit of extreme disparity in France; and,
if the degrees of oppression in England were marked on a scale by similar
graduation, as one half must fall below that mean point, so, by the very nature
of an average, the other half in number and amount must fall above it. The
evils of the old French Constitution, and even this evil, while it subsisted,
certainly deserved condemnation: but it becomes not the mouth of those who
persist in measures whose effects promote the continuance, and perhaps the
extension of greater. Its appearance, it is true, was dark; but when placed
upon a ground so much darker, its color seems to assume a different character.

I do not find in the account I follow, that any opposition was made by the
favored districts, against carrying this fair measure into execution; although
the sufferers could not add to the principles of universal equity, on which
they applied for relief, a second claim to justice, and the promptest justice
that could be rendered them, drawn from the particular circumstances affecting
both parties. They could not, as the proprietors of lands in the home counties,
produce historical proofs, that the inequality of the tax had been a necessary
relief to their countrymen, at the formation of the original assessment, who
then labored under great difficulties and distress (a sect which has been
shown in the history of the English tax); and then appeal to the united
principles, of gratitude, justice, and of honor, to be freed from a burden
their humanity had been instrumental in imposing upon them, now the reason had
so long ceased.

The lightest censure with which any of these schemes for alteration can be
dismissed, is that it is a refinement totally useless, if it fail in the ends
for which it is recommended to us; and one great end must be, to bring about a
proportional division of all public burdens, particularly contributions to the
public service: it is otherwise, at best, a parade of design and accuracy,
without use; a great movement, without a motive. But it is to those who make
use of these well-sounding maxims, as pretenses to screen other motives which
it is not so convenient to avow, that the remainder of this observation, and
that which follows it, are directed.

When changes of this kind are called for, planned to fortify old abuses with
new strength, and sting into the hands of those who have always supported them,
powers to add to their weight, men feel themselves insulted as well as injured:
they see that the realities of public principle and justice are sacrificed to
the mockery of proportion and speculative equality; and that a system called by
the name of a reform, under a delusive pretense of strengthening public
liberty, and putting a necessary weight into the popular scale, slips at
clandestinely into that of inequality and oppression, already more loaded than
a decent selfishness would wish. But the present example of a neighboring
nation, and that of our own in the middle of the last century, show that the
selfishness which hypocrisy has taught to wear the mask of patriotism, strides
over all ordinary bounds.

It is not only justice that suffers thus; the spirit of liberty itself suffers
with it. Great and good principles, which have taken deep root in the character
of a nation, are most liable to be destroyed by abuse, by being practiced upon
by an insidious policy, for its own crooked ends, and being excited to the
wildness and folly of fanaticism: for every great principle has both its
fanatics, real and hypocritical, and its fanaticism. Instead of a fire
regularly and fully fed, it may be kindled into a conflagration, which destroys
every thing in its neighborhood, devours its own magazines; and, amidst the
ruin which it spreads round, hardly a spark may be found to survive, covered up
in the embers. Our history in the last century furnished more than one example
of this; and it will be the happiness of the present, if our posterity has to
recur so far back as to that period, for such domestic instances. In the reign
of Charles I. the principle of loyalty had been overstrained, to serve the
purposes of the Court: when the civil war and all its calamities might have
been prevented by its constitutional exertions, it was found to be too much
exhausted.

The spirit of liberty, whose increase at first was necessary, to oppose the
overgrown and formidable prerogatives of the Crown, ran into a contemptible and
wild enthusiasm: by its extravagances, it almost lost all hold of the
affections of the people; and at the return of Charles II. the virtue of his
minister prevented parliament from making an entire sacrifice of the national
freedom, by conferring upon the sovereign a fixed revenue, which would have
made him for ever independent of that assembly. The sobriety of manners, and
serious attachment to religion, which so honorably distinguished the English
in the beginning of the century, had been very generally debased, during the
civil wars, into a puritanical hypocrisy: and at the Restoration, public
decency appeared almost swept away, by a torrent of profligacy and irreligion.
Here it is seen, that the same physical law seems to affect society, to which
individuals are subjected: immoderate elevation proceeds, and causes a
depression in an equal degree; or to make use of the language of medicine, a
state of excitation is constantly followed by a state of collapse. The spirit
of liberty should always be vigilantly preserved in a full and regulated
degree: but when it is artificially stimulated into fanaticism, to serve mean
and oppressive purposes, the contempt with which the end only ought to be
surveyed, becomes, with the generality of mankind, attached to the instrument
employed to bring it about; and the meaner the motives an ostentatious
affectation of it is made a screen to, the more it will be degraded in the
general opinion. The national attachment to liberty is in danger enough, from
the abuse of its name, to carry on purposes inimical to the regulations and
existence of civil society: and if it be further perverted, to procure the
creation of new powers, to protect a lucrative system of injustice, and to add
more weight to its oppression, it may be pronounced, that its extinction is not
far distant.

One very important question on this subject still remains to be discussed: and
that is, how will the interest of the public creditors, and the whole class of
men whose income is derived from the profit of stock, be affected by the landed
interest of the remote counties acquiring an additional power in the House of
Commons?

By the plans for this alteration here examined, the weight of the landed
interest in the House will be greatly increased. If seventy-two members for
counties were substituted instead of the same number for boroughs; its weight
will be very considerably augmented, although twenty-eight members were
admitted, for the more populous unrepresented towns.

But there is no occasion to employ much consideration upon this, as the plan
for the absolute suppression of boroughs seems abandoned. If they be left in
their present state, and any number of members be added to the counties, the
addition to the landed interest in the House will diminish the relative
importance of that of the other two -- the mercantile and the monied men. If
the mode of election in boroughs be changed, by admitting more of their
inhabitants to have votes, it will not tend to counter-balance the increase of
weight the landed interest will acquire as above: but if that change be made,
by admitting the inhabitants of the circumjacent country, of any description,
to votes in a borough, it will give some further superiority to the landed
interest.

By the equalization of the land tax, such an addition may be made to the
applicable sinking fund, that it will very soon, by its own operation, become
what has been called, in this Essay, an adequate fund. It has been shown to be
the property of that fund, that while it is applied to the extinction of
capital, a debt ceases to increase periodically; or the additions made to it in
every war are paid off in peace. By the operations of such a fund, it is
evident, that the price of stock would be supported, both in peace and war, at
a rate much higher than at present can permanently take place. Hence the value
of the funded income of that great body of the public creditors, the
proprietors of the 3 per cent. stocks, and the irredeemable annuities, will be
very greatly increased; while the interest of capitals in trade will be
reduced; and that great class of men will be benefited by some moderate
increase of profit, and by a new facility of obtaining capital, whenever an
opportunity of employing a greater to advantage, presents itself.

These are the consequences of a revenue acquired by an equalization of the
tax, so applied: it is the only apparent anchor of the national hope; justice
demands it from the landed proprietors of the remote district: they themselves
will be great sharers of the benefit which the public may thus receive from it;
and so far the expense of their sacrifice will be lessened: but I think an
enlightened attachment to the good of their country ought to make them preserve
it for this purpose, to give it up on no other condition.

But if, before the equalization be obtained, the commercial interest and the
public creditors concur in any plan for the alteration of the representation,
which adds to the majority of the members of the remote district in the House
of Commons, they render it apparently impossible, and destroy the foundation of
their best hopes. No bodies of men exist, whose interest at this juncture
should lead them more strongly to oppose the alteration of the constitution of
the Commons, than the inhabitants of our commercial cities and towns, both in
the home and remote district, together with the great majority of our public
creditors: and perhaps it would be difficult to fix upon a measure which it was
more their interest to unite all their strength against.

FINIS.
CORRECTIONS.
PAGE 1, l. 7. for district, read districts. P. 5, l. 16, and Note, l. 9, after
own and matter, insert. P. 7, l. 18, for assessment, r. assembly. P. 13, l. 12,
after L. 10,000, a period: l. 16, after rise, add, in the former. P. 14, l. 1,
for town, r. term. P. 15, l. 22, for when, r. are. P. 16, l. 24, for following,
r. flourishing. P. 17, l. 22, for 1,000,000, r. 1,100,000.

P. 21, l. 16, after conjunction, a colon. P. 22, l. 22, for home, r. remote.
P. 25, l. 5, for 340, r. 3: l. 9 and 28, for alteration, r. altercation. P. 26,
l. 7, comprehending wages, dele wages. P. 31, l. 26, after improvement, add;
and in the margin, Smith, v. 3, p. 268: ib. l. 29, printed, add out: ib. l. 31,
augmenting, add the. P 33, l. 2, for effective, r. effect of itself: ib. l. 5,
for so, r. as. P 34, Note, l. 21, after refers, add to. P. 37, l. 29, for
former, r. latter.

P. 40, l. 1, for transaction, r. transition. P. 43, l. 6, for proportion, r.
propr^^t^rs. P. 45, l. 4, for have, r. has. P. 48, l. 1, after home, add a
colon: ib. l. 16, for as, r. or as. P. 50, l. 2 and 5, for land, r. fund: ib.
l. 31, for (...) 4. P. 52, l. 11, for effect, r. affect. P. 56, for severally,
r. severely. P. 58, l. 28, for minims, read minims. Page 59, last five lines
repetition, dele. P. 64, for consequence, r. consequences. P. 66, l. 9, r.
operated. In successive periodical publications, we, etc. lb. l. 32, after
expenses, add, in war. P. 67, l. 1, on, r. on the. P. 63, for definition, r.
diminution. P. 69, l. 6, after admitted, r. that the^ ib. l. 21, for the, r.
this. P. 70, l. 13, for corn, r. coin. P. 71, l. 10, for led, r. fed: ib. l.
31, for 1.2863, r. 1.286. P. 72, l. 5, for is, r. would be: ib. l. 11, for
59.455 d. r. 59.465 d.: ib. l. 17, after that, r. rate: ib. l. 20, for 404,333,
r. 404,330. P. 73, l. 29, dele derived from nature; and insert it in l. 30,
after other. P. 74, l. 11, for it, r. they. P. 76, l. 9, for are, r. is. P. 77,
l. 16, for 1,000, 1. 10,000: ib. l. 23, (...) 199,338, r. 199,538. P. 78, l.
24, for manufacturers, r. manufactures: ib. l. 32, after sound, r. many: ib. l.
33, after of, r. the.

P. 80, l. 18, for one, r. an. P. 83, l. 29, be, add that. P. 84, l. 16, for
L.0,174,500, r. L.2,174,500: ib. l. 33, for or, r. and. P. 86, for purchasers,
^. purchaser. P. 87, l. 2, for hom^, r. remote: ib. l. 12, for principle, r.
position: ib l. 15, for counties, r. countries. P. 88, for increase, r.
insurance. P. 88, l. 9, dele it. P. 93, l. 8, dele in the year 1785: l. 9, dele
in 1790. P. ^4, l. 3, for be, r. have been: l. 29, after their, r. elective. P.
95, l. 20, for into, r. in. P. 97, l. 2, after franchise, add of. P. 99, l. 7,
for states, r. represents.

P. 104, l 15, or, r. of -- election, r. electors. P. 106, l. 15, for their, r.
the, P. 106, l. 34. after boroughs, add be. P. 105, note, for ^ and, insert and
^. P. 110, l. 3, particular: their, r. particular; that their. P. 111, l. 17,
for country, r. county. P. 114, l. 21, for skits, r. skill. P. 116, l. 10, for
former, r. other: l. last, for I^i^^an, r. Italian. P. 118, l. 28, for
constitution, r. c^nt^^^ution. P. 119, l. 32, for lands, r. lands of.

APPENDIX. -- Page 5, line 2, for at, r. as. P. 8, l. 18, for any, r. an. P. ^,
l. 17, dele is. Page 11, l. 10, for received, r. re^^^ves, P. 12, l. 2, for
16x431,814, r. 164x,31,814. Ib. table, l. 2, col. 4, for 2 1/1^, r. 2, 7 1/1^,
P. 13 l. 16, for this, r. the. P. 16, l. 59, for 3 3/10, r. 3/10. P. 19, l. 18,
after only. insert a colon: ib. note, after this, r. but.

P. 20, l 5, after L 4.1827, r. ms. P. 21, l. 4, for L.12,436, r. 12,456. P.
22. l. 10 and 15, for 1.0078, r. 1.00,728: ib. l. 15, for 12.0 ms. r. 12.0
ms.x: ib. l. 40, for shillings 5, 5, r. 5 s. 5 d. P. 23, l. 27, for
proportions, r. proportion. P. 24, l. 11, for Sulmioch, r. Susmilch. P. 25, l.
24, after ms. insert l: ib. l. 25, for 4, insert x: ib. l. 27, for, insert. P.
26, l. last, after greater, r. branches of. P. 28, l. 26, for 1.200948, r.
1.00948. P. 30, l. 20, place of table: ib. table, col. 5, l. 8, for 6208, r.
16208. P. 33, l. 5, dele of: ib l. 31, for somewhat more than, r. nearly. P.
34, l. 18, after be, r. as. P. 35, table, col. 4, art. 1, for 716,61, r.
716,861. P. 40, l. 31, after ms.) r. L.6.593 ms.

APPENDIX.
ARTICLE I. On the Proportion of the Values of the Land, contained in the Home
and Remote Districts of England. -- Also, on the Sum the latter ought to pay to
the Land Tax, in Proportion to the actual Charge thereof upon the former; the
nominal Rate of the Tax being at Four Shillings in the Pound.
1. IN the preceding tract, the kingdom is taken as divided into two great
districts; and the proportion of their value is there assigned, from the best
elements I could procure.

2. An account is here to be given of these fundamental elements, and of the
mode by which this proportion has been deduced from them. The first, or that
which is called the Home District, comprehends the eleven home counties, and
that of Middlesex; London being excluded: that named the Remote District,
includes the remaining counties of England and Wales.

3. The total number of acres in the several counties, and in the whole
kingdom, are taken from the account given by the celebrated Dr. Halley, in
Houghton's Tracts. Husbandry and Trade improved, v. 1. No. 25. It is from this
account that all the measures of quantities of land in this Appendix are taken.
This account (though there are some exceptions against it, which certainly
must be allowed their weight) is the best survey of the quantity of land in the
kingdom, which has fallen into my hands. By summing up the contents of every
county, he found the kingdom to contain 39.938 ms. of acres. By a second and
different operation upon a map on a smaller scale, he determined that area to
be 38.66 ms. of acres: and considers the difference as not important. Mr.
Gregory King (whose researches in political arithmetic are deservedly held in
the first degree of esteem) stated it at 39 ms. Davenant. v. 2. p 216.
of acres: if he discovered this amount, by an original operation of his own,
it is a proof that the conclusion of Dr. Halley is very near the truth; if he
was his copyist only, he gives his own authority to that account, which has
very great weight. Dr. Nehemiah Grew examined a second and ancient account of
the contents of all the counties, by which that of the whole kingdom appears to
be 39 ms. of acres. Motte's Abridgement of Phil. Transactions. P. 41. chapter 3.
art. 8.
This is a distinct and independent proof, that the estimate of Dr. Halley It
is evident, from the words of Dr. Grew, 1st, That the account here referred to,
is not that of Dr. Halley; and 2d, That he did not know of the existence of the
latter.
approaches very nearly to the truth; the contents of the kingdom, from the
mean of his two operations, being 39.299 ms. of acres. Dr. Grew has also, in
the same paper, given a method of his own, to approximate to that quantity; but
it is founded on an assumption so gross and ill-adapted to the purpose, that
its result is not to be set against that of Dr. Halley, as confirmed by
concurring authorities. He makes the contents of the kingdom to exceed, by a
small quantity, 46 ms. Grew in Philos. Trans. ubi supra.
of acres. By some mode of proceeding, equally erroneous, Sir William Petty
reduces that amount to 28 ms. Grew in Philos. Trans. ubi supra.
but the mean of these extreme estimates is 37 ms.; and it tends, as far as
such a mean can be evidence, to confirm the account of Dr. Halley; who
observes, that, in his time, the best maps did not agree to a million or two of
acres.

4. It appears from this table of the contents of the several counties, that
the home district contains 8.253 ms. and the remote districts 31.685 ms. of
acres. And the contents of the former being taken as 10,000; those of the
latter will be as 38,392.

5. It was observed above, that some exceptions may be taken against the
mechanical approximations used by Dr. Halley, in assigning the contents of the
counties, which must be allowed to have their weight. In determining the
proportion of two small counties by this mode, an error of some consideration
may arise: but this will not sensibly affect the truth of the conclusion given
above; for if the contents of two small tracts of land, containing two such
counties each, be compared together, the error in their proportion will be
less, than in the comparison of such counties single; and if there be 7, 8, or
9 such counties comprised in each district, it will become insignificant; and
the result may be taken as true to all practical purposes. In like manner, in
determining the area of a single county, if it be very large, the probability
of error will be reduced in proportion to its size. In increasing the number of
counties in each district, we approach nearer and nearer to absolute truth in
these proportions; in the same manner, and for the same reasons, as in
multiplying the number of astronomical observations, to obtain a correct
average: its error decreases rapidly, as their number increases; and it soon
arrives at the greatest degree of accuracy that can possibly be required in use.

6. We are now to endeavor to determine, as near as may be, the proportion
which the rents of the two districts bear to each other.

7. If their rent be taken to be, as the total number of acres in each, it is
evident that the remote division will be estimated considerably too high.

8. But it must be admitted, that this district has increased in riches, with
more celerity than the rest of the kingdom. The number of its inhabitants
likewise exceeds that of the home counties, in a considerably greater degree
than it did a century ago: It is not assumed here, that an actual increase of
the number of the people in either of these districts, has taken place since
the Revolution. I am not entering the lists with the sturdy advocates for
depopulation. If the number of inhabitants of the remote district have
continued the same, while those of the home counties have decreased; or if the
former have decreased, with any assignable degree of celerity, and the latter
with a greater; what is laid down in the text remains true.
being therefore relatively increased in wealth and population; it follows,
that if the value of the two districts be taken as their respective number of
inhabitants in 1690; that of the remote district in this second mode, will be
estimated considerably too low: therefore, let it be here assumed, that the
error of excess in that value, determined in the first mode, is nearly equal to
that of defect in the second; and that the mean of both approaches very near to
the true value.

9. The proportion of the population of these districts in 1690, is now to be
found; and this may be done, from that valuable account of the number of houses
in each county, given by Dr. Davenant, from the hearth books. Davenant, v. 1.
p. 39. It is from this table that the number of houses, and the land tax of
each county, are constantly taken in these computations.


10. It is necessary in this computation, to leave out the number of houses
contained in London; as the land tax of that city will not be brought to
account, in the estimate of the payment of the home district.

11. The number of houses in the county of Middlesex, (exclusive of London) is
not separately given, in the account referred to; but it must have nearly borne
that proportion to the number of acres it contains; which took place at that
time, between the quantity of land and number of houses, in the counties of
Essex, Kent, Surrey, and Hertford, taken together; they being contiguous to it,
and, in other circumstances, similarly situated. Now, the contents of the four
counties are 3.531 ms. of acres; and the number of houses, 145,317; whence the
number of acres in Middlesex being 247,000, the proportional number of houses
to be assigned to that county, is 10, 164. To avoid a repetition of the steps
of this process in another place, I add here, that the land tax of the 4
counties being L.284,302, that of Middlesex, exclusive of London, is found by
the same method to be L. 19,887.

12. The number of houses of the 7 remaining counties of the home district,
were 190,226; and those of the whole division, 345,707; the number in the
remote district, by the same table, was 872,457. Hence, by the second
supposition, the value of the two districts is as those numbers respectively:
or that of the home district being taken as 10,000; that of the remote district
appears to be as 25,237.

13. It was shown above, that, if their proportional values be taken at the
quantity of land in each, they will be as 10,000 and 38,392 respectively: and
it was also assumed, that the error of excess in the proportion of the remote
counties, by that mode of estimation, is nearly equal to the error of defect in
this; and therefore, that the mean of the two is very near the truth. Thus, the
value of the home district is to that of the remote, as 10,000 to 31,814
nearly; and to that of the whole kingdom, as 10,000 to 41,814.

14. To confirm this conclusion, the proportion of the rents of the two
districts are now to be determined in another mode. Both of them contain many
and considerable uncultivated tracts of land; and as profitable land is the
only subject of taxation, in order to determine how far the land tax upon each
is proportioned to its value or rent, the profitable land in each district
ought to be known. Upon the authority of Mr. Young, the land in cultivation, in
the whole kingdom, is here taken at 32 ms. Chalmers, p. 178.
of acres; and thus the quantity of land at present lying waste in both
districts, amounts to 7.938 ms. of acres; but I have discovered no direct
authority, to determine the quantity of profitable land in either. It is
therefore here assumed, as an hypothesis, that if, of a tract in the home
district, of a given magnitude, a certain number of acres upon an average ought
to be allowed as waste land; and in the same quantity in the remote district,
treble of that allowance, and deduction be upon an average made; the value of
equal proportions of land, of the two remainders, will, upon the average, be
equal. From this assumption it follows, that nearly 1-13th of the whole, or
7,684 acres in every 100,000, is to be taken as uncultivated land; and in the
remote division, 23,054 acres, in every equal tract; or nearly 3-13ths of the
whole. The waste land in the home district, will then amount to 634,200 acres,
and the profitable land to 7.619 ms. of acres; and in the remote district, the
uncultivated land will be 7.304 ms. and the land under cultivation, 24.381 ms.
of acres; making the quantity of cultivated land in both, 32.000 ms. of acres,
as above.

15. Hence the value of the home district being taken as 100,000, that of the
remote district will be as 320,002; and of the whole kingdom as 420,002; for
7.619 ms. is to 24.381 ms. as 100,000 is to 320,002. By the former process, it
had been found, that taking the value of the home district as 10,000, that of
the remote division is as 31,814; and of the whole kingdom as 41,814; which
conclusions agree sufficiently well.

16. If the proportion of waste land, in equal tracts, Davenant, v. 1. p. 39.
in the home and remote districts, had been taken as unity and four
respectively; then every 100,000 acres in the home division, would have been
found to contain 5,880 acres of waste; and in the remote district, 23,523; and
the value of the former district being taken as 10,000, that of the latter will
be 31,198; which agrees still nearer with the result of the first process.

17. The sums actually paid on account of this tax by the two districts, and
their proportional charges, are now to be compared. Davenant, v. 1. p. 39.
Davenant has given the produce of every county to the first 4-shilling aid,
granted in the 4th year of William and Mary; the variations which have since
taken place, are too minute to be considered here. It appears from his table,
that the charge upon the home counties (London and Middlesex being excluded),
was L.632,388. The sum paid by that county, exclusive of London, was before
shown to be nearly L.19,887: the amount of the land tax for the home counties
is therefore L.652,275; which sum, as appears above, is to the proportional
charge upon the remote district, as 10,000 to 31,814: the proportional charge
upon that district, is therefore L.2,075,100 nearly; exceeding its actual
payment L.1,038,184, Davenant, v. 1. p. 39.
by L.1,036,916.

ARTICLE II. A Comparison of the Burden which the proportional Payment to the
Tax, would at present be upon the Remote District; and that of its actual
Charge upon it, at the Imposition of the Tax in 1693; the nominal Rate of the
Tax being at 4 Shillings in the Pound.
1. WHEN the proportion of the tax to the rent remains fixed, the burden
continues the same, although the cotemporary amounts of the rent and tax vary
in any assignable manner.

2. To determine the amount of the tax, which, in the year 1793, would be equal
in its burden on the remote district, to that paid in 1693; the proportion of
its rents in those two years must be found. And this may be very well taken to
be the same as that of the cotemporary amounts of the entire national rent.
Hence the rents of the land of England, for the years 1693 and 1793, are first
to be sought. Thus Mr. King made the aggregate of all these rents of estates
real 13 ms. pounds; for personal estates, chargeable also to the land tax, he
added one million more; stating the total so chargeable at 14 ms. pounds.
Davenant, v. 2. p. 216. This latter sum, Davenant mistook for the national rent
of 1688, and gives it as such. P. 221. But instances of considerable error are
not unusual in that writer: this has been copied from him by the generality of
authors since.
These are to be derived from the rents of the years 1688 and 1774; which have
been ascertained, with more accuracy than those of any other terms. In the
former, the rent of the land of England, or the rent of superior conditions,
was stated by Mr. King (the best political arithmetician this kingdom has ever
produced) at 10 millions; and those of buildings, mines, and other
hereditaments, being rents of inferior condition, at 3 millions. It is evident,
by his estimate of the amount of the landed capital, as preserved by Davenant,
that he rated the value of these inferior rents as equal to that of a landed
income of 2 millions of superior condition: This point has been carefully
examined; the several elements he made use of, and the results he obtained from
them, are to be found scattered, in separate essays of Davenant; but without
any reference to the process, of which they are a part. A proof of this
position is much too long to be given here. I shall add, however, a
circumstance, which I think tended to determine him to take the value of the 2
species of real income, in the proportion of 3 to 2. I have been informed,
that, in the assessinents of parishes, Lord Chief Justice Hale directed lands
to be laid at 3-4ths of the rack-rent, and buildings at one-half. And such a
rate so formed, was confirmed by Lord Mansfield, in the case of K. and
Brograve, M. 10. G. III. Now 3-4ths is to 1-half, as 3 to 2. It was possibly
upon the authority of Hale, that Mr. King adopted this proportion of the value
of equal rents from land, and buildings without land; and took it as holding
true of other rents of inferior condition. This opinion would have great weight
with him, as Sir Matthew Hale had applied himself to political arithmetic, as
appears by the observations he has left upon population. He died in 1676. The
work referred to was published 1677 (Chalmers, p. 183); and upon that subject,
Mr. King must have considered him as his immediate predecessor.
the value, of such rents being thus reduced in the market for income, upon
account of the inferior nature of the subject from whence they result; hence
the whole rent, being in value equal to 12 millions a year in land, ought to be
taxed as an income of 12 millions is only.

3. In the year 1774, Mr. Young estimated the rents of land, or those of
superior condition, at L. 19.2 ms. and the rents of inferior condition, as
buildings, etc. at L. 5.2 ms. Chalmers, p. 178.
From the latter sum, 1.733 ms. or 1-3d, is to be subtracted as before; and the
remainder, L. 3.466 ms. will be the equivalent income of superior condition:
the taxable rent was therefore 22.666 ms.

4. From these rents of 1688 and 1774, thus reduced to a proper form, those of
the years 1693 and 1793 are to be determined: in order to this, let it be
admitted, that in the whole interval from 1688 to 1774, or during 86 years,
that equal rents, upon an average, increased equal sums, in equal times; or,
which is the consequence thereof, that the national rent increased at any equal
rate per cent. annually: that rate is now to be sought. The rent of 1688, L.
12.000 ms. multiplied by 1.8888, is equal to L. 22.6^6 ms. that of 1774. Now
there intervened 86 years between those terms; and 1.00742, raised to the 86th
power, is equal to 1.8888: hence the annual average augment of rent for that
term, was L. 0.742 or nearly per cent. From 1688 to 1693, there elapsed 5
years; and the rent being supposed to have increased annually, in the ratio
assigned above, became in the year 1693 (L. 12.000 ms. x 1.00742^=12.000 x
1.0376) L. 12.451 ms. In like manner, from the year 1774 to the year 1793,
there elapsed 19 years; and the rent of the year 1793, is equal to L. 22.666
ms. x 1,007421^ = L.22.666 ms. x 1.1508) L. 26.085 ms. Now it is evident,
considered in every point of view, that the improvements of the remote
districts have advanced with greater celerity than those of the rest of the
kingdom: and the increase of rent, from the natural connection between general
improvement and the improvement of land, has gone on in the same manner. Hence
the rents of that district have increased, with a greater rate of celerity,
than the total national rent. But let them be taken by the assumption laid down
above, to have increased only in the same proportion. Then the rent of that
division in 1693, being taken as 12.451, that of 1793 is as 26.085: its
land tax in 1693 was L. 1,038,184: and it will be as 12.451 is to 26.085, so is
L. 1,038,184 to L. 2,174,500. And these two sums being as the rents of the home
district in the years 1693 and 1793; the burden of the former upon the
landlords in 1693, was equal to what the burden of the latter would be upon
the landlords in 1793; if their charge to the land tax were to amount to the
latter sum.

5. It has been seen before, that the tax which ought to be paid by the remote
district, in proportion to the actual charge of the home division, is L. 2.0751
ms. App. Art. I. 17.
which is L. 99,400 a year, less than the sum assigned above, as the present
charge of the land tax is equal in burden to the original payment.

ARTICLE III. On the proportional and actual Charges of the Land Tax on the
County of York; its nominal Rate being Four Shillings in the Pound.
1. IN Dr. Halley's table, the county of York is stated to contain 3.77 ms. of
acres; and the contents of the home district being nearly 8.253 ms. App. Art.
I. 4.
of acres; estimating the value of each thereby, the latter is to the former as
10,000 to 4,568. The proportion of their values is now to be assigned,
according to the population of these two tracts. In 1690, the home district
contained 345,700 App. Art. I. 12.
houses, and the county of York 121,052: Davenant, v. 1. p. 39.
therefore the value of the former being assumed as 10,000, that of the latter,
derived from this second assumption, appears to be as 3,501. But taking the
arithmetic mean of these results as before, those values will be as 10,000 and
4,034 respectively: hence the actual payment of the home district to the
land tax, being L.652,275; App. Art. I. 17.
that of the county of York ought proportionally to be L. 263,120: the actual
payment of the county is L.91,620; which is L. 171,500 less than that
proportional payment. Hence the average charge of the tax upon an income from
land, of any given amount, in the home counties, is to that on an equal income,
in the county of York, as 10,000 to 3,481; or the owners of land there are
acquitted, for the payment of little more than 1-3d of their equitable
contributions: and for every L. 10,000 paid by the county to this tax, their
proportional charge is, on an average, L. 28,719.

ARTICLE IV. On the Balance of Payment between the two Districts, as affected
by the Inequality of the Land Tax; its nominal Rate being Four Shillings in the
Pound.
THE land tax of the home district (excluding the metropolis) being L. 652,270;
App. Art. I. 19.
and that of the remote district, L. 1,038,100; Devenant, v. 1. p. 39.
the total provincial land tax is L. 1,690,370. Suppose now the annual expenses
of the government in the provinces, for the payment of public annuitants,
services, for commodities, etc. to amount to this sum and no more; and in each
district, to be in proportion to the value of the lands; that of the home
division being as 10,000, the remote as 31,814; App. Art. I. 13.
the value of the two taken together, will be as 41,814. Therefore, as 41,814,
the number proportional to the value of both districts, is to L. 1,690,370, the
money so returned into both; so is 31,814, the number proportional to the value
of the greater division, to L. 1,286,000, the sum remitted thither by
government. And the difference of these sums, L. 404,300, will be the money
flowing back into the home division on the same accounts. But their charge to
the tax being L. 652,270, the difference of their payment thereto, and the
money returning to them annually, is L. 247,970. This sum constitutes an
effective balance of payment against them, in favor of the other division;
being the excess of the money the latter received back, above the charge of the
tax to them.

ARTICLE V. On the Number of Members to be returned to the House of Commons in
future, from the Counties of the Remote District, according to certain proposed
Alterations in its Constitution.
1. BY the plan for the change of the constitution of the House of Commons,
brought forward in 1785, the number of the members for counties was to have
been increased by 72; and it would thus have amounted to 164. It is taken here
as granted, that this plan, if carried into execution, will be effected, by so
increasing the number of representatives for each county, that it will become,
as nearly as possible, proportional to its value. And although for a single
county, we cannot approach nearer that proportion than its next integer number;
yet if many counties be taken as forming a large district, the new number of
members to be allotted to it, taken collectively, may be made to be extremely
nearly proportional to the aggregate value of the district formed by them.
Hence the total number of county members, now to represent the remote division,
(the value of which somewhat exceeds 3-4ths of the whole lands of the kingdom),
might, and would, by the new arrangement, be made very accurately proportional
to that value. Now, the value of the lands of the kingdom being as 41,814, and
of the remote district as 31,814; Art. I. 17.
and the total number of the representatives of counties by this plan, being
164; the number to be sent by that district shall be (16x431,814/41,814=124^78)
125.

2. By Mr. Flood's plan, the addition to the number of representatives of
counties was to have been 100: if it be followed, the number of county members
in the House will amount to 192; and that for the remote district to
(192x31,314/41,814), 146.

ARTICLE VI. To determine what would have been the present periodical Amount of
the Land Tax, if it had increased in the same Proportion as the Rent, from the
Beginning of the present Century.
1. A TABLE, showing the average actual charge, and nominal rate of the
land tax, in each of the five great wars since the Revolution; and in the
following terms of peace: together with the periodical amount of the tax, and
the nominal rate thereof, in each of the terms, the first war excepted.

Terms. Aver. Actual Charge War. Nom. Rate. Aver. Actual Charge. Peace. Nom.
Rate. Periodical Average Charge. Nominal Rate. s. d. s. d. s. d. War 1689
1,832,015 3 10 Peace 1697 1,258,582 2 ^/1^ 1,545,298 3 2 -- War 1702 1,969,492
4 0 1,614,037 3 3 ^ Peace 1712 1,116,437 2 2 1,542,964 3 1 ^ War 1739 2,000,292
Id. 1,558,364 3 1 ^ Peace 1748 1,251,005 2 6 1,625,648 3 3 -- War 1755
2,007,636 Id. 1,629,320 3 3 ^ Peace 1763 1,690,321 3 4 4/1^ 1,848,978 3 8 War
1775 1,999,392 Id. 2,004,752 4 0 Peace 178^ 2,029,184 4 0 2,014,288 4 0

A detailed account of the authorities on which this table is founded, would be
much too long for this place; the average actual amount of the tax in each term
of war and peace, together with the nominal rates, are here assigned; after an
accurate examination and comparison of the data to be found in the authors
named in the margin. Davenant; Postlewayte, in his History of the Revenue; Dr.
Price; and Sir John Sinclair. The first and last of the periodical charges are
she only articles of the table here treated on: it was not drawn out on this
occasion; but I have chosen to give it entire and unmutilated; as it shows the
progressive amounts of the tax.
The several sums include the expenses of collection.

2. The nature and determination of the amounts in the third greater column,
called the Periodical Average Charge, or of the smaller column which follows
it, being the same average of the nominal rate of the tax, require an
explanation; the former being the bases of the calculation now to be entered
upon.

3. The periodical average, either of the actual charge, or nominal rate of the
tax for any term; as for instance, that of the peace of 1748; is found in this
same manner: that is, by multiplying the annual average payment, or rate of the
term, by the mean length of a term of peace; and that, annual payment, or rate,
during the preceding war, by the mean number of years in a term of war; and
dividing the sum of the products, by the number of years comprehended in one
period, consisting of a term of war and a term of peace, each of the mean
length. This may be illustrated in the instance of the nominal rate of the tax,
for the term mentioned above. During the peace of 1748, this rate was at two
shillings and sixpence in the pound: and taking the mean length of a term of
peace at 10 years (which, though not accurately true, as will be seen
hereafter, is near enough for the present purpose, which is that of mere
illustration), the product formed by the multiplication of the rate and the
term, will be 25 shillings. Again, the constant nominal rate of the tax in the
war of 1739, which immediately preceded this peace, was 4 shillings in the
pound; and taking the mean duration of war at 8 years, which is likewise near
enough to the truth, the product will be 32s. and the sum of the product 57s.
The sum of the length of the two terms is 18 years; by which dividing the sum
of the products, the average nominal rate for the whole period (determined on
the above assumptions), is 3s. and 2 pence. And by a similar process, the
periodical charge for the whole period may be determined.

4. And supposing the average length of peace and war duly assigned above; as
they are sufficiently nearly for the purposes of illustration; it is evident,
that this is the nominal rate at which the charge of the tax upon land ought to
have been then allowed, in all treaties of bargain and sale at that time; for
its true charge upon any estate, could not be estimated for the future, at
either the one or the other rate; the one being too great, and the other too
small; but by a mean, properly taken between both.

5. Amounts thus calculated for each term of peace and war, ought to be
reckoned (according to the equality of chance) the true average charge of the
tax upon the kingdom at that time; the accidental excess of one period, being
always compensated with an accidental alleviation at another.

6. The average length of a war is very nearly 8 years; and of a term of peace,
10. For the sum of the lengths of our five great wars since the Revolution, was
exactly 43 years; computed from the month in which they effectively commenced,
to that in which they effectively terminated. And if the peace of Utrecht had
continued uninterrupted until the commencement of the war of 1739, the length
of the 4 intermediate terms of peace would have been 51 years and 2 months. But
the Rebellion in 1715, and the petty hostilities with Spain in 1718, 1726, and
1733, may be taken together, as adding 4 years to the duration of the 5 wars,
and increasing the number of terms by the fraction one half. Thus the total
number of years of war are 47, equal to the duration of 5 terms; and the mean
length of a war is 8^54 years, to be taken at 8 years. The number of years of
peace is reduced to 47 years and 1-6th, or 2 months; the number of terms
increased by a half, becomes 4; and the mean length of a term of peace 10 48,
to be taken at 10 years. Now 19 years being the distance from the commencement
of one term of peace to that of the following, is here called a period; and the
averages of the land tax for 19 years, are named periodical averages.

7. But during the first year of every peace, the land tax has always been
continued at 4 shillings in the pound, or at the rate of the preceding war; it
is therefore effectively, with respect to the tax, a year of war; wherefore, in
the table, the terms of the duration of the tax in war and peace, are taken as
having been equal. This accidental circumstance of their equality, is purposely
neglected in the illustration given in 3.


8. The periodical charge of the tax during the peace of Riswyck, is stated in
the table at L.1.5452 ms.; and its nominal rate at 3s. and 2d. in the pound;
the middle of that term fell in the beginning of the year 1700: we are to find
what was the charge of the tax upon the whole kingdom in that year, exclusive
of London; and hence determine what it would amount to in the present year;
Written Dec. 1792.
upon a supposition that it had increased during the whole of this century,
with the same celerity as the rent. The land tax of London and Middlesex, at
4s. in the pound, is L. 307,140; Davenant, v. 1. p. 39.
and that of Middlesex, L. 19,887, as above. App. Art. 1. 11.
The tax upon London, therefore, amounts to L. 287,254, at 4s. in the pound;
and at 3s. and 2d. (the periodical rate in 1700), to L. 230,399; and that of
the provinces, to L. 1,314,899.

9. This charge is to be supposed to have increased with the same celerity as
the rent, or L. 1 at the end of one year to be increased to L. 1.00742. App.
Art. 2. 4.
At the end of 92 years, it will become (L. 1.0074292), L. 1.9745; and the
whole tax on the counties (1.9745x L.1.3148 ms.=) L. 2.5960 ms.

10. The periodical and actual land tax of Great Britain, at this time, is L.
2.0142 ms.; the rate, 4 shillings in the pound: that of Scotland, L. 0.052 ms.
of London L. 0.2872 ms. and that of the counties L. 1 6750 ms. Now this charge
falls short of the sum, found above to be proportional to the rise of rents, in
the first. 92 years of this century, by L. 921,000. The remote district now
pays L. 1.0369 ms. annually, less than its due proportion, according to the
present constant rate of the tax; and if the proprietors thereof were to take
this augmentation entirely upon themselves, that defalcation would still
continue to be L. 115,900 a year.

11. It may be contended against the whole of what is here laid down, that in
treaties for the sale of land, this periodical average never comes into
consideration: that it never has been, even eventually, the actual measure of
the charge, for any real period of war and peace. And in fine, that it is an
amount never considered in speculation; and which never becomes the actual
measure of the charge in fact. To this it is answered, that for the reason
given above, Section IV. of this Article.
the charge of no one year in particular, either of war or peace, or the
average of no one term of either can be assumed as the constant measure of this
charge; therefore an average is to be taken in some other manner; which must be
such as, upon the equality of chance, will approach nearest to the truth; and
this is the property of the periodical average above assigned. This certainly
is not necessarily the real or eventual average; and perhaps not that most
frequently adopted in treaties, or the speculative average: but it is
notwithstanding the probable average; and, as such, ought to supersede the
other two in use. Any mean taken in any other manner, must in long terms be
found erroneous: and this is generally true, of the mean taken from the actual
length of two assigned successive terms of war and peace.

12. But let the actual average of the war of the Revolution, and the following
peace, be now made the basis of computation, as the proper periodical average;
and it will be found, that the conclusion before derived, is not invalidated
thereby; the mean annual amount of the tax, which was paid for 6 years in the
war of the Revolution, was L. 1.832 ms. the sum of the 6 nominal rates 23s.
that of the 1st year having been 3s. in the pound. In the following peace,
which continued 4 years, its amount was L. 1.2585 ms. and the sum of the 4
rates was 11s. therefore the actual mean payment of these 10 years for all
England, was L. 1.6026 ms. and the mean nominal rate 3 shillings 3.3/10 The tax
of London was L. 0.2369 ms. and the charge on the remainder of the kingdom L.
1.3657 ms. which augmented as before, in the proportion of 1.9745 to unity,
gives L. 2.6965 ms. as the amount of a land tax, which in 1792 would be equal
in burden to the average payment of the counties in 1700, exclusive of London.
The advance upon the counties thus found, is L. 1.0215 ms. and the defalcation
of the remote district being L. 1.0369, if the whole of that advance were
levied upon them, their payments would become very nearly proportional to that
of the home division; the difference of these sums being L. 15,400 a year only.

ARTICLE VII. On the Charge of the Land Tax, at the nominal Rate of Four
Shillings in the Pound; and of the general Taxes, separately and conjointly, on
the Owners of Land in the two Districts.
1. THE amount of the taxes of England (the land tax excluded), is first to be
shown; and as these taxes may fall on the whole society in general, they are
here called the general taxes. We are next to enquire, what part thereof is
paid by income from land; the fund for the payment of all taxes, being income
of some kind or other. That part being found, its charge upon the two districts
severally will be determined; and the general taxes paid by each, its payments
to the land tax (which falls on landed income alone), being added, the total
tax of the landlords of each district will be obtained; and its proportion to
their respective incomes may be assigned. Moreover, if we compute the absolute
rent of each district; the sum of the general taxes, the land tax, and the
total of both being before found, the charge of each of these in the pound, in
both divisions, will be found likewise.

2. The taxes of England, exclusive of that on land, are here given, from the
account of the national income for the year ending at Lady Day 1789. Sinclair,
v. 3. p. 290.
The articles of that account fall under two heads, proper taxes, and money
derived from other sources. In the statement here followed, impressed money, and
arrears of taxes, are given in one article; and their joint amount is L.
113,591. The former is a saving from money allotted before to specific
purposes, it forms no part of the taxes paid in this year; but not having
authority upon which to settle its amount, it is taken equal to the arrears of
taxes of preceding years, paid in during the year comprehended in the account:
half this compounded sum is therefore struck off; but the other half is carried
to the general total, to balance such part of the taxes of the year, as are not
paid in until the next; and therefore do not appear in their proper places. The
profit of the lottery is likewise struck out of the account; it is not a part
of the general taxes, though an annual resource of the State; it is no more
such, than the money for cards at a card-table.
The difference of the general taxes of Great Britain and Scotland, is their
amount in England.

3. The account stands as follows: Taxes of Great Britain. L. ms. On Scotland.
Customs gross produce 4.7256 Total income, including Land Tax, L.ms. 1.0991
Excise ditto 7.1960 Stamps ditto 1.3299 Deductions Miscellaneous ditto 2.0801
non-taxes
Crown rents L. Bishops ditto Seizures, Customs, Forfeitures, Excise
7,055 Appropriated duties do. 0.0318 4,200 Malt Tax 0.7500 18,275 Arrears of
former years 0.0567 9,812 Land Tax and charges 52,000 Great Britain 16.1702
Scotland 1.0078 Total L. 91,342 General taxes of England 15.1624 General taxes,
L. ms. 1.0078

4. The amount of the general taxes paid out of the anded income, is now to be
sought, together with the charge upon the two districts separately. Let the
nation be supposed to be divided into two great classes, the first ^eriving
their income from the rent of land; and the ^econd, from all other sources;
that the income of many individuals is mixed, will not affect the truth of the
conclusion sought: let it also be assumed, that the charge of the general taxes
upon each class, will be as its total expenditure; which is to be taken to be
in the same proportion to its gross income in each. And lastly, let it be also
admitted, that the total income of the district bears the same proportion to
the total income of the nation, which was determined by Mr. King to obtain in
1688. I find that the application of the calculations and results of Mr. King,
frequently made in this tract, is justified by the uniform practice of those,
who have treated on subjects similar to this, because they were interwoven in
the body of Davenant's works, they are frequently referred to as his: and
Postlethwayt, speaking of them as such, says; The quantities are since, no
doubt, considerably increased: but, as, most probably, the proportion remains
very little (nearly) unaltered, it is fair to argue upon them, as has been done
by the best writers upon these subjects. Dictionary, Article Landed Interest,
column 4th, line 9th, edition 3d, 1766. Of the great comparative authority of
what Mr. King has left us, mention has been before made. App. Art. I. 3.


5. The actual income of the two districts in 1688, must therefore be assigned.
When it was before enquired, what proportion of the tax the remote district
could equitably pay; the selling value of the estates in each, or the rent of
estates of equal value in land, or of the best condition, was taken as the
proper measure by which to estimate that ability: the estates of inferior
condition, as buildings and mines, being reduced to landed income of equal
value. But here the question is, what is actually paid from incomes of estates
real, of all qualities, all being equally assessed, without regarding that
better or worse condition; but their amount only for the comparison is now
actual income and actual taxes. The income of all the estates real in the
kingdom, in 1681, was 13 millions; and of buildings, two millions: now, from
this amount, the rent of London is to be deducted, which being taken in that
year at one million, A very considerable part of the general taxes of the city
of London, is paid directly out of the income of the landed gentry, constantly
or occasionally residing there; and it duly corresponds to the rents of all the
houses they occupy by the year, or for shorter terms. And it does not appear,
that the clear income of estates in London in 1623, is taken too low,
consideration being had of this circumstance.
leaves the income of both the districts 12 millions.

6. The total national income being as L. 43^498 ms. its absolute amount in
1688; the present amount of the general taxes, L 15^162 ms. and the provincial
rent as L. 12,000 ms. its absolute amount at the Revolution; the general taxes
upon that income at this time, will, by the assumption, be a fourth
proportional to those three numbers, or L.4^1827, the sum paid thereto, out of
the income of estates real in both districts.

7. That paid by each comes next to be determined; and it will be directly
proportioned to the income of each respectively. Now the incomes of superior
and inferior conditions will be mixed, very nearly in the same proportion in
the two districts; and the sums of each in each district, will be as the
selling value of that district, whence the sum of the rents of both, being
taken as 41,814, that of the remote district will be as 31,814; App. Art. 1. 13.
and the general taxes of both conjointly, being equal to L.4^1827 ms. by
taking a fourth proportional to these 3 numbers, their charge on the income of
the remote district is found to be L. 3^1824 ms. and on that of the home
district at L.1^0003.

8. The last object of this part of our enquiry is, the total total taxes paid
out of the landed income of each district, separately; and the proportion of
those payments to each other.

Districts. Home. Remote. L. ms. L. ms. General Taxes 1^0003 3^1824 Land Tax
0^6522 10381 Total Taxes 1^6525 4^2205

9. Now it shall be as L. 1^6525 ms. the total tax upon home district, is to
10,000; so is L. 4^2205 ms. the sum paid by the proprietors of land in the
remote district, to 25,540. Therefore the sum of the taxes upon the home
district being taken as 10000, their charge on the remote district will be as
25,540; but the rent of the home district being taken as 10000, that of the
remote division is as 31,814; and the total charge of the taxes paid by the
owners of the land of each, ought to be in that proportion. Hence the actual
taxes on landed income in the remote district, is to their proportional and
equitable amount, as 25,540 to 31,814; or when the sum of their payments to the
taxes is L. 10,000, their charge ought to be L. 12,436.

10. The total sum levied by taxes on the remote district, is L. 4^2205 ms. but
to render it proportional to the charge on the home district, it must be
increased to L. 5^2572 ms. The difference of these sums, or the defalcation of
the land-owners of this division, in their payment of the taxes, is thus found
to be L. 1^0367 ms. being that of their payment to the land tax; which had been
before determined to be L. 1^0369 ms. The difference, L. 200, arises from all
places of figures, after the 5th, being entirely neglected in these operations.

11. The charge in the pound of the land tax, the general taxes, and both
conjointly, upon the income of land in each of the two districts, and their
averages on the income of all provincial estates, are lastly to be determined.

12. The rents of the two districts are to be first sought. In the year 1774,
Mr. Young found the income from the estates real to amount to L. 24^400 ms.
Chalmers, p. 178.
From this sum, if 2 millions be deducted for the rent of London, Mr. Young,
following Mr. King without variation, states the rent of buildings in the whole
kingdom at 2 millions; that of London is taken above at the same sum. It might,
upon the first inspection, seem to be the consequence of this, that it is
supposed above, that there were in 1774 no other buildings without a
proportional quantity of land annexed to them, than those contained in the city
of London. But in this account, Mr. Young's object was, to give the total
receipt of the landlords annually from their estates; he has, therefore, in the
next article, included in a single sum with other things, the value of timber
sold by them; and that being his object, it is rightly included in the total.
But timber being a commodity, its value is not a rent of ground on which it
grows, any more than the value of a quarter of corn is the rent of the land
producing it. Now, supposing its annual value in 1688 to have been rightly
assigned by Mr. King; and that it had increased from that time, until the year
1774, in the same proportion as the rent; it would in the latter year have
amounted to L.903,700. The statement made above, therefore,, tacitly supposes
this sum to have been the rent of the remaining buildings of the kingdom, which
have no land annexed to them. It may, perhaps, be too small; but I have chosen,
as the probable error in the text is thus very greatly reduced, to adopt no
further correction to it.
the remainder, L. 22^400 ms. will be the sum of the rents in both districts in
the year 1774; that of 1688 was 12 millions as above; from both, the income of
1792 is to be determined.

13. Now let the same assumption be made with regard to the mixed rent, as was
before laid down, with respect to the rents of superior condition only; that it
has increased, during the whole of this period, with one constant degree of
celerity; or, which is the same thing, that it has been every year augmented at
an equal rate per cent. The number of years from the Revolution to 1774 was 86;
that rate was therefore L. 0^728 per cent.: for the first rent, 12 millions,
multiplied by 1.007886, is equal to (1^8666, xL. 12,000 ms.) L. 22^400 ms. The
period between 1688 and 1792 was 104 years: and by the assumption, the mixed
rent at the end of the term was become (L.12^000 ms. x1^0078104=L.12.0 ms.
2^1271) L.25^525 ms.

14. This being the sum of the mixed rents of the two districts, that of each
is now to be assigned: the rents of the superior and inferior condition in the
two districts, are in both very nearly in the same proportion to each other:
hence the sum of these rents, or the mixed income of each district (which is
the subject here considered) will be as the value of that district; but the
value of both is to the value of the remote district, as 41814 to 31814: App.
Art. I. 13.
therefore, as 41,814 is to L. 25^525 ms. the sum of the rents of both
districts, so is 31,814 to L. 19^421 ms. the mixed rent of the greater: that of
the home division is therefore L. 6^104 ms.

15. Hence the amount of a tax, or set of taxes, upon either district, or both
jointly, being given; the proportion of the charge to the rent, or its rate in
the pound, may be found. As for example, to find the present rate of the
land tax of the home district, it will be, as its annual rent L. 6^104 ms. is
to its annual tax, L. 0^6522 ms. so is L. 1 to L. 0^10685, the real rate of the
tax in the pound, equal to 25^644 pence, or two shillings and one penny and
two-thirds nearly. Again, to find how much in the pound is paid by the
landholders of the same district to all the taxes: it will be, as its rent, L.
6^104 ms. is to L. 1.6525 ms. their total payment to the state; so is L. 1 to
L. 0^27072; or shillings 5, 5, nearly. And if from this rate L. 0^27072 be
subtracted L. 0^10685, that of the land tax as above, the remainder, L.
0^16387, or 3 shillings 3 pence, is the charge in the pound, of the general
taxes, upon their income; and that of all the upper class in society. It is
thus that the table in the text is formed; exhibiting the rate in the pound of
the land tax, the general taxes, and both conjointly, for the two districts.

OBSERVATIONS ON THIS ARTICLE.

16. This finishes the account of the computations on this branch of the
subject, referred to in the Fourth Section. But if the train of reasoning be
carried a little further, the conclusion we shall come to, will lend no
inconsiderable evidence to the assumptions which have been made in the course
of these operations; it being apparent that the total national income may be
deduced from what is laid down in this article. Now the result which will be so
obtained, very nearly coincides with the amount which the general estimation
has assigned to that income; but it has not been hitherto calculated upon these
grounds: the evidenue of these assumptions is therefore hereby increased; there
is superadded to their own internal probability, the whole of that of the
generally received estimate of the national income; beside the presumption of
the truth of both, arising from their results, being found to be congruous
parts of a whole.

17. To determine this income, let us follow an arrangement originally adopted
by Mr. King; and suppose the nation to be divided into two classes, each
subdivision of the first increasing its wealth in its respective proportions;
and of the second, diminishing it; the expense of the maintenance of each of
its subdivisions exceeding its income.

18. It has been before observed, that the income of the lower class exceeds
that which would be found from the proportion of their payment to the general
taxes; an observation laid down, as part of the evidence on which the
assumption here proceeded upon is founded. And that income must be evidently
very nearly equal to the sum of their wages, and the present amount of the
national poor's rate; for most of this class have no other subsistence than
what they derive from the one or the other.

19. The wages of the laborers in agriculture, was fixed by Mr. Young, in
1774, at L. 14.016 ms. This sum has since been increased, and its rate of
increase is to be sought. In the year 1670, the average wages of husbandmen in
all England was 8 pence a day: Petty: Polit. Arithm. p. 124, in Political
Essays, or the British Empire. 410. Strahan. 1772.
and including extraordinary wages in harvest, turnip-hoeing, and similar
incidents, it is here taken to have been, in the year 1770, 14 pence a day.
This charge therefore increased at the rate of L. 0.5612 per cent annually, in
this interval of 100 years; and in 18 years, elapsed from 1774 to 1792, the
wages of these laborers became increased to (1.0056181^ x L. 14.016 ms.
=1.0818 x L. 14.016 ms.) L. 15.501 ms. upon a supposition that their number
continued absolutely stationary.

20. The wages of the remainder of this class is now to be sought. Mr.
Sulmioch, a German writer on population, of great celebrity, has determined the
average decrements of human life for a whole kingdom, similar in circumstances
to the Kurmark of Brandenburgh; on a supposition, that one third of the
inhabitants are resident in great towns, and the remainder in country parishes
and villages. Now, in all kingdoms, the laboring poor of great towns are as
numerous in proportion to the upper class, as in the country; but the great
towns are generally the seats of manufactures for foreign commerce; and their
numbers of every description in this kingdom, taken collectively, greatly
exceeds that proportion of our total population, which takes place in
Brandenburgh. Again, the husbandman supplies our natural wants only; all our
artificial wants are supplied by laboring artizans and manufacturers; and as
they much exceed those of that part of Germany, the number of persons employed
in the supply of them here, must be a proportionably greater part of the
people. Hence it is to be concluded, that more than one third part of the
laboring class are inhabitants of great towns; the average of their wages is
also more than that of laborers in husbandry; and upon these two accounts
alone, the annual income of the sets of men already enumerated, must exceed
that of one third of the whole class: and if to the expense of their
maintenance, we add, that of the laboring manufacturers and artisans, residing
in villages; of servants in the country, not employed in husbandry; of our
sailors in the foreign and coast trades, and in the navy; the soldiers; and the
men whom our home fisheries employ; the sum of their income by wages, may very
well be taken equal to that of the laborers in husbandry.

21. The amount of the poor's rate remains to be added to this sum: it may be
said, that being paid to them from the income of the upper class, it is
included in it; and thus the same sum will be brought twice to account, in the
amount of the national income sought. But all income is rightly brought to the
account of that class, which ultimately expends it for its own support; not of
that which pays it to them by law or contract; otherwise rent would be the
income of farmers, not of landlords. Accordingly, in Mr. King's table of
national income, Davenant, v. 2. p. 184.
the amount of the national poor's rate is taken from the income of the upper,
and inserted in that of the inferior class; as appears from its construction.
This rate is an increasing rate; its annual increment in the city of Bristol,
for 20 years, had been found to be L. 4.688 per cent.; in a country district,
comprehending many parishes, L. 3.885 per cent. in two contiguous hundreds, in
7. years, L.4.58 per cent. and in 10 parishes, in 22 years, L. 2.39 per cent.
Observations on Mr. Gilbert's bill, 1776, p. 9^.
Let the average rate of increase be therefore taken at L. 3 per cent. and in
18 years the charge will be augmented in the proportion of 1.6047 (the amount
of one pound at that interest for that term) to unity. The charge for the
maintenance of the poor, for the year ending at Easter 1776, was L. 1.5568 ms.
and in 10 years, ending at Easter 1792, it had thus become increased to (L.
1.5568+1.6047) L. 2.4981 ms. Hence the income of the whole class is (L.
15.501x2, Annual Register. Dodsley. v. 20, p. 259.
L. 2.4981) L. 33.500.

22. That of the upper class is now to be found. From the result of the
assumption made at the beginning of this article, that income appears to be, to
the part of the general taxes paid out of it, as unity to 0.16386: Section 15.
the charge of those taxes upon it is therefore to be assigned. The total
amount of the income of this class in 1688, was L. 34.488 ms. Davenant, v. 2,
p. 184, table.
and of the national income, L. 43.498 ms. Therefore, by the assumption, it
shall be as L. 43.498 ms. is to L. 15.162 ms. the present amount of all the
national general taxes; so is L. 34.488 ms. to L. 12.021 ms. the amount of
those taxes, now paid out of the income of the upper class. And again, as
0.16386 is to unity, so is L. 12.021 ms. to L. 73.363 ms. the income sought.

23. Hence the income of the upper class being L.73.363 ms. and that of the
lower class L. 33.500 ms. the national income is L. 106.863 ms. At the end of
the last, and the commencement of the present peace, it was generally stated at
L. 100 ms. and with this, the amount here found is in perfect coincidence. And
the evidence of the assumptions made at the beginning of this article, is the
amount of their own internal probability, combined with the probability that
the commonly received opinion of the amount of the national income, is near the
truth.

ARTICLE VIII. On the Proportion of the Taxes paid by the upper Rank of the
Proprietors of Land, to their Income; and of that of the other Classes.
1. THE income of the upper class of the proprietors of land, in the year 1688,
was stated by Mr. King as follows: Davenant, v. 2: p. 184.
Annual Income. Total. L. L. Temporal Lords 3,200 512,000 Spiritual Lords 1,300
33,800 Baronets 880 704,000 Knights 650 390,000 Esquires 450 1,200,000
Gentlemen 280 2,880,000 Eminent Clergymen 72 144,000 Freeholders of the better
sort 91 3,640,000 Proprietors of land, upper class 9,503,800

2. The remainder of the income of the upper class, consisting of those who are
engaged in the greater commerce, the individuals of the several liberal
professions not included in the account given above, together with the whole of
the middle class, was in that year calculated by Mr. King, at L. 24^985 ms.
that of the lower class comprehending soldiers, sailors, and laborers of all
denominations, at L. 9^010 ms. And he computed the whole income of the people
at L. 43^498 ms. Whence the proportion of that of the three great divisions of
the people here classed together, being supposed to remain constant to this
time; if the present national income be taken as 1000; that of the greater
landed proprietors will be as 218; that of the lowest class as 207; and the
remainder of society as 574.

3. The general taxes (or those to which every class contributes, in proportion
to its income) amount to App. Art. 7. 3.
L. 15^162 ms. a year; and the contribution of the greater land-owners to that
total, is 0^218 thereof yearly; or 3^3124 ms.

4. This would be their payment to the public expenses, if their income were
taxed only in the same proportion as that of the rest of the people: but in
addition, they pay their share of the land tax; and here, by the constant
assumption, let their present rents be taken as bearing the same proportion to
the whole national rent, which took place in 1688; and it will be as 13
millions, Whitworth's Davenant, v. z. p. 216.
the total rent of estates real in 1688, is to L. 1^9622 ms. the present amount
of the land tax; so is L. 9^5038 ms. the income of this class in 1688, to L.
1^4344, their present payment to that tax; or the excess of their charge above
what is paid out of any other equal income. And the amount of their general
taxes being L. 3^3124, the sum of both is L.4^7468 ms. which exceeds their
proportional charge, L. 3^3124 ms. in the proportion of 14330 to 10000.

5. This is the average rate of the excess of taxes upon rent throughout the
kingdom; but in the home counties, it is more, and in the remote counties less,
than here assigned; the proportion of land tax to income in the latter, being
one-half that of the former only. And it may be added, that the present total
burden of taxes upon the income of land in the home counties, is very near the
limit which the whole landed interest can properly bear.

ARTICLE IX. On the Effect of the Equalization of the Land Tax, on the Price of
the Products of the Soil.
THE increase of the charge in the pound on the landlords of the remote
district, is to be sought. The charge on the home district is L. 0^10685; and
of the other, L. 0^05345: See comparative Table, Section IV. in the Notes.
the augmentation upon them to equalize the tax, will therefore be L.0^0534, or
one shilling and d. in the pound, amounting to L. 5: 3: 9 per cent.

2. Half this charge (by the assumption in the text) is taken as the
augmentation of the rent, which is thus increased in the ratio of L.1^0267 to
unity, or L. 2^67 per cent. Now, if the former rent of a farm had been L. 19^2
the proportional poor's rate would have amounted to L.1^9266; and the other
parish charges, L.0^31. Chalmers. p. 178.
Now their sum L. 21^4366, multiplied by 1^0267, as above, will give the
augmented disbursement of the tenant on these three articles, L. 22^008: and
these are the only parts of his annual expense which will be initially affected
by the advance of his rent. Hence the annual increase thereof is L. 0^572: his
total expenditure before amounted to L. 60^331, and is now become L. 60^903.

3. Suppose him to augment the price of his products, in the same proportion as
these expenses are increased; their former selling value was L. 72^826;
Chalmers. p. 178.
it is now become L. 73^516; or augmented in the proportion of 1^200948 to
unity; that is, 18 shillings and 11d. per cent. And if before, he sold a
quarter of wheat for 44 shillings, he must now add 5 pence and 1/230d. to its
price.

ARTICLE X. On the Tonnage of the English Ships cleared outward, from the Port
of London, the four greater Ports of the Remote District, and the other Ports
of the Kingdom.
1. THE computations to be given in this article, require two observations to
be placed before them, by way of introduction: the first is, that although the
existence of a great decrease of the shipping of the ports of the home district
(exclusive of that of London) be clearly proved by the accounts to be produced,
its exact measure is not thereby assignable; and the other, that the first
application made of them (as I afterward found) was not the best approximation
to the purpose in view. The process, however, so employed, presented some
conclusions, which seem to have importance enough, to be preserved in an
article of a miscellaneous Appendix. Here will, therefore, be found other
matter, beside what is referred to as proved, in the body of this tract, or
what is necessary to its support.

2. In this subject, it becomes requisite to consider the total tonnage By the
tonnage of a port or ports, is here uniformly meant, tons English, cleared
outward in a year, without regard to repeated voyages.

But the number of tons of shipping belonging to any port exceeds the tonnage
annually cleared outward; and on an average of the whole kingdom, by one third
of the latter amount. (Chalmers, p. 29.) Hence the tons of shipping, and the
tonnage cleared outward, are on an average proportional in different years.


of the kingdom as divided into three parts: the first, that of the port of
London; the second, that of the four ports next to it in consequence; or
Whitehaven, Liverpool, Newcastle, and Bristol, all situated in the remote
district; and the third, that of all the remaining and smaller ports, taken
collectively.

3. The amounts of these three parts of the tonnage, for the years 1750 and
1772, may be determined from two tables given by Mr. Chalmers; whence the
increase or decrease of any one may be assigned, for a term of time of
sufficient duration. In the first table, he shows the tonnage of England for
1772, and its average for the years 1749, 1750, 1751; here to be taken as the
tonnage of 1750. The circumstance which led him to choose those years is
evident; but if the average had begun with the year 1750, the comparisons here
to be given might have been instituted upon averages of 3 years for every
article; and the matter of the account would have been somewhat more perfect:
as it is, we must rely on the consequences to be drawn from the entries of 2
single years; but from an inspection of his tables, it is evident, that any
error to proceed from this circumstance, must be very minute. It ought however
to be subjoined to this observation, that it must be the fate of writers, who
are so much more full of information than others, as to present us with almost
every thing we can want, that if we miss a single article of it, our
disappointment is more marked: it is somewhat like that of the purchaser of a
ticket in the lottery, which is either the number immediately above or below a
considerable prize.

4. The two first columns of the following account of tonnage, are compounded
from the two tables given by Mr. Chalmers. Tons -- Kingdom total, Chalmer's
Estimate, table, p. 37. The five ports, ibid, p. 46.


5. The third column in the table, is the difference of the tonnage of the
whole kingdom, and the several parts thereof Places, Tonnages 1750. 1772.
Difference. 1750. 1772. Increasing Kingdom total 609,798 716,861 107,063 Tons
in 1750 as 10000. As 11755 London Whitehaven Liverpool Newcastle Bristol
146,187 198,758 52,571 13596 100,068 192,436 92,368 19231 33,233 76,036 42,803
22879 41,826 61,603 19,777 14728 24,411 31,529 7,118 12915 The 4 Ports 199,538
361,604 162,066 18122 London and the 4 ports 345,725 560,362 214,637 6208
Decreasing on Aver. Small ports of England 264,071 156,499 107,574 As 10000 As
5926 London, with smaller ports 410,260 355,257 55,003 10000 8659 respectively,
at the beginning and end of the term of 22 years.

6. The two last columns exhibit, first, the proportion in which the tonnage
has increased in that term, where any such augmentation took place. And here,
that of the year 1750 is constantly made the standard of comparison: this is
done by taking it as 10000; and finding a fourth number, bearing such
proportion to 10000, as the actual tonnage of 1772 bore to that of 1750; which
fourth number will be as the tonnage of 1772. Or it may be conceived another
way: if the tonnage of 1750 be supposed to be divided into 10000 equal parts,
the fourth number, or the proportional, shall be the number of such parts, of
which the tonnage of 1772 consisted. Let the first article in the table, or the
total tonnage, be the example of this process: then as 609,798 tons, the
tonnage of 1750, is to 10000; so is 716,861, the national tonnage in 1772, to
11,755, the fourth proportional. Here the tonnage of 1750 being taken as 10000,
that of 1772 will be as 11,755; or if the tonnage of the first term be supposed
to be divided into 10,000 equal parts, that of the second will consist of
11,755 such parts.

7. And in the two last articles, which relate to the smaller ports, first,
separately, and secondly, in conjunction with London, where the tonnage is seen
to have decreased in the same period; that of 1750 again is made the standard
of comparison, to determine its proportional decrease.

The following observations suggest themselves on this table:

8. Firstly, The celerity of the increase of tonnage of the five greater ports
conjointly, exceeded that of the kingdom in general, in this period of 22
years; and upon an average, in the proportion of 162 to 118 nearly.

9. Secondly, The proportion of increase of the tonnage of London exceeded that
of the whole kingdom, in the ratio of 136 to 118 nearly. The disproportion of
the head to the body of the kingdom is a real evil; and that it is augmenting
with the celerity that this proportion implies, is at least a drawback from the
advantage derived from the increase of its shipping. Cities may attain such a
degree of population and riches, that the sources of their further augmentation
would be attended with much greater advantage, if their operation could be
transferred to new seats. If that part of its superabundant waters, which
renders one place a rank and putrid marsh, should work its way to some other
where it was wanted, it would diffuse life and fertility over it; and the first
retain all that luxuriance, and all that luxuriance only, which is wholesome.

10. However it appears, that even in 1772, the proportion of the shipping
belonging to the port of London, compared with that of all England, was not so
great as in the beginning of the century; by a survey taken in 1701, which is
preserved in the Plantation office, we see that the tonnage of all the trading
vessels in England amounted to 261,222, and of the port of London to 84,882
tons; Chalmer's Estimate, p. 9.
the former of which numbers is to the latter, as 10,000 to 3,249. It therefore
had relatively fallen, even in 1772, in the proportion of 3249 to 2772; but in
1750, in the ratio of 3249 to 2397, as will be seen in the next table. In which
state, if it had continued, and its re-augmentation pointed out above had been
divided among the smaller ports of the kingdom, whereby the quantity of our
shipping would have remained the same, it might have been of much greater
general advantage.

11. The table here given, shows the proportion of the tonnage of English ships
cleared outward, in the kingdom in general, and the port of London, at sundry
periods, since the Revolution.

Tons kingdom as 10000 London Tons London as War 1693, 1694. Chalmers, p. 6.
1693 118,088 44,912 3812 1694 73,056 39,648 5427 1701, Ib. p. 9. The tonnage
of all shipping this year was 261,222, of ships of the port of London, 84,882
tons: the English tonnage cleared outward was 273,693; and the proportional
quantity for London, 88,934 tons, as in the table. It was necessary to
calculate this amount, that all the articles therein might be of one
denomination; that is, of tons English cleared outward in each year.
1701 273,693 88,934 3249 1719, 1779. Chalmers, p. 5.
1719 421,431 187,122 4440 1750 609,798 146,187 2397 1772 716,861 198,758 2772
1719, 1779. Chalmers, p. 5.
1779 590,911 236,659 4004

12. In war, the tonnage of shipping cleared outward from the port of London,
decreases; but its proportion to the whole tonnage of the kingdom increases:
this appears from the two first articles of the table. In 1779, the tonnage of
English cleared from London, was in all probability considerably less than it
had been in 1776: it amounted, in the first-mentioned year, to 2-5ths of the
tonnage of the whole kingdom; in 1776, it probably might be about 1-3d of the
whole: its increase, therefore, in the latter end of the peace, was extremely
rapid.

13. I am not without suspicion of some error of the press in the authority I
follow, in the account of the tonnage of London for the year 1719.

14. Thirdly, The tonnage of the four great out-ports, had, upon an average,
increased during 22 years, with a greater celerity than that of London, and in
the proportion of 181 to 136. And their increase, simply considered, exhibits
nothing which is not advantageous. It points out the spirit of enterprise to be
diffused: a great town increasing rapidly in commerce, is a punctum vitae to
the whole country round it; and these advantages continue, until its increasing
opulence begin to have a bad effect on manners, and its increasing number on
population.

15. Fourthly, The tonnage of Whitehaven, which appears, in the table, to have
very nearly obtained an equality with that of London, had actually, upon an
average of three years, ending with the year 1772, somewhat exceeded it; that
of London, for those three years, having been 191,069; and of Whitehaven,
194,417 tons. Chalmer's Estimate, table, p. 46.


16. Fifthly, The proportional increase of the commerce of Liverpool, appears
to have been somewhat more than double that of the kingdom in general; and to
have exceeded that of all other ports.

17. Sixthly, With respect to shipping, Bristol, which is only the fifth, has
been hitherto deemed the second port in relative importance. Chalmers, p. 46.


18. Seventhly, Although the port of London is situated in the home district,
it is to be considered as the emporium of the kingdom in general: both are
interested in what regards the extension of its commerce, and nearly perhaps in
proportion to the importance of their own fabrics and manufactures; and it
cannot be said to belong exclusively to either; but considering the
consequences to be drawn from this statement, it is highly probable that there
will not be wanting some, who paying a greater regard to the geographical
situation of that city, than its relation to the whole kingdom as its capital,
will argue for taking the increase of its shipping to the account of the
tonnage of the home district. Now, this cannot be separated from the general
total of that of the smaller ports: but being joined with them, it appears,
that the tonnage of London, and the smaller ports, had decreased in 22 years,
55.003 tons; and if the tonnage of 1750 be taken as 10000, that of 1772 will be
8659 only. Hence there appears a very considerable decrease of tonnage, even in
this mode of stating it.

19. Eighthly, The observations on the decrease of the shipping of the smaller
ports, the object for which these inquiries were instituted, are given in the
body of this tract.

20. Ninthly, The proportion of the tonnage of any one or more ports, to that
of the kingdom in general, or any other port or ports made the standard, that
is taken as 10000, is the measure of the proportion of their shipping nearly,
or of their maritime importance: See note, 2.
and the difference of those measures, at distant terms of time, of their
relative progression or retrogression, and both these points, in every
necessary instance, may be determined for the years 1750 and 1772. This is done
in the divisions of the following table; the tonnage of the first article of
each, being made the standard in both those years. Thus, in the fourth
division, in the year 1750, the tonnage of the four greater out-ports, 199,538
tons, being made the standard, or taken as 10000, that of the smaller out-ports
having been 264,073 tons; the proportion they then bore to the former, will be
defined by the fourth proportional to these three numbers; or be as 13234: but
in the year 1772, that measure of their relative importance had become
diminished to 4327.

A Comparison of the Tonnage of particular Ports (chiefly the smaller
Out-ports) with sundry Standards.
1750 1772 Ports, London included. Tonnage equal to Tonnage as Tonnage as
Tonnage equal to Kingdom(standard) 609,798 10000 10000 716, 61 London 146,187
2397 2772 198,758 4 greater out-ports 199,538 3272 5044 361,604 Smaller
out-ports 264,073 4330 2182 156,499 London, and four greater out-ports 345,725
10000 10000 560,362 Smaller out-ports 264,073 7638 2792 156,^99 London excluded
Total out-ports(st.) 463,611 10000 10000 518,103 Smaller out-ports 264,073 5695
3020 156,499 4 greater out-ports (standard) 199,538 10000 10000 361,604 Smaller
out-ports 264,073 3234 4327 156,499

21. Tenthly, Again, the different proportions which the tonnage of any port or
ports bear to that of any other or others, at any two periods, may become a
subject of inquiry, as was intimated in the account of the construction of the
last table. Thus the tonnage of the four greater out-ports being taken as
10000, it is seen by the last table, that in 1750 the tonnage of the smaller
out-ports was as 13234; and in 1772, as 4327. Their relative importance,
compared with that of the four greater ports, had therefore, in twenty-two
years, diminished in the proportion of those numbers: and taking its measure in
the year 1750, or 13234, as the standard, or as 10000; in the year 1772, it had
become diminished in the proportion of 3269 to 10000; or to something less than
1-3d of its former measure; for as 13234 is to 10000, so is 4327 to 3269.

22. The variations of the tonnage of the smaller out-ports being the principal
object of investigation in this article, its decrease, when compared with the
total shipping of the kingdom and the greater subdivisions, is given in the
third column of the following table. The first two are copied from the
preceding table; and by taking each number in the first as 10000, the
corresponding number in the third is a fourth proportional to the number in the
first column, the common standard 10000, and the number in the second column.

Proportions of the Tonnage of the smaller Out-ports, to sundry others as
Standards; and the Decrease of those Proportions, that of the Year 1750 being
made the Standard.
Smaller Out-ports Proportions. Ratio of decrease 1750 As 1772 As 1772 as
Tonnage of England 4330 2182 1750 5040 5 greater ports As 10000 7638 2792 as
3656 All the out-ports 5695 3020 10000 5302 4 greater ports 13234 4327 3269

I conclude this Article with a comparative table of the tonnage of the port of
London with diverse ports; its construction is the same as that of the third.

Tonnage of the Port of London and the greater Out-ports, compared.
1750 1772 Places Tonnage equal to Tonnage As Tonnage As Tonnage equal to
London standard 146,187 10000 10000 198,758 4 greater out-ports 199,538 13649
18193 361,604 Mean of 3yrs. or yr. 1751 1771 London standard 144,231 10000
10000 191,060 Whitehaven alone 112,104 7772 10017 194,417

ARTICLE XI. On the Amount and Operation of the Fund for the Discharge of Debt,
here called the Adequate Fund.
1. TO calculate the adequate fund, there must be given the money to be
borrowed at interest in war; the mean length of a term of war and a term of
peace; the price of stock in each; and the douceur, or premium given for the
actual advance of L. 100 to the State in war.

2. The sum to be borrowed in war, and for which interest is to be paid, was
formerly all advanced by individuals; but in future, money is to be borrowed
from the appropriated sinking fund; and taxes raised to pay the interest
thereof. The amount to be obtained from both these sources, or the
extraordinary expense of a future war, is taken at L. 80.000 ms.

3. The mean length of a term of peace is supposed to be 10 years; and that of
war 8 years, as before. App. Art. VI. ^ and 6.


4. The price of stock in the two half terms of peace is taken at L. 75 per
cent.; the tables given in periodical works, exhibit always the gross price of
stock, which is divisible into two parts; its neat market value, and the
interest accrued thereon since the last dividend. The following table shows the
neat values of the consolidated 3 per cents. from the commencement of the
present peace to December 1791.

1783 63.23 1786 72.78 1784 56.09 1787 74.00 1785 59.09 1788 74.26 Average
59.47 1789 75.00 -- -- 1790 76.25 1791 83.04 -- -- Average 74.45

5. The average of these nine years has been L. 70.52 per cent.; of the present
I have no account. That of the whole term of peace hitherto elapsed, may
probably amount to L. 72. It has been necessary for Maseres's Annuities, p.
290. Sir John Sinclair's Hist. p. 3, p. 267.
Baron Maseres and Sir J. Sinclair, in their disquisitions on some subjects,
collateral to that here treated of, to assume hypothetically some rate for the
average of this peace; they have concurred in assuming L. 75 per cent. as that
rate; in which they are here followed.

6. In the last peace, the mean price of the same stock, so taken, was L.
87.05; and in the following war, L. 65.75 per cent. the first of which rates is
to the second, as L. 75 to L. 56.64; supposing therefore that the proportion of
the prices of peace and war will continue the same, L. 56.64 per cent. will be
the average value of the stock next war.

7. The douceur, or premium given for the actual advance of L. 100 to a loan,
is the excess of the market value of all the heterogeneous securities granted
to the lender, and every other beneficial condition of his contract, which has
a value in money, above the sum advanced, L. 100. From calculations of all the
loans of each, it appears, that the average douceurs of the wars of 1739, 1755,
and 1776, were L. 7.789, L. 5.716, and L. 7.947 per cent. respectively; the
mean of which is L. 7.150 per cent. It is taken here at 7 per cent.

8. The amount of an adequate fund, to be established immediately upon the
expiration of the fifth year of a peace, is here sought. This will be applied
to the payment of the debt during 5 years; be taken during the next 8 years to
the current service, the remaining supplies necessary for which are to be
advanced by loans: and thus, during the war, the debt will increase; at its
termination, the fund is again to be applied to the discharge of the debt for
the term of 5 years. In peace, it is annually augmented, with the interest of
the capital of the public debt paid off thereby; and in war, by a rate of
interest equal to that effectively made, by those who lend money to government.
Now, the amount of the adequate fund is required to be such, that the capital
of the debt, at the beginning and end of the whole term of 18 years, shall be
equal.

9. The elements for its computation being stated above, according to these
conditions, the amount of the adequate fund will be found to be L. 3.485 ms.
Call the initial amount of the fund F. it will be found by this general form. ^

Where E= the extraordinaries of war (80 ms.): d= L. 100 increased by the
douceur, (L. 7): P= the amount of an annuity of L. 1, for the number of years
to expire in the first peace (5 years); improved at the cotemporary rate of
interest of the stocks (4 per cent.): s= the price of the 3 per cents. in war
(L. 56.64): p= the amount of one pound improved at compound interest, during
the unexpired term of the first peace (5 years); at the rate of that term (L. 4
per cent.): q= the like amount of L. 1, during the number of years the war is
to continue (8 years); at the interest made by subscribers to the loans (5 per
cent.): Q= the amount of an annuity of L. 1, for the same (...) of time, and at
the same rate of interest.


For in the first half term of peace, 5 years, the amount of an annuity of L.
1, at 4 per cent, will be L. 5.4163; and of L. 3.485 ms. L. 18.876 ms. which is
the sum furnished by the fund in that time, to pay off the existing capital.
But the price of stock being L. 75 per cent. the capital extinguished will be
one third part, or L. 6.292 ms. more than that amount of the fund, or be equal
to L. 25.168 ms. The fund likewise will be increased during the 5 years of
peace, at the rate of L. 4 per cent. yearly. Now, L. 1 so increased, amounts at
the end of the term to L. 1.2166; the initial fund, L. 3.485 ms. will become L.
4.2399 ms. This sum will be advanced by the trustees of the fund, the first
year of the war, in part of the extraordinary expenses.

10. Let it be supposed that the remainder of the money to be borrowed is
funded in the 3 per cent. stocks; and that the douceur for every L. 100
actually advanced, is L. 7; or the public creditors for every such sum
advanced, are to be supposed to receive a capital in the 3 per cents. whose
value is L. 107. The interest, therefore, made by advancing money to
government, will be to that made by the purchase of stock at the market price,
as 107 to 100. The price of the stock in war is taken at L. 56.64 per cent. and
the interest made by such purchases, is L. 5.2958 per cent. That made by the
advance of money to the loans, is therefore (L. 5.6665) L. 5 per cent.

11. It is this latter rate of interest, which is to be allowed to the trustees
of the fund for its augmentation, when it is taken to the current service in
war; and which is to be provided for by new taxes. We must enquire now, how
much the fund will supply toward the charge of the war, during the whole eight
years of its continuance. Now, this sum will be equal to the amount of an
annuity of L.4.2399 ms. increasing at the rate of 5 per cent. during 8 years:
the amount of L. 1 for that term, at L. 5 per cent. is L. 9.5491; at L. 6 per
cent. L. 9.8974; and at L. 5 per cent. L. 9.7813 very nearly. Hence the total
of the sums advanced by the trustees in eight years, will be (9.7813 x L.
4.2392 ms.) L. 41.471 ms.

12. The whole of the extraordinary charge of the war is taken at L. 80 ms. and
the advances of the common creditors must therefore be L. 38.528 ms. for every
L.100 of which sum, they will obtain a new capital in the 3 per cents, whose
value is L. 107. The selling price of the whole of the new capital will
therefore be L. 41.224 ms. and the stock being L. 56.64 per cent, the whole of
the new capital will amount to L. 72.771.

13. We are now to enquire how much 3 per cent. capital will be paid off by the
fund, in the first five years of peace; its amount for the first year must be
therefore determined. L. 1 annually increasing at the rate of 5 per cent. will,
at the end of 8 years, become L. 1.5550 very nearly; for increasing at L. 5 per
cent. it would have become L. 1.4774; and at L. 6, it would have increased to
L. 1.5938. Hence L. 4.2399 ms. the fund at the beginning of the war, will, at
the termination thereof, be augmented to (1.5550 x L. 4.2399 ms.) The interest
and price of stock in the first 5 years, or half term of this peace, are taken
at the same rates as in the latter 5 years of the preceding; or at L. 4, and L.
75 per cent. respectively: and proceeding as before, it will be found, that the
fund will produce in money, in 5 years, (5.4163 x L. 6.593 ms.) L. 35.710 ms.
which sum (the 3 per cents being at L. 73) will discharge a capital (L. 35.710
ms. + L. 11 903 ms.) L. 47.613 ms. and the capital discharged by the operation
of the fund in the former peace, was shown to be L. 25.168 ms. and in both
conjointly, L. 72.781 ms. the new capital generated by the intervening war.

END OF THE APPENDIX.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE DECREASE OF THE SHIPPING OF THE HOME-DISTRICT, AS STATED
IN THE FOURTH SECTION OF THE TEXT, AND THE TENTH ARTICLE OF THE APPENDIX.
SINCE this Tract has been printed off, a new edition of Mr. Chalmers's
estimate (so often quoted in it) has been put into my hands. In this, the table
of the yearly tonnage of the five greater ports is omitted -- the foundation of
every thing laid down above, concerning the shipping of the ports of the home
counties. This omission is of too much consequence to be passed over without
some observations upon it.

Although the matter of the table be in itself very curious, it appears to have
been inserted in the original edition principally on account of two inferences
there drawn from it. These appear to me to have been afterward discovered by
this candid Writer, not to be legitimately founded thereon; and it was (as I
suppose) omitted in the edition of 1786, as no longer lending support to any
thing there advanced, and consequently become superfluous.

In the observations which introduce it, he states the five principal ports as
representatives of the whole;" and as demonstrating the great progress of our
navigation in twenty years: Edition of 1782, Table, p. 47.
hence it is evident that he supposed the tonnage of the smaller ports had
increased, in some proportion, not very dissimilar to that of the greater. In
suppressing the table, together with his remarks upon it, he has tacitly given
up this induction. It has been shown above (and from this Extract from the
Register of Shipping, Edition of 1782, Table, p. 47.
joined with others contained in the same work), that while the tonnage of
these ports increased with an assigned celerity, that of the smaller had
decreased with much more.

His second greater inference from the table is of an importance, on this
subject, which demands a fuller consideration of it. From the equality of the
tonnage cleared outward in 1772, he lays it down, that in that year Whitehaven
claimed an equality with London, in respect to the numbers of native shipping.
Edition of 1782, Table, p. 47.
This deduction, which is likewise erroneous, he appears desirous of disavowing
more explicitly in the Preface to his improved edition of 1786; Edition of
1786, Preface, p. 9.
by stating, that the colliers of Whitehaven and Newcastle enter and clear at
the Custom-House several times in one year. Hence, from a given increase of
tonnage annually cleared outward from one of these ports, the same increase of
its shipping is not to be inferred, as from an equal augmentation of that of
the other ports of the kingdom, taken on the average.

Now many of the considerations on the decrease of the shipping of the home
district given above, admit the assumption which Mr. Chalmers seems to have
rightly now guarded against, by a protest in form; and it is impossible to
conceive the error it may lead to on this subject as of no consequence. It is
evidently of that magnitude, that it may either greatly exaggerate the
appearance of the growing depression of the shipping of the smaller ports, or
operate so on the result, as to conceal a very great part of its true amount.

It shall therefore be here shown, that the latter has been the case; and that
if any allowance be made to counter-balance the effect of this erroneous
principle in the preceding computations, what has been laid down on this
subject in the fourth section will hold good a fortieri.

This is proved as follows: Whitehaven and Newcastle being excluded, the
proportion of the whole tonnage of the greater ports annually cleared outward,
to the shipping they possess, may be taken to be very nearly the same as that
of the smaller ports; but the annual tonnage of those two ports bears a greater
proportion to the quantity of their shipping. Now here let there be assumed, as
successive hypotheses, that the voyages made by the shipping of those two
ports, are to those made by that of the other ports of the kingdom in equal
terms of time, first, in the ratio of equality; secondly, in that of two to
one; and lastly, in that of three to one: it follows, that the quantity of
shipping in the rest of the kingdom, being as the tonnage cleared therefrom
annually, that of the two ports shall be, on the first supposition, as their
annual tonnage; on the second, as one half thereof; and on the third, as one
third part thereof.

By the Table in the 30th page of the Appendix, we find, that in the years 1750
1772 The total tonnage of the kingdom was 609,798 716,861 Of Whitehaven and
Newcastle 181,894 254,039 Of the remainder of the kingdom 467,904 462,822

The difference of the latter numbers, 5,082 tons, may very well be taken as
accidental: hence it follows (the two coal ports being set out of the great
question), that if the remaining ports of the kingdom be taken, as divided into
two sets, the first increasing in shipping, and the second decreasing, the gain
of the one has, in this term of twenty-two years, been equal to the loss of the
other.

According to the first hypothesis, the shipping of Whitehaven and Newcastle,
in the years 1750 and 1772, are to be taken as 141,894, and 254,039
respectively; according to the second, as one half thereof, or 70,947, and
127,019; and according to the third, as one third thereof, or 47,298, and
84,679; to render the total national tonnage, and its principal divisions,
proportional to the total shipping, and its corresponding divisions
respectively, according to the condition of each hypothesis.

The Table quoted above, being extended to comprehend the results of the second
and third hypothesis, will stand thus --

PORTS. TONNAGE. By Is It By IId By IIId By 1772 Years HYPOTH. HYPOTH. HYPOTH.
HYP As Whitehaven and Newcastle 1750 141,894 70,947 47,298 TONNAGE of 1,750 as
10,000 I. 1772 254,039 127,019 84,679 II. 17,903 Increase 112,145 56,072 37,381
III. Liverpool 1750 33,233 1772 76,036 Same Same 22,879 Increase 42,803 Bristol
1750 24,411 1772 31,529 Same Same 12,915 Increase ^,118 Four Great Out-Ports
1750 1^9,538 128,591 104,942 I. 18,122 1772 361,604 234,384 192,244 II. 18,242
Increase 162,066 105,993 87,302 III. 18,319 London 1750 146,187 1772 198,758
Same Same 13,596 Increase 52,571 Five Great Ports 1750 345,725 274,778 251,129
I. 16,208 1772 560,362 433,342 391,002 II. 15,771 Increase 214,637 158,564
139,873 III. 15,570 Smaller Ports 175^ 264,073 1772 156,499 Same Same 5,926
DECREASE 107,574 Kingdom Total 17^^ 600,789 538,851 515,202 I. 11,755 1772
^16,861 589,841 547,501 II. 10,946 Increase ^^,063 50,990 32,299 III. 10,626
Increase Smaller Port Stationary 214,637 158,564 130,873

The decrease of the annual tonnage of the smaller ports, and that of their
shipping proportional thereto, must remain the same, on each of the three
hypotheses; or on any other which can be laid down, whereby allowance is made
for the greater number of repeated voyages of the shipping of Whitehaven and
Newcastle: for, by every such hypothesis, the sum of the annual tonnage of
those ports must be diminished; and that of the five great ports, and the total
tonnage of the kingdom, will each be diminished by the same amount as that of
those two ports. Hence the difference of those two great aggregates, being the
tonnage of the smaller ports, will be constantly the same at any two assigned
times, on any such hypothesis; and its increase or decrease in the interval
between them remain constant and unaffected thereby.

The proportion which the decrease of the tonnage of the less ports in
twenty-two years, as given in the Table, bears to the increase of the total
national tonnage in that term, according to each of the three hypotheses, is
comparatively shown as follows:

The increase of the national tonnage in twenty-two years, would have been Hyp.
I. -- 214,637 II. -- 158,564 III. -- 139,873
tons, if the small ports had retained the shipping they possessed in 1750. By
its decrease, this augmentation was reduced to Hyp.
I. -- 107,063 II. -- 50,990 III. -- 32,299
tons, or to less than Hyp.
I. one half II. one third III. one fourth
of that amount; and thus Hyp.
I. one half II. two thirds III. three fourths
of the increase of our commercial shipping and naval force, generated by the
increase of the trade of the five great ports, has been annihilated by the
decline of the trade of the smaller, taken conjointly: wherefore, if they had
been able only to retain the trade they possessed at the beginning of the term,
the augmentation of our shipping for trade and war (considerable as it was),
would have been more than Hyp.
I. doubled II. trebled III. quadrupled
in the above term of twenty-two years.

Hence the increase of the national shipping, and its naval force, appears to
have been much more retarded by the decline of the smaller ports upon the
second and third hypotheses, than on the first; that is, than on the statement
of the same matter, given in the third paragraph of the 76th page of this
tract. As, therefore, some allowance must be made for the repeated voyages of
the colliers of the two ports, the bad consequences of that decline are there
stated at less than their true magnitude.

Its celerity was likewise such, that the tonnage of the smaller ports was, in
twenty-two years, reduced in the proportion of 10,000 to 5,926: an unparalleled
and afflicting contrast to the prosperity of the four great out-ports; the
annual tonnage of which increased in the same time, in the proportion of Hyp.
I. -- 18,122 II. -- 18,242 III. -- 18,319
to 10,000.

Here again, the first hypothesis is that on which the celerity of the decrease
of the former, and the increase of the latter, is given, p. 77, l. 13, etc. and
its result is confirmed by that of the two last hypotheses, a fortiori.

The shipping of the greater ports of the remote district having increased in
the above proportion, it may with great moderation be assumed, that the small
ports of that district, by situation partaking of the same common advantages,
have, in the same time, increased in the proportion of Hyp.
I. -- 11,755 II. -- 10,946 III. -- 10,626
to 10,000; which is the average rate of the increase of the tonnage of the
whole kingdom; their advantages being above the general average: and hereby the
argument made use of, p. 79, l. 6, receives an additional strength.

Thus it is evident, in the three last comparative statements, that every thing
on the decline of the smaller ports, deduced from the first hypothesis,
follows, a fortiori, from the second and third: but these consequences of Hyp.
I. contain the whole arithmetical matter brought forward on the subject in the
fourth Section; whence any allowance to be made on account of the repeated
voyages of the shipping of the coal ports, adds to the strength and
conclusiveness of that branch of the general argument.

In the table here annexed, are contained such of the articles of that in the
35th page of the Appendix, and the first table of page 36th, as relate to the
smaller ports, on each of the three hypotheses.

TONNAGE Of Smaller Ports as Their Ratio of Decrease Standard Tonnage of 1750
1772 In 1772, as HYP. Their Proportion of Tonnage in 1750, as 10,000 Kingdom
Total I. 4330 2182 5040 II. 4900 2653 5413 III. 5125 2858 5576 Five Greater
Ports I. 7638 2792 3656 II. 9610 3611 3757 III. 10515 4002 3806 Four Greater
Out-Ports I. 13234 4327 3269 II. 20535 6671 3248 III. 25163 8140 3234 Out-Ports
(London excluded) I. 5695 3020 5302 II. 6725 4001 5950 III. 7156 4487 6270

By the second and third hypotheses, the annual tonnage of the sets of ports,
successively made standards, being diminished by the reduction of that of the
two coal ports; the proportion of the annual tonnage of the smaller ports (the
quantity of which is the same on each hypothesis) appears increased in each
successively. But it is not the absolute proportion of the shipping of the
smaller out-ports at any one time, to that of any other set of ports, as a
standard, which is here to be considered; but the variation of that proportion
in twenty-two years: representing the relative celerity of their decline,
compared successively with each standard; and the measure of their variation is
very little changed upon any of these hypotheses. Thus the proportion of the
shipping of the smaller ports, to that of the whole kingdom, appears, upon the
first, to have decreased in twenty-two years in the ratio of 5,040 to 10,000;
and by the third, in that of 5,576 to the same number, which is its greatest
difference. Here, although their relative decline appears, by the second
estimate, somewhat less than before, that difference of these results is not
enough to have any weight against any general conclusion which might have been
drawn from the first: but in the Fourth Section, no argument has been brought
forward from the decrease of the tonnage, considered in this point of view.

As by the two last hypotheses, the total annual tonnage of the kingdom is
diminished, that of London remaining the same as before in every period; hence
it follows, that what is said of the great proportion of the national commerce
concentrated in that vast city, holds good, a fortiori. If it had been judged
necessary, the table in which it is particularly given might have been extended
to comprehend the results of the two last hypotheses, and enlarged from the
later collections of Mr. Chalmers. Estimate, Edition of 1786, p. 61.


THERE are some further Variations in the edition of Mr. Chalmers's Estimate of
1786, from that of 1782, which must be likewise here noticed.

In the 178th page of the first edition, Mr. Chalmers has given a Table of the
annual produce of the land of England, and the annual expense of it to the
farmer. It is copied from Young's Political Arithmetic, part II. page 32. This
Table likewise is not reprinted in the subsequent publication of his Estimate
in 1786. The edition I possess of this work of Mr. Young, has no second part;
nor have I been able to find one in which it is contained; but from the
correspondence of the general totals to the articles of which they are
compounded, it is evident that the whole was accurately copied in the first
publication of Mr. Chalmers. From a comparison of Mr. Young's Northern and
Eastern Tour, I have verified the first article of the farmer's expenditure,
the rent of the land of England, and the sum of the three following -- the
tithes, poor's rate, and parish charges: the amount of the two last articles,
the annual expense of seed-grain and labor, as deduced, in the same mode, from
these Tours, -- are sufficiently near to those in this account, for the
purposes for which I have quoted it. Even if the difference of these articles
be an error in the latter, which however ought to be understood as a correction
of the average of the Tours, made upon reason by Mr. Young, these several
amounts are determined from the minutes he took in his journeys; and there is
no reason to suppose them not to be as accurate as those he collected at the
same time, to determine the number of persons engaged in farming. These Mr.
Chalmers, in the improved edition of his Estimate, states to have been of
sufficient accuracy for that purpose. It may be supposed, therefore, that
although he did not find it necessary to the improved and abridged plan of his
work, to retain the Table, he notwithstanding had not changed his former
opinion of the several articles thereof, that they were satisfactory, because
the data were good. This Table is quoted in the 5th, 8th, 21st, and 28th pages
of the Appendix of this Tract.

IN his first Edition, Mr. Chalmers had stated the value of land in 1729, at
twenty-five and twenty-six years purchase: in support of which he quotes
Anderson's History of Commerce, Vol. II. p. 322. In the edition of that Work
printed in 1787 (Vol. III. p. 156) it is said, that land then sold at
twenty-five, twenty-six, and twenty-seven years purchase: but the two first of
these are to be esteemed as the ordinary rates, and the last as the highest
price of land at that time; and its average value may, in all contracts, very
well be taken to have been, at that time, twenty-five and a half years
purchase, as stated in the first section of this Essay, p. 18. If we compare
Mr. Chalmers's extract from Anderson, in p. 138 of the edition of 1782, with
the corresponding passages of that of 1786 (p. 98 and 167), the necessity of
this observation will be evident.

I have followed the first copy of the Estimate in this Pamphlet, in other
places besides those already noticed; but the passages I have made use of are
repeated in the improved edition of his work, printed in 1786.

ERRATUM.
Notes to p. 8 and p. 12 of the Text, for Molesworth, read Molleson.


