A VIEW of NORTHUMBERLAND with an EXCURSION to The ABBEY of MAILROSS in
SCOTLAND.

By W. HUTCHINSON Anno 1776.

VOL. II.



NEWCASTLE Printed by T. SAINT, for W. CHARNLEY and Messrs VESEY and WHITFIELD

MDCCLXXVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MY adoption of the word Pater, in the Hexham Inscription, engraved, and facing
page 91, vol. I. having been objected to by an anonymous writer, in order to
show it was by no means improper or singular, I beg leave to refer the reader
to the 2d volume of the Archaeologia, page 190, where in the Salisbury
Inscription commented on by Mr Gough, the words are Pater Ecclesiae
Salisbiriensis; and that writer gives it the antiquity of the beginning of the
12th century, the supposed personage for whom that tomb was erected, Roger
third Bishop of Salisbury, having been elected A. D. 1102 to that See. His
munificence to his infant church entitled him to the name of Pater Ecclesiae
Salisbiriensis, are his words. The era and occasion agree critically in the
two instances: others might be pointed out; but this, from its pertinence, may
seem sufficient.

In my account of Blanchland, page 119, by former writers I was led into an
error, touching the family of Forsters, to whom it formerly appertained. This,
I presume, will appear to be duly rectified, in the account of Bambrough, in
this volume.

The liberal minded reader, I flatter myself, will make allowances for such
errors as appear in this work, which, consistent with its title, is a View of
the County.

A VIEW OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
WE repassed the Tweed by Coldstream Bridge, a handsome structure of seven
arches, having had

WARK CASTLE
in view for several miles of our passage down the banks of the river: a small
part of it standing, forms a rude pillar, which at a distance appears of some
consequence. A platform lays to the west, with a trench called Gully's Nich; a
mean village to the east, from whence you approach the castle. This fortress
stood on a circular eminence, formed by art: its founder is not positively
known, nor is any certain date fixed to it. In Leland's Collectanea, part 1. p.
531. it is said, King Henry the 2 causid the Castle of Work to be made. From
several circumstances of history, it appears, that it was formidable so early
as the beginning of the 12th century. Work Castle on the southe syd of Twede.
A praty town there. -- Lel. Itin. v. 7. p. 54.


Near this place are several intrenchments, some of which are defended by
mounds of earth. These mounds have a trench cross the crown of each.
There is a spot adjoining called the Battle Place; but from what particular
event it obtained that denomination is not known. As being on the borders, this
castle was subject to repeated assaults.

On King Stephen's usurpation of the English crown, David of Scotland, with
great indignation, entered the borders, and among other fortresses assaulted
and took Carrum, which Richard of Hexham says was by the English called Werk.
This is an error in the Historian, the places are distinct, and separate a
considerable distance.
On a treaty held whilst Stephen lay at Durham and David at Newcastle, these
conquests were restored by the Scotch King, who took as a compensation,
Carlisle and some other places of less import, as additions to the Earldom of
Huntington, which was then ratified to him: Stephen also engaged, that before
any disposition was made of the Earldom of Northumberland, he would cause the
claim of Henry (David's son) thereto, in right of his mother, to be fairly
heard by his Judges. David received in marriage, from King Henry I. of England,
his brother-in-law, Maud, the eldest daughter of Waltheof Earl of
Northumberland, from whom Henry his son derived his pretensions to that
Earldom. Henry, by the resignation of his father, and King Stephen's
ratification, held the Earldom of Huntington.

The determination of Henry's claim to Northumberland being suspended, and
Stephen unwilling to bring it to a fair discussion, sensible of the great power
it would give to the Scotch crown, irritated David to support his son's
pretensions by force of arms. Stephen's absence in Normandy favored his
purpose; and soon after Easter, in the year 1137, he levied a great army, with
intent to invade England. The northern Barons, with Thurstan Archbishop of
York, assembled the English forces at Newcastle; and the Archbishop proceeding
to Roxburgh, then in the possession of the Scotch King, in conference with
David and his son, prevailed on them to enter into a truce till Stephen's
return, when it was presumed the matter in contest would be honorably
accommodated: but Stephen persisting in a denial of Henry's right, war
immediately ensued.

The winter was set in, when David, flattered with hopes of an insurrection in
England, a plot Ordericus Vitalis. -- L. 13. p. 912.
having been laid to massacre all the Normans, and deliver the kingdom to him,
who was nearest heir in the Saxon line, not regarding the rigor of the season,
dispatched his nephew William, son of Duncan, with part of his army, against
the Castle of Wark. Richard of Hexham, John of Hexham. -- Redpath's Border
History.


William invested this fortress early in the morning, and David with a numerous
army and engines of war, advanced soon afterward to maintain the siege. This
investiture continued three weeks, during which time the most vigorous assaults
were sustained by the garrison, under command of Jordan de Bussis, nephew of
Walter D'Espec, Lord of Wark. Walter D'Espec had great estates in Yorkshire,
and was founder of the Abbey of Rievalle, which he filled with Monks from St.
Barnard. The site of this abbey is by ancient writers described to be
melancholy and desert, on a tract of land called Blackowmor, on the banks of
the river Rye, from whence the monastery had the name of Rievalle. Rye empties
itself into Derwent. The abbey, of which there are fine remains to this day,
stands near Helmsley, in Yorkshire. We find a particular description of Walter
D'Espec given by Ethelred or Ailred, second Abbot of Rievalle, an elegant and
spirited writer, in his History of the Battle of the Standard. He is there
represented as a person of the first eminence and esteem in the English army,
haranguing them before the battle from the carriage in which the famous
standard was erected. Vir senex et plenus Dierum, acer ingenio, in Consiliis
prudens, in Bello Amicitiam Sociis, fidem semper Regibus servans. Erat ei
statura ingens, membra omnia tantae magnitudinis, ut nec modum excederent, et
tantae proceritati congruerent. Capilli nigri, barba prolixa, frons patens et
libera, oculi grandes et perspicaces, facies amplissima, tracticia tamen, vox
tubae similis, facundiam quae ei facilis erat, quadam soni majestate componens.
Dec. Scr.

An account of the dispositions made by both armies before the battle known by
the name of Bellum Standardi, as collected from Historians of character, may
not be disagreeable to the reader in this place, though not pertinent to this
work.

This expedition of David's was unfortunate to the Scotch: they were joined by
Eustace Fitz-John Lord of Alnwick, who resented Stephen's taking from him
Bambrough, and who hoped to have regained that fortress by the arms of the
Scottish King. The castle sustained the assault of the whole army, and remained
impregnable. David with fire and sword laid waste the country to Durham, where
he was joined by the men of Galloway, Cumberland, and Carlisle, augmenting his
army so, that it consisted of 26,000 men at the least. He was opposed near
Northallerton by a much smaller number, chiefly consisting of the nobles and
men of Yorkshire, headed by their Archbishop Thurston, whose presence animated
them to the highest pitch of bravery. The mast of a ship, having on its top a
cross, wherein was the consecrated host in a silver pix, and the banners of St.
Peter, St. John of Beverley, and St. Wilfrid of Ripon waving below it, was
erected on the beam of a vast chariot. Around this standard, and some of them
upon the carriage on which it stood, were placed the more aged of the English
Barons, and with these Roger de Moubrai the infant Earl of Northumberland.
Roger was the son of Negel de Albanei, who at the battle of Tinchebrai, in
Normandy, took Duke Robert prisoner; for which and other great services, King
Henry rewarded him by a gift of the lands of Robert de Moubrai Earl of
Northumberland, which had been forfeited on account of his rebellion against
William Rufus. His presence drew around him all his vassals, who made no
inconsiderable part of the English army. Immediately before the battle, Ralph
Bishop of the Orkneys, deputed by the aged and infirm Thurstan, having assured
the army that by fighting bravely they would purchase the remission of their
sins, did, on receiving their confessions, actually pronounce their absolution,
joining to it his benediction; at the same time the priests in their white
vestments carrying crosses and relics, went among the ranks, encouraging the
soldiers by their exhortations and prayers. These pious acts were accompanied
with a wise arrangement of the English warriors, adapted to sustain and repel
the first fierce onset of their enemies. The Abbot of Rievalle relates, that
David was prevented making the disposition he intended by the obstinacy of the
Gall^waymen, who claimed it as their right to fight in the van, a station which
David and his best officers perceived they were not fit for, on account of
their wanting heavy armor, such as was borne by those who stood in the first
rank of the English army. The King however fearing sedition, at a time when it
might have proved so fatal, was obliged to grant these troops their request.
The next line was commanded by Prince Henry, consisting, as Aulred says, of
knights and archers, or according to Huntington, of English and Norman
horsemen, who belonged to his father's household, and with them the men of
Cumberland and Tiviotdale. In this division was also Eustace Fitz-John. The
third line consisted of the Laodomains with the Islanders and Lavernans. The
King had in his own line the Scots and Murraymen, and for his body guard a band
of English and Scotch Knights. Robert Brus and Bernard Baliol, both of whom,
besides the great estates they possessed in England, did also hold lands of the
Scottish King, went to him before the battle, and endeavored to persuade him
to retire, assuring him that Northumberland should be delivered to his son
Henry; but not being able to prevail, they renounced their fealty to David, and
returned to fight under the English standard." Richard Hagulst. -- Ailz. Abb.
Rev. C. 342. -- Lord Lyttleton. -- Sir James Dalrymple.





David was obliged to raise the siege with disgrace; his forces were much
reduced, and his Standard Bearer fell among the slain. The border conflicts
were all after one mode, rendered horrible by ravage and rapine. David, after
his departure from before Wark, led his forces to the western parts of
Northumberland, where he spread desolation and ruin, and marked his progress as
far as Tyne with acts of savage cruelty.

To oppose these invaders, Stephen at the head of a numerous army advanced to
Wark, which obliged David to abandon Northumberland, and prepare to defend his
own territories: but Stephen, apprized of a plot which was laid to entrap him
at Roxburgh, returned to England without effecting any thing against his enemy.
David seeing the English forces had abandoned the border, after taking and
demolishing Norham, advanced against Wark, to revenge an insult the garrison
had committed, by taking some baggage, and giving annoyance to his troops,
marching under his son Henry. His success in this second attempt was no better
than in his former assault; he exerted his powers, employed every engine the
art of war had introduced, and with much bloodshed persisted in the siege; till
conceiving the fortress was impregnable to every other maneuver than a
blockade, which could cut off provisions and reinforcement, he determined
thereon; and marching southward with the main body of his army, left there a
circumvallation of troops, under the care of two of his Barons.

David soon after had a dreadful defeat near Northallerton, at the Battle of
the Standard; after which he retreated with the shattered remains of his troops
to Carlisle, through a country enraged at the barbarities he had been guilty of
in his former incursion: the peasants in every avenue revenging on his flying
troops, the sufferings their families had sustained. After a short respite, and
a collection of his scattered army at Carlisle, he commanded the siege of Wark
to be resumed, in which many new-invented engines and machines were employed.
The besieged with unparallelled fortitude sustained the shock: their
skilfulness is as admirable as their courage, for they lost but one Knight,
whose intrepidity in attacking a machine, exposed him to numbers of assailants,
in the midst of whom he fell, after testifying the highest human valor. The
slaughter made by the garrison was terrible; insomuch that David, relaxing his
rigorous command, ceased all assaults, and again formed a strong blockade. The
garrison were reduced to great extremities; they had killed their horses, and
salted their flesh for food, and when that was nearly consumed, resolved, as
soon as all provision was exhausted, to make a general sally, and cut their
passage through the lines of the assailants, or die sword in hand. During this
interval, Walter D'Espec, their Lord, willing to preserve so brave a corpse,
sent the Abbot of Rievalle with his command, that the garrison should surrender
the place: on whose arrival a treaty was entered into, in consequence of which
the garrison capitulated, and were permitted to march out of the castle under
arms, with 20 horses provided them by the Scotch King. On this evacuation, the
castle was demolished, and the fortifications were rased.

King Henry II. to strengthen the frontiers of his kingdom against the Scots,
ordered the fortifications of the castle of Wark to be restored. A.D. 1158,
Iterum firmatum est castellum de Werk praecepto Regis. Lel. Collecta. 206.


King John, in the year 1215, in resentment of the defection of the northern
Barons, who had done homage to Alexander II. at Mailross, advanced to the
borders, and, amongst other places, reduced Wark to ashes. M. Paris gives the
following account of this horrid expedition: Deinde Rex Ira succensus,
vehementi apud parts Scotiae tendebat cismarinas, et captis Castris de Berwic,
et aliis quae videbantur inexpugnabilia, improperavit Regi Alexandro, et quia
erat Rufus, signicavit ei, dicens, sic sic fugabimus rubeam vulpeculam
latibulis suis, multum igitur ibidem stragem et exterminium exercuisset, nisi
eundem necessitas magna dilationem non capiens revocasset.

King Edward, on the breach of fealty by John Baliol, in the year 1296, having
levied a great army, advanced toward the Scotch borders; and halting at
Bamburgh, received intelligence that Robert de Ross, Lord of Wark, had
abandoned his castle, and gone over to the Scots, being enamoured of a Scotch
woman, whose affection he preferred to his duty and allegiance: his brother
William remaining in the fortress, dispatched a messenger to require immediate
aid of the King, as he apprehended Robert would attempt to deliver Wark to the
enemy. King Edward immediately ordered 1000 men to march to sustain William and
his garrison, who, on their arrival, were attacked in their quarters in the
night, in a small village called Prestfeu, by Robert de Ross, with a detachment
from Roxburgh, who burnt the village, and put the reinforcement to the sword.
King Edward soon after this disaster marched with his whole army to Wark, where
he continued to celebrate the festival of Easter.

In the reign of King Edward II. 1318, Wark was taken by the Scots, under King
Robert Brus, by assault. In Leland's Collecta. p. 548, it is said, that the
Scotts came into the Marches of England, and destroyed the castelles of Wark
and Harbottle.

As King David Bruce with his victorious army was returning from Durham in the
summer of the year 1341, where he had imbrued his hands in the horrid massacre
of all ages and both sexes, had spoiled and plundered the sacred places, and
put the religious to miserable deaths, the rear of his army passing the castle
of Wark laden with spoils, were seen by the garrison with the greatest
indignation. Sir William Montague was then Governor, and the Countess of
Salisbury, whose Lord the fortress then belonged to, resided there. The
Governor with 40 horsemen made a sally, attended with considerable slaughter,
bringing into the castle 160 horses laden with booty. King David, incensed at
this insult, led his army against the castle, and made a general assault, but
met with a repulse attended with great bloodshed. David then prepared to fill
up the ditches, and bring his battering engines to play upon the walls: the
imminent danger of the garrison rendered it necessary to send information of
their situation to the English Monarch, who was approaching the borders with a
considerable army. The place being close invested, rendered such an attempt
perilous, but it was effected by the Governor himself, on a fleet horse, in the
darkness and tumult of a stormy night: he passed through the enemy's lines, and
carried intelligence to King Edward, who redoubled his speed to relieve the
place. The Scotch Chieftains, unwilling to hazard the treasures they had reaped
in their expedition, persuaded the King to raise the siege and pass the Tweed;
which was done only six hours before the van of the English army appeared. The
joy of the Countess of Salisbury for this relief, and her pleasing deportment
whilst she entertained the King at Wark, were the beginning of an amor, to
which the famous institution of the order of the Garter is said to owe its
origin.

In the reign of King Richard II. 1383, A. D. 1383 and 7 Rich. Scotti ceperunt
castellum de Werk super Fluv Twede and depraedatum incenderunt. Lel. Collecta.
252.
it was besieged by the Scots, and part of the fortifications destroyed.

Soon after the accession of King Henry IV. the truce made with Richard II.
expiring, the Scots made an incursion, in which they took the castle of Wark,
and after holding it some time, utterly demolished the works. It was a fortress
of too much consequence to be neglected, and therefore we find it soon after
restored and in a state of defense: for in the same reign it sustained many
shocks, with various degrees of fortune. In 1419, in the absence of the King of
England, who was then in France, hostilities being commenced on the borders,
William Haliburton of Fast Castle took the castle of Wark, which was then in
the keeping of Robert Ogle, and put all the garrison to the sword; but it was
soon recovered by the English, who, from a perfect knowledge of the place, made
their way by a sewer which led from the kitchen into the Tweed, and surprising
the garrison, put them all to death, in revenge for their cruelty on Ogle's
troops.

In the reign of Henry VI. 1460, the Scots gathered great booty on the Marches,
and among many other castles which they assailed, Wark was taken and demolished.

The castle was afterward repaired by the Earl of Surry, and in the year 1523,
in the 15th year of the reign of King Henry VIII. the Scotch army laying at
Coldstream, resolved to attempt the reduction of Wark, under the command of the
Duke of Albany, Sir John Lisle being then Governor. Buchanan the Historian,
being present at the siege, gives the following description of the castle: In
the innermost area was a tower of great strength and height; this was encircled
by by two walls, the outer including a large space, into which the inhabitants
of the country used to fly, with their cattle, corn, and flocks, in time of
war; the inner of much smaller extent, but fortified more strongly by ditches
and towers. It had a strong garrison, good store of artillery and ammunition,
and other things necessary for defense. The Duke of Albany sent against it
battering cannon, and a chosen band of Scots and French, to the number of 4000,
under the command of Andrew Ker of Fairnherst. The French carried the outer
enclosure at the first assault, but they were dislodged by the garrison setting
fire to the corn and straw laid up therein. The besiegers soon recovered it,
and by their cannon effected a breach in the inner wall. The French with great
intrepidity mounted the breach, sustaining great loss by the shot of those who
possessed the tower or keep, and being warmly received by the forces that
defended the inner ballium, were obliged to retire after a great slaughter. The
attack was to be renewed the succeeding day, but a fall of rain in the night,
which swelled the Tweed, and threatened to cut off the retreat of the
assailants to the main army, and the approach of the Earl of Surry, who before
lay at Alnwick with a large force, obliged the Duke to relinquish his design,
and repass the Tweed.

The present remains of Wark do not in any wise strike the traveller with an
idea of so formidable a fortress, as it assuredly was for many centuries. At
what time it was dismantled, and thus totally destroyed, I have not been able
to learn; but it is probable it was one of the strongholds ordered to be
demolished by King James VI. of Scotland, on his accession to the crown of
England.

The great convention for the settlement of the tenths demanded by King Henry
II. in the year 1188, was held at Brigham, near Wark. Hugh Bishop of Durham was
the chief of King Henry's Envoys, and was met by King William the Lion of
Scotland, his Bishops, Earls, Barons, and a vast concourse of inferior vassals,
when the Scotch rejected the demand with the utmost contempt. In the year 1549,
we read of Wark receiving the Earl of Rutland and his army after their Scotch
expedition.

Wark was the barony and ancient possession of the family of Ross. Robertus Ros
tenet Baroniam de Werk. Lel. Col. 200.
William de Ross was a competitor for the Crown of Scotland in the 20th year of
King Edward I. and was one of those Lords who, in 1301, protested against the
supremacy of the Sea of Rome over Scotland. Robert de Ross, one of this family,
with John de Baliol, were guardians of Alexander King of Scotland, on his
marriage with Margaret eldest daughter of King Henry III. of whom the following
unaccountable anecdote gained acceptance: -- That they were guilty of
injurious conduct toward their charge, by denying them social intercourse: on
the information of an English Physician, they were punished; Baliol by a large
sum in mulct, and Ross by confiscation of his estates. King Henry and his
Queen, from their parental feelings, made a journey to Edinburgh, to see them
possessed of their wishes. -- This remarkable tale we have in Hollinghead's
Chronicle.

William de Ross, the successor of Robert, on the death of Alexander King of
Scotland, was a competitor for that Crown, with William de Vesey Baron of
Alnwick, Florence Earl of Holland, Patrick de Dunbar, Robert de Pinkney,
Nicholas de Saul's, Patric Golightly, Robert Bruce, and John Baliol, 1292.


John Lord Ross, Baron of Wark, was one of the guardians of the Crown, during
the minority of King Edward III. It continued in that family to the end of the
14th century, when (by the escheats of King Henry IV.) it appears to have
become the possession of the Greys, Of this illustrious family of Greys we have
the following account: Their arms gules, a lion rampant, with a border
engrailed argent. Sir Thomas Gray, High Sheriff 9 King Henry IV. Sir Ralph --
ditto 34 and 38 King Henry VI. Sir Ralph -- ditto 5 Queen Elizabeth. Sir Thomas
-- ditto 16 Queen Elizabeth. Sir William, created a Baronet 17 King James I. He
was made a Peer by the title of Lord Gray of Wark 21 King James I. --
Lieutenant General of the parliament army under Lord Fairfax. -- joint
Chancellor with Lental of the Duchy of Lancaster 21 King Charles I. -- made
joint Keeper with Sir Thomas Widdrington of the Great Seal, 1647.His son Ford
Gray was created Viscount Glendale and Earl of Tankerville 7 King William III.
He married Mary daughter of Earl Berkley, and had one child, Mary, who married
Charles Bennet Earl of Ossulton. Ralph Gray, Governor of Barbados. Lady
Ossulton his niece became his heir, and having a son, he was created Earl of
Tankerville, 1 King George I. His son Charles Earl of Tankerville was Lord
Lieutenant of Northumberland and Newcastle upon Tyne. Charles the present Earl
of Tankerville.



who took their title from the place; In Lord Wharton's proposals for better
protection of the Marches, it seems that the castle of Wark was then held by
the Crown. On the accession of King James I. all the fortresses on the borders
were ordered to be reduced and dismantled, and it is most probable that was the
period when Wark went finally to ruin.


in the descendants of which family it has continued to the present time, being
now the property of Lord Tankerville. Mr Pennant remarks from the Life of Lord
Keeper Guildford, that after the union of the two kingdoms by the accession of
King James I. Lord Grey's estate rose from 1000l. to 7 or 8000l. a year, so
instantly did these parts experience the benefit. -- Near to Wark lays

CARHAM,
memorable for the battle fought here with the Danes. In Leland's Col. p. 520,
it is thus mentioned: In the 33 year of Ecbrighth the Danis arrived at
Lindisfarne, and fought with the Engles at Carham, where eleven Bishopes and 2
Englisch Countes were slain, and great number of people. At this place a
great battle was fought in the year 1018, in which the Scots were victorious,
and almost all the fighting men between Tees and Tweed were cut off, together
with their Chieftains; on which event it is said by some authors, that Aldun
Bishop of Durham died brokenhearted. Infelicissime pugnatum ab Anglis contra
Scottos apud Carham. Lel. Collectea. 330.


Here was an Abbey of Black Canons, subordinate to Kirkham in Yorkshire. In the
24th year of King Edward I. it was burnt by the Scots, then led by Wallace,
whose encampment gave name to an adjacent field. In Edward's letter to Pope
Boniface, he describes their cruelties in a most horrible manner; The Scots
inhumanly destroyed an innumerable multitude of his subjects, burnt
monasteries, churches, and towns; with an unpitying and savage cruelty, slew
infants in their cradles, and women in childbed, barbarously cut off women's
breasts, and burnt in a school, whose doors they first built up, about 200
young men, who were learning their first letters and grammar. Rym. II. 887. In
the 44th year of King Edward III. 1370, Sir John Lilburn was defeated by the
Scots near this place, under the command of Sir John Gordon, who was returning
from an incursion with many prisoners, and a great train of cattle: the
engagement was fierce, and its decision long doubtful, the Scots being driven
from their ground and returning again five several times. In the end Sir John
and his brother were made prisoners.

We arrived at

CORNHILL,
noted for the valuable Spaws near it. By the escheats of the 1st year of King
Edward I. we find this place mentioned as the possession of William de
Cornhill. The castle of Cornhill, I presume, was the fort or tower, near
Cornhill Bridge, and opposite to Linnel House. The remains are surrounded with
a ditch, called the Castle Stone Nich. It has been well situated for defending
the passage over the river. Here is a seat house of Henry Collingwood, Esquire
commanding a view of the ground we had traversed on the north side of Tweed,
extended to the Helton Mountains; and on the southern side of the river having
a prospect of a wide country, over which many Gentlemen's seats are dispersed,
the whole closed by a range of mountains, of which Cheviots are supreme. In
1549, on an incursion of the Scots, they took the castle of Cornhill, described
as being an old house of considerable strength, Ridpath's Border History.
and a valuable booty was gained.

In 1751, in pulling down Cornhill chapel, there was found, about three feet
lower than the old foundation, a coffin of stone, about eight feet long, in
which were two urns of coarse pottery, and the shank bones and scull of a
person of great size.

South-east of Cornhill is a remarkable encampment, but to what people or to
what particular event they appertained, I have gained no certain information.
The several lines are of great extent, but as they form no regular figure, in
their present state, do not merit a particular description: what is worthy of
notice, is the mode in which the works are defended, by ranges of conic
eminences; a thing singular, and what rather confounds my judgment as to the
antiquity of the place, and who were its occupants. Mr Wallis says they are
sepulchral Tumuli; from which opinion I must beg leave to dissent.

In Branxton West Field is a column, placed as a memorial of the battle fought
there on the 9th of September, in the 5th year of the reign of King Henry VIII.
called the battle of Flodden Field, from the Scotch encampment on Flodden Hill.
The disposition of the Earl of Surry's forces was such, as to oblige the Scotch
to come to an engagement, their retreat into their own country being cut off.

James IV. had wasted much time at Ford, captivated, as it is said, by the
beauties of the daughter of Sir William Heron, so as give the Earl of Surry
time and opportunity for advancing toward the borders with a large army. The
Scottish Nobles were averse to hazarding a battle, and strenuously insisted on
the policy of their return into their own country, loaded as they were with
spoils, and having gathered many laurels in their campaign: but James, fired
with resentment at the challenges sent by Surry, determined to engage the
English, and for that purpose made choice of an advantageous situation for his
army, in the neighborhood of Ford. The eminence called Flodden, lays on the
opposite side of the river Till; it is the last and lowest of those hills that
extend on the north-east of the great mountain of Cheviot, toward the low
grounds on the side of the Tweed; from which river, Flodden is distant about
four miles: The ascent to the top of it, from the side of the river Till, where
it takes a northerly direction, just by the foot of the declivity on which the
castle and village of Ford stands, is about half a mile; and over the Till, at
that place, there is a bridge. On the south of Flodden, lays the extensive and
very level plain of Milfield; having on its west side high hills, the branches
of Cheviot; on the north, Flodden and other moderate eminences adjoining to it;
on the south and east, a tract of rising grounds, nigh the foot of which is the
slow and winding course of the Till. The nearest approach for the English army
to Flodden, was through this plain, in every part whereof they would have been
in full view of the Scots; where they had a great advantage in possessing an
eminence, which on the side toward the English had a long declivity, with
hollow and marshy grounds at its foot; while its crown contained such an extent
of almost level ground, as would have sufficed for drawing up in good order the
forces that occupied it. Surry encamped on Wooler Haugh, on the 7th of
September, 1513, sent a Herald with a challenge, to join battle in the plain
the next day, between the hours of twelve and three. This challenge was dated
the 7th of September, 5 o'clock in the afternoon, as appears by Stowe, p. 493.
The names of the subscribers were, Surry and his Son, Thomas Dacre, Clifford,
Henry Scrope, Ralph Scrope, Richard Latimer, William Conyers, John Lumley, R.
Ogle, William Percy, Edward Stanley, William Molineux, Marmaduke Constable,
William Gascoyne, William Griffith, George Darcy, William Bulmer, Thomas
Strangeways, etc. James did not accept the challenge, but lay in his
intrenchments, whilst Surry advanced his army near to Barmoor Wood, about two
miles distant from the Scotch army, and lay there all night. A little hill on
the east of Ford, covered the English army from the observation of their
enemies; whilst, from this eminence, the Lord Admiral obtained a distinct view
of all the Scottish army, and of all the eminences near it. The next morning
the English made some marches to amuse the enemy, and then gained the ground
which cut off James's retreat to Scotland. By this position of his forces,
Surry had an access opened to the Scottish camp, much less difficult and
dangerous than on the other side of Flodden. The batteries raised by the Scotch
to command the Bridge of of Ford, of which the vestiges still remain, were now
rendered of no use. The Scots, deluded either by the treacherous advice of one
Giles Musgrave, who engaged the King's confidence, and abused the royal ear, or
depending that Surry, by his mode of marching the army, intended to gain
Berwick, and avoid a battle, appeared now to be confounded by the maneuvers of
the English, which bespoke their determination to come to an engagement; in
order to receive them with the greater advantage, and to gain the ground they
supposed the English would attempt to possess, on the western side of the hill,
the Scots set fire to their huts on the eastern side, and made a motion to the
west. The smoke being driven between the armies, concealed the progress the
English were making, till they had almost gained the foot of the hill. Surry
observed the confusion his approach had occasioned among the Scotch troops, and
finding the ascent of the hill short and moderately steep, determined not to
delay the onset.

The English were disposed in three divisions; the van under Thomas Howard, the
General's eldest son, Lord Admiral of England, the right wing being led by Sir
Edmund Howard, brother to Lord Thomas, and Knight Marshal of the army. The
middle division, or main battle, was led by the Earl of Surry in person, and
the rear by Sir Edward Stanley. The Lord Dacres commanded a body of reserve,
consisting of horsemen. The ordnance was placed in the front of the battle, and
in the openings of the several divisions. After they had passed the little
brook of Sandyford, the Lord Admiral perceiving the Scots approaching toward
him, drawn up in four great bodies, armed with long spears, like Moorish pikes,
sent to his father the Agnus Dei that hung at his breast, as a token,
accompanying a request, that as the van of the army was not sufficiently strong
or extensive to receive the brunt of the whole Scottish army, his father would
bring up the forces of his division, and range them in a line with the van. The
English General, convinced of the expediency of this disposition, immediately
came forward with his forces, and drew them up to the left of those of his son.
The mode in which the Scots advanced to battle is variously described: Paulus
Jovius says, they were formed in five square bodies, so that the third of those
in which the royal standard was erected, and all the chief men fought, was
enclosed on each side by a double line, forming, as it were, two wings.
Comparing the several accounts, it seems most probable that the battalia was
thus arranged: The van of the Scotch army led on the right by Alexander Gordon
Earl of Huntley, and on the left by the Earls of Crawford and Montrose, and
some say Lord Hume: the King was in the center or main body: a third division
was commanded by the Earls of Lenox and Argyle with whom were Mackenzie,
Maclean, and the Highlanders. Adam Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, with his kindred
and clan, and the men of Lothian formed a body of reserve. They had with them a
large train of artillery. The English artillery began to play, which made a
dreadful carnage, whilst the Scotch cannon, from their high situation, took
little or no effect, the shot going over the heads of the English. This obliged
the Scotch to advance, the Earls of Lenox and Argyle, together with Lord Hume,
moving with a body of ten thousand spearmen, supported by some horse, down the
hill toward Branxion, made a fierce attack on the wing commanded by Sir Edmund
Howard. The shock was violent, the Scots prevailed, and Sir Edmund was reduced
to the last extremity, himself beaten to the ground the third time, and in
imminent peril of Death, when Lord Dacres, and Heron the Bastard, who had
joined the English army with a troop of fierce outlaws, his followers, came in
time to his rescue. Sir Edmund, thus relieved, immediately joined the body
commanded by his brother Lord Thomas, and they advancing against the Earls of
Crawford and Montrose, whose troops were armed with spears, put them to the
rout, and both the Earls were slain. On the other side of the field, Sir
William Stanley, with the forces from Lancashire and Cheshire, being bowmen,
forced the Scots to break their array, and descend to closer fight, in more
even ground, where they were soon thrown into confusion, and put to flight,
after leaving the Earls of Argyle and Lenox with the slain. The English
attributed this success to the archers, but the Scotch writers allege, the
miscarriage of this part of their army was owing to the undisciplined ferocity
of the Highlanders, who, animated by the success of the attack made on that
wing of the English army commanded by Sir Edmund Howard, could not be
restrained from rushing impetuously forward, in an irregular and open manner,
notwithstanding the signals, cries, and menaces of the French Ambassador La
Motte, who perceived the consequence of such an improper and loose attack. The
King of Scotland, whose bravery kindled to extravagance of courage at the
perils which now seemed to surround him, deaf to every advice and remonstrance,
pressed forward, and exposed his royal person to all the dangers of the field:
being sustained by Bothwell and his band, he charged on foot, at the head of
the best of his troops, whose armor resisted the arrows of the English
archery; he pressed forward to the standards of the Earl of Surry, and with
such ardour and valor, that they were nearly gained by this heroic phalanx:
but at length the wings of the Scotch army being totally routed, all the
English forces were employed against this valiant band, who were surrounded by
the coming in of Lord Dacre's horse in the rear.

A considerable body of Borderers, commanded by Lord Hume, stood aloof during
the most arduous part of the battle; and when he was required by Huntley, to
attempt the King's deliverance from the circle of his enemies, he answered,
that the man did well that day that stood and saved himself. Before the battle
the old Earl of Angus, anxious to dissuade the King from engaging, was told by
his Sovereign, that if he was afraid he might go home. The Earl judging it
repugnant to his honor, to fight under the standard of a Prince from whom he
had received so great an affront, requested he might be dismissed the service;
but as pledges of his loyalty and firm attachment to James, left as hostages of
his honor, a large body of kindred and dependents, with his two sons, who both
fell in the battle.

This memorable battle began at four o'clock in the afternoon, and continued
till it was dark. King James IV. was slain, with his natural son, the Bishop of
St Andrews, In the ingenious notes by the Rev. Mr Lamb of Norham, to the
ancient poem on Flodden Field Fight, we have the following concise account of
Howard Earl of Surry. "Thomas Howard Earl of Surry was knighted for his
remarkable courage at the battle of Barnet; he was made Knight of the Garter 1
King Richard III. He was taken prisoner at the battle of Bosworth, and
committed to the Tower by King Henry VII. and attainted by Parliament. King
Henry asked him how he durst bear arms in behalf of that tyrant Richard? To
which he answered, He was my crowned King, and if the parliamentary authority
of England set the crown upon a stock, I will fight for that stock; and as I
fought then for him, I will fight for you, when you are established by the said
authority. In the rebellion against the King by the Earl of Lincoln, the
Lieutenant of the Tower offered him the keys of the Tower, in order to set
himself at liberty; but he replied, that he would not be delivered by any
power, but by that which had committed him. After he had been in prison three
years and a half, the King gave him his liberty; and knowing his worth and nice
sense of honor, took him into favor, and delivered up to him all his estates.
The Earl took all occasions of relieving the oppressed subjects, and was
accounted one of the ablest and greatest men in the kingdom. The Scots made an
irruption into England, and besieged Norham Castle: the Earl raised the siege,
took the castle of Ayton, and made all the country round a desert. James IV. of
Scotland, incensed at this, sent a Herald with a challenge to him; to which he
made a sensible and spirited answer, that his life belonged to the King, whilst
he had the command of his army; but when that was ended he would fight the King
on horseback or on foot; adding, that if he took the King prisoner in the
combat, he would release him without any ransom; and that if the King should
vanquish him, he would then pay such a sum for his liberty, as was competent
for the degree of an Earl. In the year 1501 the Earl was Lord High Treasurer.
In June, 1502, Margaret the King's daughter, a beautiful Princess, at the age
of 14 years, was attended by the Earl of Surry, with a great company of Lords,
Ladies, Knights, and Esquires, to the town of Berwick: she was conveyed to St
Lambert's church in Lamyr Moor, where King James, attended by the chief
Nobility, received her, and carried her to Edinburgh. The next day after her
arrival there, she was with great solemnity married unto him, in the presence
of all his Nobles. The King gave great entertainments to the English, whom the
Scotch Noblemen and Ladies far outshone, both in costly apparel, rich jewels,
massive chains, habiliments set with goldsmith's work garnished with pearl, and
stones of price, and in gallant and well-trapped horses. They made also great
feasts for the English Lords and Ladies, and showed them justling and other
pleasant pastimes, as good as could be devised after the manner of Scotland.
Diverse Ladies of Queen Margaret's train remained in Scotland, and were
afterward well married to Noblemen. In 1507, two years before the death of
King Henry VII. the Earl was Ambassador to the King of France; 2 King Henry
VIII. he was made Earl Marshal for life; in 1511 he was one of the
Commissioners at the Court of Arragon. When King Henry VIII. heard that the
Scots were preparing to invade England, he said, that he had left a Nobleman
who would defend his subjects from insults. After the battle of Flodden, the
Earl himself presented King James's armor to the Queen Regent. When the King
returned from France, he gave the Earl an augmentation of his arms, viz. to
bear on the bend the upper part of a red lion depicted in the same manner as
the arms of Scotland, pierced through the month with an arrow. In 1514 the Earl
was created Duke of Norfolk, and a grant was given him in special tail of
several manors. He hated and opposed Cardinal Wolsey, because he advised the
King to pursue measures hurtful to the liberties of the people: finding that
his opposition prevailed nothing, he resigned his post, and retired from Court.
He died in the year 1524.

After these Lords were dead or fled,
And companies left captainless;
Their soldiers then did fly with speed,
With souls of horror and distress.
Whom Stanley with his total strength,
Swiftly pursues unto the plain;
Where on the King he light at length,
Who fighting was with all his main.
When his approach the King perceived,
With stomach stout he him withstood;
His Scots right bravely then behaved,
And battle boldly there abode.
Then showers of arrows, fierce were shot,
Which did each side so pierce and gall;
That ere they came to handy strokes,
Great numbers on the ground did fall.
The King himself was wounded sore,
An arrow in his forehead light;
That he could scarce fight any more,
The blood so blemished his fight.
Fight on my men, the King then said,
Yet Fortune she may turn the scale;
And for my wounds be not dismayed,
Nor ever let your courage fail.
Thus dying did he brave appear,
Till shades of death did close his eyes;
Till then he did his soldiers cheer,
And raise their courage to the skeys.
But what availed his valor great,
Or bold device, 'twas all in vain;
His Captains keen fell at his feet,
And Standard Bearer too was slain.
The Archbishop of St. Andrews brave,
King James his son in base begot,
That doleful day did death receive,
With many a lusty lordlike Scot. Poem of Flodden.
William Bishop of St. Andrews was a most accomplished youth, handsome, tall,
and genteel, endued with excellent parts, great sweetness of temper, virtue,
prudence, and liberality; he was skilled in the civil Law, Latin, Greek, and
Music. The elegant pen of Erasmus, who was one of his Preceptors at Siena, in
Italy, has set his incomparable character in a most amiable light. By a
dispensation from the Pope, the King created him Archbishop of St. Andrews,
1509, and made him his Chancellor, 1511: he was also made the Pope's Legate at
Latere.

It was not unusual, in ancient times, for the Dignitaries of the Church to
attend their King in the wars; they were bound to do it by the feudal law. They
held the temporalities of their benefices of the King as Barons, by the tenure
of military service. It appears from many grants to the Clergy, that according
to the establishment of the church of Scotland, the clerical and military
character were not inconsistent. King Edward III. 1368, ordered all the Clergy
to take up arms.


two other Scotch Prelates, four Abbots, twelve Earls, seventeen Lords, four
hundred Knights, and seventeen thousand others, among whom were many Esquires
and men of note. When the Scotch King was perceived to be in imminent danger,
those near his person formed themselves in circular order, and all fell by the
sword, except Sir William Scott his Chancellor, and Sir John Foreman, who were
taken prisoners. The royal body was not discovered till the next day, when, in
a circle of his slain Nobility, he was found by Lord Dacres, who was well
acquainted with his person. After the royal remains were removed to Berwick,
Sir William Scott, Chancellor of Scotland, and Sir John Foreman, prisoners
there, acknowledged the body of their late Sovereign. He was wounded in many
parts, pierced also by several arrows; his left hand was almost severed from
the arm by two several wounds, and his neck was laid open to the middle. How
unfortunate was this race of Kings! James I. was murdered by the Earl of Athol,
his uncle, in his palace. James II. died by the bursting of a piece of his own
ordnance. James III. was slain by rebels, headed by his own son, James IV.
whose miserable death is above described. His body was embalmed at Berwick, and
from thence conveyed to the monastery of Sheene, where, at the dissolution,
according to Stowe, it remained uninterr'd, and then thrown into a waste room
among lumber. King James was killed in the 25th year of his reign, and the 39th
of his age. He was of a majestic countenance, of a middle size, and a strong
body. By the use of exercise, a slender diet, and much watching, he could
easily bear the extremities of weather, fatigue, and scarcity. He excelled in
fencing, shooting, and riding. He delighted in fine horses, the breed of which
he endeavored to propagate in his own country, as it appears from several
letters still extant, which he wrote to the Kings of Spain and Poland,
entreating them that they would suffer his servants to buy such horses and
mares as their respective dominions afforded. In return, he made them presents
of hunting dogs, and of the famous little ambling horses called galloways, bred
in the mountains and isles of Scotland. About the year 1508, the Lord of
Campvere sent him many fine large Flanders horses; and also King Henry VII.
several fine horses and rich furniture. He was of a quick wit, which by the
negligence of those times was uncultivated with letters. He had great skill in
the art of curing wounds, which was then common to the Scotch Nobles, always in
arms. He was of a high spirit, of easy access, courteous, and mild; just in his
judicial decisions, merciful in his punishments, which he inflicted upon
offenders always unwillingly. He was poor, from his profusion in sumptuous
buildings, public shows, entertainments, and gifts.

As long as he lived he wore an iron chain girdle, to which he every year added
one link, in testimony of his sorrow for having appeared at the head of the
rebels who killed his father, contrary to his express orders. Bishop Lesley
concludes his Life of James with telling us, that the Scotch nation lost in
him, a King most warlike, just, and holy. Certain it is, that he was so dear to
his subjects, that his death was more lamented than that of his predecessor
ever was.

He married Margaret the eldest daughter of King Henry VII. by whom he left two
sons, the eldest not two years old. About a year after King James's death, she
married Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, by whom she had a beautiful daughter,
Margaret, born A. D. 1516, at Harbottle Castle, in Northumberland, afterward
the wife of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lenox, and by him mother to Henry Lord
Darnley, father to King James I.

Lamb's Notes to the Poem of Flodden. The Excommunication pronounced against
this Monarch not having been solemly revoked, and absolution granted, was the
cause why the royal remains had not received interment.


The FOORD CASTLE. South Aspect.
depiction of Ford Castle standards taken on this victory were carried to the
cathedral of Durham. The loss of the English was computed at fifteen hundred,
in which number scarce a man of considerable note was included. The
disproportion of the slain was attributed to the English artillery and archers.

After passing this scene, where every reflection was filled with horror, it is
not to be wondered that the beauties of Etal should be enhanced. We passed in
view of

FORD CASTLE, Foord Castle in Glyndale upon the east syd of Tille. It is metly
strong, but in decay. Lel. Itin. v. 7. p. 54.

the seat of Odonel de Ford in the time of King Edward I. from whom, by
marriage, it came to the family of Herons. William de Heron King Henry I.
Jordan de Heron King Henry III. Sir William de Heron Hing Henry III. Sir
William Heron 44 King Edward III. He was Ambassador to France and Steward of
the King's Household King Henry IV. Sir John Heron, his brother. Sir John Heron,
nephew and heir of Sir William High Sheriff five years. King Henry VI. Sir
William Heron, High Sheriff 17 King Henry VIII. Elizabeth Heron, heiress,
married Thomas Carr, Esquire Etal. His heiress married Sir Francis Blake, whose
daughter Mary married Edward Delaval, the ancestor of Sir John Hussy Delaval.
Wallis.
It was the possession of Sir William Heron in the reign of King Henry III. who
was Governor of the castles of Bambrough, Pickering, and Scarbrough, Lord
Warden of the Forests North of Trent and Sheriff of Northumberland for eleven
successive years. In the year 1385 the Scotch, under the Earls of Fife, March,
and Douglas, making an incursion by the western Marches, laid waste the country
as far as Newcastle, and demolished the fortresses of Ford, Wark, and Cornhill.
Previous to the battle of Flodden, James's troops assaulted and took Ford
Castle. It was in this place the Scotch King found Elizabeth the wife of Sir
William Heron (who was then a prisoner in Scotland) together with their
daughter, a Lady of great beauty; with whose charms the King was so fascinated,
as was before observed, that for several days he desisted from all military
advances, even under the momentous circumstance of the Earl of Surry's hasty
approach. It was suspected by some, according to Drummond, p. 74, that Surry
being acquainted with the King's amorous constitution, continued the detention
of the Lady of Ford and her daughter in their castle, in order to stay the
advances of the Scotch troops, till he could by long marches come up with them.
Here is a tradition, that King James returning from a visit to Mrs Ford A
mistake in the Editor of this Poem.
at Ford Castle, found himself in danger of drowning in his passage through the
Tweed, near Norham, at the West Ford, which is pretty deep on the Scotch side.
Upon which he made a vow to the Virgin Mary, that if she would carry him safe
to land, he would erect and dedicate a church to her upon the banks of the
Tweed; which he performed in the jubilee year, A. D. 1500, according to an old
inscription upon the church, mostly now defaced. This Gothic structure is much
admired; it is entirely of stone. The roof of it rests upon what the masons
call here, point cast arches, which are supported by nineteen buttresses.
William Robertson, Esquire added to this church a handsome steeple, A. D. 1743, and
in 1769 paned the greatest part of it.

Lamb's Notes to the Poem of Flodden.


In 1549, the Scotch under the the command of D'Esse, a French General of great
military skill, made an incursion with a considerable army, attended with four
field pieces: they made an attack upon the castle of Ford, and laid the
greatest part of it in ashes. One of the towers, defended by Thomas Car, made a
gallant defense, and remained unreduced.

This castle came to the family of Carr of Etal, by marriage with the heiress
of the Herons; whose daughter and heiress married Edward Delaval, Esquire the
ancestor of the present proprietor, Sir John Hussy Delaval. Ex rotula Curiali
Northumbriae.

Odonellus de Ford -- Leprosi de Bolton -- Eustachius de la Vale -- Radulphus
de Blenkenshop tenet Blenkenshop de Nicolas de Bolteby -- Thomas de
Fetherstanhaugh -- Joannes de la Dene -- Priorissa de Lamley -- Joannes de
Hawelton tenet in capite de Domino rege Halton Claverwwurth and Wetingtun --
Joannes de Esselington -- Thomas Bedenhaul de Bedenhaul -- Joannes Rex dedit
Roberto filio Rogeri Newburne cum pertinentiis -- Joannes filius Roberti tenet
in capite de Domino rege Corbruge quod est Burgus, pro 40 li. per annum ad
feod. firmam -- Nicolaus de Bolteby -- Gul. Heron -- Hugo de Bolebek tenet in
capite de Domino rege 5 feoda -- Willyam Burneton -- Willyam Heron -- Robertus
de Wechester -- Odonellus de Insula -- Radulphus de Cangi -- Alexandre de
Bradeford -- Hugo de Morewik -- Baro de Graystoke -- Rogerus Marley --
Radulphus de Merley -- Hugo de Gubion -- Richardus de Boinden -- Gul. Coniers
-- Joannes Plessys -- Galfridus de Wetslade -- Adam Barrette -- Rogerus Bertham
-- Robertus filius Ranulphi -- Eustachius de la Vale -- Gul. de Crancestre --
Robertus de Muschampe tenet in capite de Domino rege 4 feoda: de quibus
Odonellus de Ford tenet unum, Robertus de Manners tenet dim. Robertus de Heddam
4 partem unius feodi -- Gul. de Ros tenet in capite de Domino rege 2 feoda.
Joannes de Viscount -- Nicolaus de Farindun -- Radulphus super Thays --
Gilbertus de Unfranville tenet 2 feod. de rege -- Unfranville de Insula --
Henricus de Halton -- Thomas de Fenwik -- Bernardus de Babington -- Galfridus
de Haiden.

Ex Veredicta de terris Northumbr. anno 3. Henricus de Ulcotes tenet manerium
de Devilston -- Emma Uxor Gualteri filii Gilberti nupsit Petro de Vallibus --
Robertus Taileboys -- Matildis de Claverworth -- Emma de Aeiden -- Alicia de
Morwik nupsit Rogero Galafre -- Nicolaus de Biker -- Thomas de Wautham --
Dominos rex habet in villo de novo castro 110 ^ol and 6 depar. reddituum, quos
dedit Burgensibus ejusdem villae pro terris suis, quas amiserunt per fossata
Domini regis -- Thomas Statton.

Lel. Collect. 200.


About a mile to the east, lays Barmoor, an ancient estate of the Muschamps.
And at about an equal distance to the west,

PALINSBURN,
the seat of John Askew, Esquire Improvements in husbandry and cultivation have
become the prevailing passion of the age; and in this country the advances are
rapid. I am informed Mr Culley, who lately visited Palinsburn.
that Mr Askew lately found some small earthen vessels or urns in his estate,
of a singular form, being triangular; that they are of coarse pottery, and it
is that gentleman's opinion, they are of Danish manufacture, and enclosed the
heart of the deceased. On what this conjecture is founded, I profess my
Ignorance. We read of the heart of one which was sent embalmed to the holy
sepulcher, and the heart of John Bailey, who died at Newby Abbey, was embalmed
by Dovergilla his wife, lodged in an ivory case, and deposited at the high
altar. But I am uninformed of any custom among the Britons, Romans, Saxons, or
Danes, in this country, of interring the heart separate.

ETAL
is a modern elegant structure, the seat of the late Sir William Carr, Bart.
but its appearance is not improved by the avenue on the south: the opening of
the village, which presents a prospect of the towers of the old castle of the
family of Manners, Sir Thomas Manners, Lord Ros, of Etal, was created Earl of
Rutland 17 King Henry VIII. 1526. Sir Robert de Manners, in the 15th of King
Edward III. built the castle of Etal. -- James IV. before the battle of Flodden
Field, assaulted and took this castle, and ruined part of its fortifications.


is an elegance which is at once uncommon and highly pleasing. Etal was one of
the dependent manors of the Barony of Wooler, and the castle was built by Sir
Robert Manners, 15 King Edward III. Etel Castle stondinge on plain grownde,
hard on the este side of Till longing to the Earl of Rutland. -- Lel. I^n. v.
7. p. 54.
The prospect over the vale by the river Till is beautiful, graced with
plantations, formed in a good taste, upon the natural eminences: the distant
scene is mountainous and august; Watchlaw, a beacon hill, toward the east; the
hills of Branxton and Flodden to the south-west, and beyond them the torrs of
Newton; Yevering Bell, Cheviots, Akeld, and Humbledon, afford the contemplative
spectator noble subjects for animadversion.

Lord Wharton, in 1552, appointed Etal to be the residence of the Deputy Warden
of the East Marches.

Near a square intrenchment called the Haly Chesters, is a stone cross, but of
what event it is a memorial is not known. -- In the road from Cornhill, we
passed

TILMOUTH, The Vicar of Tillemuth did write an history, thus entitled,
Historia arirea, wherein is much to be seen of King William Conquerors cuming
in to England. -- Lel. Col. 509.

the ancient manor of the family of Ridell, held of the Bishop of Durham, by
half a Knight's fee, under the castle of Norham; it afterward came to the
Claverings, by marriage, and is now the possession of Sir Francis Blake.

At a little distance are the ruins of

HETON, Eyton Castle longing to Sir Edward Graye 2 miles lower on Till than
Etel. It stondithe on the west syd of Tille. The Scotts at Flodden Filled bet it
sore. -- Lel. Itin. v. 7. p. 54.

an estate of the family of Greys, Of this House was Sir Thomas Gray, Governor
of Norham Castle in the reign of King Edward II. Sir Thomas his son, Governor
of Norham in the reign of King Edward III. In 1355, too rashly pursuing an
advantage he had gained against the Scots, he was taken prisoner. Sir Thomas,
Representative in Parliament for Northumberland 1 King Henry IV. Governor of
the castle of Wark, executed for conspiring the death of that Sovereign. Sir
Ralph Gray, knighted with King Henry VI. Governor of the castles of Wark and
Roxburgh: he was made Governor of Bambrough Castle by the Lancastrian party,
and was degraded and beheaded at Doncaster. Sir Edward in the time of King
Henry VIII. and after him William Lord Gray of Wark.

who were Governors of Norham, Wark, and Roxburgh, now in the possession of
Lord Tankerville. The castle was of a square figure, and very strong; on the
west side it had an area or court, called the Lion's Court: it sustained a
siege by the Scots, before the battle of Flodden Field: on the north side was a
vault capable of receiving an hundred horses or other cattle.

On a fine peninsula formed by the confluence of the Till and Tweed, are the
ruins of a small chapel, called St. Cuthbert's Chapel; near which lie the
remains of a stone boat or coffin, ten feet long within, and three and a half
wide, eighteen inches deep, and four inches and a half thick; it is of a
singular form, and a strange traditional history is told of it, that St.
Cuthbert's remains not resting at Norham, were carried to Mailross, where
showing the same signs of agitation and restlessness as had occasioned former
removals, by a vision the attendants were ordered to pacify his impatient
spirit, by constructing a boat of stone, in which the sacred relics floated
down the Tweed 20 miles to Tilmouth. By some hydrostatical experiments, it has
been proved capable of floating and carrying the remains of the Saint. These
philosophical exhibitions in ages of profound ignorance, among the vulgar were
always esteemed miracles and food for superstition.
It is said that not long ago there was a design to convert this hallowed
vessel to mean offices, a peasant having devised to pickle pork in it, or
thereout to feed his hogs: to preserve it from such profanation, the spirits of
darkness brake it in the night, leaving the fragments near the chapel.

We passed under

TWIZEL CASTLE,
built on a rocky eminence of uncommon appearance and singular form, said to be
remarkably pleasant and agreeable within, the circular corners affording a
great command of prospect. This is the seat of Sir Francis Blake, Baronet, F.
R. S. The Lordship was anciently held of the Bishops of Durham, by an annual
rent and suit at the seigniory court of Norham. The Lord of this manor has a
singular right of fishing in Tilmouth Haugh Fishery; he is to use a ring net
only, and the person who fishes is to stand on a place called Fillespote, on
the south side of the river. The name probably a sarcasm on the nature of this
fishery.
From the 4th year of the reign of King Edward III. it has been possessed by
several families, Ridells, Selbys, and others. In Leland's Itinerary, it is
mentioned thus: so to Twisle bridge of stone, one bow, but great and strong,
where is a tounlet and a tower.

At a little distance is Grindon, where the Scots were defeated by Sir Thomas
Percy the 6th Earl of Northumberland, and Sir Henry Percy, in the 5th of Queen
Mary, 1558: the place is distinguished by four stone pillars.

We arrived at

NORHAM,
a pleasant village, in a low situation, on the banks of Tweed. This is a place
of great antiquity, by Hoveden called Ubbanford, said to be built by Egfrid
Bishop of Lindisfarn in the year 830, and gives the name of Norhamshire to a
large tract of country, a member of the county of Durham.

Durham is a county palatine; by some authors it is said, the power of the
palatinate commenced soon after the Norman conquest; but as no royal grant is
to be found in the public repositories of records, we may presume it is of
greater antiquity. The manors of Norham and Holy Island, and also the manor of
Bedlington, commonly called Bedlingtonshire, anciently have been, and still
continue parcels of the body of the said county palatine, and the inhabitants
resort to Durham for justice, in all matters of law and civil jurisdiction, as
members of the palatinate. Anciently Norham, Island, and Bedlingtonshires had
several courts and officers of justice within their respective limits, under
the Commissions of the Bishop of Durham, who held Jura Regalia within his See,
as Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators, Coroners, and other officers, equally with
the chief body of the county palatine laying between Tyne and Teese, until by
act of parliament, in the 27th year of the reign of King Henry VIII. many of
these royal franchises and jurisdictions were resumed to the Crown.

The royal remains of Ceolwulf were removed from Lindisfarn and deposited at
Norham. A part of the old church is standing, and by some modern repairs is
made a decent place of worship. Toward the east of the present church, the
foundations of some buildings have lately been opened, and therein discovered a
stone with sculptures upon it, and part of an inscription, faithfully copied in
the plate.



I confess myself at a loss to decipher it, but presume it does not relate to
any historic matter: the stone appears to have been cut for the stalk of a
font, many of those in old churches being sculptured; as the font of Bride
Kirk, in Cumberland, another at Rothbury, and others I have seen.

Mr Lamb, in his notes to the Poem of Flodden Field Fight, gives the following
remarks, extracted from Symeon Dunelm. and Hoveden: Egred of noble birth was
consecrated Bishop of Holy Island A. D. 831; he dedicated the church of Norham
to the Saints Peter, Cuthbert, and Ceolwulf, which he built, together with the
town, and gave them both to the Sea of Holy Island: he gave to it also the town
of Jedburgh, in Tiviotdale, with its appendages, and the church and town of
Gainforth, and whatever belonged to it, from the river Teise to the river Wear:
these two towns the Bishop built." Hathuredo post novem annos mortuo successit
Egredus 22o. anno Eamedi Regis In Norham Eclesiam construxit in honor Sancti
Petri Apostoli, S. Cuthberti, nec non Ceolwulphi Regis and Monachi cujus corpus
eo transtulit, Geneforde non long a Tese Flu. i^ nac parochia est castellum
Barnardi.

Wigelif unde Wigelif haereticus originem duxit.


ipsamque villam, and Gedeworde ecclesiamque quam construxerat in Geneforde,
and quicquid ad eam perteriita flu. Teisa usque ad Weor flu. S. Cuthberto
contulit Ileclif Wigclif, sed et Billingham in Hertrunesse quarum ipse conditor
fuerat. Lel. Coll. v. 1. p. 328.
"King Ceolwulf, to whom Bid dedicated his Ecclesiastical History, was a
learned man; he was descended from Ida the first King of Northumberland. The
former part of his reign was full of trouble; afterward, in time of peace,
many Northumbrian nobles and private men, with their King Ceolwulf, turned
Monks: in the 10th year of his reign, A. D. 738, he quitted his crown for a
cowl, and entered the monastery of Holy Island, to which place he carried his
treasure, leaving his kingdom to Eadbert his uncle's son. He endowed the
monastery with the towns of Braynshaw, Warkworth, and the church which he built
there, and also four other villages, Wudecestre, Whittingham, Edlingham, and
Eglingham, with their appendages. After a long life he was buried in that
monastery, but the abovementioned Bishop Egred took up his body, and deposited
it in the church of Norham. His head was afterward carried to the church at
Durham. -- The Monks of the cell of Norham, in the following age, called in the
country to make their offerings at the shrine of their royal brother, who
always performed some mighty miracle on his feast day, In the northern counties
these holy feasts are not yet abolished, and in the county of Durham many are
yet celebrated: they were originally feasts of dedication, in commemoration of
the consecration of the church, in imitation of Solomon's great convocation at
the consecrating the Temple of Jerusalem: the religious tenor is totally
forgotten, and the Sabbath is made a day of every dissipation and vice which it
is possible to conceive could crowd upon a villager's manners and rural life.
The manner of holding these festivals in former times, was under tents or
booths erected in the Churchyard, where all kinds of diversions were
introduced. Interludes were there performed, being a species of theatrical
performance consisting of a rehearsal of some passage in holy writ personated
by actors: this kind of exhibition is spoken of by travelers who have visited
Jerusalem, where the religious even presume to exhibit the crucifixion and
ascension, with all their tremendous circumstances. On these celebrations in
this country, great feasts were displayed, and vast abundance of meat and
drink. From whence we adopted the custom is not ascertained, but it seems
probable, and by some authors it is insisted upon, that we had it in very great
antiquity, and derived it from the Easterns. All their Holydays were
distinguished by great feasts; the celebrations we read of, were performed with
all the pomp of procession, approaching the temple of the Gods with offerings
in great magnificence and splendor; where the cattle were consecrated, and
then delivered over to feast the multitude. The feast of the translation of St.
Cuthbert's body is celebrated every year with great reverence, by the
inhabitants of Norham, on the first Sunday and Monday after the 4th day of
September, O. S.

St. Gregory in his letter to King Ethelbert in the year 601, had enjoined him
to destroy the heathen idols, their temples, and high places, that their
influence might be taken away from the people, and their memory effaced. But on
reviewing the estate of the inhabitants, their superstitions, and settled and
habitual customs, he thought it expedient not to pursue measures so violent and
alarming at first; and therefore in a letter wrote to Mellitus, an Abbot, who
was upon his voyage to Britain, he orders him upon his arrival to inform
Augustine, that on more mature deliberation, he had resolved that the Pagan
temples in Britain should not be pulled down, it being sufficient that the
Idols were taken away: therefore the places of the heathen worship were to be
purified with a libation of holy water, altars were to be erected therein, and
relics placed under them; for if these temples were well built, it was fit the
property of them should be altered, the worship of Devils abolished, and the
solemnities changed to the service of the true God: that when the natives
perceived those religious structures remained standing, they might keep to the
place without retaining the error; and be less shocked upon their first
entrance upon christianity, by frequenting the temples they had been used to
esteem. And his injunctions were, that since it had been their custom to
sacrifice oxen to the Devils they adored, this usage ought to be refined on,
and altered to an innocent practice. He recommends, that on the anniversary of
the Saints whose relics are lodged there, or upon the return of the day on
which the church was consecrated, the people should erect booths about the
churches lately rescued from idolatry, provide a feast, and keep a christian
holiday: not sacrificing their cattle to evil spirits, but killing them for
their own refreshment, and praising God for the blessing: and thus by allowing
them sensual gratifications, they may relish christianity the better, and be
raised by degrees to the more noble pleasures of the mind; for unpolished and
ignorant people are not to be withdrawn from their habits all at once. God when
he discovered himself to the Israelites in Egypt, did not forbid them the
customary rites of sacrificing, but purified the service to himself. Greg.
Epist. Lib. 9. Epist. 71. Thus the Pope thought it expedient to bend to the
prejudices of the new converts, as a more likely expedient to reconcile them to
christianity than rigid measures, the abolition of their old customs, and
forcing the people from one extreme to another.


to the great astonishment and edification of his numerous worshippers.

Out of the foundations of this cell, Cells were houses appertaining to great
abbeys or monasteries: sometimes they were far distant from the mother church,
as that of Wyndham, in Norfolk, which was annexed to St. Albans. To these cells
the Monks of the abbeys sent colonies, when they were too much crowded, or when
afraid of an infectious disease at home.
which belonged to the church of Holy Island, I dug a stone, on which were cut
the effigies of three patrons of Norham church, St. Peter with his keys, St
Cuthbert, and St. Ceolwulf with a scepter in his hand.

There were three chantries in this church, one of which was dedicated to St.
Cuthbert, the founder not known. One Thomas de Kellawe occurs Chaplain in the
year 1362.

The second chantry was founded by Anthony Beck, Bishop of Durham, in the year
1288, and was dedicated to the blessed Virgin.

The third chantry was founded by William de Twisill in the year 1344, and was
dedicated to St. Nicholas.

Gospatrick made Earl of Northumberland by William the Conqueror ended his days
at Ubbanford, and was buried in the porch of the church there. Dugdale's Bar.
v. 1. p. 54.


This church had the privilege of a sanctuary.

About half a mile from the church stands the castle, built by Ralph Flambert,
Bishop of Durham, in the year 1121. Its situation is on the brink of a steep
rock, whose foot is washed by the river Tweed. Ranulphus quoque Dunelmensis
episcopus castellum incepit apud Norham super Ripam Twedae. Lel. Coll. v. 2. p.
203.
This castle did not remain long unassailed by the Scots: in 1138, King David
I. of Scotland besieged Norham: the castle at that time is described to consist
of a very strong tower surrounded with a wall. The Scotch forces having refused
to proceed on the incursion they had entered upon, Lent being come, retreated
from the eastern part of the county of Durham, where they had committed
dreadful depredations, and in their passage home undertook the siege of this
castle, which was at that time thinly garrisoned, having only nine Knights of
their corpse. A gallant defense was made for some time, but no succors
arriving, the place was surrendered, and the troops permitted to retire to
Durham. David proposed to the Bishop to resign his castle, if he would renounce
his allegiance to Stephen, in favor of the Empress Maude, which the Bishop
refusing, he caused the town and castle of Norham to be destroyed. -- Lyt. Hen.
II. John of Hexham, Cont. Sym. Dunelm. Rich. of Hexham, Border History.

The castle and fortifications were restored by Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham,
in the year 1174, at the instance of his kinsman King Stephen: he then built
the great tower, which remains to this day: but this Bishop in the succeeding
reign purchased his peace with the King of England, after certain defections in
favor of the Scotch, by delivering up to him this castle. In 1176, we find the
castle still in the hands of the Crown, William de Neville being Keeper or
Governor, who was sworn upon the relics of Saints, that upon the event of the
King's death, he would deliver it up to the Bishop, on receiving orders from
Richard de Lucy, the Bishop of Winchester, or the Bishop of Ely; and if the
Bishop should die, that the castle should be restored to St. Cuthbert's church
at Durham, that the rights of that church might not be impaired. The castle of
Berwick at the same time was governed by Geofrey de Neville, who was under the
like oath in respect thereof.

In 1203, King John held a personal conference with William the Lion, King of
Scotland, at this castle, touching the demand made by the Scotch King of the
northern counties; but nothing was determined, and King John returned in great
displeasure.

In the year 1209, King John came with a great army to Norham; the King of
Scotland then assembling his troops at Roxburgh, a dreadful war seemed to be
threatened, from King John's extravagant demands and vehement wrath against the
Scotch; but by the intervention of the Nobility, the two Monarchs agreed to
hold a conference for settling their disputes, at Newcastle; to which place the
King of Scotland immediately repaired, attended by his brother David and a
large train of Nobles; but being taken suddenly ill, a truce was concluded on
till his health was restored. The dispute remaining unsettled, each Monarch
again prepared for war, but a second interposition of the Nobility occasioned
them to hold another conference at Norham, in the same year, when a treaty of
peace was concluded between William King of Scotland and King John, in which
John stipulated not to erect any fortress at Tweedmouth; William on the other
hand depositing a large sum of money as restitution for the ravages he had
committed on the English borders.

In the year 1211, the two Kings held another conference at the castle of
Norham, at which Ermengard Queen of Scotland was present, and by her amiable
conduct greatly promoted the treaty on which the Sovereigns had met. Here the
terms of the former peace were ratified, and several new articles agreed to.

In the year 1213, King John, in the utmost terror of an insurrection of his
subjects and an invasion from France, in consequence of the papal interdict
which had been pronounced, came again to Norham, earnest to secure the amity of
Scotland. William the Scotch King then lay dangerously ill, and was not able to
proceed further than Haddington on his engagement to meet the King of England.
Highly chagrined at this disappointment, he returned southward, and it was not
long before his sentence of deposition was pronounced, his kingdom given to the
king of France, and a croisade published against his territories by the
Emissaries of the Sea of Rome. Driven to dreadful dilemma's, John was at length
obliged to make his peace with the Holy See; the interdict, which had continued
six years, was revoked, and the lands of those who had adhered to the papal
authority against their Sovereign, and had been pronounced forfeitures to the
Crown, of which those of Eustace de Vesey were part, were restored. Soon after
this event succeeded that glorious combination of the Barons, under which the
great charter and charter of the forests were obtained from the reluctant hands
of this miserable tyrant. To those patriots, whose names ought to be engraven
on the hearts of every Briton, we owe every thing valuable upon earth, the
liberty we possess, and our authentic right to the properties we enjoy. To men
of the North, the memory of Eustace de Vesey, Richard de Percy, Robert de Ros,
Peter de Bruis, Nicholas D'Estoutesille, William de Moubrai, and Oliver de
Vaux, northern Barons in this combination, should be immortal.

By Hemingford, and under his authority by Knighton, it is alleged, that the
violations and injuries the Barons had sustained, as well touching their
liberties and properties as in their private and family concerns, urged them to
appear more readily in the promotion of this great work, the necessity for
which had indeed long been experienced. The base tyrant was not content with
public oppressions, but in his meanness of vice, even descended to the
violation of the wives and daughters of his Barons; to which purpose he
practiced the vilest artifices. He had by stratagem possessed himself of the
signet of Eustace de Vesey, by means of which he attempted to delude his Lady,
that he might violate her chastity. Vesey by a happy discovery gained a
knowledge of the King's intentions, and concerting measures with the Lady, had
address enough to put a common prostitute into the arms of the tyrant, and
preserve the honor of his family. Exulting in the success of his project, and
amidst the fervor of a generous resentment, he reproached the King to his face
with his baseness, reviled him for the possession of a strumpet, and defied his
wrath.

But to return to the history of Norham. -- William King of Scotland dying, was
succeeded by his son Alexander II. a youth not more than 15 years of age. The
Barons of Northumberland had recourse to him for protection, and thereupon paid
their homage at Felton. This incensed King John so much, that he prepared for a
northern expedition. In the Year 1215, King Alexander came before Norham with a
mighty army, and after an investiture for 40 days, was obliged to raise the
siege. This circumstance is thus mentioned in Leland's Collectanea, v. 1. p.
535. Alexander King of Scotts, sun to King William, did enter ynto England,
and did much despite to King John; he assegid the castle of Mitteford and
Norham, and took homages.

In 1258, King Henry III. had projected a scheme for surprising Alexander III.
King of Scotland, and rescuing him from the government of those who had taken
him from those ministers approved of by King Henry. The government of the
castles of Norham and Wark was conferred on Robert de Neville, Lord of Raby,
whose commission from King Henry was to provide himself with horse and arms, to
march with the forces designed to rescue Alexander from the restraint in which
his rebellious subjects held him Dugdale's Peerage, vol. 1.
But this project was rendered abortive by the assembling of a great army of
Scots in the forest of Jedburgh, and a treaty ensued. This Robert de Neville
was the second Lord of Raby, of the name of Neville, being the grandson of
Robert Fitz Maldred, Lord of Raby, who was the lineal male heir of Uchtred Earl
of Northumberland.

A convention was appointed to be held at Norham, on the 10th day of May 1290,
previous to King Edward the First's entering upon a decision of the claims made
by the several competitors for succession to the Crown of Scotland, on the
death of Margaret of Norway, the infant heiress. The assembly that day is said
to be held in the parish church of Norham, when were present the King, and many
Nobles and Prelates of both nations. The King declared, that the purpose of his
coming was in quality of Superior and direct Lord of Scotland, to maintain the
tranquillity of that kingdom, and to do impartial justice to those who laid
claim to the Crown, but previous thereto he demanded their recognition of such
his pretended sovereignty; and it is alleged, that his claim was historically
deduced with great skill and artifice by Anthony Beck, then Bishop of Durham:
after which three weeks were given for the Scotch Nobles to deliberate on the
demand. On the 2d day of June then next, eight competitors, with several of the
Prelates, Nobles, and Community of Scotland appeared, and held their council on
this important matter, Congregatis ex opposito castri de Norham, ex alia part
fluminis Tweedae in quadam arda viridi, Rot Turri.
when all the competitors made the required recognition, and absolute
submission of their several claims and pretended right to the Scottish Crown,
to his decision.

On the same day the competitors, together with the whole company, came to the
King in the church of Norham, and several subsequent meetings were held there
for settling preliminaries: and the second day of the succeeding August was
appointed for hearing all claimants at Berwick.

After judgment was given at Berwick in favor of John Baliol, on the 20th of
November 1292, he swore fealty to King Edward in the castle of Norham, in the
presence of many Nobles of both nations; and a commission was thence issued for
enthroning him at Scone.

In the following reign, in the year 1318, it was besieged by the Scots, Sir
Thomas Gray being then Governor, In Leland's Collectanea, we have the following
curious particulars of this siege.

The Scotts came in to the Marches of England, and destroyed the castles of
Werk and Herbotel, and overran much of Northumberland Marches.

"At this time Thomas Gray and his friends defended Norham from the Scotts."

It were a wonderful process to declare what mischefes came by hungre and
asseges by the space of XI years in Northumberland; for the Scotts became so
proud after they got Berwick, that they nothing esteemed the Englishmen.

About this time there was a great feste made in Lincolnshir, to which came
many Gentlemen and Ladies; and among them a Lady brought a heanlme for a man of
were, with a very rich creste of gold, to William Marmion, Knight, with a
letter of commandment of her Lady, that he should go into the daungerest place
in England, and there to let the heanlme to be seen and known as famous. So
he went to Norham; whither within 4 days of cumming, came Philip Moubray,
Guardian of Berwicke, having in his band 140 men of arms, the very flour of
men of the Scottish Marches.

Thomas Gray, Captain of Norham, seying this, brought his garrison before the
bariers of the castle, behind whom came William richly arrayed, as al
glittering in gold, and wearing the heanlme as his Lady's present.

Then said Thomas Gray to Marmion, "Sir Knight, ye be cum hither to fame your
heanlme, mount upon your horse, and ride like a valiant man, to yown even here
at hand, and I forsake God, if I rescue not thy body dead or alyve, or I
myself will dye for it."

Whereupon he took his cursore, and rode among the throng of enemies; the which
laid sore stripes on him and pulled him at the last out of his sadel to the
ground.

Then Thomas Gray with all the hole garrison let pryk in among the Scotts,
and so wondid them and their horses, that they were overthrowen, and Marmion
sore beten was horsid again, and with Gray persewid the Scotts in chase. There
were taken 50 horses of price; and the women of Norham brought them to the
foot men to follow the chase.

Sir Thomas Gray himself killed one Cryne, a Fleming, an Admiral, and great
robber on the se, and in hy favor with Robert Bruise: the residew that escaped
were chased to the Nuns of Berwick.

Adam de Gordon, a Baron of Scotland, came with 160 men to dryve away the
cattle pasturing by Norham, but the young men of the country thereaboute
encountered with them, whom Thomas Gray seeing to stand in jepardy, went out
with only 60 men, and killed most part of the Scotts and their horses.

The same Thomas was twice assiged in the castle of Norham by the Scotts, one
time by the space almost of an year, the other 7 monithes: his enuemies made
fortresses before the castle, one at Upsedlington, another in the church of
Norham. This castle was twice vitailied by the Lord Percy and Neville, that he
came with very noble men, and rich and great socorers of the Marches of England.

The utter ward of Norham Castle was ons taken in Thomas Gray's time, on the
vigill of St. Catherine, but they kept yt by 3 days, for their purpose in
myning fayllied them.


by whose brave defense, and the timely aid of the Lords Percy and Nevil, it
was preserved from the hands of the enemy. In order to carry on the siege, the
Scots raised two forts against the castle; one at the church of Norham, and the
other at Upsitlington. On a succeeding siege in 1322, the Scots became masters
of this fortress, but held it not long, for King Edward retook it after an
assault of ten days, he having brought before it a very powerful army.

In 1326, on the night of King Edward the Third's coronation, the Scots made an
assault on the castle: Robert Manners then Governor had received previous
intimation of the intended attempt, and permitting 16 of the assailants to
scale the outward wall, put them to the sword.

In 1327, soon after their march from Weardale, in the county of Durham, the
Scots laid siege to Norham, and took it by storm. Three Knights of great
military fame in the Scotch army fell in the attack, William de Montalt or
Montraud, Robert Bruce King of Scotland had assegid the castle of Norham, where
Robert Manners was Capytane; which with his garrison issuid out one day, and
discomfited the Scotts, killing William Monhaud, a Baron of Scotland. -- Lel.
Coll. v. 1. p. 550.
John de Clapham, and Mailis de Dobery. Another party made an unsuccessful
attempt on the castle of Alnwick, near the same time. In 1355, a party of Scots
under the command of Sir William Ramsay burnt and plundered the town of Norham
and adjacent country.

In the 13th year of the reign of King Henry VII. the Scots led by King James
in person besieged Norham Castle, which had been put into good repair by Fox,
then Bishop of Durham, and was well garrisoned. The Bishop came in person to
its succor, the besieged making a valiant defense. Many of the outworks were
destroyed. Some authors assert the Scotch did not raise the siege till the Earl
of Surry with an army of 20,000 men came to its support, and obliged the
assailants to retire. In the 5th year of the reign of King Henry VIII. the
castle was assaulted by the Scots, previous to the battle of Flodden Field, We
have this mentioned in the poem of the battle of Flodden, part 2, fit. 3, line
147.

It was the King's express command,
To waste with cruel sword and flame;
A field of blood he made the land,
'Till he to Norham Castle came.
148.
Which soon with siege he did beset,
And trenches dug without delay;
With bombard shot the walls he beat,
And to assault it did essay.
149.
The Captain great, with courage stout,
His fortress fiercely did defend;
But for a while he lashed out,
'Till his ordnance did spend.
150.
His powder he did profusely waste,
His arrows he hailed out every hour;
So that he wanted at the last,
And at the last had none to pour.
151.
But yet five days he did defend,
Though with assaults they him assailed;
Though all their strength they did extend,
Yet all their power had not prevailed.
152.
Had not there been a traitorous thief,
Who came King James's face before;
That in that hold had got relief,
The space of thirty years and more.
* * * * * * *
* * * * * * *
156.
O King! quoth he, now quit this place,
And down to yonder valleys draw;
The walls then shall you rend and raze,
Your batteries will bring them low.
157.
Which as he said, so did the King,
And against the walls his ordnance bent;
It was a wretched dismal thing,
To see how soon the walls were rent.
158.
Which made the Captain sore afraid,
Beholding the walls, how they reeled;
His weapons all then down he laid,
And to King James did humbly yield.
* * * * * *
160.
So when the Scots the walls had won,
And rifled every nook and place;
The traitor came to the King anon,
But for reward, met with disgrace.
* * * * * *
165.
Therefore for this thy traitorous trick,
Thou shall be tried in a trice;
Hangman, therefore, quoth he, be quick,
The groom shall have no better place.
The Battle of Flodden. The King, by the advice of this traitor, descended from
Lady Kink-bank into the flat ground near the Tweed, now called the Gin Haugh,
whence with his cannon he threw down the north east corner of the castle wall,
a large fragment of which now lies by the side of the river. Bishop Tunital, in
Queen Elizabeth's time, rebuilt the wall: this is now very distinguishable from
the old work. There is a field near the castle, in which this traitor was
hanged, now called Hangman's Land. This fact is not mentioned by the
Historians. By the account of it in the poem, we shall more readily understand
the following epigram of Sir Thomas More, Lord High Chancellor in the time of
King Henry VIII.

In Regem Scotiae, qui arcem Norhamam proditam sibi, tamen oppugnavit,
dissimulans proditam esse.

Scote quid oppugnas Norhamam viribus arcem
Ante tibi falsa proditione datam?
Artibus ergo malis capta fuit arce voluptas
Magna tibi forsan, sed brevis illa fuit.
Teque tuisque mala, merita sed morte peremptis,
Arx intra est paucos, capta, recepta, dies
Proditor inque tuo peteret cum praemia regno
Mors sceleri est merces reddita digna suo
Proditor ut pereat pereat cui proditor hostis
Invicta in satis arx habet ista suis.
I take this to be the meaning of the two last verses, which are the most
difficult: -- There is a tradition here, that the King was told where the
castle wall was weakest, by a letter fixed to an arrow shot over the Tweed into
his camp.

Lamb's Notes to the Poem of the Battle of Flodden.
and part of the outworks were destroyed.

In order to entertain a just idea of those conflicts on the borders, I will
extract from the letters of the Commanders in the year 1544, a short state of
their progress and proceedings in the Mers and Tiviotdale. The progress of the
Berwick garrison was as far as Dunglass: the garrisons of Wark and Cornhill
proceeded as far as the hills of Lammar Muir, and over the dry March of
Tiviotdale. The chief Commanders were Sir George Bows, Sir Brian Laiton, and
Sir Ralph Eure. On the 17th of July, Bows, Laiton, and others burnt Dunse, the
chief town of the Mers; and John Carr's son, with the garrison of Cornhill
Castle, entered Greenlaw, and carried off a booty of cattle, sheep, and horses.
On the 19th of the same month, the men of Tyndale and Ridsdale, returning from
a road into Tiviotdale, fought with the Lord of Ferniherst and his followers,
and took him and his son John prisoners. On the 24th of July, the garrison of
Wark, the Captain of Norham, and Henry Eure burnt Long Edmin, made many
prisoners, and took a bastell-house strongly kept, and got a booty of 40 nolt
and 30 horses, besides those on which their prisoners were mounted, each on a
horse. On the 2d of August, the Captain of Norham burnt the town of Home, near
to the castle gates, with the surrounding steads. Sept. 6th, Sir Ralph Eure
burnt Eikford church and town, the barnekin of Ormeston, and won by assault the
Moss Tower, burnt it, and slew 34 people within it: he likewise burnt several
other places in that neighborhood, and carried off more than 500 nolt and 600
sheep, with 100 horse load of spoils got in the tower. Sept. 27th, the men of
the east and part of the middle March, won the church of Eccles by assault, and
slew 80 men in the abbey and town, most part gentlemen of head sirnames; they
also took 30 prisoners, and burnt the abbey and town. On the same day the
garrison of Berwick brought out of the east end of the Mers 600 bolls of corn,
and took prisoner Patrick Home, brother's son to the Lord of Aiton. November
5th, the men of the middle March burnt Lussedden, in which were 16 strong
bastell houses, slew several of the owners, and burnt much corn. November 9th,
Sir George Bows and Sir Brian Laiton burnt Dryburgh, a market town, all except
the church, with much corn, and brought away 100 nolt, 60 nags, 100 sheep, and
much other booty, spoilage, and insight gear.

The whole number of towns, towers, steads, barnekins, parish churches, and
bastell houses seized, destroyed, and burnt, in all the border country, was
192, Scots slain 400, prisoners taken 816, nolt 10,386, sheep 12,492, nags and
geldings 1296, gayts 200, bolls of corn 850, insight gear an indefinite
quantity.

In Hertford's expedition, places burnt, rased, and cast down 129; among these
Dunse, the abbey and town of Eccles, the tower and barnekin of Nisbit, the
towers of Dunse, Redbraes, Pollard, and Mertington, with the castles of
Wedderburn and Blackadder were rased. On the river Tweed, from Kelso upwards,
33 places were destroyed; among which were the abbey of Kelso, the abbey and
town of Dryburgh, the abbey of Mailross, and the towers of Dawcove and
Stotherick: on the river Tiviot 36; among which were the friars near Kelso, the
towers of Roxburgh and Ormeston, and the two towers of Boon Jedburgh: 12 places
on the Roll Water: 13 on Jed; among which, the abbey, friars, and town of
Jedburgh: 45 places on the Kayle, and between it and the Tweed: 19 on Bowbent
(alias Bowmont). The sum total of the places destroyed or laid waste in the
whole inroad was 287; of which, monasteries and friar houses 7, castle towers
and piles 16, market towns 5, villages 243, mills 13, spitals and hospitals 3.

In the 22d year of the reign of King Henry VIII. Norham was surprised by the
Scotch, and soon after recovered by one Franklin, Archdeacon of Durham.

In the year 1551, a treaty was signed in the church of Norham: the Scotch
Commissioners were Robert Bishop of Orkney, Robert Lord Maxwell, Thomas Master
of Erskine, and Louis de St. Gelais, Lord of Lansac, Knt. those for England
were Thomas Bishop of Norwich, Robert Bows, Leonard Beckwith, and Thomas
Chaloner, Knt.

In 1552, the castle of Norham, which from the time of Bishop Flambert had
appertained to the Sea of Durham, appears from Lord Wharton's proposals for the
better protection of the Marches, to be vested in the Crown. The deprivation of
Cuthbert Tunstal happened on the 11th of October in this year, soon after the
accession of Queen Mary, before which time we have no public record to show how
Norham might come into the power of the Crown. The infamous law for the
dissolution of the bishopric, is the first act of any notoriety I have been
able to discover which could effect the matter: and notwithstanding that law,
it appears from several records that in the reign of Queen Mary the castle was
repaired and again fortified by Bishop Tunstal; and that some very short time
before his death, in the year 1559, he held a treaty there with the Scotch,
when were present, Thomas Earl of Northumberland, William Lord Dacres of
Gilsland, and Croft, Commander of the fortress of Berwick, on the behalf of the
English; and for Scotland, the Earls of Morton and Hume, with the Dean of
Glasgow.

Camden describes Norham Castle in his time to be situate on the top of a high
steep rock, and fortified with a trench: the outward wall, of great circuit,
was guarded by several turrets in a canton toward the river, in which another
wall much stronger encircled the keep or tower of great height. This
description gives a perfect idea of its figure, after the repairs made by
Bishop Tunstal. Toward the river the ruins now hang upon the very verge of the
precipice, part of which, by the washing of the torrent, has given way, and
carried with it the superstructure on that side; which with the decay incident
to the length of time, has occasioned a wide breach in the outward wall spoken
of by Camden: the turrets, as he is pleased to style them, appear to be no
other than demi-bastions, a mode of fortification peculiar to the age in which
this erection arose; a perfect model of which, still in good preservation,
appears at Hartlepool, in the county of Durham, of near the same date, being
the palatinate port of the bishopric.

The wall of the castle of Norham, which extended from the water on the south
side, was guarded with a gate-way and tower, having square turrets on each
side, and thence ascending the steeps stretching eastward, was also defended by
another gate-way of superior dimensions, fortified by two heavy round flanking
towers, the remains of which are still considerable. This appears to be the
chief entrance, and fronts a plain of considerable extent: it was defended by a
draw bridge over a very wide moat, which began here, and was extended round the
land side of the castle, enclosing a spacious area or ballium, with a very
strong wall garnished with demi-bastions at intervals. Within the area of this
outward wall are the remains of a chapel and several other structures. To
defend the keep or main tower, a very strong wall encloses a narrow area or
interior ballium, which is entered by a gateway, guarded on each hand by square
towers. The keep is a very large heavy square building, vaulted underneath,
like most structures of this kind. Part of the vaults and some of the prisons
remain entire, but all the interior parts of the tower above, are laid open and
demolished. The remains of an exploratory turret are seen on one corner of the
keep: it may be presumed it was originally uniform, bearing a turret at each
corner. The height of the great tower is about 70 feet, containing four stories
or ranges of apartments. The whole building is constructed of red freestone,
of a soft nature, and subject to decay. There is not the least ornament about
it, and the whole aspect is gloomy to the greatest degree: it wears the
countenance of the times of King Stephen, without any embellishments of the age
in which Bishop Tunstal lived.

This has been a very formidable fortress, inaccessible from the Tweed; and
before the use of fire arms, from its present remains appears impregnable, if
fully garrisoned, and duly provided with stores against a siege. When the
outward walls were in repair, and filled with troops; when the oillets and
other devices for the garrison's fighting and defense were properly supplied
with experienced archers, and the bastions were kept by men of valor, it seems
almost incredible that this place could ever be taken by assault. But when
there was a regular blockade, and time for mining and raising engines, the
defense then consisting of different maneuvers, would consequently harrass the
most powerful garrison; frequent sallies becoming necessary, by which the
troops are exposed to the superior numbers of besiegers: incessant watchings
and severe duties wear down the greatest fortitude of soul, and scarcity of
provision with perpetual anxiety subdue the most vigorous heart. Such are the
calamities of a siege, and such were many times experienced here: but of all
the distresses the valiant know, none equals that which proceeds from a
defection in his partisans, and the corruption of his colleagues. So prone is
the human heart to evil, that we find in the history of every state and people,
such horrid tales of treachery, that the stain upon the human character leaves
so disagreeable a sentiment upon the mind of the reader, as with its bitterness
and gall almost overwhelms the pleasures we receive by the images of virtue. I
forbear to search into this part of the history of Norham. A fishery in Tweed,
near the castle, called Hallywell, for one night and one day, adjudged, by
Commissioners to settle claims on the borders, 1553, to be the inheritance of
Lord Hume.

A mile below Norham the Tweed forms an island of 14 acres, near a place called
St. Thomas's Den.

A little to the west, a lofty terrace on the banks, where the Tweed forms a
serpentine canal. The seat of James Ker, Esquire of Ker's-field, on the other side.

Further down the river is the pedestal of a cross, with some of its fragments;
and about 200 yards further, in a direct line, another with steps round it, a
place of sepulcher or barrow. Crosses were erected by the road side leading
from Tilmouth chapel to Norham.

Wallis.


The castle with its demesnes, consisting of 1030 acres, are now the property
of Robert Fenwick of Lemington, Esquire In right of his wife, one of the daughters
and coheirs of William Ord, Esquire of Sandy Bank.
held by payment of a castle rent to Sir Thomas Haggerston, Lord of the Manor
of Norham. Richard Barnes, Bishop of Durham, severed this demesne and castle
from his See, by grant to Queen Elizabeth, by whom it was given to the Earl of
Monmouth, and passed from him by sale. George Charleton, born at Norham, bred
in Oxford, was one of the four Divines sent by King James to the Synod of Dort.
He was Bishop of Landaff, afterward of Chichester; a man of good affections,
solid judgment, and clear invention. He wrote, amongst others, two Treatises
called A thankful Remembrance of God's Mercy, and a Confutation of Judicial
Astrology. When young he was grave in his manners, so when old he was youthful
in his parts, even to his death, which happened in the 1st of King Charles.


All the banks of the Tweed afford the same cultivated scenes, down to Berwick,
almost naked of wood, and consisting of wide enclosures. On the environs of
Berwick we first lost sight of the Helton Mountains adjoining to Mailross.

The village of

TWEEDMOUTH,
situate at the south end of Berwick bridge, is noted for the assembly of
Barons and others, in the 4th year of the reign of King Edward I. An ancient
hospital, dedicated to St. Bartholomew, stood here.

The access to

BERWICK,
is by a fine stone bridge of 16 arches, built in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
A bridge of wood was carried away by the floods in the reign of King John, and
was restored by William King of Scotland. In Leland's Collectanea, this event
is thus mentioned: The bridge of Berwike brake about this time with great
force of water, because the arches of it were to low, and after the making of
it, as it was then, it durid scars IX years. This objection was removed on
renewing some terms of convention, stipulated in the time of Philip's
predecessor. -- Hoved. p. 796.

What these terms were my author does not mention.


AD. 1198, hoc tempore ponte de Berwic inundatione asportata, Philippus
episcopus prohibuit ne pontem reaedificarent nam altera pars ripae terra erat
Dunelmensis episcopi. Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 539.
Tandem tamen pons refectus rogante Gul. de Stoteville. Ibid. p. 293.


The old castle, of which little remains but scattered fragments, and confused
heaps of foundations, stood to the north-west of the present town: much of its
strength seems to have consisted in the elevation and mount on which it was
erected. The present heaps and lines of ruins merit no description; their
extent and situation remain to point out the ancient strength of this important
fortress, now mouldering under the wrath of Time, and prostrate with the earth.

Monsieur Jorvin wrote a description of England and Scotland, published at
Paris, A. D. 1672, which the editor of the Antiquarian Repertory thought worth
inserting in that work: the account given of Berwick, and the adjoining
country, contains several particulars which claim a place here.

Barrwick is the first town by which I re-entered England, and being a frontier
to England, has been fortified in different manners: there is in it at present
a large garrison, as in a place of importance to this kingdom. It is bounded by
the river Tweed, which empties itself into the sea, and has a great reflux,
capable of bringing up large vessels, was it not prevented by sands at the
entrance into its port. I arrived here about ten of the clock on a Sunday; the
gates were then shut during church time, but were opened at eleven, as is the
custom in all fortified places. Here is an upper and a lower town, which are
both on the side of a hill, that slopes toward the river. On its top there is
a ruined and abandoned castle, although its situation makes it appear
impregnable: it is environed on one side by the ditch of the town, on the other
side by one of the same breadth, flanked by many round towers and thick walls,
which enclose a large palace, in the middle of which rises a lofty keep or
donjon, capable of a long resistance, and commanding all the environs of the
town.

The high town encloses within its walls and ditches those of the lower, from
which it is only separated by a ditch filled with water. In the upper town the
streets are straight and handsome, but there are not many rich inhabitants,
they rather preferring the lower town, in which there are many great palaces,
similar to that which has been built near the great church, and in all the open
areas are great fountains, and in one of them, the guard house and public
parade, before the town hall or sessions house, over which is the clock tower
of the town; so that by walking over Barwick, I discovered it to be one of the
greatest and most beautiful towns in England.

The greatest part of the streets in the lower town, are either up or down
hill, but they are filled with many rich Merchants, on account of the
convenience and vicinity of its port, bordered by a large quay, along which the
ships are ranged. There is not a stone bridge in all England, longer or better
built than that of Barwick, which has 16 large and wonderfully well wrought
arches; it is considered as one of the most remarkable curiosities of the
kingdom. I passed over it in leaving the place, adjoining to it is a large
suburb, from whence the country is covered with heath and briars to Ashton,
where there is a castle; Bowklin, where the sea appears on the left, and a
small island not far off, which forms a pretty good harbor, near a village,
having a castle. All this sea coast is covered with sand banks, and the
interior country to Belford an entire desert, as it is far above 20 miles round
about; being only fitted for feeding cattle, occasioned by diverse rivulets,
which run through meadow, where great herds of all sorts of cattle may be seen
feeding.

The town of Berwick lays on the inclination of an easy slope, toward the
river; most of the buildings are ancient, and make but a mean appearance; the
streets are narrow, except that only in which the town house is placed. The
fortifications are modern, and said to be excellent, being constructed
agreeable to the modes adopted since the use of cannon. In the year 1560, these
new works were begun, by which the ancient fortification was greatly reduced;
for this purpose many houses were taken down, and a tower which stood in a
street called Hide hill: the ancient chief fortress or castle, which adjoined
to the south-west corner of the old town wall, was left at the distance of
several hundred yards from the modern works. Camden speaking of Berwick, says
it is "Munitissimum totius Brittaniae oppidum." The manner of fortifying with
bastions was a French device, begun in the time of Francis I. and Charles V. or
at the soonest of Louis XII. -- The Lord Gray of Wilton was the first that bore
the title of Governor of Berwick in commission. There are excellent barracks
for the garrison, the building plain and neat, consisting of a center and two
wings. The public walk is on the rampire, where the gaity of the inhabitants is
chiefly displayed, and to which the soldiery contribute greatly. The church is
a neat plain structure, built in the time of Cromwell, and consequently without
a steeple, Colonel George Fenwick of Brinkburn, under parliament, superintended
the work. He lays buried in the church, under the following epitaph: Col. Geo
Fenwick of Brenkburn Esquire Governor of Berwick In the year 1652 was a principal
Instrument of causing this Church to be built And died March 15th 1656 A good
man is a public good.
he forming much of his religious manners on affected simplicity and a mask of
meekness. Monosterium de Coldingham, in Scotio ditionis Dunelmensis, Berwick in
parochia de Coldingham. Unde Dunelmensis ecclesia habet Rectoriam de Berwick.
-- Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 334.
A Lectureship was founded here by the Mercers Company in London, who also
founded another at Hexham. For the support of the Lecturers, they purchased
tithes, according to the will of Richard Fishborn, Esquire dated March 30, 1625,
wherein he left them the sum of 2800l. The tower of the town house, which is a
spacious handsome building, contains a good set of bells. The country north of
Berwick is open and little cultivated, and within a few miles rises in lofty
and barren hills. The town stands on a point of land exposed to the sea on the
east and north-east, and to a strong channel of air from the west, which
follows the course of the river, so that consequently the situation is very
cold.

Berwick was for ages a scene of war and bloodshed; every step the traveller
takes upon its confines, or in its boundary, is imprinted on earth stained with
human gore: It may be acceptable to the reader to find here a state of the
ancient Border Laws, as set forth in Ridpath's Border History, collected (as
the editor of that work asserts) from a manuscript copy in the Advocates
Library in Edinburgh, which differs considerably from the copy of them
published by Dr. Nicholson, and is much superior to the mixed Code of Laws in
Nicholson's and Burn's History of Cumberland, lately published, in which we are
not left to judge for ourselves, but must place an implicit confidence in the
compilers for its accuracy and propriety.

About three months before the death of Alexander, (the 2d, King of Scotland) a
meeting was held on the Marches of England and Scotland, for ascertaining the
laws of those Marches, and enforcing their observation. This work was committed
to 12 Knights The names of the English Knights were Robert de Clifford, Robert
son of Ralph Robert Mallfant, Robert de Ulfeston, William de Burnville, William
de Siremeston. William de Hermanston (alias Herrington) Robert de Glendale
(alias Glensdine) Sampson de Coupland, William de Cookpate, Henry son of
Godfred (in the translation in Edinburgh Library called Jafreson of Porseweek)
-- The Scottish Knights were Adam de Earth, Ralph de Borckle (perhaps Bonkle)
William de Northinton (alias Morthinton, perhaps Mordington) Robert Bernham
Mayor of Berwick, Adam de Morham (alias Norham) Henry son of Waldeve, Henry de
Brade, Richard Holkerton (alias Halkerston) Robert de Durham, Aymarde Ensley
Adam (alias Alan de Newbiggin).
of each kingdom, under the direction of the Sheriff of Northumberland, for the
King of England; and of the Sheriffs of Roxburgh and Berwick, for the King of
Scotland; by which Sheriffs the 24 Knights were sworn, to make a faithful
inquest and report concerning the laws and customs that regulated the
intercourse between the inhabitants on each side of the limit between the
kingdoms There are only 11 Knights of each kingdom in the foregoing List from
Dr. Nicholson's Border Laws. The Sheriff of Northumberland it may be supposed
made the 12th in the English List; and the Sheriff of Roxburgh or Berwick, the
12th in the Scottish.
.

I. The first article is, that any subject of Scotland accused of committing in
England, homicide or any other crime In MS. robbery, theft, homicide or any
other crime.
that ought to be tried by single combat, shall not be obliged to answer in any
other place but on the Marches of the two kingdoms; and in this article, the
places for the trial of those crimes are fixed If the defendant dwelt above
Redam, he was to answer at Riding Burn, but Radsdale and Cookdale were to
answer at Campespeth, agreeably to the laws and customs used between the
kingdoms.
.

II In the next place it was declared that all who dwelt between Totness in
England, and Caithness in Scotland, might agreeably to the customs of both
kingdoms, be justly called the Marches to decide their quarrels by combat;
excepting the persons of the Kings themselves, and of the Bishops of St.
Andrews' and Dunkeld.

III. It was further unanimously declared, that if any vassal or bondsman in
Scotland, should with or without his goods, fly into England with the intention
of escaping from his Lord; and if within 42 days after, he should be pursued by
his Lord's Bailiff, the fugitive should be brought back to Scotland on the oath
of the pursuer without any opposition from the English; the same being
understood to hold with regard to fugitives from England. But if the fugitive
was not pursued before 42 days were elapsed, his Lord could not recover him
without a brief from the sovereign of the kingdom where he remained: and on his
being discovered there In Reg^ ex quo exiverit (in printed copy) in MS. regno
inquo extiterit.
after the expiration of 42 days An exception is made, nisi fuera nativus (not
translated) does it mean that these oaths were unnecessary where the fugitive
was a bondsman?
, his Lord might seize him upon giving his own oath, accompanied by the oath of
six others.

IV. Moreover it was found, that if any of the rank of a bondsman Si Nativus
aliquis. Nativus is here rendered according to its usual signification in the
laws and deeds of that time; but native seems to be the juster term.
of the one kingdom had delivered pledges for a debt he owed in the other, he
might recover these pledges within thrice 15 days upon finding sureties for
payment, one out of each kingdom Namos suos replegiabit per Inbrocht wood et
utbrotcht wood MS. Wred) Wred is a surety. Inbrotcht et utbrotcht nativos et
extraneos. Not in Nicholson.
; and pay the sum itself within 15 days immediately following. But if the sum
was not then paid, the creditor might seize the pledge of his debtor, and
detain it until he received full satisfaction for the debt owing him. But if
the debtor denied his debt, he was obliged to purge himself of it on the
Marches within the first succeeding 15 days by the oaths of seven Cum septima
manu. This interpretation is given upon a presumption that the meaning is the
same here, with what is more fully expressed in the conclusion of the former
article by these words, per Jurameatum sex Virorum et se septimo, et per
sacramentum sex Virorum, et se septimo. In Art. VIII.
, his own included. And this was also to be understood of the surety when the
creditor could not be found, but if he confessed his debt and had no goods
wherewith to pay it, he was obliged to declare himself not possessed of goods
exceeding the value of five shillings and four-pence; and must further swear,
that he will pay the said debt, as he may be able to acquire or gain the means
of paying it; reserving only his own sustenance.

V. In the next place they found that all climants on either side, should in
person give their oaths in support of their claims with the exception only of
the two Kings and their Heirs, and the Bishops of St. Andrews' and Dunkeld. The
person who ought to swear in the place of the King of England, was his standard
bearer and the constable of his army, on the other hand, the Priest of Wredale
Wredale ( Vallis Doloris, Ford.) is the same with Stow (so Mill is the
description of Mellrose.
, was to swear for the King of Scotland and the Bishop of St. Andrews', and the
Prior of the Isle for the Bishop of Dunkeld Prior de Insala, probably of
Lockleven, where the Convent was governed by a Prior. The head of the Convent
at Inchcalm was an Abbot. Spotswood 236, 237. If instead of Dunkeld, Durham is
to be read, the Prior de Insula will be the Prior of Holy Island.
.

VI. It was further declared, that no person beside these had a right to depute
Facere Attornatum.
another, to swear for him in any quarrel touching life or limb, unless such
deputation was made with consent of both parties; but without this consent the
failure of either in appearing in person to give his oath lost him his cause
for ever.

Ita pro uno solo Defectu.
VII. They next found that if there were any plea on the Marches between a
plaintiff and a defendant, that affected life or limbs, and if the defendant
happened to die within the 15 days preceding the day of trial, his body should
be carried to the Marches at the time, and to the place appointed between the
parties; because no man can be essoigned by death. Again, when the appellant
delayed his appearance beyond the appointed day, the defendant The word
defendant is not in the original; but the sense seems necessarily to require
its being understood.
ought to pass to the Marches and obtain an attestation Accipere Manum de
Wardshiel; (Wardshiel (MS. Hame Wardshiel) I do not understand. This seventh is
a very obscure article, and it is doubtful if the translation expresses its
exact meaning.
from three Barons, witnessing that he had regularly made his appearance on the
day prefixed; and this being attested by them, he was to be, in all time
coming, free from challenge in that case: but if any, or all of these Barons,
refused to give testimony of the above fact, he might oblige them to decide the
truth of this charge by a combat: and the same rule was to hold with regard to
the appellant.

VIII. It was also found that if any Scottish robber stole in England an horse,
oxen, or cows, or any other thing, and carried the goods stolen into Scotland,
the person whose property they were, wherever he discovered them, might in the
Court From this it is probable there were not at that time any Warden Courts.
of the Lords in whose lands he found the stolen goods, and should there
recover them by his own oath, and the oath of six persons besides; unless the
person possessing the goods, affirms them to be his own, in which case the
question must be decided by a combat on the Marches.

IX. The next article fixed was, that in any trial on the Marches that affected
life or limb, as for robbery, theft, or murder, where the defendant was
convicted by the issue of a combat, his sureties ought not to be answerable for
a greater sum than the plaintiff mentioned in his charge. But From this to the
end of the article, from the MS. in the Advocates Library.
if a person accused, was convicted of slaying a man, and his sureties were
dead, he was obliged to make good the forfeiture Resp^^debit die de monteple^.
The learned Sir James Foulis of Collington, gave the Editor the following
probable meaning of the word montoplen. I take mont^plen to be a contraction
for manto plenitudine, a barbarous law term to express the full time of
waiting. Manto is a contracted word for mansito the frenquentative of manco, so
respen^ebit de manto plenitudine, is, that he shall answer when the full time
of waiting is expired, that is, when the legal term comes.
, if his own money, and that of his sureties, together with the produce of
their corns, exposed to sale, were sufficient for that purpose: (the lives of
different ranks of men at that time being appretiated) and if the sureties were
not dead, and the accused was convicted by combat, all the goods he possessed
at the time of attacking him ought to incur forfeiture to the pursuer. But
Debout se purgare tanquam exeuntes de Carcere quibus Plegius defuerit.
all such persons ought to purge themselves in the same manner as those who
having no sureties, are suffered to go out of prison.

X. It was next declared, that if a malefactor passing from one district or
province of the kingdom, into which he had entered into another, desired to
obtain protection Hebere voluerit Pacem. The article is, si aliquis malefactor
existens in una Regione in altera Part (MS. alteram Partem) regei in quo
intravit habere volueris Pacem, etc. perhaps it may be understood of a
malefactor passing over the March that divides the counties from one kingdom to
the other; and the sense according to this interpretation seems better.
Probably the text is corrupt.
he should receive it from those having power to grant it, viz. from the
Sheriff of the county into which he had entered; and if he could not find the
Sheriff, he might obtain peace at the first church, by ringing the bells, and
should remain in peace there until protection was granted by the Sheriff; but
if before thus obtaining his peace, he was attacked, he might be brought back
without any opposition.

XI. It was further agreed, that if any inhabitant of either kingdom affirmed
in opposition to a claimant of the other, that a horse, ox, cow, or hog, in his
possession, was his own, he should have the usual respite of days established
between the kingdoms Habebit Di^ti^e omnes inter regna Statutes ut ultimas Dies
Litis.
, before the matter was brought to a trial. And on the day fixed for that, if
he chose to avoid a combat, and knew that the thing was not his own, he was
obliged to bring it to the Marches, and inform the opposite party that he was
satisfied upon enquiry, that the horse, etc. was the property of that party,
and after this declaration he was bound to drive it into the water of Tweed or
Esk; and the defendant should then be free from the claim or challenge brought
against him. But if it was drowned before it reached the mid stream of the
water So rendered in MS. translation mentioned by Dr Nicholson.
, the defendant ought according to the custom of the Marches to be still
answerable for it; and this extended to an ox, cow, or swine, or other things,
only nothing was established about a load De Sar^^^.
.

XII. They further agreed, that no inhabitant Quod cullus de Reg^ Anglie potest
probare aliquam, Rem (aliquiem Reum in printed copy) de Regno Scotiae per
Testes ((...) ^^^verse) nisi tantum ^^do per Corpus Hominis.
of either kingdom could prove his property in any thing possessed by an
inhabitant of the other, by witnesses; but solely by the body of a man ^e. By
his own body, or that of his champion in combat; a combat of this kind on the
Marches was called by a particular name Acra, in a remonstrance of the clergy
of England, presented to the Legate Otho in 1237, for procuring redress from
the King of several encroachments on their liberties, they complain of an abuse
arising from an establishment of the Kings of England and Scotland; by which,
not only simple Clerks, but also Abbots and Priors in the diocese of Carlitle,
when challenged for any thing by an inhabitant or subject of Scotland, or
reciprocally, were compelled to fight with spears and swords, a combat called
Era, on the confines of the two kingdoms, (inter fores utriusque regni) so
that the Abbot or Prior of whatever religion or order was obliged either to a
personal combat, or to have a champion to combat for him, and if this champion
was defeated, the Abbot or Prior was to undergo capital punishment; of which
there had been a recent instant in the Prior of Lidely. The clergy supplicated
the Legate to admonish, or, if admonitions could not prevail, to employ his
Legative authority, to compel the Kings not to suffer so detestable an abuse to
be extended to ecclesiastical persons.
, whence many combats must needs ensue, from the strifes that arose from time
to time on the Marches.

XIII. They further agreed, that any person in their kingdom pursuing for the
recovery of a debt due to him in the other, ought, according to the laws of the
Marches, if the person indebted to him were a Clerk to seek justice Clericos
inde monere (MS. manare.)
from the Clerks, if a Knight from the Knights, and if a Burgess from the
Burgesses; by which classes alone judgment Et de illis et non aliis judicari
(MS. sic de aliis et non alios judicari.)
is respectively to be given, where their brethren are concerned.

Finally they agreed, that the magistrates within and without Burghs In Burgh
et Out Burgh Potestatem habebunt (MS. in Burgh et in Suth Burgh.)
, should have power to distrain the inhabitants of each kingdom, in order to
enforce the observation of the aforesaid customs between the kingdoms.


happily those intestine miseries are swept away from the face of the land, and
the strength of these walls is opposed only to the hostility of strangers. When
this place first arose to importance, is not known: whether it was of any
considerable strength during the conflicts between the Britons with their Roman
allies, and the northern nations, is not easy to determine: Camden with other
Antiquarians have not offered any thing but conjecture. Ex libello quodam,
incerti autoris, quem mutuo sumpsi a Domino Monjoro, and erat de origin
Scottorum.

Berengus, interfecto Rodrico Domino suo, obtinuit locum habitandi in
Brittannio a Mario, et poltea edificavit villam de Berwic. -- Lel. Col. v. 2.
p. 73.


Some authors allege it was known to Ptolomy the Geographer, who wrote in the
time of Antoninus, by the name of Tuesis; but the situation described by him,
does not correspond with that of the present town.

According to Hector Boethius, Berwick existed as a place of strength in the
days of Osbert the Northumbrian King. It is reasonable to conjecture, when
Tweed became the boundary between Scotland and England, that Berwick would
arise as a barrier town, be fortified, and have an armed garrison. In the
account given of the Danish invasion under Hubba, about the year 867, Berwick
is mentioned as the landing place of the invaders. Whilst the Saxons possessed
the country north of Tweed, Berwick was not likely to have risen to any great
importance, being so near the royal seat of Bamburgh, except it should have had
a fortress, as a safeguard to the episcopal seat of Lindisfarn.

The same author relates, that King Donald having defeated the army of Osbert
near the river Jedd, marched down the Tweed to Berwick, which the Saxons then
had in possession, and which they abandoned on the news of their Sovereign's
overthrow: Donald seized three Saxon vessels in the Bay, with great riches on
board; upon which event he and his followers gave themselves up to riot and
revelling: of this the Saxons took advantage, and made an unexpected assault on
the town in the night, when many of the Scots were slain, and their King was
taken prisoner. He also tells us, that King Gregory the Great took Berwick,
then possessed by the Danes, and put the garrison to the sword: after which the
Scotch Monarch spent his winter there.

Berwick continued for many ages part of the dominions of Scotland, and was one
of the four original Scotch burghs. Conjectures on the rise of Borroughs.
From the manuscripts of the late Roger Gale, Esquire
Opinions concerning the aboriginal form of human habitations in general, and
British in particular, founded upon the word BUROUGHS, by the Rev. Mr Conyers
Place of Dorchester.

Borough and its contraction Burgh (of which also I take Burrow, Barrow, and
Bury to be so many corruptions) is an allowed note of the antiquity of the
place so called, as well by Cambden himself as those who are the authors of the
annotations upon him; nor can there be a more effectual confirmation of that
note, than that those old and mother towns that have the privilege of sending
members to parliament, are particularly distinguished by that name, and are
called Buroughs, or allowed to be so; the whole title of many of them to their
present enjoyment of that right in the state of decay they are now reduced to,
seems to rest in their claim to that title, and in the respect and veneration
which the evidences of antiquity inserted in that name bespeaks for them.

I cannot perceive that the name Borough or Burgh, was instituted to denote
any kind of eminence in the place so called, beyond others, so as to mean a
Fort or Castle, or place any way fortified with ramparts, or otherwise
distinguished by any peculiar advantages, as is often suggested by Camden; or
that the name puts the place called by it under any distinction whatever,
unless accidentally, besides that of common habitation, the bare antiquity of
which it only implys, because it is often confounded with such appellatives to
ascertain and distinguish it, as Burgh Castle, Burgh Fort, etc. and that it
signifies no more than house, houses, or a town, a settlement where one or more
families dwelt. Borough was the habitation, and Bour was the inhabitant, hence
neighbor i. e. a nigh-bour or one that lived in a Borough not far off.

But the name Borough, though at first it directly meant only one common
habitation, yet carries in it monumental evidences of the original form of such
habitation, and indirectly lets us into that: for our application of the name
Borough, to the habitation of such animals whose natures are incapable of
making improvements in their manner of dwelling that is still retained among
us, discovers the native and simple signification of the name Borough, when
our ancestors gave their own dwellings that name; for we appropriate it only to
the underground lodgings of animals, as to the holes of foxes, badgers, and
rabbits. From whence I infer that when it was first applied to human
habitation, whether in an allusive sense from them, or their's from it; or
whether both were simple and equally original, that it signified the very same,
or what nearly resembled the habitations of those creatures, and consequently
that the inhabitants of this land, when the name was given, dwelt chiefly
underground, and lived not in houses raised from the ground, but in holes dug
in it, which sense of the word seems still to obtain as to the dead, though it
has lost its native idea as to the living; for hence we may call putting a
corpse into a hole underground to bury or borough it: a barrow or borough
being a place dug for that purpose, though the custom of monumental tumulation
has abused the word to express the contrary to what it was instituted to
express, and to signify a hill instead of a hole.

Our original Buroughs in the primitive simplicity were but as so many human
warrens, consisting of a set of underground caverns; the lodging part and body
at least of each dwelling run in, and was underground; and this is but suitable
to the savage way of life of the old Britons in other respects; such as their
going naked, which alone cuts off all the ends almost of raising houses: for to
what end should men raise houses, who had neither clothes nor furniture, nor
wanted any guard against the inclemency of the air, nor had any intent of
retirement to answer, but security from wild beasts, or noise whilst they
slept? Their painted or rather smoke-bound hides, looked as if they lived in
rooms where smoke had no vent by windows or chimneys; to which we may add, as
an inducement to natural simplicity, that underground lodgings were both cooler
in summer (if our clime is ever too hot) and warmer in winter; for which latter
reason it is pretty near kept to in Iceland, Lapland, etc. Purchase says of the
Icelanders, all their houses are under ground. Lib. 3. ca. 22.

Nor were the inhabitants of this island singular in this matter, so no
derogation to them, because it seems to have been Nature's primitive mode of
dwelling, common with them to most nations. The various notions of (...), of
old, that took their names from the custom of living in holes or buroughs,
strictly such, is an instance of it: hence it is that the old Giants are
represented to us as underground livers all of them, as Polyphemus's Cave,
Cacus's Den, etc. The rustic Divinities of the heathen, such as Pan, Faunus,
the Satyrs, etc. are proposed to us as residing in underground seats, and your
Sibylls, Trophonius, and the rest of them, made choice of caverns to vent their
oracles from, as more awful and venerable by their resemblance of primitive and
simple times, when heaven and earth corresponded together more familiarly; and
I am apt to think, that the notion of your (...) and Terrae Filii, men
springing out of the earth, did arise hence; and that a great many suddenly
bolting out at once from their buroughs, like the Tinners in Cornwall from
their mines, might first give occasion to those fables and fancies, of crops of
armed troops starting up from dragons and serpents teeth, to the great surprise
of Cadmus and Jason. Ovid reckons men's building houses and living above ground
as an improvement, or rather a degeneracy gradually introduced after the golden
age, and in process of time Tum primum subiere domos, domos antra fuere
Et densi frutices, aut junctae ortice virgae.
following to be sure the tracks of history and traditionary chronology, at
least from the creation, in this matter.

After the deluge, the terror it had struck, and the fear of its return, made
men keep chiefly to the mountains, as the safest: besides that, the plains and
flat countries must be all so mixed, and thereby puddled, that a century would
scarce harden and settle them again sufficiently for safe and convenient
habitation; for till the waters had wrought themselves drains, after such a
thorough blend, they must be drawn off very leisurely, and when the fertility
of the plains invited them down, the distrust of the floods returning, first
put them upon building upwards from the level; of which new project Babel seems
to have been the first instance, followed by others built after the same new
mode by Nimrod, in the plain of Shinar, nor does it appear that any such thing
had been practiced before by the antediluvians; and Moses's way of mentioning
that piece of architecture does intimate the project to have been entirely new,
and that the tower or town of Babel was the first building that men had raised
above ground for habitation; for Cain's building of a city may be accounted for
by forming a society only, or surrounding the place where he dwelt with
trenches, ramparts, or fortifications, such as his fears put him upon, and does
not determine it to any mode of building. Digging downward for habitation, both
before and long after the flood, appears to have been the common and general
practice, and Nature's first genuine method, which men departed from either
through distrust or ignorance of God's providence, lest there should be a
second deluge; or as the fear of wild beasts, or of each other grown wild or
savage, prevailed over Nature's present or more simple recourse for habitation;
or as the local inconveniences of the foundering in the natural mould might put
them here and there upon artificial walls and roofs; or as suffocating damps or
sulphurous steams and exhalations made them continue building upwards as an
expedient; or as the nearness of the springs would not permit them to sink
houses, but forced them to aboveground habitations: this not being a thing of
choice but necessity, a violence offered to natural dictate and disposition,
men went no further nor faster into them than just in the simplest manner, to
avoid inconvenience that put them upon it, so as to live above ground with as
much resemblance still as possible to living under ground; either raising an
artificial bank, and then scooping out the earth from the side, for even mud
walls were not presently invented, till some superior and happy genius
discovered the tempering of the artificial paste, and the use of it now so
vulgar and universal, which was once the secret and rarity of the age: however
now the prejudices from the reverse of custom, and the modern refinements of
artificial dwellings has turned the ideas and very thoughts of subterraneous
living within walls, and under roofs of earth, of Nature's disposing, into
contempt and ridicule, and we laugh at the simplicity and extreme awkwardness
of the thing, yet we continue to pay regard to the name, and while we spurn the
substance, load the shadow with dignity and pre-eminence, and make it a title
of preference to all that culture and elegance of modern architecture that has
succeeded it. -- All the first settled habitations were caves, nor is it likely
there were houses, unless stationary places of defense before, or for some
generations after the flood. Had architecture been presently from the creation
invented, or been natural, yet it is not likely there were any materials in the
first ages to build withal, for they would require considerable time for their
generation, there being few stones, and still fewer quarries to be supposed
perfectly formed, the rocks requiring ages to bring them to a firmness beyond
paste; nor were the mines of metals hastily ripened to a hardness for tools:
nor are we sure that woods or timber trees were created mature, or enew to be
employed in building, till they had by God's command propagated their several
kinds. Brick, therefore, or naked earth, was of necessity, probably, not
choice, the first material of architecture, and the only one, which
nevertheless must have been unserviceable, had not the natural ex^^station of
bitumen upon the spot luckily supplied the want of cement, to the first
undertakers: for from the creation to the building of the tower of Babel, they
had none at all of an artificial sort, it is plain from the text, so never had
built.

The best therefore that we can suppose of our top British mansions and towns,
when the name of borroughs was imposed on them, in the barbarous state the
inhabitants were then in, is, that they came up to the ^uts of the Hottentots,
or Indian Savages, or other uncultivated tribes of men: and if their houses
stood above ground, yet they were such congesta culmina ^espite, or extempore
hovels, as our beggars now but make against banks of the road side; one degree
removed from subterranean, if at all: they lived under earth, if not under
ground; and indeed what are our houses still, but supplemental caves above
ground?

Nor does the antique mode of living under ground seem to have gone off at
once, but by degrees by little and little, since it is hardly yet quite worn
out: it is but lately that the fashion of ascending to houses has much
prevailed, most old houses may be observed to be descended into by steps, and
floors laid a good deal below the level, with expense to have them so; which is
to be ascribed either to nature, or to a remain of the old British genius and
custom of underground living still ^^icking in us.

The old pavements of your opus tesselatum, are generally found so low in the
ground, that I cannot see how they can be so well supposed to be either so far
overgrown, or sunk beneath the surface, but rather to have been designedly at
first laid under ground, though by Roman hands, in compliance with the natives'
mode of underground habitations.

Nor is it an unlikely conjecture, that the vast and various cavities under
ground, such as those of the Peak and Wookey or O^^ey Hole, near Wells. These
are without doubt natural, and never could be habitable.
and a great many others less famous, may not be all the work of nature, but in
great measure the effects of underground architecture, by men's cultivating
the dispositions of nature: and as they look like the palaces of some old
Giants, so they might be the Windsors and Hampton Cour^ of their times; when
underground dwellings were in fashion, and once admired no less for
magnificence, than now for prospects of wildness and horror. I know no
hypothesis that can account so well for all those odd hollows, sinkings in the
ground, and pits that are every where to be met withal, and in some places too
many, and too regular to have happened there by chance, As just by Nottingham.
and yet one cannot imagine that they should have been made there for any
purposes above ground, but as they are the manifest foundering in of
subterranean caves by length of time, why might they not be the work of men for
habitation, when borough life was in fashion? Abundance of these kinds of
large basins I remember when I was a boy in Ripon Common, in Yorkshire, and a
great many in a neighboring Heath, and hard by here, etc. Dorchester.


After underground living was generally quitted, as to natural and civil life,
yet we find how devotion and superstition still loved to keep it on, by
underground cells, chapels, and oratories: nor is it to the disadvantage of
borough life, that so many of those, of whom the world was not worthy, are
said to have dwelt in dens and caves of the earth, some of choice, and others
for refuge. Grotius notes on Lot's dwelling in a cave, (Genesis xix. 30.) that
Strabo relates there were abundance of caves in that country, which being one
of those that were first inhabited, strengthens the thought that they came not
there by chance, but were made by the men for habitation, though by change of
custom difused; and the abundance of them in all countries that admit of it,
confirms the same truth, as to their several aborigines.

That there are fewer buroughs in our lower and flat countries, and part of
the nation, though otherwise more populous, and better stocked with modern towns,
than the hilly parts, may also proceed from their being less commodious for the
borough life then in vogue; which may be one reason why Cornwall has in it
more buroughs, in proportion, than any other county, and where the aboriginal
inclination to borough life very remarkably also exemplified itself among the
inhabitants, as many of which almost are said to live in buroughs in the old
sense of the word, as in those above ground.

The Romans indeed represent the Britons, when they found them, as living in
huts of reeds or wood, and their towns as so many woods; but the Britons, who
knew themselves best, cannot be supposed, without reason and propriety, to have
given a name to their habitations, that speaks them to have been of another
nature; against which no foreign testimony can so far prevail, as to make us
think otherwise, but that in some period of time or other, either then, before,
or since, the inhabitants notions of dwelling were agreeable to what that name
expressed, and that considerable dispositions were made actually among
themselves accordingly.

The name borough appears to have traveled hither from Germany and the North,
whence we were first peopled, and where a great many of their oldest and most
considerable towns carry burgh and borough in their name; and the thing
itself, in the colder climates, as I have hinted, is pretty near kept up to.
The infamous custom of incestuous community of wives, which Caesar takes notice
of among the Britons, and says they had ten or twelve of them wives together in
common, especially brothers with one another, and parents with their children,
very well agrees with borough living; for families cohabiting in one common
room together, without partition, and that suited such works of darkness, must
of course fall by that means into such unnatural practice; He must mean
Gav^^^^ed, for by Borrough English the inheritance goes to the youngest child
only.
and that sort of odd tenure which they call Borough English, must as
naturally as necessarily arise again from men's having community of wives; for
where men could not know which were their own, which others children; it of
course drew them into the agreement of letting all fare alike.

The invention of this tenure of Borough English, has likewise raised a
thought in my head concerning the etymology of the name England itself, that
falls in with what I have said of buroughs, from an old word still in use in
the North, which is angle, and signifies a hole that runs under ground, on the
branch of a mine. From the old word that worm takes its name, whose use for
baits has given the name of angling when we fish with it, it is not unlikely
but the name of England and Angle-land might also come from living in
subterraneous caverns, a borough differing from an angle, as a part from the
whole, a house from a town, or one room from a house. If we suppose some of
those buroughs, like the cave of Machpelah, double, Genesis. chapter xxiii. but
there is nothing said of its being double there.
that is running in several ways from one common mouth, so that Englishmen, was
as much as to say Burroughmen or cavern-livers, the very same as (...), which
example makes it more likely, and which I think is a much better conjecture
than from Angulus, or their living in a corner, or from angling, or from
Angelus, the story of the Pope's admiring the English boys; which paultry
etymologies yet are thought worthy of a place in our Antiquities. That the name
of England or Englishman, By this argument the Britons could never be called
burrough-livers, as he before supposes, since the name of England was unknown
till long after the arrival of the Saxons.
as it is thus of cognate signification, may come from the word angle, which is
the same thing almost as borough, is still more likely from hence, that the
Angles or Angle-livers have their original fixed in that same quarter, whence,
as has been observed, borough came, and so the two words give mutually light
to one another, and strength to what I have observed; the native force of the
one supports the denominative title of the other, and with an equal propriety,
had arbitrary custom happened to have made the counter-change of application,
the kingdom might have been called Burroughland, and our towns for buroughs,
angles.




Edgar King of Scotland gave it to the Sea of Durham, according to
Hollingshead, in honor of St. Cuthbert, under whose banner he had obtained an
important victory. This donation was made about the year 1097. Ralph Flambert,
after a vacancy in the Sea for three years, from the death of William de
Caralepho, was consecrated Bishop in 1099; he disregarding the great gift of
Edgar to the church, made an irruption into his territories; on which Edgar,
provoked at his ingratitude, reassumed the town of Berwick, with its valuable
appendages.

In the reign of King Henry II. William King of Scotland surrendered Berwick to
the Crown of England, as a pledge for the payment of his ransom: and it is said
that King Henry built a castle there, Collier's Dictionary.
after William's failure in his stipulated payment. But in the time of King
Richard I. the ransom money being paid, which was no less than 100,000l.
Berwick was restored to the Scotch.

King John, in resentment of the homage paid by the Barons of Northumberland to
Alexander King of Scotland, laid waste the whole county, and took Berwick by
storm. A. D. 1212, Castrum de Berwic captum a Joanne Rege. -- Lel. Col. v. 1.
p. 281.
King John is charged with committing the most savage barbarities on this
occasion, having, as it is said in the Chronicle of Mailross, Jews with him, on
purpose to devise tortures. In order to extort from the inhabitants a discovery
of their money and effects, he caused to be hung up men and women by the joints
of their hands and feet, and inflicted on them various other bodily pains. His
troops burnt the town of Berwick, the King disgracing royalty, by setting fire,
with his own hands, to the house in which he had lodged: he also permitted the
adjoining monastery of Coldingham to be plundered.

Alexander King of Scotland, still remaining under sentence of excommunication,
for his adherence to Louis, who had been invited to accept the Crown of England
by King John's dissident Barons, after peace was made with King Henry III. and
on Alexander's acceding thereto, the Pope's Legate gave authority to the
Archbishop of York and Bishop of Durham to give him absolution; for which
purpose they met the King at Berwick. This event happened in the year 1217.

In the year 1235, Gilbert Earl of Pembroke, Earl Marshal of England, on his
marriage with Marjory, sister of Alexander II. King of Scotland, came to
Berwick to receive his bride, and celebrate his nuptials.

In the year 1266, Edmond the younger son of King Henry III. after being
invested with the dukedom of Lancaster, and the forfeited honors and estates
of the Earl of Leicester, paid a visit to the King and Queen of Scotland at
Berwick, where the King with a numerous assembly of his Nobles celebrated the
royal birthday.

The great assembly of the states of England and Scotland was held here, on the
2d day of August 1291, for determining the claims of the several competitors
for the Crown of Scotland, in pursuance of the adjournment from Norham, in the
preceding June. King Edward I. received the Prelates and Nobles of both
kingdoms in the chapel of the castle: after which the Bishops, Prelates, Earls,
Barons, Knights, and people of both nations, were convened in the castle of
Berwick, and the Delegates were commanded to assemble for receiving the claims,
in the deserted church of the Dominicans, adjacent to the castle. An
adjournment was made to the same place in the month of June in the following
year, where the King again appeared in person, and difficulties still remaining
unsolved, a further adjournment was made to the ensuing October, at which time
his Majesty, attended as before, again came to Berwick. Several intermediate
days being given for solving the incident questions which arose on the claims,
the 17th day of November, A. D. 1292, was appointed for giving judgment, in the
hall of the castle, when John Baliol was pronounced successor to the Crown. The
seal used by those who had governed Scotland during the interregnum, was broken
in four parts, and delivered up to King Edward to be deposited in his treasury,
as a monument and evidence of the sovereignty and direct dominion of that
Monarch over Scotland.

In Leland's Collectanea it is noted, that in the year 1295, John King of
Scotts, contrary to his feith and aliegeaunce, rebellid again King Edward,
and came into England, and brent and slew. Wherapon King Edward with a great
host went to Newcastelle upon Tyne, and passid the water of Twede and besiegid
Berwick, and gat it: and also he gat the castelle of Dunbar, and there were
slain XXV M and VII C Scotts. And so proceeded forth, and gat the castelle of
Rokesburgh, and the castelles of Shremborough, Stryvelin, and Gedworth, and his
people foured all the land. Lel. Col. v. 2. p. 7.
After these several operations the King returned to Berwick, where he resided
some time, to direct several new works for the better fortification of the
place; among which was a ditch over the neck of land from Tweed to the sea, in
breadth 80 feet, and 40 feet in depth. A. D. 1296, Edwardus Rex occupat villam
de Berwic. Richardus de Cornubia, frater Edmundi comitis Cornub. occisus
spiculo in villa de Berwic. Gul. Duglas capitaneus ville de Berwic captus.
Edwardus Rex villam de Berwic novo fossato munivit.

Parlamentum apud Berwic in quo fidelitates nobilium Scotiae accepit. -- Ibid.
vol. 1. p. 180.

Edward got Berwic. There were XXVM and seven C Scotts slain. At this siege
was Sir Richard of Cornewal, a noble Englischman, slain by a Fleming shoting a
quarrel owte of the Red Hall.

King Edward let well enclose Berwik with ditches and waulles. -- Ibid. p.
473.




The accounts given of these successes of King Edward are various, and authors
differ much in regard to the slaughter which attended them. The King being
encamped near the nunnery, offered terms of peace, which after being demurred
upon for two days, were rejected by the garrison. On the next day, being
Thursday after Easter, A. D. 1296, the English army was drawn up, on an
extensive plain, near the nunnery, at the eastern foot of Hallydown Hill, in
full view of Berwick Castle and the high parts of the town. There the King
conferred the honor of Knighthood on Henry Percy and others, as was usual in
those times, on the like occasions. The navy perceiving the display of banners
from the mouth of the Tweed, where the fleet then lay, and presuming the attack
was beginning, anxious to win part of the laurels of the day, pushed over the
bar, and gained the haven; by which three ships were lost, having stranded,
where they were burnt by the townsmen: the rest were scarce able to escape in
the ebb tide. King Edward desirous to save his fleet, ordered an immediate
attack, whilst the chief part of the garrison was employed in defending the
town nearest the haven. He is charged by Fordun and other Scottish writers with
using a delusive artifice, in detaching a body of men, under the cover of some
rising grounds, to gain an approach on another quarter, and by displaying
Scotch colors, induce the garrison to permit their advancing near the
fortifications, under a presumption that they were a reinforcement for the
town. The English authors take no notice of this stratagem. It appears from the
best authorities, that the fortifications of this place, at that time,
consisted chiefly of a ditch, and a rampire of earth with a barricado of
timber: through these the English army made their entrance with very little
difficulty, and the garrison and inhabitants, astonished at the suddenness of
the event, and overwhelmed by superior force, were slaughtered without much
resistance. The chief opposition that was made, was by 30 Flandrian Merchants,
who held out a strong tower, called the Red Hall, till the evening, when fire
being set to it, the building was consumed, and all within perished. In the
reduction of this tower, the brother of the Earl of Cornwall, a valiant Knight,
was slain by a spear's piercing his eye, as he looked up to those who fought
above. All the gentlemen and fighting men of Fife are said to have been put to
the sword. The castle, commanded by William Douglas, surrendered the same day,
and its garrison, consisting of 200 men, were permitted to march out armed, on
swearing from thenceforth not to fight against the King or kingdom of England;
but their Governor was detained a prisoner. Fordun says the number of slain was
7500; that the streets ran with blood two days, and in such quantities as to
make mills go. Boetheus says also the slain were about 7000 in number, and says
that mills were actually set a-going with the blood. Matthew Westminster says,
that all were slain, without distinction of sex or age, in number 60,000. In
the instructions from the Regency and Council of Scotland, to their Procurators
at Rome, A. D. 1301, it is said, that after taking Berwick, the King and his
army committed the most barbarous cruelties on the inhabitants, who to the
number of almost 8000 were slain, without distinction of character, sex, or
age. The churches afforded no protection to those who fled thither; after being
defiled with the blood of the slain, and spoiled of all their ornaments, the
King and his followers made stables of them for the horses of the army. In
these instructions there is the following charge against King Edward: -- That
he had violently seized Baliol's person and kingdom, and compelled his
Chancellor to resign his great seal: and after Baliol and his son were sent
prisoners to London, he caused letters of resignation to be forged, and
afterward published them to the inhabitants of Scotland, although they never
were, nor should be ratified by Baliol.
This carnage may be ascribed to a resentment of the cruelties committed the
preceding year by the men of Berwick and the fighting men of Fife, in attacking
certain English vessels that had entered the port, setting fire to the ships,
and putting the several crews to death.

On the 24th day of August, A. D. 1296, the King received the homage The oath
of fealty then administered:

Because we are under the subjection of the thrice noble Prince and our dear
Lord, Sire Edward King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain, we do
faithfully promise for ourselves, and for our heirs, upon pain of body and
estate, that we will serve him truly and loyally against all manner of people,
that may live and die whenever it shall be required or commanded by our said
Lord the King of England or his heirs; that we will hinder him from damage as
much as we can, and set upon his enemies with all our forces where ever they
may be found. And to the end that we may firmly keep and hold these presents,
we do bind ourselves, our heirs, and our goods, and we have sworn to this upon
the blessed Evangelists. Besides, all we that are present, and every of us
separately, have done homage to our Lord the King of England in these words.

I will be true and loyal and bear true faith and allegiance to Edward King of
England and his heirs, and serve him with life and limb, and do him all earthly
honor against all manner of people that may live and die; and from henceforth
I will not bear arms, nor be aiding in council against him, or against his
heirs, on any cause whatsoever So help me God and all the Saints. In witness of
these things we have made these letters patent, and sealed them with our seals.
Given at Berwick upon Tweed the 28th day of August, in the year of the reign of
our said Lord the King of England 24.


of the Scotch Nobility here, in the presence of an English Parliament,
summoned for that purpose. In the year succeeding, he established an Exchequer
here, on the principles of that at Westminster, for the receipt of the Scotch
revenue.

In the year 1297, the English inhabitants being struck with a panic on the
approach of Sir William Wallace with his forces, evacuated the place, His
stature and strength were gigantic, his aspect and address pleasing and
attractive of popularity: he was subtle in devising, and dexterous in the
execution of the most adventurous and perilous projects. In an old Poem he is
thus described: Wallace stature of greatness and of height
Was judged thus by discretion of sight,
That saw him both on Cheval and in Weed, F. I. 6 11

Nine quarters large of height he was indeed.
Third part that length in shoulders broad was he;
Right seemly strong and lusty for to see;
In limbs great, with stalwart pace and sound,
His brands hard, with arms long and round;
His hands made right like to a palmeir,
Of man-like, make, with nails long and cleir.
Proportioned fair and long was his visage,
Right sad of speech, and able of courage.
Both breasted high, with sturdy craig and greet,
His lips round, his nose square and neit.
Burning brown hair on brows and brees light,
Cleir asper eyes like diamonds full bright.
Under his chin, on his left side was seen
(By hurt) a wan, his color was sangueene.
Wounds he had, in money diverse place,
But fair and whole well kept was his face.
Of riches als he keept no proper thing,
Gave that he wan, like Alexander the King.
In time of peace meek as a mind should be,
When war approached the right Hector was he,
To Scotsmen right and good credence he gave,
But known enemies they could him naught deceive.

and fled with their movables to the southern parts of Northumberland.
Cressingham, Cressingham was a Clergyman, Rector of Ruddeby, Chief Justiciary
in York Assize, and Prebendary of many Churches. -- He never assumed spiritual
Ensigns or Armor, or was habited in the Clerical Garb, but always used the
Helmet and Breast Plate, in which be died.
whom King Edward had made his Treasurer, from his avarice, neglected putting
the King's commands in execution, for building a stone wall along the side of
the new fosse, and applied the King's treasures to his own appropriations; so
that Berwick was apparently in so defenseless a state, as not to be esteemed
tenable by the garrison against Wallace's troops.

Cressingham was slain at the battle of Sterling Bridge, and was flead by the
soldiers, who divided his skin among them as a trophy.

The castle of Berwick was so strong and well maintained, that the Scots were
not able to reduce it: the Regency levied a great force, the army consisting of
2000 armed horse, 1200 light horse, and 100,000 foot; on the approach of this
formidable armament, the Scots deserted the town, and the faithful garrison in
the castle, who had sustained a long blockade, were happily relieved. One of
the Towers in Berwick Castle, called Hogs Tower, was at this time the prison of
Sir William Douglas, where it is said he died.


The alarm occasioned by Wallace's insurrection, and the invasion with which
England was then threatened, brought forth excellent fruits, which still bless
this kingdom, and are the felicity of the present age; the ratification of the
great charter and charter of the forests, with a most inestimable addition, a
grant and concession that no tallage or aid should thenceforth be imposed on
the people, without the assent of the Prelates, Nobles, Knights, Burgesses, and
other Freemen.

King Edward, in the year 1303, mustered that victorious army here, with which
he penetrated the remotest parts of Scotland, and completed its conquest.

In the year 1305, Wallace having been betrayed into the hands of his enemies,
suffered an ignominious execution, and half of his body was ordered to be
exposed on Berwick Bridge. In the succeeding year, Neal Bruce, brother of
Robert Bruce, was taken in the castle of Kildrummy, with many other persons of
great distinction, who were sent prisoners to Berwick, where King Edward
ordered them to be tried by Justices sent thither, by whom they were condemned,
and sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. The Countess of Buchan,
sister to the Earl of Fife, eloped from John Common her husband, and carried in
her retinue all his war-horses, with which she repaired to Robert Bruce, at
Scone, and in the absence of the Earl her brother, who was then with the King
of England, and whose hereditary office it was to place the crown on the heads
of the Scotch Monarchs, she assumed that high duty, and put the diadem on the
head of Bruce. King Edward senteaced her to be shut up in a wooden cage, in one
of the towers of Berwick Castle. Redpat^'s Border hist. p. 229.
From the order set forth by Rymer, it appears, that the Chamberlain of
Scotland, or his Lieutenant at Berwick, was to cause this cage to be made of
sufficient strength; in which she was to be attended and served by one or two
English women of the town of Berwick, and no Scotch man or woman, or any other
person, except the servant or servants appointed her, were to be suffered to
have access to her. Another author Westminster.
says, that the King declared as she did not strike with the sword, she should
not die by it; but ordered her to be shut up in an habitation of wood and iron,
shaped like a crown, and to be hung out at Berwick, in the open air, for a
spectacle and everlasting reproach, both living and dead, to all that passed.
Mary a sister of Bruce, was ordered to be shut up in like manner at the castle
of Roxburgh. The Countess of Buchan lived in this confinement six years, when
by the royal mandate she was released from her cage, and given in charge to
Henry de Beaumont.

In the year 1307, the stores ordered by the King of England to be delivered by
the citizens of London at Berwick, for the use of the forces against the Scots,
were 20 barrels of honey, 100 barrels of wine, 12,000 lb. weight of iron, 500
lb. of hemp-cord for balistae, 500lb. of hemp, 100 balistae of one foot, 40 of
two feet, 20 balistae de turno, 30,000 arrows for balistae of one foot, 12,000
arrows for those of two feet, 2200 feathered arrows of copper for balistae de
turno. Rymer. III. 16.
The measure by which these balistae are here distinguished, relates to the
arrows these engines were to throw; as the accepted phrase in regard to cannon,
is so many pounders, as the weight of the shot may be they are bored for.

In the year 1310, King Edward II. his Queen, and Nobles, spent their winter at
Berwick; the King returning thither from his Scotch expedition. The dearth was
so great in Scotland this year, that the people fed on horseflesh and other
carrion. Ibid. 226.
During the King's residence here, he confirmed the election of Richard de
Kellow to the Sea of Durham, on the death of Anthony de Beck.

In 1312, Robert Bruce attempted to surprise Berwick, by a scalade in the
night; but after ladders of ropes were fixed, the place was saved by the
barking of a dog, which alarmed the garrison, and the assailants were repulsed
with considerable loss.

In the year 1314, King Edward II. rendezvoused his army at Berwick, consisting
of 40,000 horse (three thousand of which were completely armed, horses and men)
and 52,000 foot: they were in part lodged within the town, and the rest in
tents without the walls. The carriages attending this army were numerous, as no
supplies could be drawn from a country desolated by war, and wasted by famine.
Malmsbury says, if they had passed in one line, they would have extended sixty
leagues in length. Most authors agree, that so fine an army had not in the
memory of man marched from England. The army of the Scots consisted of 30,000,
advantageously posted, and waiting the approach of the English, on the banks of
Bannocks Burn. I seem to be led involuntarily to a relation of this battle;
famous, for the establishment of Robert Bruce on the throne of Scotland, in its
event.

Sterling Castle had sustained a long siege and blockade, and the Governor was
at length obliged to accede to certain articles, under which, if this fortress
was not relieved before an appointed day, it was to be surrendered to Bruce:
King Edward determined to march to its relief, and with all possible expedition
moved his army from Berwick. Robert Bruce, informed of the intention of the
English Monarch, resolved to abide the event of a battle, rather than raise the
siege. He had viewed the ground, and fixed upon a part near the castle, where
he should have only just sufficient room to marshal his troops with advantage,
according to their arms. This place was defended on the one hand by
inaccessible rocks, and on the other by a morass, having the water of
Bannokburn in front. King Edward being informed the country near Sterling was
full of morasses, and difficult to be passed, so that his horse could not be of
the service he wished, he levied a reinforcement of foot, 4000 from Yorkshire,
2500 from Northumberland, 1500 from Durham, and 2000 from Derby and Nottingham.
In the advance the army was divided into ten columns, 10,000 men in each,
commanded by leaders of the most distinguished character; the Earls of
Gloucester and Hereford led the van, the center was led by the King in person,
Sir Giles D'Argentein and Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, Generals under
him. The army under these divisions, is said to have covered a large tract of
country, and was a sight august and solemn; the whole scene made resplendent,
by burnished arms and displayed ensigns.

As the English approached, Bruce led his troops to occupy the chosen ground,
on the Saturday before the battle. To strengthen the station, he caused pits to
be dug in front, armed with pointed stakes within, covered with hurdles or
flakes, and concealed by turfs and rushes. On the morning of Sunday, being
Midsummer Eve, Bruce with his Lords and Chieftains attended solemn devotions
and mass in the front of the army; and the Priests went through the ranks,
exhorting each soldier to exert his powers for the relief of his country, and
rather die a martyr in the virtuous cause, than see the English again become
tyrannical taskmasters, as they had been in the time of King Edward I. of
detested memory. Such arguments and exhortations served to inflame the Scotch
army with enthusiastic ardour. The English were ordered to advance so near
Bruce's station; on Sunday evening, that though harrassed with a tedious march,
they were obliged to lay under arms all night, for fear of a surprise. This
evening was not without several skirmishes and re-encounters, in which the
English were worsted: in one of these Robert Bruce engaged and slew Sir Henry
Boynton; cleaving his head with a battle ax. A party of 300 horse, under the
command of Lord Robert Clifford and Henry Beaumont, attempting to gain the
castle, were engaged by a chosen band of Spearmen, led by Earl Murray, and put
to the rout: Sir William Dayncourt was slain, and Thomas Gray made prisoner;
Lel. Coll.
the Earl of Gloucester was unhorsed, but rescued. Malmsbury.


The disposition of the Scotch army on the day of battle was in four divisions:
Sir Thomas Randolph commanded the van, Edward Bruce the right wing, and Sir
James Douglas the left; Robert Bruce was with the body of reserve or rear. The
Scotch were all on foot, that by making the danger and distress of the
engagement equal, the ardour of each might by example be exhilerated. The
soldiers of the body of reserve, were covered with light coats of mail, which a
sword could not penetrate: they carried an ax in the belt, and lances in their
hands. Malmsbury describes the Scotch army moving, "as thick as a hedge." The
leaders were men of that skill and valor, that they possessed the confidence
of the troops. In the English army, the foot, consisting of spearmen and
archers, were in the van, the horse were on each flank; and in these positions
the armies engaged.

The onset was vigorous and well maintained on both sides. The Earl of
Gloucester commanded that part of the line which was attacked by Sir James
Douglas's corpse, consisting of 7000 Borderers and 3000 Irish Scots or Katerans,
vulgarly called Redshanks, a fierce and valiant race. The English, unable to
sustain the shock, began to give way, when the Earl, impatient of disgrace and
inflamed with ire, accompanied by a chosen band, rushed into the thickest of
the foes, where he was beaten from his horse and slain. The covered pits
deterred or frustrated his Knights from effecting his rescue. Malmsbury says,
with great warmth, (confundat eos Dominos) they were 500 in number, and in the
emergency 20 might have effected his relief. Sir Giles D'Argentein, a man much
esteemed by Robert Bruce, and of great military fame, one of the Commanders of
the Gens d' Arms who guarded the King, advanced to Gloucester's relief, but
died in the attempt. Robert de Clifford, Payen de Tiptoft, William Marescal,
Edmund Mayley, and several other eminent leaders were equally unfortunate in
those parts of the army where they commanded, and were soon numbered with the
slain. The English archers, who had so often carried victory with them in
former conflicts, were attacked in flank, and put to the rout, by a troop of
light cavalry close armed, who were remounted for this critical service, and
led by Sir Robert Keith, Marshal of Scotland. The confusion among the archers,
and the fall of such eminent leaders, struck the English army with a panic,
which was not a little increased by the sight of a large body of men advancing
over the summit of a distant eminence, who were no other than the attendants on
the carriages and baggage, drawn up in martial array, and displaying pieces of
linen on the ends of spears, which at that distance appeared like a crowd of
banners. Confusion and uproar soon took place, and the English Monarch was
advised to secure his retreat, as Victory was declaring on every hand for
Bruce, and the English forces, wearied and fainting, were giving way. The King
with great reluctance and shame consented to move the royal standard, the sight
of which completed what the valor of the Scotch phalanx had so gloriously
begun: the rout became general, and multitudes fell as well under the sword in
the pursuit, as in the waters of Bannockburn and Forth. The effusion of blood
was greatly spared, by the avarice of plunder, the rich baggage of the English
army affording immense booty to the victors. Of the Scots, only two leaders of
note fell, William Vipont and Walter Ross. Seven hundred English Gentlemen were
missing after the battle, the greatest part of whom were among the prisoners.
Sterling surrendered to the King of Scotland, who ordered the fortifications to
be destroyed to their foundations. Redpath, in his Border History, says, The
rout of the English was indeed very entire; but neither the number they brought
to the field, nor the loss they sustained, appear to have been nigh so great as
the Scottish writers represent them.

King Robert Bruce treated the prisoners with great humanity, and buried the
dead with all due decorum. The bodies of the Earl of Gloucester and Lord Robert
Clifford, he sent to the King at Berwick, to be interred with the honors due
to their rank and military fame. On account of a personal friendship which had
formerly subsisted between them, he liberated without ransom his prisoner Lord
Ralph de Mounthermer, husband to the Countess of Gloucester, the King of
England's sister.

King Edward with a body of horse fled toward Berwick, pursued by Sir James
Douglas with a party of light cavalry, who effected nothing but taking up a few
stragglers, who fell off from the King's troop. He first took shelter in the
castle of Dunbar, from whence he was conveyed by sea to Bambrough or Berwick.
It is certain he was at Berwick the third day after this defeat, as he issued a
proclamation from thence, to advise his subjects of the loss of his privy seal;
which was restored to him by Mounthermer, on his return.

After this victory, various bands of Scots ravaged Northumberland.

In the year 1315, the Scots attempted to take Berwick by surprise, by means of
their shipping, with which they entered the river under false colors; but
being discovered by the garrison before they began an attack, suffered
considerable loss ever they could effect an escape.

In the following year, the dearth was so great in Northumberland, that the
people were obliged to eat the flesh of horses and dogs. A quarter of wheat
sold for 40 shillings.

Berwick had continued in the possession of the English for 20 years, when the
Commander in the town being corrupted, betrayed it to the Earl of Murray, in
the year 1318, who led a body of Robert Bruce's forces. James Duglas, by the
help of Patrike Count of March, and Peter Spalding of Berwike got Berwike out
of the Englischmennes hands. But the castle kept a XI wekes after, and then,
for lak of vitaile and rescue was gyven up. Then Roger Horseley, the Captain of
the castle for the Englischmen, lost one of his yes.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 547.


Barber, the Historian of Bruce, says, that one Spalding, incensed against the
Governor's cruelty toward the Scotch inhabitants, had determined to betray the
town into the hands of Bruce's party; and accordingly having intimated his
design, and assigned the time and place for the enterprise, when it was his
turn to mount guard at the Cowgate, Randolph and Douglas, with a chosen band,
repaired to Dunse Park, and under cover of the night, advanced to a part of the
wall which was left unguarded, and by ladders entered the town, unperceived by
any but Spalding. They lay concealed till daylight, when other forces coming
up, upon the assault, were aided by those within, and gained the place by noon.
Many of the garrison and townsmen retired into the castle, from whence they
made a sally, presuming the Scotch forces were weak, from the thin display of
banners; but they were repulsed with some loss. The news of regaining Berwick
was soon spread over the adjacent country, and numbers of Scotch crowded
thither, to maintain the place and assist in the siege of the castle, which
stood out six days, This differs widely from Leland's account.
and then capitulated on terms, for the garrison to march out with their arms,
and depart for England. The Scotch King Robert Bruce soon after arrived, and
with his Court resided some time in the castle. He made his son-in-law, Walter,
Steward of Scotland, Governor, who, ambitious of possessing a settlement on the
borders, where he might display his youthful courage, called out 500 Gentlemen
his dependents, with others of inferior rank, skilful in shooting with bows and
working engines, for the more effectual defense of the place. Sir John Crab, a
Fleming, of high reputation in his art, was made chief Engineer.

King Edward, in the succeeding year, prepared to recover Berwick, and on the
first of September approached with a large body of troops, having with him
Lancaster, Pembroke, Arundell, Hertford, Warren, and the Earl Marshal the
King's brother, Hugh D'Espencer, Roger de Tammori, and Hugh Deudeley, parceners
to the earldom of Gloucester, by marriage of the coheiresses, the late Earl's
sisters. This force was accompanied by a fleet from the cinque ports, laden
with provisions and all kind of stores. The English fortified their camp, and
then proceeded to an assault. The walls of the town are described to be so low,
that an assailant might strike the people that defended them, with a spear. On
the seventh of September they attempted an escalade, at different parts in the
same time, and a ship was directed to approach with an engine, to attempt the
walls on the side next the haven; but all these were fruitless, the ship was
left on ground by ebb of tide, and burnt by the garrison. In the next general
assault, which was made on the 13th of September, the English employed a great
machine called a Sow, constructed for holding and defending men, who were moved
in it toward the foot of the wall, in order to undermine and sap its
foundation. Devices were used to burn this machine, but by throwing a stone of
vast weight from an engine, the Sow was split, and her occupiers dislodged. On
an attack of Marygate, the draw bridge was burnt, and the gate in great danger;
but forces from the castle coming to its defense, the assailants were obliged
to retire. These efforts harrassed and weakened the garrison considerably, and
the town must on another assault, have fallen into the hands of the English, if
Lancaster had not withdrawn his forces from the camp, exercising his malignant
spirit at this critical time against the King, whom he hated most inveterately.
The Earl of Murray and Lord Douglas had entered England with 10,000 chosen men,
and penetrated almost to the city of York, the Queen escaping with difficulty.
These circumstances determined Edward to raise the siege of Berwick.

King Robert Bruce perceiving the importance of this place, strengthened the
walls, and raised them considerably in height, giving also many new towers and
additional bulwarks to the whole.

In the year 1323, King Robert Bruce at this place ratified the treaty of peace
entered into with King Edward III. by his plenipotentiaries at Bishop Thorpe
near York.

In 1328, Joan the sister of King Edward III. being contracted to David the son
and heir of King Robert Bruce, was conveyed to Berwick with a splendid retinue,
where she was received by the Earl of Murray and Lord Douglas, representatives
of the King, he being sick; and the nuptials were celebrated with great
magnificence. She was called Make Peace, and carried with her the ragman roll,
and all records which had been seized by King Edward I. to be again deposited
in the Scotch archives.

At this ceremony, a magnificent parade was made by the nobles of each nation,
and a sumptuous pageant crowded the place, with all that solemn pomp, which in
the days of chivalry decked out public spectacles: Sumptured horses, and men
braced in shining arms, forming long trains of steel effigies, stiffened in
coats of mail, and strapped like inanimate beings to the saddle, were the chief
objects: Lord Mortimers' retinue alone, consisted of nine score Knights,
properly caparisoned, with their Esquires, Gentlemen, and Yeomen.

The expedition of Lord Henry Beaumont and his associates into Scotland, in the
year 1332, being attended with remarkable success, became an object of serious
attention with the English Monarch; in so much that Edward Baliol, supported by
this party in his pretensions to the Crown of Scotland, as successor of his
father John Baliol, having gained the castle of Roxburgh, King Edward received
his letters patent issued from thence, in which he acknowledged the King of
England supreme Lord of Scotland, and ceded to him the town, castle, and county
of Berwick, to be annexed to his kingdom, with many other advantageous cessions
and terms of amity and alliance, of such weight and consideration, that the
King summoned his parliament to meet at York, to deliberate thereon. As many of
the states, especially the Prelates were absent, nothing was determined: in
general, it was thought expedient to treat with the guardian and nobles of King
David's party; for which purpose commissioners were instructed to require
homage and fealty from the Scotch King, and a cession of Berwick; but these
requisitions were rejected with the utmost disdain. Baliol during this time had
a perilous escape from Annan, and was obliged to take refuge in England, his
party being thrown into the utmost confusion. King Edward was too far advanced
in the cause to recede, and therefore accepted the terms proposed by Baliol at
Roxburgh, and ratified them on his part. Edward Baliol gave up Berwick,
Roxburg, Dedinburg, Pebilles, and Dunfres, to King Edward, and promisid to make
him homage for the resideu, after that the hole Englisch Host had faught with
the Scotts, and had so great a victory of the town of Berwick, was gyven up
to King Edward.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 554.


The English did not recover Berwick, till the 7th year of the reign of King
Edward III. after the battle of Halydoun Hill, where the slaughter of the
Scottish forces was terrible, 7 Earls, 900 Knights, 400 Esquires, and 32,000
common men died in the field; a carnage dreadful to recount, and from the very
idea of which the soul recoils with horror.

King Edward the Third, on being refused the homage of David Bruce, and
restitution of Berwick, ordered his Herald to proclaim his defiance of the
Scotch King. The English army began to besiege Berwick on the 12th of April,
1333. The Scots knowing the reduction of this place would be one of the first
and chief enterprises of their adversaries, to the utmost of their power put it
in a state of defense, to resist the great shock they presumed it would
necessarily sustain: they filled it with a garrison of chosen veterans, and
made Sir William Keith governor of the town, and Patrick Earl of Dunbar the
keeper of the chief fortress or citadel. The King soon arrived, and remained in
person before the walls about a month, when perceiving from the strength of the
garrison, and the vigorous defense they made, that it would not be easy to
reduce the place, he marched part of his army into Scotland, carrying the
horrid ravages of war as far as Scone, Dundee, and Dumbarton. The most savage
cruelties mark those times; the wild American never devised more shocking
barbarities than stained these borders; each nation was ingenious in torture,
in modes of devastation, and in the prosecution of revenge. Having glutted
their avarice of blood, and being loaded with pillage, they again returned to
Berwick, which King Edward still found unsubdued. After receiving
reinforcements, he declared his determination was either to be master of
Berwick, or effect something of consequence, by bringing his adversaries to
battle. The siege was changed into a strict blockade: the besieged distressed
by the cutting off supplies, made many sallies, with various fortune; they made
a vigorous attack upon the fleet, and most of the navy then before Berwick was
burnt. The garrison still entertained hopes of relief, and refused to
capitulate, presuming this key to the kingdom, was of too great consequence to
the Scotch, at that time to be neglected, and suffered to fall into the hands
of the enemy. Lord Douglas had levied a powerful army, with which he marched to
the neighborhood of Berwick; but to the great distress of the garrison, who
believed their day of deliverance was at hand, instead of attacking the
English, Douglas crossed the Tweed, and in sight of the town, marched along the
coast toward the castle of Bambrough, which being esteemed impregnable, was
chosen by the King of England, as a secure residence for his Queen. The Scotch
wasted several days in blocking up that fortress, and ravaging the adjacent
parts, hoping that King Edward's solicitude for his Queen, would induce him to
raise the siege of Berwick.

The device which had been practiced with effect in the year 1318, did not now
take place; King Edward was not to be moved from his determined purpose; the
garrison reduced to extremities for want of provisions, and dispirited by the
apparent neglect of Douglas, proposed a treaty, which King Edward readily
attended to, and the capitulation was concluded on the 15th day of July, under
the following conditions: That the town and castle should be surrendered to
King Edward on the 20th, if not relieved with 200 men at arms, or by a battle;
that in the interval, there should be a cessation of arms; that in case of a
surrender, the lives and properties of the garrison and inhabitants should be
protected, with liberty to such as were so inclined to leave the place; and
that the Governor should have safe conduct granted him to the Scotch army, to
communicate the articles. Sir William Keith repaired to the Scotch camp without
delay, and there prevailed that an attempt should be made to relieve the place:
a measure totally disapproved by some of the oldest and most experienced of the
Scotch leaders.

In this interval, a transaction is said to have taken place, which sullies the
luster of Edward's military character, and stamps an odium on his memory; it
stands recorded to the following effect, by Buchanan, Boece, and other Scotch
authors of great credit.

Hostages were given by the Scots, for performance of their part of the treaty,
one of whom was the eldest son of Sir Alexander Seeton, who was Deputy
Governor, and took command on Keith's resorting to the camp. King Edward had
also in his camp Seeton's younger son, taken a prisoner at the assault made on
the navy. The King apprehending that by the approach of the Scotch army, he
might probably be deprived of the capture of Berwick, an object of so great
importance, soon after the departure of Keith, contrary to the faith of
Princes, the sacredness of treaties, the common policy of nations, and all
private honor, demanded an immediate surrender of the place; threatening if
Seeton refused, that he would immediately hang up his two sons, the hostage and
the prisoner, before the walls. Seeton remonstrated, but Edward regardless of
all the charges made against him for the violation of public faith, caused a
gibbet to be erected in full view of the town, to put in execution his infamous
threat. Seeton struggling between honor and parental feelings, between duty to
his country and love for his children, suffered all the pangs arising from a
conflict, in which every sentiment was on the rack: Nature would have
prevailed, and Seeton's children been saved by a sacrifice of his country's
honor and his own, had not the mother, with all the virtue and heroism of a
Roman matron, and the greatness of the most exalted mind, argued forcibly to
support his principle, and sustain his fainting soul; and when yet he seemed to
relax, she withdrew him from the horrid spectacle, that he might retain his
rectitude, though his sons were the inestimable price by which it was
maintained. Edward unrelenting, put them to death, and Seeton kept the town.

This transaction is denied by the English Historians, who affirm that the
Scotch army came in fight before the truce was expired; and therefore Edward
could have no pretense for demanding a surrender. Smollet, vol. 2. p. 19.

Tyrell says, on expiration of the truce mentioned by Boece and Buchanan, King
Edward summoned the town to surrender; to which Seeton replied, he could not
consent thereto, as he had assurances of speedy relief. The King insisted on
the terms of the truce, by which the surrender was stipulated, and the time was
now expired. Seeton still refused, would have prevaricated and argued; which so
incensed the King, that by advice of his Council he executed one of Seeton's
sons. This act is said to have induced the townsmen whose sons were hostages,
to solicit new terms, and additional days for cessation of arms, which King
Edward granted.

It does not appear that Seeton's son was an hostage; his name is not in any
record of that treaty: but presuming there was a former treaty, which was
renewed or prolonged, and of which no record is now in being, this difficulty
ceases. Fordun expressly says, King Edward caused Seeton's son Thomas to be
executed on a gibbet, in sight of his parents; but agrees with Tyrell, that it
was not done till after the time of the treaty was expired.


This argument is futile, and seems weak in opposition to the uniformity of the
Scotch Historians.

On the 18th of July, Lord Douglas led his army over the Tweed, and encamped at
a place called Bothull or Bothville: the English possessed Halydown Hill, a
very considerable eminence on the west of Berwick, having an easy declivity
toward the river; the other sides were steeper. The Scotch disregarding this
apparent advantage, determined to engage on the Scotch side of the hill, not
only to secure a retreat, but in case of victory, to take advantage of the flow
of tide, which would render the Tweed impassable to the English if they should
be routed.

The Scotch army was disposed in four grand divisions; John Murray commanded
the first, with Lord Andrew Frazer and his sons Simon and James; the second was
commanded by Robert Lord High Steward of Scotland, with the principal men of
his kindred and the Earl of Monteith; the third by the Earls of Ross,
Sutherland, and Strathern; and the fourth by Lord Archibald Douglas, Guardian
of the kingdom of Scotland, and Commander in Chief, accompanied by the Earls of
Lenox and Carrick. The whole army amounted to 68,000. The number of King
Edward's army is not positively mentioned by any author. It is supposed the
number of the Scotch was not so great as Historians have asserted, and that
they were nearly equal to their adversaries. King Edward also disposed his army
in four divisions, each of which was flanked by choice and skilful archers.

When both sides were ready to engage, the onset was a while suspended, by the
appearance of a Scotchman of gigantic stature, who had gained the name of
Turnbull, on account of a gallant exploit, by which King Robert Bruce was saved
from the attacks of a wild bull, which had unhorsed him, as he was hunting.
Turnbull, attended by a great mastiff, Some of the Borderers on the western
Marches kept mastiffs or bull-dogs, which were let loose on the ravaging
parties -- Nicholson and Burn's Hist. West.
approached the English army, and gave a challenge for single combat. After a
short pause, which the singularity of the circumstance occasioned, the
challenge was accepted by Sir Robert Benhale, a young Norfolk Knight, much
inferior in stature to the Scotch champion, but of great strength and
adroitness in military achievements. The mastiff immediately flew forward, and
was received by the Knight with a stroke upon the loins with his sword, which
severed his body. The Scotch champion advanced: Benhale, with great agility and
skill, eluded the heavy blows aimed at him, and first cut off the left arm of
his adversary, and at last struck off his head. Stowe.


The Scotch army began to ascend the hill about the hour of vespers, with great
impetuosity; their leaders, chieftains, and men at arms dismounted, the more to
animate the troops by rendering the danger equal. They were soon out of breath,
in consequence of ascending the steep. The English archers were advantageously
placed, in different stations on the hill, so as to pour down such showers of
arrows on the close bodies of the Scotch troops, as made a terrible slaughter:
they were also greatly annoyed by the rolling down of large stones from the
eminence, and were soon thrown into confusion. Smollet, v. 2. p. 19.
The English commanders instantly availing themselves of the enemy's disorder,
ordered an attack to be made by the spearmen and men at arms, by which they
were pressed whilst breathless and dispirited, so that multitudes fell. The
Scotch often retreated, and again rallied and bravely returned to the fight,
fiercely maintaining the battle till their General was pierced by a spear: his
fall struck the army with a panic, and a total rout ensued. The carnage was
dreadful. The servants charged with the care of the horses fled, and left their
masters to the destroying sword of a victorious enemy, who were not accustomed
to mercy. Edward, at the head of a chosen brigade of cavalry, and archers on
horseback, attended by Lord D' Arcy with his Irish troops, led on the pursuit,
and directed the slaughter. The country for the distance of five miles, was
strewed with carcasses of those who were cut down by their pursuers. Barnes,
Fordun, Boece, Buchanan, Knighton, etc.
Among the persons of distinction in the Scotch army, there fell the General,
the Earls of Ross, Sutherland, Carrick, Athol, Lenox, and Monteith; three
Stewards, uncles of Robert the Lord High Steward, three Frazers, Sir John
Graham, Sir Duncan Campbell, and Sir William Tudway. Edwardus 3 debellavit
Scottos apud Halidon hille, and occidit in illo Bello 35 Millia and postea
cepit castrum de Berwicke -- Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 448.

In the VII year of the reign of King Edward he assembled a great host, and
came to Berwike upon Tweede, and laid siege thereto: and to him came Edward
Bailiol, King of Scotts, with a great power to strenght and hyde him. The
Scotts came out of Scotland in four batailles, well armed and araied.

Edward King of England, an Edward King of Scotts, appareiled their people in
other iiii batailles, and upon Halydun Hille beside the town of Berwik, met
these 2 hosts, and there were discomfitid of the Scotts, xxv M and vii C,
where of were slain viii Earls, a M and iii C Knights and Gentilmen. This
victory done, the King returned to the town of Berwik, and the town and the
castelle were yeldid up to him. -- Ibid. p. 9.


Among the prisoners were Sir William Keith, Sir William Douglas, Sir Robert
Kirkpatrick, Sir William Campbell, Sir Gilbert Wiseman, Sir Alexander Graham,
and Sir Oliver Sinclair. Boece charges King Edward with an unmanly piece of
barbarity, the putting these prisoners to death.

The loss of the English is not related with certainty by any Historian. Rymer
records a note sent by King Edward, to direct a public thanksgiving after this
victory, in which it is said, that the battle was gained without much loss on
his (the King's) side. This expression implies a loss more considerable than
what some authors have set forth, viz. one Knight, one Esquire, and 13 foot
soldiers. Smollet, etc. etc.


On the day after the battle, the castle and town of Berwick was surrendered,
the King faithfully observing the articles of capitulation. A public
thanksgiving was ordered through his dominions, and he made a donation of 20l.
per annum to the Cistercian Nuns, near whose convent the battle was fought,
with full reparation of all damages done to the conventual church and other
buildings; as the author of the Border History says, thus affecting, like most
other conquerors, to draw Heaven to his party; and to regard the success
accompanying the most unjust enterprises, as a proof of the peculiar favor of
the Deity.

King Edward determining to retain Berwick, appointed Lord Henry Percy Governor
of the castle, and gave a commission to him and the Earl of March, to act as
joint Wardens of all the country on this side the Scottish sea, where the terms
of peace were received. He required 12 hostages for Berwick, to be chosen out
of the chief inhabitants; eight of whom he placed at Newcastle, and four at
York.

Edward Baliol did homage to King Edward at Newcastle upon Tyne, in June 1334,
his parliament having ratified the treaty of Roxburgh, whereby the castle,
town, and county of Berwick, with their appendages, were to be annexed to the
Crown of England for ever.

In the year 1339, Lord John Mowbray was Governor of Berwick: he had in
garrison 120 men at arms, 100 halberdiers, and 200 archers.

In 1340, King Edward III. was at Berwick with an army of 40,000 foot and 6000
horse.

In 1341, King Edward kept the festival of Easter here, and held a tournament,
in which 12 Knights of Scotland entered the lists with 12 of the King's train.
This spectacle was exhibited with great magnificence and solemn pomp; but from
the animosity which subsisted between the people of the two nations, this
exhibition was attended with so much ire and inveteracy, and such bitter
rivalship, that two Scotch Knights were slain, and Sir John Twiford, an English
Knight.

On the 12th of November, A. D. 1354, a treaty was held at Berwick for the
ransom of David Bruce, King of Scotland, taken prisoner at the battle of
Durham, on the 26th of October 1346; and on the 3d of October 1357, all the
articles of treaty for his deliverance were concerted there; and the payments
of the ransom-money were ordered to be made at Berwick, Norham, or Bambrough.
On failure of performance of the former articles, another treaty succeeded,
with a truce for 14 years; under which 56,000 marks were to be paid, by yearly
instalments of 4000 marks each. The following papers are in few hands, and as
they contain many curious particulars relative to this ransom, it is presumed
their insertion will be agreeable to the reader.

A truce of fourteen years between the King of England and Scotland, concluded
at London, in May 1369, under the seal of diverse Scottish Lords.
Be it known to all, who are present now, and may be hereafter, that the
Reverend Fathers in God, William of Saint Andrew, Walter of Glascow, John of
Dunkelden, Patrick of Brechin, Chancellor of Scotland, and Walter of Dunblane,
Bishops: The Noble and Puissant Lords, Robert Steward of Scotland and Earl of
Stratberne, Thomas Earl of Mar, George Earl of March, William Earl of Douglas,
John Steward Earl of Carry, William of Keth Marshall of Scotland, Archibald
of Douglas, Robert of Erskyne, James of Douglas, Walter of Lesley, Walter of
Halyburton, Alisaunder of Lyndesay, all Barons and Knights; Mr John Carr Keeper
of the Privy Seal of the High Prince the King of Scotland, being deputed by the
said Lord the King of Scotland; and other Prelates, Nobles and Lords, deputed
by the King of England, have for both of the aforesaid Princes and Lords, the
Kings, and for all their kingdoms, lands, counties, territories, and subjects
of each side wheresoever they be, by land and by sea, in expectation of a happy
peace, stipulated and concluded a just, lawful and stable truce, forbearance,
and cessation of war from this present day, till the purification of our Lady
next coming, and from thence forward for fourteen years next ensuing and fully
accomplished.

During which truce there shall no molestation, damage, injury, assault or
enterprise be offered on either side, whether by taking of towns, castles, or
fortresses: by burning of houses or other things: by taking and detaining of
persons: by plundering of cattle and goods; or by any other hostile act
whatsoever; but they shall live, converse, and traffic mutually together,
freely, and peaceably, without producing any letters of safe conduct, and
without any arrest, disturbance, or interruption altogether in as much amity as
they would, and ought to do in the time of an absolute peace; only paying the
dues and customs to one King as well as to the other.

And if any thing chance to be attempted, or committed by either King, or their
subjects of either part, contrary to the same, it shall duly, and as soon as
may be, without any fraud or delay, be repaired, redressed, and made good to
the party that shall be injured; the truce for all that remaining in full force
and virtue.

And in like manner, during the term of the said truce, neither the King of
England, nor of Scotland, nor any of their subjects of either kingdom, nor any
of their Lords, may be an ill-wisher, adversary, or enemy: nor shall commit any
act of hostility, damage, or injury: neither may they be aiding, comforting, or
counselling in England, or in Scotland, or in any place elsewhere, against the
Kings and subjects of either kingdom, or of any of their dominions in any
manner whatsoever.

And if any of the said subjects do act to the contrary, they shall, in the
first place, be required and commanded by way of letter to desist; and, upon
neglect thereof, they shall be punished as traitors and rebels, and all their
goods be forfeited and confiscated to that King whose subjects they are.

And during the said term, no subject, who may be a rebel, and disobedient to
either King, shall be admitted into one kingdom, nor into the other, nor into
any of their dominions, whereby he may offer injury and wrong to the said
Kings, or to any of their subjects.

And the said King of Scotland, for the remainder of his ransom, shall pay
56,000 marks in gold, or silver of an equal value, to the King of England, or
to his heirs or deputies, at Berwick upon Tweed, at Norham, or at Bambourgh, in
the space of the foresaid truce.

That is to say, every year 4000 marks, till the whole sum aforesaid shall be
paid; whereof the first payment shall commence, in the same manner, as has
been said before, at Candlemas next coming, or within fifteen days after; and
so from year to year, till all the foresaid sum of 56,000 marks shall be fully
paid, as has been already said; and afterward the King, and all the other
Lords of Scotland, who stand engaged for the payment of the said remainder,
their heirs and successors, shall remain acquitted and discharged by the said
King of England, his heirs and successors, and assigns, of all the said ransom,
and all other sums, penalties, failures, oaths, obligations covenants promises
and defaults, if any chance to be alleged: And of all demands, which may be
made by virtue of any obligations by indentures and public instruments, granted
and passed to the said King of England, since the time that the said King of
Scotland was taken prisoner at the battle of Durham.

And, in particular, of the last obligation by the said King of Scotland, given
for the payment of 100,000l. And that same last bond, and all other letters
obligatory, indentures, and public instruments shall, upon the last payment, be
actually restored and delivered to the Commissioners of the said King of
Scotland. And in case that any such writings, relating thereunto, shall be
found and appear afterward, they shall be always looked upon as void and null,
and shall loose their force, effect and power, in all points: and shall not be
of any benefit, after the said last payment, to the King of England, nor of any
damage to the King of Scotland.

It is in like manner stipulated by the Commissioners of the King of England,
that the subjects of the King of Scotland shall have, during the said truce,
one moiety of the rents and profits of the lands and possessions in the hands
of those people, who are under the subjection and obedience of the King of
England in the county of Roxburgh; that is, in such manner that those of
Scotland, claiming right of inheritance in the said lands and possessions, may
enjoy one moiety of the profits; but that all the time of the said truce, the
said lands and possessions, together with the persons, in whose hands they are,
shall remain, as to the King of England, in the same state, fealty, obedience,
and condition, they are in this present day.

And the said lands shall, during the term of the said truce, be farmed out
well and faithfully, by the joint consent of both parties concerned, to as much
advantage as may be, without any fraud or deceit.

And the said truce shall be proclaimed and published yearly through all the
kingdoms, in Ireland, and through all the dominions of both the Kings
aforesaid, both on this side and beyond the sea; and upon the delivery of this
present treaty under the seals of the Prelates and Lords abovesaid, the said
King of England, shall in like manner deliver a counterpart of the same, under
the seals of the Honorable Fathers in God William of Winchester Chancellor,
John of Ely Treasurer of England, S^mon of London, Adam of Saint David's,
William of Worcester, Bishops: the Noble and Puissant Lords John Duke of
Lancaster: Richard of ^rundell, Thomas of Be^u^hamp of Warrewick, Robert of
Suffolk, and William Montague of Salisbury Earls: Henry Lord Percy, Roger Lord
Clifford, William Lord Latimer, Sir Peter Lacy Keeper of the Privy Seal.

All and every of which articles the Prelates and Lords of Scotland have sworn
and promised that they will observe, preserve, and fulfill, so far as they do,
or may concern them in every individual point, well and faithfully, without
frand or deceit; and without saying, or acting any thing tacitly, or expressly,
by themselves, or by any other for them, to the contrary.

Concluded and delivered under the Seals of the Prelates and Lords of Scotland
aforesaid, at the city of London, in the month of June, and in the year of
Grace 1369

John of Carryk, Secret. Alexander of Lyndesay Walter de Haliburton Walter de
Lesley James de Douglas Robert de Erskyne Archihald de Douglas William de Keth
Earl of Carryk Earl of Douglas Earl of March Earl of Mar Steward of Scotland
Dunblain Brechen Dunkelden Glasguen St. Andrews


De Obligatione facta Domino Regi per David de Bruys.
A Tresexcellent Prince nostre Treschere and Treshonure Friar Edward, par la
grace de Dieu Roi D'engleterre. David par mesme la grace Roi d'Escoce Salutz
and dilection; Pur ceo que de votre grace espetiale vous nous avez accord par
vos lettres overtes que de la Some grande des deniers d'argent, la quele nous
vous devons paier, a cause de notre deliurance, d'ont nous vous devons paier
chescun an quatre Mill marcz ala Chaundeleure a certain lieu. Solone la form
and l'effect, d'unes lettres Obligatoirs d'arreinment faites Sur la rest de
nostre ranceon, que nous duissons paier d'An en An au dit liu quatre Mill marcz
a la feste de Seint John le Baptistre, nous promettons loialment, and en
paroule de Roie Sacre que nous ferrons le dit paiement d'An en An au lieu
accord a la dite fest de Seint John le Baptistre a voz deputez, tanque a
l'enterim paiement de tute la rest de la Sum, que nous vous devons par la
cause avantdite; c'estassavoir, de Cinquante and deux mill marcz d'esterlinges
le term de primer paiement; comenceant a la fest de la Nativite de Seint Johan
Baptistre, l'an de grace M.CCC.LXXI. Et n'est pas notre volunte n'entention que
la dite grace, q'ensi fait, nous avez vous turn en damage ou prejudice, ne
ascun autre a cause de vous ne a les lettres obligatoriez que faitez vous
avouns darreinment par la mesme cause; einz volons q else estoisent and
demorent en lour effect, force and fermetee, en touz pontz and articles,
horspris Soulement la change des terms avaunt nomez tout auxi come vous ne nous
eussez fait la grace avandite. Don. par tesmoignance de notre Seal Secre a la
Cite de Londres le quart jour de Juyn, I'an de grace M.CCC.LXX. Et de nre
Roialme Quarantisme.

Rot. Scot. 31 E. 3. M. 1 dors.
Nomina Obsidum de Scotia, viz.
Liverez au Sr. de Percy,
1. Jehan Fitz and Heir au Seneschall d'Escoce 2. Umfred Fitz and Heir a Roger
de Kirkpatrick
Liverez a Alain del Strother, come a Vicount de Northumb.
3 Reynard Fitz and Heir Seign Will More 4. Gilbert Fitz and Heir Johan Kenedy
5. Johan Fitz Johan de Berkclay
Au dit Alain, etc.
6. Johan Flemyn Heir au Conte de Wygets 7. Johan Fitz Seign. Andrew de Valence
8. Patrick Fitz and Heir a Sr. David de Graham -- Livere a Mons. Will. de
Wessyngton. 9. Robt. Fitz Sr Will. de Conyngham -- Livere a Rog. Corbet.
a Mons. Rich. Tempest.
10 Joh. Fitz and Heir Sr. Joh. Steuard de Dernele 11. Rob. Fitz and Heir Sr.
Rob. de Danyelston
12. Tho. Fitz a Rob. Erskyn a Johan de Coupland. 13. Will. Fitz and Heir Sr.
Tho. Somervill a Mons. Johan de Evre. 14. David Fitz and Heir David de Wemy^ a
Will. de Strother Mair del Noef-chastell. 15. Tho. Fitz and Heir Will. de la
Hay de Lockow a Henry de Stro -- 16. Johan Fitz and Heir Joh. Gray a Mons. Tho.
de Gr -- 17 Item, Johan. Fitz and Heir le Count de Sothirland est Envoe a
Loundres devers le Chancellor. 18. Item, William Fitz and Heir le Comte de
Rossie est malades and le Roi David, and les Evesques de Seint Andrew and de
Brethyn, and le Count de la March sont Empris q'il terre Livere au Gardein de
Berwick devant Nowel, and s'il soit mort que la prochein Heir au dit Count
vendra en son lieu. 19. Item, Patrick Fitz and Heir a Mons. Will. de Levynston
est baille a Richard Snell Burgeis de Berwick, and le Roi David ad empres -- sa
bouche and une Lre -- de son Sigut q'il serra -- and ne elongera. 20 Item, Sive
Thomas Byset ad Empress que William son Fitz terra a les touz Seintz -- du
Seigneur d'Manny pur them --
Rot. Scot. 32 E. 3. M. 6. De denar recipiend and obsidibus admottend.
Rex dilectis and fidelibus Suis Henrico de Percy, Rado de Nevill, and Johanni
de Coupeland Custodi Villae Regis Berewici super Twedam, Salutem. Cum, in
Tractatu inter Concilium nostrum and quosdam Praelatos Magnates and alios de
Scotia super deliberatione David de Bruys Prisonarii nostri pridem habito,
concordatum Sit quod Centum Milia marcarum Sterlingorum pro redemptione
Praedicti David infra december annos extunt proximo Sequentes apud Berewycum super
Twedam, vel Norham, aut Baumburg, vel London nobis solvant videlt december Milia
martarum de prima solutione ad festum Nativitatis sancti Johannis Baptistae
proximo futurum. and residum corumdem Centum milium marcarum ad alios terminos
in quadam Indentura inde facta contentos, and quod Johannes Primogenitus and
haeres Senescalli Scotiae qui una eum quibusdam alijs Magnatibus de Scotia in
obsides pro deliberatione praedicti David liberantur, in Custodia vestra,
praefatus Henr. Moraretur quousque dicta december milia marcarum plenarie fuerint
persoluta, and tunt loco suo veniet Secundo genitus praedicti Senescalli frater
ipsius Johannis in obsidem in forma supradicta, and dictus Johannes
deliberabitur prout Indentura praedicta before continetur.

Nos, de fidelitate and circumspectione vestris before confidentes,
assignavimus vos conjunctim and divisim ad dicta december milia marcaraum, de
prima solutione praedicta, ad instans festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis
Baptistae apud dicta loca de Berewico, No^ham, vel Baumburgh, nomine nostro, in
sterlingis vel in moneta auri in Anglia iam currente recipiendum, and ad
Secundo genitum praedicti Senescalli Fratrem praedicti Johannis loco Ipsius
Johannis in obsidem admittendum and per vos, praefate Henr. custodiendum; and
admisso in vestram securam custodiam ipso Fratre ejusdem Johannis sic in
obsidem, and dictis december Milibus Marcarum vobis persolutis, Sicut predictum
est ad praedictum Johannem a prisona, qua sic detinetur, extunc deliberand'
juxta vim and effectum Indenturae pradictae.

Et ideo vobis mandamus quod praemissa faciatis in forma predicta. In cujus,
etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. viij die Junij.

Rot. 34 Edw. 3. De uno Obsidum David de Bruys deliberando and alio recipiendo.
Rex dilectis and fidelibus suis Henrico de Percy and Radulfo de Nevill
Salutem: Cum nuper, super tractatu deliberationis David de Bruys habito,
concordatum fuisset quod Johannes filius and haeres Senescalli Scotiae, unus
obsidum pro dicto David in Comitiva vestra, vel alterius vestrum, moraretur
quousque prima solutio december Milium Marcarum de redemptione dicti David plene
fiat, and ea facta Filius dicti Senescalli Secundo genitus loco predicti
Johannis fratris sui in dictum Regnum nostrum veniet in Obsidem moratur pari
forma, and Statim super adventu dicti Secundo-geniti in ipsum Regnum
deliberabitur dictus Johannes, quodque quilibet dictorum filiorum predicti
Senescalli, qui in Obsidem sic veniet sit ejusdem conditionis, Ita quod nullus
little, nisi pro unica solutione dictae redemptionis, obses morabitur, ut est
dictum.

Nos volentes dictum tractatum in omnibus observari, vobis mandamus quod cum,
per Cancellarium and Thesaurarium nostros certificati fueritis, quod secunda
solutio redemptionis praedictae plenarie facta fuerit, and filius dicti
Senescalli tertio-genitus in obsidem pro dicto David se intraverit praedictum
secundo-genitum, in custodia vestra, sic existentem deliberari faciatis juxta
formam Tractatus praedicti. Volumus enim vos de ipso secundo-genito extunc
exonerari.

Test R. apud Westminster. xiii. die Junii. Per ipsum Regem and Concilium.



In the 29th year of the reign of King Edward III. he then being on one of his
French expeditions, the Scots surprised the town, but the castle sustained
their assault from the 29th of November to the month of January following, when
King Edward having returned, and received the intelligence at the instant of
his landing from Calais, he tarried in London only three days before he set
forward for Berwick; before which place he came on the 14th day of January with
a large army, attended by a great naval power, with which he laid siege to the
town both by sea and land. The King entered the castle, which still held out
for him, and meditated a sally at the time his troops began the assault on
other quarters: Sir Walter Manny, with miners brought from the forest of Dean,
was employed at the same time, in advancing a mine below the wall. These
vigorous measures induced the garrison to surrender the town. Some of the
Scotch Historians say, the garrison on the approach of King Edward's army
evacuated the place, having first plundered it and beat down the walls. The
King added greatly to the fortifications, and strengthened the fortress with
several new works. The surprise of Berwick by the Scotch, is spoken of with
some incredible circumstances: Steward Earl of Angus, with Earl March, having
collected a powerful navy, from different parts of Scotland, in which they
embarked a chosen band of soldiers, entered Tweed in a dark night, and landed
the forces under the walls unperceived: by break of day, with scaling ladders,
they mounted the wall at Cowgate, and overpowered the guard; after which they
soon made themselves masters of the whole town. It seems probable there was
some treachery in favor of the Scotch assailants. Patric of Dunbar Count of
March, and Thomas le Seneschal, that caulled himself Count of Angus, one and
twenty days after this prepaired themself upon a night with scaling laders
cumming to Berwick, and with in VI days after tok be assaute one of the
stronges toures of Berwik, and enterid the town.

This tydinges was brought to King Edward at his very landing at Calays in to
England. Wherefore he tarried at his parliament appointed at London but 3 days,
and with all speed came to Berwike, and enterid the castle, and then the burgeses
tretised with him, and the town of Berwik was redelyverid full sore again the
Scotts will to King Edward.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 565.


Berwick Castle afterward had many changes of possessors. In the year 1377,
seven intrepid and valiant Scots made themselves masters of it in the night,
killed the Governor, Sir Robert Boynton, and gave liberty to his Lady under a
ransom of 2000 marks. But these heroes did not long possess their honorable
acquisition, for the Earls of Northumberland and Nottingham, and the Lords
Lucy, Neville, and Stafford, with several other English Nobles, soon after
invested the place, took the fortress by storm, and put the Scots to the sword,
who were increased to the number of 48: but this was not effected till the
small garrison had held out eight days against 7000 English archers and 3000
horse, and during the assault lost only two of their number. The Northumbrians
soon after ravaged the territories of Lord March, in revenge for his destroying
the town of Roxburgh. The abovementioned surprise was effected in the night
before the feast of St. Andrew. The leader, some authors say, was the valiant
Sir John Gordon, but the English Historians allege it was Alexander Ramsey.
When the Earl of Northumberland summoned them to surrender, they answered with
insolence, that they would not yield it either to the King of England or
Scotland, but would retain and defend it for the King of France.

In 1384, the Scotch gained Berwick, by corrupting the Deputy Governor. The
Duke of Lancaster, then in enmity with Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland,
possessing the King's ear, improved this circumstance greatly to the Earl's
disadvantage, and he was in consequence attainted of high treason, as having
been guilty of treachery; and consequently his possessions were forfeited. The
Earl thinking his immediate presence before Berwick was of the first
consequence, with a numerous army besieged the town; but bloodshed was spared
by the secret application of 2000 marks, which regained the place. This event
operated so powerfully as to gain the King's pardon, and restitution to the
Earl of his possessions and honors. A. D. 1384 castellum de Berwik a Scottis
captum, and ab Henrico de Percy comite Northumbr. receptum. -- Lel. Col. v. 1.
p. 184.


A conspiracy and insurrection were formed in the year 1405, against King Henry
IV, in which the Earl of Northumberland, the Archbishop of York, Thomas
Mowbray, son of the then Duke of Norfolk Hereditary Earl Marsh^l, Lord
Bardolph, and others, were the leaders. The Earl of Northumberland could not
brook the indignities his Sovereign had heaped upon him; for beside the grief
he sustained in the loss of his son who fell at the battle of Shrewsbury, and
the execution of his brother, he had the mortification to see the King's third
son John, assume the office of High Constable, which the King had conferred on
the Earl for life, with the Wardenship of the East Marches; he also was
deprived of the office of Warden of the West Marches, in favor of the Earl of
Westmoreland. The King demanded the resignation of the castles of Berwick and
Jedburgh, and in contempt of the general act of grace for the remission of all
offenses, passed after the battle of Shrewsbury, sent out commissioners to
compound with the Earl's adherents, and grant them separate charters. The
Archbishop, and Earl Marshal were apprehended, before the Earl of
Northumberland could join them with his forces, and suffered execution at York.
The Earl of Northumberland held the castle of Berwick. On the King's arrival at
Pontefract, he ordered a confiscation of all the Earl's estates, and commanded
the Sheriff of Yorkshire, to summon the whole military power of his county, to
rendezvous at Newcastle. The force with which the King proceeded on this
expedition, was no less than 37,000 men, with engines and artillery for a
siege. This powerful armament alarming the Earl, with his grandson, the son of
Henry Hotspur, and Bardolph, he retired privily from Berwick, and took refuge
in Scotland. Sir William Greystock was left to command the fortress. King Henry
on his march summoned the castle of Warkworth to surrender, but it was not
yielded to him, till after a siege of eight days, when the garrison capitulated
on the honorable terms of departing with their horses and accoutrements. He
made the like summons to the garrison of the castle of Alnwick, to which he
received for answer, Hard. p. 203.
"That win Berwick, ones, he should have his intent." The army advanced to
Berwick, and made the usual preparations for a regular siege, whilst the
Governor on his part pursued the necessary maneuvers, for a vigorous defense,
in hopes of receiving succor from Scotland, which had been promised him by the
Earl on his departure. The royal army had some pieces of ordnance, engines of
destruction which had never before appeared against the fortifications of
Berwick; and which Speed, by the authority of Walsingham, says, were on this
occasion, for the first time, employed in Britain. A shot of an enormous size,
discharged from a cannon of large bore, The first construction of Cannon, was
by iron bars bound together with hoops.
shattered one of the principal towers, which threw the garrison into such
consternation, that they immediately surrendered. The Governor, Sir Henry
Bolton, and Blenkinsop suffered instant decapitation; and the remaining part of
the garrison were committed close prisoners. A. D. 1505 comes de Northumb. and
D. Bardolf fugerunt de Berwick in Scotiam. Rex obsessit castrum de Berwicke and
expugnavit and multos in eo captos decollavit.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 314.
On the royal army's returning, Alnwick Castle was surrendered by Henry Percy
of Athol and William Clifford, who had the command, on the same terms of
capitulation as had been granted to the garrison of Warkworth.

On the demise of King Henry V. in France, and the accession of his infant son,
the Scots, in the year 1422, invaded England. The Governor of Scotland with one
army invested Berwick, whilst Earl Douglas with another laid siege to Roxburgh;
but neither of these attempts were attended with success.

In Leland's Collectanea Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 499.
are the following notes: Edward Earl of March, because King Henry had broken
convenauntes, was made King at Westminster Anno D. 1459.

And strayte King Edward rode northward, and at Towton, not far from York, on
Palms Sunday advengid his fathers death, and wan the feld, where were slain xxM
people on both parties. The Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Clifford, Sir John
Nevil, the Earl of West merlandes brother, and Andrew Trollop were killid at
this time.

King Henry, the Prince, the Queen, the Duke of Somerset, Henry Duke of
Excestre, the Lord Roos, Sir John Fortescue Chief Judge of England, and
Tailbois Earl of Kyme, being at York, and hering of this, fled first to
Newcastelle, and then to Berwike, delyvering it to the Scotts.

Upon a rupture with Scotland in the year 1480, the English in the winter laid
siege to Berwick, by sea and land, with a great force. Part of the
fortifications were then new, the same having been constructed by King James
III. of Scotland, after the surrender above mentioned, who had expended a large
sum in strengthening and rebuilding the walls of the town, repairing the
castle, and furnishing it with a complete arrangement of artillery. The
assailants flattered themselves, from the newness of the works, they should be
able to beat them down without much difficulty, and easily win the place; but
although considerable breaches were effected, the garrison made so brave a
defense, that after spending a great part of the winter in carrying on the
siege, the English were obliged to raise it, and retire with disgrace.

King Edward IV. in the year 1482, about the beginning of July marshalled his
army at Alnwick, amounting to 22,000 men, the van of which was led by Henry
Earl of Northumberland. So great a force appearing unexpectedly on the banks of
Tweed opposite to Berwick, the town made no resistance, and was immediately
seized by the English. Lord Hales, who commanded the castle, having answered
that he was determined not to surrender it, 4000 men under the command of Lord
Stanley, Sir John Elrington, and Sir William Parr, were left to besiege it,
whilst the main army marched into Scotland. Stowe, p. 432.
The great confusion which shortly after took place in the Scottish state, it
is said, was Lord Hales's sole motive for surrendering the castle on the 24th
day of the succeeding August, he having no hope of succors. On the succeeding
truce Berwick was given up to England, and the Scots engaged never again to
attempt by any art the reduction of it. Since which time it has constantly
remained in the possession of the Crown of England.

In the reigns of King Richard III. and King James III. of Scotland,
Commissioners were appointed by the two Crowns, to set the limits of Berwick;
on which occasion the disputed ground was agreed to remain uncultivated,
unbuilt, and uninhabited.

In the treaty and convention entered into by King Henry VII. and James IV.
King of Scotland, A. D. 1502, it was stipulated, that the town and castle of
Berwick, with their ancient bounds and the inhabitants thereof, should for ever
remain and be included in the present perpetual peace, friendship, league, and
confederacy: so that neither the King of Scotland, his heirs and successors,
nor any of them, should by themselves, or any of their subjects, lieges, or
vassals, make or suffer to be made war, insult, ambush, or siege, publicly or
privately, against the places themselves or their inhabitants; nor the King of
England, his heirs, successors, or any of them, should by themselves or the
inhabitants of the town and castle, make any war insult or siege on the King of
Scotland or his vassals.

In the month of January, A. D. 1502, James IV. King of Scotland, espoused
Margaret eldest daughter of King Henry VII. In Leland's Collectanea is a
record, styled The Fyancelles of Margaret eldest daughter of King Henry VII. to
James King of Scotland: Together with her departure from England, journey into
Scotland, her reception and marriaged there, and the great feasts held on that
account. Written by John Young, Somerset Herald, who attended the Princess on
her journey. As the ceremonies attending her journey through Northumberland
give us a striking representation of the magnificence of those times, they are
worthy attention.

The XXIIIIth day of the said monneth (June) the Qwene departed from Durham,
accompanyd by her noble company, as she had been in the days past, in fair
manner and good order, for to com to the town of New Castle. Three mylle fore
thens came to her the Prior of Tynemouth, well appointed, and in his company xxx
horsys. His folks in his liveray. And there was in lyk wys Sir Rawff Harbotelle
Knight, richly appointed, well mounted, and his folks in his liveray to the
nombre of XL horsys.

At the intrynge of the said town of New Castle, the Queen appointed her, and
intred in noble astat. Ich Lord and others tuke new horsys rychly appointed, in
special the Earl of Northumberland, as in the manner of the entering of York,
and his folks in like wys.

Upon the bryge came in processyon rychly revested the College of the said
town, and with them the Freres Carmelets and Jacobius with the croseys, the
which war gyffen to the said Qwene to kiss, as before, by the Archbyschop.

After them was the Mayr of the said town, acompayned of the Scheryffes and
Aldermen, well appointed, on foot. The which receyved the said Qwene honorably:
and after the receyvynge the said Mayr monted on horseback, beryng his mass
before her.

At the bryge end, upon the gatt, war many children, revsted of surpeliz,
syngyng mellodiously hympnes, and playing on instruments of many sorts.

Within the said town, by order, the bourges and habitants war honnestly
appointed. The streytts were hanged, and the wyndow loupps, topps, and schipps
was so full of people, gentylmen and gentylwomen, in so great nombre, that it
was a playsur for to se. But they maid non sound of artyllery and ordinance.

In such statt and fair array, was the said Qwene brought and conveyed to the
Freres Austyns, where she was lodged, and honestly receyved by those revested
with the cross, in the manner as it is rehearsed before. And when she was
brought to her lodgyng every men drew him to his awn.

The next day after, being the XXVth day of the said monneth, Saunt Jamys day,
she abode all the day in the said town, and was at the church mass very nobly
acompayned.

That fam day, at even, the Earl of Northumbrelaund made to many Lords,
Knights, and others, a goodeley baunket, which lasted to mydnyght, for cause of
the games, daunces, sports, and songs, with force of ypocras, succres, and
other metts of many delicyouses manners.

To the said New Castle came the Lord Dacre of the North, acompayned of many
gentylmen, honestly appointed, and his folks arayd in his liveray.

The XXVIth day of the said monneth the said Queen departed from the said
place, after the custom precedent, varey richly and in fair array. And the said
Mayr conveyed her out of the said town, and after tuke lyve of her.

Haff a mylle out of the said town was Sir Humfrey Lysle and the Prior of
Bryngburn, well appointed and well horst, to the nombre of XX horsys. Their
folks arayd of their liveray. And a mylle from the said town was in order the
Scheryffe of Northumberlaund, Sir Rawff Evers, in company of many other
gentylmen, varey well appointed, their folks clothed in their liveray, well
monted. And with them were many honests folks of the country, with spers and
bows, in jackets, to the nombre of two hondreth horsys.

With the sam fair company, was the said Qwene conveyed to Morpath, and by the
town passed in fair order, where there was much people; and so she went to the
abbay, where sche was well receyved by the Abbot and Religyous revested, at the
gatt of the church, with the cross. And after the receyvyng she was conveyed to
her lodgyngs in the said place for that sam night.

The xxvijth day of the said monneth, the Qwene departed from Morpath, after
the custom before, to goo to Alnewyk, a place of the Earl of Northumbelaund.
And in half of the way came before her, Master Henry Gray, Esquier, well
appointed. In his company many other gentilmen, and his folks well monted and
arayd in his liveray, to the nombre of a hundredth horsys.

Two mylle from the said place, the said Earl came and met her, well
acompanyed, and brought her thorough his park, where she kylde a buk with her
bow. After which she was conveyde to the said castle, where sche and her
company was welcomed by the said Lord, the which maid her varey good chere.

The next day, the xxviiith day of the said monneth, she was all the holl day
in the said castle, and by the Lord well cheryst and her company.

The xxixth day of the said monneth the said Qwene departed from Alnewyk, for
to go for Barrwyk, and at half of the way, named Belleford, she bayted. For Sir
Thomas Darcy, Capittayne of the said Barrwicke, had maid rady her dynner at the
said place very well and honnestly.

For that the said Master Henry Grays abouffe named is Sheryffe of Ellaund
Shyre and Northumberland Shyre, he bore his rod before the said Qwene, sens the
entering of the said Lordships to Barrwyk.

Betwyx Alnewyk and Barrwyk came to the Qwene Master Rawff Wodryngton, having
in his company many gentlemen well appointed. His folks arayd in liveray, well
horsed, to the number of an hundredth horsys.

At the coming ny to Barrwyk was shot ordonnounce, the wiche was fair for to
here. And ny to the said place, the Qwene dressed her. And ichon in fair array,
went the on after the other in fair order.

At the entering of the bryge was the said captain well appointed, and in his
company his gentylmen and men of arms who receyved the said Qwene into the
said place.

At the the other end of the bryge toward the gatt, was the Master Marshall
compayned of his company, ichon bearing a staff in his haund.

After him was the college revested with the cross, the wiche was gyffen her
for to kiss by the Archbischop as before.

At the gatt of the said town was the Master Porter, with the guard and soyars
of the said place, in a row well appointed. Ichon of those had an hallebarde or
other staff in his haund, as the others. And upon the said gatt war the
mynstraylls of the said Capitayn, playnge of their instruments.

In the midds of the said town was the Maistre Chamberlayn, and the Mayre,
acompayned of the bourges and habitaunts of the said place, in fair order, and
well appointed.

In such fair order and company she was conveyed and brought to the castle,
where she was receyved by the Lady D'Arcy honnestly accompayned.

The XXX and XXXIth days of the said monneth, the Qwene tarried at Barrwyk,
where she had great chere of the said Cappitayne of Barrwyk, and her company in
likewys. That sam day was by the said Capyiteyne, to the pleasur of the said
Qwene, gyffen corses of chasse within the said town, with other sports of bayrs
and of dogs togeder.

The first day of August the Qwene departed from Barwick for to go to Lamberton
kerke in varrey fair company, and well appointed.

First, of the said Archbyschops and Bischops, the Earls of Surrey and of
Northumberlaund, the Lord Dacres, the Lord Scroop and his son, the Lord Gray,
the Lord Latemer, the Lord Chamberlain, Master Polle, and other Nobles and
Knyghts. The young gentylmen were well appointed at their devises, and there was
fou much of cloth of gold, as of other rich rayments. Their horsys frysks in
harnays of the self: and upon those orfavery, sum others had campaynes gylt,
the others campaynes of Sylver. Gambads at plasur, that it was fair thing for
to se.

The said Earl of Northumberlaund was varey well mounted, his horse rychly
appointed, his harnays of gold in brodeux, himself in a jakette betten of
gold, well wrought in goldsmith work, and brodery, and in a cloak of porple
borded of cloth of gold. His Hensmen appointed as before mentioned.
Incontinently before him rode the Master of his Horse, conveying the sam three
Hensmen arrayed in jaketts all of orfavery and brodery, and there harnays of
their horsys in such wys of orfavery and brodery, full of small bells that maid
a grett noise. After those came a gentylman ledyng in his haund a corser, covered
to the grownde of a vary rych trapure betten of gold of orfavery and brodery in
oraunge. And ichon of the sam a grentre in the manner of a pyne, and maid the
said Lord pannades, and they weigited varey honestly.

After came the said Qwene varey rychly arayde and enorned with gold and
precious stones, setting in her lytere rychly appointed. Her foteman always ny
to her well appointed, and monted upon fair pallefrys, and their harnays rich
in appareyll.

After came her char rychly appointed, fournysched of ladies and gentylwomen well
appointed, and after that, sum other gentylwomen on horsebak honorably appointed.

The said Cappitayne of Barrwyk, and my lady his wyffe acompayned of many
gentylmen and gentylwomen rychly arayd, and clothed of a liveray, went with the
said Qwene to Edinburghe.

Before the said Qwene war by order Johannes and his company, and Henry
Glascebery and his company, the trompetts, officers of arms, and sergeants of
mass, so that at the departing out of the said Barrwyk and at her Bedward at
Lambertonkerke it was a joy for to see and here.

In such stat and array the said Qwene came out of Barrwyk, ichon by order, the
Lords and Nobles three and three togeder, to the said Lambertonkerke, and the
company behind well appointed and in fair array, that it was estimed that there
war of the part of the said Qwene xviii C or two M horsys well appointed.

On the 10th day of October A. D. 1525, a treaty was concluded at Berwick,
between the Commissioners of King Henry VIII. and King James V. for a
three-years peace; and in the year 1528, the truce was renewed, and the peace
continued for five years.

In the year 1547, King Henry VIII. being dead, leaving his son Edward VI. an
infant of ten years of age, the Earl of Hertford, then created Duke of
Somerset, in the month of August, advanced to Berwick with an army of 18,000
men, attended by a fleet of 34 ships of war, 30 transports and a galley, on an
expedition to Scotland. See an account of the devastations made on this
expedition, p. 37.
The army lay encamped without the walls of the town.

In the year 1550, great repairs were made in the fortress of Berwick, the
expense of which, with the repairs of Calais, are alleged in the King's
Journals as the reason for debasing the coin; from thence it also appears, some
of the walls had fallen, the foundations having been shaken by working a
bulwark. Also in the year 1552, it appears considerable improvements had been
made to the fortifications, in which, by the minutes of Secretary Cecil, Hayne,
p. 127.
6000l. had been expended. The fort then erected was contrived to have four
bulwarks, for erecting which the wall was to have been left open, on the
enemy's side, for a considerable space; but as this was dangerous and
expensive, it was resolved the wall should be strengthened by an additional
wall, and two slaughter-houses, to scour the outer cu^^ains, and a great ditch
intervening, that an other wall fortified in the same manner should be erected
within the former. Sir Nicholas Sturley appears to have been nominated Captain
of this new fort, Alexander Brett, Porter, and one Rokesby, Marshal. No
vestiges of these works now appearing, it is to be presumed they were rased,
when Queen Elizabeth put the fortifications upon a regular and modern plan.

In the reigns of King Edward VI. and Queen Mary of Scotland, Berwick by treaty
was made a county town, and as Rymer's Faedra notes it, "a free town
independent of both states."

In the year 1558, Lord Wharton in his reports to the Lord President of the
North, says, the ordinary officers of the town appointed by letters patent,
were, a Captain, a Marshal, a Treasurer, a Chamberlain, a Porter, and a Master
of the Ordnance: These with the Mayor for the year, were counselors for the
town, each having a yearly salary, and pay for attendants.

In the year 1566, Queen Mary of Scotland came into the neighborhood to view
Berwick; she was met at the extreme of the liberties by the Deputy Governor and
his train, who conducted her first to Hallidon Hill, and thence to the west of
the town, where she had a perfect view of the place, and was saluted by a
general discharge of the ordnance.

In 1588, King James VI. of Scotland did the like, and received the same salute.

Queen Elizabeth having fortified Berwick, made the following military
establishment there, in the year 1576, as appears by the archieves of the
borough.

The garrison consisted of eight companies of musketeers, two of them
containing 100, and the rest 65 men each; the pay of the private men 8d. per
day, Captains of larger companies 4s. of lesser companies 2s. 80 horsemen under
command of eight constables: the horsemen had 4d. per day added to their former
pay of 6l. 13s. 4d. per annum. The gunners were augmented, on account of the
great additional number of large ordnance, from 28 to 60, with a Master Gunner,
a Mate, and four Quarter Masters: the whole establishment for the artillery
amounting to about 860l.

L s. d. The Lord Governor his Salary 133 6 8 A Chaplain 13 6 8 A Secretary 13
6 8 40 Household Servants at 6 13 4 each Especial money per annum 40 0 0 And a
reward in consideration of his Barony The Marshal, his Salary 33 6 8 An under
Marshal 16 0 0 20 Horsemen each 6 13 4 Two Tipstaffs each 5 6 8 An increase of
pay given by her Majesty 66 13 4 The Treasurer, his Salary 20 0 0 Two Clerks
each 13 6 8 20 Horsemen each 6 13 4 An increase of pay 80 0 0 Gentleman Porter,
his Salary 20 0 0 Six Horsemen each 6 13 4 14 Footmen each 5 6 8 An increase of
pay 50 0 0 Chamberlain, his Salary 20 0 0 12 Soldiers, 4 at 6 13 4 Eight each 6
0 0 Master of the Ordnance per day 0 5 0 One Clerk per day 0 1 0 Two Servants 0
0 6 Two Laborers 0 0 6

Lord Hunsdon was Governor of Berwick at the time of this establishment; his
council was composed of Sir Robert Constable, Knight, High Marshal; Robert
Bows, Esquire Treasurer; John Selbie, Esquire Chief Porter; Sir Francis Russel,
Knight, Chamberlain; and Thomas Sutton, Esquire Master of the Ordnance. The Mayor
had an appointment of 10l. per ann. the Customer 10l. and the Comptroller of
the Customs 5l.

The Master of the Ordnance had under his charge more than 20 artificers
employed for service of the garrison: among these was one Bowyer, one Fletcheur
or arrow-maker, and one Master Wheeler.

The whole number of men on this establishment, was 980, and their pay amounted
to the yearly sum of 12734l. 19s. 2d.

In the year 1603, on the demise of Queen Elizabeth, King James VI. of
Scotland, was proclaimed March 26th, at this place, King of England, France,
and Ireland, by the name of King James I. In the archieves of Berwick, is kept
a copy of the letter wrote by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, dated on the
above day, informing the King, they had, with present expedition, and with what
solemnity the leisure of time would afford, published and proclaimed his sacred
Majesty King of England, France, and Ireland; and entreats him to pardon such
defects as by ignorance, omission, or otherwise, by the straitness of time, had
happened in the performance thereof. To which the King returned the following
answer.

To our trusty friends, the Mayor and Aldermen of the town of Berwick.

Trusty friends, we greet you heartily well. We render you thanks for your so
dutyfull affection, utterit in assisting and concurring sae willingly with your
Governor, in putting the town of Berwick in our hands, which we have appointit
to be governed in the same form and manner as heretofore, while we advise
otherwise to dispose upon the same; assuring you always to find us a gracious
and loving Prince, wha sal be careful to maintain your wonted liberties and
privileges, and to see that the same be nae ways braugillit, nor otherways
prejudget. Sua we commit you to God. From Hallirude house this 27th day of
March 1603.

On the King's arrival at the boundary of the liberties of Berwick, he was
received with every demonstration of duty and welcome, by Sir John Carey, then
Marshal, accompanied by the officers of the garrison: their several corpse of
horse and foot were marshalled in due order, and on the King's passing saluted
him with a feu de joy, which was returned by a discharge of the artillery on
the ramparts. The roads were lined with people, who on all sides joined in the
loudest acclamations.

When his Majesty entered the gate, the keys of the town were delivered to him,
by William Selby, Gentleman Porter; who was immediately knighted, and the keys
were returned. In the marketplace, he was met by the body corporate of the
borough; Hugh Gregson, the Mayor, presented him with an offering of gold, and
surrender of their charter; after which the Recorder made a speech of
congratulation: these the King received most graciously, at the same time
restoring the charter, and promising his royal favor and protection. The King
proceeded to the church to return thanks for his peaceful entry into his new
dominions, when Toby Mathews, Bishop of Durham, preached an excellent sermon.
From thence his Majesty went to the castle, the ordnance were again discharged,
and the streets re-echoed with acclamations of joy. On the following day the
King received several of the English Nobles, among whom were Lord Cobham, and
Henry Howard, brother of the Duke of Norfolk, who came to Berwick to pay their
duty to their new Sovereign: his Majesty inspected the fortifications,
magazines, and port, and at the head of the garrison drawn out and under arms,
with his own hands, discharged a piece of ordnance.

Berwick became the ducal title of James Fitz James, natural son of King James
II. of England, whom he created Duke of Berwick, A. D. 1686.

Berwick is a borough of very great antiquity, being as before asserted one of
the four original Scotch burghs; The town arms, a dog passant by a tree, in
fesse point, two escutcheons with the arms of England and France quarterly,
tied together by an arch; in chief a King sitting on an arch,' with a scepter
in the right hand, and a mound in his left. -- Brown Willis.
the corporation was prescriptive, but after this place became the settled
possession of the English Crown, the corporate body was established by charter;
and at present consists of a Mayor, Recorder, and four Bailiffs, chosen
annually by the burgesses. This borough was summoned to send two members to
parliament in the reign of King Henry VIII. the election of representatives is
by the burgesses, the Mayor and Bailiffs making the return. Representatives in
Parliament for the Town of Berwick.

Brown Willis says, that the burgesses were summoned to send representatives to
parliament, in the latter end of the reign of King Edward IV. From the 17th of
King Edward IV. to the First of King Edward VI. the returns are all lost,
except an imperfect bundle of the 33d of King Edward VIII.

16 Jan. 1542 King Henry VIII. 33 P. at Westminster. 8 Nov. 1547 King Edward VI. 1 P.
at Westminster. 1 March 1552 7 P. at Westminster. Queen Mary. 5 Oct. 1553 No return 1 P. at
Westminster. 2 April 1554 George Brown, Odwell Selby, Gentlemen 1 P. at Oxford
Philip and Mary. 12 Nov. 1554 No return 1 and 2 P. at Westminster. 21 Oct. 1555 John
Bredforth, Charles Wharton 2 and 3 P. at Westminster. 20 Jan. 1557 No return 4 and 5
P. at Westminster. Queen Elizabeth. 23 Jan. 1558 No return 1 P. at Westminster. 23 Jan.
1562 Anthony Temple, Thomas Norton 5 P. at Westminster. 11 Jan. 1571 Valentine
Brown, Knight, Henry Cave, Esquire 13 P. at Westminster. 8 May 1572 Martin Garnet,
Gentleman, Robert Newdigate, Esquire 14 P. at Westminster. 23 Nov. 1585 William Moreton,
Thomas Parkinson, Aldermen 27 P. at Westminster. 29 Oct. 1586 Valentine Brown,
Knight, Thomas Parkinson, Alderman 28 P. at Westminster. 4 Feb. 1588 William Moorton,
Mayor, William Selby, Esquire 31 P. at Westminster. 19 Nov. 1592 William Moorton, Mayor,
William Selby, Esquire 35 P. at Westminster. 24 Oct. 1597 William Selby, Thomas Parkinson
39 P. at Westminster. 7 Oct. 1601 William Selby, Senior, Esquire David Waterhouse, Esquire 43
P. at Westminster. King James I. 19 March 1603 William Selby, Knight, Chapter Parkinson,
Recorder 1 P. at Westminster. 5 April 1614 William Selby, Knight 12 P. at Westminster. 30
Jan. 1620 Joh. Selby, Knight, Robson Jackson, Knight 18 P. at Westminster. 19 Feb.
1623 Rob. Jackson, Knight, Edward Lively, Gentleman 21 P. at Westminster. King
Charles I. 21 Jan. 1625 John Selby, Knight, Rob. Jackson, Knight 1 P. at Westminster.
6 Feb. 1625 Rob. Jackson, Knight, Richard Lowther, Esquire 1 P. at Westminster. 16 March
1628 Edward Lawyer, Knight, Edward Lively, Gentleman 3 P. at Westminster. 13 April
1640 Thomas Widdrington, Knight, Hugh Potter, Esquire 15 P. at Westminster. 3 Nov. 1640
Thomas Widdrington, Knight, Robert Scawin, Esquire 16. P. at Westminster. Oliver Cromwell
Convened an assembly called the Little Parliament, but no representatives for
Cities or Boroughs, London excepted, were summoned to it. 5 July 1654 Geo.
Fenwick of Brenkburn, County of Northumberland P. at Westminster. 3 Sept. 1656
Colonel George Fenwick, Ob. 15 March (1656) P. at Westminster. Richard Cromwell. 27
Jan. 1658 John Rushworth of Lincolns Inn, Esquire P. at Westminster. George Payler, Esquire
one of the Commissioners of the Navy The Convention Parliament. 25 April 1660
Sir Thomas Widdrington, John Rushworth P. at Westminster. King Charles II. 8 May 1661
Sir Ralph Gray, Sir Thomas Widdrington 13 P. at Westminster. 6 March 1678 John
Rushworth, Sir Ralph Gray 31 P. at Westminster. 21 March 16 John Rushworth, Sir Ralph
Gray P. at Oxford King James II. 19 May 1685 Philip Bickerstaff, Ralph
Widdrington 1 P. at Westminster. The Convention Parliament. 22 Jan. 1688 Francis
Blake, Esquire Philip Babington, Esquire P. at Westminster. King William and Queen Mary. 20
March 1689 Samuel Ogle, Samuel Ogle of South Dissington, County of
Northumberland, Esquire Commissioner of the Revenue in Ireland. Coll. Per. v. 3. p.
350.
and Francis Blake, Esqrs. P. at Westminster. King William III. 22 Nov. 1695 Ralph
Gray, Samuel Ogle, Esquire 7 P. at Westminster. March 9, 1696, The right of election is
stated in the report to be in the freemen. 3 Dec. School Sir Francis Blake,
Samuel Ogle, Esquire 10 P. at Westminster. 10 Feb. 1700 Jonathan Hutchinson, Samuel Ogle,
Esqrs. 12 P. at Westminster. 30 Dec. 1701 Samuel Ogle, Jonathan Hutchinson,* Esqrs.
13 P. at Westminster. Queen Anne. 20 Oct. 1702 Jonathan Hutchinson, Samuel Ogle,
Esqrs. 1 P. at Westminster. 25 Oct. 1705 Jonathan Hutchinson, Samuel Ogle, Esqrs. 4
P. at Westminster. 8 July 1708 Jonathan Hutchinson, Samuel Ogle, Esqrs. 7 P. at
Westminster. 25 Nov. 1710 William Kerre, Esquire Brother of John the First Duke of
Roxburgh.
Richard Hampden, Esquire Hampden in the County of Bucks.
9 P. at Westminster. 12 Nov. 1713 William Orde, Esquire Of Fenham, County of
Northumberland.
Richard Hampden, Esquire 12 P. at Westminster. King George I. 17 March 1714 Gray
Neville, Esquire Neville one of the Commissioners for stating the debts due to the
army.
John Shute, Esquire Shute Barrington, created Viscount Barrington in Ireland,
during this Parliament, July 11, 1720, and expelled the house 1723.
1 P. at Westminster. 10 May 1722 John Lord Viscount Barrington, Gray Neville, Esquire 7
at P. Westminster. Gray Neville, died 24th April, 1723, a new writ 29 April. William
Kerre, Esquire in the room of Gray, and Henry Neville Gray, Esquire in the room of
Barrington expelled. King George II. 28 Nov. 1727 Joseph Sabine, Esquire A
Lieutenant General of his Majesty's forces, Governor of Berwick and Holy
Island, and Colonel of the royal regiment of Welsh Fuzilcers. On his death Hugh
Lord Polwarth succeeded to his seat in Parliament.
and George Liddel, Esquire 1 P. at Westminster. 13 June 1738 George Liddel, Esquire Ob. Oct.
9, 1740.
Hugh Lord Polwarth Hugh Lord Polwarth, on the death of his father in 1740,
succeeded to the title of Earl of Marchmont.
P. at Westminster. Thomas Watson, Esquire succeeded to Lord Polwarth's seat, and William
Wildman, Barrington Shute, Viscount and Baron Barrington, to Mr Liddel's, by
virtue of a writ tested March 6, 1740. 25 Jan. 1741 Lord Viscount Barrington,
Made one of the Lords of the Admiralty, and a new writ being issued 20
February, 1746, he was re-elected.
Thomas Watson, Esquire P. at Westminster. 13 May 1747 Thomas Watson, Esquire John Delaval,
Esquire P. at Westminster. No. of Burgesses polled 23 April, 1754 476 Watson 374 Delaval
307 John Wilkes, Esquire 192
King George III. 5 May 1761 Thomas Watson, Ob. 6 January, 1766, Viscount
Lisburne succeeded to his seat.
Esquire Sir John Hussy Delaval, Bart. 1 P. at Westminster. 12 May 1768 Sir John Hussy
Delaval, Bart. Robert Paris Tailor, Esquire Elected on Wednesday 19th October, 1774
8 P. at Westminster. Jacob Wilkinson, Esquire Hon. John Vaughan, Esquire P. at Westminster.
Candidates No. polled Jacob Wilkinson 452 Hon. Vaughan 388 Alexander Campbell,
Esquire 147





The charter granted to the corporation by King James I. soon after his
accession to the Crown of England, gives to the Mayor, Recorder, and Bailiffs
many special liberties and privileges; or I may say more properly, confirms to
them the several ancient prescriptive franchises and privileges, which Berwick
from very distant ages had possessed: among which is the power of holding a
Court of Pleas every fortnight -- the right of having four Sergeants at Mace
and a Coroner -- a Guild with its privileges at large -- authority to make
Bylaws for the government of the town -- to purchase lands of the value of
60l. per annum, notwithstanding the statute of mortmain. The burgesses are
privileged with exemption of toll throughout the kingdom, and of prisage or
imposts of wine brought into the port of Berwick; of pontage, Pontage -- A
contribution toward the maintenance or re-edifying of a bridge. West. 2. Cap.
25. 13 Edward I. Or a toll collected from passengers on bridges for the above
purpose. 1 Henry VIII. 29 Elizabeth.
passage, murage, Murage -- Is a toll or tribute to be levied for the building
or repairing of public walls. It is due either by grant or prescription. Co.
Inst. 2. It is also construed to be a liberty granted to a town by the Crown,
for collecting money toward walling the same. 3 Edward I.
pannage, Pannage -- The feeding swine on the mast of beech, acorns, etc. in
the royal forests.
cranage, Cranage -- The liberty of using a crane on the wharfs of an haven or
port.
lastage, Lastage -- Has various constructions; a right to carry goods in a
fair; the ballasting of ships; custom for goods sold by the last.
carncage, Carncage -- A taxation of lands computed by the earnca or oxgang.
kayage, Kayage -- A customary toll for wharfage of merchandise.
vinage, Vinage -- Duty on wine.
achate and rechate. Achate and Rechate -- Buying and selling provisions, etc.
etc.
The corporation has power to tax the inhabitants for the chamber's use, and
has seck and sock, toll and theme, ward and ward penny. The Mayor is Clerk of
the Markets for the time being, and holds two weekly markets on Wednesday and
Saturday, having a pye-powder court, tolls, tallages, picage or stall-money,
fines, amerciaments, etc. The jurisdiction of Berwick comprehends a court leet,
and view of frankpledge, and anciently possessed the powers of infangtheof and
outfangtheof; and with aid of the Coroner, who in this liberty retains the
ancient authority of that office, and executes the duty of Sheriff, the body
corporate has power of assize and gaol delivery.

The Mayor and Corporation hold the seigniory borough and soke of Berwick, with
all rights and privileges legally appertaining to such possessions, under the
yearly rent of 20l. paid to the Receiver of the Crown. The boundaries are from
the port, extending northward by the sea shore to the road called Brown Rod,
and by that road westward to the rivulet of Witteter, and by the said road to
the river Tweed, and by the river's banks to the port or haven.

The site of the ancient castle and its outworks remains in the Crown, being
specially reserved in the grants made to the corporation. Several tenements are
in the same reservation, a water mill, the inner castle hills enclosed, the
outer castle hills unenclosed, New Water Haugh, Lumsden's Avery, Gayn's Law,
Goak Haugh, the Sunk, Maudlin Field, Coney Garths, Marshal Meadow, Horsman's
Bat, Horsman's Meadow, Yellow Gowland Meadow, fishings in Tweed from Finches
Haugh, and lands called Broadshaugh, Borrey Avery, and Ethermouth Avery. Wallis.


By the rolls of King Edward the Second's reign, it appears that a house of
Carmelites, or White Friars, was founded at Berwick, by Sir John Gray, about
the year 1270, whose duty it was to officiate at the chapel royal within the
castle. Sir John Gray founded here, A. D. 1270, a house of White Friars. Vide
Rot. Pat. 11 Edward II. p. 1. m. 14. Quod fratres Carmelitae deserviant in
capella regia in castro de Berwic et habeant consuetum stipendium. -- Tanner's
Not.

South Berwick. David King of Scotland (who died A. D. 1153) is said to have
founded in or near this place a Benedictine Nunnery. Tanner's Not. Jun. 6,
1291. Religiosa Mulier Domina Agnes de Berinham Prorissa de Berewico, took the
oath of allegiance to King Edward I. in the chapel of the castle of Berwick.
Pryn. v. 3. p. 508. Rym. tom. 2. p. 568. Aug. 20. 24 Edward I. 1296. Anneys
Prioresse de South Berewyk and le Covent swore fealty to King Edward I. Pryn.
v. 3. p. 655.




According to the custom of the times, a religious house was founded at Berwick
Bridge, dedicated to the Holy Trinity. Leland's Itin.

Leland says that there was an order here Ordinis S. Trinitatis, but Anthony
Be Bishop of Duresme destroyed it, and then one William Wakefield, master of
the house in Berwik, at the defacing it came to Newcastle, and, by the aid of
William and Lawrence Acton, brethren there, builded an house of that religion,
which was afterward called the Walk Noll. Quere, Bishop Beck died A. D. 1311.
and claus. 2 Edward III. m. 16. is pro ministro et fratribus S. Trinitatis
pontis Berwici. -- Tanner's Not.


Those praying fathers were placed in such situations, to take possession of
the moment of the traveller's gratitude, for his easy and safe passage over
great rivers.

By Rymer's Convent. it appears that there was also a house of Gray Friars
here. These were called Gray Friars, Friars Minors, or Franciscans, so named
from their patron St. Francis, born at Spoletum in Italy, (ob. 1226) and
canonized by Pope Gregory IX. It was one of the convents of the custody of
Newcastle. King Edward III. 13th year of his reign, confirmed to it an
allowance of 20 marks yearly, settled on the Friars of this convent by the
Kings of Scotland. This gift is declared to be bestowed as a free charity, and
a pure alms for the support of these poor Friars. Stephens Mon. p. 25. of the
appendix.

Randal's Manuscripts.
The Master and Brethren of God's house are mentioned in Claus. 2 Edward III.
m. 16. and had a grant of 20 marks per ann. out of Wetherborn, by pat. 21
Edward III. m. 21. and pat. 22 Edward III. p. 2. m. Rex protegit Willielmo de
Emeldon statum quem habet in Hospitali Domus Dei de Berwico. In Cl. Rimeri
Conventionum, etc. tom. 5. p. 104. Maerdatum R. Edward III. anno regni 13 de
solvendo guardiano et fratribus de ordine Minorum de villa de Berewice
commorantibus viginti marcas per ann. de firma dictae villae de ^l^^mosina
regnum Scotiae ab antiquo constituta.

Tanner.


Tanner says, here was a house of Friars Preachers before the year 1291. These
were called Preaching Friars, Black Friars, Jacobine Friars, or Dominicans, so
named from St. Dominick their founder, born in Spain. They first came over into
England about 1221. R. Mon. p. 396.

Aug 4, 1291, Henry Abb of Abirbrothok, and Sir David de Forthorand, Knt. in
the decayed (deserted Ecclesia) church of the Friars Preachers, took the oath
of fealty to King Edward I. Pryn, v. 3. p. 512.


He also speaks of an Hospital dedicated to Mary Magdalen, with an appendant
Hermitage at Sogden. Friar Will. Mestre de la Meson de S. Austyn de Seggeden,
took the oath of fealty to King Edward I. Aug. 20, 1296. Pryn, v. 3. p. 660.

In the escheat rolls of Northumb. 41 Edward III. 1367, there is mention of the
Hermitage of Segden, and of an inquiry concerning the lands belonging to it. In
the pat. 16 King Henry VI. 1437, the hospital of St. Mary Magdalen is called a
free chapel, and Segeden an hermitage, and these are said to be united.

Nicholas Newton custos of the free chapel of St. Mary Magdalen near Berwic,
and of the hermitage of Segden annexed to it. Pat. 16 King Henry 6. -- Randal's
Manuscripts.


A field between Berwick walls and the sea, mentioned in the reservations to
the Crown, bears the name of Maudlin Field to this day, from its being the
ancient site of the Hospital. Rot. Pat. 29 Edward I. -- In Rymer, v. 3. p.
786, such an hospital is mentioned as near this town.

In Sancroft's Manuscripts Valor. under Kepyer, near Durham, there is said to
have been an hospital near Berwick dependent on Kepyer, to which it paid an
annual rent of 20s.

Tanner's Not. Jon. de Cerve was custos of this hospital 13 King Edward II. A.
D. 1319.

Rym. v. 3. p. 786.


There is a free Grammar School appertaining to this town, founded by Queen
Elizabeth, the Master nominated by the Guild. The attention paid to this part
of the charge vested in the body corporate, cannot appear in more favorable
language, than contained in the advertisement given in the note. Published in
the Newcastle newspaper, Oct. 20, 1750.

The public Grammar School of Berwick upon Tweed, being vacant by the
resignation of the late master, the Guild has determined to fill the
employment, by the most deserving man they can find to undertake the charge.

Notice is hereby given, that the said employment will be disposed of on
Thursday the 27th of December next, at Berwick, where the candidates are
desired at that day, to make their personal appearance.

The corporation being duly sensible of the high importance of the charge, and
how much the principles of the society may be corrupted, their morals
debauched, and the public peace disturbed, by the jacobitism, bigotry, loose
morals, imprudence, or ill temper of the person that is entrusted with their
children, at an age susceptible of every impression, desire that whoever is
willing to offer themselves as candidates for such employment, may, on or
before the 27th of November, send certificates sealed up and enclosed, to the
Town Clerk of Berwick, under the hands of gentlemen of probity and knowledge,
of their zeal for liberty and the present constitution, their sobriety,
moderation, good conduct and temper, as the corporation is resolved to commit
that care to the person who shall appear best qualified: and therefore after
the attention to their characters in these respects, gentlemen of undoubted
honor will be employed to examine into the learning of the persons best
recommended.

The master has a commodious dwelling house and garden; the salary for teaching
freemen's children is 60l. per annum, and 10s. a quarter for teaching every
unfreeman's child; out of which the master is to provide himself with an usher,
at a yearly salary not less than 20l. who is to be approved by the Guild.




The chief imports of the port of Berwick are from Norway and the Baltic,
consisting of timber and deals: the exports, corn, wool, salmon, and eggs; the
latter of which articles, though apparently small or insignificant in the list,
yet brings in an annual sum of 13 or 14,000l. they being sent to London for the
use of sugar refiners, etc. packed in boxes the thick end down.

The salmon fishery here is very considerable. Mr Pennant speaks of it in the
following terms: They lay on each side the river, and are all private property,
except what belongs to the Dean and Chapter of Durham, which in rent and tithe
of fish, brings in 450l. per annum: for all the other fisheries are liable to
tithe. The common rents of these are 50l. a year, for which tenants have as
much shore, as serves to launch out and draw their nets on shore; the limits of
each are staked, and I observed that the fishers never failed going as near as
possible to their neighbor's limits. One man goes off in a small flat-bottomed
boat, square at one end; and taking as large a circuit as his net admits,
brings it on shore at the extremity of his boundary, where others assist in
landing it. The best fishery is on the south side; very fine salmon trout are
often taken here, which come up from the sea to spawn, and return in the same
manner as the salmon do. For a fuller account of this fishery, vide British
Zoology III. 241. To it may also be added, that in the middle of the river, not
a mile west of the town, is a large stone, on which a man is placed, to observe
what is called the Reck of the salmon coming up.

Historians have differed greatly in the etymology of the name of Berwick.
Camden seems to determine in favor of the Saxon (...), the town of the
Bernicians.

After having mentioned the evidences of antiquity, it is requisite, before I
quit the subject, I should speak of Berwick in its natural state. Being built
on an angular point of land, at the mouth of Tweed, on two sides it is bounded
by water: the sea in this part of the channel is tempestuous and rough, the
tide setting in very strong, occasions a heavy surge, which increased by
frequent storms, renders the coast tremendous. The prospect of the ocean
conveys to the contemplative mind, a grand association of images, which
describe the might and majesty of the Creator. As I walked the banks,
imagination roved at large, but took a melancholy strain; I conceived I heard
the alarm guns fired at Bambrough Castle, and the signal of distress waved in
my Fancy's eye, from some vessel at a distance. The ocean, which before had
affected my soul with a scene of magnificent delight, now seemed full of horror
and dismay; the rolling billows became tremendous, the yawning gulf an object
of gloomy terror, the whole conveyed the apprehension of imminent peril and
distress; and in the end, all the agonies of a distracted crew, who labored
for life, filled my imagination, and the wanderings of Fancy were replete with
dismay and misery.

The inhabitants of Berwick have enough of such horrid scenes: the coast is
terrible to mariners. After having once been witness to so melancholy an event,
one would scarce ever look upon the sea again with pleasure.

The Land Prospect does not produce a scene wild enough to be called romantic,
or sufficiently cultivated, to be smooth, placid, and agreeable. The banks of
Tweed loss much of their sweetness in the environs of the town; and Flora
reserves most of her beauties for the neighborhood of Kelso and Coldstream.
Below Berwick bridge, there is not enough either of trade or tranquillity; it
possesses the middle station; neither busy enough nor enough at rest, is
dullness. Above bridge, in the fishing season, the scene is beautifully
enlivened. Below, some few vessels are moored, but too often the heavy hulks
are turned up on the dry sands, with masts unrigged, waiting for trade and
tide. Such are dull objects to the eye, and have no other effect upon the
spectator than to promote weariness and impatiency.

Over the arm of the sea which breaks upon the bar of Tweed, the lands to the
southward are extended for several miles upon the view, varied with the happy
colorings which succeed to cultivation; but the distance is so great, that
objects are indistinct, and the beauties of the landscape lay in confusion: two
often indeed the whole is enveloped in sea vapor.

I cannot take my departure from the banks of Tweed, without passing some few
thoughts on the carnage and bloodshed, which for ages rendered them famous to
the arms of both the Scotch and English; and to posterity made their history a
subject of horror and detestation.

Alberic Bishop of Ostia, being sent as Legate from Pope Innocent II. on his
visitation at Carlisle, is said to have taken great pains to remonstrate to the
army of King David of Scotland, after the retreat from the battle of Alerton,
that they ought to wage war with greater humanity; and prevailed with them so
far as to gain the release of the female captives, whom they were carrying as
slaves into Scotland. He also obtained their solemn engagement, that in future
inroads they would not violate the churches and religious houses; and would
also spare from the sword, women, infants, and the aged. These show to us what
were the infamous enormities committed in these expeditions.

The war carried on between the two nations, was as brutal as any in the annals
of the Caribbees, or any savages under the sun. The public injuries of states,
the policy of empires, the balance of trade, the peace of Europe, or the
equilibrium of power, were not the objects of warfare: like the wild Arabs, the
estate of the people was that of robbers, rapine and plunder their objects; as
if devoid of all religious sense of oaths and moral obligations, the compacts
of states, and the ties of honor and moral honesty, they often forsook every
principle for plunder, and like barbarians, levied war for the sake of
pillaging, of reprisal, and retribution. When the wolves descend the Alps upon
the villages, it is the effect of hunger in its extreme; but here the blood of
the peasant was shed without any cogency of cause, but the lucre of his herds,
flocks, and possessions. The immortal King John burnt, laid waste, and
destroyed half the island, from York northward: Alexander in all his glory
never exhibited a more noble conflagration. Edward contaminated his honors
with many of those achievements. Torrents of blood have issued from these
borders; they were the common charnel of the two nations. Thirty-three thousand
souls fled in one day to the gates of eternity, dispatched by the command of
Princes, who could not account to heaven what it was they fought for. The petit
massacres were equally as inconsiderate; the heroes of those bands walked forth
with their adherents, imbruing their hands in human gore, burning and
destroying, laying waste towers, towns and villages, and spreading desolation,
in the most savage manner, for the reward of savages: reciprocal slaughters,
devastations, and cruelties marked both people. When the most valiant
achievements were performed, even in the presence of their Princes, revenge
appeared to be the only instigation, and common justice was seldom considered.
What was the battle of Allerton, in the reign of Stephen, when David with a
mighty slaughter was overthrown, after having ravaged Northumberland and
Durham, returning like a disappointed miscreant, with his hands red in the
blood of thousands of his band of robbers! William King of Scotland was a
prisoner on one of his incursions: he witnessed a cruel slaughter of his
people. Our Edward I. slew 60,000 at Falkirk; Edward III. slew his tens of
thousands at Hally-down Hill; and Penrith and Durham witnessed to the
succeeding destruction made of the Scots in this reign under their unfortunate
David, who in the battle at the last-mentioned place was made prisoner. The
battles of Otterburn and Flodden Field were upon the same principles as the
others. -- How does this retrospection fully the hero, stain the luster of his
arms, and the honor of his valor! yet it is too true such were the conflicts
on the borders, and such the arms that waged the inglorious warfare on this
once wretched, but now most happy country; at this time abounding with wealth,
flowing from peace, by the channels of cultivation, manufactory, and trade:
where the brethren of one climate and one island, under the blessed protection
of one common father, and a constitution admired and envied by all the world,
are acting together in a state of mutual offices, to contribute to the general
opulence and felicity.

How baneful and obnoxious is he to the common interests of this now united
family, who attempts to sow the seeds of dissatisfaction and jealousy, and
through calumnies arising in the venom of malevolence and disappointed ambition
endeavors to cultivate contempt and aversion between the brethren of this
land! The strength of this, and every nation, is the union of its inhabitants
-- he who blows up the embers of extinguished feuds, is particularly an enemy
to both parties, and a foe to the state at large.

The accession of King James the VI. to the Crown of England, operated
powerfully toward the felicity of this part of the island; cultivation
immediately took place, the country so often desolated by war, received new
inhabitants, who brought with them not only flocks and herds, but also
manufactories and commerce: the works effected in peace were soon
distinguished, the barren wastes were put under the plough share, towns and
hamlets diversified the scene, and increasing population enlivened every
valley, which for ages had been marked by works of hostility. Yet it was not
till the union of the two kingdoms, that these effects of peace were brought to
the happy eminence now discovered on every hand. As to political advantages, it
is evident, their discussion comes not within my plan in this work; I am
persuaded of their vast importance to both nations: Mrs Macauley says, on very
sound principles of policy, the union had been several times rejected by both
nations; and which was with great difficulty coerced on the Scots: though as
Burnet observes, the advantages which were offered to Scotland, in the whole
frame of it, were great and visible. The Scots were to bear less than the
fortieth part of the public taxes, and they were to have the eleventh part of
the legislature. Trade was to be free all over the island, and to the
plantations; private rights were to be preserved; and the judicature and laws
of Scotland were still to be continued. Lord Marchmont having been pointed at
by Historians as being one of those corrupt partisans, who effected the union
from sinister views, the following authentic letter in the author's custody,
among many state papers found in the cabinet of the late Lord Wharton, will be
thought worthy a place here: To which some historical notes, etc. are added.

From the Earl of Marchmont to Lord Wharton.
Nov. 29, 1706. Edinburgh. MY LORD,
I had the honor of your Lordship's letter of the 31st July last, by the Lord
Ross, who did me the kindness to call at my house, on his way to Edinburgh, and
gave me the satisfactory account of your Lordship's hearty inclinations to the
union, and of your prudent diligence to advance it in the treaty: such as I
would have expected from your understanding and parts.

I have been long wishing an opportunity to assist in that design; being
convinced that an union of the kingdoms is the only solid way to secure the
religion and liberty, The Duke of Hamilton's speech was spirited: What! shall
we in one day give up what our forefathers maintained with their lives and
fortunes for many ages? Are here none of the descendants of those worthy
patriots, who defended the liberty of their country against all invaders: who
assisted the great King Robert Bruce to restore the constitution, and revenge
the falsehood of England and usurpation of Pa^^ol? Where are the Douglasses and
Campbe^ls? Where are the Peers, where are the Barons once the bulwark of the
nation? Shall we yield up the sovereignty and independency of our country, when
we are commanded by those we represent to preserve the same, and assured of
their assistance to support us.
to increase the power and significancy of this island, and to establish the
peace of it.

I would have written to your Lordship sooner, but delayed till I might observe
the motions of our parliament. I had discovered some time ago, that in all
corners of the country, endeavors were used to possess the people with fears
about it, and great prejudices against it, as if it would bring slavery upon
them, destroy the little trade they have, and make them miserable beyond a
possibility of remedy; The processors were the Duke of Athol, Earl Marshal,
Marquis of Annandale, Lord Belhaven, Earl of Buchan, Lockhart of Carnwarth, Sir
Walter Stuart, the Earl of Errol, and some of inferior rank.

Those who promoted the union were headed by the Dukes of Queensberry and
Argyle, the Earls of Montrose, Seafield, and Stair.

Smollet says, they found means, partly by their promises and partly by
corruption, to bring over the Earls of Ro^burgh and Marchment, with the whole
squadron who had hitherto been unpropitious to the Court.

From this letter the reader must entertain a more favorable idea of its
author.


but especially that it would overturn the church government established here,
which the people are so addicted to, that they can suffer as much for it, as I
think they would for Christianity itself.

Some had influenced the most part of our preachers, to whom the people have
great regard, that it is scarcely possible to persuade them to a true notion of
the union, or to any good thoughts of it, though there has been much pains
taken by others to do it.

When the parliament met, it was easy to find out who had been the somenters of
the fears and doubts causing the aversion; and it is evident enough the
opposers in parliament have been the authors of very bad impressions upon the
clergy and lower people, Mr Fleming's Voyage to Scotland, printed with Hook's
Negotiation, says, The same evening I arrived at Lord Nai^ns, in the county of
Perth, who expressed great zeal for the service of the K --; and as I had a
letter of the Earl of Errol for him, that he might inform me of the most proper
measures to see his brother the Marquis of Athol, he undertook to conduct me to
him. We found that Lord in such a temper as we could wish; for five months
before he had all his vassals ready to take arms upon the first news o^ the K
-- 's arrival.

In this collection we have the two following letters.

From the Earl of Errol, Lord High Constable of Scotland.
Stains, 27th May, 1707. May it please your M --,
The satisfaction which I feel on receiving your M -- 's orders, answers to my
zeal and hopes, of being one day (...) in your service. I have left nothing
undone to restore your M -- y to the throne of your ancestors; and though our
design of doing it by the parliament, has not had the success your faithful
subjects wished for, yet the arrival of Colonel Hook, and his diligence in the
execution of his orders, have been so useful, that I hope in consequence
thereof, to have the happiness of seeing your M -- y in this country; an
happiness after which we have so long sighed, to be delivered from oppression.
Most of your M -- 's friends having left Edinburgh before the arrival of
Colonel Hook, all that we could do was to act in concert, in signing the
memorial: and as the memorial is not so ample as some of us could have wished,
we have desired the Colonel to supply what is wanting therein, by representing
several things, concerning which we have instructed him. He will also inform
your M --, how much this nation is generally well affected to your service, and
with how much pleasure we shall venture our lives and fortunes for so just a
cause. No one will concur more heartily than I, who constantly pray for your M
-- 's prosperity. I am,

May it please your M -- y, Your M -- 's most faithful subject, and most
obedient, most humble servant, (Signed) ERROL.


Extract of the letter from the Countess of Errol to the Queen of England, May
29th, 1707.
All the delays which we have suffered have not diminished our zeal, though
they have prolonged our miseries and misfortunes.

Colonel Hook has been so well received among us, that he is able to give an
exact account of his negotiations, which will not displease your M --.

I confess, that after having waited for him for a long while, our servour
began to diminish, in proportion to our hopes; but his prudence and good
conduct joined to his indefatigable diligence, has revived our ardor; and he
has put our affairs into so good order, that we hope they will come to an happy
issue. The present opportunity is looked upon by all as the best that has ever
offered, and the last that will offer for a long time.

All ranks of people earnestly demand their K --, and the Scots will certainly
return universally and unanimously to their duty toward their lawful S --.

Though the relations of Mr Murray are very considerable, and able to do much
for your M -- 's service, yet he has not thought proper to promote it in the
country, on account of the situation he is in with respect to the government:
beside, Colonel Hooke's activity has been such, that he has not stood in need
of assistance. However Mr Murray has always been ready to do every thing in his
power, and has followed exactly the advice of the Colonel, etc. etc



yet I am of opinion, that the fancies they have taken up will soon vanish, and
will not be the hinderance of concluding a treaty.

Upon the 4th current the house came to a question, Approve the first article
of the treaty or not? -- With this provision, that if other articles be not
adjusted by the parliament, the agreeing to the first should be of no effect.

The voters present were 199, of which 116 were approvers, 83 were opposers; of
these 66 entered their dissent and protested -- 17 would not join in the
dissent, because they differed from the approvers, only in that they were not
for putting a question upon the first article, till votes should pass on the
4th, 5th, and some other following articles: and I think, the most part of, if
not all the 17, are for an entire union, if the terms please them.

Several very understanding and well affected members find difficulties in some
of the articles, whereof they apprehend some to be insuperable, unless they
meet with a remedy from the wisdom of England.

Many of the more judicious members are little moved by the cross humor raised
among the people, by the pains of ill-designing men, while it is founded only
upon speculation, for they think that will vanish. But if the mulitude of the
lower people, shall at the beginning feel a sensible prejudice by the execution
of any article, then the danger may prove greater among a hot stubborn vulgar,
than can well be foreseen.

I cannot yet condescend upon particulars, which I will do when I am able to
explain them more distinctly: this I can say in the general, that I am only
apprehensive of such things as may universally affect the common people, before
they can have much relish of the advantages which certainly will in course be
the product and fruit of an union.

In the beginning of this session, those who in the last were called the new
party, made up of the Peers and Gentlemen who were laid aside from public
employment and the council in the year 1705, and others their friends upon whom
they have influence, who have still stuck together, above 24 in number, were
suspected that they would go cross to the Ministers: but God be thanked they
have not done so, for which they merit esteem and thanks from all who wish well
to her Majesty and her kingdoms. They have carried themselves and concurred as
persons of honor and understanding, for promoting the common good, without any
appearance of resentment toward those now employed. Whereas if they had joined
with the opposers of the union, the promoters of it here were not able to carry
it through.

As for the protesters, I am confident, the far greater part, if not all of
them, are designing to make way for the ST GERMAINS YOUTH, and to divide these
kingdoms. Voltaire speaking of the Tories attempting to replace the Stuart
family on the throne of England, is thus noted by his translator Smollet: We
can affirm, on the very best authority, that the Tories never harbored any
such design: there might indeed be some Jacobites among them, who secretly
entertained notions of that kind, but these they carefully concealed from the
party with which they associated. Some too were driven into Jacobitism by hard
usage; but the Tories in general had no intention to alter that succession
which they themselves had established.
They well discern that an union extinguishes all hopes of that sort; and
therefore they will certainly embrace any means that can prevent an union. But
as the friends to it cannot miss to out-vote the other, if insuperable
difficulties of the kind I have mentioned be not found in some of the articles;
or if found, be removed or redressed by the prudent assistance of your
Lordship, and such as you in your parliament; I doubt not the treaty will be
brought to a happy conclusion, which I heartily wish, and wherein I shall
labor to be as much assistant here as can be in the power of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient and most humble servant, (Signed)
MARCHMONT.
Turn over.

If your Lordship n^eds to write to me, the gentleman who delivers this, has a
way to have it brought with certainty to me.

My shaking hand serves me not to write, therefore I make use in this of my son
Sir Andrew's.




23 November. MY LORD,
The difficulties and warm debates which happened in the house, led me to delay
the sending my letter, till I could give you this further account.

The 2d, 3d, and 4th articles of the treaty are approved, with the like
provision as the first is; but the carrying of these votes was with a great
deal of wrangle and contest: even as much upon the 4th (wherein we expected
little resistance) as upon any of the former; whereby it is easy to discern the
design of the opposers. Yet our greater difficulty is to keep many by whom we
must carry our votes, from being misled by the designing opposers, with the
subtle pretenses they make; so plausible, as are of danger to prevail upon the
less understanding sort of well-meaning persons.

The 5th article is this day approved, with this alteration. The Diet is
changed from the time of signing the treaty for the union, to the time of
ratifying the treaty.

"I know not how your parliament may like this, but I am hopeful that an affair
of so manifold advantages to this island, as an entire union may prove, will
not stop upon differences of lesser moment.

What I foresee of this sort, brings to my remembrance a very old treaty
betwixt Reheboam and the tribes of Israel; and of the wise advice which the old
Counselors gave him. This similitude halts, as commonly all do; yet I believe
your Lordship will find something in it that may be of use.

I shall add no more now, but that I am

Your Lordship's humble servant, (Signed) M. E.





Whether the security pretended to be obtained by England by this union was
worth purchasing at so high a price: whether the union has answered the
expectations of those who prophefied that it would be the means of extending
the bounds of the British empire, and of enlarging the happiness of its
citizens, by cementing in the closest bands of friendship two nations who had
ever regarded each other with the eyes of jealousy and aversion, will be
differently determined by men, who, from their different connections in both or
either countries, have contracted different prejudices; but whether, as the
series of these times predicted, it will be attended with consequences no less
fatal than the destruction of the laws and constitution of England, the space
of a very few years will, in all probability, determine beyond a doubt.

We passed by the sands to

HOLY ISLAND;
the morning was calm, the sea smooth, and the land prospect gilded with the
sun; very beautiful, though not much variegated.

The description given of this island (Symeon, p. 87) is to the following
purport: That in circumference it comprehends eight miles, in which was a noble
Monastery, famous for its Prelates, (among whom was St. Cuthbert) whose bodies
were there deposited, and whose memory would live for ever. It has the name of
Lindisfarn, from a small rivulet called Lindis, which from the opposite
continent empties itself into the sea." In Mr Grose's works we find these
particulars relative to this Island.

Bid calls it a Semi Island, being as he justly observes, twice an island and
twice continent in one day; for at the flowing of the tide it is encompassed by
water, and at the ebb there is an almost dry passage, both for horses and
carriages to and from the main land; from which if measured in a straight line
it is distant about two miles eastward; but on account of some quick sands
passengers are obliged to make so many detours, that the length of the way is
nearly doubled, the water over these flats at spring tides is only seven feet.

This island was by the Britons called Inis Medicante; also Lindisfarn from the
small rivulet of Lindi which here runs into the sea, and the Celtic word Fahren
or recess; also on account of its being the habitation of some of the first
monks in this country, it afterward obtained its present name of Holy Island.
It measures from east to west about two miles and a quarter, and its breadth
from north to south is scarcely a mile and a half. At the north-west part there
runs out a spit of land of about a mile in length. The Monastery is situated at
the southermost extremity; and a small distance north of it stands the little
town inhabited chiefly by fishermen. This island though really part of
Northumberland belongs to Durham; and all civil disputes must be determined by
the justices of that county.


By Bid it is described, "Qui locus accedente ac recedente reumate, bis
quotidiae instar insulae maris circumluitur undis, bis, renudato littore
contiguus terrae redditur. Lindis dicitur flumen, quod in mare excurrit, duorum
pedum latitudinem habens, quando Ledon fuerit, id est, minor aestus, and videri
potest. Quando vero Malina fuerit, id est, major aestus maris, tum nequit
Lindis videri. Farne autem insula est, in qua beatissimus Cuthbertus
heremitican invitam duxit. Non tanta est Lindisfarne, sed est posita in mare,
magnis exturbata fluctibus dicbus and Noctibus. -- Lel. Col. v. 2. p. 173.


There is one small farm of cultivated land upon the island, with some few
acres of good pasture ground, capable of improvement; and the rest, by the
violence of tempests, is covered with sand. The island chiefly consists of one
continued plain, inclining to the south-west. The land on which the village
stands, rises swiftly from the shore; at the southern point, is a rock of a
conical figure, and almost perpendicular, near 60 feet in height, having on its
lofty crown a small fortress or castle, which makes at once a grotesque and
formidable appearance. I did not observe one tree upon the island.

HOLY ISLAND
depiction of Holy Island

The village consists of a few scattered houses, two of which are Inns, the
rest chiefly inhabited by fishermen. The shore is excellent for bathing, and
the situation at once healthy and romantic: it is surprising it should be so
little resorted to. The north and east coasts of the island are formed of
perpendicular rocks, the other sides sink by gradual declinations toward the
sands. The rock on which the castle stands, is accessible only by a winding
pass cut on its southern side: the narrow limits of its crown will not admit of
many works, the whole strength consisting of a single battery on the south-east
point, mounted with seven or eight guns, which commands the approach to the
island from the sea; but would be of little consequence against a ship of any
considerable force. The rest of the summit is taken up with a house for the
Governor and guard, the walls of which stand on the very brink of the
precipice. This fortress, before the use of gunpowder, from its situation
appears to have been impregnable, the superstructures being above the reach of
any engine, and the rocks too high to be scaled. The antiquity of this castle
is not known, but I should presume it is coeval with the abbey, and was used as
a place of resort in times of peril, and a stronghold for the religious,
whenever they were disturbed in their holy retreat. The present fortifications
appear to be the work of the last century. In the military establishment made
by Queen Elizabeth for Berwick in 1576, the castle is noted, and a patent for
life was granted to Sir William Read as keeper of the fortresses of Holy Island
and Farn, with a yearly payment of 362l. 17s. 6d. per annum.

The ingenious Mr Gross gives the following anecdotes relative to this castle:
-- Camden mentions it, so that it is evidently as old as his time. Probably it
has been the scene of very few remarkable events: history being nearly as
silent with respect to them, as concerning its origin. The first time it
occurs, is in the history of the civil war in the time of Charles I. when it
appears to have been seized for the Parliament; and according to Rushworth, in
an order of the House of Commons, May 7th, 1646, for sending forces thither,
this reason is assigned, "it being of such consequence to the northern parts of
the kingdom. Probably this consequence arose, more for the convenience of its
harbor, than the strength of the castle."

In the year 1647, one Captain Batton was Governor of the island, for the
Parliament; to whom Sir Marmaduke Langdale, after the taking of Berwick, wrote
the following letter, but without success. The letter, together with the
Captain's refusal, were transmitted to the House of Commons, for which they
voted their thanks to Captain Batton, and that he should be continued Governor
of the place.

Sir, you have the good opinion of the counties to be a sober discreet man
amongst them, which emboldeneth me, a stranger to you, to propose (that which
every man in his duty to God and the King ought to perform) the veil of these
horrid designs plotted by some, that men may run and read the misery and
thraldom they intend upon the whole nation. It is believed by many that know
you, that you are sensible of the imprisonment of his Majesty, and the
violation of all our laws. If you please to consider the ends being changed,
perhaps for which you first engaged, and comply with the King's interest, by
keeping the fort now in possession for the King's use; I will engage myself to
see all the arrears due to yourself and the soldiers duly paid, and to procure
his Majesty's favor for the future: and that I only may receive some
satisfaction from you, that this motion is as really accepted as intended by

Your humble servant, MARMADUKE LANGDALE.
Berwick, April 30th, 1647.

Holy Island does not appear ever to have fallen into the hands of the
Royalists; for it continued in the possession of the Parliamentarians anno.
1648; when it was (as may be seen in Rushworth) relieved with necessaries by
Colonel Fenwick's horse and some dragoons. From that time nothing memorable
seems to have been transacted here, till the rebellion in the year 1715, when
the seizure of this castle was planned and performed by two men only. In which
exploit, such policy and courage were exerted, as would have done them much
honor, had they been employed in a better cause. The following particulars of
the story were communicated by a Gentleman whose father was an eyewitness to
the facts, and well knew both the parties.

One Lancelot Errington, a man of an ancient and respectable family in
Northumberland, and of a bold and enterprizing spirit, entered into a
conspiracy for seizing this castle for the Pretender; in which it is said, he
was promised assistance not only by Mr Forster, the rebel General then in arms,
but also by the masters of several French privateers. At this time the garrison
consisted of a sergeant, a corporal, and 10 or 12 men only. In order to put
this scheme in execution, being well known in that country, he went to the
castle, and after some discourse with the sergeant, invited him and the rest of
the men, who were not immediately on duty, to partake of a treat on board of
the ship of which he was master, then lying in the harbor: this being
unsuspectingly accepted of, he so well plied his guests with brandy, that they
were soon incapable of any opposition. These men being thus secured, he made
some pretense for going on shore; and with Mark Errington his nephew, returning
again to the castle, they knocked down the sentinel, surprised and turned out
an old gunner, the corporal, and two other soldiers, being the remainder of the
garrison, and shutting the gates, hoisted the Pretender's colors as a signal
of their success, anxiously expecting the promised succors. No reinforcement
coming, but on the contrary a party of the King's troops arriving from Berwick,
they were obliged to retreat over the walls of the castle, among the rocks,
hoping to conceal themselves under the sea weeds till it was dark, and then by
swimming to the main land, to make their escape: but the tide rising, they were
obliged to swim, when the soldiers firing at Lancelot as he was climbing up a
rock, wounded him in the thigh. Thus disabled, he and his nephew were taken and
conveyed to Berwick gaol, where they continued till his wound was cured. During
this time he had dug a burrow quite under the foundations of the prison,
depositing the earth taken out in an old oven. Through this burrow he and his
nephew, with diverse other prisoners, escaped; but most of the latter were soon
after taken. The two Erringtons however had the good fortune to make their way
to the Tweedside, where they found the custom-house boat; they rowed themselves
over, and afterward turned it adrift. From thence they pursued their journey
to Bambrough Castle, near which they were concealed nine days in a peastack; a
relation who resided in the castle supplying them with provision. At length
traveling in the night by secret paths, they reached Gateshead House, near
Newcastle, where they were secreted till they procured a passage from
Sunderland to France. A reward of 500l. was now offered to any one who would
apprehend them; notwithstanding which, Lancelot was so daring as soon after to
come into England, and even to visit some of his friends in Newgate. After the
suppression of the rebellion, when every thing was quiet, he and his nephew
took the benefit of the general pardon, and returned to Newcastle, where he
died about the year 1746, as it is said, of grief at the victory of Culloden.

The remains of the old abbey in the next place require my attention; such
parts of this cathedral are standing as give a perfect idea of its original
form and appearance. The monastery is in ragged ruins, and not worthy to be
delineated, the walls having been robbed for the buildings in the village, and
the erection of the present parochial church.

It is said by some authors, that the monastery was built by St. Cuthbert of a
plain model, without ornament, and enclosed with a high wall, in order that
outward objects might not withdraw the attention of the society from their
divine contemplations.

In Mr West's Antiquities of Furness Abbey, we have this short account of the
rise and origin of Monastic Orders. Soon after the christian religion had made
some considerable progress in the east, the policy of the Roman empire exposed
the professors of it to many and great inconveniences, and a succession of
bloody persecutions: the two last under Decius and Dioclesian more especially
obliged many to betake themselves to mountains, deserts, and solitary places,
to secure themselves from the unrelenting fury of these bloody tyrants: there
they found a safe retreat, with time and liberty to give themselves up to the
exercises of piety and divine contemplation, in a course of most rigorous
mortifications, and preternatural austerities. This kind of life, which
necessity gave rise to, was afterward in the time of the Christian Emperors,
embraced through choice; and Pacomius about the middle of the 4th century,
committed to writing rules for regular societies, and founded some monasteries
in the environs of Thebes in Egypt.

The introduction of Monks into England, is spoken of as a masterpiece of
policy in the court of Rome, as endeavoring thereby to secure her authority by
an increase of property, which would arise to her by the pious donations and
offerings of the faithful, and the founding of many religious houses, to be
occupied by such as were, from the nature of their institute, attached to the
Holy See, and might occasionally serve every purpose of spiritual tyranny. And
it is alleged, that the Monks by the austerity of their religion and morals
fascinated the minds of the people, and by their pretension to extraordinary
sanctity, secured a submission to all their decisions, and an implicit
obedience to all their doctrines. This is a heavy charge, and if well grounded,
should have prevented the monastic rule from ever taking effect in any kingdom,
or occasioned its ruin as soon as the discovery was made, or the charge formed.

This he obviates, by monasteries being established here before Austin's time;
and takes for his authorities Gildas and Bid, as to their being schools of
christian learning. He adds, in all this, we hear nothing of foreign
connections, of sinister inventions, or hypocrisy.

The Roman Pontiff knew how to draw from the circumstances of William's
afrairs, advantages which the Conqueror never intended; and which his immediate
successors could not prevent, as they were equally or more obliged to the
church for her support, than he himself had been. The foreign Ecclesiastics
which the Norman King LINDISFARN N. Aspect
depiction of Lindisfarn Abbey introduced, readily gave up the liberty of a
country, to which they were strangers, and a happiness the sweets whereof they
had never known: but from that consequence, of which the Conqueror and his sons
had made them, they soon became sensible of there own importance; the foreign
Monks, from the great property conferred upon them, soon found of what weight
they were in the scale of government, and readily turned it to their own
advantages, as occasion offered.

The introduction, therefore, of so many new orders of Monks into England by
the Norman Kings, was according to their own policy, and not that of the Court
of Rome. -- He then takes occasion to mention the good offices of the church in
favor of the Conqueror's younger sons, and the Earl of Moreton and King John.

The Court of Rome could have no direct hand in all this; and the monastic
institute, of its own nature, can have no part in either a civil or a spiritual
tyranny, unless where perverted; as the best of institutes may have been, by
the malice of men. -- I have been led to lengthen the quotation beyond the
bounds I at first intended, to show with what arguments this subtle author, and
other writers of the like class, can put a plausible countenance on facts,
which reflected dishonor on the Sea of Rome. But to return from this
digression.

The cathedral is in the form of a cross, the east and west limbs of which are
yet standing, the other parts totally in ruins, and almost level with the
ground. The order of building in this structure is rude and heavy, and most of
it in the worst mode of the early Saxon architecture. Mr Gross says, probably
it was the work of different periods; great part of it seems very ancient, the
arches being circular, and the columns very massy and much like those at
Durham, but richer. On the north and south walls there are pointed arches,
which proves that part of it at least was built since the reign of Henry II.
The pillars on which the arches rise in the center of the cross are clustered
and plain capitalled, each forming the corner of the great tower; these arches
are of few members. There are two side ailes, the columns of which are heavy,
and the arches circular: the windows are narrow, and ornamented with a corner
pilaster, and a moulding of few members: the walls are very thick, and every
part wears a gloomy countenance. The south wall of the middle tower is standing
about 50 feet high; and one corner tower on the west end of the church remains
perfect. The cathedral, with the town of Fenham, and the town and church of
Norham were given by William de Carilepho, to the monastery of Durham. Monast.
Angl. Vol. 1.
These ruins retain at this day one most singular beauty, the tower has not
formed a lanthorn, as in most cathedrals; but from the angles, arches sprang,
crossing each other diagonally, to form a canopy roof. One of those arches yet
remains, unloaded with any superstructure, supported by the south-east and
north-west corner pillars, and ornamented with the dancette or zig-zag
moulding, much used in old Saxon architecture, extending a fine bow over the
chasm and heap of ruins occasioned by the falling-in of the ailes. The whole
structure is composed of a soft red freestone, which yields much to time, and
renders the aspect of the building dark and melancholy. Mr Grose's account
comprehends the following particulars:

Various fragments of the offices of this monastery are still standing, and
foundations of buildings are scattered over a close of near four acres; the
main walls of the church on the north and south sides are still standing,
though much out of the perpendicular; inclining outward so considerably, as to
make the horizontal distance between them, at the top, exceed, by near two
feet, that at the bottom. Another winter or two seems to be the utmost they can
stand.

This building consists of a body and two side ailes, into which it is divided
by a double row of very solid columns, whose shafts are richly ornamented. Each
row has five columns of four different constructions, and two pilasters in the
walls on the east and west ends. The shafts of these columns are about 12 feet
high, their diameters about five, their capitals and pedestals are plain, they
support circular arches, having over each arch two ranges of windows; the
lowest large and in pairs, separated only by a short column; the upper small
and single. The length of the building is about 138 feet, the breadth of the
body 18 feet, and that of the two side ailes about nine feet each.

The prospect from this island is beautiful; to the northward you command the
town of Berwick, over an arm of the sea about seven miles in breadth: at nearly
the same distance you view Bambrough Castle, on a bold promontory, toward the
south: on the one hand you have a view of the open sea, at the time of our
observation calm and resplendent, and scattered over with vessels; and on the
other hand a narrow channel, by which the land is insulated, about two miles in
width; the distant shore exhibits a beautiful hanging landscape of cultivated
country, graced with a multitude of cottages, villages, and woodlands.

This island became the seat of Episcopacy early in the era of conversion: the
Northumbrians received the christian doctrine much sooner than some of the
southern provinces of Britain. Oswald King of Northumberland, S. Oswaldus
successit in reg. utriusque.
Hic Aidano Episcopo sedem in Lindisfarne dedit.
Hic Eccl. S. Petri Ebor. ab Edwino rege inceptam consummavit.
Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 411. Erat namque filius Potentissimi regis Ethelfridi,
cujus Pater Ethelricus rex, cujus Pater Ida rex, a quo, ut Beda refect, regalis
Northanhymbrorum prosapia cepit originem. Nec tantum paterna sed et materna
quoque origin clarissimum ducit genealogium ex sorore, videlicet Edwini Regis
procreatus, etc. etc.

Symeon Dunel.
in the second year of his reign, and in the year of our Lord 635, Anno igitur
Dominicae incarnationis DCXXXV, qui est annus adventus Anglorum in Brittaniane
CLXXXVIII, adventus vero sancti Augustini XXXIX piissimus Rex Oswaldus, secundo
imperii sui anno, venienti ad se Aidano, sedem Episcopalem in Insula
Lindisfarnensi constituit, ubi et ipse antistes, jubente suffragante and
co-operante Rege, Monachorum, qui secum venerant, habitationem instituit, hoc
illis Rege scilicet and Episcopo procurantibus, ut et Pontificale auctoritate
fides reboraretur novella, and monachia institutione semper in posterum caperet
augmentum religionis observantia.

Ibid.
founded the Bishopric of Lindisfarn, the proper name of this island, as before
observed.

The succession of Bishops was as follows. Nomina Episcoporum Lindisfarnensium.

Aidan, Finan, Colman, Tuda, Eata, Cuthbertus, Eadberht, Aetheluuold,
Cineuulsus, Hygbaldus, Ecgbertus, Earduffus, Cuthheardus, Tilredus, Wigredus,
Vhtredus, Sexhelme, Aldredus, Alsius, Aldhumus, Eadmundus, Edredus, Egelricus,
Egelwinus, Walcherus, Wilhelmus, Ranulphus, Gaufridus.

Lel. Col. Vol. 1. p. 320.


EPISCOPUS I.
Aidan, of Scotch extraction, In Ridpath's Border History said to be a Monk of
the chief Scottish monastery of I'colm'kill; but there is no authority quoted
for this assertion.
an excellent Pastor, to whom is attributed the conversion of many of the
Saxons. The King frequently officiated as interpreter of this Prelate's
doctrines, to an audience who knew not his dialect. Regno enim potitus, gentem
fibi subditam secum mox Christo subdidit, utpote in verbo fidei pontifici
Aidano socius and co-operator existens egregius: praedicante namque in sua id
est scottorum lingua Episcopo, ille qui hanc aeque ut sum perfect noverat, Rex
utique Regis aeterni minister devotus assistere, and fidus interpes fidei
ducibus suis ac ministris ministrare solebat verba salutis.

Symeon Dunelm. p. 17. He was buried in the church of Lindisfarne, and was
esteemed so holy, that Colman, also Bishop of that See, some years afterward
retiring into Scotland in the year 664, carried part of his relics with him.
The Monks of Glastonbury falsely pretended he was buried in their abbey.

Gross.
The venerable Bede speaks thus honorably of him: Ut multa, inquit breviter,
comprehendam, quantum ab eis, qui illum novere didicimus, nichil ex omnibus
quae in Evangelicis sive Apostolicis, sive Propheticis litteris facienda
cognoverat praeter mittere, sed cuncta pro suis viribus operibus explere
curabat. According to the above author, he was a Monk of the Isle Hii,
otherwise called by him Hydestinate, whose convent was said to be founded by
Columbus. What greatly contributed to the prevalence of his doctrines, was his
exemplary life, which strictly corresponded with the rules he prescribed: Bid
Chapter His. 3d book.
he was constantly employed in preaching, to which end he traveled much, and
seldom on horseback.

Oswald, some few years after these pious works, was slain, Hujus praesulatus
anno 8. regni autem sui nono, sanctissimus and piissimus Rex Oswaldus primus in
tota Berniciorum gente signifer fidei Christianae and fundator ecclesiae
Lindisfarnensis, ex qua omnium ejusdem provinciae ecclesiarum primordia, a
Paganis, in Bello prostratus occubuit.

Sym. Dunel.
and canonized. Aidan held the Bishopric 17 years, and died, it is said,
through grief for the loss of his royal patron, A. D. 651: Peractis in
Episcopatu december and septem annis, praesul Aidanus viam patrum est ingressus,
cui mors temporalis laetum vitae alterius pendebat introitum, etc. etc.

Ibid. The holy Bishop Aidan, when he was near the close of life, having
exercised the episcopal office for 17 years, remained in a royal village not
far from the city of Bebba: for having a church and habitation there, he used
frequently to reside at that place, for his greater convenience of preaching in
the adjacent country; he never resting long in a place, having no possessions
but his church, and a small spot of ground thereabout: being sick, he erected a
hut, close to the wall, on the west side of the church. In this place he gave
up the ghost on the last day of August, in the 17th year of his episcopacy. His
body was carried to Holy Island to be interred in the churchyard of the
monastery; but shortly after, a more spacious church being erected there,
dedicated to St. Peter, his bones were removed, and with much religious
ceremony interred on the right side of the high altar.

Bede's Chapter Hist. b. 3. chapter 16.
his spirit ascended to heaven, where the future Saint, the elected Cuthbert,
who was promised to the faithful, as he tended his sheep on the hills near the
river Leder, in a holy vision, beheld him in his celestial glory; and from
thenceforth vowing a life of sanctity, entered the monastery of Mailross, under
the Abbot Eata. Hujus ad caelos felicem triumphum coelestium agminum choris
eximia cum claritate deducentibus, ille Israhelita in quo dolus non erat, in
carne non secundum carnem vivens, ille cujus a puero tota conversatio erat in
caelis, ille, inquam, conversationis angelicae juvenis egregius, sanctissimus
videlicet Cuthbertus videre promeruit: nam cum pastor futurus animarum, agens
in montibus custodiam pecorum juxta fluviam Leder, solus secretis pernoctaret
in orationibus, jamque studio and amore totus in caelum raperetur, tantae
gloriae ac beatitudinis contemplatione dignus habebatur. Qua visione dilectus
Deo adolescens incitatus ad subeundum arctioris propopositi gradum, ad
promerendam inter magnificos viros altioris praemii gloriam, mane facto, statim
commendans suis pecora quae pascebat dominis, perfectioris vitae gratia
monasterium petere decrevit. Anno enim Dominicae incarnationis DCLI, ab adventu
vero sancti Augustini in Britanniam LV, ex quo autem provincia Berniciorun
industria Regis Oswaldi fidem Christi perceperat anno XVII, quo Pontifex
Aidanus ad caelestia tranfiit, qui est annus imperii Regis Oswiu, nonus,
juvenis ille sanctissimus Christo soli famulaturus, monasterium Mailrosense
intravit, susceptus a reverendissimo Abbate Eata, suggerente ei de Cuthberto
Boisilo eximiae sanctitatis and prophetici spiritus viro, qui ipsum monasterium
secundus ab Abbate, praepositi jure, gubernabat.

Sym. Dunelm. In the paintings of one of the windows in the cathedral church at
Durham, St. Aidan is represented in his episcopal garb, with a crosier in his
hand, whilst his soul is carried to heaven in a sheet by two angels.

The effigies of this Saint were placed at the north door of the entrance into
the quire of the cathedral at Durham, underneath which was the following
inscription: Sanctus Aidanus natione Scotus, Monachus Monasterii de Hii,
Episcopus factus per Oswaldum vocatus, anno gratiae 635, fundavit sedem
Episcopalem and Monachorum congregationem in insula Lindisfarnensi, ac gentem
Berniciorum, co-operante sancto Oswaldo ad fidem Christi convertit. Hujus
Aidani animam sanctus Cuthbertus ab Angelis in Caelum deferri conspexit: ejus
caput et Ossa in hac Ecclesia Dunelmensi, ut sanctae reliquiae sunt servata.

Oswald, the second son of Ethelfrid, succeeded to both the kingdoms ( Deira
and Bernicia) a noble and virtuous Prince, whose chief study was to promote the
christian religion. To this effect he sent his Ambassadors unto Donald IV. then
reigning in Scotland, and entreated him by the old familiarity that had been
among them, to help him with some worthy and learned men that could instruct
his people in the faith of Christ. The King recommending the matter to the
Clergy, one Cormanus was elected to go thither; but his labors proving
unprofitable, he returned about the end of the year, and in a synod of the
Bishops and Clergy, informed them, that they were a people so indocile and
froward, that the pains taken upon them were lost, they neither being desirous
nor capable of instruction.

It grieved the synod exceedingly to hear this, and while they were consulting
what to do, Aidanus, a learned man and reverend preacher, is said to have
advised them not to give over the work at any hands, for that the bad success
of Cormanus's labors might possibly proceed from himself, that had not used
the people tenderly, nor according to the Apostle's rules fed them at first
with milk; and therefore desired some other approved man might be employed of
new, who would probably do good among them.

This opinion allowed by all, none was thought fitter for this service than he
who had given the advice; and so with common consent was Aidan ordained Bishop,
and appointed to that charge. Being come thither, he set himself to amend the
fault which he supposed Corman had committed, and so tempered his doctrine, as
multitudes of people daily did resort unto him to be instructed. It was great
hinderance unto him at first, that he was not skilled in the Saxon tongue,
neither did the people understand his language; but this defect the King
himself supplied, interpreting to the auditory all that Aidanus delivered in
his sermon: so by the King's zeal, and Aidanus's diligence, such numbers were
brought to the christian profession, as in the space of seven days 15,000
persons were by him baptized.

Whether this people were more happy in their King or in this Bishop, it is
difficult to say, for the King he did so excel in piety and prudence, that, as
Beda writes, all the nations and provinces within Britain were at his devotion;
and not the less his heart was never lifted up within him, but still he showed
himself courteous and affable, and of the poor most compassionate. Among
examples of his liberality toward these, the same Beda related, that sitting
at table on Easter Day, and Aidanus by him, when it was told that a number of
poor men were at the gate expecting his alms, he commanded to carry the meat
that was set before him unto them, and the platter of silver wherein it was to
be broke in pieces, and distributed among them. Aidanus beholding it, took the
King by the right hand, and kissing it, said, "Nunquam marcesca haec manus,"
never let this hand consume or wither; which, as he writes, came also to pass,
for being killed in battle, and his arm and his hand cut off, the same was
enclosed in a silver shrine, and remained for many years uncorrupted, in the
church of St. Peter, at Bambrough.

As to Aidanus, he was an ensample of abstinence, sobriety, chastity, charity,
and all other episcopal virtues; for as he taught, so he lived, was idle at no
time, nor did he admit any of his retinue to be so, but kept them in a
continual exercise, either reading scripture or learning the psalms of David by
heart. If he was invited to any feast (as rarely he went) he made no stay, but
after a little refreshment taken, got himself away. In preaching he was most
diligent, traveling through the country, for the greater part on foot, and
instructing the people wheresoever he came. In a word, he was deficient in no
duty required of a good Pastor; and having governed the church in those parts
most happily the space of 17 years, he died in the Isle of Lindisfarne, the
place he chused for his residence, where he was also buried.

After his death, which happened in the year 651, Finianus was ordained Bishop,
and sent to the Northumbers, from Scotland.

Spotswood's Hist. of the Church of Scotland, book 1. p. 14.


EPISCOPUS II.
Finan, in the year 651, succeeded Aidan in this Bishopric: he was a Scotchman,
and member of the same society with his predecessor. Succesiit autem Aidano in
Episcopatum Finan, ab eadem Gente et Monasterio unde ut predecessor ejus fuerat
misius. Sym. Dunel.
He built a church on the island, which according to the fashion which
prevailed in Scotland in those days, was constructed of beams and planks of oak
covered with reeds. Archbishop Theodore, some time after this building was
completed, dedicated it to St. Peter. Eadbert, a succeeding Bishop, improved
or rather rebuilt the church, and covered it with lead. Finan, Qui in Insula
Lindisfarnensi fecit Ecclesiam, sedi Episcopali congruam, quam tempore sequente
reverentissimus Archiepiscopus Theodorus in honor beati Petri Apostoli
dedicavit: (Petri and Pauli Lel. Col.) Sed Episcopus loci ipsius Eadbertus, de
quo in sequentibus decimus, ablata arundine, Plumbi laminis eam totam, hoc est,
et tectum, and ipsos quoque parietes ejus, cooperire curavit. Ab hoc Episcopo
filicet Finano, princeps Mediterraneorum Anglorum Peada in provincia
Northanhymbrorum baptizatus est, etc. Nec multo post Rex Orientalium Saxonum
Sigbertus, ab eodem Episcopo lavacrum salutis accipit, etc.

Fecit Eccle. quam tamen more Scottorum, non de lapide, sed de robore secto
totam composcit, atque arundine contexit, etc.

Symeon, Bid, Lel. Col.
Pope Gregory commanded Finan to remove his See to York; but the mode of
government established in the Eastern churches, was the only ecclesiastical
rule which he had adopted, and consequently the Papal supremacy was denied, and
the command unobserved. This Bishop baptized two royal converts, Penda Lel.
Collect. vol. 2. p. 140.
the Mercian King, and Segbert King of the East Angles. He ordained Bishops to
attend the initiated, who in consequence of the example of the Princes, and
from the influence of their own doctrines, converted multitudes. Finan was
Bishop ten years, and died in the year 661.

EPISCOPUS III.
He was succeeded by Colmannus, Mayo.

S. Colmannus Episc. Lindisfarnensis, abdicato Episcopatu, in Hiberniam rediit
ann. 655, ubi in Monasterio Magionensi a se constructo, Anglos (inter quos fuit
S. Geraldus) collocavit, unde locus olim dicebatur Magionia-Sasson, id est,
Magio-Saxonum. Canonici hujus Coenobii, ordinis fuit Augustiniani.

Hibern. Antiq. Jacobo Waraeo, p. 220.
who also came to this See from Scotland: Defuncto autem Finano decimo sui
Episcopatus anno, Colmannus and ipse a Scotia missus, ad Ecclesiae regimen
successie.

Sym. Dunelm.
he held it only for three years, being disgusted at the part which King Oswy
took, touching the affairs of church government, in which he coincided with the
Romish maxims. During the incumbency of Colman, a controversy concerning the
celebration of Easter, the tonsure of Priests, and some other ceremonies of the
church, which had long been agitated with great acrimony, was determined in
favor of the Roman manner, in preference to that of the Eastern churches, by
King Oswy, at a council held at Steanch Hall (now Whitby) monastery.

Gross. The mode of tonsure used by the continental churches, was to make bare
the crown, leaving the remaining hair as a resemblance of our Savior's crown
of thorns. The Scotch church shore the hair off from ear to ear. In the contest
touching the celebration of Easter, the authority derived from St. Peter to his
successors in the Sea of Rome was chiefly insisted on; and the idea of his
keeping the keys of heaven, admitted by all the disputants, determined the King
in his opinion.

Collier's Chapter Hist.
Thirty English, and all his countrymen who adhered to his tenets, left the
island when he departed, and accompanied him to Scotland. Deinde secessit ad
insulam quandam parvam, quae ad occidentalem plagam ab Hibernia procul secreta,
sermon Scottico Inishouinde ((...), ves. Ang. Sax.) i. e. insula vitulae albae
nuncupatur. In hanc ergo perveniens, construxit monast. and monachos inibi,
quos de utraque natione collectos adduxerat, collocavit. Qui cum invicem
concordare non possent, eo quod Scotti tempore aestatis, quo fruges erant
colligendae relicto monasterio, per nota sibi loca dispersi vagarentur; at vero
succedente hyeme redirent, and his, quae Angli praeparaverant, communiter uti
defiderarent.

Lel. Col. vol. 2. p. 144
He carried with him some of the remains of Aidan, as holy relics, leaving the
rest in the church of Holy Island, which afterward, it is said, were by the
order of King Edmund, whilst on his northern expedition, removed to
Glastonbury. Smith. Not ad Bed. p. 135, from a MS. of John Weshington, Prior of
Durham.


EPISCOPUS IV.
Tuda then became Bishop, being the first of this See who adhered to the modes
and principles of Rome: he was educated in the western parts of Scotland, In
Ridpath's Border History, p. 24, he is said to have received his education and
ordination in Ireland; but no authority is quoted.
and it is said came into England with Colmannus. He held the Bishopric a very
short time, being carried off by a pestilence which then raged in
Northumberland. Quo patriam reverso suscepit pro illo Pontificatum
Northanhymbrorum famulus Christi Tuda, qui apud Scottos austrinos eruditus erat
atque ordonatus Episcopus; vir quidem bonus and religiosus, sed eodem anno
superveniente pestilentia, ac provinciam Northanhymbrorum depopulante, raptus
est de Mundo.

Sym Dunelm. Tuda qui apud Scottos Austrinos eruditus erat, successit in Episc.
Lindisfarn: Colmanno, et eodem anno ex peste obiit, et sepultus est in
Monasterio de Penelegh.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 368.
Bede's remarks on the succession of Scotch Bishops ending in Tuda, are too
honorable to be omitted observation here. Their frugality, simplicity of life,
and parsimony appeared in the place of their residence, in which there was
nothing unnecessary, or unadapted to the simplest accommodation: in the church
only magnificence was permitted. Their possessions consisted chiefly in cattle,
for money was no longer retained than till a fit opportunity offered to
distribute it to the poor. Places of entertainment for Potentates and Princes
were unnecessary, for they were visited only for their doctrines and the holy
offices of the church. The King himself, when he came thither from his royal
residence, had no other object in view than to partake of the rites of
religion, and departed immediately after the service: if perchance he took
refreshment, it was of the common fare of the Monks. The attention of these
Pastors was on spiritual matters only; temporal affairs were deemed derogatory
of their holy appointment; and thence arose the high veneration which was paid
by all ranks of people to the religious habit. When any Ecclesiastic went from
his monastery, it was to preach the word of salvation, and he was every where
received with joy, as a messenger of the Divinity: on the road, the passengers
bowed the head to receive the sign of the cross and his benediction, with pious
reverence noting his precepts, as documents of the most salutary purport: the
churches were crowded with a devout audience, and when a Monk was seen entering
a village on his travels, the inhabitants flocked about him, entreating for his
admonitions and prayers. On their visitations, riches and donations were not
their pursuit; when a religious society received any augmentation of the
revenues of the house, it was through compassion by the donor, and they
accepted it as an additional store with which they were entrusted for the
benefit of the poor.

EPISCOPUS V.
Chad was his successor, by the title of Bishop of York, at the nomination of
King Alfred. He was a man of great humility, and without ambition. He received
two consecrations, one during the vacancy of the Sea of Canterbury, and the
other by Theodore, at York. At the instance of Oswy and Alfred he resigned his
Bishopric in favor of Wilfred.

EPISCOPUS VI.
Wilfred was the preceptor of King Alfred; Many anecdotes of Wilfrid take place
in the account given of Hexham and its Prelates.
he was a Northumbrian by birth, and received his education at Lindisfarn:
being recommended by Queen Eanfleda to a Nobleman called Cudda, who retired to
this monastery, he attended him thither as his companion, and continued there
from the 14th to the 18th year of his age. During this Prelate's episcopacy
there happened great revolutions and changes in the Sea of Lindisfarn; the
death of King Oswy was only a part of the calamities which fell upon
Northumberland in his time: Egfrid not only obtained the throne of the deceased
Sovereign, but by his powerful interest and efforts deposed Alfred, assuming
the second scepter, and uniting the whole in one sovereignty. Wilfred was a
proud aspiring man, and debased the pall of the Prelate with ambition. He
became obnoxious to Theodore, who determined to humble him, and in a short time
got his deposition effected. Theodore had great interest with Egfrid, which he
used on this occasion, to gratify his malice and resentment; and under that
ordinary craft of Ecclesiastics, a specious pretense for the advancement of
religion and the honor of the church, he obtained the royal mandate to divide
the kingdom of Northumberland into two dioceses, on a presumption that one
Bishop had too much power and authority. This ancient diocese then underwent a
severance, and the two parts were distinguished by the names of York and
Lindisfarn: that of York comprehending the district of Deira, and Lindisfarn
that of Bernicia. The adopted supremacy of Rome, gave opportunity for appeal,
and Wilfred, burning with resentment and disappointed ambition, fled thither,
where a chapter being readily obtained, he returned with the Pope's resolution
in form for his restoration. Big with the supreme mandate, he obtruded himself
abruptly on the royal presence; but to his great mortification, found the King
exasperated at his insolence and impudent appeal: not being the vassal of the Sea of Rome, he professed his contempt of its commands, reproached Wilfred for
having procured his credentials by bribery, and as a presumptuous offender
against the royal dignity, he cast him into prison. His lamentable situation
excited the intercession of the devout Ebba, St. Ebba, daughter of Edilfrid
King of Northumberland, was Prioress of Coldingham in Scotland. She with others
cut off their noses, that their beauty might be no bait to the lustful Danes.
aunt to the King, who obtained his liberty with an injunction, that he never
afterward should enter the kingdom of Northumberland. After his release,
Wilfred became a member of the monastery of Glastonbury, under the then Abbot
Berthwald, of the royal house of Mercians; but Egfrid's wrath and resentment
was not subsided, he continued his persecution of him even in his retreat, and
obtained his expulsion from that house. He then fled to the court of Adelwack
King of Sussex, whose subjects were just receiving the light of conversion, and
that King gave him a Bishopric called Selsey. Upon Egfrid's demise, the crown
of Northumberland devolved upon Alfred; and Theodore declining in health and
strength, as he approached the grave in the steps of old age, grew anxious to
acquit or relieve his conscience of the severities he had exercised against
Wilfred, sought to gain his friendship, and by his interest with the Crown and
earnest solicitations, obtained his restoration to the Sea of York. Wilfred had
no sooner reassumed his ecclesiastical dignity, than his ungovernable ambition
and arrogance blazed out anew: the Sea of York, at his first assumption of the
episcopal dignity, held in unity the kingdom of Northumberland; at his
restoration it was dismembered by a triple severance, by the disunition of
Lindisfarn and the new constitution of Hexham. Wilfred made injudicious
pretensions and claims to effect a reunion, which so exasperated the King, and
was a thing so inconsistent with the politics of the times, that he was again
expelled, and obliged to fly the realm. He now sought refuge in the court of
Mercia, where he won upon the ear of Etheldred, and gained from him the
Bishopric of Leicester. Adversity is said to be the school of wisdom, but it
proved not so with Wilfred; for in this new institution he conducted himself
with that insolence and impropriety, that he soon incurred the displeasure of
the Mercian King and the Archbishop of Canterbury, who brought him to trial
before a synod, and deposed him. He was now 70 years of age, and yet his powers
were so little debilitated, and his passions remained so warm, that he again
journeyed to Rome, and in spite of the character of a turbulent and contentious
Prelate, which he carried with him, obtained a decree for his restoration. He
returned a second time with the powers of Rome in his favor, and at a more
favorable season to obtain the rewards of his labor. The Archbishop found it
convenient at that time to adhere to the mandate of supremacy; the Mercian King
had fallen into a state of enthusiasm, and assumed the habit of a Monk; the
King of Northumberland was under the attacks of a dangerous disease, and
feeling compunctions for the sufferings Wilfred had undergone, became
reconciled to him. Appearances were now much in the Prelate's favor, and the
propitious hour seemed to await him, but Fate snatched off Alfred before a
restoration was effected. He obtained a council to be held upon the banks of
the river Nidd, under the mandate of King Osred, Alfred's successor, where with
great difficulty he gained the Bishopric of Hexham, a small and modern member
of his former See.

EPISCOPUS VII.
When the severance of Bernicia and Deira again took place, Eata was Bishop of
Lindisfarn: Anno ab incarnatione Domini 664, ex quo autem seeds Episcopalis in
Insula Lindisfarnensi and Monachorum habitatio a studiosissimis Christi
cultoribus Rege Oswaldo and Pontifice Aidano institutae sunt anno tricesimo.
Quo Scotti domum redeuntes ipsam ecclesiam reliquerant: Abbas Eata, ut dictum
est, cura ipsius ecclesiae sive monasterii suscepta, etc. -- Porro fratribus
qui in Lindisfarnensi Ecclesia, Scottis abeuntibus, remanere maluerunt,
praepositus est Abbatis jure, vir reverentissimus ac mansuetissimus Eata, qui
erat Abbas in monasterio quod vocatur Mailross, etc. etc.

Sym. Dunelm.
he was one of the pupils of Aidan, who lived to see him his successor in the
Abbacy of Mailross. About the year 664, The effigies of Eata were placed at the
north door of the quire of Durham cathedral, with this inscription.

St Eata Monachus and Abbas Mailrosensis and Lindisfarnensis, fecit sanctum
Cuthbertum monachum ac praepositum sive Priorem primo Mailrosensem post
Lindisfarnensem, and dato loco ab Alfrido Rege, in Ripon fundavit monasterium;
ubi sanctus Cuthbertus hospitio suscepit Angelum domini. Et Episcopus factus,
quintus in ordine rexit ecclesiam Lindisfarnensem, simul cum ecclesia de
Hexham: cujus ossa in ecclesiam de Hexham sunt canonizata.

This inscription differs greatly from Symeon's account of the succession of
our Bishops, making Eata the 5th, instead of the 7th Prelate. It corresponds
with Leland's list, in which neither Wilfred or Chad appears.


Eata left Mailross to receive the Episcopacy of Lindisfarn, which he possessed
for many years, though not entire; for during his time the Bishopric of Hexham
was instituted, and a portion of the Sea of Lindisfarn severed for the new
appropriation. Eata fell into the opposition of Theodore, and denied his
jurisdiction as Metropolitan over the northern churches. Theodore was a
powerful adversary, and held abundance of resentment when his pride was
wounded. He caused the convention of a chapter of Bishops to be held on the
Banks of Aln, A. D. 684, when Eata was deposed. Post tres autem annos
abcessionis Wilfridi, Theodorus ordinavit Tumbertum ad Hagustaldensem
ecclesiam, Eata ad Lindisfarnensis ecclesiae praesulatum, per quatuor annos
remanente. Quadrienno vero ex acto, contigit ut congregata synodo non parva sed
praesentia piissimi and deo delecti Regis Ecgfridi, juxta fluminum Alne, in
loco qui dicitur Aettiwaforda, quod significavit ad duplex vadum, cui beatae
memoriae Theodorus Archiaepiscopus presidebat, unanimo omnium consensu, ad
Episcopatum ecclesiae Lindisfarnensis beatus pater Cuthbertus eligeretur.

Sym. Dunelm.
On this event Cuthbert was elected to Lindisfarn, and Eata was translated to
Hexham; Theodore not presuming to carry his resentment to so high a pitch, as
entirely to degrade him. Eata successit Tudae in Episc. Lindisfarn: consecratus
Ebor: a Theodoro. Hic Eata 3 annis pontific: Lindisfarn and Haugustaldensem,
quem S Wilfridus A. D. 673 fundavit, rexit. Deinde electo Tumberto ad Hagustal:
ille solus praefuit Lindisfarn: sedi.

Nec multo post Eata exactis in Episcoparu Lindisfarn 14 annis, reductus est ad
sedem Hagustaldensem, and Cuthbertus fit Episcopus Lindisfarn.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 368.


EPISCOPUS VIII.
Cuthbert, from whose piety and exemplary life the church derived great honor
as well as riches, calls for particular attention. The cloister of Mailross was
honored with his initiation to a religious life, the pious Eata was his
preceptor, and induced him to become a member of the house of Lindisfarn. Abbas
Eata 664, ut dictum est, cura ipsius ecclesiae sive monasterii suscepta, beatum
Cuthbertum cum in Mailrosensi monasterio in monachiae vitae perfectione jam
quartum decimum ageret annum, illo transtulit, ut ubi quoque fratribus
custodiam disciplinae regularis, and auctoritatae prepositi intimaret and
examplo virtutis praemonstraret.

Sym. Dunelm.
A happy vision which had been revealed to Cuthbert, St. Cuthbert, as it is
generally agreed, was born of mean parents, though some make him descended from
the blood royal of Ireland; but the first seems the most probable, as he
followed the occupation of a shepherd.

Once upon a time when the saint was preaching in a certain village to a
crowded audience, the alarm was given that there was one of the cottages on
fire, this drew a number of people from the sermon to extinguish it, which was
just what satan proposed; the more water they threw on it, the more fiercely it
seemed to burn, and all efforts to put it out seemed ineffectual. The saint
missing so many of his auditors, enquired the cause, when leaving off his
preaching and repairing to the scene of action, he perceived it was all
illusion, and ordered a few drops of holy water to be sprinkled on it; on which
the devil sneaked off, and the fire disappeared.

Gross. The same author repeats some other Iudicrious tales of the like nature.


whilst he tended his flocks on the mountains, first warmed his mind with that
religious fervor which prompted him to a monastic life. He was received into
the fraternity of Mailross at an early age, possessing a graceful person, He
had such grace and skill in expression, such persuasive zeal, and such an
angelic face and countenance, that no one presumed to lock up the secrets of
his heart from him.

Bede's Eccl. Hist. Extracts from the Legend of St. Cuthbert, or the Histories
of his Churches at Lindisfarne, Cunecascestre, and Dunholm, by Robert Hegg,
1626. -- A Manuscript in the Bishop's Library at Durham.

"At which time I find, that St. Cuthbert was a shepherd, and that in the
dead of the night, he saw the soul of the said Bishop carried up with great
melody by a quire of angels into heaven; which heavenly vision so seaz'd upon
his affection, that resolving upon an holyer course of life, he thought he
could betake himself to noe better place then to the abbey of Mailrose, built by
Aidanus upon the banks of Tweed; but the devil to cross his good intent,
meets him in his journey, and after a good cudgeling, was glad to leave him;
for proof whereof, in the same place to this day (if you will borrowe an
optick-glass from superstition) you may see the printe of his cloven foot:
Neither did his valor, but also his humulitie appear, when overtaken by night
and hunger, he was forced to succor himself under an old cottage, where he
found noe other guest for entertainment, then an horse, which turning up the
hay, discovered a loaf of bread, at which the Saint right glad, said grace,
and giving the horse one half, satisfied himself with the other, and the next
day came to Mailrose, where he had no sooner entered, but Boysilus Prior of the
abbey, by a prophetical phisiognomy, as if he had read in his face his
sanctite, solemnly receives him in his arms, and presents him to Eata the
Abbat, who committed him to Boysilus for his tutor, who taught him St. John's
gospel, in that book, which in honor of the scholar, was kept in the abbey
at Durham in Prior Turgots time, on which, after so many centuries of years,
noe moth durst ever presume to feed.

"In this abbey, after he had spent in the perfection of a monastical life 15
years, he was preferred by Eata the Bishop, to the Priorie of Lindisfarne. In
this Holy Island (so christened in after ages for St. Cuthbert's sanctity)
stood that renouned monastery founded by K. Oswald, and was the mother church
and nurcery of religion among the Bernicians under Aidanus, from whom the
episcopal race of the Prelates of the church of Durham reckon their succession.

"In this island fourteen Bishops successively ascended the episcopal seat;
among whom, as a glorious star of the first magnitude, St. Cuthbert shyned in
the firmament of this church; where after twelve years he had borne the
dignity of the Priorship, he became a votary to an anachoreticall life, and
choosed the island Farne, seated in the maine ocean, for the place of his
hermytage. This island as void of trees, water, and grain, as full of devils,
became the stage whereon St. Cuthbert acted all his miracles; for at his
arrival, the spirits that frequented this isle were put to slight, the rocks
powered out their water, and as if there had been a return of the golden age,
the earth brought forth corn without tillage, with many more wonders, if they
might be reported upon the creditt of a legend: but these are enough to show
what advantage the Monks took of the blind devotion of that age, whose study
and whole practice was to devise and relate miracles of their Saints, which (as
superstition is always credulous) were as easily believed: Thus to gain from
the Pagans a reverend opinion of christianity, they thought it but a pious
fraud to cosen the people with volumes of wonders, who whiles they defended
truth by forgeries, their impostures discovered to wiser ages, have rather
made religion suspected, then any way advanced it: but if I should proceed in
this discourse, I should leave St. Cuthbert too solitary in his cell at Farne,
where for want of other auditors, I find him in the history preaching to birds
that eat his corn, who so confuted them out of the text, with aliena non
concupisces, that they never after touched his harvest. In like manner he
reclaymed two crows from their wonted stealing and rapine, that pulled thatch
of his anchorage for to build their nests, and made them so penitent, that they
lay prostrate at his feet for absolution.

"In this isle he voluntarilye suffered nine years imprisonment from the
society of men, so wholly devoted to heaven, that he remembered not he was upon
earth, and for a whole year forgott to put off his shoes: but he could not
live so obscurely in his cell, as his same was resplendent abroad; and in a
synod at Alne upon Twysord he was in his absence chosen Bishop: This dignity
was prophesied to him long before whiles he was a child, by an infant of three
years old, who gravely reproved him, Fie Saint Cuthbert! what a Presbyter and
a Bishop, and playing among boys? as if at that time he had seen him in his
myter and crosier staff; but St. Cuthbert had so wedded his affection to a
solitary life, that neither letters nor ambassadors from the synod could
persuade or command him to take upon him the government of the church, till
King Egfrid himself, attended with both the Lords temporal and spiritual,
sailed to his hermytage, and with the same company might have besieged and
taken a city whiles they were conquering his resolution.

"The King to enlarge his diocese gave him a great part of the city of York,
and the village of Creca with three miles compass about it, as also the city
of Carliel with the circuit of fifteen miles about it: but for all this, St.
Cuthberts mind was still on his anchorage, whither shortly he betook himself
again, and in contempt of honor, edded his life in his cell. But it shall be
no part of his funeral praises thus to unman himself to contemplate himself
into a God or Silvanus, for what was this else then to excommunicate himself
from the commonweal, and to finne against the definition of a man, to whom
society is as natural, as to be a creature: and surely religion cannot be
the motive of such an unnatural act, but rather in all such anchorites a
melancholy distemper is usually mistaken for devotion.

"His last will and testament was to his Monks to bury him at the east side of
his oratory, in a coffin that venerable Cudda the Abbat gave him, which they
should find hid in the ground at the north side of his cell, and to putt his
corpse in the shirt that Verca Abbatesse of Tinmouth had sent him for a token
(which for the reverence of that holy woman he had never worn in his life
time,) and lastly, if the Pagans should invade them, and force them to fly,
that they should carry with them his bones: All these desires were performed;
only at the weeping request of the Monks, he permitted that his body should
be transported to Lindisfarne, where in St. Peter's church, at the right side
of the high altar, he was solemnly enshrined anno domini 687.

"But to return to Saint Cuthbert, who had now an eleven years lain in his
sepulcher, when the Monks thought to place his bones, by this time dry and
disrobed of flesh, among their other relics, for kisses and adoration: but
behold a wonder! They look for a skeleton, but found an entire body, with
joints flexible, and flesh so succulent, that there only wanted heat to make
his body live without a soul; nay his very funeral weeds were so fresh, as
if putrefaction had not dared to pluck him by the coat. This was rather to pay
his debt to heaven then to nature; who after he had restored his soul to God,
should keep back the payment of his body from corruption. In other men it is
true, that sleep is the image of death, but here the grave suffered a cheat,
and death was the image of sleep.

"This miracle St. Beda reports (who was an eleven years old at St. Cuthberts
death) in relating whereof he made no lie, but perhaps told one. The history of
whose life and death, he writ from the information of the Monks of
Lindisfarne, who had defloured all the miracles of Saints in holy writ, and
bestowed them upon their St. Cuthbert; who, like man in paradise, had the
beasts to do him homage, and the sea monsters to ask him blessing: Like
Abraham he entertained three angels at the monastery of Rippon: A raven
brought Elias flesh, and an eagle brought St. Cuthbert fish. As he sailed with
his mother from Ireland, his native soil, into Scotland, he let the book of
Psalms fall into the sea, which forthwith was swallowed up of a sea calfe, and
by the same fish delivered to them at their landing. Take here the psalter for
a man, and the sea calfe for a whale, and you have the history of Jonas, with
many such histories of wonder, with which the Monks delighted the superstition
of the times.

"After this illustrious miracle of St. Cuthbert's incorruption, Lindisfarne
raised itself to that height of renown, that Ceolwolphus the King, to whom
Bid dedicates his English History, resigned an earthly crown to gain a
celestial one, and took upon him the habitt of a Monk in Lindisfarne; a
welcome man you may be sure to that monastery, for whose sake, it was granted
the Monks there to drink wine or ale, who before were only to drink milk
or water, though they that drank after Saint Cuthbert in his cupp, found
sometimes water turned into wine without a miracle.

"Many kingly treasures did this devout Prince bestow upon that monastery,
with such large possessions, as he seemed rather to resign his kingdom to the
church than to his successor, and became a Monk to make St. Cuthbert a King:
for he endowed that monastery with all the land between the rivers of Tees and
Weer, and many towns and lordships, as Warkworth Castle, Billingham, Gedworth,
(where Ceolwolphus built the church,) and diverse other villages, as
Woodcestre, Hutingham, Bresgen, Edulingham, names that for ought I know, have
outlived their towns, or towns that have changed their names.

"After the manifestation of this miracle of bodily immortality after death.
Eadfrid then Bishop, caused him to be laid in a new sepulcher, and to be
advanced for state and reverence above the pavement in the sanctuary, for it
was not fit that he should have his grave among the dead, whose body lived by
sanctity when his soul was gone.

"Now they began to worship the very ground St. Cuthbert had troad upon, whose
sanctity was such, that he made every place he came in a church; and Eadfrid in
honor of St. Cuthberts presence, there built up his hermitage; where, as if a
genius of sanctity had frequented that place, Ethelwald a Monk of Rippon lived
an Hermit twelve years.

"Thus for a long time flourished the Monks of that church in great repute and
prosperity, till the Danes disturbed their peace, who now began to make
incursions upon the frontiers of this land, for many years continueing their
piracies, till they had made a final conquest, which at length yielded to the
Norman sword. Those were the times, when so many monasteries (which the
devotion of former ages had erected) had their funerals: then perished that
famous Emporium of Hartlepoole, where the religious Hieu built a nunnery, of
which I may speak as Hildebert of Rome, Quam magna fueras integra, fracta
doces; whose ruins show how great she was in her glory, but now remayns to
passengers both a monument of devotion and hostility: then were demolished the
two monasteries of St. Peter and St. Paul at Weremouth and Jarrow, built by the
reverend Abbats Celfrid and Benedict.

"The fury of the Danes still increasing, continued by the sea costs to
Tinmouth, so that it was now time for the Monks of Lindisfarne to look about
them; for they well understood by the lamentable usage of their neighboring
abbyes that the Danes would not, like the devil, be affrighted with holy
water, and saw by the bad success of other monasteries, that it was not safe
trusting to the protection of a Saint, and so concluding upon flight, putting
all their relics into St. Cuthberts coffin, they left the Pagans the spoil
of an empty church, anno Domini 893.

"It was Eardulphus his fortune to be Bishop in these troublesome times, who
with his whole Clergy and families of People, followed this sacred bier;
which, besides seven Monks, as deputed Esquires of his body, none durst
presume to touch. These miseries had been enough to have unfainted St
Cuthbert, when pursued both by foreign foes, and overtaken with an homebred
enemy, famyne, he could afford them no releife. They were now come to the first
sea, and might complain as the old Brittanes did to Actius the Consul,
Repellunt nos Barbari ad mare; repellit mare ad Barbaros; inter haec duo
oriuntur genero functum, aut jugulamur, aut mergimur. But because the
disrespective sea would not divide itself at the approach of St. Cuthbert, the
Bishop with some few of his Monks, determined privily to sail over into
Ireland with his corpse, that there he might find rest for his toumbe, where he
first had his birth. But they had not far sailed from the shore, but the
winds and the sea were both up in arms against their ship, which both Aeolus
and Neptune might have reverenced for her sacred carryage of a Bishop and his
Clergy: but the sea roared so loud, that noe prayers for St. Cuthbert could
be heard, but threatened them so near with shipwreck, as they had not that
confidence in their Saint, as to encourage the mariners as Caesar did, Ne
metues, Cuthbertum vehis! who now himself wanted some other Saint to invocate
for help, and was in danger to be drowned after he was dead. Where had then
been the church of Durham, and the devotion of Kings to his sepulchur? Where
had then been the tutelarie Deity against the Scotts, and the land of the
church called St. Cuthberts patrimony? How then should his halywarke-folk be
freed from tribute and service in war, and the Monks of Durham fed so many
years with ease and fatt revenues, if now their Saint had been entombed in
the sea, and erected his episcopal seat among the fishes? This sacrilegious
storm struck this ship with such a palsy, that it shook out the texts of
the Evangelists into the sea: This book Eadfrid Bishop of Lindisfarne had writ
out with his own hand, and Belfrid the Anchorite had curiously painted and
gilded it, in which art the Monks were admirably expert; not that I tax in
them this quality, but only, it argued the Monks were at great leisure. Thus,
whether the sea, as envying the land such a precious jewel as St. Cuthbert, or
he himself to show his dislike for Ireland, had raised this storm, it was not
long 'till in a calm they were carried to the shore from whence they set
forth: but great sorrow you must imagine was for the drowned book, 'till one
Hundredus (one of the seven that carried the coffyn) was bid in a night vision
by St. Cuthbert, to go seek it on the shore at Whitterne, where he found it
in its former beauty and splendor, which was kept in Prior Turgots time in
Durham, in memory of the miracle; when the water seemed to run out of herself
to do homage to St. Cuthbert, and would rather loose her nature then wett his
book. If this were true, then I am sure that St. Cuthberts books had twice
better fortune in the sea, then they have now in his library at Durham, which
was once a little vatican of choice manuscripts, but now rather a (...) than a
library; rather a sepulcher f^r books, than a place to conserve them: but this
is the disease of most church libraryes, since the inventing of printing, by
which, men finding a more compendious way, and a cheaper passage to superficial
learning, have bequeathed old manuscripts to the mothes and jackdawes, the
only students at this day in such libraries.

"But to return to the forenamed Monks, who had another oracle by night from
St. Cuthbert, to repair to a certain tree, whereon he should find a bridle,
at the sight whereof, a dunne horse should proffer his service (for ease of the
Monks) to draw St. Cuthberts body laid upon a wagon: but this was not to
steal an horse, because it was an horse of St. Cuthberts providing, the
conduct whereof (as if he understood more of St. Cuthberts mind than the rest)
they followed whither soever he drew him, and at length, by the providence of
the horse, they came to the monastery of Creca, where for four months they
were kindly entertained by the Abbat and his Covent, and had leisure to tell
stories of their travailes.

"From this abbey, in a revelation by night, St. Cuthbert sent Aeadred Abbat of
Luell, upon an embassage to the camp of the Danes, that they should crown
Guthredus King, whom they had sold to a widow; a thing in those days not
practiced by the Pope to dispose of kingdoms. But what authority he had to
nominate a King, or what reason they had to believe a dream, must be ranked
amongst St. Cuthberts miracles: for Guthred thus to be made a King, what was
it else then to become St. Cuthberts subject, and to oblige his royalty to
those Monks that as boldly encroacht upon so fair an advantage? For first,
they require the restoration of their episcopal seat in Cuncacestre, where
Eardulphus first ascended the pontifical chair. And it was but another dream,
for the foresaid Abbot to go to the King from St. Cuthbert, and bid him give
all the lands betwixt Weer and Tyne for ever to his church. This modest request
must be granted, or else the Monks would be ready to upbrayd him with
ingratitude. Ah poor Prince! to be thus robbed of his kingdom, and to receive
a diadem, to set it upon St. Cuthberts head! Thus was the religious King
cheated of his sovereignty by those Monks that had now got the art of
anslaving the devotion of Princes to their private ends; for at this time also,
the great Alfred swore fealty to St. Cuthbert and his Clergy, by whose help
they persuaded him, that he had got the victory over the Pagans. This made them
bold also to ask the privilege of a sanctuary for their church, to reskue
offenders 37 days at St. Cuthberts sepulcher, that neither Justice should
curb the freedom of sinning, either against heaven or the state; for noe
other use was commonly made of asylums, than, that men might offend more
securely, and disloyally appeal from the King and the Laws to the protection
of a Saint. Neither was this enough, 'till King Alfred must by his royal
charter free the inhabitants of St. Cuthberts land from tribute to the King,
which he sealed with fearful anathem's to his successors, that should infringe
the said liberties. What else was this, than for a King to be a Traitor to
his own Majesty, and deprive himself of that service, which even by the law of
nature is due from a Subject to his Prince.

"Now in what reverend esteem this Saint was to King Alfred, I gather from the
consecration of the chapel to St Cuthbert in University College in Oxford,
where he is said to be the first founder: in an ancient window whereof King
Alfred and St. Cuthbert are painted together, the King bespeaking the Saint in
a pentameter, Hic in honor tui Collegium statui; and St. Cuthbert thus
replying in an hexameter, Quod statuisti in eo, pervertentes maledico; and by
such curses, the Monks maintayn'd their lands in a better tenure than under the
Kings broad seal. The like malediction you may read in a distick in Trinity
College in Oxford, engraven in wooden letters over the screene, Terras
Cuthberti qui non spoliare verentur,
Esse queant certi, quod morte mala morientur;
which college was founded by Thomas Hatfield Bishop of Durham, anno Domini
1340.

"Thus after Eardulphus (the last Bishop of Lindisfarne, and the first of
Chester) had shared with St. Cuthbert both in his prosperity and adversity, and
had seen this new church sprung up like a phoenix out of the ashes of the
former, he ended his life in a full age, and was solemnly enterred anno Domini
894; in which year also died the victorious Alfred, who on his death bed,
bequeathed his love of St. Cuthbert, as a precious legacy to his son Edward,
chargeing him to be as well heir to his devotion to that Saint, as to his
kingdoms. King Edward also, as if it had been ex traduce to those Princes to
honor St. Cuthbert, left his son Athelsian executor of his love to that
church.

An Anthem for St. Cuthbert, exscribed out of a Manuscript of a Monk of Durham.
Splendour Christi Sacerdotis,
Et vicinis et remotis
Preeminet cum gloria.
Lux Cuthberti fulget late,
Corporis integritate,
Nec est transitoria.
Incorrupta vernat Caro,
Quam decore Rex preclaro
Celestis magnificat.
Cujus festum Celum plaudit,
Cujus Terra lauds audit,
Aspicit, et predicat.
Parvuli triennis ore
Pontificali decore
Ornandus asseritur,
Angelo docente Dei,
Celo missa salus ei,
In genu edocetur.
Pene mersos in profundo,
Prece sancta, cord mundo,
Litteri restituit.
Animam ad Celos vebi
Aidani, Viri Dei,
Cernere promeruit.
Panes nivei candoris
De supernis dedit oris
Tribus allatoribus celitus,
Quos per Angelum de Celis,
Ministrari vir fidelis,
Applaudit meditullitus.
Bellue dum de profundis,
Gradiuntur maris undis,
Illi dant obsequia.
Futuri diem sereni,
Predicit sermon leni,
Vi precludens noxia.
Lympham sibi Deus dedit,
Heremita quo resedit,
Ex humi duritia.
Regem cito moriturum,
Seque Presulem futurum
Certa dat indicia.
Quem ab arbore cadentem,
Celos vidit ascendentem
Ejus narrant premia.
Christi mysticis resectus
Sacramentis, et protectus,
Transit ad celestia.
Sunt miracula perplura,
Obsistente que Natura
Per hunc fiunt inclyta.
Hec ad laudem Dei crescunt,
Ablati nec delitescunt
Sancti Viri merita.
Integris in Urna pannis,
Quadrigentis december annis
Et octo dormierunt:
Nec putredo, nec vetustas,
Imo splendour, et venustas
Illum circum diderunt.
Caput tuum, Rex Oswalde!
(Vir dilecte Deo valde)
Hec Theca servaverat;
Et Bid sancti Doctoris,
Qui celestis est odoris,
Ossa recondiderat.
Fragrans odor Balsamorum
Hos perfundit supernorum
Qui presents aderant:
Qui in carne Dei virum
Incorruptum (dictu mirum!)
Cernere meruerant.
Odor ergo nos celestis
Comat moribus honestis;
Ut fruamur Celi festis
In Sanctorum Gloria.
AMEN."

an emphatic and clear expression, poignant wit and eloquence, and engaging
manners: with such natural advantages, it is not to be wondered that his
doctrines were persuasive, or rather irresistible. For twelve years he governed
the priory of Lindisfarn, where he lived an exemplary life for piety and
self-denial, and never ceased his exhortations to religion and virtue,
frequently taking journies into the desert and mountainous parts of the
country, to instruct and convert the most barbarous of the inhabitants. At
length conceiving that the luxury or ease of a monastic life afforded too
selfish enjoyments, to allow his spirit due attendance on contemplations and
the service of the Deity, he retired from Lindisfarn, and commenced the life of
an Anchorite, in the largest of the Farne Islands, laying opposite to
Bambrough, and within sight of Lindisfarn, being distant from thence about two
leagues. Anno incarnationis Dominicae sexcentesimo septuagesimo sexto, qui est
annus imperii Regis Ecgfridi sextus, cum vir Domini Cuthbertus in
Lindisfarnensis monasterii prioratu duodecimum and eo amplius annum
transegisset: tandem comitante praefati Abbatis sui simul and fratrum gratia,
Anachoreticae quoque contemplationis secreta silentia petiit. Sym. Dunelm.
He built a cell with a small oratory, and surrounded it with a wall, which cut
off the view of every object but heaven. Est locus insignis flu, super ostia
Tini,
Ex imio jam tunc monachorum examine pollens.
Cuthbertus fit socius monachorum.
Fit monachis socius, quos Lindisfarnea glanci
Insula clara maris refluis, circumluit undis.
Tandem Farne petit senior, cupitisque potitus
Sedibus, indigenas patria fugat impiger atros,
Illa prius nam honens larvalibus insula flabris
Arcebat humana minis consortia caecis.
Bid. Lel. Col. Ubi vero talia vir Domini promeruerat, est insula Farne, quae
hinc altissimo, inde infinito clauditur oceano, tunc aquae prorsus inops,
frugis quoque and arboris, malignorum etiam spirituura frequentia humanae
habitationi minus accommoda.

Sym. Dunelm.
He could not have chosen a place better adapted to a life of mortification and
severity than this island; the ancient description of it is horrible, seated
near a stormy coast, surrounded by rocks, over which the sea breaks incessantly
with great tumult, destitute of fresh water, without tree for shelter, or
fruit-bearing shrub, or where withal to sustain human life; and worse than all,
said to be possessed by devils. Bid says the cell of St. Cuthbert was
surrounded with a trench: perhaps the meaning is by a fence of earth.
But the happy and miraculous change which took place, on Cuthbert's taking up
his solitary residence there, is too singular to escape observation: Verum,
illo quoque virum Dei comitante miraculorum gloria, de rupe saxosa precibus
fontem elicuit, de tellure durissima segetem produxit, host antiquo cum
satellitum turba fugato, locum ipsum habitabilem fecit. Postquam enim
inhabitator sancti Spiritus suam ibidem habitationem instituit, in tantum
Spiritus nequam deinceps ipsam insulam exhorruit, ut qui eam Christo
famulaturus ingreditur, nullas ex phantasiis Daemonum inquietudines sustinere
dicatur.

Sym. Dunelm.
the flinty rock bubbled with fountains of fresh water, the once barren soil
with prolific abundance brought forth grain, Bede's account of this growing
corn, like the miracles of those days, is reconciled by the simple rules of
nature. He desired to have wheat brought him, and tools to till the ground, and
when he had prepared the land with infinite labor, and sown it in due season,
in the summer there appeared neither blade or ear: when he was again visited by
his brethren, he required of them barley for seed, and having sowed it in the
same field out of all sowing season, and without hope of fruit, there grew up
an abundant crop, etc.
trees and shrubs bearing fruit decked the smiling shores, the troubled waters
clapped their hands for joy, the plains assumed a mantle of green embroidered
with flowers, the evil spirits were bound in eternal darkness, and angels of
light communed with the Anchorite. Such are the records of the religious of
those ages. In this dreary solitude St. Cuthbert remained several years, during
which time he had a variety of combats with the devil, the print of whose feet
is, it is said, to be seen in many places. If any persons out of devotion came
to visit him, he retired to his cell, and discoursed with them only through his
window. Once indeed to oblige a Lady, the Abbess of Coldingham, he paid her a
visit at the Isle of Coquet, where going down to the sea shore, as was his
custom every night, two sea monsters presented themselves kneeling before him,
as if to demand his benediction, which having received, they returned to the
deep. Gross.
Credis huic quod dicat?

This life of severity excited the reverence and admiration of those ages of
ignorance. Whether enthusiasm alone could determine the human mind to such
undertakings, or there was a degree of pride mixed in the influenza, I cannnot
determine. The vices of those times, I presume, were not attended with such
degrees of despair as are unknown to us; the inducements must have been more
complicated than the outward countenance of piety expressed. How different the
manners of the religious of the same church in modern times. An ambitious or
hypocritical religious, who makes a profession of humility, whilst he is puffed
up with pride; a man meanly clad, and who only seeks after riches; a pretender
to devotion, who gives himself out as a servant of God, while he is no more
than a slave to his passions, is a monster both in church and state. -- Every
intriguing Monk or Friar, who thrusts himself into families, for the purpose of
prying into secrets, regulating marriages or wills, is as despicable as he is
dangerous. -- These are the liberal sentiments of the immortal Ganganelli, Pope
Clement XIV. whose works have placed the Romish church in a more amiable point
of view, than it has appeared in several past ages.

I have frequently ruminated on man's several affections, and this severity of
St. Cuthbert's restores to my memory some distant ideas. I have always
considered Friendship as comprehending the most excellent feelings of the human
heart: how a social and generous-minded man could live without the enjoyment of
friendship, and totally withdraw himself from all attachments with the world,
is to me truly a severity little to be comprehended. I presume the Saint must
have held the very argument Mr Hume Hume's Eassays. Not. Hist. of Religion,
vol. 2. p. 469.
adopts to account for the austerities of superstitious men. Nor is it
satisfactory to say, that the practice of morality is more difficult than that
of superstition; and is therefore rejected. For, not to mention the excessive
pennances of the Bachman's and Talaponis; it is certain, that the Rhamadan of
the Turks, during which the poor wretches, for many days, often in the hottest
months of the year, and in some of the hottest climates in the world, remain
without eating or drinking from the rising to the setting sun; this Rhamadan, I
say, must be more severe than the practice of any moral duty, even to the most
vicious and depraved of mankind. The four Lents of the Muscovites, and the
austeries of some Roman Catholics, appear more disagreeable than meekness and
benevolence.

Perhaps, the following account may be received as a true solution of the
difficulty. The duties which a man performs as a friend or parent, seem merely
owing to his benefactor or children; nor can he be wanting to these duties,
without breaking through all the ties of nature and morality. A strong
inclination may prompt him to the performance: a sentiment of order and moral
obligation joins its force to these natural ties: and the whole man is truly
virtuous, is drawn to his duty, without any effort or endeavor. Even with
regard to the virtues, which are more austere, and more founded on reflection,
such as public spirit, filial duty, temperance, or integrity; the moral
obligation, in our apprehension, remove all pretension to religious merit; and
the virtuous conduct is deemed no more, than what we owe to society and to
ourselves. In all this, a superstitious man finds nothing, which he has
properly performed for the sake of his Deity, or which can peculiarly recommend
him to the divine favor and protection. He considers not, that the most
genuine method of serving the Divinity, is by promoting the happiness of his
creatures. He still looks out for some more immediate service of the Supreme
Being, in order to allay those terrors, with which he is haunted. And any
practice, recommended to him, which either serves to no purpose in life, or
offers the strongest violence to his natural inclinations; that practice he
will the more readily embrace, on account of those very circumstances, which
should make him absolutely reject it. It seems the more purely religious,
because it proceeds from no mixture of any other motive or consideration. And
if, for its sake, he sacrifices much of his ease and quiet, his claim of merit
appears still to rise upon him, in proportion to the zeal and devotion which he
discovers. In restoring a loan, or paying a debt, his Divinity is in no wise
beholden to him; because these acts of justice are what he was bound to
perform, and what many would have performed, were there no God in the universe.
But if he fast a a day, or give himself a sound whipping; this has a direct
reference, in his opinion, to the service of God. No other motive could engage
him to such austerities. By these distinguished marks of devotion, he has now
acquired the divine favor; and may expect, in recompense, protection and
safety in this world, and eternal happiness in the next.

But I will quit this review, to return to the more interesting features of
Friendship.

If we compare Friendship to the other affections of man, we see Love has a
powerful influence on the human heart; but its bounds are confined, and its
conclusions selfish; it has but one object to possess: its attachments are
rigorous indeed, but full of prejudice; and its whole influence centers in an
Egoity, wherein generosity and honor lose much of their luster.

Gratitude is an excellent operation of the soul; our obligations are therein
duly estimated: it is a confession of our former indigence; and self-importance
is refined by such humiliation: it depends on the comparison which is drawn,
between our own wants and the bounty received. Gratitude is a branch of moral
honesty, a confession of the debt of obligation.

Yet Friendship is abundantly superior to Love and Gratitude; it is an
affection of the heart, in which Benevolence presides: it is accompanied by an
openness of mind, wherein Generosity and Honor are exemplary, without
selfishness, or price, or consideration of reward. In Friendship, the bosom is
expanded and elated; secrecy, guile, and concealment are expelled; and probity,
truth, and virtue reign in their place. There is an energy in Friendship, to
which every faculty contributes: it fires the soul with fervor, and fills the
heart with gladness. You act therein, from the same principles, as would
conduct your own nearest and most momentous affairs: it is that divine
perfection, to which we are peculiarly exhorted: Love your neighbor as
yourself. With our friend all disguise is thrown off; the political guise of
politeness, which masks sincerity, is taken away; the heart leaps with
affection; the eyes gaze with rapture, approbation, and esteem; the countenance
glows with expressions of delight; the bosom is unlocked, the treasures of the
bosom are thrown abroad; you fear no treachery, you are open and confident; you
communicate with the same joy you receive instruction, and all is pleasure.

Such were the feelings my youth experienced in the possession of a friend. How
often has the young mind hung enraptured in the association of my friend. The
cordiality that then took place was as dear as life. Riper manhood has
retained the whole, though in a graver degree.

I think I hear the Saint reply, the warmth of our sociability freezes up with
declining youth, our cordiality cools as age advances, and our openness of
heart decreases, as the frauds of mankind, and disappointments of life, advance
upon experience: we grow afraid of the hidden dangers our confidence has often
prompted; and we gradually treasure up in our memories, the lessons of example,
and the inferences of experience; which, like the sepulchers of the dead, only
remind us how many friends are departed, how many disasters are incident to
life, how little dependence there is on man, and how vain is all human
confidence in the things of this world.

If such is the consequence of age; if the delightful taste of Friendship
passes away; I will cling to the departing footsteps, I will grasp at the
sacred verge, from whence to fall, is to depart from the first, and the finest
enjoyment of human life; the only possession on earth, which gives an idea of
the communion of angels.

To return to our Saint. He was elected by the Synod of Aln, Cuthbertus in
Synodo apud Twiford juxta Alne flu. a Theodoro Archiepiscopo cantaur: in
episcopum Lindisfar. electus est. Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 327.
but reluctant to assume the episcopal dignity, rejected the nomination, and
refused to quit his cell and austerities, until Egfrid himself, attended by all
the religious and great personages of his realm then present, resorted to his
island, and on their knees, with tears and supplications, in the name of God,
won his consent to take upon him this Episcopacy. Haec quae sequuntur de
Episcopis Hagulstalden decerpta sunt ex libro superiori de Episcopis
Eboracensibus.

Expulso Wilfrido ab Echerto rege Northumbr. Eata succeffit ad Hagustaldensem
Episcop. adjecta preterea sede Lindisfarnensi, et utramq. sedem 3 annis tenuit.
Sed postea ad solam Lindisdar, remanfit, and ad Hagustaldensem ordinatus est
pro eo Tumbertus. Cui cum 3 annis praefuisset depositus est, and S. Cuthbertus
pro eo subrogatus. Sed quia ille maluit ei praefici in qua conversatus fuerat,
Eata reverso ad Hagustaldensem, ad quam primo ordinatus fuerat, Cuthbertus ad
Lindisfar, ordinatur, quam 2 annis regent, ad insulam Farne postea rediens
solitariam vitam in sancta conversatione usque ad mortem duxit.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 338. Qui cum multis legatariis ac litteris ad se praemissis
nequaquam suo loco posset erui, tandem Rex ipse praefatus una cum sanctissimo
Antistite Trumwino, nec non and aliis religiosis ac potentibus viris ad insulam
navigavit. Convenient and de ipsa insula Lindisfarnensi in hoc ipsum multi de
fratribus, genuflectunt omnes, adjurant per Dominum, lachrymas fundunt,
obsecrant, donec ipsum quoque lachrymis plenum dulcibus extrahunt latebris
atque ad Synodum pertrahunt, etc.

Cum ergo per novem annos in solitaria vita soli Deo vacasset, in Pontificatus
honorem auctore Deo levatur, consecratus Eboraci VII. Kalendas Aprilis in ipso
die sancto Paschae, sub presentia Regis Ecgfridi, convenientibus ad
consecrationem ejus septem Episcopis, in quibus beatae memoriae Theodorus
ordinator ejus primatum tenebat, anno Dominicae incarnationis 685, regni autem
Ecgfridi XII. Electus est autem primo in episcopatum Hagustaldensis ecclesiae
pro Tunberto qui ab episcopatu fuerat depositus; sed quoniam plus
Lindisfarnensi ecclsiae, in qua conversatus fuerat, dilexit praefici, placuit,
ut Eata reverso ad sedem ecclesiae Hagustaldensis cui regendae primo fuerat
ordinatus Cuthbertus ecclesiae Lindisfarnensis gubernacula susciperet.

Sym. Dunelm. The effigies of St. Cuthbert was placed at the south door of the
quire of Durham cathedral, with this incription: Sanctus Cuthbertus Monachus,
Episcopus Lindisfarnensis nunc patronus Ecclesiae et Civitatis ac Libertatis
Dunelm. cujus corpus post 418 annos sepulturae suae incorruptum et flexibile,
dormienti quam mortuo similius est inventum, and sic vitam intimeratam
commendat corporis incorrupto.




Thus, after nine years continuance of a solitary life in the Isle of Farne,
was this pious man induced to assume an episcopal duty. He was consecrated at
York on the 7th day of April, being Easter day, in the year 685, and in the
11th of the reign of King Egfrid. The King was present at this ceremony, with
seven Bishops. He was first made Bishop of Hexham, and thence translated to
Lindisfarn, in the place of Eata, who was removed to Hexham. On this occasion
Egfrid, with the Metropolitan Theodorus, in testimony of their love and
reverence for this holy Prelate, gave to the church of Lindisfarn all the land
from the walls of the church of St. Peter, in York, to the west gate of the
city, and from the same church to the city wall on the south; also the village
of Craike, with territories there not less than three miles in circuit, that
the Bishops might have a house of rest as they should pass to and from York;
Dedit ei Rex Ecfridus in Civitate Eboraco a muro Ecclesiae S. Petri usque ad
magnam portam versus occidentem, and a muro ipsius Ecclesiae usque ad murum
civitatis versus austrum. Villam quoque crecam, et tria in circuitu milliaria,
ut iens Eboracum vel rediens haberet mansionem ubi requiescere posset, ubi
monachorum stationem instituit.

Et quia illa terra minus sufficiens erat, Lugubaliam, que Luel vocatur, in
circuitu 15 milliaria habentem in augmentum suscepit, ubi sanctimonialium
congregatione stabilita reginam dato habitu religionis consecravit, and scholas
ibidem instituit.

At Ecfridus Rex eodem anno, quo consecratus est Cuthbertus cum max. part sui
exercitus in terra Pictorum secundum viri Dei prophetiam, extinctus est apud
Nathanesmere, quod est stagnum Nethani, anno regni sui 15, cujus corpus in Hii
insula Columbae sepultum est.

Cuthbertus vixit in Episcopatu duos annos and menses aliquot.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 327, 328.
and also added Carlisle, with a large district, to this See.

Some short time preceding the consecration of St. Cuthbert, the monastery of
Coldingham was consumed by fire. The religious society of this house consisted
of Monks and Nuns, This association of Monks and Nuns is said to be grounded on
the words of our Savior, John xix. 26, 27.
who occupied separate parts of the edifice; but the severities of a devoted
life, and the strict rules professed in such societies, were not sufficient to
prevent a shameful relaxation of discipline, and many gross abuses and
enormities took place; insomuch, that the destruction of this stately edifice
was regarded as a judgment, for the crimes and pollutions of its inhabitants.
The monastery of Lindisfarn looked upon the event with religious horror, and
soon after Cuthbert was made Bishop, he forbid the approach of women to the
convent, and even denied them access to the church where the Monks performed
their devotions: he caused a small chapel to be erected in a distant plain on
the island for the reception of the female sex, from its situation taking the
name of Greenchurch. From thenceforth the women were excluded the churches or
cemeteries where St. Cuthbert's body rested; and some miraculous punishments
are related which attended infringements on this injunction. In the cathedral
church at Durham the pavement is distinguished by a cross of black marble,
beyond which women were not allowed to advance toward the choir.

Cuthbert enjoyed his change of life and dignities but a very short time, for
within two years finding his health declining, and his mind being by habit
tempered more for solitude and silence than the duties of this high office, he
resigned the Sea, and returned to his cell in Farne, where he survived only two
months, yielding his spirit to God on the 20th day of May, 687, in the 53d year
of the creation of the Sea of Lindisfarn, and 37 years after he had assumed the
monastic habit at Mailross. He directed by his last will, that his body should
be buried at the east end of the oratory, in a stone coffin given him by the
holy Tuda, and wrapped up in a sheet presented him as a token by Virca Abbess
of Tynemouth, which out of reverence to that holy woman he had never used: and
lastly, if the island should be invaded by Pagans, he ordered the Monks to fly
from them, and carry his bones away with them. These directions were none of
them performed, his body was transported to Lindisfarn, where in St. Peter's
church, at the right side of the high altar, he was solemnly laid in a tomb of
stone; but the Monks left behind them the coffin for which he expressed such
regard, which still continues to be shown at Farne Island, and it is highly
probable they were not more mindful of the sheet

Gross.
His body was brought from Farne to be interred at Holy Island, where his
remains were deposited with great funeral pomp, first in the cemetery of the
old church, and afterward on the right side of the high altar, on the
cathedral's being rebuilt: and for his exemplary piety and virtue, the church
enrolled him in the table of Saints. In the Philosophical Transactions a
curious painting of St. Cuthbert is described, found near Ashelney, in
Somersetshire. The portrait is enamelled on gold, drawn sitting in an episcopal
chair, with the following inscription: AELFRED MEL HETT GEWYRLAN.

Thus construed: Alfredus me jussit fabricari.

Mr Wallis speaking of this portrait, has the following remarks. King Alfred
preferred these characters to the Saxon, and when he swayed the scepter,
brought them in use. This curious memorial of St. Cuthbert was found in the
very place of that glorious Monarch's retreat and deliverance from the Danes,
fortified by him in the time of war, and in time of peace converted into a
monastery. Dr. Musgrave thinks this curious Cimolium an undeniable instance of
the use of images coming from the heathens into the christian church.

St. Cuthbert's shrine had the privilege of sanctuary, where fugitives were
safe for 37 days. This respite allowed criminals a time for making restitution,
or under the feudal laws they would have suffered immediate pains and
punishments: it was the process by which the rigor of common law was
moderated; and when kept in due restraint was of great benefit to mankind: but
by an enormous extension which took place, it produced infinite mischiefs to
the community and to the state.




On St. Cuthbert's death, Wilfrid Bishop of Hexham held the Sea of Lindisfarn
for one year only: he was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS IX.
Eadbert, a learned man of exemplary life and piety, and of a most humane and
charitable disposition. His custom was to remit all tithes to the poor. He
re-erected the church of Lindisfarn, and covered it LINDISFARN
with lead; of which edifice the present remains have been described in page
111, etc. He held the Sea ten years, and departing this life in the year 698,
was interred near St. Cuthbert's body. Cujus corpus in sepulchro beati patris
Cuthberti ponentes apposuerunt de super arcam in qua incorrupta ejusdem patris
membra locaverunt.

Sym. Dunelm. His effigies was placed at the south door of the quire of the
cathedral church at Durham, with this inscription: Ss Eadbertus monachus
septimus Episcopus Lindisfarnensis: Vir, sapientia divinarum scripturarum and
observantia praeceptorum caelestium, ac maxim operatione Eleemosynarum
insignis; corpus Si Cuthberti, post undecim sepulturae suae annos, incorruptum
and flexibile inventum, absque laesione pannorum, quibus erat involutum, de
terra juslevari, et Theca reconditum super pavimentum veneratione dignum
locari, in cujus sepulchro idem Eadbertus sepultus erat, sed in ultima
translatione corporis Si Cuthberti ejus reliqiae cum sancto corpore sunt
repositae, and in hac Dunelmensi ecclesia adhuc servatae.

Eadbertus post annum ab obitu Cutheberti ordinatus est in Episcopum
Lindisfarn. Hic Cuthberti corpus post IIm. annum ejus obitus transtulit. Obiit
Eadbertus 10 Episcop. sui anno qui fuit, A. D. 698, sepultus est Lindisfarn.
unacum Cutheberto.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 370.


EPISCOPUS X.
Egfridth, or, as some authors write him, Eadfrid next possessed the Sea, a
Monk of Lindisfarn, one of the most learned men of his time. His effigies was
placed at the south door of the quire of Durham cathedral, with this
inscription: Ss Eadfridus de habitu monachali octavus Episcopus Ecclesiae
Lindisfarnensis; hujus hortatu venerabilis Beda Presbyter, and monachus
girvensis vitam Si Cuthberti, tam in metro quam in prosa compofuit: cujus Ossa
in arca cum corpore Si Cuthberti sunt inventa, and in hac ecclesia Dunelmensi
conservata.
He translated the Gospels into Latin; which work after his death was highly
decorated by his successor with gold and jewels: Bilfrid, an Hermit,
illuminated it with various paintings and rich devices; and Adred, a Priest,
interlined it with a Saxon version. This curious work is now deposited in the
British Museum, in the Cottonian collection. A curious specimen of one of the
finely illuminated pages of this work is given in the Antiquarian Repository.
Under this learned Prelate's patronage, the venerable Bede wrote the Life of
St. Cuthbert. Bid presumed to remonstrate to his friend, for his neglect of
the duties of his high office; for though he had, early after his coming to the Sea, through his high veneration of the memory of St. Cuthbert, repaired and
beautified his little oratory on Farne, Praedictus itaque reverentissimus
Pontifex Eadfridus, multum fervens amore sui predecessoris beati Cuthberti,
oratorium in suae anachoreticae conversationis insula, longa jam vetustate
dissolutum, a fundamentis restauravit.

Sym. Dunelm. Eadfridus successit. Hic oratorium S. Cuthberti in Farne
restauravit, Felgildo tunc in vita solitaria post Ethelwoldum conversante.
Fuerat Ethelwoldus Monachus Ripensis, and mortuo Cuthberto in Farne 12 an.
exegit, postea sepultus Lindisfarn.

Eadfridus exactis in Episcopo 24 ann. obiit and sepultus est Lindisfarn.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 370.
yet he did not so closely follow his exemplary life, as Bede conceived he
should have done for the honor of religion; whereupon he took upon him to
dictate manners to the Prelate. The letter wrote on this occasion, was said to
be the means of Egfridth's attending more strictly to his studies; and from
that time he translated a great part of the Gospels into the Saxon language,
for the easier communication to the people. Bede's maxims were, I doubt not,
well adapted to the age; and they still are not insignificant to the Prelates
of more modern and learned times. The subjects of this expostulation, were
chiefly the importance of a Bishop's duty, and the greatness of the charge
which he had assumed: he entreated him to recognize the divine commission, as
being the ordination of the great missionary of heaven: that he should rebuke
the proud in the vanity of their high station, and instruct them in the duties
of humiliation: that they should not erect churches for the sake of popular
admiration and worldly honor, but as works of piety only, for the propagation
of religion and virtue: that he should visit his Clergy, and reprove or lop off
those branches which were contaminated with the vices of the age: and that his
leisure hours should be appropriated to acts of devotion and study, and not
sacrificed to pleasures, luxuries, and indolent ease. Egfridth was Bishop for
24 years: he departed this life in 721, and was buried at Lindisfarn.

EPISCOPUS XI.
Ethelwold Abbot of Mailross succeeded to this Bishopric. His effigies was
placed at the south door of the quire of Durham cathedral, with this
inscription: Ss Ethelwoldus de habitu monachali nonus Episcopus Ecclesiae
Lindisfarnensis; hic primo religiosae vitae Abbas et Presbyter monasterii
Mailrosensis, and quondam B. Cuthberti dignus minister erat, ac Episcopus
consecratus sanctissime vixit et obiit; cujus Ossa cum corpore Si Cuthberti
inventa, and in hac ecclesia in scrinio sunt reposita.

Ethelwoldus successit Eadfrido. Presbiter hic Mailrosen. monaster. and quondam
S. Cuthberti minister fuit. Fererat iste de Lapide crucem artificis opere
expoliri, and in sui memoriam in ea nomen sui exarari. Cujus summitatem multo
post tempore dum ipsam Eccl. Lindisfarn. pagani devastarent, fregerunt. Sed
postea artificis ingenio reliquiae parti infuso plumbo, ipsa fractura est
adjuncta: semperque deinceps cum corpore S. Cuthberti crux ipsa circumferri
solebat, and a populo Northumbr. propter utrumque sanctum in honor haberi,
quae etiam usque hodie in Dunelmensis Eccl. caemiterio stans sublimis
utrorumque pontificum intuentibus exhibit monumentum.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 370.
He was an intimate friend of St. Cuthbert. His episcopacy was famed for the
abdication of King Ceolwolfe, Ceolwulphus anno reg. sui 9o. fit monachus
Lindisfarn. -- Ibid.
who quitted the throne, to take upon him the monastic habit at Lindisfarn,
where he died A. D. 764. His body, after some years sepulture, was translated
to Norham; and from thence his head was removed to the cathedral church in
Durham. Sym. Dunelm. c. 16.

Ceolwulphus olim Rex, postea in Lindisfarnensi ecclesia Monachus caelesti
regno militavit. Cujus corpus postea delatum in ecclesiam Northam multis
ibidem, ut fertur ab habitatoribus, miraculis claruit. Hoc rege, jam monacho
facto, efficiente, data est Lindisfarnensis ecclesiae Monachis licentia bibendi
vinum vel cerevisam. Ante enim non nisi Lac et aquam bibere solebant.

Ibid. p. 172. He procured an improvement in the living of the Monks, gaining
the use of ale and wine in the room of water and milk, which were the only
liquors they had been permitted to use by the rule of their founder Aidan. In
this retreat he spent the last 22 years of his life, and acquired on his death
the title of Saint.

Hoveden, Bid Con.
Ceolwolfe gave great possessions to the Sea of Lindisfarn. Ceolwulphus dedit
monaster. Lindisfarn. Brigesne and Werceworde alias Werkworth, cum suis
appendeciis, simul et eccl. quam ibi aedificaverat, alias quoque 4 villas,
videlicet, Undecester alias Wodecester, Hwytingham, Eadulfingham, and
Egwulfingham. Hi sunt termini donat praedictae ab aqua quae vocatur Lina usque
ad Cocwnda; inde ad Civitatem quae vocatur Brincewel, and a Cocwnda usque ad
Hafodshelf versus orientem, and ab Alna usque ad dimidiam viam inter Cocwnda
and Alna.

Ceolwulphus primo sepultus Lindisfarm postea ad Norham ab Egfrido episcopo
translatus.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 370. Edelridus Rex Merciorum -- Kenredus successor
Ethelredi, Cedwalla Rex Westsax. -- andIne successor ejus -- Sigebertus Rex
Estangl. -- Sebbi Rex Estsax. monachalem habitum assumpserunt: quorum exemplum
secutus est Ceolwolphus and regnum deliquit, etc.

Ibid. p. 213. Osia sanctorum Bedae and Ceoluulphi regis, qui apud Lindisfarnum
monachus, and sanctus fuerat, in singulis saccis lineis reperta.

Ibid. p. 261.
Ethelwold made a ponderous crucifix of stone, inscribed with his name, which
afterward attended the body St. Cuthbert in its journeyings. This is remarked
by Historians to be the first crucifix that was erected in the diocese: it was
brought to the cathedral of Durham with the remains of St. Cuthbert, and placed
in the century yard. This Prelate died in the year 740, and was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XII.
Cynewolf, who was elected the same year. His episcopacy was attended with
innumerable troubles: King Egbert accused him of being accessory to the death
of Offa, Turgot represents this matter somewhat different. He was charged (he
says) for suffering Offa, after almost perishing by hunger in the sanctuary of
St. Cuthbert, whither he had fled for refuge, to be carried away from it by
unarmed foes, who afterward put him to a cruel death. The King thus provoked,
beset St. Peter's church, seized the Bishop, and detained him a prisoner in
Bambrough, committing the administration of his See to Fredbert Bishop of
Hexham, until Cynewolf, having made his peace with him, was restored. -- L. 2.
chapter 2.
a person of the royal line, who had taken refuge in the church of St.
Cuthbert. Symeon Dunelm. chapter 17.
Some authors say, that his refusing to give up the assassin gave the suspicion
of his being privy to the crime. The Bishop was imprisoned at Bebbanburgh, now
called Bambrough, where he remained in close durance for a considerable time.
After his restoration, being exhausted with age and affliction, he resigned the Sea, and died A. D. 783, having spent the latter days of his life in acts of
the strictest piety and devotion. Cinewolphus episcopus Lindisfar. 41 anno sui
episcop. senio confectus vices suas Higbaldo delegavit, and 3 annos postea
vixit.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 328.


EPISCOPUS XIII.
Higbald, who had officiated during Cynewol's imprisonment, succeeded to the Sea. During his episcopacy, on the 7th of June, 793, Elfwoldus Rex 6 anno
episcop. Higbaldi interfectus est apud Scitelecestre juxta murum. Sepultus est
autem in Hagustaldensi ecclesia.

Anno sequente dum pagani portum Ecgfridi regis, hoc est Girvi, vastantes
monasterium ad ostium Tini amnis depraedarentur, dux eorum ibidem crudeli nece
interiit.

Eodem tempore depopulata est ecclesia Lindisfar.

Higbaldus expletis in pontificatu Lindisfar. annis 22 obiit, cuit successit
Ecbertus.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 328. DCCXCIIIo.

Sigga dux, qui interfecit Elfwaldum regem, interiit propria nece, corpus
corpus ad insulam Lindisfarnen. Prelatum est IXo. Call. Maii Lindisfarnensis
insula magna est, per ambitum, verbi gratia, octo, vel amplius, milliariis fe
extendens: in qua est nobile monastarium, quo eximius Cuthbertus antistes
positus erat, cum aliis presulibus, qui ejus successores dignissimi extiterant,
de quibus convenienter dici potes quod canitur, "corpora sanctorum in pace
sepulta sunt."

Ibid. vol. 2. p. 173. Higebaldi Episcopi tempore Dani depopulati sunt
Lindisfarnensem insulam, ut nec sacrosanctis parcerent altaribus. Tunc corpus
Sancti Cuthberti quidam Hubbenford deposuere juxta amnem Tuedam, ubi jacuit
multis annis usque ad adventum Edredi regis.

Ibid. p. 325. DCCXCIIIo.

Eodem sane anno pagani ab aquilonali climate navali exercitu, ut aculeati
crabrones, Britanniam venientes, hac illacque, ut dirissimi lupi, currentes
praedantes, mordentes, interficientes non solum jumenta, boves et oves, verum
etiam sacerdotes. Levitas, choros monachorum, atque sanctimonialum. Veniunt, ut
praefati sumus, ad Lindisfarnensem ecclesiam, miserabili praedatione, vastant
cuncta, calcant sancta pollutis vestigiis, altaria suffodiunt, et omnia
thesauraria sanctae ecclesiae rapuint. Quosdam e fratribus interficiunt,
nonnullos secum vinctos assumunt, perplurimos, opprobriis vexatos, nudos
projiciunt, aliquos in mare demergunt, etc.

Ibid. p. 173. Ex Epistola Albini ad fratres Lindisfarnensis ecclesiae and
Higebaldum Episcopum.

Vestrae tribulationis calamitas licet absentem multum me quotidie contristat,
quando Pagani contaminaverunt sanctuaria Dei, and fuderunt sanguinem sanctorum
in circuitu altaris, vastaverunt domum spei nostrae, calcaverunt corpora
sanctorum in templo Dei quasi sterquilinium in platea. Quid nobis dicendum est,
nisi plangendum animo nobiscum ante altar Christi and dicere, Parce, domine,
parce populo tuo, and ne des hereditatem tuam gentibus, ne dicant Pagani, ubi
est deus Christianorum. Quae est fiducia ecclesiis Britaniae si Sanctus
Cuthbertus cum tanto sanctorum numero non defendit. Aut hoc initium majoris est
doloris, aut peccata habitantium hoc exegerunt. Non equidem casu contigit, sed
magni cujus libet meriti indicium est. Sed modo qui residui estis state
viriliter, pugnate fortiter, defendite castra Dei. Mementote Judam Macchabeum,
qui templum Dei purgavit, and populum a servitute liberavit extranea.

Et tu, pater sancte, dux populi Dei, pastor gregis sancti, medicus animarum,
lucerna super candelabrum posita, esto forma in omni bonitate omnibus te
videntibus. Esto praeco salutis cunctis te audientibus. Sit tuus comitatus
honestibus moribus, aliis exemplum ad vitam, non ad perditionem.

Cum Dominus noster Rex Carolus hostibus per Dei miserecordiam subditis domum
reverteretur, nos Deo juvante ad illum ire disponimus, and si quid tunc vel de
pueris, qui in captivatem a paganis subducti sunt, vel de aliis quibusque
necessitatibus vestris vestrae sanctitati proficere possumus, diligenter ad
effectum perducere curabimus.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 394.
the Barbarians from the north made a descent upon this island, and not only
seized the cattle, but also destroyed the monastery, pillaged the church, and
inhumanly butchered many of the inhabitants; among whom several of the
Ecclesiastics fell. These heathens rejoiced in defiling the sacred things,
overturning the altars, and spoiling the hallowed shrines of their relics and
ornaments. They were not informed of the chief treasure, the body of St.
Cuthbert, which remained undisturbed; and to which, after their retreat,
several of the Monks returned. The episcopal seat still continued here for
several years after this invasion. Haec de ipsa insula; cujus cladem and
aliorum quoque Sanctorum necem futuram presignantia, horrenda fulmina and
dracones igneis jactibus per era vibrantes and volitantes videbantur. Mox
eodem anno Pagani ab aquilonali climate navali exercitu Britanniam venientes,
hac illicque discurrentes, praedantes, interficiunt non solum jumenta, verum
etiam Sacerdotes, Levitasque, Chorosque, Monachorum atque Sanctimonialium.
Veniunt VII Iduum Juniarum ad Lindisfarnensem ecclesiam, miserabili praedatione
cuncta vastant, sancta pollutis vestigiis calcant, altaria suffodiunt, omnia
thesauraria ecclesiae rapiunt. Quosdam e fratribus interficiunt nonnullos secum
vinctos assumunt, plurimos opprobriis vexatos nudos projiciunt, aliquos in mare
demergunt.

Sym. Dunelm.
All these misfortunes, according to the legends of those days, were some short
time before portended to the inhabitants, by dreadful storms of thunder, and a
horrid convulsion in the aerial regions; during which fiery serpents were
observed flying and winding through the tempest.

The Bishop with some few of the Monks escaped the massacre; and eleven years
after this catastrophe, Higbald, having been Bishop 22 years, departed this
life in the year 804: Higbaldus completis in episcop. annis 22 octavo Call. Jun.
vita defunctis est anno D. 804.
to whom succeeded

EPISCOPUS XIV.
Egbert, whose episcopacy furnishes history with nothing memorable, though it
continued 18 years. Egbertus successit Higbaldo, and consecratus est ab
Eanbaldo Archiepiscopo, and Eanberto and Badulpho, aliis quoque Episcopis in
loco qui dicitur Bignelle. 3 Non. Jun.

Tempore hujus Egberti praedaverunt Northumb. and monasterium Ecfridi
spoliaverunt apud dunemuthe: quo tempore occurrentibus Anglorum nobiliss: Dani
partim interfecti, partim ad naves fugati sunt.

Obiit Egbertus eractis in Episcop. 18 annis A. D. 822.


He died A. D. 821, and was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XV.
Heathured, who held the Sea in peace nine years; His effigies was placed at
the north door of the quire of Durham cathedral, and had the following
inscription: Ecgredus de habitu monachali decimus quartus Episcopus
Lindisfarnensis; hic Vir natu nobilis dedit So Cuthberto ecclesiam de Norham
quem redificavit; villam quoque de Hedworth cum appendiciis; ecclesiam quoque
and villam de Geynford and quicquid ad eam pertinet.
and to whom succeeded

EPISCOPUS XVI.
Egfrid or Egrid, Heathuredus Egberto succedens novem annis eccl. rexit. Obiit
autem A. D. 831.
a personage of noble birth and enlarged mind, strenuous in good works: he
greatly contributed to the honor and opulence of the church of St. Cuthbert:
Hathuredo post novem annos mortuo successit Egredus 22o. anno Eanredi regis.
Hic ecclesiam S. Cuthberti rebus and terris locupletare studuit. In Norham
ecclesiam construxit in hone S. Petri Apostoli, S. Cuthberti, nec non
Ceolwolphi regis and monachi cujus corpus eo transtulit, ipsamque villam and
Gedeworde, ecclesiamque quam construxerat in Geneforde, and quicquid ad eam
pertinet a flu. Teisa, usque ad Weor flu. S. Cuthberto contulit: Ilecliff
Wigcliff, sed et Billingham in Hertenesse, quarum ipse conditor fuerat.

Egredus Episcopus completis in officio 16 annis obiit, (A. D. 847) cui
successit Eanbertus, qui Episcop. 8 annis praefuit.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 328.
he built the church of Norham, and dedicated it to St. Peter, St. Cuthbert,
and the royal St. Ceolwolf: he gave to the Sea of Lindisfarn, Gedword, the
church and village which he had built at Gainford, and all his possessions
between Tyne and Tees, together with his estates at Cliff and Wyckliff in
Yorkshire, and Billingham in Heortness. He was Bishop of this See 16 years,
departed this life A. D. 845, and was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XVII.
Eanbert, whose episcopacy, of eight years continuance, affords the Historian
no memorable matters. He died in 854, and was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XVIII.
Eardulf, whose possession of this See is marked with peculiar misfortunes,
among which was the second descent of the Danes. His effigies was placed at the
north door of the quire of Durham cathedral, with the following inscription:
Eardulphus de habitu monachali decimus sextus and ultimus Episcopus ecclesiae
Lindisfarnensis. Hic Vir magni meriti erat; audito adventu Danorum Paganorum,
ille et Edridus Abbas tollentes secum corpus Si Cuthberti ecclesiam
Lindisfarnensem reliquerum post anno 241 ex quo se^es episcopalis cum caetu
monachali ibidem erat instituta, A. gratiae 875, and de loco ad locum fugientes
per septennium rabiem Danorum, tandem reportaverunt dictum corpus in Cestriam
in strata, ubi per centem and tredecim annos dictum corpus and seeds
episcopalis permanserunt.
This invasion happened in the 17th year of the reign of Osbert King of
Northumberland. By some authors it is ascribed to the resentment of Bruern
Brocard, a Northumbrian Nobleman. King Osbert having come to Bruern's castle in
his absence, was most courteously received and entertained by his Lady, of whom
he became enamoured; and in defiance of all the principles of humanity,
hospitality, and justice, constrained her to receive his embraces. Bruern on
his return being informed of the irreparable injury and disgrace he had
sustained by this royal rape, went to court, attended by his kindred and
dependents, and solemnly renounced his allegiance, and the lands he held of the
King: then taking his passage immediately to Denmark, he fell at the feet of
King Guthred, to whom Bruern was related, describing his injury in such
pathetic terms, and uttering his grief with that energy, that the Danish
Monarch readily hearkened to his requests, fitting out a powerful fleet and
great army for the coasts of Northumberland, under two Generals who were
brothers, Inguar and Hubba. Matthew of Westminster says, the principle view of
this Danish expedition, was against the dominions of Edmund King of the East
Angles, who was falsely charged with putting to death the father of the Danish
chieftains, who had been assassinated by an exiled traitor. They had proposed
to land, this author says, on the coasts of Edmund's kingdom, but by contrary
winds being driven northwards, they landed at Berwick upon Tweed. The convent
of Coldingham having been restored after a former conflagration, was then
possessed, it is said, by Nuns, under an Abbess called Ebba, of royal blood.
She dreading the barbarities these invaders exercised in their former descent,
on all ranks of religious, in an assembly of her Nuns representing the hazard
their chastity was in, communicated a device which she presumed would preserve
them from these violators. Without hesitation they vowed that her rules should
be strictly observed. Forthwith she drew out a razor, and as an example, with
the greatest fortitude, cut off her nose and upper lip: she was followed by the
whole sisterhood. When the Danes entered the convent in the morning, they were
shocked with the horrid spectacle, and disappointed in their lusts, set fire to
the edifice, wherein the Abbess with all her whole convent were consumed. There
is the greatest improbability in this relation, touching the massacre of Ebba
and her Nuns. In the time of Ebba who was of royal race, the society consisted
of Monks and Nuns; and she was dead before St. Cuthbert was consecrated Bishop
of Lindisfarn, and made the regulation noted in regard to the female sex. --
The reader will correct the note at p. 120. If the name of the Abbess of
Coldingham, at the time of this descent of the Danes, was Ebba, it could not be
Ebba daughter of Edilfrid King of Northumberland.
This is the story of Matthew of Westminster; but other authors, Chron. Sax.
Sym. Dunelm. etc.
whose relations are attended with greater probability, fix the place of this
Danish descent at the mouth of the Humber, from whence the invaders marched to
York. Osbert at their approach led forth a powerful army, and engaged them near
the city, where he fell amongst the slain, and his troops were totally routed.
Aella, who had held a conflict of five years for the kingdom of Northumberland
with Osbert, under the support of Bruern and his allies, is said upon the
Danish invasion to have come to a compromise with Osbert, and joined with him
against the common enemy; and that in the battle, he also fell with Osbert.
This account gains greater credit than that of Bruern's application to the
Danes; and it seems most probable, the object of this invasion was no other
than rapine and plunder. The Danes after this victory, having laid waste the
country between York and the Tyne, made Egbert King of Northumberland, north of
Tyne, to hold his Crown as their dependent: Being afterward employed in
expeditions against the southern parts of this island, the Northumbrians
dethroned this vassal King, and gave the Crown to Ricsig. Not long after this
the Danish King embarking his troops in some of the southern counties, sailed
for the mouth of Tyne, and landed at the town of Tynemouth, where he wintered,
it being too late in the year to attempt any thing against the Northumbrians.
On the opening of the spring they began their ravages on this unfortunate
country, and marked their progress with unequalled barbarities: Lindisfarn was
the object of their peculiar wrath -- the christian religion their most
inveterate aversion. Halfdeni ducis Danorum adventu cognito, Eardulphus
Episcopus Lindisfar* accito Eadredo viro sancto, abbate monasterii quod S.
Cuthbertus in urbe Luel construxerat, nomine Luliso, habito inter se concilio,
tollentes incorruptum S. Cuthberti corpus, and una cum eo in ejusdem thecae
loculo sanctorum reliquias, and caput S. Oswaldi martyr: ante in ejusdem
ecclesiae caemiterio sepultum, partemque ossium Aidani, nec non and
venerabilium episcoporum ossa. Eadberti, Ealfridi, Ethelwoldi, Lindisfar.
ecclesiam barbaros fugiendo relinquunt, etc. ut passim vagati sint cum
reliquiis and intrautes Derwentae flu. ostia, post metum naufragii pervenerint
ad candidam Casam, alias Witernam dictam. Episcopus vero cum S. Corpore in
Monasterio Creca a S. Cuthberto constituto 4 Mensibus residebat.

Sopitis itaque procellis perturbationem seeds Episcop. quae usque tunc in
Lindisfar. insula fuit, in Cuncacestre restauratur, incorruptum corpus sancti
illuc transfertur; simul and qui Deo ibidem servirent institutis.

Obiit Eardulphus Episcopus anno 18 ex quo Sanctum Cuthberti corpus in
Cunecacestre translatum fuerat, sui vero Episcop. anno 46.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 328.
The Bishop of Lindisfarn, with Eadred the Abbot, on the approach of the Danes,
left the island, carrying with them the remains of St. Cuthbert, and the most
valuable of their riches and sacred things. This desertion of the monastery of
Lindisfarn happened in the 22d year of Eardulf's episcopacy, 241 years after
the foundation of the Sea by Oswald and Aidan, and 189 years after the death of
St. Cuthbert. These Ecclesiastics flying from the fury of the invaders,
wandered from one hiding place to another with their hallowed burdens, of
which even the stone crucifix of Ethelwold made a part, for seven continued
years: at length resting at Chester-le-street, in the county of Durham. The
legendary tales of St. Cuthbert's miracles during his life time, must give
place to those after his death.

King Alfred for the first six years was greatly distressed by the Danish
invasions: he was at last reduced to the necessity of seeking his safety for a
considerable time in an obscure and inaccessible retreat, among the Marshes of
Somersetshire. Having there collected a few chosen troops, he issued out
unexpectedly on the enemy, and obtained a glorious victory. Guthurn, one of the
Danish Chieftains who was taken prisoner, was persuaded by Alfred to embrace
the christian religion, and his example influenced his adherents. After which
he was raised by Alfred to the throne of the East Angles, as a dependent
Prince, under the Saxon Monarchy. Whilst Alfred endured great distress in his
retreat, he was comforted by a vision of this Saint, who promised him the
success he afterward experienced: from hence Alfred was inspired with great
veneration for him. The body of Danes which had settled in Northumberland
having lost their Chieftain Haldan, remained some time without a leader. Eadred
the Abbot of Lindisfarn, who, together with his Bishop, was still flying from
one retreat to another with their sacred charge, assured the Bishop and the
whole army of Danes and English, that the Saint had appeared to him in a
vision, and expressed his command to them to redeem from slavery Guthred the
son of Hardiknut, a youth sold by the Danes to a widow at Whittingham, and make
him their King. The injunction was received with enthusiastic reverence, and
piously obeyed. Guthred was crowned at York, and ruled over the southern
departments of the Northumbrian kingdom. Soon after his accession, Guthred, in
gratitude to the Saint, gave all the county between Tyne and Tees to the
Bishopric, then settled at Chester. And King Alfred, from a like principle,
confirmed the donation.




With the sacred remains of the Saint, the Bishopric was removed from this
island to Chester; and whilst settled there, this Bishop, A. D. 883, annexed
thereto the vacant Bishopric of Hexham, which had been without a Pastor 63
years, from the time of Tidfrith's resignation. Eardulf continued the remainder
of his episcopacy at Chester in peace, and died in the year 900, having been
Bishop 46 years.

Soon after the desertion of Lindisfarn, the monastery was destroyed, and the
church dismantled: but afterward there was a cell of Benedictine Monks
established here, who were subordinate to the Priory of Durham. The annual
revenues were valued at 48l. 18s. 11d. by Dugdale, and 60l. 5s. by Speed. 26
King Henry VIII. in the 33d year of the same reign, the possessions were
granted to the Dean and Chapter of Durham. Bishop Tanner's Notit. Monast.


There is a legendary tale, that Guthred received from St. Cuthbert a singular
mark of protection, on an invasion of the Scots, who had in their progress
trampled on the remains of several religious houses, and threatened the utter
demolition of Lindisfarn. When the Scotch army was drawn up in array, and ready
for action, the earth opened, and in an instant swallowed their tens of
thousands. Interjecto tempore aliquanto, gens Scottorum innumerabili exercitu
coadunato, inter caetera suae crudelitatis facinora Lindisfarnense monasterium
seviens and rapiens invasit. Contra quos dum Rex Guthredus, per Sanctum
Cuthbertum confortatus, pugnaturus staret, subito terra dehiscens hosts vivos
omnes absorbuit, renovato ibi miraculo antiquo, quando aperta est terra and
degluttivit Dathan, and operuit super congregationem Abiron. Qualiter autem
gestum sit alibi constat esse scriptum.

Sym. Dunelm. l. 2. c. 13.


As the future succession of Bishops is in no wise pertinent to this work the Sea of Lindisfarn being translated from this island, and never resettled there,
I must take my leave of that rich and powerful episcopacy; but cannot refrain
mentioning some few circumstances which happened to the wandering bones of
Cuthbert.

In 995, the Danes again afflicting the Clergy, who had been settled at Chester
for near a century, they took up the holy relics, and fled with them to Ripon
in Yorkshire: where remaining till the ravagers again quitted the country, and
presuming it a proper season for their return to Chester, on their way, by a
miraculous power, they were stayed at Wardelaw, a hill near the sea coast,
within about eight miles of Durham, where, in a vision, Eadmerus, one of their
pious attendants, had a revelation, that at Dunhelmus the sacred relics should
rest for ever: a situation fortified by nature, being a lofty eminence,
surrounded by the river Wear, overgrown with a thick entangled grove, in the
center of which was an open though concealed plain of cultivated land, which
offered its sequestered bosom for their religious repose. Eardulphus successit;
cujus pontific: anno 22 destructa per Danos Lindisfarn. eccl. seeds
episcopalis, and congregatio Monach. quae ibidem annis 141 duraverant,
cessaverunt. A. D. 875 adveniente Halfden Dano, Osbertus Werkworth, and
Tilemuth, Ellavero Billyngham, Ycliffe and Wicclif, crecam quoque sacrilego
ausu S. Cutheberto abripuerunt. Quo etiam anno Angl. Reges, qui annis 321o.
regnaverunt in Northumbr. desierunt imperare per annos 51. Depopulationi namque
servitutique errundem Paganorum absque rege octo annis subjacebant: et ex tunc
Danici generis reges regnare caeperunt.

Monachi Lindisfarn. per septennium discurrebant cum corpore S. Cutheberti.

S. Cuthebertus apparuit regi Aluredo.

Corpus S. Cutheberti ab Eadulpho episcopo and Eadredo abbate delatum ad
crecam, ibique ab abbate, cui nomen erat Gene, benign suscepti velut in
proprio 4 Mensibus residebant.

Guthredus, Hardeknuti regis filius, a paganis in Angl. ductus, and audam
viduae in Witingham in servum venditus, miraculoso S. Cutheberti admonitu in
regem elevatus est.

Guthredus Rex Northumbr. and Alfredus Rex Westsax. adjecerunt totam terram
inter Tesam and Tinam in augmentum episc. S. Cutheberti. Haec donatio facta est
anno 13. reg. Alfredi, anno autem Di. 883.

Tunc caedes episc. quae fuit in Lindisfarn. restauratur in Conechester, quo a
Creca translatum est corpus S. Cutheberti.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 372. Aldunus Elfsigo successit, qui oraculo admonitus ut
rabiem in Danorum declinaret, tulit secum corpus S. Cutheberti, and usque ad
Ripon pervenit, anno 113 ex quo in Cunecacestre locatum fuerat. Pace post 4
Menses reddita, assumpto secum corpore sancto, ut ad priorem locum illud
reportaret, cum prope Dunelmum ad orientalem plagam in locum qui Wardelaw
dicitur advenissent, vehiculum, quo sanctum corpus techa ferebatur, ulterius
moveri non poterat, sed velut mons quidam immobile permansit, etc. ut corpus
Dunelmum postea perductum. Quod non fecisset, facta de virgis ecclesiola ibidem
corpus ad tempus locaverunt. Erat namque Dunelmum locus quidem natura munitus,
sed non facile habitabilis, quem densiss. undique sylva totum occupavit.
Episcopus vero auxilio Uthredi comitis totam extirpans Sylvam locum in brevi
habitabilem fecit, ecclesiam construxit, and in illam corpus sanctum transtulit
anno, ex quo seeds episcop. ab Oswaldo and Aldano in Ins. Lindisfarn. fuit
instituta 361.

Ibid. p 330. Lindisfarne Ins. alias dicta sacra insula, habuit olim nobile
Coenobium, ubi etiam erat seeds episcopalis, in qua floruit Sanctus Cuthbertus.
Sed vi Scotica primo spoliatum, deinde a Danis prorsus deletum. Monachi vero
and provinciales, miserti tantarum calamitatum, reliquias S. Cuthberti Castrum
detulerunt, quod media via positum est inter Dunholmum and Novum Castellum,
ibique, tanquam in episcopali sede, requievere centum and tredecim annis.
Postea orta per bellum ibidem novacalamitate, translatae sunt Cuthberti
reliquiae Riponam, ubi cum ad tempusculum requievissent, caeperunt monachi
cogitare, temporibus jam serenis, de reportandis Cuthberti reliquiis castrum.
Sed cum monachi comitantibus multis provincialibus, sanctum feretrum Dunholmum
usque perduxissent, feretrum adeo immobile fuit, ut nulla prorsus vi inde
amoveri potuerit. Provinciales, rei novitatem admirantes, posuerunt ibidem
reliquias in porticu, quae nunc Alba porticus appellatur. Hic manfere donec
magnifica and nova basilica consummata fuit. Tandem vero propter princeps
altar cum magna celebritate positae sunt.

Ibid. v. 4. p. 40.


The remains of St. Cuthbert rested here till the year 1069, when the the
Northumbrians with other northern powers rebelling against the Norman King
William, he entered the city of Durham, and laid it waste with fire and sword;
the church being miraculously preserved by the sudden springing up of an
eastern breeze. Sym. Dunel. -- Hoveden.
Such was the horrid devastation made on this occasion, that the whole
territories of York and Durham are said to have lain waste and uncultivated for
nine years. Cospatricius comes Northumbr. hoc maxim concilium dedit, ut
fugientes eccl. Dunelmen. relinquerent: and ipse max. ejus ornamentorum partem
secum abduxerat.

Cospatricius postea nudis pedibus incidens ad insulam ubi S. corpus Cuthberti
fuerat, veniam eorum, quae in eum deliquerat, precibus and muneribus petivit.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 381.


The Ecclesiastics hearing of his horrid approach from York, fled from the
enraged sword of the Conqueror, and sought the island of Lindisfarn as their
refuge, bearing with them the holy relics of their Saint. They rested the first
night at Gyrum or Jarrow, the second at Belinghum, the third at Inghala, now
Ellingham; and now preparing to pass over to the island, at the approach of
night, they found the tide at height, and the sea, which flows over the neck,
in width about half a league, which intersects Lindisfarn from the main land,
was then impassable. The severity of the season, it being midwinter, and the
perils of the night greatly distressed the Ecclesiastics: but to their tears
and prayers, the God of Nature, through his abundant favor to the pious
adherents of the Saint, reverted his ordinary rules; and behold the sea fled
backwards, and gave passage to the holy labourer's dry foot. The Saint's bones
rested a very short time; for on the re-establishment of peace, on the 8th of
April, 1070, the sacred remains were restored to the church of Durham, where
they have since rested, and will rest for ages. The donations to the church of
Durham were immense: Carlisle and a district of 15 miles round by Egsrid. All
the district between Tyne and Tees by Guthred and Alfred, A. D. 883. Staindrop
and Raby by Canute. South Wearmouth, in the county of Durham, together with 11
villages, by Ethelstan. The Lordship of Darlington, in the county of Durham, by
a Nobleman whose name was Slire. The Lordships of Braaburg, Morden, and Griseby
were given by one Swaculph. King William II. gave North Allerton, where Bishop
Pudsey built a palace. Sadberge was purchased of King Richard by Pudsey and
annexed to the Sea, from whence the temporalities of an Earl are derived by the
Bishops of Durham. Jarrow was given by Bishop Walcher. South Yoden was given by
Tillered Abbot of Heffereham. Norham by Bishop Egfrid. Chester-le-street by
King Egfrid.


The form of one of the Grants may be agreeable to the reader in this place.

In nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti Amen. Anno Dominicae
incarnationis 685 Congregata synodo juxta flu. Alne in loco qui dicitur
Twiford, cui Theodorus Archiepiscopus Durovernensis praesiuebat, cum Cuthbertus
multis legatariis ad se premissis nequaquam posset suo loco erui, tandem ego
Ecfridus Rex Northumbr. cum antistite Trumwino, and aliis religiosis viris
insulam navigavi, and invitum ad synodum pertraxi, ubi omnium jussione
episcopatus officium suscipere compellitur: cui et omnibus successoribus suis
cum consilio Theodori Archiepiscopi, and Trumwini, and totir^ concilii pro
salute animae meae, and omnium successorum meorum, donavi villam quae vocatur
Creec and 3 millia in circuitu ipsius villae. Donavi etiam civitatem quae
vocatur Lugubalia, and in circuitu ejus quindecim milliaria, ut haec tam ipse
quam successores sui ad Dei servitium in perpetuum habeant, ita sicut ego habui
libera and quieta, and secundum suam voluntatem disponenda.

Ego Theodorus Archiepiscopus Durovernensis subscripsi

Ego Bosa Episcopus subscripsi

Ego Cedde orientalium Saxonum Episcopus subscripsi

Ego Sexuif Merciorum Episcopus subscripsi

Ego Trumwin Pictorum Episcopus subscripsi

Ego Ceadda Lichefeldensis Episcopus subscripsi

Ego Eadhed Lindissy Episcopus subscripsi.

Haec donat. scripta est tempore Agathonis Episcopi To. anno aetatis Ecfridi 40
regui vero ejus 15o.




The catalogue of holy remains which Symeon says were translated from
Lindisfarn with the body of St. Cuthbert, is not unworthy observation: The head
of the holy Martyr St. Oswald. -- Part of the bones of St. Aidan, who founded
the monastery; the rest being carried away by Colmannus into Scotland. -- The
bones of Eadbert, Eadfride, and Ethelwold. -- To these, from Leland's Collect.
we must add, the remains of Eata, Ceoluui^phus, and Oildiauldus, an Anchorite.

Aidan's monastery at its foundation was under the government of the Bishops,
and his Ecclesiastics, of the cathedral Clergy.

In the year 941, this island suffered greatly by the ravages of war. Inde
Eboracenses Lindisfarnem insulam vastantes multos occiderunt. -- Lel. Col. v.
1. p. 185.
In 1061, under Malcolm King of Scotland, the inhabitants were again
distressed. Scottorum Rex Malcolinus sui conjurati fratris Tostii comitatum, i.
e. Northumbriam, fortiter depopulator, violata pace S. Cuthberti in Eiland.

Ibid. v. 2. p. 194.


In the treaty entered into by King Stephen with David I. King of Scotland, A.
D. 1139, when the Earldom of Northumberland was settled on Prince Henry,
David's son, it was especially excepted, that the power of the Prince should in
no wise extend to the lands of St. Cuthbert, or those of St. Andrew in
Hexhamshire.

Holy Island was the retreat of William de Sancta Barbara: during part of the
time, William Cuming, Chancellor of King David I. of Scotland, held the Sea and
Castle of Durham, in confidence that by the support and influence of his
Sovereign and many confederate Barons of the Bishopric, he should obtain his
election to the Sea. William on the 18th of October, A. D. 1144, was installed
Bishop, after Cuming had held possession near four years. Whart. Ang. Sac. v.
1. p. 710. -- Symeon Dunelm. p. 63. etc. etc.


We continued upon the island so long, in reviewing these venerable remains, as
almost to forget we had yet to visit many scenes in this county, as worthy the
observation of the Antiquarian and Traveller, as those present to us: and we
calculated our departure so ill, that the tide had begun to return, before we
entered upon the sands. We thought ourselves secure indeed against all dangers,
by having a Farmer from the neighboring shore for our guide, who had brought
over butter that morning for the inhabitants. The tide approached in a singular
manner, not flowing forward in waves, but the water increased imperceptably, by
oozing through the sands. At first the passage seemed a tract of wet sand, but
presently it became a shining plain of level water, unruffled by any influx,
reflecting in the most beautiful manner the variegated landskips of the
adjoining shores. Our guide rode upon one of those methodical beasts, which
keeps up an invariable motion with a kind of mechanical exactness, in spite of
every approaching emergency. We expressed our anxiety at the increasing waters,
yet not daring to leave our guide, on account of the intercepting gullies, and
the apprehension of quicksands, of the situation and nature of which we were
totally ignorant. He was unaltered, except in his dialogue, which now was
filled with the circumstances of a late Traveller's death, who perished in the
passage, wandering on the sands till he could not extricate himself from the
surrounding floods. This was no pleasing narrative to us, who were now dashing
through the increasing waters, up to our horses girths; our guide's constancy
of countenance and unmoved mind affording us no very agreeable contemplation. I
wish to prevent strangers engaging in so disagreeable a project, though ours was
attended with no other circumstances than anxiety and impatiency of mind; yet
had we attempted to make this passage without a guide, it is impossible to
determine what would have been our lot.

At some little distance we viewed

HAGGERSTON,
covered with a fine grove. Here is an old tower, memorable for being the place
where King Henry II. A. D. 1311, received the homage of Thomas Earl of
Lancaster. This is an ancient mansion of the family of Haggerstons, whose
possession we find recorded in the escheats of King Edward I. the present
proprietor Sir Carnaby Haggerston. John Haggerston King Henry III. Sir Thomas,
created a Baronet 19 King Charles I. was Colonel in the famous Northumberland
regiment. Sir Thomas, Governor of Berwick. Sir Carnaby. Sir Thomas. Sir Carnaby
Wallis.


The church of

KYLOE
graces the distant prospect. In the former part of the reign of King Henry
VIII. the buckles, bars, and studs of a Knight's belt, and a pommel and cross
for a sword, and buckles and studs for spurs, all of gold, were found between
two stones here. They came into the possession of Dr Ruthal Bishop of Durham.

Leland's Itin. vol. 7.
Kyloe the residence of Eustace de Kiley, in the reign of King Edward I.

FENWICK and BEAL
were also in view; the latter of which places, it is said, was for some time
honored by the residence of, and takes its name from, the famous Irish female
Saint Begogh. This is the patroness of Kirby Begegh and Beal, in Yorkshire. --
Life of Grindad.


We approached

BELFORD,
a small town, not seated in the most fertile spot in Northumberland, the
country being open and unsheltered. The mansion of Abraham Dixon, Esquire a modern
structure of Pane's architecture, surrounded with pleasure grounds and young
plantations, greatly ornament the scene; but the situation is far from
eligible, there being none of that rural variety, that elegant simplicity, or
its reverse, those wildnesses in nature, which constitute a pleasing country
prospect. The hills rise tamely, the enclosures are large and ill wooded, the
hamlets are very distantly scattered, and nothing appears singular or
attracting upon the whole view, but the Castle of Bambrough and the sea which
forms the horizon. Belford was the property of a family of Hepburns, in the
reign of King Henry V.

We passed from Belford to

BAMBROUGH,
by Budle, once the possession of the family of Bows of Streatlam. Near Budle,
at a place called Spindleston, The poem of the Laidly Worm of Spindleston
Heughs, inserted in the following notes, seems to be of an historic nature, but
wrapped up in such dark allegory, the humor of those times, as to render it
unintelligible in this age. The fortifications are Danish, and it is probable
that the ballad relates to the conflicts of that people, with the garrison of
Bambrough.
is a Danish camp, circular in form, and fortified with a triple ditch and
vallum. Two mounts are seen from it, which appear to be out-posts, and not
Tumuli as some writers have conjectured. To the westward is another
intrenchment, which forms a crescent, and seems not to be the work of the same
people who had constructed the former fortifications. It is defended by a
triple ditch and vallum, the interior vallum composed of uncemented stones, as
was the British custom. This commands a look-out to sea, and has in view the
castles of Bambrough and Holy Island. Opposite to this fortification is a
square camp, apparently Roman, called Ulchester. The manor of Budle was
formerly a member of the Barony of Wooler, and was the possession of Sir Robert
de Ulchester, as appears by the escheats of King Edward I. It was forfeited on
the attainder of its late owner, Lord Derwentwater, and now makes a part of the
appropriations of Greenwich Hospital.

Within a mile lies

EDERSTON,
the seat of the late John William Bacon Forster, Esquire which descended to him on
the extinction of the right line of the family of Forsters, who possessed it
for many ages. Sir Thomas Forster in the reign of King Henry VIII.
He married Dorothy the daughter of Ralph Lord Ogle.

Thomas Forster, High Sheriff of Northumberland 6 and 14 Queen Elizabeth.
Matthew, High Sheriff 18 King James I. Thomas He lived in the reigns of King
Charles I. and II. Thomas, High Sheriff 2 Queen Anne. Thomas, died 1763.
Succeeded by John William Bacon, who assumed the name of Forster. John Bacon,
his great grandfather, High Sheriff 5 King William III. William, High Sheriff
1745. John, Fellow of the Royal and Antiquarian Societies.
Wallis.


We now reached the

CASTLE of BAMBROUGH,
whose venerable remains give the traveller an idea of the state of palaces and
strongholds, in the remotest era of our Saxon ancestors in Britain. The site
of this fortress is on the crown of a high rock, triangular in figure, one of
the points projecting into the sea. Many of the buildings stand on the very
brink of the rocks, to the land side: the aspect toward the sea is very lofty,
being near 150 perpendicular feet above the level of low water mark. Part of
the most ancient fortifications on the land side are broken and defaced, by the
falling of the cliffs on which they were erected, the same consisting of a soft
red stone, which perishes much by the weather. On this side a circular tower
remains, of very antique construction, its base projecting in several tiers.
Many of the other buildings appear to be the work of more modern ages, till you
approach the gate-way, which is on the only accessible part of the rock; it was
defended by a deep ditch, cut through a narrow neck communicating with the main
land, having a draw bridge: this lays to the south-east, and on the brink of
the precipice above the sea shore. The gate-way is strengthened by a round
tower on each side, from whence passing about 12 paces, which space appears to
have been formerly a covered way, you approach a second and machicolated gate,
of a much more modern order of building, having a port-culice. After you have
passed the second gate, on the left hand, on a lofty point of the rock, stands
a very ancient round tower, of great strength, commanding the pass. Assailants
having won this approach, entered upon a situation of imminent danger on a
tremendous precipice, subject to every kind of annoyance from the besieged, who
possessed the round tower. This part of the fortress wears the most ancient
countenance, and challenges the Saxons for its origin. The ingenious Mr
BAMBROUGH CASTLE
depiction of Bambrough Castle Gross says, this is the spot where, according to
the Monkish Historians, stood the castle or palace of the Kings of
Northumberland; built, as it said, by King Ida, who began his reign A. D. 559.
Part of the present ruins are by some supposed to be the remains of King Ida's
work. -- On the whole, though there was undoubtedly a fortress or palace here
in the Saxon times, and perhaps earlier, every part of the present buildings,
seems to have been the work of the Normans. On what circumstances Mr Gross
grounds this general determination, I cannot discover: most of the northern
Norman structures are of excellent masonry; the buildings here are various in
figure, materials, modes of arching, windows, bases, and other parts. The round
tower I have noted is different in all those matters, from the greatest part of
the works; and it is to a common observer marked with much greater antiquity
than the Keep or main tower, which I shall next describe. It is impossible to
prevent a disagreement in opinion on subjects of this kind; where there is no
certain rule to fix determination, it must be the case: I pay the greatest
deference to Mr Grose's judgment, but think he has passed this determination
hastily. The Keep or chief tower of this fortress is a lofty square structure,
of the same model with many Norman fortresses founded in or near the time of
the Conqueror; it stands on the crown of the rock, having an open area round
it, but most extensive toward the north and north-east points. Mr Wallis says,
that from the style of the architecture of its base, being of the Doric order,
it is believed to be of Roman work. He adds, that it is well known the Saxons
erected their castles when they could on Roman foundations, and gave them the
name of Burg or Brough. It is very probable the Romans held this part of the
country, to be of singular importance to their navy; but that they built
castles here, is not by any means admissible. They might erect small towers,
like those whose remains appear on the wall of Severus, on places of special
import. I do not doubt the Saxons would enter upon the Roman fortifications,
for the same reasons the Normans after them made such choice: the northern
counties furnish a multitude of instances that the Normans possessed themselves
of such situations; but in those places the Roman vallum and fosse only served
for outworks to the Norman structures. The remains of the Roman station are
visible at many of those fortresses. In most of the places I have observed, the
Roman works are retained as a platform or outward area, to the south sides of
the castles. In the northern stations, of the largest size, there are no
remains of castles. Whether the Saxons or Normans entered upon those places, I
do not presume to determine. The site of the Praetorium is to be traced in
many, but without any other appearances, than of erections for domestic uses,
not showing a sufficient quantity of ruins, to give the least idea of a decayed
castle. Mr Gross says, some assert the Keep to have been a Roman structure, for
which supposition they give the following reasons; its great similarity to the
Keep of Dover Castle, and the White Tower of London, both allowed to be Roman
-- the shape of its arches, which are either flat or semicircular -- a Doric
base round its bottom, and the great depth of its well, sunk 75 feet, through a
whinstone rock. -- The first of these is evidently founded on a mistake,
neither the White Tower nor the Keep of Dover Castle being Roman, but built
since the conquest; the last in the time of King Henry II. proofs of which are
to be met with in Dugdale's Monasticon, the Textus Roffensis, and diverse other
authentic records. Nor is the proof drawn from the shape of its arches more
conclusive; semicircular and flat arches are found in almost every building
erected before the time of King Henry II. and from the argument deduced from
its Doric base, it is not at all wonderful or uncommon, to find the members of
Grecian architecture employed in Norman buildings. One instance of this, among
many, may be seen at the cathedral of Canterbury, where a massive column,
placed in the under-croft, to support some vast weight, has a rude sort of
Ionic capital. Besides it is well known most of the architects of those days
learned their art at Rome, where they had the Grecian architecture continually
before them; of which indeed the Saxon was only a debased kind. After the
stupendous works carried on by our Norman ancestors, it seems extraordinary,
that the digging of the abovementioned well should appear so arduous an
undertaking, as to be deemed possible to the Romans only. Besides, in Beeston
Castle, Cheshire, there is a well full as deep, cut through the solid rock: and
that is universally known to be the work of the Normans.

The following remarks, extracted from the same work, will not be unacceptable
to the reader: The stones with which the Keep or great tower is built, are
remarkably small, and were taken from a quarry three miles distant. From their
smallness it has been conjectured they were brought hither on the backs of men
or horses. The walls to the front are 11 feet thick, but the other three sides
are only nine. The original roof was placed no higher than the top of the
second story. The reason for the side walls being carried so much higher than
the roof, might be for the sake of defense, or to command a more extensive
look-out, both toward the sea and land. The tower was however afterward
covered at the top. Here were no chimneys, the only fire place in it was a
grate in the middle of a large room, supposed to have been the guard room,
where some stones in the middle of the floor are burned red. This floor was all
of stone, supported by arches. This room had a window in it near the top, three
feet square, intended to let out the smoke. All the other rooms were lighted by
slits or chinks in the walls, six inches broad. The outworks are built of a
very different stone from that of the Keep, being a coarse free stone of an
inferior quality, ill abiding the injuries of weather; taken from the rock
itself. In all the principal rooms in the outworks there are chimneys,
particularly in the kitchen, which measures 40 feet by 30 feet, where there are
three very large ones, and four windows; over each window is a stone funnel,
like a chimney open at the top, intended as it is supposed to carry off the
steam. In a narrow passage near the top of the Keep was found upwards of 50
iron heads of arrows, rusted together into a mass; the longest of them about 7
inches. In December 1770, in sinking the floor of the cellar, the draw well was
accidentally found: its depth is 145 feet, cut through the solid rock, of which
75 feet is of hard whin-stone. In the summer of the year 1773, in throwing over
the bank a prodigious quantity of sand, the remains of the chapel were
discovered, in length 100 feet. The chancel is now quite cleared, is 36 feet
long and 20 feet broad; the east end, according to the Saxon fashion,
semicircular. The altar, which has been likewise found, did not stand close to
the east end, but in the center of the semicircle, with a walk about it, three
feet broad, left for the Priest to carry the Host in procession. The font,
richly carved, is also remaining.

This fortress is by Florigelus, Hoveden, and others, attributed to Ida, Regnum
Nordanhumbrorum incepit XIIIo anno regni Kinrici. Cum enim proceres Anglorum
patriam illam multis and magnis praeliis sibi subjugassent, Idam quendam,
juvenem nobilissimum, sibi regnem constituerunt, qui fuit filius Eoppae.

Construxit autem Bebbanburg, and circumdedit eam prius sepe, postea muro.

Lel. Col. v. 2. p. 293.
and by them esteemed nearly cotemporary with the rise of the kingdom of
Northumberland: but there are sufficient grounds to believe that there was a
fortress here before Ida's time. It is said the ancient name was Bebbanborough,
which Camden, from Bede's authority, imagines was borrowed from a Queen Bebba:
but the author of the additions to Camden is of a contrary opinion, as in the
Saxon authorities it is called (...), implying the royal mansion. But yet it
may be questioned, whether Bid himself ever gave out this etymology. No
mention of it is in the Saxon, but it is there called (...), i. e. the royal
mansion. Florence of Worcester seems to have been the first contriver of the
story of Queen Bebba; but Matthew of Westminster tells us it was built by Ida
the first King of Northumberland.

Gibson's Camden, p. 1094. Anno 774.


Ida by some authors is said to have fortified the rock with a wooden palisado;
but others mention his removing the wooden pale and erecting a wall in its
place. On the conversion of the Saxons, the chapel, of which the ruins have
been lately discovered, was erected within the walls, and dedicated by King
Oswald to St. Aidan. Hoveden, who wrote about the year 1192, says, Bebba is a
very strong city, but not exceeding large; containing not more than two or
three acres of ground. It has but one hollow entrance into it, which is
admirably raised by steps. On the top of the hill stands a fair church; and in
the western point is a well, curiously adorned, and of sweet clean water. Bebba
vero civitas, urbs est munitissima, non admodum magna, sed quasi duorum vel
trium agrorum spatium, habens unum introitum cavatum, et gradibus miro modo
exaltatum. Habet in summitate montis ecclesiam praepulchre factum, in qua est
scrinium speciosum et pretiosum; in quo involuta, pallio jacet dextra manus St.
Oswaldi regis, incorrupta, sicut narrat Beda, historiographus hujus gentis. Est
in occidente et in summitate ipsius civitatis, fons miro cavatus opere dulcis
ad potandum, et purissimus ad videndum.

Sym. Dunelm.


It is admitted by all writers that Bambrough is of great antiquity, and was a
fortress of singular consequence and strength in the early times of the Saxons.
It has furnished history with many memorable events.

Penda King of Mercia, still remaining a Pagan, breathed the most inveterate
hatred against the Christians: having obtained a victory over King Oswald in
Shropshire, in which he treated the royal captive with the most savage
barbarity, like a whirlwind he rushed to the destruction of his country. In the
year 642, having ravaged Northumberland as far as Bambrough, he laid siege to
it, and not being able to take the place by storm, attempted to burn it, by
raising huge piles of wood against the walls, and setting them on fire; but
when his machines were fully prepared, and his piles were burning, the wind
suddenly changed, and blowing a storm, the blazing faggots were carried into
his camp, and made a great destruction, insomuch that he was obliged to raise
the siege. This deliverance was ascribed, according to the superstition and
bigotry of those times, to the prayers of Aidan Bishop of Lindisfarn, who for
the sake of greater retirement, and an uninterrupted devotion, was then
resident on the Farn Island, afterward famous for the cell of St. Cuthbert.
Oswald's great zeal for the conversion of his people, his bounties to the
church, and his suffering under the hand of a Pagan conqueror, procured him the
immortal honors of a Saint and Martyr. His arms were preserved as relics in
the church at Bambrough, and were believed to remain uncorrupted, through the
influence of a blessing pronounced on them by Aidan, whilst doing a singular
act of charity. Symeon Dunelm. chapter 1.

Nam tempore episcopatus ejus hostilis Merciorum exercitus, Penda duce,
Nortdanhumbrorum regiones impia clade long lateque devastans, pervenet ad
urbem usque regiam, quae ex Bebbae quondam Reginae vocabulo cognominatur,
eamque, quam neque armis, neque obsidione capere poterat, flammis absumere
conatus est. Descissisque viculis, quos in vicinia urbis invenit, advexit illo
plurimam congeriem trabium, tignorum, parietum, virgeorum, and tecti fenei, and
his urbem in magna altitudine circumdedit a part qua terrae est contigna: and
dum ventum oportunum cerneret, inlato igne urbem conburere visum est. Quo
temtempore reverentiss. antestes Aidan in insula Farne, quae duobus ferme
milibus passuum ab urbe procul ab est, morabatur. Illo enim saepius, secretae
orationis and silentii causa, secedere consueverat. Denique usque hodie locum
sedis illius solitariae in eadem insula solent ostendere. Qui cum ventis
ferentibus globos ignis, ac fumum super muros urbis exaltari conspiceret,
fertur, ad coelum elevatis oculis manibusque, cum lachrimis dixisse: "Vide,
domine, quanta mala facit Penda." Quo dicto, statim mutati ab urbe venti in
eos, qui accenderant, flammarum incendia retorserunt. Ita ut aliquot laesi,
omnes territi impugnare ultra urbem cessarent.

Bid. Lel. Col. v. 2. p. 139.


After the death of Alfred, who had reigned over Northumberland near 20 years,
the Crown was usurped by Eardulph, to the prejudice of Osred, Alfred's eldest
son, then an infant of the age of eight years. As this act of Eardulph's
portended imminent peril to the young Prince, Brithrick, a zealous adherent to
Alfred and his family, seized the castle of Bambrough, where he placed Osred.
It was not long before the Usurper laid siege to the place; but it was so well
defended, as to baffle all his attempts, and his assaults were attended with a
succession of ill fortune. Whilst Eardulph remained before the walls, the
people in general declared for Osred, and having levied a considerable army,
advanced toward the Usurper, who being informed of this unexpected change in
the sentiments of the people, prepared to raise the siege and draw off his
troops. Brithrick at this instant made a vigorous sally, the adversaries were
thrown into confusion and soon routed, Eardulph was taken prisoner, and
immediately executed, and Osred ascended the throne of his ancestors, to the
great joy of his subjects.

This was the place of Alured's retirement, when he fled from York, to avoid
the dangers of civil commotion, having in the ninth year of his reign been
deserted by his family and nobles. He was descended of Ida, but through the
misery of those times obliged to abdicate the throne of Northumberland, and
seek for safety under Cynoth King of the Picts.

In the reign of King Egbert this castle was the prison of Cynewolf Bishop of
Lindisfarn: his imprisonment began in 750, and continued for 30 years, being
accused as an accomplice in a crime, of which some authors assert he was
innocent.

According to Florence of Worcester, Alred, the son of Eardulph, whom Athelstan
expelled, (on the death of Sititric, who married Athelstan's sister, and was by
him raised to the Northumbrian throne) in the year 926 seized this fortress,
and made himself master of the dependent territories, but was soon forced to
fly before the arms of Athelstan.

In the descent made by the Danes about the year 933, this fortress suffered
greatly, but was soon afterward restored, and new works were added. It is said
a great booty fell into the hands of these invaders, by the reduction of
Bambrough.

Waltheof Earl of Northumberland, in his declining years, was disturbed by an
incursion of the Scots, under Malcolm their King: he retired to this fortress,
whilst his son Uchtred, a valiant youth, raised a few troops to oppose the army
of the invader. He gained an advantageous post, and with great bravery made
such an attack upon the undisciplined Scots, that they were soon thrown into
confusion, and after suffering a dreadful slaughter, made an inglorious
conclusion of their invasion, by a precipitate retreat into their own country.
Uchtred did not conduct his success with temperance; he sullied his victory
with cruelty, inhumanly slaughtering in cold blood, the nobility and officers
of rank which were among his prisoners, their heads becoming the horrid
furniture of the walls of Durham. King Ethelred overlooked this barbarity, and
rewarded his valor by giving him in marriage his daughter Edgiva, with a
princely portion; his father resigning his possessions to the young hero, the
King added thereto the county of York. The savage barbarity of those times is
shocking to humanity; there was seldom a victory obtained in the reciprocal
depredations made on the borders, but the utmost cruelty and undistinguished
slaughter was the consequence. The warfare itself was infamous; for it was no
better than robbing by a Banditti commanded by Kings, who sullied the luster of
a Crown by impious acts which will for ever remain ignominious in story.

In the year 1015, the Danes again besieged and took this place, and pillaged
it. Lel. Col. v. 2. p. 285.


Bambrough is said to have been in good repair at the time of the conquest,
when it is probable it was put into the custody of some trusty Norman, and had
additions made to the works; as the present area contained within its walls
measures upwards of eight acres, instead of three, as described by Hoveden
Gross.


Whilst Malcolm King of Scotland was carrying his horrid ravages along the
banks of Tees, Gospatric made an incursion into Cumberland, which the Scottish
King then held by force of arms; and having laid waste the country, he returned
to Bambrough laden with spoils: but this was succeeded by a severe revenge,
for Malcolm soon after entered Northumberland, and after cruel depredations,
carried with him a multitude of the inhabitants into slavery. Dum sic saevit
Malcolin, Cospatricius comes Cumberland: vastavit, ac cum spoliis onustus
rediit, and in Bebbanburg munitione firmiss: se conclusit. Erat id temporis
Cumberland sub regis Malcolini domino, non jure possessa, sed violenter
subjugata.

Malcolinus propter excursionem Cospatritii in Cumberland, Northumbr. saeviss.
strage depopulatus est, abducta postea magna hominum in servitutem multitudine.

Lel. Col. v. p. 382.


In the reign of William II. A. D. 1095, on the defection of Mowbray Earl of
Northumberland, the royal troops laid siege to Bambrough, under the command of
the Sovereign, the Earl having taken refuge there. The King finding the place
impregnable, to distress the garrison, and cut off all succors of men and
provisions, he erected a fortress in the neighborhood, according to the art of
war practiced in those days, which was named Malvoisin, or the bad neighbor,
in which he placed a strong garrison, and drew off the main body of his army
southward. The Earl by means of a secret correspondence held with some of the
garrison of Newcastle, had entertained hopes of making himself master of that
place: with that intent, under covert of the night, he set out from Bambrough,
accompanied by 30 horsemen, but being observed by the garrison of Malvoisin,
was pursued. When he arrived at Newcastle, he found the gates shut against him,
and the garrison apprized of his intention: he was now reduced to the necessity
of flying to the monastery of St. Oswin at Tynemouth, where he was besieged six
days, and received a wound in his leg; at length he and his followers having
retired to the sanctuary, in defiance of the holy prescription, were dragged
forth, and delivered up prisoners to the King. Robertus de Mulbrai comes
Northumbr. and Gul. de Auco cum multis aliis regem Gul. Rufum reg. vitaque
privare, and filium Amitae illius Stephanum de Albemarla conati sunt regem
constituere.

Moreal propinquus Mulbraii reddidit castellum de Bebbanberg Gul. Rufo.

Gul. Rufus jussit oculos erui and testiculos abscidi Gul. Auco duello apud
Saresbyri victo.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 159.
His wife, with one Morael, his kinsman and Lieutenant, still held out against
the besiegers, and kept the castle of Bambrough, in defiance of every assault,
and every device then practiced in sieges. The King, wearied with this
unsuccessful procedure, led forth his prisoner before the walls, and threatened
instantly to put out his eyes, and give him up to torture, if the garrison did
not surrender. Morael, overcome by the threatening calamity which impended on
the head of his Lord, capitulated; and for his bravery and singular fidelity,
the King pardoned his offenses, and took him into favor; at the same time
sparing the Earl's life, committing him prisoner to the castle of Windsor.
About this period of time the following old poem seems to have been composed;
but to what historic fact (if any) it relates, I have not been able to
discover. It was communicated to me by the Rev. Mr Lamb of Norham.

The LAIDLEY This is a northern corruption for Loathly; i. e. loathsome.
WORM of SPINDLESTON HEUGHS.
Virgo jam serpens sinuosa volumina versat,
Mill trahens varios adverso sole colores,
Arrectis horret squamis et sibilat ore;
Arduaque insurgens navem de littore pulsat.

A Song 500 years old, made by the old Mountain Bard, Duncan Frasier, living on
Cheviot A. D. 1270. From an ancient manuscript.
THE King is gone from Bambrough castle:
Long may the Princess mourn,
Long may she stand on the castle wall,
Looking for his return.
She has knotted the keys upon a string,
And with her she has them taken,
She has cast them over her left shoulder,
And to the gate she is gane.
She tripped out, she tripped in,
She tript into the yard:
But it was more for the King's sake,
Than for the Queen's regard.
It fell out on a day the King
Brought the Queen with him home:
And all the Lords, in our country,
To welcome them did come.
Oh! welcome father, the Lady cries,
Unto your halls and bowers;
And so are you my stepmother,
For all that is here is yours.
A Lord said, wondering while she spoke,
This Princess of the North
Surpasses all of female kind
In beauty, and in worth.
The envious Queen replied, at least
You might have excepted me;
In a few hours, I will her bring
Down to a low degree.
I will liken her to a Laidley Worm
That warps about the stone,
And not, till Childy There is a street now called the Wynd at Bambrough.
Wynd comes back,
Shall she again be won.
The Princess stood at her bower door
Laughing: who could her blame?
But ever the next day's sun went down,
A long worm she became.
For seven miles east, and seven miles west,
And seven miles north, and south,
No blade of grass or corn could grow,
So venomous was her mouth.
The milk of seven stately cows,
It was costly her to keep,
Was brought her daily, which she drank
Before she went to sleep.
At this day may be seen the cave,
Which held her folded up,
And the stone trough, the very same
Out of which she did sup.
Word went east, and word went west,
And word is gone over the sea,
That a Laidley Worm in Spindleston Heughs
Would ruin the north country.
Word went east, and word went west,
And over the sea did go;
The child of Wynd got wit of it,
Which filled his heart with woe.
He called straight his merry men all,
They thirty were and three:
I wish I were at Spindleston,
This desperate worm to see.
We have no time now here to waste,
Hence quickly let us sail;
My only sister Margaret
Something, I fear, does ail.
They built a ship without delay,
With masts of the rown-tree, Mountain ash.

With fluttering sails of silk so fine,
And set her on the sea.
They went aboard. The wind with speed
Blew them along the deep,
At length they spied an huge square tower,
On a rock high and steep.
The sea was smooth, the weather clear,
When they approached nigher,
King Ida's castle they well knew,
And the banks of Bambroughshire.
The Queen looked out at her bower-window,
To see what she could see;
There she espied a gallant ship
Sailing upon the sea.
When she beheld the silken sails,
Full glancing in the sun,
To sink the ship she sent away
Her witch-wives every one.
Their spells were vain. The hags returned
To the Queen in sorrowful mood,
Crying, That witches have no power,
Where there is rown-tree wood.
Her last effort, she sent a boat,
Which in the haven lay,
With armed men to board the ship;
But they were driven away.
The worm leapt up, the worm leapt down,
She plaited round the stane;
And ay as the ship came to the land
She banged it off again.
The child then ran out of her reach
The ship on Budle sand;
And jumping into the shallow sea
Securely got to land.
And now he drew his berry-brown sword,
And laid it on her head;
And swore if she did harm to him
That he would strike her dead.
Oh! quit thy sword, and bend thy bow,
And give me kisses three;
For though I am a poisonous worm,
No hurt I will do to thee.
Oh! quit thy sword, and bend thy bow,
And give me kisses three;
If I am not won ever the son go down,
Won I shall never be.
He quitted his sword, he bent his bow,
He gave her kisses three;
She crept into a hole a worm,
But stepped out a Lady.
No clothing had this Lady fine,
To keep her from the cold;
He took his mantle from him about,
And round her did it fold.
He has taken his mantle from him about,
And it he wrapped her in;
And they are up to Bambrough castle,
As fast as they can win.
His absence, and her serpent shape,
The King had long deplored:
He now rejoiced to see them both
Again to him restored.
The Queen they wanted, whom they found
All pale, and sore afraid,
Because she knew her power must yield
To Childy Wynds, who said,
Woe be to thee, thou wicked witch,
An ill death may thou dee;
As thou my sister have likened,
So likened shall thou be.
I will turn you into a toad,
That on the ground does wend;
And won, won shall thou never be
Till this world has an end.
Now on the sand near Ida's tower
She crawls a loathsome toad,
And venom spits on every maid
She meets upon her road.
The virgins all of Bambrough town
Will swear that they have seen
This spiteful toad of monstrous size,
Whilst walking they have been.
All folks believe within the shire
This story to be true;
And they all run to Spindleston,
The cave and trough to view.
This fact now Duncan Frasier,
Of Cheviot, sings in rhyme;
Lest Bambroughshire men should forget
Some part of it in time.



In the next reign it was entrusted by King Henry I. to Eustace Fitz-John, who
was dispossessed of it and his other employments by King Stephen, jealous of
his attachment to Maud, daughter of King Henry I. Irritated at this injury,
Fitz-John attached himself to David King of Scotland, and levied a great force
from his barony of Alnwick, with which he openly joined the Scotch invader.
They marched toward Bambrough, and made a regular attack; but so far from
being able to possess the place, they only forced an outwork, which had been
lately erected, and put to the sword about 100 of the defenders, by whose
reproachful speeches they were irritated to the assault. After destroying the
corn, hamlets, and erections in the adjacent country, they marched southward;
and in the county of Durham being joined by a large body of forces from
Galloway and Cumberland, with King David at their head, they advanced to
Northallerton, and soon after were defeated at the battle of the standard.

In the conditions of peace made between King Stephen and King David I. of
Scotland, it was stipulated, that the earldom of Northumberland should be
conclusively settled on Prince Henry, David's son, with all its appendages,
except Bambrough and Newcastle, which the English Monarch was to retain on
Henry's receiving a compensation by lands in the south of England. All the
Barons within this earldom did homage to Prince Henry for their estates, with a
salvo for the fealty they had sworn to King Stephen, it having also been
premised, that the laws and customs established by King Henry I. in
Northumberland should remain in force. This treaty was ratified at Durham, in
the month of April, A. D. 1139, in the presence of Maude Queen of England and a
great assembly of the Barons of both nations; and thereupon the King of
Scotland and his son entered into compact for the maintenance of peace with
England during their lives; for the observance of which Cospatric Earl of
March, Hugh de Morvill, Fergus Mel and Mac were given as hostages.

King Henry II. in the third year of his reign, had restored to him, by Malcolm
IV. King of Scotland, the northern territories which King Stephen had granted
to David King of Scotland: and therewith King Henry was put in possession of
the city of Carlisle, the castle of Bambrough, and Newcastle upon Tyne. It is
presumed by some authors, that David having taken advantage of the broils in
which King Stephen was involved, had seized the castle of Bambrough; as in the
treaty when the earldom of Northumberland was resigned to Prince Henry, this
fortress and Newcastle were expressly reserved to the Crown of England.

In the 16th year of King Henry the Second's reign, some great work seems to
have been added to this fortress, as in Madox's History of the Exchequer, under
the article of Amercements, it appears one William, son of Waldef, was fined
five marks for refusing his assistance in the King's works at Baenburg Castle:
he was fined also 40s. to have a respite touching the said works. Perhaps at
this time the Keep was built; its great similarity to that of Dover, the work
of that reign, makes it at least probable. Gross.


In the time of King Richard I. Hugh Bishop of Durham held this castle, but his
power was of short date; for the King being offended at his insolence,
disseized him of this place, together with the county of Northumberland, and
imposed on him a fine of 2000 marks.

William Heron, son of Jordan Heron, who held a barony in this county by the
service of one Knight's fee, as his ancestors had done from the conquest, was
in the 32d year of King Henry III. constituted Governor of Bambrough Castle,
and of Pickering and Scarbrough, in Yorkshire: in which appointments he was
succeeded in the 37th year of the same reign, by John Lexington, Knt. Chief
Justice of the Forests North of Trent.

In 1296, King Edward I. summoned John Baliol, King of Scotland to renew his
homage at this castle; but the proud vassal forgetting his fidelity, contemned
the command, and levied an army to resist the English arms, if Edward entered
his kingdom. Edward burning with indignation at this insolence, marched to
Berwick, which he took by storm, and put the garrison to the sword. From thence
proceeding to Dunbar, near which place the Scotch army waited his approach, an
engagement ensued, in which the English were victorious: the field of battle
was covered with innumerable carcasses, 22,000 Scots, some Historians assert,
fell that day. Dunbar was taken, and Baliol was made prisoner. The great trophy
of this victory, was the stone chair in which the Kings of Scotland had been
crowned from the earliest times. This was the palladium of the Scotch, the loss
of which shook the superstition of the whole empire. This chair was brought in
triumph to England, with the King in chains, and was placed in the abbey of
Westminster, where it has remained for regal honors ever since -- a degree of
appropriation which nothing but the bigotry and superstition of that age could
have decreed to it in England. To increase the superstitions import of this
palladium of monarchy, it is reported that it contains or is composed of the
stone of Beth-el, on which Jacob slept when he had the beatific vision, and
received the promises of inheritance from the voice of the Supreme.


Isabel de Beaumont, related to Eleanor Queen of Edward I. sister to Lord Henry
Beaumont, and widow of John de Vesey, afterward wife of John Duke of Brabant,
had a grant of this castle for her life, on proviso that she did not marry
again. During her possession, Piers de Gaveston, Earl of Cornwall, was
protected here from the vengeance of an injured and incensed nobility. In 1312,
he was dragged from the castle of Scarbrough, and given up to the hands of his
adversaries.

In the year 1311, this castle, on the marriage of the Lady Vesey, was
reassumed by government, and given to Lord Percy. Carte, II. 320. Dug. I. 273.


In 1355, Earl Murray being taken prisoner by King Edward III. was committed
prisoner to this castle, from whence he was removed to Nottingham, and lastly
to Windsor.

It was held for a short time by Roger Heron, a younger son of William Heron
before mentioned; after which it was conferred on Henry Percy, for his good
services in the Scotch wars. In this family it continued for several ages, and
a grant of this castle, together with the manor and fee farms of the town, was
made to his grandson for life. In the reign of King Henry VI. Henry Percy, Earl
of Northumberland, was Constable. During the contention between the King and
the House of York, there were diverse Governors, according to the party which
happened to be victorious. Sir Ralph Gray and John Lord Wenlock were both of
them Constables for Henry VI. the latter in the 25th year of that King: he
nevertheless sided with King Edward IV. and served under him at Towton.

In the second year of the reign of King Edward IV. an insurrection of the
Lancastrian party appearing in the North, the King advanced to Northumberland,
and at once laid siege to the three castles of Alnwick, Dunstanburgh, and
Bambrough. Ten thousand forces invested the latter under the command of the
Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Arundel, the Lord Ogle, and the Lord Montecute:
the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Pembroke, Lord Roos, and Sir Ralph Percy
maintained the fortress until Christmas eve, when it was surrendered. The Lords
Pembroke and Roos effected their escape, and the Duke of Somerset and Sir Ralph
Percy received the royal pardon. The Queen still struggling against the
torrents of adversity, such in the whole, as royalty seldom ever experienced,
again made head in Northumberland. Sir Ralph Gray surprised the castle of
Bambrough, which was then in the keeping of Sir John Astley; and he garrisoned
it with Scotch troops: but the battle of Hexham Levels soon put a final end to
these commotions, and gave a conclusive blow to the hopes of the House of
Lancaster. Sir Ralph Gray and Sir Humphrey Nevill were excepted in the general
pardon. Nevill soon afterward suffered at York, but Sir Ralph Gray knowing his
perilous estate, held out the castle of Bambrough until July. The Lords
Montecute and Warwick conducted the siege. A tower being beat down by the
canon, Sir Ralph received such bruizes by its fall, that he was taken up for
dead; and the garrison dismayed at the catastrophe, immediately surrendered. It
was Sir Ralph's fate to survive the day, and afterward to suffer death as a
traitor at York.

The damages the castle had sustained, were not repaired in that or the
succeeding reigns: King Henry VII. and King Henry VIII. both esteemed those
castles as places of refuge only for malcontents. From the time of King Edward
IV. there is a total suspension of its history. By the escheats of the 10th of
Queen Elizabeth, it appears to be in the Crown, with the adjoining castle of
Dunstanburgh. Sir John Foster of Bambrough Abbey, was then Governor of this
castle. His grandson, John Foster, Esquire had a grant of the manor of Bambrough
from King James; but in the year 1715, his descendant forfeited, and it was
purchased by his uncle, Lord Crew. I am indebted to Ralph Spearman, Esquire of
Eachwick, in the county of Northumberland, for the following curious survey,
taken by inquisition, of this castle, its rights and liberties.

Inquisitio indentata capta apud Bamburge in com. Northumb. xvio die Aprilis
anno regni Eliz. Dei gra. Anglie France et Hibernie Fidei Defensoris etc.
Decimo octavo 1576 Coram Johae Selbye Ar. janitore ville Barwici Willimo Reed
Ar. capitaneo insulae sacre and Thomae Bates Generoso Supervisore omniu. and
singulor. Dm^ior. Man^ior. terraru. et Tentoru. dic. dn^e Rin^i in com.
Northumbr. virtute commissionis dce Dme Rin^e eisdem commissionar. ac Cuthberto
Collingwood Militi and Roberto Raynes eis quinq. quatuor aut tribus eoru.
direct et hinc inquisit annexe sacrum Thome Bradford Ar. Nicholas Hebburne
Genesis Petri Wetwood Genesis Willimi Wallis Genesis Jacobi Wallis Genesis Edwardi Hebburne
Genesis Radi Collingwood Genesis Thome Lilburne Genesis Edwardi Mastians Genesis Uswini
Mastians Genesis Thome Swinho Gene. de Mowlsen Roberti Roddam Genesis Cuthberti Ogle
de Dichburne Genesis Oswaldi Younghusbande de Budley Yeoman qui super sacrum etc.
dicunt quod sup. castri de Bamburge in dicta commissione specificati ac extent
terrar. Dn^icat. et alior. possessionem eid. castro pertinet. cum juribus
previligiis consuetudinibus et servitiis eid. castro pertinent et aliis
sircumstantibus juxta tenorum et effectum quorundam articulor. eid.
commissionis annexed. in hac inquisit. postea in lingua Anglicana script. et
resitat. est vera et ad quam quidem jur. interessent.

The survey and view taken of the castle of Bambrough, in the county of
Northumberland, the 2^th of October 1574, in the 16th year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lady the Queens Matye that now is, by the Commissioners and Jury
abovenamed as follows: To the first article, the said castle is situate upon
a main rock, on the sea bank, a very strong situation; and has on the cost
northward from him the Holy Island, distant by estimacon 4 miles; and from
thence the Queens Majties town of Barwicke, distant from Island 6 miles; and
toward the south, from Bambrughe, on the sea coast, y^. situate the castle of
Dunstenburge, parcel of her Maties possession of the Duchy of Lancaster,
distant 5 miles, or thereabouts; which said castle of Bamburge, in the said
commission named, is in utter ruin and decay, the drawbridge and gates so
broken, that there is noe usual enter on the fore part, save at a breach on
the wall, that has been well walled, and yet has walls much decayed
standing; and is of three wards, in the two utter wards whereof nothing is but
walls much decayed; in the innermost ward is one tower of 25 yards square by
estimation standing upon the topp of the rock, and in the same a well of fresh
water, the walls whereof are upright, but much worn and decayed with weather,
the roof whereof, which has been timber, and swintime covered with lead, as
it seemed, is utterly decayed and gone; within the said ward has been also
the principal lodging of the house, and as it may appear, all offices belonging
thereunto, which for the more part, as it seame, have been long in decay, save
the remotese walls do in the most part thereof stand, and yet in one part of
the same lodging has been of late a lodging for the Captain, the parts
whereof called the hall and great chamber have been covered with lead, and
yet have some lead upon them, and in some parts revin and the lead taken away.
The hall in the Captain's lodging, containing in lenth 6 yeards and in breath 7
yeards by estimation, has lead upon him yet, by estimation (...) feathers; the
great chamber, containing in lenth 10 yeards and in breath 5 yeards by
estimation, has lead yet remaining to the va^ of (...) foothers by estimation,
by reason of the lead of both houses decayed and taken awa^

The timber of both the said houses is piched and in much decay; within the
said ward have been of late a chapel and other little turats covered, all
which be now utterly decayed, saveing the (...) walls of the most part
thereof, much worn with weather, standith. The Cee Town, there is at this day
no place or town of that name, that we can know, unless that be menie of the
town of Bamburghe, which is situate not far from the foresaid castle, on the
west part thereof, and has been a borough and market town, but now not
frequented with market, but in manner decayed, and the most part thereof
desolate and unbielded. The Lordshippe is reputed to be the ancient inheritance
of the crown and ancient demayne, and has the liberties, royalties,
privileges, and services belonging thereto, and anciently have used the same;
and the tenants of certain towns there, as of Bamburgh, Shoston, and Sunderland
are not empleaded, nor do not few for that inheritance, but only in the
courts there, and have their courts kept at certain customable days
accordingly. There is belonging to the said castle the demain lands of
Bamburghe, demain lands at Sunderland, the towns or hamlets of Bedenhall,
Shoston, and Sunderland, all which be reputed as the upper Lordshipp belonging
to the said castle. And besides the payment of the rents in money and grains
mentioned in the next article following, they or some of them perfectly there
known, do owe by their tenure and by custom certain services to the said
castle, as the casting away of sand and clenging the castle thereof, certain
daysworks of husband labor for occupation and manuring of the said demayne
lands; and also that every two tenants should bring every year one carte load
of wood from Rochwood, and one foother of turves from the Kings Moore to said
castle, to be spent with certain other accustomable services: to the said
castle also belongs a certain peace of ground, which as it seems has
been enclosed, because there remains yet about it the mencon where the ditch
has been, called by the name of Rotchwood, where great woods has been, but
now utterly decayed, and noe wood at all remains thereon: there is also
certain other towns, as Bewicke, Dichburne, Calvele, Eslingtone, Yetlingtone,
Midletone, Middle Midletone, North Midletone, South Mowlflen, and Bedenhall,
which pay yearly several rents unto the said castle, which rents be commonly
called Drimgage. As this service has of late engaged the attention of
Antiquaries, the following definitions are worthy a place here.

Drenches or Drenges, Drengi, were tennets in capite, says an ancient MS.
Doomsday, Tit. Lest. Reg. Pictaviens Neuton. They were, says Spelman, E^ge^ere
vassallorum non ignobilium, cum singuli qui in Doomsday nominantur, singula
po^ent mane^a. Such as at the conquest being put out of their estates, were
afterward restored; for that they being before owner thereof, were against him
neither by their persons or councils; Coke on Lit. fo. 5. says, Dre^e^
misprinted there for Drenches, are free tenants of a manor. See also Mon. Ang.
2 part, fo. 598.

Dre^g^giam, the tenure by which the Drenches held their lands, of which see
Trin. 21 Edw. 3. Eb^r and Northumbr. Rot 101. and we may observe, says Spelman,
Qu^ Drengorum classe-erant vel per Drengagium tenure sua incoluisse (...) ^te
adv^tur N^an^ra^n.

S^r Matthew Have, in his Exposition of the Vetripont Charter, says there is no
such tenure in the southern part of England, and observes from the records
before him, that it drew wardship and relief. Sir Henry Spelman re^ites several
records, wherein these words had occurred to him, and conjectures upon the
whole, that the Drenges were free tenants holding by military service. But
there are other records, which had not fallen under the inspection of that
learned author, that destroy this notion entirely. Mr Denton, from the Red Book
in the Exchequer, observes, that Sir Hugh Mor^il, in Westmoreland, changed
drengage into free service (several instances are quoted). At Clifton also in
this county, and other neighboring parts, there were drengage tenants; and in
the 31st Edw. 3. Gilbert de Eugain, of Clifton, granted by indenture to Roger
de Clifford, Lord of Westmoreland, the services of diverse persons there by
name, with their bodies and all that belonged to them (cum eorum corporious et
little equ^lis) during the life of the said Roger. So that they seem to have
been drudges to perform the most servile and laborious offices. And of these
Roger had great use at Brougham; for of him the Countess of Pembroke's Memoirs
take notice, that he was a lover of building, and a great repairer of his
ancient castles, the seats of his ancestors. They seem to have been tenants in
pure villenage, who were bound to the Lord as members of and annexed to the
manor, and were usually sold with the farm to which they belonged.

Nicholson and Burn. Hist. of Westmoreland. The work from whence the last
quotation is made, is marked with many forced and uncouth etymologies and
derivations: the above of ^ru^ges from ore^ges. not a little remarkable. A more
perfect knowledge of the feodal ten^tes would have discovered the sutility and
inconsistency of the above argument. There were certainly villains in C^fton,
yet it does not follow that the drenges and they were one.

We do not find these tenants mentioned in Blakiston's Commentaries or
Sullivan's Lectures. The villains or lazzi held no lands but at the will of the
Lord, and were in absolute vassalage. When they bettered their condition, they
became base copyholders* It would be a change not instanced in records of the
feodal tenures, for a villain to be raised to free service. The original
acceptance of the old word Dre^, is not known to us, or to what language it
belongs: Balley in his Dictionary supposes it derived from the Saxon (...), a
Drone.


And the same towns also do make appearance at the head courts, or in
default thereof lie in fine or be mercyed, and what other services they or any
of them be charged with all the jury knows not. There is belonging to the
said castle certain fishings in the water of Tweed, the rents whereof and all
other the premises belonging to the said castle, does particularly appear in
a rentale and scedule hereunto annexed, with the names of the occupiers and
payers of the same. The demaine lands of the said castle do lie in three
several fields, the southwest and north fields, and do extend in the south
fields, beginning at the castle gates, goeing sowth between the Sea and the
Straidburne to the south side of the Straid field, and the turning west up the
said burn to a ditch which is nere betwixt the demains and a parcel of
Learmuth lands, and then turning south by the same diche to the south end of
Baseletche, in the which compass there is a parcel of ground sometime
belonging't, Colte and diverse others cont. by estimac. one acre and a half
from the south, and of Baseletch close that goes south by certain mark
stones, and other meres between the demains and the lands of Sir Thomas Gray,
and between the demains and the lands of the Earl of Rutlande, till it come
to the Longdales in the King's Meadow, and then turns west to a diche that is
more between the demains and the fields of Burton, and then turns southest a
certain space, and then east to a diche between the demains and Fowbridge
fields, and the demains of Bamburgh and the demains of Shoston to the sea shore
to the said castle, in which compass there is a parcel of Learmoths land,
containing by estimation acres, all the residewe of the demains being
contains by estimation, in areable land, meadow, and pasture, (...) acres. In
the west field there is one forlong containing by estimation 5 acres, called
the Blind Wells, joyneing on the one part to Learmoth's lands, and one the
other part to a furlong of the said demains called Shoutrings, which
contains by estimation 8 acres, and joyneth to another furlong of the same
demains called Starrehoetopps, containing by estimation (...) acres, and
joyneth to the fields of Barton, and one the north part to another furlong of
same demains called the Stake Flatt, containing by estimation 7 acres, joning
to the fields of Budle on the one part, and to another flatt of the said
demains called Rags Flatt, containing by estimation 3 acres, of which parcells
some be with a diche lately made, enclosed with other lands, and some be left
out and yey be not so well bounded with perfect meres as the residue of the
demains be. There is another parcel of the said demains called Potter Field,
lyeing all together, saveing that the way or lane leading west out of the town
of Bamburghe divides that in that place, and has some part thereof one the
south side of the way, and contains in the whole by estimation acres: the
north fields of the demains lies alltogedder, and has one the west part
Learmoth's lands, one the south part a letch, and joyneth to the sea,
containing by estimation (...) acres. There is a parcel of land in Shoston
Fields, in the tenure of William Hood, parcel of Porter Land, and of the said
demains, containing in acres by acres 6. The demaine lands, called the Mains of
Shoston, belonging to the said castle, lies in the fields of Shoston
altogidder, in the north part adjoyneing to parcel of the demains of
Bamburgh, and on Learmowths lands lying within compass of the said demains and
in other parts, save a piece of the est part abutting opon parcel of the said
Learmowth's lands that is environed with the fields and lands of Shostons, and
contains by estimacon (...) acres.

To the fourth, the said castle is in utter ruin and decay, as before is
menconed, and the place called the town is not known, unless it be the town
of Bamburgh, which is likewise in decay and ruin, and very few houses in
respect of the buildings that have been there, and in respect of the intre of
burgage are now there standing, but when, where, how, or by whom, or to what
damage or loss or vallew we cannot understand or estimate; yet for the decay
of the said castle of late time, the deposicons of certain persons who were
servants to Sir John Horsley, late Captain, there is by virtue of the said
admissione, taken as follows at Bambrugh the 24th of October, in the 17th
year of the rain of the Queens Matie that now is.

William Hunter of Thorny Haugh, in the county of Northumberland, aged 53
years, or thereabouts, sworn and examined to the first, second, third,
fowrth, fifthe, and sixthe says, that in the time of Sir John Horsley, late
Captain of the said castle, and at his death there was in the said castle one
hall, one great chamber, and one other chamber on the east side of the hall,
all covered with lead, and furnished in other reparacons at that time
convenient to be dwelled in; and that there was at that time two other chambers
in the said castle likewise covered with lead and in like reparacons; and that
there was in the said castle kitchinge covered with flaggs, and a chapel
covered with slate; and that under the said hall and great chamber were
scellers for offices, with doors and all other foornitours as were convenient:
and being examined how he knew the same to be true, he says Sir John Horsley
being the last Captain there, the said Sir John Horsley did dwell and keep his
house continueally in the said castle, and that this deponent was his servant,
and did for the most part attend upon him there.

Henry Mustchant of the Greans, in the countye of Northumberland, of the age of
60 years, or thereabouts, sworn and examined to the first, second, third,
fowrth, and fifth and sixth, says in all things as his presests have said,
which ludginging is now in utter ruin and decay, the chapel, timber, and
stones clean taken away, and all the other bieldings before mentioned, save
only the hall and great chamber, which have yet some lead upon them as
appears that in the answer of the first article, the timber by reason of the
lead taken away much pyched, but by whom the same spoil is done they know not.

To the 5th, for the decay of the castle is before declared, and what the
repair thereof will cost they know not; but if it shall be to any purpose to
restore the former strenth and beautye thereof, the charges will be great, and
they say to their knowledge the Queens Matie is to repair and maintain the
same, because that is the ancient inheritance of the Crown: and of the town
specified in that article be the town of Bambrughe, they say to their knowledge
the houses decayed and ruinewse are to be repared and maintaned by the owners
and inheritours of the said lands and burgage, as in all other boroughs is
usual.

To the 6th, they know not of any lands, tenements, or services, or rents
withdrawn or kept back, but they say that, etc. etc.

In cujus rei testimon huic inquisit, tam predict. Commissionar. quod prefat.
Jur. Sigill. sues a posuerunt.




The town of Bambrough is now reduced to a mean village, no traces of its
splendor as a royal borough and the seat of Kings remaining. It sent Members
to Parliament in the reign of King Edward I.* In King Edward the Third's time
it contributed one vessel to the expedition against Calais. The shire of
Bambrough is of great extent, containing the baronies of Bradford, Vicount, and
Muschamp, formerly a separate franchise, and possessed of certain immunities
and privileges now obsolete.

In 1137, during the reign of King Henry I. a Monastery was founded at
Bambrough, for Canons Regular of the order of St. Austin, subordinate and as a
cell to Nosthell, near Pomfret, in the county of York, valued at the
dissolution, by Dugdale at 116l. 12s. 3d. but by Speed 124l. 15s. 7d. The site
of the monastery, with its possessions as parcel of St. Oswald of Nosthell,
were granted to John Foster, 37 King Henry VIII. as is set forth in Tanner's
Notitia, p. 392. King Henry gave the churches of St. Oswald and St. Aidan here
to the beforementioned priory.

By license of King Edward II. an Hospital was founded here dedicated to Mary
Magdalen. Tanner's words, p. 396, are, "Here was an old Hospital dedicated to
St. Mary Magdalen." Vide Pat. 7 Edw. 2. Pat. 22 Edw. 3. Pat. 37 Edw. 3. Pat. 50
Edw. 3. Escheat Northumb. 50 Edw. 3.


Leland speaks of a fair college a little without Bambrough. This was a
religious house founded by King Henry III. for Preaching Friars. Queen
Elizabeth, in the second year of her reign, granted the site to Thomas Reeve
and Nicholas Pinder. Tanner, p. 396. Vide Rot. Pat. 50 Hen 3. Cart. 51 Henry 3
Pro december acris terrae ad ^rium construendum. Pat. 51 Hen. 3. Pat. 22 Edw 1.
Prope finem rotuli.


Bambrough was a very extensive Deanery, comprehending a tract from Berwick to
Kirk Newton, taking in Norham.

The church of Bambrough is a plain structure; there is no great mark of
antiquity in the building; when or by whom it was erected is not known. The
church within the castle walls, I presume, had Oswald for its Note to p. 170.
-- 23d Parl. King Edward I. John le Graystang and William le Coroner, Members.
founder; this edifice seems to be of much more modern date. In a nich in the
wall is a recumbent effigy of a Knight Templar, the personage represented
unknown. As these apertures on the building of churches were designed for the
tombs of founders or other benefactors, this tomb reduces the antiquity of the
church to a late era; and indeed the whole building has that appearance.
Unless we conceive the outworks of the fortifications of Bambrough were of
great extent, it is not reconcilable that this should be the church founded by
King Oswald.

There are monuments of the Foster family in this church, but all of inferior
date to the beforementioned grants. Of which the two following inscriptions
are the most singular; and as they contain some history of the family, may be
acceptable to the reader.

On a monument of black marble in the chancel.
Scio quod Redemptor meus vivit in coelis.
Claudius Forsterus Eques Aurat' et Baronettus, antiqua numerosa et Nobili
Forsteroru Familia in Com. Northumb. oriundus Dno Nicholao Forstero Fortiss.
illi' viri Filio Dni Joannis Forster, Qui 37 Anos Mediar. Marchiar. Scota vers'
Dns Guardian' Extitit, Fili' and Haeres. Honoratiss. etiam Dnis Cumbriae et
Bedf. Comitib' nec non insigni et illustri Fenwicoru Progeniei totiq. Generosu
Genti inter Tinam and Tweda Celeberr. Sanguine Conjunct' Castri deniq. Bamburg.
Dns sceniscall et summ' Constabulari obiit in manerio suo De Alba-Terra in
commit. Northumbr. Ano Sal. Nost. 16^3.

Memoriae sacru Lugens posuit uxor ejus Dna Elizabetha Guilielmi Fenwici de
Wallingtonia Equitis Aurati, Filia.

On a monument of white marble in the chancel.

In the vault below lie buried the bodies of WILLIAM JOHN and FERDINAND sons of
SIR WILLIAM FORSTER Born Nov. 12, 1674. P. R.
of BAMBROUGH KNT. by DOROTHY Ob. 26 Sept. B. 30, 1672. P. R.
daughter of SIR WILLIAM SELBY of TWISDALE BART. and by ELEANOR Daughter of
FERDINANDO LORD FAIRFAX of DENTON WILLIAM was born 28th July 1666 married
ELIZABETH Daughter of WILLIAM PERT ESQR. died 1st Sept. 1700 without issue.
JOHN was born 24th Sept. 1668 died 15th Novr. 1699 FERDINAND was born 14th
Feby. 1669 died 22d Augt. 1701 B. 2 Sep. P. R.
Both unmarried They had another Brother NICHOLAS who did young and was buried
in the Church of Saint Mary in the South Baiely in Durham As also five Sisters

ELEANOR and DOROTHY who both died very young.

FRANCES married to THOMAS FORSTER B. 19 Dec. 1673. P. R.
of ETHERSTONE Esqr

To whom she had several children. MARY who died unmarried And DOROTHY Ob. 16
Oct. 1715.
wife of the RT HONOBLE THE LORD CREWE Lord Bishop of Durham Of whom their
Mother died. SHE Being the only one remaining of the Family Set up this
monument in memory of her dear Brothers As the last respect that could be paid
them For their true affection To the CHURCH, ye MONARCHY their COUNTRY and
their SISTER Ao 1711 This being the burying place of their Ancestors.




It is necessary in this place to take a particular view of the charity of Lord
Crew, who purchased the forfeited estates of the Fosters. In Mr Randal's
Manuscripts it is stated, that Bambrough was afterward granted to his
grandson, Claudius Forster, Esquire Mar. 15, 7 King James I. Dorothy the only child
of William Forster, Knt. marrying Nathaniel Lord Crewe, Bishop of Durham, and
Baron of Steane in the county of Northampton, July 23, 1700, brought with her
the estates of Bambrough and Blanchland. She died without issue.

"His Lordship left by will, dated June 24th, 1720, the said estates to
charitable uses.

There are several good rooms furnished in the tower. Dr R. Trevor, Bishop of
Durham, held a confirmation at Bambrough, on Sunday August 10th, 1766, for that
parish, and dined with Dr. Sharp at the castle, in the large room where the
manor court is held

Randal's Man.
It is not arrogant to say, that his bequests have furnished the most exalted
degree of charitable distribution, that ever flowed from a private donation in
this country.

Lord Crew's will bears date the 24th June, 1720, and he died the 18th of
September, in the 88th year of his age, at Stene, the seat of his ancestors, in
Northamptonshire. The appropriations which particularly relate to Bambrough,
are the sole objects of my present attention. I cannot describe them to the
reader in more expressive language, than that of the worthy and learned
traveller Mr Pennant; from whose works I will select a few sentences.

The castle, and the manor belonging it, was once the property of the Forsters;
but purchased by Lord Crew, Bishop of Durham, and with other considerable
estates, left vested in Trustees, to be applied to unconfined charitable uses.
Three of these Trustees are a majority: one Dr. Sharp.
of them makes this place his residence, and blesses the coast by his judicious
and humane application of the Prelate's generous bequest. He has repaired and
rendered habitable the great square tower: the part reserved for himself and
family, is a large hall and a few smaller apartments; but the rest of the
spacious edifice is allotted for purposes, which make the heart to glow with
joy when thought of. The upper part is an ample granary; from whence corn is
dispensed to the poor without distinction, even in the dearest time, at the
rate of four shillings a bushel; and the distressed, for many miles round,
often experience the convenience of this benefaction.

Other apartments are fitted up for shipwrecked sailors, and bedding is
provided for 30, should such a number happen to be cast on shore at the same
time. A constant patrol is kept every stormy night along this tempestuous
coast, for above 8 miles, the length of the manor, by which means numbers of
lives have been preserved. Many poor wretches are often found on the shore in a
state of insensibility; but by timely relief, are soon brought to themselves.

It often happens, that ships strike in such a manner on the rocks as to be
capable of relief, in case numbers of people could be suddenly assembled: for
that purpose a cannon Once belonging to a Dutch frigate of 40 guns, which with
all the crew was lost opposite to the castle, about 60 years ago.
is fixed on the top of the tower, which is fired once, if the accident happens
in such a quarter; twice, if in another; and thrice, if in such a place. By
these signals the country people are directed to the spot they are to fly to;
and by this means, frequently preserve not only the crew, but even the vessel;
for machines of different kinds are always in readiness to heave ships out of
their perilous situation.

In a word, all the schemes of this worthy Trustee have a humane and useful
tendency: he seems as if selected from his brethren for the same purposes as
Spenser tells us the first of his seven beadsmen in the house of holiness was.

The first of them that eldest was and best,
Of all the house had charge and government,
As guardian and steward of the rest:
His office was to give entertainment
And lodging unto all that came and went:
Not unto such as could him feast again,
And doubly quite for that he on them spent;
But such as want of harbor did constrain;
These, for God's sake, his dewty was to entertain.
That all seamen may be informed of the circumstances of this charity, a
printed account is published under the direction of the Trinity House in
Newcastle upon Tyne, and which is subjoined in the notes. An Account of the
Signals made use of at Bambrough Castle, in the county of Northumberland, in
case ships or vessels are perceived in distress, and of the charitable
institutions established there for their assistance and relief, now published
by the direction of the Trustees of Nathanael late Lord Crewe, with the
approbation of the Master, Pilots, and Seamen of the Trinity-house in Newcastle
upon Tyne.
SIGNALS.
I. A gun (a nine-pounder) placed at the bottom of the tower, to be fired as a
signal in case any ship or vessel be observed in distress, viz. once, when any
ship or vessel is stranded or wrecked upon the islands, or any adjacent rock:
twice, when any ship or vessel is stranded or wrecked behind the castle, or to
the northward of it: thrice, when any ship or vessel is stranded or wrecked to
the southward of the castle; in order that the custom-house officers, and the
tenants with their servants, may hasten to give all possible assistance -- as
well as to prevent the wreck from being plundered.

II. In every great storm, two men on horseback are sent from the castle to
patrol along the coast, from sunset to sunrise, that, in case of an accident,
one may remain by the ship, and other return to alarm the castle. Whoever
brings the first notice of any ship or vessel being in distress, is entitled to
a premium, in proportion to the distance from the castle; and if between twelve
o'clock at night and three o'clock in the morning, the premium to be double.

III. A large flag is hoisted, when there is any ship or vessel seen in
distress upon the Fern Islands, or Staples, that the sufferers may have the
satisfaction of knowing their distress is perceived from the shore, and that
relief will be sent them as soon as possible. In case of bad weather the flag
will be kept up, a gun fired morning and evening, and a rocket thrown up every
night from the north turret, till such time as relief can be sent. These are
also signals to the Holy Island Fishermen, who by the advantage of their
situation, can put off for the islands at times when no boat from the main land
can get over the breakers. Premiums are given to the first boats that put off
for the islands, to give their assistance to ships or vessels in distress, and
provisions and liquors are sent in the boats.

IV. A bell on the south turret will be rung out in every thick fog, as a
signal to the fishing boats; and a large swivel fixed on the east turret will
be fired every fifteen minutes, as a signal to the ships without the islands.

V. A large weathercock is fixed on the top of the flag-staff, for the use of
the pilots.

VI. A large speaking trumpet is provided, to be used when ships are in
distress near the shore, or are run aground.

VII. An observatory or watch tower is made on the east turret of the castle,
where a person is to extend every morning at daybreak during the winter
season, to look out if any ships be in distress.

VIII. Masters and Commanders of ships or vessels in distress, are desired to
make such signals as are usually made by people in their melancholy situation.

Assistance, Stores, and Provisions, prepared at Bambrough Castle for Seamen,
Ships or Vessels, wrecked or driven ashore on that coast or neighborhood.

I. Rooms and beds are prepared for seamen, ship-wrecked, who will be
maintained in the castle for a week (or longer, according to circumstances) and
during that time be found with all manner of necessaries.

II. Cellars for wine and other liquors from ship-wrecked vessels, in which
they are to be deposited for one year, in order to be claimed by the proper
owners.

III. A storehouse ready for the reception of wrecked goods, cables, rigging,
and iron. A book is kept for entering all kinds of timber and other wrecked
goods, giving the marks and description of each, with the date when they came
on shore.

IV. Four pair of screws for raising ships that are stranded, in order to their
being repaired. -- Timber, blocks and tackles, handspokes, cables, ropes, pumps
and iron, ready for the use of ship-wrecked vessels.

N. B. But if taken away, to be paid for at prime cost.

V. A pair of chains with large rings and swivels, made on purpose for weighing
ships (of a thousand tons burden) that are sunk upon rocks, or in deep water.

N. B. These chains are to be lent (gratis) to any person having occasion for
them, within forty or fifty miles along the coast, on giving proper security to
re-deliver them to the Trustees.

VI. Two mooring chains of different lengths are provided, which may
occasionally be joined together, when a greater length is required.

VII. Whenever any dead bodies are cast on shore, coffins, etc. will be
provided, gratis, and also the funeral expenses paid.

December the 24th, 1771. TRINITY-HOUSE, NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE. We the Master,
etc. of this house desire the Trustees to make their humane intentions public.
By order, THOMAS AUBONE, Secretary.


It is much to be lamented that this example has not induced the benevolent to
adopt the plan on the southern coasts: by which many acts of barbarity might be
prevented, and valuable lives saved to the public.

The reader will form a perfect idea of the extent of Lord Crew's charity, in a
department distinct from that of seamen under the above description, by the
following tables, published in the Newcastle newspapers.

Annual account of the charitable institution at Bambrough Castle, for the
relief of sick and lame Poor, from Oct. 17, 1774, to Oct. 17, 1775.
Remaining on the books Oct. 17, 1774 65 Out-patients admitted since 681
In-patients 17 763 Of these, discharged cured 579 Relieved 81 Inoculated and
recovered 9 Dead 9 Remaining on the books 85 763 Account from Oct. 17, 1775, to
Oct. 17, 1776.
Remaining on the books Oct. 17, 1775 85 Out-patients admitted since 1009
In-patients 26 1120 Of these, discharged cured 928 Relieved 73 Sent to the
Infirmary at Newcastle 4 Dead 9 Remaining on the books 106 1120 Account from
Oct. 17, 1776, to Oct. 17, 1777.
Remaining on the books Oct. 17, 1766 106 Out-patients admitted since 1055
In-patients 27 1188 Of these, discharged cured 1028 Relieved 59 Sent to the
Infirmary at Newcastle 1 Dead 11 Remaining on the books 89 1188 So extensive a
charity, to flow from a private bounty, is singular: men in former ages were
canonized for trifling acts of benevolence, compared to this. But although the
resources were given by Lord Crew, yet the disposition was not of his
arrangement; to the benevolent heart of the Rev. Dr Sharp, the chief part of
the blessings derived from his Lordship's will is to be attributed. He resides
many months in each year in the castle of Bambrough, superintends the works of
charity, has his eye open upon every new channel by which he may give relief or
consolation to his suffering fellow creatures. The shipwrecked and the diseased
are comforted by his visitation, and the calamities of life are all alleviated
by his care. It is an exalted duty; the blessed spirits of heaven are described
to us as dispensing the gifts of universal benevolence.

In regard to natural strength, there is not a situation in all Northumberland
equal to that of Bambrough, or one in any wise so well adapted to the ancient
rules of fortification. From the great tower there is an extensive sea and land
prospect; you overlook the whole group of Farn Islands; you view the castle of
Holy Island, which from thence makes a very formidable appearance; and on the
more distant peninsula, you discern the town and fortifications of Berwick. On
the other side, Dunstanborough Castle crowns the nearest cliffs, behind which a
winding shore is seen, with many little promontories, creeks, and bays,
beautifully mingled, and graced with multitudes of small vessels, laying in
their ports or under sail. The extreme point of view is Tynemouth, whose ruined
monastery gives an obelisk to terminate the landscape. All the inland prospect
gradually inclines toward the sea banks, with many considerable swells,
displaying a fine cultivated scene to the eye, varied with innumerable villages
and hamlets.

THE FARN ISLANDS
possess little matter of sufficient consequence to tempt a traveller to sea,
especially where there is so constant a ripling and breaking of the waves, as
is to be found between them and the continent. The effect of oil on troubled
waters, mentioned lately as a modern and accidental discovery, was known in
very distant ages: it was practiced in this country, and esteemed a miracle.
Indeed most of the miraculous works of the religious were deduced from some
knowledge of the simplest principles of nature, discovered and displayed in
ages of profound ignorance. In Bede's third book of the history of the Church
of England, touching the miracles wrought by Aidan, this practice is thus
mentioned. A certain priest named Utta, a man of great gravity and sincerity,
and one who for his qualities and truth was well esteemed, was commissioned to
go into Kent, for Eanflede, King Edwine's daughter, who after her father's
death had been sent thither, in order to her espousal with King Oswin. He was
to travel by land to Kent, but to return by sea; on which account he addressed
Bishop Aidan, beseeching him to put up fervent prayers to God to prosper their
Voyage. The Bishop gave them his blessing, and having recommended them devoutly
to the protection of God, he also delivered to Utta some jars of hallowed oil,
saying, I foresee that whilst you are at sea, a sudden tempest will come upon
you; remember to cast into the troubled waters the oil that I give you, and and
speedily the tempest shall be assuaged, the sea be calmed, and you shall have a
pleasant passage. All these things were fulfilled according to the prophecy. At
the beginning of the tempest, when the waves and surges chiefly raged, the
sailors endeavored in vain to cast anchor; but the storm increased, and the
waves multiplied so fast, that the vessel was almost filled with water, and
nothing but immediate death presented itself. In this distress the Priest had
recourse to the Bishop's directions, and took the pot of oil, some of which he
cast into the sea, and the sea was immediately calmed, the sun soon after shone
forth, and the ship proceeded with a prosperous voyage. Thus the man of God,
through the spirit of prophecy, predicted the tempest, and by the same holy
spirit, though he was himself absent, appeased the same.
In the month of August, when we visited the islands, the sea was tumultuous,
making a violent inset between them and the main land. They are 17 in number,
the largest and only one we thought worth attending to, is the House Island,
nearest to Bambrough, where St. Cuthbert made his residence. Mr Pennant visited
them all, and has the following remarks, which, as the work of a very able
Naturalist, highly merit a place here. There ly certain isles adjoining to Farne
Island, bigger then Farne itself. But in them is no habitation. Certn big
fowls, caullid S. Cuthbertes birds, bread in them, and puffins, birds less
than dukkes, having gray feathers like dukkes, but without painted feathers, and
a ring about the nek, be found breding there in the cliffy rokkes.

Lel. Itin. vol. 6.


Opposite to Bambrough lie the Farn Islands, which form two groups of little
isles and rocks, to the number of 17, but at low water the points of others
appear above the surface; they all are distinguished by particular names. The
nearest isle to the shore, is that called the House Island, which lies exactly
one mile 68 chains from the coast: the most distant is about seven or eight
miles. They are rented for 16l. per annum: their produce is kelp, some few
feathers, and a few seals, which the tenant watches and shoots, for the sake of
the oil and skins. Some of them yield a little grass, and serve to feed a cow
or two, which the people are desperate enough to transport over in their little
boats.

Visited these islands in a coble, a safe but seemingly hazardous species of
boat, long, narrow, and flat-bottomed, which is capable of going through a high
sea, dancing like a cork on the summits of the waves.

Touched at the rock called Meg, whitened with the dung of corvorants, which
almost covered it; their nests were large, made of tang, and excessively
faetid.

Rowed next to the Pinnacles, an island in the farthest group; so called from
the vast columnar rocks at the south end, even at their sides, and flat at
their tops, and entirely covered with guillemots and shags: the Fowlers pass
from one to the other of these columns by means of a narrow board, which they
place from top to top, forming a narrow bridge, over such a horrid gap, that
the very sight of it strikes one with terror.

Landed at a small island, where we found the female Eider ducks, at that time
fitting: the lower part of their nests was made of sea plants; the upper part
was formed of the down which they pull off their own breasts, in which the eggs
were surrounded and warmly bedded: in some were three, in others five eggs, of
a large size, and pale olive color, as smooth and glossy, as if varnished
over. The nests are built over the beach, among the loose pebbles, not far from
the water. The ducks sit very close, nor will they rise till you almost tread
on them. The drakes separate themselves from the females during the breeding
season. We robbed a few of their nests of the down, after carefully separating
it from the tang, found that the down of one nest weighed only three quarters
of an ounce, but was so elastic as to fill the crown of the largest hat. The
people of this country call these St. Cuthbert's ducks, from the Saint of the
islands.

"Besides these kinds, I observed the following.

"Puffins, called here Tom Noddies "Anks -- here Skouts "Guillemots "Black
Guillemots "Little Anks "Shiel Anks "Shags "Corvorants "Black and white Gulls
"Brown and white Gulls "Herring Gulls -- which I was told sometimes fed on eggs
of other birds "Common Gulls -- here Annets "Kittiwakes or Tarrocks "Pewit
Gulls "Great Terns "Sea Pies "Sea Larks -- here Brockets "Jackdaws which breed
in rabbit-holes "Rock Pigeons "Rock Larks
The Terns were so numerous, that in some places it was difficult to tread
without crushing some of the eggs.

The last isle I visited was the House Island, the sequestered spot where St.
Cuthbert passed the two last years of his life. Here was afterward established
a Priory of Benedictines for six or eight Monks, subordinate to Durham. A
square tower, the remains of a church, and some other buildings, are to be seen
there still; and a stone coffin, which, it is apprehended, was that of St.
Cuthbert. At the north end of the isle is a deep chasm, from the top to the
bottom of the rock, communicating to the sea; through which, in tempestuous
weather, the water is forced with vast violence and noise, and forms a fine jet
d'eau of sixty feet high: it is called by the inhabitants of the opposite
coast, the Churn.

The horrible description given of this island by ancient authors, before St.
Cuthbert blessed it with his presence, is already mentioned. I am apt to doubt
whether Aidan ever made any other retreat to these islands, than merely
occasional, and for no longer stay, than to put up his supplications to heaven
on singular events; where from greater privacy he might possess more fervor of
mind, than he could command in the cells of a convent.
Here the Saint built himself a cell and a small oratory, which he surrounded
with a wall that cut off his view from every thing but the heavens: those who
visited him, only conversed through a grate, not having access to his presence.
Farne dicitur insula medio in mari posita, etc. sed aliquot milibus passuum ab
hac semiinsula distans, quae et hinc altissimo, and inde infinito clauditur
oceano.

Qui videlicet miles Christi, ut, devicta tyrannorum acie, monarchus terrae,
quam adierat, factus est, condidit civitatem suo aptam imperio, and domos in
hac aeque civitati congruas erexit. Est autum aedificium situ pene rotundum, a
muro usque ad murum mensura 4or. ferme sive quinque, perticarum distentum,
murus ipse deforis altior longitudine stantis hominis. Nam intrinsecus imam
caedendo rupem multo illum fecit altiorem, quatenus ad cohibendam oculorum
simul and cogitationum lasciviam, ad erigendam in superna desideria, totam
mentis intentionem, pius incola nil de sua mansione praeter coelum posset
intueri. Quem videlicet murum non secto lapide, vel latere, and caemento, sed
impolitis, prorsus lapidibus and cespite, quem de medio loci fodiendo tulerat
composuit.

Duas in mansione habebat domos, oratorium scilicet and aliud ad communes usus
aptum habitaculum; quorum parietes quidem de naturali terra multum intus
forisque circumsodiendo sive cedendo confe^it. Culmina vero de lignis
informibus and foeno super posuit. Porro ad portum insulae major erat domus, in
qua visitantes eam fratres suscipi, and quiescere possent. Nec long ab ea fons
eorundem usibus accomodus.

Lel. Col. v. 2. p. 158 -- Bid
In Bede's Life of St. Cuthbert, we are told the Saint's cell was not the only
erection upon the island, for there was a larger house near the landing place,
where the brethren who came to visit him lodged. After the death of St.
Cuthbert, Ethelwold, who took on him the religious habit at Ripon, resorted to
this hermitage, and possessed it 12 years, ending his life there. Felgild
succeeded Ethelwold, and in the time of that Hermit, Eadfrid Bishop of
Lindisfarn restored from its foundations the oratory of St. Cuthbert, which had
gone to ruin. Bid relates, that Felgild was more than 70 years old when he
wrote the Life of St. Cuthbert. Besides the persons mentioned by Bid, there
were other devotees who chose Farn for the place of their retreat. St.
Bartholomew was one, as appears from a manuscript History of his Life in the
Bodlean Library, who obtained leave of Lawrence Prior of Durham to go to Farne,
where he found one Elwyn in possession of the desirable residence, and whose
religion was not sufficiently tempered with charity, to induce him to welcome
the stranger. Bartholomew wrote in this retreat his Farne Meditations, now
preserved in the Durham Library. Thomas Thomas the First succeeded at Farn
Isle, A. D. 1158. -- Randal's Manuscripts.
Prior of Durham retired to Farn in the years 1162 and 1163; he had engaged in
a controversy with that arrogant Prelate, Hugh Bishop of Durham, touching
certain liberties which the Monks of that church prompted him to maintain; and
who afterward deserting him, induced Hugh to procure his deposition.

On the death of Richard Bishop of Durham, surnamed the Poor, the Monks elected
their Prior, Thomas Richard Bishop of Durham, surnamed the Poor, was translated
from Salisbury, A. D. 1226. His memory was revered for his pious act in paying
his predecessor's debts. Ob. Apr. 15, A. D. 1237, and was buried in the nunnery
at Tarent, of his own foundation.

A. D. 1238, Thomas the Second of Melsonby succeeded in Farn Isle, where he
died. -- Ibid.


de Melsonby, to the Sea. The King opposed this election, esteeming him
disaffected to his government, because he had been Prior of Coldingham, and
sworn fealty to the King of Scotland; and there was singular danger in having a
Bishop of Durham under any attachment to the King of Scotland, as in right of
his See he would possess places of great strength and importance: more
particularly he would hold a large tract of sea coast and many havens, where
the shipping and troops of France and Flanders might be received. These
objections not being esteemed of sufficient importance to the Monks, for them
to renounce their right of election, or fearing new innovations from regal
power, they appealed to the Sea of Rome; but the messengers charged with this
matter died in their passage, and Melsonby being intercepted as he attempted to
leave the kingdom, he resigned his title to the Episcopacy on the 8th of April,
A. D. 1240, having contested his claim three years. In the year 1244, the King
advancing toward Newcastle with his army, the Prior was struck with new
apprehensions of danger, as he dreaded resentment for the conduct he had shown
under his election to the Sea; consequently he resigned his office of Prior,
and retired to Farn Island, where the Hermit Bartholomew then was in occupation
of the sacred cell of St. Cuthbert. Here the Prior spent the remainder of his
life in devotion and austerities. He was buried in the cathedral church of
Durham, among the Bishops; and many miracles were said to be wrought at his
tomb. Whart. Aug. Sax. v. 1. p. 735.


Alexander II. King of Scotland, confirmed by deed to the Monk Henry, and his
successors in Farn Island, 8s. sterling, in free alms, to be received annually
out of the farm of his mill at Berwick, instead of half a chalder of corn,
granted to him by the charter of King William.

In commemoration of these examples of religious severity, a Priory was founded
here, according to Leland, for six Benedictine Monks, subordinate to Durham,
with a revenue of 13 marks from the corporation of Newcastle. The endowment at
the dissolution was estimated at 12l. 17s. 8d. King Henry VIII. in the 33d year
of his reign, granted it to the Dean and Chapter of Durham. Farn Island, by Mr
Speed corruptly called Frameland, Flaneland, and Fern eland.

A priory of six or eight Benedictine Monks, subordinate to Durham, valued at
12l. 17s. 8d. per annum. -- Dugdale and Speed. It was granted to the Dean and
Chapter of Durham, 33 Henry VIII.

Vide in Bourne's Hist of Newcastle, p. 199, Assisam per Priorem Dunelm. contra
majorem et ballivos Novi Castri pro redditu annuo Tresdecem marcarum et december
solidorum concesso domni de Farneland anno 25 R. Edward 3. -- P. 209,
Requietantiam Prioris Dunelm. pro redditu praedicto debit ad festum S.
Michaelis anno 5 R. Henry 5. -- P. 218, R. Henry 7. Confirmationem istius
redditus anno regni 7.

Pat. 41 Henry 3.

Claus. 10th Edward 2. de quinque quarteriis frumenti singulis annis e maneriis
de Toghale et Swinson.

Pat. 9 Edward 3.

Claus. 2 Henry 4. de XIII Marcis annui redditus concessis de redditu Novi
Castri per regem Edvardum.

Rec. in Scac. 7 Henry 7. Trin. Rot. 11. Confirmationem super Carta R. Henry 4.
de redditu Novi Castri.

Tanner, p. 394. In the above assize, the revenue is thus mentioned. That our
Lord Edward lately King of England, had in his life by word of mouth granted to
the Monks dwelling in the island of Farneland, near Bambrough, which island is
a cell to the Priory of Durham, 10 quarters of corn and 2 tuns of wine, to be
received every year by the hands of the Mayor and Bailiffs of Newcastle upon
Tyne, as an alms, etc. for ever. Our present Lord the King being willing to
fulfill and continue his (father's) will in this part, has granted to the
aforesaid Monks, as a compensation of the aforesaid corn and wine, 13 marks and
10s. to be received every year at the feast of St. Michael, by the hands, etc.
from the fee of the said town, namely, 5 marks for every tun of wine, and 5
shillings for every quarter of corn, to be paid etc. for ever.

Bourne, p. 200.


The remains of these edifices are very ragged and confused, and show little
other than marks of severity and inconvenience, notwithstanding the happy taste
which is denoted in the scites of most of the religious houses of the same
date. A part of a square tower is standing, which was built by one Castle,
Prior Castle of Dyrham, the last save one, buildid the toure in Farne Islane
for defense out of the ground. There was a chapel and a poor house before.

Lel. Itin. vol. 5.
Prior of Durham, in the beginning of the 15th century: part of the priory is
also remaining; near which is shown a stone coffin, intended to have enclosed
the hallowed remains of St. Cuthbert. There was a church built there, for the
women to hear mass, pray, and receive the sacrament, afterward demolished; and
another built for the same use by Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, called the
Gallilee.

Randal's Manuscripts.


These erections are on the best part of the island; a little lawn skirts the
edifices, surrounded with rugged rocks, from whence issues a spring of fresh
water. Since the departure of the religious, this island has returned almost to
its pristine state: it consists of a few acres in its whole surface, the chief
part of which is sand and rock. A scanty herbage takes place indeed in some
spots, especially on the little lawn; but there is neither tree or shrub. The
shore is rocky, and sounding to the hollow sea which rolls upon it, sends forth
a horrid howling: the north-east winds blow fiercely here, and every inclemency
of weather known to the climate beats on these inhospitable shores, which are
tremendous from frequent shipwrecks. -- There is not a coast more likely to
give one the idea of shoals of wandering spirits, who visit the semisepulta
Ossa, over which they loiter on this side Styx, whilst unfriendly whirlwinds
wreck them over with sand, and forbid the funeral rites for which they languish.

We left

ELLINGHAM
on our right hand, the seat of one of the Haggerston family, an ancient barony
of the family of Guagy, who possessed it in the time of King Henry I. as
appears by the Testa de Nevil: it was afterward the possession of the Hetons.
Sir Allan de Heton acquired great honor in the siege of Berwick, under Henry
Percy, Earl of Northumberland.

Holl. Chron. vol. 2.
The church was founded by Ralph de Guagy, in the pontificate of Hugh Pudsey,
Bishop of Durham.

We passed through

EMBLETON,
the ancient barony of the family of Viscounts, as is shown by the escheats of
King Edward I. and the Testa de Nevil: it is said afterward to have become
annexed to the Duchy of Lancaster, and now is the property of the Earl of
Tankerville.

Some authors assert, that in this parish was born Duns Scotus, Johannes
Scotus, born at Dunston, a Franciscan Friar, got the title of Doctor Subtilis.
He maintained against the Thomists, that the blessed Virgin was conceived with
sin. He died of a fit of an apoplexy at Colen.

England's Worthies. The famous Doctor Joannes Duns, alias Scotus, lived in the
time of Bishop Lamberton (he died 1328). He was born in the town of Duns, in
the county of Mers, and being yet a child, after some taste he had got of the
Latin tongue, by the perswaision of two Minorite Friars, went to Oxford,
studying Logic in Morton College: then applying himself to scholastic Divinity,
grew to such a perfection therein, as he was called the subtle Doctor; and was
followed of a number, who after his name are called to this day Scotistae.
After he had professed a while at Oxford, he was called to read divinity in the
university of Paris, and from thence went to Colon, where he died of the
apoplexy. They write that after he was laid in grave, his spirits did return,
and that striving to get forth, he was there smothered; whereupon an Italian
did write this epigram.

Quaecunque humani fuerant jurisque sacrati
In dubium veniunt cuncta vocante Scoto
Quid? quod et dubium illius sit vita vocata,
Morte illum simili ludificante stropha;
Quam non ante virum vita jugularet adempta,
Quam vivus tumulo conditus ille foret.
The English writers contend that this Scotus was born in England, in Dunstane
village within the parish of Emilden, in the county of Northumberland; and
confirm it by the manuscripts reserved in the Library of Merton Collge, in one
whereof are written these words, Explicit actura subtilis Doctoris in
Universitate Oxoniensi (super libros sententiarum) Doctoris Joannis Duns nati
in villa de Emilden vocata Dunstan contracta Duns, in comitatu Northumbriae,
pertinens ad Domum scholasticorum de Marton Hall in Oxonio and quondam dictae
Domus socii. But this is no sufficient proof; for it may be probably supposed,
that he living at Oxford, in England, when the wars were so hot betwixt the two
kingdoms, did dissemble his country, and pretend himself to be an Englishman
born to eschew the hatred of the Students. In Colen, where he might without
danger show of what country he was, he did profess himself a Scot, and the
Minorites (of which order he was) did therefore upon his tomb, erected in their
church, at the end of the quire nigh unto the high altar, set this inscription,
which is there yet to be seen: Scotia me genuit, Anglia suscepit
Gallia edocuit, Germania tenet.
What a fine subtle wit he had, the monuments left by him to posterity do
witness. He died young in the year 1308.

Spotswood's Hist. Chapter of Scot.
that learned Sectary, and claim for their evidence his manuscript works in
Merton College, Oxford, in which is an entry to this effect: John Duns born in
a certain little village or hamlet, within the "parish of Emildon, called
Dunston, in the county of Northumberland." In Camden we find his lamentable
exit thus mentioned: But he died miserably, being taken with an apoplexy, and
over hastily buried for dead; whilst upon return of life, nature (though too
late) was about to throw off the violence of the disease, (and he making a
lamentable noise calling for help) after he had for some time beat his head
against his coffin, he dashed out his own brains, and at last yielded up his
vital breath.

In our road to Dunstanbrough, we had a view of

ROCK,
a little village, situate on an eminence, commanding a fine prospect. It was a
dependent manor, and member of the barony of Alnwick. The family of Rocks
possessed it in the time of King Edward I. as appears by the escheats of that
reign.

We now approached the ruins of

DUNSTANBURGH
DUNSTANBOROUGH CASTLE,
which though extensive, have at a distance a ragged and confused appearance.
Nothing remains but the outworks on two sides to the land, viz. the west and
south, which with stupenduous cliffs to the sea enclose a plain nearly square,
consisting of about nine acres. The Keep and interior works, if there ever were
any, are totally gone, the plough-share having passed within the walls. Within
the circumference of which there grew not long since 240 Winchester bushels of
corn, beside several cart loads of hay.

Gibson's Camden.
The rocks to the north are perpendicular, of a columniary form, about 30 feet
in height, black and horrible; the shore rugged, covered with broken rocks
woven over with sea-weed. From the edge of the sea cliffs on the north-west
point, the western wall runs along the brink of an elevated rock; a square
tower arises near the center of this wall, of a considerable height, and of
excellent masonry, placed on a projecting point of the cliff, so as to afford
to the armed men within a means of flanking the wall with their missile
weapons; on each corner there was an exploratory turret. This seems to be the
most modern part of the castle, built of the best materials, and by the ablest
workmen. Where the land rises to the summit of the rock on the south-west
point, the wall turns and makes a long straight front to the south, as
represented in the plate: the ground before it is level, and appears to have
been assisted by art, to form a more commodious parade for the garrison. In
this front there is a gate-way, built in a very remarkable style, being the
great entrance to the castle: it is formed by a circular arch, with a portico
and interior gate; is defended by two heavy semicircular towers uniting with
the superstructure of the gate-way: these towers, after rising about 20 feet,
and containing two tiers of apartments, support turrets of a square form, now
so very rugged and ruinous, as not to allow a conjecture what was their
original height. This wall extends to the cliffs on the sea banks, is guarded
by two square bastions and a small sally-port, and is terminated by a square
tower with a gate-way. On the brink of the cliff to the sea, on this quarter,
appear the remains of a very strong wall; indeed it is probable the whole Area
was originally so enclosed. The heavy seas which break upon the rocks of the
north-west point have torn them much; and it appears as if the area had been
originally of greater extent than at present, many separate columns of rock
standing near the cliffs, which some ages ago may have been joined to the main
land. At the south point of the area is the well: near to the eastern tower are
the remains of a chapel. Immediately below this tower is a gully or passage of
perpendicular sides, formed in the rocks, about 60 yards in length and 40 feet
deep, where the sea makes a dreadful inset, breaking into foam with a
tremendous noise: the spray occasioned thereby is driven within the castle
walls. This place is called by the country people the Rumble Churn. The gulf,
from the walls of the tower, which I ascended to obtain the view, has a very
awful appearance: you look immediately down upon the abyss, where, as the tide
rushes up, the waters are lifted many feet above the common level, rising
toward the walls of the tower, as if they would surmount the cliffs and deluge
the plain. The breaking of the waves in foam over the extreme point of the
rocks, the heavy spray, the noise of the disturbed waters, and the groan which
echo returns through the desolated towers, are noble, though tremendous.

The date of this castle is fixed by authors to the beginning of the 14th
century, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, General of the confederate army which
opposed King Edward II. being said to be the founder. He was also owner of
Pomfret Castle, where, after being taken by the King's troops at Burrowbridge,
he was imprisoned, and soon after decollated as a traitor; though afterward he
was canonized, and the place of his martyrdom took the name of St. Thomas's
Hill. He was possessed of immense estates, and was the most powerful and
opulent subject in Europe, holding at once the Earldoms of Lancaster, Lincoln,
Salisbury, Leicester, and Darby. The King sat personally on his trial, a
remarkable circumstance: he died 25th March, 1322, and was buried on the south
side of the high altar in the priory church there. Such veneration was paid to
his tomb, as the enthusiasts wasted on that of Becket. The King of his royal
clemency remitted the severities of his sentence, by which he was condemned to
be hanged and quartered, an infamy which seldom had fallen on those of royal
descent, he being grandson of King Henry III. But so fluctuating are human
affairs, that the ignominious exit of this Earl, gave exalted honors to his
name after his death: he was enrolled in the list of Martyrs, was canonized,
and his portrait placed among those of sacred memory in the cathedral of St.
Paul's.

The following account of this matter, extracted from the Chronique of William
de Pakington, is contained in the 1st vol. Lel. Col. p. 461. etc. -- About this
time Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln dyed, and charged Thomas of Lancastre his sun
in law and heir, that he should maynteine his quarelle against Peter Gaveston.
Be whose means after, and the Count of Warwickes, was Pers Geveston behedid at
Gaverishith by Warwick the xxix of Juin in the year of our Lord 1312. King
Eduarde lamenting and desiring of God that he might ons be revengid of Peter
Gavestons death.

The Nobles of England seeing the infinite covetusnes of the Dispenser, came to
Thomas of Lancastre to treat a mean for it. And after of one assent made
assemble at Shirburne in Elmede. And sending the Kings supplication, and not
hard, the Barons went into the Marches of Wales, and destroyid the Dispensars
lands. Then King Edward, at the motion of the Dispensars, banishid John
Mountbray, Roger Clifford, Gofeline Dainville, and dyvers others. And after the
Barons caulid by brief to a parliament came with 3 battayles in order, having ten
colourid bands on their sleves, wherefore it was caullid the parliament de la
Bend. And in this company were Humfre de Boun Count of Hereforde, Sir Hugh de
Andeley, Sir Roger Damare, etc. etc.

The Barons hering (the King had taken the castle of Leeds) both the Mortymers
took Brigenorth, for the which the King banished, by proclamation, Thomas of
Lancastre and Humfrede Boun with all their adherents.

And after the King cumming again his Barons with a strong host, both
Mortymer the uncle, and Mortymer the nephew, put them self in the Kings grace,
and were sent to the Toure of London.

The Barons hering this came to Pontfract, to Thomas of Lancastre, and their
gathering their pour, assauted the Kings castle of Tikhille, but not wynning
it.

And hering of the Kings host, went to Burton upon Trente, keeping the Bridge
to let the Kings passage. But the King passid per foro^, and thens went the
Barons with Thomas Lancastre to Tuttebyri, and thens to Pontefract. And in this
gorney Sir Roger Dainmore dyed in the abbay of Tuttebyry.

After this Thomas Lancastre and the Barons counselid together in Blake Freres
in Pontfracte, and the Baron concludid to go to Dunstanburg, a castle of Thomas
of Lancasters in Northumberland: but he utterly refusid that counsel, lest it
might have be thought, that he had, or would have intelligence with the
Scotts. Wherefore he intendid to remain at his castle at Pontfract.

Sir Roger Clyfford hering this, took out his dagger, and said, that he would
kille him his oune hands in that place, except he woold go with them.

Then Thomas Lancastre a force granted, and went with them, having in company
VII. C. men to borowbridge.

To Borowbridge came Sir Andrew he Harkeley, Warden of Cairluel and that
Marches, and Sir Simon Ward, to encountre with the Barons. Where Thomas
Lancastre told Harkeley his just quarrel again the Dispensers, promising him,
if he would favor his cause, one of the V Countes that then he had in
possession. But Herkeley refusid his offer. Them Thomas prophetied that he would
sore repent, and that shortly, so fair, and that he should die a shameful death,
that is to say, to be hangid, drawn and quartered.

Then Harkeley, whom Thomas of Lancastre had before time made Knight, made his
archiers to shote, and so did the Barons upon the bridge. And among al other,
one got unde the bridge, and at a hole thruste with a lance the renounid
Knight thorough out al Christentye Humfrede de Boun in the foundemente, so
that his bowels came out. And Sir Roger Clifforde was sore wonded on the hedde.
And Sir William Sulley and Sir Roger Bernefeld were slain. And then went
Thomas Lancastre into a chapel, denying to render himself to Harkeley, and
said, looking on the crucifix, Good Lord, I render myself to thee, and put me
in to thy mercy.

Then they took of his cote armures, and put on him a ray cote, or goune, one
of his men's lyveryes, and carried him by water to York, were they threw balls
of dyrte at him. And the residew of the Barons part were pursuid from place to
place, and to the church hold was no reverence gyven, and the father pursuid
the sun, and the sun the father.

The King hering of this discumfiture, came with the Dispenfars and other Nobles
his adherentes to Ponfracte.

Sir Andrew of Herkeley brought Thomas of Lancastre to Pontfracte to the King,
and there was put in a tower that he had newly made toward the abbay, and after
juged in the haule suddenly by these Justices, Sir Hugh Dispensar the father, Sir
Aimer Count of Pembroke, Sir Edmunde Count of Kent, Sir John de Britayne, and
Sir Robert Malmethorp, that pronouncid his judgment.

Then Thomas Lancastre said, Shaul I die with out answer?"

Then certain Gascoyne took him away, and put a pillid broken hatte or hoode
on his hedde, and set him on a lene white jade with out bridil, and he than
cried thus, King of Heaven have mercy on me. For the King of Herth nous ad
querpi.

And thus he was carried, sum throwing pelottes of dyrt at him, and having a
friar Precher for his Confessor with him, on to a hille withowte the town,
where he knelid down toward the este, on tille one Hughinde Muston causid him
to turn his face toward Scotland: where kneling, a villayne of London cut of
his hedde, 11 Call. Aprilis anno D. 1321. And after the Prior and the Monks
required his body, and got it of the King, and buried it on the right hand of
the hy altar.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 464, etc.
In the succeeding reign, Henry the brother of the Martyr, obtained from
parliament a reversion of the attainder, and restitution of the family honors
and estates. He held great offices in government, was one of the guardians of
King Edward III. by whom he was created Duke of Lancaster, and on that
investiture, had license to have his chancery within the Duchy, and issue
process there. We do not hear of this fortress being made memorable by any
singular conflict, till the unfortunate conclusion of the affairs of King Henry
VI. and the total destruction of the Rose of Lancaster. Queen Margaret
perceiving that the French succors were too inconsiderable to induce the
Northumbrians to rise in her favor, made another voyage, and having borrowed a
sum of money and gained a reinforcement of 2000 men, in October, 1462, she
landed near Bambrough. Her return with those aids did not yet induce the people
of Northumberland to take up arms. Through the treachery of Sir Ralph Gray, the
castle of Alnwick was surrendered to her. Margaret hearing that King Edward was
advancing with a numerous army, found it necessary again to seek refuge in
Scotland: to this end she embarked, but a violent storm arising, she was in
imminent peril, and at length gained the port of Berwick. King Henry, the Duke
of Excestre, and the Duke of Somersete, and other Lords that fled, had kept
Alnewicke, Banborow, Dunstanburgh, Warkworth, and mannid and intailid them.

Sir Peers de Brasile, the great warrior of Normandy, came to help Queen
Margaret with French men, and XX. M. Scotts, and to remove King Edwardes men
from Alnewik sige, and the residew of other castelles there. By this mean both
Edwardes men were aferde of the Scotts, as recoiling from the siege; and the
Scotts aferd of Edwardes men, lest they had recoylid to bring them to a trap.
And Henrys men issuyng owte of to much boldness, gave Edwardes men opportunity
to enter into the castle.

Ibid. p. 499.
Breze her General, with about 500 of his troops, were shipwrecked on Holy
Island, where they were all slain or taken prisoners, except Breze himself, who
escaped to the Queen in a fishing-boat. Edward on his arrival in
Northumberland, finding no enemy in the field, laid siege to the castles of
Alnwick, Bambrough, and Dunstanbrough, the latter of which, after holding out a
considerable time, was at length taken by storm, and the garrison made
prisoners: after which they dismantled this fortress, and as much as possible
destroyed the fortifications; since which time it has lain in ruins. It appears
by the escheats of Queen Elizabeth, to be in the possession of the Crown in
that reign; King James I. granted it to the Grays of Wark, and it is now the
possession of Lord Tankerville.

We passed by

CRAISTER,
a neat little mansion, the ancient manor of the family of that name. We find
them settled here in the reign of King Edward I. as appears by the escheats
William de Craster 1 King Edward I. Sir Edmund 26 King Edward III. Richard 13
King Edward IV. Edmund King Edward IV. granted lands for their faithful
services. Edmund was Governor of Bambrough Castle. Richard King Edward IV.
granted lands for their faithful services. Edmund was Governor of Bambrough
Castle. John 12 King Henry VI. Edmund 10 Queen Elizabeth. John George, the
present owner.
Wallis.
of that time. The manor of Crawcester, Crawster, now Craster, is on the banks
of the sea, and lays in the parish of Embleton.

William de Craster held it, 1 King Edward I. by half a Knight's fee of the
Barony of Embleton.

Randal's Manuscripts.


HOWICK
lay to our left, as we passed to Alnwick, one of the ancient members of the
Barony of Alnwick, the possession of the family of Greys. We do not trace this
family, in ancient records, to be settled here earlier than the reign of King
Henry VIII. this being a branch of the ancient Chillingham family. The
following character of its late owner, Sir Henry Gray, was given in the public
prints. Howick, May 7th, 1759. Last night about nine, by his own express order,
the remains of Sir Harry Gray, Knt. and Baronet, who died in the 58th year of
his age, were deposited in the family vault of this church. A Gentleman of an
ancient and honorable family, and of the greatest personal worth and merit; an
upright and impartial magistrate, and zealously attached to the established
government, and to the true interest of his King and country; an affectionate
husband, a tender father, a kind master, and a generous landlord; one of the
greatest probity and sincerity, and no less conscientious in the discharge of
divine than social duties; of a very charitable and beneficent disposition, as
appears by the following instances (among many others): Upon the site of an
old decayed church here, he erected a new one of an elegant taste, and not
inferior to any of its size in those northern parts, upon which he expended at
least 500 l. He laid out 100 l. toward building a convenient school-house, for
the use of the poor children of this parish, and to the former salary of 10l. a
year for the master, for teaching all the indigent children gratis, he has
added the interest of 200l. yearly for the master's better subsistence and
encouragement. And besides a liberal distribution to the necessitous of this
place and others at his funeral, he has bequeathed the interest of 100l. to be
given annually on his birthday, for the relief of the indigent inhabitants of
the parish. He was endowed with all the amiable qualities which could endear
him to mankind in this life, and perpetuate his memory after death to the
latest posterity. He is succeeded in his estate and honors by his eldest son,
of the same name.

Sir Ralph Gray, Knt. King Henry VIII. and Edward VI. Thomas Gray John Gray,
High Sheriff of Northumberland, 14 King William III. Sir Harry Gray, High
Sheriff. 1736. Sir Harry Gray.

The old tower noted by Leland still remains, being ALNWICK CASTLE
depiction of Alnwick Castle kept in good repair, and now forming a part of the
mansion house. The church was rebuilt by the 1st Sir Harry Gray, though he was
not the patron.

We now gained a sight of the town of

ALNWICK,
and as we approached from the north-east, had a most pleasing prospect of the
palace of the Duke of Northumberland,

THE CASTLE OF ALNWICK.
The situation is not naturally elegant, the aspect being rather confined, and
the adjacent lands affording no original beauties. The opposite hills rise
tamely, and are not yet brought into such order, as to possess artificial
graces enough, to conceal the want of that variety and beauty, which a
traveller wishes to find surrounding so noble a palace. The woody banks of the
Aln, with all the wild romantic scenes which hang upon her borders, are
excluded from the prospect. The castle stands upon a fine elevation, rising
gradually from the river, whose open banks are turfed and kept in the most
exact neatness under the gardener's scythe; but withal, possessing that trim
countenance, given by straight lines and angles, level walks, and slopes of a
mechanical formality; a garb in which nature does not look the most lovely. The
castle is a noble structure, rebuilt on the old foundation, and in the Saxon
style; the architect has strictly preserved the whole modes and ornaments of
the original: the battlements are crowded with effigies, according to the taste
of the Normans, in whose time it underwent a principal reparation: these
represent men in the act of defense, wielding such arms as were then used; some
of them are disposed with great propriety, the guard of one of the gate-ways is
in the attitude of casting down a mighty stone on the heads of assailants. The
building is of a beautiful freestone, in chisel'd work; its form is singular,
being composed of a cluster of semicircular and angular bastions. I cannot,
without the ichnography of the place, give the reader a more competent idea of
its figure, than by comparing it to a section of the clustered Saxon pillar in
our cathedrals. This edifice stands in a spacious area, which at the time of
its greatest strength, I presume, totally surrounded it, defended by a complete
circumvallation and a moat; otherwise the principal part of the fortress would
have lain unguarded by any outwork, except a moat. At present the front is
opened to the north-east, and the wall having towers at proper intervals, shuts
it in on the other quarters. As we viewed the castle on our approach, the walls
with its towers formed a noble flanking to the principal structure: to the
southward, the garden grounds appeared prettily disposed; to the north and
west, the town of Alnwick was seen spreading on the back ground. We lamented
the want of some of those fine woodlands, and lofty gray rocks, which impend
over the Aln, above Alnwick, to give rural and romantic graces to objects so
imperial, if I may be permitted to use the expression, in distinguishing this
noble edifice.

We passed over an elegant stone bridge, on our approach to the town, the
battlements formed of interwoven crescents: we found the Inn crowded with
people of fortune, come from all parts of the county, to pay their compliments
to the Duke and Duchess, Her Grace was living when the author made his tour and
compiled this work. He should think himself happy, could he compose an Eulogium
equal to so eminent and illustrious a character.
it being their first public day, after their arrival at this palace for the
summer recess.

The approach to the castle retains much of the solemn grandeur of ancient
times: the inscription on the gate-way still legible, Esperance me comfort,
appertained to the arms of the Percies, and was placed there when the repairs
were made by that family: the moat is drained, and the ceremony of letting down
the drawbridge is forgot; but the walls which enclose the area still wear the
ancient countenance of strength and defiance. You enter by a machicolated gate,
defended by an upper tower, and after passing a covered way, approach the
interior gate which admits you to the area: this entrance is defended by all
the devices used in ancient times; iron studded gates, portcullis, open
galleries, and apertures in the arching for annoying assailants. The ingenious
traveller, Mr Pennant, had been out of humor when he visited this place. We
met with all the inconveniences of a noisy and crowded Inn, with every awkward
circumstance which could befall travelers, who had undergone no little fatigue
in pursuing the paths of pleasure; and yet we could not submit to coincide with
that gentleman's sentiments: You look (says he) in vain, for any marks of the
grandeur of the feodal age, for trophies won by a family eminent in our annals
for military prowess and deeds of chivalry; for halls hung with helms and
hauberks, or with the spoils of the chase; for extensive forests and venerable
oaks. Ye look in vain for the helmet on the tower, the ancient signal of
hospitality to the traveller, or for the grey-headed Porter, to conduct him to
the hall of entertainment. The numerous train whose countenances give welcome
to him on his way, are now no more; and instead of the disinterested Usher of
the old times, he is attended by a Valet, eager to receive the fees of
admittance. I must beg leave to pronounce, that though the savage ferocity of
the feodal ages is taken away, yet not the marks of grandeur: we saw no
miserable dungeons filled with captives, no places of execution groaning under
their execrable burden; the towers remain, but without the cry of captivity
and torture: Hospitality clothed in princely array, sits in the hall,
dispensing with a brow of benignity, mixed with features of the highest
magnificence, gifts worthy her hand: the Duke and Duchess are easy of access,
and of an affable deportment; their visitants are happy under their smiles,
without being awed by their eminence. The attention they pay to the petitions
of dependents, is marked with the greatest benevolence; no vain promises are
given to still importunity, no hopes are flattered without sincerity -- the
strictest honor attends the most trivial actions. A truly great principle
distinguishes these noble personages; amidst a happy liberality, there is so
exact a propriety, and such perfect economy, that no transaction passes in the
household, without a certain rule, and singular regularity. The innumerable
charities they pour forth, are bestowed with such admirable propriety, that
each person relieved at the gate, brings a ticket as an authority to the
officer for the dispensation of his Lord's bounty; so that improper objects
cannot deceive, or crafty knaves obtain the portion assigned for the relief of
the truly necessitous and meritorious object. To enumerate acts of benevolence
is inconsistent with my plan, but some are so singularly worthy the world's
attention, that I cannot resist the pleasure of relating a single transaction,
which on my hearing it, brought tears of joy into my eyes.

Her grace returning from an airing in her chariot, passed through the ranks of
people in the gate-ways, who attended to receive a daily distribution to the
poor. A widow oppressed with grievous necessity, could not leave her domestic
employment, or her labor, to attend with her ticket; she entrusted it to her
daughter, a girl about seven years of age, who took her parent's place at the
gate. Her Grace observed this girl employed in knitting, whilst all the rest of
the indigent group sat with idle hands: she sent a servant to bring the child
to her, who received the message with astonishment and apprehension; she
followed the messenger with trembling steps, revolving in her mind the supposed
offenses she had committed, and looking with eyes swimming in tears on the
ill-fated work, she held in her hand, as the cause of her Grace's displeasure.
Pale with apprehension of reproof, she approached the Duchess; confusion and
dread were mixed upon her features, whilst looks of timid innocence lived in
her eyes. Her grace perceived the child's distress, but conceived not the
cause. When the infant had recollected courage enough to give her the power of
expression, she began a faultering and fearful excuse for the supposed crime
she had committed, in knitting at the gate: a smile of divine benevolence arose
upon the Duchess's countenance -- simplicity and native innocence have great
charms -- she was won by the child's sensibility as well as by her industry.
The girl was taken from her indigent mother, clothed and put to school, where
she is acquiring those accomplishments, which one day will advance her above
the rank of her humble progenitors.

The inside of this palace is finished in a most splendid taste, every thing
(to use Mr Pennant's expression) being completed with an incompatible
elegance. A particular account of suits of apartments, finished and furnished
in the highest manner, would be tedious: the rich variety is for the eye only.
The chief descriptions I will borrow from Mr Grose's work; to which gentleman I
am bound to pay due acknowledgments for his elegant drawing, from which the
preceding plate was engraved by the ingenious artist Mr Bailey, who was my
fellow-traveller.

A description of Alnwick Castle, taken from an ancient survey of diverse of the
possessions of the Right Hon. the Earl of Northumberland, made about the year
1567, by George Clarkson, Surveyor of all his Lordship's lands, and other the
said Earl's officers, remaining among the evidences of their Graces the Duke
and Duchess of Northumberland at the said castle in 1775.

The castle of Alnewike is a very ancyent large beutifull and portlie castle,
scytewate on ye southe side of ye ryver of Alne upon a little mote. The circuit
thereof by estimacon about the walls cclxxvj yeards; conteyninge in yt self
vxx.xiiij (5 score and 14) roodes. In ye which is three principal wards. And in
the utter ward, where is the entry from the town, is a fair gate house
coverid with lead, with ij pair of wood gates, and on either side is a porter's
lodge with ijo house height about: which is now rewynoose and in decay, by
reasone the flores of the upper house is decayed, as well in dormounts and
joasts, as in boordes, and very necessary to be repaired. Without which gayts
there is a very fair turnepike, dooble battelled about, with a pare of wo^le
gats in the uttermoste pte thereof. Between which turnpike and the great gats, yt
seamythe theer has been a draw bridge, but yt is now filled uppe and paved.
From the said gathouse, toward ye north, is a curtane wall, of lenth vij roods
dim. (seven and a half) and between yt and a tower standinge on ye north west
corner, called the Abbots Tower. And in the said courten wall on the inner
part is a turret covered with free stone, which is upon ye wall two houses
hight. The said tower, called ye Abbotts Tower, is of three house hight: ye west
house is the Armorie. From the Aboots tower toward the east is an other
curtain wall joynige unto the wall of ye dungeon, conteyinge in lenthe xxxijo
roods: and in ye same as in ye middle, betwixt yt and ye dungeon is two little
garrets. Guerite, Fr. a centry-box.
From the east most garrett havinge a chamber, to the dungeone, ye said wall
has no battelment to walk upon. On ye other part of the gate house toward
ye southe is a curtain wall of length forty two yeards to a tower called ye
Corner Tower. In ye middle between ye gatehouse and the said corner tower is one
garrett in the wall; in the upper part whereof is a little chamber; the nether
part servinge for a buttresse to ye wall.

Between the said corner tower and the middle gatehouse, turning east, is a
curtain wall of length lxx yeardes, in the which is one tower raised of viijth
yeards square, of three houses height, called the Auditors Tower. The under
house is a stable, and the other houses two fare chambers covered with lead
and in good reparacions.

Within the said utter curten is one house, of two house height, standinge on
the left hand at the partinge of ye gate, called ye Checker House, the under
houses servinge for lodgings, the upper house for a court house; covered with
slate and in good raparacions. And in ye same court on the other hand of the
gate, standinge north and southe, is a another house for a stable of two house
heighte; the under part only servith for stables; ye over part thereof is to
be loftede and serve for keapinge of grain now newly builded. Another like
house, a stable, stands on the right hand between ye gaits east and weste,
coverid of late with slaits, and in good reparacions.

The gate house tower for the mydle gate, is a tower of three house height and
in some part iiij house height, on the left hand one strong prisone and on
the right a porter lodge. All the houses above are lodgings; wherein is
contained hall, ketchinge, buttrie, pantery and lodginge for a constable or
other gentlemen to keipe house in. From the same tower est goithe a corteyne
wall to the corner tower on the southe east part, of leinght vxxvij (five
score and seventeen) yeardes: in the which is raised one tower at the end of
ye gardnors of three house height, and of lenght -- yeardes square. Wherein is
on the ground a stable, the mydle house for hay, the overmoste, a chamber;
and betwixt ye same, which is covered with lead, and the said corner tower is
raised two little garretts in ye wall; the nether parts servethe for butteryss
to the wall, the other parts servithe only for privies, and are coveryd with
stone. The said corner tower is on three parts round, the inner part square
without wall, conteninge in the round thereof xvijth (17) yeardes. The same
tower is raised no heigher then the battlement of the wall, and is of two
house height all to gyther in haine, and servithe for a part of the curtinge
wall.

Between the same round tower, turning toward ye north west to a tower
called the Ravine Tower, is a curtinge wall of xiiijth (14) yeardes of length:
ye same tower is coviryd with lead, in good reparations: the tower yt self is
so rent yt yt is mooche like to fall: yt is also of three house height; the
nether servith for a stable, the middle for a chamber, and in decay wthout
lofte, the overmoste a chamber well repaired. This tower is in three pts round,
the iiijth part square, conteyninge, in the holle xxvjth (26) yeardes.

Between the said tower and a tower called the Counstables Tower, is a cortinge
wall of xxxth (30) yerdes of lenght. The said counstables tower, is three
parts round, the fourth square, containinge xxxvith (36) yeardes; and is of
three house heighte; the nether part servithe for a buttrie; the other ijo
parts servithe for two fair lodgings; and yt is covered with lead, which would
partly be helped; in all other things yt is in good reparacions.

Between the said tower and the postrene tower, is a curteine wall contg.
xxiiith (23) yeards in lenght; and the same postrene tower is raised, of
xxxvjth (36) yeardes square, and is of three house height; the nether part
servethe for a through passinge of ye posterne; the other for two fare
chambers. The same is now coverid with lead sense my L. entered, and is in good
reparacions. And in ye north weste coarner of the said tower is raised a
garrett above ye batttellment thereof, and right over the gate of the said
posterne. And from the said tower to the dungeon there is a single curtinge wall
without battellment of lenghte.....

Within the said inner courtine, betwixt the said tower of the mydle gate and
said little four squared tower toward the east, is raised one house upon the
courteine wall, of three house height, well coveryd with lead; and is of lenght
xxvth (25) yeardes; part thereof now servethe for ijo (two) stables for my
Lords horses: the over part for ijo gardners. The same house in all things is
in good reparacions.

At the east end of the said gardner is builded one little house of three
cooples and one gavill of stone, and joined upon the said little square tower
and is covered with slate, which neadithe nothing but pointinge, with in ye which
is one horse-milne now in decay, and servith for nothing.

And a little from the said house is there a another house of two house height,
and is of iiijth (four) coople of timber, with two stone gavills, covered with
slate, and newly pointed; which servithe only for keapinge of hay. Toward the
east, joyninge to the said house is there a little gardine, on the one side is
enclosed with the said cortinge wall; and the others of a wall made of stone;
containing in lenght xijth (12) yeardes. And this gardinge is kept by Raphe
Graye, who has ye fee of xxs by year for the same, besides ye profett
thereof. So that the Lord is here charged with more then neadethe; for the
profett thereof would be sufficyent for his pains. And from the north east
corner of the said gardinge, right over to ye said ruinous tower, in ancient
time has been fair and tryme lodgings, where now be nothing; the stones
thereof taken away, and put to other uses in the castle; the place now void
would be a tryme gardinge: yt joyneth upon the said rovinte tower. In the
southe east pte of the said cortinge wall, with small charges, would be made a
fair bankettinge house with a fair gallorie, going from the same toward the
north to the said rovine tower.

There is neighe ye said curtinge wall, which is betwixt ye said counstables tower
and rovine tower, is builded one fair chapel of vijth (seven) yeardes height
of the wall, in leinght xixth (19) yeardes, and vijth (seven) yeardes of
bredthe, covered with slate; the windooes well glazed, in all things well
repaired, (the sylong thereof only excepted). Betwixt ye said chapel and the
said corteyne-wall, is builded one little house of two house height, of length
viijth (eight) yeards; the nether part thereof called the revestry; the over
part thereof a chamber with a stone chimley, wherein ye Lord and Lady, with there
children, commonly used to hear the service: the same is coverid with slate; ye
lofte thereof would be repaired.

And before the said chapel door is one conducte set with stone and a chiste
of lead: which chiste is three yeards of length, and xviiith (18) inches brod: ye
cesterne thereof covered with lead: whereunto comethe a goodlye course of trime
and swite water from one well called Howlinge Well in pipes of lead. The same
well covered with a house made of stone. And the water of the said conducte
rynnethe in pipes of lead to the brewe house only, and cannot be brought to
have course to any other houses of office, but such as are builded, and to be
builded wthout the dungeon.

And betwixt the said constables tower and postern tower, standith one fair
brewhouse well covered with slate, and is in lenght xxtie. (20) yeardes, in
bredthe ixen. (nine) yeardes: wherein there is a copper set in a furnace ekid
with a crybe of clapbord which will hold lyckor for the brewinge of xxivth. (24)
bolles of malte: and in the same brewhouse there is all manner of vessels to
serve for brewinge of the said quantyte of malte newly made and repaired. There
would be one appointed to keape ye said crybe copper in the furnace. All the sd
vessels for brewinge, with pippes and hodgesheads perteyning to the same,
sweite; and the theight....

And joyninge upon the said posterne tower standethe the bake house southe and
north; being of lenght xvth (15) yeardes; in breadthe viiith (8) yeardes; well
covered with sclate. In the north end thereof there be two ovens; and in the
southe end one boultinge house well colleryd with wainscote, the wyndowe thereof
glaysined, and would be repaired. And joyninge to ye southe end of the said
bake house is builded two houses covered with slate, and of two house height;
ye nether part servethe for a slaughter house, and a store house; the over
part of the one for hayehouse, the other for chambers for the launderors; and
are in lenght.... foot.

And joyninge upon the west side of the said two houses is the scyte of the
chaunterie-house; and the said storehouse and chambers above yt did serve ye
prests for [their] cellers and chambers; and now nothing left but one
[single] wall goinge from the said store house to the entry of the.... side of
the dungeon gate: which. is in lenght xxxiiih (33) yeardes. And the ground
between ye. wall, houses and dongeone is used for a wood garthe. And from the
weste side of the said entry to the tower called ye middle ward, is another
small parcel of ground enclosed for a wode garthe with a little stone wall of
xvj (16) yerds of lenght. And from the said tower, called ye middle ward, is a
single curteyne wall joined to the said dungeon of xxitie (21) yeardes in
lenght.

The dungeon is set of a little moate made with men's hands, and for the most
part, as yt were square. The circuit thereof, measured by the brattishing,
contains ccxxvth (225) yeardes. It is of a fare and pathe buildinge with vijen
(seven) round towers, iiijth (four) garretts. Betwixt the same garretts and
towers, lodgings: besides the gate house, which is two towers of four house
height, is of a stately buildinge; and the other towers be all of three house
height and well covered with lead, as is likewise the said gatehouse and other
lodgings. Round about the same dungeon upon the said lead, is a tryme walk
and a fair prospecte, and in six parts thereof is passadges and entries to ye
same leads. In ye which dungeon is hall, chambers and all other manner of houses
of offices for ye Lord and his train. The south side thereof servethe for the
Lords and Ladies lodgings; and underneighe them the prisone, porter-lodge and
wine celler, with ye skollerie. On the weste side for chambres and wardrope. The
north side chambers and lodgings. The east side the halle, ketchinge,
chambers, pantrye. Underneithe ye same hall a marveylouse fare vaulte, which is
the butterye, in lenght xvij (17) yeards, in breadthe vjth (6) yeardes. And
underneighe the same ketchinge a lardnor, and at the end of the said butterie
a draw-well of long time not occupied. Within the same dungeone is a proper
little coortinge for the most part square, and well paved with stone. All the
chambers and houses of office within the said dungeone in good reparacions, and
has in the same the impleyments, bords, and bedstedes perteyninge thereunto,
as appearethe by indenture. There is raised on the weste side of the said
dungeon one little square tower, called the Watch Tower, above ye leads
xiiijth (14) yeardes: wherein is placed for a watchemane to ley; and a beaken to
be set or hinge. For that the north part of the dungeon is the owtemoste
part of the castle on that side, yt would be good the single courteyne wall,
which is builded from the dungeone westeward to the eastemoste garrett of the
dobble cortinge wall, were taken down; and a double courtinge wall made by the
ground of the moate of the said dungeone from the said garrett right over to
the corner of the said posterne tower. The same should then be a strenght for
that part of the said castle, and serve for diverse other good purposes: the
length whereof is lxxth (70) yeardes.

And because throw extreme winds the glass of the windows of this and other
my Lord's castells and houses here in this cuntrie doothe decay and waste, yt
were good the whole leights of evrie window at the departure of his Lp. from
lyinge at any of his said castells end houses, and dowring the time of his
Lps. absence or others lying in them, were taken down and lade upe in safety;
and at sooche time, as other his Lp. or any other should lie at any of the
said places, the same might then be set uppe of new, with small charges to his
Lp. where now the decay thereof shall be very costly and chargeable to be
repaired.

Alnwick Castle contains about five acres of ground within its outer walls,
which are flanked with 16 towers and turrets, that now afford a complete set of
offices to the castle, and maintain many of them their original names, as well
as their ancient use and destination.

"These are,

I. The Great or Outward Gate of entrance, anciently called the Utter Ward.

II. The Garner or Avener's Tower: behind which are the stables, coach-houses,
etc. in all respects suitable to the magnitude and dignity of this great
castle.

III. The Water Tower; containing the cistern or reservoir that supplies the
castle and offices with water. Adjoining to this is the laundry, etc.

IV. The Caterer's Tower; adjoining to which are the kitchens, and all
conveniences of that sort.

Behind the adjacent walls are concealed a complete set of offices and
apartments for most of the principal officers and attendants in the castle.
Together with a large hall, or dining room, to entertain the tenants at the
audits; with an office for the auditors, housekeeper's room; and underneath
these, a servants-hall, with all other suitable conveniences.

"V. The Middle Ward.

"VI. The Auditor's Tower.

"VII. The Guard House.

"VIII. The East Garret.

IX. The Record's Tower; of which the lower story contains the evidence room,
or great repository of the archives of the barony; over it is a circular
apartment designed and executed with great taste and beauty for a banqueting
room, being 29 feet diameter, and 24 feet 6 inches high.

X. The Ravine Tower, or Hotspur's Chair. Between this and the round tower was
formerly a large breach in the walls, which for time immemorial had been called
by the town's people, the Bloody Gap.

XI. The Constable's Tower; which remains chiefly in its ancient state, as a
specimen how the castle itself was once fitted up.

XII. The Postern Tower, or Sally Port. The upper apartment now contains old
armor, arms, etc. The lower story has a small furnace and elaboratory for
chemical or other experiments.

"XIII. The Armourer's Tower.

"XIV. The Falconer's Tower.

XV. The Abbot's Tower; so called either from its situation nearest to Alnwick
Abbey, or from its containing an apartment for the Abbot of that monastery
whenever he retired to the castle.

"XVI. The West Garret.

The castle properly consists of three courts or divisions; the entrance into
which was defended with three strong massy gates; called the Utter Ward, the
Middle Ward, and the Inner Ward. Each of these gates was in a high embattled
tower, furnished with a portcullis, and the outward gate with a drawbridge
also: they had each of them a porter's lodge, and a strong prison, besides
other necessary apartments for the constable, bailiff, and subordinate
officers. Under each of the prisons was a deep and dark dungeon, into which the
more refractory prisoners were let down with cords, and from which there was no
exit but through the trap door in the floor above. That of the inner ward is
still remaining in all its original horrors.

This castle, like many others in the north, was anciently ornamented with
figures of warriors, distributed round the battlements, and therefore the
present noble proprietors have allowed them to be continued, and have supplied
some that had been destroyed, but to show what they once were; and, that this
is no innovation, they have retained the ancient ones, though defaced, which
were placed on the top of the two octagon towers.

From length of time, and the shocks it has sustained in ancient wars, this
castle was become quite a ruin, when by the death of Algernon Duke of Somerset,
it devolved, together with all the estates of this great barony, etc. to the
present Duke and Duchess of Northumberland; who immediately set to repair the
same, and with the most consummate taste and judgment restored and embellished
it, as much as possible, in the true Gothic style; so that it may deservedly be
considered as one of the noblest and most magnificent models of a great
baronial castle.

Nothing can be more striking than the effect at first entrance within the
walls from the town, when through a dark gloomy gateway of considerable length
and depth, the eye suddenly emerges into one of the most splendid scenes that
can be imagined; and is presented at once with the great body of the inner
castle, surrounded with fair semi-circular towers, finely swelling to the eye,
and gayly adorned with pinnacles, figures, battlements, etc.

The impression is still further strengthened by the successive entrance into
the second and third courts, through great massy towers, till the stranger is
landed in the inner court, in the very center of this great citadel.

Here he enters to a most beautiful staircase, of a very singular yet pleasing
form, expanding like a fan: the cornice of the ceiling is enriched with a
series of 120 escutcheons, displaying the principal quarterings and
intermarriages of the Percy family. The space occupied by this staircase is 46
feet long, 35 feet 4 inches wide, and 43 feet 2 inches high.

The first room that presents to the left, is the saloon, which is a most
beautiful apartment, designed in the gayest and most elegant style of Gothic
architecture; being 42 feet 8 inches long, 37 feet 2 inches wide, and 19 feet
10 inches high.

To this succeeds the drawing room, consisting of one large oval, with a
semicircular projection, or bow-window. It is 46 feet 7 inches long, 35 feet 4
inches wide, and 22 feet high.

Hence the transition is very properly to the great dining room; which was one
of the first executed, and is of the purest Gothic, with nitches and other
ornaments, that render it a very noble model of a great Baron's hall. In this
room was an irregularity in the form, which has been managed with great skill
and judgment, and made productive of beauty and convenience. This was a large
bow-window, not in the center, but toward the upper end, which now affords a
very agreeable recess when the family dine alone, or for a second table at the
great public dinners. This room is 53 feet 9 inches long, 20 feet 10 inches
wide, (exclusive of the circular recess, which is 19 feet in diameter) and 26
feet 9 inches high.

From the dining room, the stranger may either descend into the court, by a
circular Staircase, or he is ushered into a very beautiful Gothic apartment
over the gateway, commonly used for a breakfast or supper-room: this is
furnished with closets in the octagon towers, and is connected with other
private apartments. It is 38 feet 4 inches long,.. feet wide, and 16 feet 1
inch high.

Hence the stranger is conducted into the library, which is a very fine room,
in the form of a parallelogram, properly fitted up for books, and ornamented
with stucco-work in a very rich Gothic style; being 64 feet long,.. wide, and
16 feet 1 inch high. This apartment leads to

The chapel; which fills all the upper space of the middle ward. Here the
highest display of Gothic ornaments in the greatest beauty has been very
properly exhibited; and the several parts of the chapel have been designed
after the most perfect models of Gothic excellence. The great east window is
taken from one of the finest in York minster. The ceiling is borrowed from that
of King's college, in Cambridge; and the walls are painted after the great
church in Milan: but the windows of painted glass will be in a style superior
to any thing that has yet been attempted, and worthy of the present more
improved state of the arts. Exclusive of a beautiful circular recess for the
family the chapel is 50 feet long, 21 feet, 4 inches wide, and 22 feet high.

Returning from the chapel through the library, and passing by another great
staircase, (that fills an oval space 22 feet 9 inches long, and 15 feet 3
inches wide) we enter a passage or gallery which leads to two great state-bed
chambers, each 30 feet long, most nobly furnished, with double dressing rooms,
closets, and other conveniences, all in the highest elegance and magnificence,
but as conformable as possible to the general style of the castle. From these
bed-chambers the passage opens to the grand staircase, by which we first
entered, and compleats a tour not easily to be paralleled.

I must now turn my attention to the antiquity and history of this place.

Mr Gross says, it is believed to have been founded in the time of the Romans,
although no part of the original structure is now remaining. But when part of
the dungeon or castle keep was taken down to be repaired some years ago, under
the present walls were discovered the foundations of other buildings, which lay
in a different direction from the present; and some of the stones appeared to
have Roman mouldings. "The dungeon or keep of the present castle, is believed
to have been founded in the Saxon times. The zigzag fret-work round the arch
that leads into the inner court, is evidently of Saxon architecture; and yet
this was probably not the most ancient entrance; for under the flag tower,
before that part was taken down and rebuilt by the present Duke, was the
appearance of a gateway that had been walled up; directly fronting the present
outward gateway into the town."

The first proprietor of the barony of Alnwick named in history, is Tyson, who
fell at the battle of Hastings, in defense of Harold his King. 1. Gilbt. Tysonn
Lord of Bridlington, Walton, Malton, and Alnewicke at the time of the Norman
Conquest. He had Issue Wm Tysonn his S. and Heir, and Rich Tysonn.

2. Wm Tysonn S. and H. of Gilbt. had issue one only daughter Beatrix, who was
given in marriage by Wm the Conqr. D. of Normandy and then K. of England, to be
married to one of his Noblemen called Ivo Vesey Lord Vesey with the Barony of
Alnewick and Malton and all the Lands thereto appertayneing.

3. Richd. Tysonn 2d S. of Gilbt. founder of the Monastery of Gisbrough: and by
the gift of Gilbt. his F. was Ld. of Shilbotille, Hasand, Newton, Reighton,
Foland, and Boxfield. Et Ecclesiae de Gysyns ex dono patris sui. This Richd.
lies buried in the Abbey of Gisborough, which was of his own foundation. He
had Issue

4. One only Son named Wm Tysonne -- and Wm Tysonne had Issue also one only
Son named German Tysonne.

5. German Tysonne had issue only one D. Benedicta his heir, who was mar. to
Wm Hilton Baron of Hilton, and was Father of Alexr Hilton, who was father of
Robt. Hilton Dnus Hilton mil.

Gilb. Tysonn, Lord of Bridlington, Walton, Malton, Alnewick, and other great
possions and Lands. He mar. Beatrix a Norman and near kinswoman to Wm. the
Conqr. and after K. of Engl. and by her had Issue two S. Wm. and Richd. which
Richd. his 2d. S. was founder of the Abbey of Gisborough. His arms were vert, 3
Lions rampant argent, crowned and collared, Or, with chains coming over the
backs of them.

Wm Tysonn Son and H. of Gilbt. mar. ye D. of Gilbt. de Gaunt, Earl of
Lincoln, and had issue Alda his only and sole D. and H. mar. to Ivo Vesey Ld
Vesey and Baron of Alnewick and Malton. This Wm fell in the Battle of Hastings,
on the side of W. the C. and in the life time of his Father. Ivo Vesey was so
called from a town of yt name in Normandy where he was born. The arms of Vesey
were Or, a Cross, sable.

Ivo Vesey, by Alda, sole D. and H. of Wm Tysonn, had issue Beatrix, their sole
D. and H. and heir of all those Lands of Bridlington, Walton, Alnwick, and
Malton, with all their Roialties and lands thereto belonging.

Eustace Fitz John, a noble Baron, the S. of John Monoculus, or the one eyed
Lord of Knaresborough, Br. and H. of Surlo de Burgo, who in the reign of the
Conq. builded the Castle of Knaresborough in the Co. of York. This Serlo and
John were the sons of Eustace, a Norman. And this Eustace Fitz John mar. to his
first w. Agnes, D. of Wm. the Constable of Chester, founder of the Abbey of
Norton, and sister and H. of Wm. her br. Constable of Chester, who died witht
issue. And by the said Agnes he had issue Richard Fitz Eustace, and bore for
his arms quarterly Or and Gules, a Bend sable. Eustace Fitz John marryd to his
2d. w. Beatrix, the only D. and H. of Ivo Lord Vesey, with whom he had the
Baronies of Malton and Alnewicke, and with her consent founded the Abbeys of
Malton and Alnewicke, and the Hospital at Broughton. And by her he had Issue
Wm their only S. who assumed to himself and his posterity the surname and
arms of Vesey.

Wm Lord Vesey, in right of his mother Baron of Alnewicke and Malton, son of
Eustace Fitz John, and heir to his mothers estate, and of all the Lord Vesey
his lands, and the only child of Beatrix his mother, the only H. of Ivo Lord
Vesey, Baron of Alnewicke and Malton as aforesaid. This William Lord Vesey he
married Burga the D. of Robt Esto Hevill, whose arms were Barry of ten pieces
Argent and Gules, and by her had issue Eustacius Lord Vesey, Baron of
Alnewicke, his S. and H. and Warren Vesey Dnus d' Knapton ex dono Willi patris
Matildis Waleranni uxor Warini.

Eustacius Lord Vesey, Baron of Alnewicke and Malton, S. and H. of William, in
right of his mother Lord Vesey; he married Margaret (of some named Marion) D.
of Wm. K. of Scotts, and Earl of Huntingdon in England, and by her he had
issue Wm Lord Vesey, Baron of A. and M. his son and H. and Richard N^t^us.

William Lord Vesey, Baron of Alnewicke, S. and H. of Eustacius Lord Vesey,
mar. to his first w. Is^l the D. of Wm. surnamed Louspec, E. of Salisbury, but
had no issue: and then he married Agnes D. of Wm. de Ferrers, E. of Derby, and
by her had issue John Lord Vesey, Baron of Alnewicke, who died without issue,
and Wm who after the death of his brother John, was Baron of Alnewicke and Ld
Vesey. The arms of Ferrers were V^rry of Or and Gules.

John Lord Vesey, Baron of Alnewicke, S. and H. of Wm. married the D. of (...)
Bellomonte, but had no issue; leaveing William his younger brother his heir,
who after his death was Ld Vesey and Baron of Alnewicke.

Warren Vesey above named, by Matilda his wife, had issue one only D. named
Marjory, their sole heir, who was mar. to Gilbt Atton Dnus d' Atton in
Pickering Lythe. The arms of Atton are Barrways of 6 pieces, Or and Azure, on a
Canton, Gules, a cross floree, argent.

Gilbt Atton, Lord of Atton, he mar. Marjory the only D. and heir of Warren
Vesey, Lord of Knapton; and they had issue Wm. Atton, of Pickering Lythe, there
sone and heir. This Wm Atton mar. (...) and by her had issue Gilbert his sone
and heir, who died without issue: and William his 2d son.

Sr Wm Atton, Knt. 2d. S. of Wm. and grand child of Gilbert, who mar. Marjory
Vesey, Lord of Atton in Pickering Lythe, and Br. and H. of Gilbert, who died
without issue. He mar. (...) and had issue Gilbt his only S. and Heir.

Sir Gilbert Atton, Knt. Lord of Atton in Pickering Lythe, son and heir of Sr.
Wm Atton, Knight. and cozen and next heir of John Lord Vesey, Baron of Alnewicke;
and so this Gilbt being his next heir, as descended from Warren Vesey by Gilbt
Atton Lord of Pickering Lyth, who mar. Marjory the D. and sole heir of Warren
Vesey, Lord of Knapton aforesde; and so the Veseys descended from Wm. the first
Ld. Vesey in right of his mother. This Gilbt was found next H. to Wm. the last
Ld. Vesey and Baron of Alnewicke, whose son John Lord Vesey died in his
fathers life time, without issue: and so this Sr. Gilbt Atton, was admitted as
the next heir of the Lord Vesey, and had both the honor and arms: he had
issue his only son Sr. Wm Atton. Knt. who left three Dau. his heirs to the
whole Estate both of the Attons and Veseys. This Gilb^t is in sundry records
styled Sr Wm Atton, Knt. Lord Vesey.

Wm Lord Vesey, 2d S. of Wm Lord Vesey and br. and H. of John Ld Vesey, who
died without issue, and after the death of his br. John was Lord Vesey and
Baron of Alnewicke. He married Isabell the D. of Robt Perington and the widow
of Robt Lord Wells, and by her had issue John their only S. and H. who died in
his father's life time without any issue, leaving Gilbt d' Atton the 3d of
that Xian name his cossen and next heir.

Gilb^tus iste de Atton tertius and ultimus sui nominis deficientibus Dnis de
Vesey, tanquam co^sanguineus and per ximus here is ascendit ad He^ditatem suam
per linea^ recta^ descendentum a Warino de Vesey. et sui gener^is primus fuit,
qui, rejectis armis sive insig^nibus paternis illorum arma militaria per suit
in posterum usurpabat, Crucem scilicet fabulinam in Campo Aureo.

Sr. Wm Atton, Knight. Lord Vesey and Baron of Alnewick only S. of Sr. Gil^bt
Atton, Knight. who was found next heir to Wm Lord Vesey, and to John last Ld.
Vesey, who died in the life time of his F. Wm. without issue. This Wm Atton Ld
Vesey, he mar. Isabell ye Dau. of Hen. Lord Piersey, the fifth of that Xian
name, whose arms were in a field Or. a Lion rampant azure, and by her he had
issue 3 Dau^rs his heirs, Elizabeth, Anastacia, and Katherine. Elizabeth was
first mar. to Wm Place, Esquire whose arms were argent, a fesse, gules, and above
the fesse charg^d with 2 Mullets sable, and by him had issue a son named also
William. And 2dly she was mar. to Sir John Conyers of Sockburne, Knt. whose
arms were Azure, a Maunch, Or.

Anastasia the 2d of the D. and Coheiresses of Wm Atton Ld Vesey was mar. to
Edwd St John, Knt. whose arms were argent on a chief indented Gules, two
Mullets pierced, Or.

Katherine the 3d D. was mar. to Sr Ralph Ewre, Knt. of whom descended the Ld
Eweres who bare quarterly Or and Gules, on a Bend, sable, 3 Escallops argent.

Sr John Conyers had issue by the Widow Place, Robt Conyers, afterward a Knt.
and from them descended Conyers of Sockburne.

Sr Edwd St. John had issue by Anastatia Atton, one only Dau^r, their heir,
named Margaret, who was married to Those Bromfleet, Knt. by whom he had issue
Hen. Bromfleet, created Lord Vesey at the coronation of Q. Margaret, W. to K.
VI. Hen. Bromfleet Lord Vesey had issue one only Dau. Margaret, mar. to John
Ld Clifford, who bare Checkie Or and Azure, a fesse, Ruby: in whose posterity
the honor of Lord Vesey continues to this day, in Francis Earl of Cumberland,
Lord Clifford, Westmoreland and Vesey.

Sir Ra. Ewre, Knight. S. and H. of John who married Katherine Atton, one of the D.
and Coheires of Wm Atton, Knt. Lord Vesey, had by her issue Sr Wm Ewre, Knt.
from whom in lineal descent is cum Wm now Ld Ewre, and diverse others.

E Folio MSS of pedigrees penes Geo. Bows, Esquire Randal's Manuscripts. The
Lordship of Alnwick at the time of the conquest belonged to Gilbert Tyson, who
being slain in the battle of Hastings, on the part of King Harold, left this
Lordship of Alnwick, and that of Malton in the county of York, to his son
William Tyson. -- Randal's Manuscripts.

Dugdale Monast. vol. II.

This was formerly a Barony of the Veseys, for Henry II. gave it to Eustace
Fitz John, father of William Vesey, in tenure of 12 Knights fees.

Gibson's Camden.
William the Conqueror gave the heiress of Tyson in marriage to Ivo de Vesey,
one of his attendant adventurers; her possessions being very great, as well at
Alnwick as in Yorkshire. Beatrix was their issue, and by King Henry I. was
given in marriage to Eustace Fitz John; from whom descended four generations,
who successively possessed this barony. It was held in capite of the King by 18
Knights fees. This was an illustrious and powerful family. Eustace Fitz John
William He married the Earl of Salisbury's daughter, and in the 10th year of
King Henry III. had livery of the castle of Alnwick, etc. Eustace William John
de Vesey,
Who successively held the Barony of Alnwick.

The Lord Eustace had great alliances by marriage; his eldest sister Matilda
marrying Robert de Muschamp, the first Baron of Wooler.

Cecilia, a younger sister, married Hugh de Baliol, Baron of Bywell.

Lord Eustace himself married Agnes daughter of William King of Scotland, and
his own mother was of the noble house of Stutvill of Knaresbrough in Yorkshire,
the daughter of Lord Robert Stutvill.

Wallis.


King William Rufus, being required by King Malcolm of Scotland to fulfill the
articles concluded upon in the truce made in 1091, gave the Scotch Monarch
assurances of their completion, upon his repairing to his court, to which he
ordered him to be honorably conducted. On his arrival, he was received with
great insolence and contempt, being refused admittance to the King's presence,
who insisted that Malcolm should submit his claim to the judgment of the
English peers. Malcolm with a becoming dignity refused, alleging if there was
any dispute to his title, it should be settled on the Marches, by men of both
nations, agreeable to the laws and customs established there. The English
Monarch not consenting to such proposition, Malcolm returned in high
displeasure, and was not long before he showed his resentment, by entering the
borders with a powerful army, accompanied by Edward his son: they laid waste
the county of Northumberland to the environs of Alnwick, and besieged the
castle. The most authentic account of the tragical events of this siege, seems
to be that given in the ancient Chronicle of Alnwick Abbey, of which a copy is
preserved in the British Museum. Mowbray A. D. 1093. Rex Scottorum Malcholmus,
and primogenitus ejus filius Edwardus, cum multis aliis in Northumbria die S.
Bricii a militibus Rodberti Mulbrai Northumbrorum comitis, occisi sunt juxta
Alne fluvium.

Corpus vero regis, cum suorum nullus remaneret, qui terra illud cooperiret,
duo ex indigenis carro impositum in Tinemuthe sepelierunt.

Lel. Col. vol. II. p. 357.
Earl of Northumberland had collected a few troops to oppose the invader, and
with them possessed this castle. It was too strong to be taken by assault, but
a circumvallation being made by the Scotch forces, the garrison was cut off
from hopes of succor, and was on the point of surrendering, when a person
undertook its relief by the following stratagem: he rode forth completely
armed, with the keys of the castle tied to the end of his spear, and presented
himself in a suppliant manner before the King's pavilion, as being come to
surrender the fortress. Malcolm advancing hastily without his armor, received
a mortal wound from the spearman, who escaped by the fleetness of his horse,
and by swimming the river, which was then flooded with rains. The Chronicle
says his name was Hammond, and the place of his passage was for long after him
named Hammond's Ford: but in Lel. Col. he is called Morkell, from the Book of
the High Altar of Durham Cathedral. Malcolinus Rex Scottorum quinquies
Northumbriam invasit. Primo regnante Edwardo rege, quando Tosti Northumbr. fuit
Romae. Secundo reg. Gul. bastardo, quo tempore Clivelandiam etiam depopulavit.
Tertio reg. eodem Gul. sub Walchero episcopo. Quarto reg. Gul. Rufo usque ad
Cestre pervenit. Quinto sub eodem Gul. quo tempore a Morkello milite occisus
est cum filio prope Alne flu. and sepultus apud Tinimuth. Unde Margareta regina
ejus uxor ex animi moerore obiit.

Ibid. p. 387. Margareta, etc. ex quo genuit Edwardum, Edgarum, Alexandrum,
David, qui omnes post patrem in Scotia regnaverunt praetar Edwardum qui cum
patre occisus est.

Ibid. p. 416.


Prince Edward, Malcolm's eldest son, too incautiously advancing to revenge his
father's death, fell into an ambuscade, and was slain. Mr Wallis speaks of this
event in the following words: Malcolm thought himself secure by the absence of
the King's troops. Mowbray considered this, and came upon him with the forces
of his government. A smart battle ensued. The Scots being deprived of their
usual courage by their surprise, gave ground. The Sovereign and his son
astonished to see it, rode from rank to rank, exhorting, entreating, and
imploring them to remember the glory of the Scotch arms, and were both slain.

P. 397.
The garrison sallied forth, the Scotch were thrown into confusion by the loss
of their leaders, and a panic succeeding, victory, stained with great
bloodshed, declared for the English: notwithstanding the personal bravery of
many illustrious Chieftains, and their utmost efforts to rally the disconcerted
troops, they fled in the utmost cowardice before their conquerors, who were
greatly inferior in numbers. The spot where King Malcolm was slain, was
distinguished by a cross, which was lately repaired or rebuilt by the Duchess
of Northumberland, Malcolinus Rex Scottorum genuit e Margareta, Edgari Clitonis
filia, sex filios, Eadwardum, Eadmundum, Eadgarum regem, Alexandrum regem,
Ethelredum, David regem, and 2 filias, Matildem reginam Angl. and Mariam, quam
Eustachius comes Bononiae in conjugium accepit.

Lel. Col. vol. I. p. 128.
who was immediately descended from this unfortunate Monarch, by his daughter
Queen Maud, wife of King Henry I. of England; whose lineal descendants were, 1.
The Lady Mary Plantagenet, (daughter of Henry Earl of Lancaster, grandson of
King Henry III.) married to Henry Percy, the third Lord of Alnwick. 2. The Lady
Elizabeth Mortimer, (granddaughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, son of Edward
III.) wife of Hotspur. 3. The Lady Eleanor Neville, (granddaughter of John of
Gaunt) wife of the second Earl of Northumberland. Gross.



In the year 1135, King David I. of Scotland seized upon the castles of
Northumberland, Alnwick being one, previous to the treaty entered into between
him and King Stephen.

After King William of Scotland, surnamed the Lion, made his disgraceful
retreat from the castle of Prudhoe, A. D. 1174, he beset the castle of Alnwick
with his whole army, consisting of 80,000 men: being repulsed for some time, he
formed a blockade, and drew off many of his forces in plundering parties, to
pillage the country; one of which, as Benedict of Peterborough says, commanded
by Earl Duncan, entered the town of Warkworth, burnt it, and put all the
inhabitants to the sword, without distinction of age or sex; and that he made
his soldiers break open the church of St Lawrence in that place, in which, and
in the house of the Minister, they flew above one hundred men, bedsies women
and children. Bernard Baliol, a youth of great fortitude, with about 400
horsemen raised at Newcastle, engaged in an enterprise to surprise the Scotch
Monarch: they were favored in their march by a thick fog, which kept them
concealed till they reached the environs of Alnwick, when discovering the King
attended by about 60 of his chief followers on a reconnoitering party, they
came upon them unexpectedly on Saturday the 5th day of July, whilst the
principal parts of his vast army were scattered over the country in acts of
rapine and violence, and the others laying in an idle and unsuspicious security
before the castle, a conflict ensued, in which the King's horse was killed
under him, and many of his attendants were slain, the King being made prisoner.
The straggling parties were put to the route or taken, to a great amount in
number, before they gained intelligence of the real force of their opponents:
and the King of those robbers, after being confined some time in Richmond
Castle, was removed to London, and afterward ransomed for 100,000l. at the
same time doing homage for his crown: as a memorial of which submission, he
deposited his arms at the altar in York Minster.

In the reign of King John, A. D. 1212, Eustace de Vesey being accused of a
conspiracy against the King's life, fled into Scotland. His castle was ordered
to be rased; but the apprehension of a southern rebellion diverted the purpose.

Eustace with the northern Barons, A. D. 1216, at Felton did homage to
Alexander II. King of Scotland, his brother-in-law, which so much incensed King
John, that he poured forth into the north a large army, laid Felton in ashes,
together with the towns of Mitford, Morpeth, Alnwick, Wark, and Roxburgh.
Whilst John made these dreadful depredations in Northumberland, the Lord
Eustace, with King Alexander, made an incursion as far as Barnardcastle, in the
country of Durham, to which they laid siege; and being out on horseback, to
take a view of the fortress, in order to plan an assault, making too near an
approach, Eustace lost his life by an arrow shot from some of the out-posts.

What greatly contributed to prolong the intestine troubles of Henry the
Third's kingdom in 1266, was the despair of the rebel Barons, by the
forfeitures of their estates, under the determinations of the parliament of
Winchester. John de Vesey was one of them, and having been deprived of his
castle and barony of Alnwick, he entered into a combination with several others
laboring under the same proscription, for the recovery of their possessions.
Vesey raised a sufficient force to gain his castle, but Prince Edward coming
against him with a strong body of forces, reduced his garrison to such
distress, that he was obliged to surrender, and submit himself to the Prince's
mercy; through whose intercession he received the royal pardon.

In 1264, this John de Vesey was summoned to parliament in the 28th year of
King Henry the Third's reign. This was the glorious era in which our mode of
parliaments was first settled, and Commons regularly admitted to a share in the
legislative power. He died in the 11th year of the reign of King Edward I. And
in the 25th year of that reign, A. D. 1297, died William de Vesey, the last
Baron of that family; who having no ligitimate issue, but leaving a son born
out of wedlock, did, by the King's license, enfeof Anthony Beck, Bishop of
Durham and titular Patriarch of Jerusalem, in the castle and Barony of Alnwick,
in trust for such natural son; but this Right Reverend Guardian got the infant
deprived of his barony, and as he acquired other royal favors, also obtained a
confirmation from the King of a sale made thereof to Henry Lord Percy, Baron of
Topcliff and Spofford, in Yorkshire, an ancestor of the present illustrious
family.

Mr Gross says, but from what authority he is not pleased to point out, that
the appointment of the infant's Guardians, as also the very words of the deed
of enfeofment (now extant) in which the conveyance is to the Bishop absolute
and unconditional, confute a report too hastily taken up by some Historians,
that this castle and barony were only given to the Bishop in trust for William
the Bastard above mentioned; and that he was guilty of a violation of this
trust in disposing of them otherwise. It would have been well if Mr Gross could
have shown where this deed was to be seen; as it would in some measure have
exonerated the Bishop's memory of this infamous charge, and would have set
Historians right for the future. Rymer (III. 184 -- 18-9) authorizes the
contrary determination. I do not remember an instrument of that antiquity,
which contains an express trust; but where a trust was premised, it was merely
confidential, or expressed in some separate deed. Trusts were introduced by the
Lawmen to evade the statute of uses made in the reign of King Henry VIII. and
from that period gained their legal acceptance.

The castle and barony of Alnwick continued in the Bishop's possession 12
years, Gross.
before he granted them to Lord Percy. The Bishop's deed bears date the 19th of
Nov. 1309, and does not indeed wear the countenance of an obscure transaction,
for the witnesses to it were some of the greatest personages in the kingdom,
viz. Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, Robert de Umfreville Earl of Angus, Robert
Lord Clifford, etc. the grant was afterward confirmed by the King at Sheene,
23d Jan. 1310, to H. Percy and his sons; who Mr Gross says, to remove every
pretense of complaint, obtained a release of all right and title to the
inheritance from the heir at law, Sir Gilbert de Aton, Knt. who was the nearest
legitimate relation to the Lord William de Vesey above mentioned. I must
confess Mr Grose's argument with me tends not to exculpate the Bishop, but to
confirm the suspicion of his guilt. Such a ratification of title, in my
apprehension, tells a consciousness of defects: had the bastard son confirmed,
the doubt would have been taken away. Antoninus de Bek, etc.

Castrum de Alnewick, quod ei Gul. de Vesey contulerat, confidens in eo, quod
illud ad opus filii sui parvuli and illegitimi Gulielmi conserverat, and ei
adulto traderet, accepta pecunia Henrico de Percy vendidit.

Lel. Col. vol. I. p. 334. Carta Ep^i. Dun. qua Baronia de Alnewyk. H. de P.
concessit A. D. 1309. A. 3. Edw. 2.
Rym. Tom. 3. p. 183. A Permissione divinia, etc. Noveritis me dedisse
Concessisse and hac carta nostra confirmasse, nobili viro Domno Hen. de Percy,
Baroniam, Castrum, Manerium et villam de Alnewyk, cum villis Hamelettis Membris
Advocationibus Ecclesiarum, Abbathiarum Prioratuum Hospitalium et
Capellaniarum, simul cum molendis Pratis Boscis, Dominiis, Dominicis, Terris,
Patris Villenagiis, Villanis, cum eorum sequelis and catallis, Feodus Militum,
Homagiis, Redditibus, servitiis Liberorum Hominum, Wardis, Releviis Escaetis
Hundredis, Wapent, et Cur. simul cum omnibus aliis Pertinentiis et proficuis
quae aliquo modo accidere poterunt ad Baroniam praedictam; scilicet.

Quicquid habuimus de dono nobilis viri Domini Willielme de Vesey, infra
Baroniam praedictam, et alibi infra comitatum Northumbriae, una cum Ferijs
Mercatis Warennis Chaceis Wrecco Maris, et omnibus aliis libertatibus liberis
consuetudinibus Juribus et aliis rebus quibuscunq. ad predictam Baroniam
spectantibus, ubique infra Comitatum praedictum, et extra, sine allo
retenemento.

Habenda et Tenenda praedicto D. H. haeredibus and assignatis suis, Baroniam
praedictam, cum Castro, Villis, Membris, et aliis pertinentlis, Juribus
Libertatibus proficuis et aliis rebus quibuscunq. in omnibus, sicut praedictum
est, de Domino Rege and haeredibus suis, per Servitia inde debita et consueta
inperpetuum.

Et praeteria concessimus pro nobis and haeredibus Nostris, quod omnes Terrae
et omnia Tenementa cum servitiis, et aliis pertinentiis suis, quae Isabella
quae fuit uxor Dni Johannis de Vesey senioris, et Isabella, quae fuit uxor
dicti Willielmi de Vesey tenet in Dotem de Baronia^ praedicta^, et quae post
mortem praedictarum Isabellae et Isabellae ad nos et Haeredibus Nostros reverti
deberent, post decessam enjuslibet ipsarum Isabellae et Isabellae praefato
domino Henrico Haeredibus et assignatis suis remaneant Tenenda simul cum
Baronia et omnibus terris et tenementis predictis, de domino Rege et Haeredibus
suis, per servitia inde debita et consueta imperpetuum.

Et nos praefatus Antonius, et Haeredes nostri, praedicto domino Henrico
haeredibus et assignatis suis praedictam Baroniam cum Castro Villis membris,
maneriis, et aliis pertinensiis, Libertatibus proficiis et aliis rebus
quibuscumque, in omnibus, ficut praedictum est, contra omnes Geates
warranti^abimus et defendimus imperpetuum.

In cujus rei testimonium presenti chartae sigillum nostrum est appensu^, hiis
testibus, nobilibus viris, Dominis. Comitibus.
Henrico de Lacy, Lincolniae Roberto de Umfravill de Anegos
Militibus.
Dominis Roberto de Clifford Roberto de Hilton Johanne de Cambtion Richardo
Marmeduck Ada de Henton Johanne de Dudden Willielmo de Gossewyk et aliis.


Dat. apud Kenyton in manerio nobilis viri Dn^i Joh^is Comitis Warennae, nono
decimo die men. November. An^o Dn^i Millesimo trescentesimo nono, Patriarchaetis
nostri quarto, and Consecrationis nrae vicesimo sexto.
Pro H. de Percy de Conventionib. cu. Ep^o. Dun. Rym. Tom 3. p. 185. A. D.
1309. A. 3. Edw. 2. Pat. 3. E. 2. m. 30.
Rex
omnibus adquos, etc. salutem.
Quia intelletimus quod, inter venerabilem patrem A. Dunelmense Episcopum et
dilectum et fidelem nostrum Henricum de Percy, quaedam convensiones praetactae
et praelocutae sunt, videlicet, quod idem Episcopus praedictum Henricum de
Castro et Manerio de Alnewyk, cum pertinentiis feoffabit.

Nos, eidem H. Volentes in hac part, gratiam facere specialem, concedimus
exnunc et licentiam damus, pro nobis and Haeredibus nostris, quantum in nobis
est, eidem H. quod, si contingat ipsos Episcopum and Henricum super
conventionibus praedictis ad invicem concordare, et quod idem Episcopus ipsum
H. de Castro et Manerio praedictis cum pertinentiis voluerit feoffare, quod id
H Castrum illud et manerium, cum pertinentiis ingredi possit; ita quod ipse et
Haeredes sui Castrum et Manerium praedicta cum pertinentiis, teneant de nobis
et Haeredibus nostris, per fertitia inde debita and consueta imperpetuum.

Nolentes quoth praedicti Ep^us and H. vel. eo^r Haeredes, ratione praemissor p.
nos vel haeredes nr^os, aut Ballivos. seu Ministros nostros quoscunq.
occasionentur, molestentur in aliquo, vel graventur.

In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Eborum 26 die Octobus. Per ips^u. Regem,
nunciante Comite corrubiae.




From the above period Alnwick Castle became the chief baronial seat in the
north of the Percies, a family of great distinction in the southern parts of
England from the time of the Conqueror. Immediately on this acquisition, the
Lord Henry Percy began to repair this castle; and he and his successors
perfected and completed the citadel and its outworks. The two great octagan
towers which were super-added to the (...) VI. Of Plantagenet -- Mary daughter
of Henry Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster, and grandson of King Henry III. was
wife of Henry, third Lord Percy of Alnwick, son to the founder of these towers,
viz. Gules, three lions rampant, Or, charged with a label of five points. In
the center are, the arms of the Sovereign, King Edward III. viz. France and
England quarterly, France being then Semee de fleurs de Lis. VII. Of Warren --
Eleanor daughter of John Earl of Warren and Surry, was wife of Henry Lord
Percy, the founder's grandfather, viz. Chequered or and az. VIII. Of Arundel --
Eleanor daughter of John Earl of Arundel, was the founder's mother, wife of
Henry Percy, first Lord of Alnwick, viz. Gules, a lion rampant, or. IX. Of
Umfreville -- Margaret Percy, one of the founder's daughters, was then married
to Robert, son and heir of Gilbert de Umfreville, Earl of Angus, viz. Azure, a
cinque foil, or, between six croslets argent. X. Of Percy again -- Isabel
Percy, another of the daughters, was then unmarried. She was afterward wife of
William de Aton. XI. Of Neville -- Maude Percy, the founder's eldest daughter,
was wife of John Lord Neville of Raby, viz. Gules, a saltire argent. XII. Of
Fitz Walter -- Eleanor Percy, his second daughter, was married to John Lord
Fitz Walter, viz. Or, a fess between two chevrons, gules. Gross.



The last remarkable incident in history relative to this castle, was in the
reign of King Edward IV. and happened after his great victory at Towton. One
Peter de Breze, a Frenchman, being under his Sovereign's displeasure, and in
prison, was restored to liberty on condition of his entering into the service
of the King of Sicily, the father of Margaret of Anjou, and conducting the
troops raised for her service into England. Breze landed on the Northumberland
coast with about 500 men at arms: he possessed the castle of Alnwick, which was
soon after besieged by Lord Hastings, Sir Ralph Gray, and Sir John Howard. The
garrison was reduced to great distress, when George Douglas, Earl of Angus,
influenced to this service by great promises from Margaret, advanced
unexpectedly to the besiegers with 10,000 horsemen, and making such maneuvers
as induced the English army to apprehend he meant to attack them, whilst they
were forming themselves in order of battle, he brought a strong party up to the
postern gate, to whom the garrison made a sally, and being mounted on horses
brought for that purpose, or behind the armed horsemen, the small garrison
evacuated the fortress, being only 300 in number, and fled without bloodshed.
It is believed the garrison, before they retired, endeavored to destroy all
the arms and ammunition they could not carry off: for a few years ago, on
opening the principal well in the inner ward, which had been long filled up,
the workmen found in it a great number of cannon balls of a large size, such as
were chiefly used after the first invention of gunpowder.

Margaret, in the month of October following, making another effort, by the
treachery of Sir Ralph Gray, the Governor, was again put in possession of
Alnwick Castle: but King Edward soon approaching with a numerous army, and
finding no forces in the field to oppose him, Margaret having again retired
into Scotland, he laid siege to the three great fortresses of Alnwick,
Dunstanborough, and Bambrough, at the same time. The troops which invested
Alnwick, being 10,000 in number, were under the command of the Earl of Warwick,
the Earl of Kent, the Lord Powis, the Baron of Graystock, and Lord Cromwell.
Alnwick held out till the 6th of January; the French General Breze having made
an ineffectual effort to relieve it.

I must trespass upon the reader so far, as to introduce in this place a short
account of the illustrious family of Percy.

This family is descended from Mainfred de Percy, who came into Normandy from
Denmark, before the adventure of the famous Rollo, and had issue Geffrey, who
took part with Rollo in his expedition into that province, of which he obtained
the Sovereignty; being the first Duke of that country, and lineal ancestor to
William Duke of Normandy and King of England. Glover the Somerset Herald in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, set forth this as an undoubted genealogy of the
family.

Geffrey had issue William de Percy, Lord Percy and Earl of Kaws, Governor of
Normandy; who had issue Geffrey de Percy, who married Mary daughter to the Earl
of Forest; who had issue William de Percy, who had issue Geffrey, all born in
Normandy.

The last Geffrey had issue two sons, William and Serlo, who came into England
with William the Conqueror. Lord Percy made a solemn feast
In Alnwick's princely hall;
And there came Lords and there came Knights,
His chiefs and Barons all.
With wassel, mirth, and revelry,
The castle rung around;
Lord Percy called for song and harp,
And pipes of martial sound.
The minstrels of thy noble house,
All clad in robes of blue,
With silver cressents on their arms,
Attend in order due.
The great achievements of thy race,
They sung their high command;
How valiant Mainfred over the seas
First led his northern band.
Brave Galfred next to Normandy
With virtuous Rollo came,
And from his Norman castles won
Assumed the Percy name.
They sung how in the Conqueror's fleet
Lord William shipped his powers,
And gained a fair young Saxon bride,
With all her lands and towers.
Then journeying to the holy land,
There bravely fought and died;
But first the silver cressent wan,
Some Paymin Soldan's pride.
They sung how Agnes' beauteous heir,
The Queen's own brother wed:
Lord Josceline sprung from Charlemagne,
In princely Brabant bred.
How he the Percy name revived,
And how his noble line,
Still foremost in their country's cause,
With godlike ardour shine.
With loud acclaims the listening crowd,
Applaud the masters song;
And deeds of arms and war became
The theme of every tongue.
Piercy's Hermit of Warkworth.


William was a great favorite of this Prince, and by his bounty held large
possessions in Hampshire, 32 lordships in Lincolnshire, and 86 lordships in
Yorkshire; Topcliff, in the North Riding, and Spofford, in the West Riding,
being his chief seats. He left a great patrimony in France to the Lord
Monpensier. -- Madox, in his Baronia Anglicana, says, that William the
Conqueror granted to his favorite Percy a barony of 30 Knights fees.

This William de Percy was surnamed Le Gernon, or Algernon: he was possessed of
the lordship of Whitby, with the large territory adjacent thereto, in the East
Riding of the county of York, where he founded an Abbey Ex Registro Monasterii
de Whitby. -- In the Harleyan Collection, No. 692 (26) fo. 235.

William Lord Percy, the first founder of Whitby, his arms " Field azure, 5
millpikes Or." He begat of Emme of the Port Lady Percy, Alayne Percy: who by
Emme of Gawnt his wife, begat William that succeeded him, Walter, Jeffrey,
Henry, and Alayne: and he lies buried in the Chapter House of Whitbye, and his
mother Emme of the Port. Which Emme first was Lady of Semer besides Skarburgh
before the Conquest, and of other lands, William Conqueror gave to Sir William
Percy for his good service: and he wedded her that was very heir to them in
discharging of his conscience.

Gul. Percy dedit. Whitby in opus restaurandi monasterii ubi Stephanas Abbas
fuit.

Idem Gul. Percy Whitby monachis abslulit.

Stephanas Abbas caepit cum suis restaurare monaster S. Mariae Ebor. favente ac
juvante Alano comite Richemondiae, A. D. 1088.

Ex Libello Stephani li Abbatis S. Mariae Eboraci.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 22.
for Benedictine Monks, to the honor of God, St. Peter, and St. Hilda, in the
time of King William Rufus, in the place where the monastery of Strenshale
anciently stood (destroyed by Inguar and Hubba the Danes). Serlo the founder's
brother, having assumed the habit of a Monk, was Abbot. William married Emma de
Port, Lady of the honor of Semar, and had issue by her three sons, Allan,
Walter, and William. At Sion-house, in an old roll, wrote in the reign of King
Henry VIII. is a history of the family in verse, where it is said he was
Admiral of the navy which brought over William the Conqueror, that he died
beyond the seas, and his heart was brought over and interred at Whitby, in the
chapter house; where also Emma his Lady was buried, having survived her husband.

Allan de Percy, the eldest son, succeeded to the honors and estates of his
father. He married Emma daughter of Gilbert de Gant, Lord of Humundbre, and son
of Gilbert Earl of Lincoln, by whom he had five sons, William, Geffrey, Henry,
Walter, and Allan. He had likewise one illegitimate son Allan, who was with the
King of Scots, in the third of King Stephen, at the battle of Northallerton,
called Bellum de Standardo.

William, The second William Lord Percy, the son of the first Alayne married
Aliza, that lies at Whitbye, by whom he had Alayne his first begotten son
that dyed without issue, Richard the first, Lord Percy, Robert Percy who begat
John Percy.

In the year of grace 1120, and in the 20th year of King Henry the first,
William the Prince of England was at Barkeflete in Normandye, and was purposing
to follow into England his father, and he was drowned in the sea, and many mo
noble folks not far fro the land; among whom was Richard a bastard son of
the King, and also his bastard sister the Countyes of Percy (or Perch in
France) Richard the Earl of Chester and his wife the King's nese; and the
Archdeacon of Hertford, and many other to the number of 140: and none of them
escaped but one rude fellow a Bocher, and he swamme all night upon an ore, and
in the morning he was driven to the land side, and he told all the matter and
casualtye.

Ex registro Monast. de Whitby
the eldest, married Alice the daughter of Robert Lord Ross, and had issue four
sons, Allan, William, Richard, and Robert. Allan dying without issue, William
succeeded to the estate and honors of his ancestors.

This William, The first Richard Lord Percy, had the 3 William Lord Percy, who
founded the Abbey of Handell in the honor of our Lady anno Christi 1133o. and
anno 1147 he founded the Abbey of Salley, in Craven, of white Monks; and he
gave to the Monks of Whytbye the church of Semer; and to the Monks of
Fowntaynes Malmor and Mahoter; and he gatt on Mary his wife Walter the first
son, Alayn his second son, Richard the third son, and William the first
Abbot of Whythye, Maud and Agnes, and when he died he was buried at Salley in
Craven, etc. William the first Abbote of Whytbye stood Abbote 26 years, and is
beried in the Chapter House of Whytbye.

Maude the elder daughter, Countess of Warwyke, married William Earl of
Warwyke; Agnes Lady Percy marryied Jocelin Luvain, called Percy by his wife.
This Jocelyn was the son of Godfrey Lo^ain Duke of Brabant and brother to
Adelyne Queen of King Henry the first king of England, and he wedded this dame
Agnes Percy upon condition that he should be called Jocelyn Percy, or else that
he should bare the arms of the Lords Percy, and he took the counsel of his
sister, and he chose rather to be called Jocelyn Percy, then to forsake his own
arms, (which be "Feld Ore, a Lion rampant azure") for so should he have had no
right title to his father's inheritance; and so of right the Lord Percy should
be Duke of Brabant, though they be not so indede. And to this Jocelyn Percy
King Henry the second gave and conserved the honor of Petworth, as William Earl
of Arundel and his sister gave the said honor. And this Jocelyn gatt of Agnes
his wife Henry, Alianor, Adalice, Robert, and Richard, and the said Agnes is
b^ried in the Chapter House of Whytbye.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
in the 34th year of King Henry I. A. D. 1133, founded the Abbey of Hampoll for
Cistertian Monks; and also that of Sallay, in Craven, in the 12th year of King
Stephen, A. D. 1147. He was one of the northern Barons who distinguished
themselves at the battle of Northallerton against the Scots. In the 12th year
of King Henry II. on levying the aids on the marriage of the King's daughter,
he certified his Knights fees to be 28 de veteri feoffamento, and 8, a third
and sixth parts de novo feoffamento. He made a journey to Jerusalem, and
departed this life at Mount-Joy, in the Holy Land. He married Adelidis de
Tunebrigge, by whom he had issue four sons, Walter, Allan, Richard, and
William, and two daughters, Maud and Agnes. All the sons died without issue.
William was a Monk, and Abbot of Whitby. Maud married William Earl of Warwick,
and Agnes, Joceline de Lovaine, son to Godfrey Duke of Brabant, and brother to
Adelidis Queen of England, wife of King Henry I. Maud died without issue, on
whose demise Agnes her sister became sole heiress of all the large possessions
of her ancestors. Before her marriage with Joceline, a covenant was made, that
he should either bear the arms of the Lords Percy (five fusils in fess Or) and
renounce his own, or continue his own arms, and take the name of Percy to him
and his issue by her. Under her picture in the pedigree at Sion-house are these
lines: Lord Percy's heir I was, whose noble name
By me survives, unto his lasting fame;
Brabant's Duke's son I wed, and for my sake
Retained his arms and Percy's name did take.
There was issue of this marriage four sons, Richard, Henry, Robert (Lord
Sutton upon Derwent) and Joceline. In the beforementioned roll are these
lines: And at Petworth is beryed this noble Lord,
Lady Agnes his wife, at Whitby, books record.
Joceline de Louvaine's pedigree was from the Kings of France of the race of
Charlemain, son of a Prince of the Medes.

Richard, the eldest son, was one of the chief of those Barons in arms against
King John, in the 17th year of that reign, and also one of the 25 who took an
oath to compel the King to observe the particular articles granted by the great
Charter and Charter of the Forests: and he was excommunicated by the Pope, for
his being a partizan with the insurgents. He was one of the Barons who called
over Lewis, the son of the French King, to receive the Crown of England, and in
association with Robert de Ros and Peter de Brus, subdued all Yorkshire to the
obedience of Lewis. He made his peace with King Henry III. and was in arms for
him against the Welsh, in the second year of that reign. He died without issue,
as did also Robert and Joceline.

Henry The first Henry Lord Percy married Isabell Bruise, to whom Adam de Bruise
gave in full marriage with his daughter, all the town of Leuenton with the
appurtenances, by the assent and consent of his heirs. And the Earl gatt on
his wife William and Henry.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
succeeded as heir of his brother: he married Isabel daughter of Adam, and
sister of Peter de Brus, of Skeleton. He had in dowry the manor of Lekenfield,
for which he rendered the following remarkable service: he and his heirs were
to resort to Skeleton Castle every Christmas Day, and lead the Lady of that
castle from her chamber to the chapel at mass, and from thence to her chamber
again; and after dinner to depart. He was buried at Whitby, and left issue two
sons, William and Henry.

William The fourth William Lord Percy, after the death of Agnes his grandame,
and Henry his father and Richard his uncle, came to the whole inheritance of
his elders, and he gatt of Helyn his wife, Henry his eldest son, Jeffrey Lord
of Semer, Walter Lord of Kildale, that lies at Gisburne, William Lord of
Dunsle, Ingelram Lord of Dalton: and he dyed in his good age, and is buried at
Salley in Craven, etc.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
being seized of the estates of his father, paid 100 marks fine in the 26th
year of the reign of King Henry III. to exempt him of attendance on the King
into Gascoine. He had two wives; by the first, Elan daughter of William Lord
Bardolph, he had seven sons; by Joan his second wife, who was the daughter of
William de Brewer, he had no issue that survived him.

Henry, The second Henry Lord Percy, of the daughter of the Earl Warren, gat
William and John that dyed without issue, and the third Henry that was his
successor; and he dyed in his good age and is buried by his father in the Abbey
of Salley in Craven.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
his eldest son, succeeded his father in the honors and chief possessions of
the family. He married Eleanor daughter of John Earl of Warren and Surry. We
find him in several services in the reign of King Henry III. against the Welsh
and Scotch, and for some short time in association with the rebellious Barons,
but restored soon after to royal favor. He had issue three sons, William,
John, and Henry. William and John died without issue, and the honors and
estates devolved upon

Henry, The third Henry Lord Percy gat on Alianour the dawgter of the Earl of
Arundell Henry and William, and he dyed in the year of grace 1268, and is
buried at Fowntaynes before the high alter. A^ianour Arundell Lady Percy,
builded the Chapel in the manor of Semer, and she dyed before her husband,
Anno Gratiae 1263.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
whose wardship, 22d King Edward I. was granted to Edmund the King's brother.
In the 24th year of that reign, he was knighted by the Sovereign before
Berwick; after which he was in the battle of Dunbar, where the English obtained
a signal victory. He was in many distinguished services in the succeeding years
of that reign: he was one of the great Barons who signed that memorable
declaration to Pope Boniface, That their King was not to answer in judgment,
for any rights of the Crown of England, before any tribunal under heaven, etc.
and that by the help of God they would resolutely and with all their force
maintain against all men. In the 34th year of that reign he was sent into
Scotland, accompanied by Lord Clifford and the Earl of Pembroke, to oppose
Robert de Brus, then lately crowned King, and at Methfeu they obtained a
complete victory. They were besieged at Kentier by the Scotch forces, where
they defended themselves gallantly till relieved by troops sent by the King
from Lenercost. This Lord Percy purchased the barony of Alnwick, as before
mentioned. In the 5th year of King Henry II. he was Governor of the castles of
Scarbrough and Bambrough; and in the same year the King granted him the custody
of the manor of Temple Weneby, in the county of York, belonging to the Knights
Templars, who were charged by Pope Clement with being guilty of apostasy,
idolatry, sodomy, and heresy. The Pope's bull alleges, that when a brother is
admitted, he denies Christ and he treads on the cross. This Lord Percy appears
to be of the list of factious Barons, who besieged Piers de Gaviston, Earl of
Cornwall, in Scarbrough Castle, on account of the royal partiality shown to
this unhappy favorite: Gaviston had surrendered himself to his protection, but
it did not prevent his death. A royal mandate issued for the confiscation of
all Lord Percy's estates and effects; but in the 7th year of that reign, he had
restitution and a pardon from the King: after which he was in the royal army at
the battle of Bannocksburn, when the English sustained a shameful defeat. In
the history of Stirlingshire lately published, this battle is particularly
mentioned, with some singular circumstances not noted in the account given
thereof page 60, etc. in this vol. -- The most material are: That the Scots
army was flanked on one hand by Woodlands, the defiles of which would greatly
impede the English horse. That the Scotch army before engaging kneeled down to
prayers, which suppliant posture the English apprehended was to denote their
submission and that they begged their lives; a conceit in the author as
improbable as ridiculous: no credulity or confidence in the authority could
reconcile so simple a tale to common sense. That after the English army were
put to the rout, Gloucester, attended by his military tennants, made a desperate
effort to retrieve the lost honors of the day, in which he fell. That on the
day of the general engagement Robert Bruce being attacked by Sir Henry Boynton,
slew him with a battle ax, which was a signal to the Scotch army for the onset.
These are material variances from the relations of other authors, and in the
above work appear unsupported.
On the death of Robert Lord Clifford, during the minority of his heir, he had
the custody of the castles of Skipton in Craven, Appleby, Brougham, and
Pendragon, in Westmoreland and Cumberland. He died in the 8th year of King
Edward II. and was buried in the abbey of Fountains, before the high altar. By
Eleanor his wife, daughter of John Fitz Allan, he had issue two sons, Henry and
William.

Henry The 4th Henry Lord Percy was Lord of Alnewyk, and he repaired the
Castle of the same; and he by the lycense of King Edward founded a Chauntrie
of 2 Pristes in the chapel of Semer; and King Edward gave to him the countye of
Carryk, and the countye of Bowgan, and he gat on Idonn Clyfford, Henry,
William, Richard, Maude, Alianour Fitzwater, Isabell, Thomas Bishop of Norwich,
Roger, and Margaret, that was married to the Earl of Angus son, and his heir.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
was 16 years of age on the decease of his father. On the 10th of September, 16
King Edward II. he was made a Knight at York, having the year before been
appointed Governor of Scarbrough and Pickering. In the 19th year of King Edward
II. on the landing of Queen Isabel and Prince Edward in England, he was one of
the Nobles that joined with them for reforming the abuses of government,
occasioned by the influence of the Spencers. The accession of the forces headed
by Lord Percy, greatly augmented the army at Gloucester, and was singularly
instrumental in the great changes then effected. He was one of the 12 Lords
appointed the young King's Council, was principal Commissioner for settling the
Peace with Scotland, and was made Warden of the Marches. He was the first of
the Percys who possessed the castle of Warkworth, which after the death of Sir
John Clavering, without issue male, was settled to devolve to the King and his
heirs; and which Henry Lord Percy received by grant from the Crown, in lieu of
an annual salary of 500 marks paid to him for certain stipulated services. In
the 4th of King Edward III. he was Ambassador to France. In the 5th year of the
same reign, he was made one of the Conservators of the Peace for the counties
of Cumberland and Northumberland; and in the succeeding year he was appointed
Warden of the Marches, and Conservator of the Peace for the counties of
Northumberland, York, Lancaster, Cumberland, and Westmoreland. He was with King
Edward III. at the siege of Berwick, and at the memorable battle of
Hallidown-hill. He was in much foreign service in this reign, as well as being
engaged in the wars with Scotland: he signalized himself at the siege of Nantz,
and after his return to England, had the chief command at the battle of Nevil's
Cross, near Durham, where King David was made prisoner, and his powerful army
vanquished. After living a life of action and honor, he died on the 26th of
February, in the 26th year of King Edward III. and was buried in the priory of
Alnwick. By Idonea his wife, daughter of Robert Lord Clifford, he had issue
four sons, Henry his eldest thirty years of age at the decease of his father,
Thomas Bishop of Norwich, William, and Roger, and also four daughters.

Henry The 5th Henry Lord Percy married Mary the daughter of the Earl of
Lancaster anno gratiae 1334o, and he gat on her Henry the first Earl of
Northumberland, Thomas the Earl of Worcester, and Isabell married to Gilbert of
Aton. And King Edward the third, in the 5th year of his reign in his
parliament, by his letters patents gave to the said Henry and his heirs for
his good service, the reversion of the manor and castle of Warkworthe and of
the manor of Routhbery, and of other lands and tenements, which John de
Clavering held in the countye of Northumberlande to him and to his heirs male
of the King, and other things, which after the death of the said John should
revert to the King, if the said John dyed without heir male.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
was in the great expedition to France, on which succeeded the famous battle of
Cressy. He was one of the leaders of the first wing of the English army at the
battle of Nevil's Cross. On Oct. 5th, 28 King Edward III. A. D. 1354, he was
commissioned to receive from Sir John de Coupland, Sheriff of Northumberland,
the body of David de Bruce, King of Scotland, and set him at liberty, according
to the treaty for his ransom. He was present with King Edward III. when John
Baliol resigned his Crown at Roxburgh. In the 33d year of the same reign, he
was Constable of the Castle of Berwick; and in the same year attended the King
to France, and was a witness to the treaty of Chartres. He was several times in
the commission of Conservators of the Marches. He had two wives; he first
married the Lady Mary Plantagenet, daughter to Henry Earl of Lancaster, son of
Edmund Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, Derby, etc. second son of King Henry III.
Edmund married Blanch daughter of Robert Earl of Artois (brother of St. Lewis
King of France) and widow of Henry de Champaigne King of Navar. Lady Mary was
sister to Henry Plantagenet, who was created Duke of Lancaster in the 27th of
King Edward III. whose daughter and heir was wife of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, father to King Henry IV. By this marriage Lord Percy had issue two
sons, Henry and Thomas. This Thomas was created Earl of Worcester. In the 2d
year of King Richard 2d he was appointed Admiral of the northern seas, with Sir
Hugh Calvely, Knight; they had of their retinue 720 men at arms, 775 archers
and 140 cross bow-men: On a cruise they met with seven French merchantmen,
richly laden, under convoy of a man of war, which they engaged and took: in
1379 being ordered on an expedition to France, the fleet was dispersed by a
violent storm, in which it suffered great loss; Sir Thomas having rid out the
storm was soon after attacked by a large Spanish ship, which under all his
disadvantages he at length boarded and took. In the succeeding years he bore
many distinguished offices under government, and in the 10th year of the same
reign he was made Admiral of the fleet which carried the great armament into
Spain: in the 21st of King Richard 2d he was created Earl of Worcester; his
affections were not transferred to Richard's successor King Henry 4th, though
he received from him many distinguishing marks of favor: he fell from his
allegiance, and engaging in a confederacy with his brother the Earl of
Northumberland, and Hotspur, who were then in arms, after an unsuccessful
conflict was taken prisoner and beheaded at Shrewsbury.
By his second wife, Joan the daughter and heiress of John de Oreby, he had one
Child, Maud, who married John Lord Ross. Lord Percy departed this life on
Ascension-day, in the 42d year of King Edward III. he was succeeded by his
eldest son,

Henry, The sixth Henry Percy was made Earl of Northumberland by King Richard
the second, on the day of his coronation; and he gat on Margaret the daughter
of Raffe. Lord Nevyll, Henry Knight, Thomas Knight, Raffe Knight; and after her
death he weddet the Countes of Angus daughter and heir of the Lord Lucy,
(whose arms be " Feld Gules, three fyshes argent) and she gave to her husband
and his heirs by deed and by fine the honor of the Castle and Lordshippe of
Cockurmuthe.

Edmond Mortymer the first Earl of March, of Leonells dawghter and heir got
Roger the second Earl of March and of Ulnestre which was slain at Trym in
Ireland; and Edmond his brother that dyed in prison of Owen of Glendore; and
Elizabeth that was wedded to Sir Henry Percy son and heir of the Earl of
Northumberland, that was slain at Shrowesbury of King Henry 4. and this Roger
that was slain at Trym, gat on the elder dawghter of the Earl of Kent the
noble Edmond the last Earl of March and Ulnestre; and Roger his brother, which
dyed in coming from France; and Anne the Countes of Cambrige, mother of Richard
the third Duke of York, and Lady Bowster.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
who during his father's life was engaged in several expeditions into France:
but what chiefly renders his memory amiable to this age, is, that he was a
great favourer and supporter of the reformer Wickliffe, by which his life was
in imminent peril. He was appointed Lord Marshal of England, which office he
retained at the coronation of King Richard II. when he was created (16 July,
1377) Earl of Northumberland. Soon afterward he grievously revenged the
slaughter made by the Earl of Dunbar at Roxburgh; having levied an army of
10,000 men, he ravaged the territories of that Earl for three successive days,
burning and slaying conformable to the savage customs of the age. Under the
influence of the Duke of Lancaster, who had expressed an inveterate hatred to
him, he was accused of neglect of duty, wherein the Scots had surprised
Berwick, and judgment of death and loss of estate was pronounced against him:
but this severe sentence was remitted by the King, and he soon recovered that
fortress. The Earl of Northumberland having suffered many unmerited indignities
from the King, entered into an association for his deposition: messengers were
accordingly sent to Henry Duke of Lancaster, son of John of Gaunt, who was then
in France, to invite him over; and he taking advantage of Richard's being in
Ireland, with a few attendants, landed in the month of July, 1399, in
Holdernesse, Yorkshire, where he was received by the Earl of Northumberland,
Sir Henry Percy his son, the Earl of Westmoreland, and many other persons of
great power, with a considerable body of men, which in a few days was augmented
to 60,000. The succeeding event is so notorious, that it requires no place
here. The Earl of Northumberland was appointed Envoy to Richard, by whose
argument he was persuaded to resign a royalty of which nothing remained but the
name, the defection being so general, that he had not one adherent left. A
parliament was called to meet on the feast of St. Michael, when Richard was
solemnly deposed, and Duke Henry having heard read the articles of royal charge
by the Archbishop, the same were signed by him with the sign of the cross; and
the Earl of Northumberland being High Constable of England, taking the ring
with which the Kings were wedded to the realm, showed it to the whole assembly,
and then put it on the Duke's finger; after which the Duke kissed the Earl, as
he had before done the Archbishop, and immediately he was proclaimed King, by
the name of Henry IV. The Earl received appointment of the high office of
Constable of England for life, with a grant of the Isle of Man, and many other
great dignities and eminent employments. In the third year of King Henry IV.
the Scots having invaded England, the Earl gave them a dreadful overthrow at
Homeldon hill, where the Earl of Douglas was taken prisoner. Some dissentions
quickly ensued between the Earl and his Sovereign; the blood of Percys could
not brook an indignity from one chiefly by them raised to the throne; they
levied a powerful army, and under Henry Hotspur and Earl Douglas their leaders,
gave the royalists battle near Shrewsbury, In the 3 year of King Henry on S.
Magdalene's day, Sir Henry Percy, the Earl of Northumbr. sun, thorough the
Counsel of Sir Thomas Percy his uncle. Earl of Wicester, gave the King
Bataile, and there was slain; and Sir Thomas Percy Earl of Worrcestre taken,
and hanged drawn and quarterid at Shrewsbyri. And at this battle of Shrewbyri
on the Kings part were slain the Earl of Staforde and Walter Blunte wering the
King cote armure. They that were slain on the Kings party were there buried.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 485.
in which the event for long was dubious, and victory seemed to change from
party to party several times, till at length King Henry was supported by the
coming up of his corpse de reserve, and gained a complete victory, Henry Hotspur
being among the slain. Henry Percy, Knight, the first son of Henry the Earl;
of Eliz. the Earls dawghter of March gate Henry the 2d Earl of Northum. and
Elizabeth Clyffurth (afterward) the Countes of Westmerland. He was slain at
Shrewsbery by King Henry 4th. Also Henry Earl of Northumberland, father to the
said Sir Henry Percy, in the year following coming from Scotland toward London
for to ask the King's grace, besides York of the Sheryf of York there was
slain on Bramham More, and he was buried in the cathedral church of York with
Sir Henry his son. Elizabeth Percy the daughter of the aforesaid Sir Henry,
Knight, first was married to John Lord Clifford (whose arms "Feld Cheker Ore
and azure a bar Gules") who by her had Thomas Lord Clyfford, and Thomas had
John the Lord Clyfford. Her second husband was Raffe Earl of Westmerland (whose
arms be "Feld Gules a Saltier argent") who had by her John Ne^yle that dyed.

Ex. Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
The Earl of Northumberland, then indisposed, was not come up with his
reinforcements before the battle; on receiving intelligence of the ill success
of his party, he retreated to his castle of Warkworth; from whence being
summoned by the King, he surrendered himself, and obtained royal clemency for
life, but was divested of his estates and kept prisoner till the commotions
subsided, when he received restitution of honors and lands, the Isle of Man
excepted. This restoration was attended with a great solemnity, in the presence
of the assembled estates of the kingdom. The Commons gave thanks to the King in
full parliament for the favor shown to the Earl of Northumberland. The same
day, at their request, the King commanded the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmoreland, in token of perfect amity, to kiss each other in open parliament,
and to take each other by the hand thrice; which they did. The same ceremony
passed between the Earls of Northumberland and Dunbar, on the 22d February then
following. But the death of Hotspur, and the neglect shown the Earl of
Northumberland from the Crown, enraged him so much, that in the succeeding year
he openly joined the northern malcontents, and again took up arms against the
King. The royal army soon appeared in the north, seized the Earl's castles of
Alnwick and Warkworth, and drove the party to seek refuge in Scotland. A scheme
was projected to surrender up this turbulent Earl, but he gaining intelligence
of the design, escaped, and afterward levied a sufficient force to enter
England, and recover his castles: these prosperous circumstances were soon
succeeded by a total overthrow at the battle of Bramham Moor, on the 2d of
March, 8th King Henry IV. A. D. 1403, in which the Earl was slain. His head was
cut off, then white with age, and being sent to London, was fixed on a poll on
the bridge: his quarters were placed on the gates of London, Lincoln, Berwick,
and Newcastle; but in the month of May following they were taken down, and
delivered up to his friends to be buried. The Earl of Northumberland had two
wives; he first married Margaret daughter to Ralph Lord Nevil, sister to the
first Earl of Westmoreland; by her he had issue three sons, Henry named
Hotspur, Thomas, Thomas married one of the daughters and coheiresses of David
de Strathbolgy, Earl of Athol.
and Ralph. Ralph was a party with his brother Hotspur in the victory over the
Scots at Newcastle 12th King Richard II. 18th King Richard II. he had a grant
of the custody of Berwick upon Tweed to himself and the heirs male of his body.
He married the other daughter and heiress of the Earl of Athol. He with his
brother Henry were taken prisoners at the battle of Otterburn.
To his second wife he married Matilda the widow of Sir Gilbert Umfrevill, Earl
of Angus, daughter of Thomas Lord Lucy, and sister and heir to Anthony Lord
Lucy, who out of her great affection settled upon his Lordship, and his heirs,
all her honors and lands, the baronies of Cockermouth and Egremont in
Cumberland, and the baronies of Langley and Prudhoe in this county, on
condition of quartering the arms of the Lucies with his own. By her the Earl
had no issue.

Henry Hotspur, Lord Percy, showed in his early youth a martial disposition. At
the coronation of King Richard II. when his father was created Earl, he
received the order of Knighthood. In the ninth year of that reign he was made
Governor of Berwick, and Warden of the Marches toward Scotland; in which
office he was so active, that the Scotch gave him the title of Hotspur. In the
same year he was sent to Calais, where he testified his valor. In the 11th
year of the same reign he was elected Knight of the Garter: but being envied at
court for the military fame he had acquired, his adversaries who had gained the
Sovereign's ear, prevailed to get him an appointment at sea to repel the
French, who threatened an invasion: in which he acquitted himself with great
honor. In the same year the Scotch entering the East Marches, he encountered
them near Newcastle, slew the Earl Douglas with his own hands, and mortally
wounded the Earl of Murres: but pressing over forward, was taken prisoner by
the Earl of Dunbar, together with his brother Ralph, and both were carried into
Scotland. He bore many honorable commissions in this reign; and in the
succeeding one being an attendant on his father when the crown was placed on
the head of Henry IV. among other marks of royal favor, he was made Sheriff of
Northumberland, Governor of Berwick and Roxburgh, and Justice of Chester, North
Wales, and Flintshire; also had a grant of the castle and lordship of Bambrough
for life, and of the whole county and dominion of Anglesey. He was in the
battle of Hailidon-hill, and to his valor and his archers, that great victory
was chiefly attributed. He married Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Edmund
Mortimer, Earl of March, by Phillippi his wife, only daughter and heir of
Lionel Duke of Clarence, second surviving son of King Edward III. by whom he
had issue one son, Henry, and one daughter, who married John Lord Clifford, and
surviving him, to her second husband married Ralph Nevill, second Earl of
Westmoreland.

Henry Henry Percy the son of Sir Henry Percy that was slain at Shrewesbery,
and of Elizabeth the daughter of the Earl of March, after the death of his
father and grandsyre was exiled into Scotland in the time of King Henry 4: but
in the time of King Henry 5th, by the labor of Johanne the Counter of
Westmerland, whose daughter Alianor he had wedded in coming into England, he
recoverd the King's grace, and the countye of Northumberland (so was the second
Earl of Northumberland. And of this Alianor his wife he begat IX sons and III
daughters, whose names be Johanne, that is buried in Whythye; Thomas Lord
Egremont, Katheryne Gray of Pythyp; Sir Raffe Percy; William Percy a Bishop;
Richard Percy; John that dyed without issue; George Percy Clerk; Henry that
dyed without issue; Anne; but in the year of grace 1452 there arose for dyverse
causes a great discord betwixt him, and Richard the Earl of Salisbery, his
wyfes brother: in so much, that many men of both parties were beten slain and
hurt. And in the year of grace 1453 at Staynford Bridge besides York there was
a battayl set betwixt Thomas Lord Egremont and Richard his brother, the sons
of the said Earl of Northumberland on the one party, and two sons of the
said Earl of Salisbery on the other party; that is to say, Sir Thomas Nevyll
and Sir John Nevill: but through the treason, and withdrawing of Peirs of
Lounde, the said Lord Egremont and his brother were taken, and put in prison at
London. And in the year following, that is to say in the year of grace 1454, on
the 22 day of May at Saint Albons was the said Henry Earl of Northumberland
and Thomas Lord Clyfford his nephew, and many other slain.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
his son being carried into Scotland by his grandfather when an infant of
tender years, after the death of his father, in order to protect him against
the resentment of King Henry, Robert King of Scotland intending to send his son
James out of the kingdom, for fear of his coming to an untimely end by means of
Walter Duke of Albany his uncle, Henry was his attendant and companion; and
leaving Bas Castle in stormy weather, they were drove on Flambrough-head, where
going on shore to refresh themselves, and being known, were taken prisoners,
and carried to the King at Windsor. This event proved fortunate for our young
Lord, he thereby having a means of winning the friendship of Henry V. who
restored him to the title and possessions of his ancestors. King Edward ferid
then the Lord Montacute, the Earl of Warwikes brother, whom he had made Earl of
Northumberlande, and so prively causid men of the countery to desire the
rightful heir Percy, sun to Henry that was slain at York field: and so Percy
was restorid, and made Montacute a Marquis and his sun Duke of Bedforde,
which should wedde the Kings eldest daughter, which by possibilite should be
King of England.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 500.
In the 4th year of King Henry V. he sat in the parliament holden at
Westminster Oct. 19, as Earl of Northumberland, and the same year was
constituted General Warden of the Marches of Scotland. He attended the King in
his French campaigns, and during this reign held many distinguished offices. He
received the order of Knighthood along with King Henry VI. and many
accompanying Peers, from the hand of the Duke of Bedford, then Regent. In the
14th year of King Henry VI. he made an unsuccessful irruption into Scotland,
and at Piperden was defeated by the Earl of Angus, with the loss of 1500 men.
In the 29th year of the same reign, he again entered Scotland, and engaged,
near the river Sare, a large body of Scotch under the command of Sir William
Wallace of Craigy, where he again had a defeat, and narrowly escaped being
prisoner; his son choosing to throw himself into the hands of the enemy to save
his father. This Earl added to the works of Alnwick Castle, and fortified the
Town with a stone wall of considerable strength, with four gates and square
towers.

In the great carnage at the battle of St. Albans, 23d May, 1455, the Earl was
among the slain, having supported the King with all his power. He was interred
in the chapel of the blessed Virgin in the abbey of St. Albans. He married
Eleanor daughter of Ralph Earl of Westmoreland, and had by her nine sons,
Henry, John, John died in his infancy.
Thomas, Thomas was created Lord Egremont: he was slain at the battle of
Northampton, 36th King Henry VI. in the King's tent, when the King was taken
prisoner.
Ralph, Ralph was slain at the battle of Hedgelamour in Northumberland, with
his dying breath uttering "I have saved the bird in my bosom."
John, Henry, John and Henry died young.
William, William was Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and Bishop of
Carlisle.
Richard, Richard is not noted in history.
and George, George was a Prebend of the collegiate church of Beverly.
and two daughters, Catharine and Ann, Catharine married Edm. Gray Earl of
Kent, and Ann was thrice married, first to Hungerford Lord Molins, secondly to
Sir Lawrence Rainsford, Knight, and lastly to Sir Hugh Vahan.
He was succeeded by his eldest son,

Henry, Henry Percy the third Earl of Northumberland, by the mean of Henry
Cardinal of England, and of the title of Saint Eusebri, wedded Alianor the
dawghter and heir of the Lord Poinings Fitspayne and of Bryane, ( whose arms
he quartered the first cote, "Six pieces barrewayes Ore and Vert a bendlet
Gules," The second cote, "Gules a bendlet azure upon three lions argent
passaunt gardaunt") and he gate of her Henry the 4th Earl of Northumberland,
Alianor, Margaret, Elizabeth, and others.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
who was thirty years of age when he succeeded to the title. In the 4th year of
the reign of King Henry VI. he was knighted: the Duke of Bedford first knighted
the King, and then the King in like manner conferred the same honor on several
of the sons of Earls, among whom was this Henry Lord Percy, then about two
years of age, and the King not five years old; he having succeeded to the
throne before he had completed the ninth month of his age. In the 20th of the
same reign, he was retained Governor of the town and castle of Berwick, with
the East Marches of Scotland. He married Eleanor the daughter and heiress of
Robert Lord Poinings, (who was slain at the siege of Orleans) and in the 25th
year of that reign had livery of the possessions of that family. In the 27th
year of the same reign, he was summoned to parliament by the title of Lord
Poinings; and in the 33d year of King Henry VI. he succeeded to the honors of
the Earldom of Northumberland. In the 38th of that reign, he was constituted
Justice of all the Forests north of Trent. He was with Queen Margaret in the
north, when the King was taken prisoner at the battle of Northampton. She,
supported by the Earl, having collected 18,000 men, marched southward to
attempt relieving the King, and encountered the Duke of York near Wakefield, in
Yorkshire, on the last day of December; in which battle the Duke was slain, and
his army vanquished, 2800 being left dead upon the field. From thence the
victorious Queen marched southward, and on Shrove Tuesday, at St. Albans,
obtained a victory over the forces under the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Warwick, and others who were left to govern the King. By this event he regained
his liberty; but finding great levies drawing forwards from all quarters in
support of Edward, the King with his party prudently retreated to the north.
Edward having been proclaimed King by his partisans, by the name of King Edward
IV. left London on the 12th of March, leading forth a powerful army to pursue
the unfortunate Henry in his retreat, and by easy marches arrived at Pomfret,
where he rested the troops for some time, appointing the Lord Fitz Walter to
keep the pass of Ferrybridge. The Earl of Northumberland, desirous of revenging
the death of those whom he dearly loved, was well prepared to receive his
enemies; and leaving King Henry with his Queen and son in the city of York, for
their greater safety, it was resolved that Ferrybridge at all hazards should be
recovered, and the enterprise was committed to the Lord Clifford; who with a
competent number of light horsemen departing early from the army on the morning
preceding Palm Sunday, made such expedition that he surprised the guard, which
he put to the sword, and gained the bridge. The Lord Fitz Walter hearing the
noise, rose out of his bed, as did the bastard brother of the Earl of Warwick,
presuming there was a mutiny among the soldiers, but soon fell victims to the
arms of Clifford. On this Edward thinking loss of time might endanger the rest
of his forces, resolved to try his fate, by the immediate issue of a battle.
Finding the pass of Ferrybridge too well maintained to be attempted, he ordered
the vanguard of his army to ford the river three miles above, as Castleford;
and attacking the Lord Clifford near Towton, as he was retreating to the main
army, surrounded his party, who defended themselves with great bravery till his
Lordship was slain, being shot with an arrow through the throat.

Next day being Palm Sunday, 29th of March, both armies were within sight of
each other between Saxton and Towton; King Henry's forces being computed at
60,000, and King Edward's at 48,660. Our Historians have given a particular
account of this battle, which lasted three days, and in which were slain on
both sides 36,776 persons, all English; whereof the Chiefs were the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmoreland. The Earl of Northumberland commanded the
vanguard, the snow blowing in the faces of his troops, so that they could not
see how to direct their arrows, he led them on to charge sword in hand: a
bloody conflict continued for ten hours, in doubtful victory, in which the Earl
was killed, but how or by whom is not known. In the succeeding parliament he
was attainted, and the earldom of Northumberland was conferred on John Nevill,
Lord Montacute, brother to Richard Nevill, Earl of Warwick, by patent dated
28th May, 4th King Edward IV. Henry Earl of Northumberland left a son,

Henry Henry the fourth Earl of Northumberland, married the Lord Harbert's
dawghter, by whom he had Henry the 5th Earl of Northumberland.

Ex Reg. Monast. de Whitby.
being in his minority when his father was slain, was committed to the tower of
London, till the 27th of October, A. D. 1469, 9th King Edward IV. when he was
brought before the King at Westminster and took the oath of allegiance,
whereupon he was set at liberty, and soon after restored to the estates and
dignities of his ancestors: he was made Warden of the Middle Marches before his
restoration in blood and inheritance, and afterward bore many honorable
commissions from the crown: he had the chief command of the army in the 22d
year of the reign of King Edward IV. which besieged and took Berwick: in the
battle of Bosworthfield, in the third year of King Richard III. he is charged
(by Hall and Buck) as acting a treacherous part to a sovereign from whom he had
received considerable marks of confidence and esteem, by withdrawing his
troops, or otherwise standing an idle spectator of the dreadful conflict of
that day. It is certain he was immediately received to the favor of King Henry
VII. In the fourth year of that reign, being Lieutenant of Yorkshire, he was
murdered by the populace at Coxlodge near Thirsk, 28th April, 1489, on
enforcing the tax for carrying on the war in Britany. He married Maud daughter
to William Herbert, first Earl of Pembroke of that name, by whom he had issue
four sons and three daughters. He and his lady were buried at Beverley. On the
15th of September, 1678, this lady's monument was opened Dugdale's Ad.
, (but on what occasion my author does not say) when the body was found in a
stone coffin, embalmed and covered with cloth of gold, and on her feet slippers
embroided with silk and gold, by her side a wax lamp, and a plate candlestick
with a candle.

Henry the eldest son, fifth Earl of Northumberland, in the 12th year of King
Henry VII. was one of the chief commanders of the King's army in the battle of
Blackheath.

The magnificence of this Earl is mentioned on the marriage of Margaret with
the King of Scots, when in splendor he exceeded all the nobility present. Hall
says he outdid them for the richness of his coat, being goldsmiths work
garnished with pearl and stones; and for the costly apparel of his henxmen,
and gallant trappers of their horses; besides 400 tall men well horsed, and
apparel'd in his collars: he was esteemed both of the Scots and Englishmen,
more like a prince than a subject. He had also with him his officer of arms,
named Northumberland, arrayed in a livery of velvet, bearing his armorial
ensignia.

On the accession of Henry VIII. he was continued in the office of Warden of
the Marches, which he had filled in the preceding reign. He served in the
French campaign, and was present at the battle of Spurs. In the 14th of King
Henry VIII. he was made Warden of the whole Marches, which office he executed
for a very short time; at his own instance giving place to the Earl of Surry.
He died in the 18th of King Henry VIII. and was buried at Beverley. He married
Catharine daughter and coheiress of Sir Robert Spencer, by Eleanor daughter and
at length heiress of Edmund Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, by Eleanor his wife
daughter and heir of Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, who was great grandson
of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. The Earl had issue three sons, Henry,
Thomas Thomas was a party in Ask's conspiracy, was arraigned before the Marquis
of Exeter, High Steward, and executed at Tyburn 29th King Henry VIII. From him
the succeeding Earls of Northumberland descended.
, and Ingeham Died without issue.
, and two daughters, Margaret Married Henry Lord Clifford, the first Earl of
Cumberland of that name.
and Maud. Maud married John Lord Conyer, whose heiress Margaret married Sir
Arthur Darcy, Knight, ancestor of the Earl of Holdernesse, who in her right is
Lord Conyers.


It may be agreeable to the reader in this place, to find an account of the
Earl's household, as it points out the fashion of the age, as well as the
magnificence of the family.

Gentlemen who wait before noon, 6; yeomen and grooms of the chamber who wait
before noon, 10; yeomen officers, 4; and groom officers, 4; servants to wait in
the great chamber, in the morning daily throughout the week, from six to ten of
the clock, 20; gentlemen to wait in the afternoon, 7; yeomen of the chamber,
yeomen waiters, and grooms of the chamber to wait in the afternoon daily, 7;
yeomen of household and groom officers of household, which shall not attend after
supper, 8; yeomen officers and groom officers of household to wait in the
afternoon, 4; gentlemen to wait after supper, 13; yeomen waiters and grooms of
the chamber to wait after supper, 17; chaplains and priests in household, 11;
gentlemen and children of my Lord's chapel, attending in exercising of God's
service in the chapel daily at matins, lady mass, high mass, and even song, 17;
yeomen officers, groom officers, and grooms in household, not appointed to
attend because of others their business, which they attend daily in their
offices in my Lord's house, 27; an armourer; a groom of the chamber to Lord
Percy, to wait hourly in his chamber; a groom for brushing and dressing his
clothes; a groom of the chamber to his Lordship's two younger sons; a groom of
the styrrup; a groom sumpter man, to dress the sumpter horses and my Lady's
palfreys; a groom to dress my Lord's hobbeys and nags; a groom of the stable; a
groom to keep my Lord's hounds; a groom miller for grinding corn for baking and
brewing; a groom porter for keeping the gates; a groom for driving his
Lordship's chariot, and a keeper of the said chariot horses; clerks in my
Lord's house, not appointed daily to attend, because of making their books,
which they are charged with to write hourly upon, 7; servants belonging to
gentlemen in his Lordship's house, 10; servants and gentlemen servants not
appointed to wait because of other their business, which they attend on daily
for his Lordship, 44: in all 229. Colling's Peerage.


The sixth Earl Henry was deeply in love with the fair Anne Bullen, but by the
art of Cardinal Woolsey, and even the royal interposition, was withdrawn from
an attachment, which it is said gave great anxiety to the Sovereign.
Notwithstanding the Earl's early affection for the Cardinal, in 1530, he was
one of the King's Commissioners to arrest him for high treason. He was Warden
of the East and Middle Marches, and one of the Knights of the Garter. He
married Mary daughter of George Earl of Shrewsbury, and died without issue.

As his brother Thomas had been attainted, the earldom of Northumberland for
some time remained dormant: Queen Mary restored Thomas the nephew to the
honors and estates of his ancestors, the patent setting forth that the same
was done in consideration of his noble descent, constancy of virtues, valor in
deeds of arms, and other shining qualifications. The ceremony of his creation
at Whitehall was attended with great pomp: the procession was preceded by 8
heralds and 12 trumpeters: he was accompanied by the Earls of Pembroke,
Arundel, and Rutland, and the Lord Montague, walking in the middle, dressed in
robes of crimson velvet, a hat of crimson velvet, and a coronet of gold. He was
joined with Lord Wharton as Wardens General of the Marches, with very extensive
powers, A. D. 1557. He commanded against the Scots who made an incursion the
same year, and giving them battle near Cheviot, obtained a complete victory:
Sir John Forster was shot through the mouth, and had his horse killed under
him. Sir Andrew Kerr, the Scotch leader, was taken prisoner. He with his
brother Henry having entered Scotland in the following year, obtained a victory
over the Scotch near Swinton; and the same year engaged the French auxiliaries
with equal success, near Grindon. In jealousy of Lord Cecil's power with Queen
Elizabeth, he entered into the northern conspiracy, and at length appeared in
open rebellion. It would be inconsistent with my plan, in this place to speak
upon that matter; it will suffice to add, that the Earl having fled into
Scotland, was betrayed and delivered up, and in the 13th year of Queen
Elizabeth, he and his Countess were convicted of high treason and outlawed; and
on the 22d of August, 1572, he was beheaded at York, avowing with his last
breath the Pope's supremacy, affirming the realm to be in a schism, and the
subjects who were obedient to the Queen, no better than heretics. Hollingshead,
Speed, and Stowe.
He married Ann daughter of Henry Somerset, Earl of Worcester, by whom he had
one son and five daughters: the son died without issue.

The patent of restoration made by Queen Mary having limited the titles and
estates to the late Earl's heirs male, and in default of such issue, to Henry
Percy, the Earl's brother, in the 18th of Queen Elizabeth, he was summoned to
parliament by the distinction of Earl of Northumberland and Baron Percy.

On his brother's defection, he stood loyal to the Queen, and with Sir John
Forster, commanded the troops which on the 9th of December, in the 12th of
Queen Elizabeth, routed the Earl of Westmoreland's forces in the bishopric of
Durham. In the 27th year of Queen Elizabeth, being suspected of plotting to set
at liberty the Queen of Scots, he was committed prisoner to the Tower; and on
the 21st of June, was found dead in his bed, having three shots from a pistol
lodged under his left pap, his chamber door being fastened on the inside. He
married Catharine eldest daughter and coheiress of John Nevill, Lord Latimer,
by whom he had issue eight sons and three daughters. Henry his eldest son
succeeded him, the ninth Earl of Northumberland.

He was one of those volunteer Lords who hired vessels to accompany Charles
Lord Howard, Lord High Admiral, against the Spanish Armada. Being suspected as
an accomplice in the Gunpowder Plot, he suffered a long and grievous
confinement in the Tower; Wood in his Athenae Oxoniensis says, That the Rev. Mr
Nathaniel Torporley, a noted Mathematician, being made known to the great Earl
of Northumberland, Henry Percy, the generous favourer of all good learning, was
received into his patronage, and had a pension paid yearly unto him, several
years from his purse. Thomas Hariot went in 1584, with Sir Walter Raleigh to
Virginia, where he was employed in the discovery and surveying thereof. After
his return into England, Sir Walter got him into the acquaintance of that noble
and generous Earl, who finding him a gentleman of an affable and peaceable
nature, and well read in the obscure parts of learning, he did allow him a
yearly pension of 120l. About the same time Robert Hues and Walter Warner, two
other Mathematicians, who were known also to the said Earl, did receive of him
yearly pensions also, but of less value; as did Torperley. So that when the
said Earl was committed prisoner to the tower, in 1606, Hariot, Hues, and
Warner, were his constant companions, and were usually called the Earl of
Northumberland's 3 Magi. They had a table at the Earl's charge, and the Earl
did constantly converse with them and with Sir Walter Raleigh then in the tower.

Their prison was an academy, where their thoughts were elevated above the
common cares of life, explored science in all its pleasing forms, penetrated
her most intricate recesses, surveyed the whole globe, till Sir Walter's noble
fabric arose, his History of the World, probably by the encouragement and
persuasions of these his learned friends.

Wallis.
his sentence being an imprisonment for life, and a fine of 30,000l. though he
was convicted in the Star Chamber for misprision of treason only. In 1614, he
paid his fine, but he did not gain his liberty till the 18th of July, 1621,
having been confined 15 years.

In the 4th year of King Charles I. he obtained a confirmation to him and the
heirs male of his body, of the title and dignity of Baron Percy, in as ample a
manner as his ancestors had enjoyed the same. He died at his seat at Petworth,
on the 5th of November, 1632. He married Dorothy daughter of Walter Devereux,
Earl of Essex, by whom he had issue four sons and two daughters. His two eldest
sons dying in infancy, he was succeeded in title and estates by his third son,
Algernon. His Lordship's brother Henry Percy was a representative in parliament
for Northumberland, but was expelled 9th December, 17 King Charles I. 1641, for
endeavoring to engage the northern army to free his Majesty from the
Parliament Fetters, "pour mettre le Roy horse de Peine." as he terms it; to keep
up his Majesty's revenue, to maintain Bishops in their rights and functions. He
was betrayed after a solemn oath taken by Colonel Goring, afterward a General
of horse under the Earl of Newcastle. With some difficulty and peril he escaped
their vengeance. History has drawn his character in most amiable colors. His
countenance was awful and commanding respect. His mind liberal and stored with
knowledge civil and military. This made him as able a General in the field as
he was a prudent and wise Counselor in the cabinet. In the former he awed the
parliament by his management and address; and in the latter embarrassed their
measures; in both firm and intrepid; more formidable by his wisdom than his
power, though that was great; which he employed with the ardour and zeal of a
patriot, in the service of a good Master, who, to reward him, created him a
Peer, by the style and title of Baron Percy of Alnwick, 28th June, 1643. He
also made him Lord Chamberlain, and give him in charge a treasure he loved
well, the conduct of his Queen to Oxford. When the power of the parliament was
too enormous to oppose, he retreated beyond sea, leaving behind him a great
estate, etc. preferring before them a spotless loyalty and an unwounded honor.

Wallis.


Algernon the 10th Earl of Northumberland was about 30 years of age when he
succeeded to the honors of his ancestors. Lord Clarendon says, that the King
took him into his immediate and eminent care, and prosecuted him with all
manner and demonstration of respect and kindness; and (as he heard his Majesty
himself say) courted him as his mistress, and conversed with him as his friend,
without the least interruption or intermission of any possible favor and
kindness. On the 13th May, 11 King Charles I. he was installed one of the
Knights of the Garter. He was made Lord High Admiral, for his services against
the Dutch in 1636. He bore the following titles: Lord of the honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poinings, Fitz-Aine, Bryan, and
Latimer, Knight of the Garter, Lord High Admiral of England, Ireland, and
Wales, and of the dominions and isles of the same; of the town of Cales and
Marches of the same; of Normandy, Gascony, and Aquitaine; Lord General of the
navy and seas of the said kingdoms of England and Ireland; one of the Lords of
his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council; Lord Lieutenant of Northumberland,
Cumberland, and Westmoreland, and Captain General of the army to act against
the Scots. He attended King Charles I. into Scotland, on his coronation. In the
11th year of that reign, he was installed one of the Knights of the Garter; and
in the 13th year he was made Lord High Admiral of England. In the 15th, he was
made Captain General of the army. In 1639, his Lordship was at the head of
state affairs. In a letter to the Earl of Leicester, he thus expressed his
sentiments of public matters: It grieves my soul to be involved in these
councils; and the sense I have of the miseries that are like to ensue, is held
by some a disaffection in me; but I regard little what those persons say. In
1643, he with the Earls of Pembroke and Salisbury, with several Members of the
House of Commons, were indicted of high treason at Salisbury, before Judges
Heath, Forster, and Glanvill, for assisting the parliament; but they could not
induce the jury to find the bill. On the 17th of May, 1645, by order of the
Lords, the Earl and his Countess were directed to take care of the King's
children. His Lordship, though acting under many commissions of parliament,
detested the cruel murder of his Majesty, and did his utmost to obstruct it."
Colling's Peerage.
After which he retired from public business, living at his seat at Petworth,
waiting for a favorable opportunity to restore King Charles II. in which he
took an active part. He was twice married; by Anne daughter of William Cecil,
Earl of Salisbury, his first wife, he had five daughters. By Elizabeth daughter
to Theophilus Earl of Suffolk, he had issue, Josceline his only son and
successor. He died the 13th October, 1688, and was interred at Petworth.

Josceline the eleventh Earl of Northumberland married the Lady Elizabeth,
daughter of Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England. He was
made Lord Lieutenant and Custos Rotulorum of the county of Sussex, and Lord
Lieutenant of the county of Northumberland. On the 21st May, 1670, he died at
Turin, was brought to England, and interred at Petworth. He had issue an only
son, Henry, who died in infancy, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Henrietta,
the latter of which died at four years of age.

The Lady Elizabeth had three husbands; the first, Henry Cavendish, Earl of
Ogle, son and heir to the Duke of Newcastle. Her second husband was Thomas
Thynne, Esquire And her third, his Grace Charles Duke of Somerset. By the latter
her Ladyship had issue, Algernon Earl of Hertford, afterward Duke of Somerset,
and by creation Earl of Northumberland, who left an only daughter and heir, the
late Duchess of Northumberland.

In this present illustrious family, live all the heroic virtues of their
ancestors. I must give a place to the following oration, spoken at Guildhall,
Westminster, by the Reverend Mr Bennet, on Tuesday July the 30th, 1776, on
placing the picture of Earl Percy in the council chamber of that hall.

Gentlemen,
Notwithstanding your worthy Chairman has so fully expatiated. on the cause of
this cheerful and respectable meeting, I feel myself animated, not less from
inclination than duty, to offer a few words with your permission, on the
present occasion.

Public virtues and singular acts of greatness, have ever kindled in the mind
of man, an ardent desire of beholding the persons, or representations of those
in whom they shone: hence examples of great and generous actions, have been
continually handed down to posterity for their imitation, and incitement to
glory: -- hence Caesar -- hence Cato live; and their virtues remain unsullied
by the grave, amidst the rust of time.

Rome had its heroes -- Britain boasts of hers; and when Percy is no more, that
picture shall record his deeds.

At a time when the supreme legislative authority of parliament over the whole
British empire was called in question; at a time when discord, disobedience,
nay rebellion itself prevailed in America; -- at a time when dissipation and
every species of luxury pervaded this great nation, and its direful influence
was visibly increasing; -- Earl Percy, disdaining every consideration that was
unconnected with the common weal, boldly stood forth a champion for his
country, a friend to his King, and enemy to those who had fallen from their
duty.

It was not wealth, gentlemen, that could urge him to so dangerous an
undertaking -- Fortune had placed him above the pursuit of it: -- it could not
be ambition, for rank and titles were already his own; -- but it was public
spirit that called him forth; -- for he had all to lose, but nothing to gain;
-- nothing but the true interest of his country to acquire. He gave up his own
safety, he made a sacrifice of every thing; -- pleasures, profit, and interest
-- all were subservient to the common good.

Without flattery, gentlemen, I may assert Rome would have gloried in such a
real Patriot; Rome would have rejoiced to have seen one of their Nobility so
strenuous in their country's cause.

But this was not all; and what I have said would bear but little resemblance
to that great man, were I not to take notice of his unbounded humanity as well
as public spirit.

His tenderness in a time of the greatest calamity; his readiness in sharing
whatever his ample fortune afforded him with the common soldier, the widow, and
the orphan, has raised his name almost above the reach of praise.

Great as his own distress was, he overlooked it, in commiserating and
relieving that of others: indeed every humane and generous feature of the noble
Duke his father, are clearly seen in the actions of the son.

But it is not to be wondered at, gentlemen, that humanity, generosity, and
magnificence, should shine forth with so much luster in the noble Earl, when
they are the acknowledged characteristics of the House of Northumberland.


The town of Alnwick Alnwick, Alnewick or Alnewicke, in Saxon (...), implying a
town of two fathoms length. In the Deanery of Alnwick, and in Coquetdale Ward.

Randal's Manuscripts. From the Manuscripts of Roger Gale, Esquire. Extract of a
letter from Mr Gale to Sir John Clerk, 24th June, 1726.
I had lately an account from Alnwick, of some brass weapons found there by a
mason as he was clearing the earth from a rock about a mile N. W. from that
place, within the old park, to get up some stone. After having dug about half a
yard deep in the ground, he came to 20 sword blades, and 16 spear heads lying
close to the top of the rock, without any case or cover than the soil. The
swords were exactly of the same shape as those in the 51st plate of Mr Gordon's
book. No 2, 3, and 17 or 18 inches long. Some of the spears resembled 4 and 5
in the same, but others were broader and cut through as in the margin. Digging
about a foot lower on the hill side, he found 42 brass wedges or chizzels, with
a ring near their thicker end, of which I doubt not, but you have seen many,
and so need not give you any description of them, but that they are not unlike
No 4 in Mr Gordon's 50th plate. How and for what they were used, I will not
take upon me to determine absolutely, but by their edges which are much broken
and battered, they seem to have been employed as chizzels for cutting stone. I
believe they put a wooden shaft in the hollow end of them, and so drove them
with a mallet. Sir Laurence's System of Agriculture and Gardening, where he
mentions some of these found in the small joints and ^vices of the stone in a
quatry near Bishop Weremouth, which is no weak confirmation of my conjecture.
If the softness of the metal and consequently its unfitness for such work is
objected, I answer, that when they had not a harder, necessity would compel
them to use such as they had; besides most sorts of stone are so soft when they
lie bedded in, and at their first coming out of the quarry, that they might
make a very good shift to cut it and cleave it with their tools, while it was
under those easy circumstances; to which I may add, that these brass chizzels
are of a much harder temper than we know how to give that metal, as are also
their swords which are made of it, and other weapons.

The shaft when not employed might be drawn out of the chizzel, and by running
a string through the ring on their sides, several of them might be tied together,
and conveniently carried by the workman at his girdle, or otherwise, and one
shaft serve them all. About eight years ago near a bushel of them were found at
Cave, upon the banks of the Humber in Yorkshire, under a little Tumulus by the
highway side; and what is very remarkable, every one of them was enclosed in a
matrix of the same metal, or case, fitting it so exactly, that it seemed to be
cast in it, and so fresh and whole were the edges of them, all as if they had
never been used.

A little above the place where the swords and spears were buried at Alnwick,
was deeply and rudely cut in the rock 1115, but I cannot think these figures
had any relation to what was sound below. I have had the good fortune to get a
sword and spear, and 3 chizzels, The Sword, Spear Hea^d, and 2 of the Chissels
I presented to my Lord H^rtford.
for a crown piece, the rest were seized by the Duke of Somerset's Steward,
upon pretense of securing them for his Grace, but were never sent to him. So
many of these brass chizzels have been found in this island, and so few any
where else, and those only in France, that they seem almost to have been the
peculiar tools of the Britons; their near alliance and intercourse with the
Gauls easily accounting why they have been sometimes discovered in the ancient
seat of the latter. The swords and spear heads aforementioned being found so
near these chizzels, and of the very same metal, is an argument that they
belonged to the same people, which I cannot think to have been Romans, who, as
I formerly ventured to give you my opinion, seem to have left off the use of
brass in their weapons, before their arrival in this island. The word Ferrum
much earlier than that time, denoted in their authors all manner of military
weapons, and was a general name for them, which I think is some additional
strength to my former arguments on that subject.

I am, etc. R. GALE.


Sir John Clerk's Answer. 29th Aug. 1727.
I return you thanks for the account you sent me of the Antiquities found at
Alnwick, their number surprised me much. Some of the same kind have been found
here in Cairns, nothing in Antiquity is more mysterious than the use of these
Instruments of brass, which resemble small hatchets or chissels. I incline to
think them warlike instruments, as we generally take the stone hatchets to be:
I have 3 or 4 of both kinds. When they came first into my hands, I set about
reading such accounts as had been given of them, and found that one Mr Hearne
had taken a good deal of pains to prove they were Roman. His dissertation is
printed in Mott's Collection of the Transactions of the Royal Society, v. 2.
part 4. p. 70. But I cannot be of that gentleman's opinion. The Romans
understood better the expeditious ways of doing things, than to make use of
such slight and brittle tools: We must then ascribe them to the ancient Britons
who used instruments of brass before iron came to take place: What makes me
judge they were not chissels, is, that the Britons made very little use of hewn
The Stones at Stonehenge are hewn.
stone, and for that reason little or nothing of their stone monuments does
remain. It is indeed probable they made use of them for repairing their
highways, for all such instruments found here were in Cairns Cairus are burying
places, and therefore usually situated near Highways, so that the finding these
Tools near Highways, is merely accidental.

R. G.
situated near these ways, and those in my possession have induced me to think
that our great highways in Britain were not Roman but British How then were
they warlike instruments?
. I am glad you have got one of the swords, I wish I knew how to get one of the
same kind from the Duke of Somerset.

I am, etc. JOHN CLERK.



is irregular, being built on the declivities of a hill, in various directions:
the buildings are chiefly modern, and some of them approach to elegance. It is
the county town of Northumberland, and an unrepresented borough, governed by a
Bailiff (nominated by his Grace; his authority derived from the obsolete office
of Constable of the Castle) and four Chamberlains, chosen annually out of the
freemen of the town. The freedom of this borough was one of King John's
institutions, who in a ridiculous humor ordained, that it should be obtained
by passing through a deep and miry pond, on the Town Moor, Alnwicke Moor
formerly bore the name of the Forest of Aidon. There is a tradition that King
John made this foolish institution as a perpetual mark of his displeasure, on
account of his having been thrown from his horse in the bogs of this forest,
upon his dreadful visit to the north.
upon St. Mark's day; which still to render more ludicrous, the candidate is to
perform in white clothing; and sometimes it is effected with the utmost peril.
What immunities or privileges are gained by this unhappy mode of accession, I
never could learn: the trade of Alnwick, with every advantage of exclusive
exercise, is insignificant, and the appendages of the borough are of no great
moment. Machell Vivan, a Scotchman, (born near Aberdeen) beneficed in this
county, within three miles of Alnwick. An old man of 110 years of age, was
famous for a new growth of hair, breeding of three teeth in the space of two
years, and reading of small print without spectacles, whereas 40 years before
that time he had used them for the biggest print. He had five children after he
was 80 years of age.

England's Worthies.
The town was walled round by Henry Lord Percy, in the reign of King Henry VI.
having four gates guarded by square towers; three of which still remain,
Bondgate used for a prison, Clayport for a poor-house, and Pottergate
dismantled and falling to decay. This borough holds a weekly market on
Saturday, and four annual fairs, on the 12th of May, the last Monday in July,
the first Monday in October, and on the 24th of December. The Marketplace is
well situated near the center of the town, and greatly ornamented by the public
buildings lately given by his Grace: among which are the Market-house, in the
Gothic style, highly finished and decorated, the Shambles, and Font. There is
an ancient and immemorial custom retained here, on the proclamation of the
several fairs: Diverse adjacent townships, which are free of toll in the borough
by this service, send their Representatives to attend the Bailiff on the eve of
the fair, when he makes proclamation: after which they keep watch all night in
every quarter of the town. The townships of Chatton and Chillingham 4 men. Cold
Marten and Fowbery 4 men. Hetton and Hezelrigge 4 men. Fawdon and Clinch 4 men.
Alnham and Alnham Moor 2 men. Tughall and Swinhoe 2 men. Long Howton and
Denwick 4 men. Lesbury and Bilton 2 men. Lyham and Lyham-hall one. Together
with the principal inhabitants of the town of Alnwick.
Wallis.
This is the most perfect remains of watch and ward retained in any part of
this county.

Here is a School endowed with a revenue arising out of the tolls; but to which
of the Lords of Alnwick it owes its constitution, I have gained no certain
information. The School stands at the upper end of Pottergate-street, and over
the door is the following Inscription: Haec schola primo in usum municipum
Alaunensium aedificata Anno Dom. 1687
Nunc demum instaurat^r Anno Dom. 1741.





This town was subject to all the miseries of the Border Wars, and in 1448, was
reduced to ashes by the Scots.

The Church stands a little distance from the town, retaining no very
distinguishing marks of antiquity. The Church stands at the end of Bailiff-gate
street: has 3 ailes extending through as many arches into the chancell: has 4
galleries and 27 windows: a neat tower and 3 bells.

Behind the royal arms, over the arch of the middle aile, in entering the
chancell, is this inscription in black characters.

Sumptibus Edvardi comitis cognomine Bedford;
Cognita praeclari sunt haec insignia clara.
Anno Qni 1600. Randal's Manuscripts.
In the south aile is a tomb formed in the recess of the wall, with three
recumbent effigies; but of what personages, no inscription or tradition
discovers: probably they represent some of the family of Veseys, who were
founders or great benefactors.

Here are two Dissenting Meeting Houses, and a modern Westlean Conventicle.

An Hospital was founded here by the Percies, in the reign of King Edward III.
dedicated to St. Leonard; and by Henry Lord Percy, (the first of that name)
afterward Earl of Northumberland, made an appendage to the abbey, 50 Edward
III. Tanner 398. vide Escheat Northum. 50. Edw. 3. Pat. 50. Edward 3.


The attention there is given by the Duke's servants, resident at the castle,
to satisfy the inquiries and curiosity of travelers, afforded us an easy
access to the pleasure grounds which lead to Huln Abbey. John Vesey returning
from the Holy War, is said to have first brought Carmelites into England, and
to have built a Convent for them here at Holme, a solitary place, and not
unlike Mount Carmel in Syria. But in truth there never was any Convent or
Monastery founded at Alnwick, or near it, by John Vesey: there was indeed a
Monastery of the Order of the Praemonstratenses founded by Eustatius Fitz John,
father of William de Vesey, who had the surname from his mother, an heiress.
But this was done in the year 1147, long before the Carmelites were heard of in
England. John Bale who was sometime a Carmelite himself, tells us that the
first convent of that order was founded at Holme (Hull they now call it) near
Alnwick, by Ra. Fresborn, a gentleman of Northumberland, who died A. D. 1274,
and was buried in the Convent. Eustatius's Abbey is still to be seen, at half a
mile distance from the Convent of Hull, down the river.

Gibson's Camden. Holme caenobium fratrum Carmelitarum

Camd. 813. Johannes Vesey miles primus fundator, qui e Terra sancta rediens
primus in Angliam introduxit Carmelitas fratres.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 103. A. D. 926. Cantaurienses cum multitudine Danicorum
piratarum in loco qui Holm dicitur, pugnaverunt and victores extiterunt.

Lel. Col. vol. II. p. 282.
The road we passed is calculated for the family's private use and retirement;
but such is his Grace's benevolence to the public, that the eye of the curious
is not excluded from those beautiful scenes. The way to Huln forms one of the
sweetest and most romantic rides in the county; where nature has left the lands
open, art has happily disposed her works with the justest taste, to supply the
vacancy. The entrance is by a steep descent to the vale, through which the
river winds its course. The road by traversing the hills obliquely, renders the
way easy to the passenger: it is clothed on each hand with plantations of
various kinds of forest trees, mingled with great judgment, and so disposed,
that the pines and evergreens give an agreeable variegation of color in the
foliage, without deadening the scene. Nothing can be more gloomy than
long-extended lines of dusky firs, which, as the Poet Mason.
justly observes, blot the horizon. These plantations are bordered on each side
of the road with a variety of flowering shrubs and tufts of flowers. After
passing this agreeable grove by irregular windings, we descended into a plain
washed by the solemn stream of sleepy Aln, which scarce appears to flow, so
dull it seems, in this romantic valley, shut in on every hand by lofty
eminences, covered with wood, forming a spacious theater near two miles in
circuit. On the right hand the river forms a semicircle, the opposite shore
composed of shaken and perpendicular rocks, over whose brink impends a forest
of oaks, rising shade above shade up to the crown of the mountains. As the Aln
passes away from this sweet vale, and glides from under the feet of those
romantic rocks, she does not even yield a murmur or a sigh; except where
constrained by some artificial wears, she turns over with indolence, and falls
again to sleep on the succeeding lake.

After passing this plain, the vale grows narrow, the hills and woods are
loftier, and the river here and there frets over a few pebbles which impede her
passage. Here is every sylvan beauty; here we tasted enjoyment of all the
pleasures of a woody scene -- the richness of the forest hues, the deep shadow,
and the refreshing breeze perfumed by woodbine -- together with that solemnity
and stillness which sooth the contemplative mind.

As we winded through this deep valley, the prospect at length opened upon the
site of Huln Abbey: on the left hand the landscape was abruptly closed with
rugged mountains of naked white rocks; opposed to which, on the right, on a
grassy eminence, stand the remains of the monastery, humbly mourning in the
lowly garb of solitude, and bending down in ruins: over which a tower of the
Percys bears the melancholy air of unavailing defense, and overlooks the
mouldering walls with an aspect of despondency, in its inability to shield off
the strokes of time and devastation. We ascended to the summit of the hill, and
being possessed of the keys, by which alone we could have had access to these
retreats, we flattered ourselves no obstacle could arise that might deprive us
of the sight of the ruins of this religious house, and every thing curious
there; but the whole is enclosed with a lofty wall, the interior ground being
disposed in gardening: we found the keeper of this place a little man, of a
mean and insolent aspect; he heard our request with the door in his hand, after
which, with a contemptuous silence, he walked in and turned the key against us,
as if he was afraid we should discover some theft he was committing against his
Lord. Thus excluded and looking ridiculous enough, we could do nothing more
than ride round the walls, by which we observed that the ruins chiefly
consisted of a small chapel, wanting little besides a roof: the tower a square
building, with exploratory turrets at each corner, is in good repair, fitted up
as a pleasure room, commanding a beautiful prospect, as we could sufficiently
judge from our lower situation.

The view from this eminence into the vale which we had passed, was singularly
beautiful: the ragged, rocky, and barren mountain, which now lay on our right,
afforded a bold contrast to the hanging forests and the planted eminences which
intersected the winding valley: the Aln was seen in meanders down the nearer
and narrow dell, and in the extended distant plain the waters formed a fine
lucid crescent, the canal being then happily touched by the sun's beams; the
heights clothed with oaks, the lower hills girt with plantations of various
hues, the bold rocks pushing forth their fronts from out the wood, all mingled
with that irregularity and wildness nature alone can display in these hilly
countries, formed this beautiful landscape. Here was one of the first houses of
the Carmelites, or White Friars, in England, who were brought over by John Lord
Vesci about A. D. 1240, and placed here near Hulpark, within the Lordship of
Alnwick. The site of the Black Friars (probably a mistake for White Friars)
was granted to Thomas Reve, William Ryvet, etc. 6 Eliz.

Vide inter Mss. Bodl. Oxon, Dodsworth, vol xlv. f. 15. Excerpta ex cartulario
Carmelitarum de Alnwyke nuper in custodia Dom. Will. Howard dom. de Naworth,
modo penes Joannem Warburton Arm. Somerset Heraldum, A. D. 1720.

Pat. 4. Edw. 2. Pro confirmatione donationum Joannis de Vescy et aliorum.

Pat. 9. Edw. 3.

Tanner's Not.


I will pursue the account given by Mr Gross of this Abbey, as the most perfect
one extant. Hulne was the first monastery of Carmelite Friars in this kingdom.
The account of its foundation is thus given by ancient writers: Among the
British Barons who went to the Holy Wars in the reign of King Henry III. were
William de Vesey Lord of Alnwick, and Richard Gray, two eminent chieftains in
the christian army: led by curiosity or devotion, they went to visit the Monks
of Mount Carmel, and there unexpectedly found a countryman of their own, one
Ralph Fresborn, a Northumberland-man, who had distinguished himself in a former
crusade; and in consequence of a vow had afterward taken upon him the monastic
profession in that solitude. When Vesey and Gray returned to England, they
strongly importuned the superior of the Carmelites to let their countryman
accompany them home; which was at length granted, upon condition that they
would found a monastery for Carmelites in their own country. Soon after their
return, Fresborn, mindful of their engagement, began to look out for a place
for their Convent. After examining all the circumjacent solitudes, he at length
fixed upon the present spot, induced, it is said, by the great resemblance
which the adjoining hill bore to Mount Carmel: and indeed whoever looks into
Maundril's travels, will find that the draught of that mountain, given in his
book, bears a strong likeness to this before us.

The above William de Vesey gave a grant of the ground, consisting of twelve or
thirteen acres, in his park of Holne; but Fresborn is said to have erected the
building himself. The foundation was laid about A. D. 1240, and Fresborn
gathering a proper number of Monks, became the first Abbot of the Order; and
having presided here with great reputation of sanctity, at length died, and was
buried in the monastery about the year 1274.

The original grant of William de Vesey, was confirmed by his successors
Veseys; and by the Percies, after their becoming proprietors of Alnwick: many
additional privileges and immunities were added by the succeeding grants,
particularised in Mr Grose's work, but too tedious to take place, except only
such as are singularly curious following.

Also all wild bees, with their fruits of honey and wax, found in Walse and in
Holne, as well in the park as in the forest, for the perpetual support of the
light in their church; with a provision against the said Friars being defrauded
of the said bees, wax, and honey, by the foresters and shepherds there. They
shall also have yearly, out of the Lord's coney warren of Houghton, one truss
of conies at Easter, and another at the assumption of the blessed Mary. And
certain quantities of rushes, and twelve loads of broom, to cover their houses.

Henry Percy, 4th Earl of Northumberland, built in this abbey, a fine tower, as
a place of refuge for the Monks to retire to in times of danger. Near it is
this curious inscription, in ancient English.

I

n the year of Crist Ihu mccccxxVIII
This Towr was bilded by Sir hen Percy
The fourth Earl of Northu^berla^d of great hon^ and worth
That Espoused Maud ye good Lady full of virtue and bewt^
Daughtr to Sr. Will^m harbirt noble and hardy
Earl of Pembrock whose soulis god save
And with his grace co^sarve the builder of this Towr.
The annual value of this house is not given by Tanner. Some of the buildings
are fitted up and inhabited by servants, who take care of an aviary which his
Grace has established here. The other parts are decorated with plantations of
various trees and shrubs, so as to afford a delightful point of view, from
every station whence they are visible. This Convent at the dissolution, says
Fuller, was at low rates, in a cheap country valued at 194l. 7s. per annum, but
justifies our observation, that even Mendicant Friars had houses endowed with
revenues.

Fuller's Chapter Hist. p. 271. Robert Lesbury, born in Northumberland, the 32d and
last Provincial of the Carmelite Order, chosen 1519, was buried at West Chester.

Randal's Manuscripts.


From an ancient survey which Mr Gross copies, made in 1567, it appears that
the cloister is square; in the midst thereof grows a tree of ewe. It is well
paved with stone about the said cloister, the windows haith been all glasyned,
and now for the most part are in decay." -- "The place where the church was
in now full of cherry trees." -- "In the garden grows one pear tree, and all
the rest be plome trees and bullester trees.

Mr Wallis says, the famous Biographer, John Bale, lived and studied here,
being a member of this little society.

Returning from Hulne by the same road, we passed down to

ALNWICK ABBEY,
now the seat of Michael Doubleday, Esquire. This was formerly an Abbey of
Premonstratensian Canons, (Dugdale calls it a Priory) dedicated to St. James
and the blessed Virgin. It was founded in 1147, by Eustace Fitz John, who by
his marriage with Beatrix the daughter of Ivo de Vesey, became Lord of the
barony of Alnwick. He endowed it amply. The village of Hincliff with its
demesnes and wastes, with the service of half the tenants. Two parts of the
tithes of the Lordship of Tughall, of Alnham, Heysend and Chatton. One moiety
of the tithes of Wooler, of Long Houghton and Lesbury. He annexed to it the
Priory and Church of Gysnes near Felton, dedicated to St. Wilfred, to hold in
pure alms with all its privileges and endowments; a moiety of the tithes and
two bovats of land at Gyson, the church of Halgh or Haugh, the lands of Ridley
and Morewick Hough, the liberty of erecting a Corn Mill on the river Coquet,
and of raising as much Corn on his wastes there as they could plough, with
liberty to grind it at his own mill, mulcture free. He also gave the Canons for
their table, the tenth part of all the ^enison and pork killed in his parks and
forests, and of all the fish taken in his fishery by his order, and a salt work
at Warkworth.

William de Vesey his son gave them advowsons of Chatton, Chillingham, and
Alnham. They also held the advowsons and appropriations of St Dunstans, in
Fleet Street, London, and of Sckenfield in Yorkshire. They had 24 acres of
Turbary, and liberty of pasturage on Edlingham Common; Lands at Chatton and
Falloden: Also four Tenements and a Garden in Newcastle upon Tyne.

Gross and Wallis.


The charter of foundation, included in a confirmatory charter of Henry Percy,
Earl of Northumberland, is addressed to William de Sta Barbara, Bishop of
Durham. Among the souls for whose benefit it was erected, is mentioned that of
Ivo de Vesci. Dugdale and Stephens do not agree touching the time when this
order of Religious came first into England. From Dugdale's authority, it is
said that the first of that order came to settle at Alnwick in the year 1147;
but Stephens, from the authority of Raynerus, says the order first came over in
1146, and settled at Newhouse, in Lincolnshire, in their monastery built by
Peter de Saulia, dedicated to St. Martialis.

In the chronicle of this house, preserved in the library of King's College,
Cambridge, there is an account of a Banquet given by Walter de Hepescotes, the
Abbot, A. D. 1376, on the day of the assumption of the blessed Virgin Mary, to
Henry the 4th Lord of Alnwick, with the 13 following Knights, William de Acon,
Richard Tempest, Walter Blount, Allan de Heton, John Coniers, John Heron, John
Littleburum, Thomas de Ilderton, Thomas de Boynton, Ingram de Umfravil, John de
Dichaunt, John de Swynton, Radulphus de Viners, and many others of the chief
gentry of the country, amounting to 120, all entertained in the refectory;
beside 86 at a second repast. The cloisters too were filled with inferior
people of all ages, to the number of 1020, who were likewise there feasted.
Gross.


It appears from the same authority, that diverse of the Percys were interred
here; particularly Henry the second Lord of Alnwick, who died in 1351: Henry
the third Lord, who bestowed on the Monks 100l. at his death, A. D. 1368; also
Mary his wife, daughter of the Earl of Lancaster. Henry the fourth Lord of
Alnwick, A. D. 1372, was admitted in the month of February to the Brotherhood
of this Chapter, together with diverse other Knights and Esquires; as also, in
the succeeding year, Henry his eldest son, with his two brothers, Thomas and
Radulphus.

During the Abbacy of Walter de Hepescotes, this house was afflicted with a
great scarcity, together with a pestilence, whereby all the cattle belonging to
the monastery were destroyed. In this chronicle the following Abbots are
mentioned: John, who died in 1350; Walter, who resigned his office in 1362, and
was succeeded by Robert; and Walter de Hepescotes, A. D. 1376. The following
list of Abbots is given by Brown Willis. "Thomas Alnwicke occurs Abbot, A. D.
1432 and 1437. Patric Gale, A. D. 1491, in Henry the Seventh's time, when there
were accounted 22 religious in this Convent. William Harrison was last Abbot;
he surrendered his Convent 22d December, A. D. 1540, 31st King Henry VIII. and
had a pension of 50l. per annum, which he enjoyed in 1553, in which year there
remained in charge 2l. 6s. 8d. in annuities, and these following pensions.
Robert Forster 5l. 6s. 8d. Roger Spence 5l. Robert Baker 5l. Richard Miller 6l.
James Samsenne 5l. John Hochinson 5l. William Hudsonne 5l. William Saunderson
1l. and Richard Wheteley 1l.

To which we may add, Abbots. Not. Mon. Baldwin 1st Abbot, ao 1152 Robert el.
1167 Gilbert Gaufridus Adam 1208 P -- oc. in cro S. Michs. 1224 Ib. Wilhelmus
1263 John died 1350 Walter res. 1362 Robert succeeded 1362 Walter de
Heppescotes 1376 Willis Thomas Alnwycke oc. 1532 and 37. Tunstal, p. 8. Roger
Acton made his proof of obedience Oct. 28, 1531. Ib. p. 5. Dns Will. Halton el.
Sep. 4. 1532 p. mort. Dni Acton. Rhymer. He made his profession of obedience to
the Bishop of Durham Sep. 22d following, and was the last Abbot.

Randal's Manuscripts. MCXLVII

Hoc anno ordo Praemonstratensis venit ad Alnewic, ubi primus Abbas Baldewinus.

Lel. Col. vol. 3. p. 73.


The Abbot of this house was summoned to the parliaments of the 23d, 24th,
28th, 32d, and 34th of King Edward I. also to that held at Carlisle, 35th of
the same reign; and to the parliament of the 19th King Edward II. An Abbey of
Praemonstratensian Canons founded by Eustace Fitz John, A. D. 1147. It was
dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and valued 26th Hen. VIII. at 189l. 15s. by
Dugd. 194l. 7s. Speed; about which time there were 13 Canons. The site of this
house was granted 4 Edw. VI. to Ralph Sadler and Lawrence Winnington.

Vide in Mon. Angl. Tom. 2. Diploma Henry Percy com Northumbriae, recit, and
confirm. cartam fundationis: Cartas tres Will. de Vesey filii Eustachii; unam
pro Eccl. de Chetton; alteram pro Eccl. de Chaulingham; tertiam pro Eccl. de
Alncham. p. 592. Stemma fundatoris ex roll. escaet. 8 Edw. II. in cedula.

In Bourn's History of Newcastle, p. 142. of four tenements and a garden in
Newcastle, belonging to this Abbey.

In Newcourt's Repertorium, vol. 1. of the church of St Dunstan, in the West,
London.

Registrum et cartas penes Franc Brandling de ead. M^l. A. D. 1639. Collect ex
eisdem ms. Dodsworth, vol. xlix.

Chronicon monasterii de Alnwike, ms. in bibl. Coll. Reg. Cantab. hugus
apographum in bibl. Stillingfleet, nunc Harleyana, et excerpta ex eodem ms.
Cotton. Vitell E xiv. 22. 10.

Cart 2. Joan m. 12. p. 13. pro Turbaria xxiv acrarum inter Yerlesseter et
divisas de le Morton et Edelingham.

Plac. in com. Northumb. 21. Ed. 1. assis. vol. 27. de commun pastur. in
Edelingham: Cart. 35. Edw. 1. p. 25. recit. et confirm. donationes.

Pat. 1. Edw. 2. p. 2. m 4. pro. Eccl. de Wollore concess. per Nic. Graham:
Pat. 5. Edw. 2. p. 1. m. 23. pro Eccl. de Chartam: P. 16. Edw. 2. p. 2. m. 1.
de teris ibidem et in Falendon.

Pat. 3 Edw. 3 p. 2. m. Pat. 8. Edw. 3. p. 2. m. 9. vel. 10. Pat. 9. Edw. 3. p.
2. m 14. Escheat Northumb. 50. Edw. 3. p. 56. Pat. 50 Edw. 3. p. 1. m. 24. pro
hospitali S. Leonardi ibidem annectendo.

Pat. 9. Ric. 2. p. 1. m. 14. pro. eccl. S. Dunstani in Fletestreet Londini
approprianda.

Pat 2. Hen. 4. p. 4. m. 9. Fin. 2. Hen. 4. m 3.

Pat. 35. Hen. 6. p. 2. m ult. Pat. 37. Hen. 6. p. 1. m. 4. pro eccl. de
Lakenseld approprianda; et p. 2. m. 20. et 37.

Tanner.


At the dissolution the revenues of this house were valued at 189l. 15s. by
Dugdale, and 194l. 7s. by Speed, there being then 13 Canons. King Edward VI. in
the 4th year of his reign, granted the site to Sadler and Winnington. It came
afterward to the possession of the Brandling family, and the Doubledays from
whom the present owner is descended, derived their title by purchase from the
Brandlings. This is a sweet though deep retirement, on the banks of Aln,
defended by lofty hills to the north and west.

ALNWICK ABBEY GATEWAY
depiction of Alnwick Abbey gateway

There are no remains of the Abbey, but a Gateway and Tower, which by the
architecture and arms sculptured upon the building, show it is of much more
modern date than the foundation of the house. This tower is not square, but
oblong, having an exploratory turret on each corner. The north side is
ornamented with a nich, canopy'd, capable of receiving a statue five feet high:
most probable it contained the effigies of the dedicatory Virgin. Beneath is a
figure of an angel in relief, with expanded wings. Over this entrance are
shields of arms, a cross, supposed to be the arms of the Veseys, and a cross
molin. On the south side, in a nich, is the figure of one of the Religious, of
the order of White Friars of Premonstratenses, in his proper habilament, in
pretty good preservation. This front is ornamented with shields of arms, the
arms of Brabant adopted by the Percys, with the arms of Lucys quarterly, the
principal; and also the arms of Vesey.

A gate opens to the east, on each side of which are the figures of cherubs
supporting armorial shields: on this front is also a canopy and nich for a
statue. Here are the arms of Brabant and the arms of Lucys on separate shields.
At this entrance, as also on the north side, were machicolations; and in the
center of the arching of the gateway is a square aperture, from whence the
possessors could annoy assailants. The masonry of this tower is excellent; the
gates of lattice braced with iron still remain.

Above the gate going into the court of the house, is an escutcheon of white
marble, much injured by the weather, but retaining some marks of the Sculptor,
to distinguish that it once contained the crest of the Doubledays, an arm in
armor suspending a mullet. The antiquity of this piece has been much doubted,
but the materials determine that point clearly.

This seat of the Doubleday family has nothing very singular to mark it, but
the beauty of the retirement, under the hanging woods of the river Aln. The
ground plot of the religious house is now included in the orchard; the ruins of
which probably afforded materials for the present mansion; but there are not
the least remains to denote the exact site of the monastic buildings, or the
place of interment of the illustrious personages before mentioned.

Solemn situations like this, and the ruins of religious houses, always affect
my mind with a degree of languishment. Such a seclusion, such a retirement,
would have filled my wish. The life of the Ecclesiastic is most desirable, and
seems calculated to be the happiest. No natural tendency to indolence and ease
prompts this determination; but the serenity of a Churchman's life, under the
entire preclusion of all worldly concerns, affords that tranquillity of mind,
so necessary to contemplation and study, to philosophic researches, and divine
meditation -- without the poison of ambition, some minds can enjoy a mediocrity
with content -- without an impertinent wish to intermeddle with public affairs,
some men can sit within the little mansion, busied only in pious duties and
contemplations; and amidst domestic peace, living each day, in gratitude for
the enjoyment of the rural beauties of some sylvan scene, the plain, the mead,
the grotto, and the stream -- call it luxury: but the busy world incessantly
rolls the heavy wheels of care too near my threshold -- I am frequently induced
to adopt Horace's description: WARKWORTH CASTLE.
depiction of Warkworth Castle Agricolam laudat juris legumque peritus,
Sub Galli cantum, Consultor ubi Ostia pulsat.
And a thousand times am induced to follow his precept, -- Rebus omissis,
Atria servantem postico fall clientem.


We passed from Alnwick Abbey to

WARKWORTH,
the roads agreeable, and the country finely cultivated. In the way, we had a
view of the port of

ALEMOUTH.
This was a dependent manor of the barony of Alnwick. The town is small, but
carries on a considerable trade in the export of corn and other produce of the
country. The imports are chiefly timber, and some merchandise from Holland.
Near the sea, on an eminence, are the remains of a church in the form of a
cross. When this edifice was destroyed, or by whom, is not known. The
churchyard is still used for sepulture. In the banks, as washed away by the
violence of the sea, have frequently been discovered, Bones of an enormous
size. Ignorant spectators have retained the circumstance, without
distinguishing of what animals these were the remains: and being found near a
place of human interment, they are at once conceived to have belonged to men of
gigantick stature. The constant warfare that distressed these shores for ages,
might occasion the slaughter of vast numbers of horses and other beasts, which
after a day of havoc may have been thrown into one common pit. The remains of
elephants have been discovered in several parts of England, and have given the
like apprehension to the vulgar, that giants once distressed this island.
We approached the town of Warkworth by a fine stone bridge of three arches
over the river Coquet, anciently defended by a tower with an iron gate and
portcullis.

THE CASTLE OF WARKWORTH
stands on a lofty eminence, the town of Warkworth lying on the northern
inclination of the hill, and forming a pleasing, though steep approach to the,
castle: the street is wide, and contains some modern buildings. This access
gives the fortress an august appearance. Werkworthe Castle stondythe on the
southe side of Coquet watar. It is well maynteyned and is large. It longed to
the Earl of Northomberland. It stondithe on a high hille, the which for the
more part is includyd with the ryver, and is about a mile from these. There is
a pretty town, and at the town end is a stone bridge with a town on it.
Beyond the bridge is Banborowshire.

Lel. Itin. v. 7. p. 76.


An account of this place, published in the Newcastle Courant in the year 1772,
contains the following particulars: It is about three quarters of a mile from
the sea. The principal street stands upon a rising ground, at the higher end of
which, upon an eminence, are the remains of an ancient castle. The market place
is in the middle of the town, where is a fine stone cross on a spacious area at
the meeting of two streets, the one leading to the church, which is an elegant
structure, whose spire is upwards 100 feet high; the other to the bridge, where
is an ancient tower. Contiguous to the bridge is a large freestone quarry, the
stones of which are so much esteemed, that great quantities thereof are shipped
for London. The salmon fishery here is carried to a very great extent, so that
at the mouth of the Coquet, in the summer season, as well as in the river
itself, are some thousands caught, which gives employment to a number of hands.
The river, which almost surrounds the town, directs its course in a straight
line for about half a mile, then leaving the fine and pleasant villas of
Glosterhill and Amble on its southern banks, while it loses itself in the
ocean. In the year 1764, it left its old course, and forced its way between two
sandy hills overgrown with bent, that had obstructed its passage for ages, and
is now settled in a very deep channel, with a fine clay bottom, which makes it
navigable for small craft. It is said there is upwards of 14 feet of water upon
the bar at full sea, and continues that depth very near the town; so that with
a little assistance of art, it might be made to admit ships of a considerable
burden; and as Coquet Island is situated a little to the southward, forms a
fine bay at the very mouth of the river. The grounds adjoining thereto abound
with a fine seam of coal; and so plentiful is corn, that few counties can equal
its fertility. From these considerations, what pity it is that Warkworth was
not made a seaport, since nature has almost half finished the design.

This little borough is governed by a Mayor, who is chosen annually at a Court
Leet, and enjoys great privileges by an extensive common, the property of the
village, and some little indulgencies from his Grace the Duke of
Northumberland; and as the town consists all of free burgesses, is capable of
great improvements. John Fitz Robert, in 7 King Henry III. obtained license
that the market which had been usually kept upon the Sunday at his manor of
Werkworth, should be held upon the Wednesday every week.

Dugd. Baron. v. 1. p. 107.


The castle stands on the crown of a rock, of an oblong figure; the great tower
to the north, placed on the brink of the cliff above the town, is of fine
architecture in chisel-work, of a singular figure, being octangular, and from
the center of four opposite sides, a turret projects, of a semi-hexagonal form;
from the middle of the building a very lofty exploratory turret arises. This
part of the castle owes its origin to the Percys, as appears by the Lion of
Brabant above the gate, and the arms dispersed over the building. The western
side is formed of various irregular towers and walling of different ages,
extending along the brink of the cliff, whose foot is washed by the river
Coquet. On the south, the ground rises gradually to the height of the rocks on
which the western buildings are founded. This side of the castle fronts to a
spacious plain or platform, and is defended by a high wall with an outward
moat. The ancient gateway and chief entrance to the castle is on this side; the
gate defended by circular towers and a draw bridge. The eastern side is placed
on the brink of a steep declivity, defended by an outward moat, and a lofty
wall guarded by a square bastion near the center, and an angular tower at the
south point. The walls enclose a spacious area, almost square, within which the
ancient parts of the fortress are very ruinous.

The view from hence is so extensive and various, that description can carry
but a very imperfect idea of its members or its beauties: to the east and
north-east, there is a sea prospect, with which you take in all the shore we
had traversed, with Dunstanbrough and Bambrough Castles at the most distant
point of land: the Farn Islands lie scattered like patches on the face of the
waters. The port of Alemouth is a nearer object, and at a little distance the
mouth of the river Coquet and Coquet Island with its ruined monastery are seen.
To the north, you view a rich cultivated country to Alnwick; westward, the
banks of Coquet river, graced with little woodlands, which here and there
impend on its winding channel; to the south, you view an extensive plain,
inclining toward the sea, crowded with villages, and interspersed with woods;
the shore indented by many little ports and creeks; the higher grounds are
scattered over with innumerable hamlets, churches, and other buildings,
mingling with a variety highly pleasing; whilst on the extreme distance, the
different teints of the landscape, arising from various objects, require colors
to convey their picture to the mind.

Mr Gross, who has given two views of this castle in his excellent work, says,
nothing can be more magnificent and picturesque, from what part soever it is
viewed; and though when entire it was far from being destitute of strength, yet
its appearance does not excite the idea of one of those rugged fortresses
destined solely for war, whose gloomy towers suggest to the imagination only
dungeons, chains, and executions: but rather that of such an ancient hospitable
mansion as is alluded to by Milton, Where throngs of Knights and Barons bold
In weeds of peace high triumphs hold.


The castle and mote, according to an ancient survey, contained 5 acres 17
perches of ground. Its walls on the south, east, and west sides are garnished
with towers. The great gate of the castle is on the south side, between two
polygonal towers, and is also defended with machicolations.

The keep or dungeon forms the north front; its figure is a square with the
angles canted off. Near the middle of each face of this square there is a
turret, projecting at right angles, its end terminating in a semi-hexagon:
these projections are of the same height as the rest of the keep. This keep is
very large and lofty, and contains a variety of magnificent apartments.

Mr Gross gives the copy of a survey taken of this castle in 1567, of which
some extracts may be pertinent here. The Buyldinge of the said castle on the
sowth part is three towers, viz. the Gatehouse tower in the middle thereof,
which is the entrye at a draw bridge over dry moyte; and in the same toure is
a prison and porter lodge, and over the same a fare lodging, called the
constables lodgings; and in the curtayne is a fair and comely building, a
chapel, and diverse houses of office, and above the great chamber and the Lords
lodginge. On the west side, the posterne tower, and the old hall, which was
very fare at the entrye into the hall, for the porche thereof is raised a
little square tower, wherein is two chambres; and on the foresyd, in stone,
portrayed a lion, very workmanly wrought, and therefore called the lion tower.
In the east side of the great hall, was an i will set out, with pyllers, which
yet stands. The doungion is in the north part of the scyte of the said
Castle, set upon a little mount highyer than the rest of the cowrte; steps
of a greas before ye enter to yt: and the same is buyld as a four square, and
out of every square one tower; all which be so quarterly squared together, that
in the sight every part appears five towers, very finely wrought of
mason-work: and in the same contained as well a fair hall, kytchinge, and all
other houses of offices, very fare and apteley placed, as also great chamber,
chapel, and lodgings for the Lord and his trayn. The castle is envyroned on
three parts with the said ryver; and of the north part, in an angle within
the said water is situate a town called the borough of Warkworth, and the
parish church, etc.

Warkworth was formerly the barony of Roger Fitz Richard, who held it by the
service of one Knight's fee, of the grant of King Henry II. He married Eleanor,
one of the daughters and coheiresses of Henry de Essex, Baron of Raleigh and
Clavering. The name of Clavering is derived from the barony of Clavering in
Essex.

By the testa de Nevill it appears, that Robert, the son of Roger, held of the
King in capite, by the service of one Knight's fee, the barony of Warkworth,
with its appurtenances. And Roger, the son of Richard, held the same barony by
like service from the time of King Henry, the father of King John, who gave it
to him in fee.

John de Clavering was summoned to parliamant as Baron Warkworth and Clavering,
25th King Edward I. 3d King Edward III. and the 6th King Edward III.


It continued in this family for several successive generations. John, in
obedience to King Edward I. by his command, took upon him the surname of
Clavering. In consideration of certain grants of lands in the southern
counties, he made over to King Edward II. the reversion in fee of his barony
and castle of Warkworth, And also Rothbury, Corbridge, and Newburn, which by a
reversionary grant to Henry Lord Percy, now are become part of the possessions
of his Grace the Duke of Northumberland.
provided he should die without issue male. This reversion King Edward III.
granted to Henry Lord Percy, from whom these possessions have descended to the
present Duke of Northumberland.

The church is a handsome building, ornamented with a spire, the inside very
neat. There is a monument with the recumbent effigy of a Knight Templar, with
an inscription intimating that the personage there interred was Sir Hugh de
Morwick, who gave the common to the town of Warkworth.

In a window of one of the ailes, is painted the figures of St. Hilda and an
attendant female.

Leland says, Warkworth was much resorted to by Merchants. At present there is
no navigation on the Coquet, though it is said to be practicable to bring up
small craft to the bridge. The town is entitled to a weekly market on Thursday,
and three annual fairs on the Thursdays preceding St. George's, St. Lawrence's,
and St. Martin's days.

We passed up the river Coquet about three quarters of a mile to the

HERMITAGE at WARKWORTH.
depiction of Warkworth Hermitage HERMITAGE.
The approach is kept in neat order, but still retains its original form; a
narrow walk on the brink of the river, which at this place flows without any
troubled current, leads to the door of the Hermitage; The Poem of the Hermit of
Warkworth, to which I shall have frequent occasion to resort in the following
description, opens thus: Dark was the night, and wild the storm,
And loud the torrents roar,
And loud the sea was heard to dash
Against the distant shore.
Musing on man's weak hapless state
The lonely Hermit lay;
When lo! he heard a female voice
Lament in sore dismay.
With hospitable haste he rose,
And waked his sleeping fire.
And snatching up a lighted brand,
Forth hied the reverend fire.
This short extract will show the Poet's mode of introductions he then leads on
the personages to whom the Hermit relates his tale.

Ah, seldom had their host, I ween,
Beheld so sweet a pair:
The youth was tall, with manly bloom,
She slender, soft, and fair.
* * * * * *
First tell me father, said the youth,
(Nor blame mine eager tongue)
What town is here? what lands are these?
And to what Lord belong?
Alas! my son, the Hermit said,
Why do I live to say,
The rightful Lord of these domains
Is banished far away.
Ten winters now have shed their snows,
On this my lowly hall,
Since valiant Hotspur (so the north
Our youthful Lord did call)
Against fourth Henry Bolingbrook,
Led up his northern powers,
And stoutly fighting lost his life,
Near proud Salopia's towers.
One son he left, a lovely boy,
His country's hope and heir;
And oh! to save him from his foes,
It was his grandsire's care.
In Scotland safe he placed the child,
Beyond the reach of strife,
Nor long before the brave old Earl
At Bramham lost his life.
And now the Percy name, so long
Our northern pride and boast,
Lies hid, alas, beneath a cloud,
Their honors rest and lost.
No chieftain of that noble house
Now leads our youth to arms;
The bordering Scots despoil our fields,
And ravage all our farms.
Their halls and castles once so fair,
Now moulder in decay;
Proud strangers now usurp their lands,
And bear their wealth away.
Not far from hence, where yon full stream
Runs winding down the Lea,
Fair Warkworth lifts her lofty towers,
And overlooks the sea.
The towers, alas, now stand forlorn,
With noisome weads oerspread,
Where feasted Lords, and courtly dames,
And where the poor were fed.
Meantime far off, mid Scottish hills,
The Percy lives unknown;
On strangers bounty he depends,
And may not claim his own.
O might I with these aged eyes
But live to see him here;
The should my soul depart in bliss,
He said, and dropped a tear.
And is the Percy still so loved
Of all his friends and thee;
Then bless me father, said the youth,
For I, thy guest, am he.
Silent he gazed, then turned aside
To wipe the tears he shed;
And lifting up his hands and eyes,
Poured blessings on his head.
* * * * * *
But who may this young lady be,
That is so wondrous fair.
* * * * * *
Then up and down in hunters garb,
I wandered as in chase,
'Till in the noble Nevill's house Raby Castle.

I gained a hunter's place.
Some time with him I lived unknown,
Till I Would the hap so rare.
To please this young and gentle dame,
That Baron's daughter fair.
* * * * * *
This evening as the night drew on,
Fearing we were pursued,
We turned adown the right hand path,
And gained this lonely wood.
Then lighting from our weary steeds,
To shun the pelting shower.
We met thy kind conducting hand,
And reached this friendly bower.

lofty perpendicular rocks on the other hand confining the walk to about the
width of four feet. From the summit of the cliffs a grove of oaks is suspended,
giving a solemn shade; and at their feet issues a spring of the purest water,
which formerly supplied the Recluse. The steps, vestibule, and chief apartments
of the Hermitage, are hewn out of the bosom of a freestone rock, whose outside
face is about 20 feet high, embowered with stately trees, which impend from the
top of the precipice and fissures of the cliffs. One lower and outward
apartment is of masonry. We entered into this lower apartment by a passage of
three paces, the doorway marked with the remains of bolts and iron hinges: it
is built up against the side of the rock, about 18 feet square, and appears to
have been the kitchen or principal dwelling, having a range or fireplace six
feet wide. On the south side of this apartment, opposite to our entrance, is a
doorway leading to an outward seat formed in the rock, and opening upon the
walk on the river's brink. On this side of the room are two windows, which bear
the marks of iron-grating, and also a closet. By holes cut in the rock, it
seems as if timbers had been lodged therein for the flooring of an upper
chamber. This structure is built of ashler-work, and appeared to us of much
more modern date than the cells formed in the rock. Passing from this outward
building the way we entered, we ascended by 17 steps to a little vestibule,
with a seat on each side capable of holding one person only. Above the inner
doorway some letters appear, the remains of a phrase which may be thus rendered
in English: "My tears have been my food day and night." From thence we entered
the principal apartment or chapel, about 18 feet in length, and not more than
seven feet and an half wide, and of the same height. Two pilasters of
semi-hexagonal form project from the opposite walls in the center, and one from
each corner, from whence spring the intersecting groins of the roof, the
joinings ornamented with roses. The pilasters have plain capitals and bases, in
the old Gothic style. All the work is chiselled, and done with mechanic
exactness and regularity: the wall or outside rock as you enter is left so
thick, as to admit the vestibule before described. At the east end is an altar,
formed cross the whole apartment, ascended by two steps; the upper plane edged
with a moulding. In the center of the wall behind is a nich for a crucifix or
image, with the remains of a glory. On the right hand as you approach the
altar, cut out of the thickness of the wall, is a nich or cavity, like those
often described in the progress of this work, left in the walls of the ailes of
churches; within which there is represented a table monument (no chink or
cavity appearing, to give a supposition that it is hollowed to receive any
human remains) with a recumbent female figure, Mr Wallis's description is in
the following words. In the fool of a window, at the south end of the altar, is
the effigies of the blessed Virgin, sculptured in stone, recumbent; another of
the child Jesus on her right hand, standing, his left rested upon her shoulder;
at her feet, in a nich in the wall, is the effigies of an Hermit, in the
attitude of prayer. Mr Wallis is in an error here, for the female recumbent
figure, having its head toward the east, lays with the right hand to the
chapel: if any figure has stood on the side of the effigies, it must have been
against the pillar which divides the windows. There is an absurdity in the idea
of the boy Jesus standing over the tomb of the Virgin Mary, that need not be
dwelt upon.
the hands and arms of which appear to have been elivated. Light is admitted by
two small windows behind. On the pillar which divides the windows, are the
remains of some sculpture, supposed by many to be that of an hovering cherub;
but with the utmost attention, and a strong desire to coincide with others, I
could not see any such figure, even with an eye prejudiced by such
prepossessions: And now attended by their host,
The hermitage they viewed;
Deep hewn within a craggy cliff,
And overhung with wood.
And near a flight of shapely steps,
All cut with nicest skill;
And piercing through a stony arch,
Ran winding up the hill.
There decked with many a flower and herb,
His little garden stands;
With fruitful trees in shady rows,
All planted by his hands.
Then scoop'd within the solid rock,
Three sacred vaults he shows;
The chief a chapel neatly arched,
On branching columns rose.
Each proper ornament was there
That should a chapel grace;
The latice for confession framed,
And holy water vase.
Over either door a sacred text
Invites to godly fear;
And in a little 'scutcheon hung
The cross, and crown, and spear.
Up to the altar's ample breadth
Two easy steps ascend;
And near a glimmering solemn light
Two well-wrought windows lend.
Beside the altar rose a tomb,
All in the living stone,
On which a young and beauteous maid
In goodly sculpture shone.
A kneeling angel, fairly carved,
Leaned hovering over her breast;
A weeping warrior at her feet,
And near to these her crest. This is a bull's head, the crest of the
Widdrington family. All the figures, etc. here described are still visible,
only somewhat effaced with length of time.


if it has ever been the representation of any figure, and now wasted by the
weather beating through the windows, I conceive it was that of a child standing
in a weeping attitude over the recumbent effigies. At the foot of the recumbent
effigies is a basin cut for holy water, and the feet of the effigies rest
against an animal (most likely a dog, as an emblem of fidelity) as is usual on
monuments of the like form. I pay great deference to the opinions of other
visitants, but cannot agree with the author of the poem, that this is a bull's
head, or the usual place for crests: on the contrary, according to the virtues
of the deceased, ancient tombs are decorated with an animal at the foot of the
effigies, as a lion for fortitude, a dog for fidelity, etc. and this same
figure appeared to me no other than that of a crouching dog; as is to be seen
on multitudes of ancient tombs. The usual place of the crest on tombs, is under
the head of the effigies. The examples in the northern counties are most likely
to point out to us the prevailing fashion. The bull's head is in that position
on the tombs of the family of Nevils, in Brancepeth and Staindrop churches, in
the county of Durham; and a dog lays at the feet. The same on the fine tomb of
Ogle, in Bothal church, and also the Ram's head on the elegant tomb of Gray, at
Chillingham, with many other instances in Northumberland. Under the head of the
effigies no crest appears; a double cushion is the support. By length of time,
and the weather beating through the windows, the figures are greatly injured.
In a nich at the foot of the monument, and cut in the wall, is the figure of an
Hermit on his knees, resting his head on his right hand, and his left hand
placed on his bosom, as in a lamenting or pensive posture. The author of the
poem has racked invention to conceive a cause for our Hermit's vow of severity
and retirement.

The cliff, the vault, but chief the tomb,
Attract the wandering pair;
Eager they ask what hapless dame
Lies sculptured here so fair?
The Hermit sighed, the Hermit wept,
For sorrow scarce could speak;
At length he wiped the trickling tears,
That all bedewed his cheek.
Alas! my children, human life
Is but a vale of woe;
And very mournful is the tale
Which you so fain would know.
Young Lord, thy grandsire had a friend,
In days of youthful fame;
Yon distant hills were his domains;
Sir Bertram From the advertisement to the Poem.

About a mile from the castle, in a deep romantic valley, are the remains of a
hermitage; of which the chapel is still entire. This is hollowed with great
elegance, in a cliff near the river; as are also two adjoining apartments,
which probably served for the sacristy and vestry, or were appropriated to some
other sacred uses: for the former of these, which runs parallel with the
chapel, appears to have had an alter in it, at which mass was occasionly
celebrated, as well as in the chapel itself.

Each of these apartments is extremely small; for that which was the principal
chapel does not in length exceed 18 feet, nor is more than 7 feet in breadth
and height: it is, however, very beautifully designed and executed, in the
solid rock; and has all the decorations of a complete Gothic church or
cathedral in miniature.

But what principally distinguishes the chapel, is a small tomb or monument on
the south side of the altar; on the top of which lies a female figure, extended
in the manner that effigies are usually exhibited praying on ancient tombs.
This figure, which is very delicately designed, some have ignorantly called an
image of the Virgin Mary, though it has not the least resemblance to the manner
in which she is represented in the Romish churches; who is usually erect, as
the object of adoration, and never in a prostrate or recumbent posture. Indeed
the real image of the blessed Virgin probably stood in a small nich, still
visible behind the altar: whereas the figure of a bull's head, which is rudely
carved at this lady's feet, the usual place for the crest in old monuments,
plainly proves her to have been a very different personage.

About the tomb are several other figures, which, as well as the principal one
above mentioned, are cut in the natural rock, in the same manner as the little
chapel itself, with all its ornaments, and the two adjoining apartments. What
slight traditions are scattered through the country, concerning the origin and
foundation of this hermitage, tomb, etc. are delivered to the reader in the
following rhimes.

It is universally agreed, that the founder was one of the Bertram family,
which had once considerable possessions in Northumberland, and were anciently
Lords of Bothal castle, situate about ten miles from Warkworth. He has been
thought to be the same Bertram that endowed Brinkburn Priory, and built
Brenkshaw chapel; which both stand in the same winding valley, higher up the
river.

But Brinkburn Priory was founded in the reign of King Henry I. whereas the
form of the Gothic windows in this chapel, especially of those near the altar,
is found rather to resemble the style of architecture that prevailed about the
reign of King Edward III. and indeed that the sculpture in this chapel cannot
be much older, appears from the crest which is placed at the lady's feet on the
tomb; for Camden informs us, that armorial crests did not become hereditary
till about the reign of King Edward II.


was his name.
Where ever the noble Percy fought,
His friend was at his side;
And many a skirmish with the Scots
Their early valor tried.
Fair Widdrington the maiden's name,
Yon tow'r's her dewlling place;
Her sire an old Northumbrian chief,
Devoted to thy race.
Many a Lord and many a Knight
To this fair damsel came;
But Bertram was her only choice,
For him she felt a flame.
Lord Percy pleaded for his friend,
Her father soon consents;
None but the beauteous maid herself
His wishes now prevents.
* * * * * * * *
When lo a damsel young and fair
Stepped forward through the hall.
She Bertram courteously addressed,
And kneeling on her knee,
Sir Knight, the Lady of thy love
Has sent this gift to thee.
Then forth she drew a glittering helm,
Well plated many a fold;
The casque was wrought of tempered steel,
The crest of burnished gold.
Sir Knight, thy Lady sends thee this,
And yields to be thy bride,
When thou have proved this maiden gift,
Where sharpest blows are tried.
Young Bertram took the shining helm,
And thrice he kissed the same;
Trust me I Will prove this precious casque
With deeds of noblest fame.
Lord Percy and his Barons bold,
Then fixed upon a day,
To scour the Marches, late oppressed,
And Scottish wrongs repay.
* * * * * * * *
Now closing fast on every side,
They hem Sir Bertram round;
But dauntless he repels their rage,
And deals forth many a wound.
The vigor of his single arm
Had well nigh won the field,
When ponderous fell a Scottish ax,
And clove his lifted shield.
Another blow his temples took,
And reft his helm in twain;
That beauteous helm, his Lady's gift:
His blood bedewed the plain.
Lord Percy saw his champion fall,
Amid the unequal fight:
And now my noble friends, he said,
Let Us save this gallant Knight.
Then rushing in, with stretched out shield,
He over the warrior hung,
As some fierce eagle spreads her wing,
To guard her callow young.
* * * * * * * *
All pale, extended on their shields,
And welt'ring in his gore,
Lord Percy's Knights their bleeding friend
To Wark's fair castle bore.
* * * * * * * *
All day over moss and moor they rode,
By many a lonely tower,
And 'twas the dewfall of the night
Ere they drew near her bower.
* * * * * * * *
Six days, young Knight, are past and gone,
Since she set out to thee;
And sure, if no sad harm had happ'd,
Long since thou would her see.
For when she heard thy grievous chance,
She tore her hair, and cried,
Alas! I Have slain the comeliest Knight,
All through my folly and pride.
* * * * * * * *
Then mounted she her milk-white steed,
One morn at break of day,
And two tall yeomen went with her,
To guard her on the way.
Sad terror smote Sir Bertram's heart,
And grief overwhelmed his mind;
Trust me, said he, I never will rest,
Till I my Lady find.
* * * * * * * *
Now, brother, we'll our ways divide,
Over Scottish hills to range;
Do thou go north, and I Will go west,
And all our dress we'll change.
* * * * * * * *
One day, as he sat under a thorn,
All sunk in deep despair,
An aged Pilgrim passed him by,
Who marked his face of care.
* * * * * * * *
Cheer up, my son, perchance (he said)
Some tidings I may bear;
For often when human hopes have failed,
Then heavenly comfort's near.
Behind yon hills, so steep and high,
Down in a lowly glen,
There stands a castle, fair and strong,
Far from the abode of men.
As late I chanced to crave an alms,
About this evening hour,
Methought I heard a Lady's voice,
Lamenting in the tower.
* * * * * * *
These tidings caught Sir Bertram's ear,
He thanked him for his tale,
And soon he hasted over the hills,
And soon he reached the vale.
* * * * * * * *
All day he sits beside the gate,
And pipes both loud and clear;
All night he watches round the walls,
In hopes his love to hear.
The first night, as he silent watched,
All at the midnight hour,
He plainly heard his Lady's voice,
Lamenting in the tower.
The second night, the moon shone clear,
And gilt the spangled dew,
He saw his Lady through the grate,
But 'twas a transient view.
The third night, wearied out, he slept
Till near the morning tide,
When starting up he seized his sword,
And to the castle hey'd.
When lo he saw a ladder of ropes
Depending from the wall;
And over the moat was newly laid
A poplar, strong and tall.
And soon he saw his love descend,
Wrapped in a tartan played;
Assisted by a sturdy youth,
In Highland garb then clad.
Amazed, confounded at the sight,
He lay unseen and still,
And soon he saw them cross the stream,
And mount the neighboring hill.
Unknown, unheard of all within,
The youthful couple fly;
But what can 'scape the lover's ken,
Or shun his piercing eye?
With silent step he follows close
Behind the flying pair,
And saw her hang upon his arm,
With fond familiar air.
Thanks, gentle youth, she often said;
My thanks thou well have won;
For me what wiles have thou contrived;
For me what dangers run?
And ever shall my grateful heart
Thy services repay:
Sir Bertram could not further hear,
But cried, Vile traitor, stay!
Vile traitor, yield that Lady up!
And quick his sword he drew:
The stranger turned in sudden rage,
And at Sir Bertram flew.
With mortal hate their vigorous arms
Gave many a vengeful blow;
But Bertram's stronger hand prevailed,
And laid the stranger low.
Die, traitor, die! -- a dreadful thrust
Attends each furious word:
Ah! then fair Isabel knew his voice,
And rushed beneath his sword.
O stop, she cried; O stop thy arm!
Thou do thy brother slay!
And here the Hermit paused and wept.
His tongue no more could say.
At length he cried, Go lovely pair:
How shall I tell the rest!
Ere I could stop my piercing sword,
It fell, and stabbed her breast.
Were thou thyself that hapless youth?
Ah cruel fate! they said:
The Hermit wept, and so did they;
They sighed -- he hung his head.
* * * * * * *
My brother, alas! spoke never more,
His precious life was flown;
She kindly strove to sooth my pain,
Regardless of her own.
* * * * * * *
Thus pouring comfort on my soul,
Even with her latest breath,
She gave one parting fond embrace,
And closed her eyes in death.
* * * * * * * *
For me, I loathed my wretched life,
And long to end it thought;
Till time and books and holy men
Had better counsels taught.
They raised my heart to that pure source,
Whence heavenly comfort flows;
She taught me to despise the world,
And calmly bear its woes.
No more the slave of human pride,
Vain hope and sordid care;
I meekly vowed to spend my life
In penitence and prayer.
The bold Sir Bertram now no more
Impetuous, haughty, wild;
But poor and humble Benedict,
Now lowly, patient, mild.
My lands I gave to feed the poor,
And sacred altars raise;
And here a lonely Anchorite
I came to end my days.
This sweet sequestered vale I chose,
These rocks and hanging grove;
For often beside that murmuring stream
My love was wont to rove.
My noble friend approved my choice,
This blessed retreat he gave;
And here I carved her beauteous form,
And scoop'd this hollow cave.
Full fifty winters, all forlorn,
My life I Have lingered here;
And daily over this sculptured Saint
I drop the pensive tear.
In Mr Grose's account of this Hermitage, it is alleged, that it was
universally believed the first Hermit enjoined himself this life of penance
and severity, in contrition for the murder of his own brother. I must say, I
was struck with an idea on my first entrance, which grew upon me whilst I
remained in these sacred vaults, and drew on a train of pensive thoughts: There
needed nothing barbarous, savage, or murderous to induce a man to such a life
-- disappointed love was sufficient of itself to incite it: Conceive the
personage sculptured upon the tomb or monument, to be the devoted bride or
beloved wife of the Recluse, cut off in the prime of life by some common
casualty, perhaps after a short life of harmony and love in the marriage state,
in the instant of bringing into the world the issue of an happy intercourse,
and the heir of an opulent race -- this was cause sufficient. Under such
circumstances, we should entertain more feelings for the tender sorrows and
disappointed love of the Hermit, than we can experience when we see him stained
with bloody crimes, arising from wrath, revenge, rashness, or indiscretion --
mad with jealousy, even to such a blindness, that he could not know his own
brother, though gone forth in disguise at his instance on the same errand with
himself. I own my ideas furnished me with a very different picture of the
Hermit's woes -- I stood over the monument with an eye flooded in tears, and a
mind distressed by the tenderest touches of commiseration. After musing for
some time, I imagined I could hear the distressed inhabitant exclaim: In the
dust rests for ever the beloved remains of the best of women -- united to me by
love and wedloc -- the hopes of my youth, the joy of my desire, and the
felicity of my possession; with her I had flattered my mind, life would pass
away serenely, and the evening of the human day advance in peace: but alas!
when my happiness was at its height, she was snatched from me, and forlornness
beset my steps.

But to return to my description: The west end of the chapel is lighted by a
window formed of four conjoining circles: above the inner door of the vestibule
is a shield, bearing the remains of some arms; by some taken to be the figure
of a gauntlet; but as it is generally believed one of the Bertrams formed this
hermitage, so it is probable this shield (the remains of which seem to
correspond therewith) bore the Bertrams' arms, Or, an orl, azure. The Bertrams
were an ancient family in this country: they held great possessions under the
savor of William the Conqueror, with whom Sir Richard Bertram; a Norman
Knight, came over to England. He had in marriage, as a royal ward, Sibel, the
daughter and heiress of the Mitford family. Sir William his son obtained his
possessions of Mitford to be created a Barony by King Henry I. He married Alice
the daughter of Sir William Merley, by whom he had issue two sons. This Sir
William was, or Osbertus Colutarius, under his grant, the founder of Brinkburn
Priony, afterward described.


On the left hand of the altar, a window is formed in the partition of the
apartments, divided by two mullions, the summit of each light or division
ornamented with work formed of sections of circles, like those seen in
cathedrals of the tenth century. From the chapel we entered an inner apartment,
by a neat door-case, over which is sculptured a shield, with the crucifixion
and several instruments of torture. At the east end of this inner apartment, is
an altar like that in the chapel, lighted by the last-described window, and
through which the person kneeling at the inner altar, could view the cenotaph
in the chapel: this apartment is about five feet wide and nine paces in length:
here is also a nich or basin for holy water. On the northern side of this inner
chamber, a recess is cut in the rock, of size sufficient to hold the couch of a
person of middling stature. I have seen several of the like form, alcoved
above, and a sole about two feet above the level of the floor to hold the
mattress and bedding of the Recluse. This recess is so placed, that whilst I sat
therein to make my notes, by a nich cut slantwise in the partition wall which
separates the two apartments, I had a view of the cenotaph and effigies
thereon. The nich seemed calculated for this very purpose; being cut through
the wall assant, it could not be conceived intended to convey the light. By
some it has been imagined to be designed for confession, but it is my sentiment
that the Hermit was priest and penitent in one; and that he had devised those
apertures, that the effigies should be constantly in his sight. In this inner
apartment, is a small closet cut in the side wall to the north: from this
interior chamber is a doorway leading to an open gallery, having a prospect up
the river; but by the falling of some of the rock above, this part is greatly
damaged. It is said by old people, that the roof was supported by a fine
pillar, and formed a small piazza cloister or open gallery -- such galleries
are seen in very ancient mansions, in the center of the front: one is yet
perfect in the remains of Bradley Hall, in the county of Durham, the mansion of
the eldest branch of the family of Bows, built, as it is presumed, soon after
the conquest.

From these cells, through a neat doorway, there are winding stairs cut in the
rock, leading to its summit, supposed to conduct to the Hermit's olatory or
garden. A channel is ingeniously formed on the steps to carry off the water.

It seems evident that the original hermitage consisted of no more than the
apartments hewn in the rock, the inner one being the dewlling place, and the
little cloister the summer seat, facing westward, and commanding a beautiful
view up the river Coquet, which here forms a fine curve, in extent near half a
mile, on this side bordered by rocks, on the other by cultivated lands, of an
easy inclination; on the extremity stands a pretty farmhold, to terminate the
sequestered rural prospect. The style of architecture adopted in this hermitage
is of the Saxon Gothic, which proves its antiquity. In the postscript to the
poem of the Hermit of Warkworth, the author asserts, that the memory of the
first Hermit was held in such regard and veneration by the Percy family, that
they afterward maintained a chantry priest, to reside in the hermitage and
celebrate mass in the chapel; whose allowance, uncommonly liberal and
munificent, was continued down to the dissolution of the monasteries; and then
the whole salary, together with the hermitage and all its dependencies,
reverted back to the family; having never been endowed in mortmain. On this
account we have no record which fixes the date of the foundation, or gives any
particular account of the first Hermit. The patent is extant, which was granted
to the last Hermit in 1532, by the sixth Earl of Northumberland. Henry Earl of
Northumberland, etc. Know you that, etc. Have geven and granted, and by these
presents do gyve and grant unto the said Sir George (Lancastre) mine
armytage, belded in a rock of stone, within my park of Warkworth, in, etc. in
the honor of the blessed Trynete, with a yearly stipende of twenty merks by
yet (now 100l.) from the feast of Seint Michell tharchangell last past, before
the date hereof yerly during the natural lyve of the said Sir George. and also
I the said Earl have geven and granted, etc. unto the said Sir George
Lancaster, the occupation of one little gresground of mine called Cony garth,
nygh adjoynynge the said Harmytage, only to his only use and proufit, winter
and sumer, during the said term: the garden and orteyard belongyng the said
armytage; the gate and pasture of twelf kye and a bull, with their calves
s^kyng; and two horses going and beying within my said park of Warkworth,
winter and somer. One draught of fish every fondaie in the year A great Salmon
Fishery.
to be drawn fornenst the said armytage, called the Trynete draught: and twenty
lods of fire wode to be taken of my wodds, called Shilbotell wode, during the
said term. The said stipend of XX merks by year to be taken and perceived
yerly of the rent and ferme of my fishing of Warkworth, by th^ands of the
fermour or fenmours of the same for the time being yerly, at the times there
used and accustomed, by evyn portions. In wytnes whereof to the^ my letters
patentes, I the said Earl have set the seal of mine arms: Yeven undre my
sygnet, at my Castle of Warworth, the third day of December, in the XXIIIth
yer of the reign of our Sovereygn Lord King Henry the Eight."
The author of the poem in this postscript adds, After the perusal of the above
patent, it will perhaps be needless to caution the reader against a mistake
some have fallen into, of confounding the hermitage near Warkworth, with a
chantry founded within the town itself, by Nicholas de Farnham, Bishop of
Durham, in the reign of King Henry III. who appropriated the church of Branxton
for the maintenance there of two Benedictine Monks from Durham. That small
monastic foundation is indeed called a cell by Bishop Tanner; but he must be
very ignorant, who supposes that by the word cell, is necessary to be
understood a hermitage; whereas it was commonly applied to any small conventual
establishment, which was dependant on another. As to the chapel belonging to
this endowment of Bishop Farnham, it is mentioned as in ruins in several old
surveys of Queen Elizabeth's time; and its site not far from Warkworth church,
is still remembered. A Cell of two Benedictine Monks from Durham, for whose
maintenance here Nicholas de Farnham, Bishop of Durham, who died A. D. 1257.
appropriated the church of Brankeston, which was confirmed by Walter de
Kirkham, his successor.

Vide Angl. Sacr. Tom. 1. p. 738.

Tanner.
But that there was never more than one priest maintained, at one and the same
time, within the hermitage, is plainly proved, (if any further proof be
wanting) by the following extract from a survey of Warkworth, made in the year
1567, viz. There is in the park also one house hewyn within one cragge, which
is called the harmitage chapel: in the same there haith been one preast keaped,
which did such godly services as that time was used and celebrated. The
mantion house is now in decay: the closes that apperteined to the said
chantrie is occupied to his Lordships use.

It appears to me, that the Monks who came here in an age in which the
severities of a religious life were relaxing, founded the good warm kitchen of
mason-work at the foot of the rock, adapted to indulgencies unknown to the
original inhabitant. The form of the doors and windows are of a much more
modern mode than those above; the windows of the hermitage have had no
iron-grating.

After wandering in this sweet sequestered vale, so singularly calculated for
contemplation, and adapted to a mind fond of serious reflections, till the
decline of day warned us of the necessity of our departure, we returned to
Warkworth, from whence we had a view of

COQUET ISLAND,
little more than a mile from the main land, and about a mile in circumference.
Here are the remains of a Cell of Benedictine Monks, which was subordinate to
Tynemouth Priory. After the dissolution, it was granted to the Earl of Warwick,
This little island is said by Bid, to be "Monachorum coetibus insignis." in
St. Cuthbert's time, about A. D. 680. Here was, till the dissolution, a small
house of Benedictine Monks, Cell to Tinmouth, as parcel of which priory, 4
Edward VI. this island was granted to John Earl of Warwick.

Tanner. Cuthbertus Coquedam venit, ubi Aelfledam Ecgfridi regis sororem,
convenit. Qui, ascensa cum fratribus navi, venit ad Insulam, quae Coquedi flu.
ostio praejacens, ab codem accepit cognomen, and ipsa monachorum coetibus
insignis.

Bid. Lel. Col. vol. 2. p. 158. Tinemuthe.

Henricos, heremita Coketensis Insulae, ibidem sepultus.

Lel. Col. v. 3. p. 43.
and is now part of the possessions of the Duke of Northumberland. This is a
much more comfortable recess than St. Cuthbert's on the Farn Island: rabbits
abound here, and pit coal was wrought before Leland's time. There is nothing
memorable in history relative to this place, but its capture by the Scots in
the reign of King Charles I. when it was garrisoned with 200 men, and defended
with seven pieces of ordnance.

We took our rout to

FELTON,
a village on the banks of Coquet. The scenes near this place are romantic and
beautiful; fine rocks and hanging woods form the margin of the winding river,
whilst on every side lies a rich cultivated country. At this place the Barons
of Northumberland, Lord Eustace being one, did homage to Alexander King of
Scotland: to chastise which defection, King John levied a great army, and in
1216, marching northward, made horrid devastations: Felton was reduced to ashes.

This was one of the dependent manors of the barony of Mitford, and passed
through the successive possessions of Bertrams, Pembrokes, Athols, Percys,
Scropes, and Lysles, and afterward of the Widdringtons, from whom the present
owner, Mr Riddell, derives his title, in right of his Lady. The church stands
on the southern side of the river, and is dedicated to St. Michael. Mr Riddell
has a seat-house at the west end of the village. Over the door of the Vicarage
House is the following inscription.

A
1683
Has Aedes
Posuit
Robertus Henderson
Trinitatis Colleg. Cantab.
Tempore Barrowni, tempore Newtoni
Socius:
Hujus et ecclesiae
Non indignus Vicarius.
Pietatis ergo posuit
Hoc patri filius testimonium
1758.



Nigh this place was the Priory of Gyson or Gisness, founded by Richard Tyson.
The Abbey of Alnwick had Gyson or Gisness annexed to it by Eustace Fitz John,
to hold in pure alms with all its privileges and endowments, a moiety of the
tithes, and two bovates of land at Gyson, the church of Halge, etc. In the
Lincoln Taxation amongst the Temporalities, there is "Priorissa de Gwysnes in
archidiaconatu Northumbriae, LXX l. IVd. And cart. 35. Edward I. n. 35. Rex
confirmat abbati et conventui de Alnwico communiam in tota mora et pastura de
Edelingham, ad omnia averia sua, tam de domo de Alnwyk et grangiis suis, quam
de domo de Gysnes," but more of this house I cannot learn.


We visited the ruins of

BRINKBURN PRIORY, BRINKBURN
depiction of Brinkburn Priory
situated in a deep vale, on a small peninsula formed by the river Coquet,
overlooked by steep hills and craggy rocks on every hand; in so much, that on
our approach by the ancient causeway, the first view we had of it, within the
distance of 150 yards, was from such an eminence, and so immediately above it,
that we looked into the interior parts of the ruins. This is the most
melancholy and deep solitude, chosen for a religious edifice, I ever yet
visited. A Priory of Black Canons, founded temp. Henry I. by Osbertus
Colutarius, upon a piece of ground which was given him by William Bertram. This
house was under the patronage of St Peter; about the time of the dissolutie
consisted of 10 religious, who had the yearly income of 68l. 19s. 1d. Dugd.
77l. Speed. It was granted to John Earl of Warwick, 4 Edward VI.

Vide in Mon. Angl. Tom. 2. Cartas Will Bertram primi advoc. Will de Guaren com
Northumbriae, pro salina apud Werkworth; et Henrici com. Northumb. pro eadem:
Cart 43 Henry III. pro cix acris terrae in Evenewode, commun socialum in
Turbaria de Glantley, vasto de Framelington, etc.

Tanner. Richardus Was witness to H. Pudsey's confirmation of certain donations
to the Nuns of Newcastle. Will Hogestone was the last Prior.

An. 1553. Here remained in charge 13s. 4d. in annuities.

Edward Hoton and Edward Long. Canonici Regulares Eccl. de domo conventual de
Brenkeburne accoliti Ord. S. Augustini die Sabbi qua cantatur ossic: Miss
scitientes Mar. X. 1496.

R. Fox, p. 12. Ricus Epus 27. d. Feb. 1500 concessit Edw. Hoton, Edw. Long,
Rob. Watson, and Ryco Lyghton can. Reg. Ecclie covent de Brenkeborn Lr.
demissor. ad oes tam minores qui Majores etia Presbyteratq. ord. etc.

R. Fox, p. 36. Will Gray Can. regularis domus Conventul de B. ordinis Sci Ang.
Pbr ordinat pennult Mar. 1499.

R. Fox, p. 20. Matheus Swan ad titlm monij. de B. ord Pbr. Mar. 8. 1532

Tunstal, p. 11. Oswald Mashione ord. Pbr. Apr. 12. 1532.

Ib. p. 12. Brinkburn Curates.

Edm. Willy Cur. ib. Jan. 29. 1577. Hum. Hutton Cur. oc. Feb. 13. 1583. Bp.
Vis. Jul. 30. 1578. Bp. Vis. 3 July. 1579. Randal's Manuscripts.



The building is in the cathedral form; the body is 22 yards in length and 13
breadth, without much ornament, and composed of a durable stone. The walls are
almost entire; the great tower is very perfect: there are some remains of the
dormitory, now converted into a cellar. Mr Gross observes, that these ruins
exhibit one among the many instances wherein circular and pointed arches occur
in the same building, and that in parts manifestly constructed at the same
time; which shows, that about the period of its erection, there was a kind of
struggle between the ancient mode or Saxon, and what is called Gothic
architecture; in which neither style then thoroughly prevailed. The upper range
of windows in this church are all circular; those immediately under them are
pointed. Two doors, one on the north, the other on the south, have circular
arches, (of various members, falling back, supported on pilasters) richly
adorned with variety of Saxon ornaments, particularly that on the north, which
has among others the heads of animals. These are generally deemed the most
ancient decorations of that style. The great tower has four pointed arches, and
others of the same shape are supported by massy octagonal pillars in the body
of the church. There have been burials here as late as the year 1745. At the
east end, and in the north and south crosses, were chapels; in one of which are
diverse fragments of coffins and human bones. On the whole, though this
building, except about the doors, is remarkably plain, it has a sober and
solemn majesty, not always found in buildings more highly decorated. Part of
this, perhaps, it may owe to its romantic situation, which is the most proper
in the world for retirement and meditation. Near the southwest angle of the
church is a house, seemingly built out of the offices of the monastery. There
are no monuments or inscriptions that we could discover: the whole of the
little plain on this peninsula is occupied by the church and the priory, the
latter now converted into a farm-house and garden.

This priory was founded by Osbertus Colutarius, under the grant of Sir William
Bertram, for Black Canons, or Canons regular of St. Austin, in the reign of
King Henry I. and by him and his heir richly endowed. Thornhaugh, Ferderhaugh,
Papwithhaugh, Heley, and over Heley, with the woods belonging to them. Also a
wood east of Heley, extending from Linckburn to the river Coquet; together with
20 fishes out of Coquet fishery. Roger the founder's grandson gave thereto 140
acres in his wastes of Evenwood, with a large share of wastes near Framlington;
also liberty to cut timber out of his woods for necessary uses, and the
privilege of killing game. Prince Henry of Scotland, Earl of Northumberland,
gave to it a salt-work at Warkworth. The Warrens gave thereto half of the manor
of Nethertyrwit, and the appropriations and advowsons of Horsley and Felton.

Wallis, Gross, etc.
The church was dedicated to St. Peter. The Monks were brought from the
monastery of De Insula: William Hogeston was the last Prior. In the year 1477,
on the 20th September, being the fourth year of the pontificate of William
Dudley, LXVI s. viij d. was paid to the Prior of Brinkburn, the Bishop's
Suffragan, proregardo suo. E. Roll. Dudley.
At the time of suppression of religious houses there were ten Canons here, and
the revenue was estimated by Dugdale at 68l. 19s. 1d. and by Speed at 77l. In
the fourth year of King Edward the Sixth's reign, it was granted to the Earl of
Warwick, but soon after came to the Fenwicks of Fenwick Tower; the last male
branch of which family was George Fenwick, Mr Wallis has the following anecdote
of this personage. In the reign of King Charles I. it belonged to Colonel
George Fenwick, in the service of the parliament, and governor of Berwick upon
Tweed. Cromwell, on taking Edinburgh, 1650, made him governor of that place. He
summoned the governor of Hume Castle to surrender to Cromwell. The governor
answered he knew not Cromwell, and for his castle it was built upon a rock. The
ordnance playing against it, he sent Fenwick these verses.

I William of the wastle
Am now in my castle;
And aw the dogs in the town
Shan'd garre me gang down.
Breaches were made in his castle, and many rich goods spoiled. Gallant William
was forced to surrender: the soldiery were ordered to share his goods, except
some furniture and bedding for the accommodation of his lady.

H was member for Berwick, and one of the Parliament Commissioners to treat
with the Scots. He was one of the 96 members not suffered by Oliver to sit in
his packed parliament, 1656.


Esquire whose daughter and heir Elizabeth married Roger Fenwick of Stanton, Esquire
one of her descendants, William Fenwick of Bywell, Esquire is the present
proprietor. Gross.


Mr Wallis says (but from what authority I know not) that the bell of this
church was removed to the cathedral at Durham.

Ralph Lord Graystock, at the instance of Johanna his mother, gave the
impropriation and advowson of Long Horsley to this priory, in the 8th year of
the reign of King Richard II. The convent in return agreed, that she and her
heirs, Lords of Morpeth, for ever should have the nomination of one Canon
there: and Allan son of John de Prestwick was the first nominee under that
power.

We passed by

NETHER WITTON,
the modern seat of the Thorntous, now that of Walter Trevelyan, Esquire by
marrying Margaret daughter of the late James Thornton, Esquire -- the tower built
by Roger Thornton about the fourteenth century now totally in ruins. The
country on every hand is rich and beautiful. Roger Thornton, the celebrated
patron of Newcastle upon Tyne.

Sir Roger married Elizabeth, daughter of John Lord Greystock, Baron of
Morpeth, Sheriff of Northumberland 29 and 36 King Henry VII. Roger 6 King
Edward VI. Sir Nicholas whose estate was sequestered by parliament, 8th Nov.
4th King Charles II. 1652. James who left two daughters and coheiresses.
Wallis.


From the road we had a view of

STANTON,
a seat of the younger branch of Fenwicks of Fenwick Tower. Sir Ra. de Fenwick,
High Sheriff of Northumberland, 7th King Henry VIII.

Ralph 6 King Edward VI. Richard 10th Queen Elizabeth. William 14th Char. I.
Roger mentioned in Brinkburn. John mentioned in Brinkburn.
Wallis.


LONG WITTON,
the modern and pleasant seat of the Swinburn family, was our next object,
commanding a fine prospect over the rich country which surrounds it. Near it
are Thurston wells, of medicinal virtues, but little known. Remains of the
Hermin-street, or, as it is vulgarly called, the Devil's Causeway, are to be
traced at some little distance.

We observed the tower of Hartburn, but did not quit our road to visit it,
though greatly tempted by the agreeable descriptions given us of the walks of
Hartburn Wood.

We arrived at

BOLHAM,
a small village of some antiquity, being the ancient residence of Sir Walter
de Bolham, to whom it was granted by King John; from the Bolhams it came to the
family of Raimes in the time of King Edward III. and as appears by the escheats
of the several reigns of King Richard II. King Henry IV. King Henry VI. Queen
Elizabeth, and King Charles I. remained in that family for many generations. We
inquired after a camp before described to us, of an oblong figure, 120 yards
long and 80 broad, fortified with a vallum and double trench, having a raised
pass leading to it: It appears to be Roman. From the Manuscripts of Roger Gale,
Esquire. Extract of a Letter from Mr John Warburton to Roger Gale, Esquire 5 January,
1717/^
As I was well assured from the authority of Mr Camden, (for I want languages
to derive words) that Clenoventa was on the banks of the Went, or Wentsbeck, in
Northumberland; I carefully examined all places from its source, 'till it falls
into the sea, that had the least appearance of antiquity, as likewise those
upon the river Glen, Bowent, and Alne, (viz.) Anterchester, Yevrin, (which is
Bedes ad Gebrin) Milfield, (Bede's Melmin) Brampton, where Mr Camden in his
first edition of the Britannia placed Bremenium, but could never satisfy myself
until I discovered the Devils Causeway, and found Thorntons standing thereon,
which though at present but an inconsiderable village, shows the Vestigia in it
of a remarkable town in former times: a high ridged military way runs through
the middle of it, and a square platform joins to it, both which are evidently
Roman.

I had once made choice of Bolham for the ancient Glanoventa, which is situated
upon an eminence opposite to Thornton on the other side of the Wentsbeck, where
there are likewise considerable remains of antiquity; but on better
consideration found that to have been of the Saxons foundation. Why of Saxon
foundation? Bolham might have been the town of Glenoventa, and Th^rton a Tarris
or Castelliam to it. Thor^ton, by Mr Warbarton's map, is at least two miles
north from Bolham. See note to Mr Warburton's letter of 21st Nov. 1717.

R. G.


About two miles south of this Thornton, close by the military way lately
mentioned, are two large stones, standing on their end like those at
Burrowbridge, but not so big, and betwixt them a tumulus, which I was at the
expense of opening, and in it found a stone coffin, about three feet in length,
two in breadth, and two in depth, which was black on the inside with smoke, and
had in it several lumps of glutinous matter, which my workmen would needs have
to be pieces of the dead hero's flesh. It was covered over with two flat
stones, and not above a yard in depth from the summit of the tumulus, but had
neither inscription, bones, coins, urns, or other remarkable thing about it. I
opened another larger than this near Chester in the Wood, and found it much the
same.

Bedal, 5th Jan. 171^/^^. J. Warburton.



The Herman-street passes over Bolham Moor, in many places perfectly to be
distinguished. Near it is a tumulus, which was opened by Mr John Warburton, by
which two pillars of stone are placed, without any inscription: the personage
interred totally unknown. On the north-east side of the moor, is a rock
trenched round, containing the ruins of interior buildings; but its history
lost in the oblivion of ages. Near Bolham is a place called Gally Hill, the
place of execution belonging to the ancient Barons. Many places of that name
are to be seen near the baronial castles in this county.

We now took our rout by

MITFORD,
to Morpeth. The ancient castle of Mitford is a rude heap of ruins, situate on
a considerable natural eminence; defended toward the north and west by a deep
ditch, and on the south the river Wansbeck washes the foot of the castle hill:
the works appear to cover about an acre of ground. The principal part of this
fortress consisted of a circular tower raised upon an artificial mount, the
chief elevation from the natural level being effected by arches of stone and
vaults, which in ancient times were used as prisons or places for concealment:
the tower was defended by an outward wall, which ran parallel with it, at the
distance of about 10 feet. There is a very narrow prospect from this eminence,
the vale is so shut in on every side. What other erections were within the
walls of this fortress cannot be traced, the ruins are so confused, and most of
them covered with grass.

It is presumed this castle was built before the conquest; the first owner and
its date are not known.

At the time of the conquest, it was the possession of Sir John Mitford, whose
only daughter and heir, Sibille, was given in marriage by the Conqueror to Sir
Richard Bertram, a Norman Knight, by whom he had two sons, William and Roger.

William succeeded to the manor and castle of Mitford, and by the grant of King
Henry I. it was created a Baronage. He married Alice the daughter of Sir
William Merley, of Morpeth. His son Roger, desirous of adding greater
improvements to Mitford, paid a fine of 50 marks to King Henry II. for a weekly
market at his town of Mitford.

Roger Bertram, Sir Richard Bertram, a Norman Knight. Sir William Sir Roger Sir
William, Ob. 8th King John Sir Roger, Ob. 26, King Henry III. Roger

a lineal descendant, having joined with the northern Barons in the 17th year
of the reign of King John, the Flemish troops commanded by that inhuman ravager
in his northern depredations, seized this castle, and destroyed the town of
Mitford with fire and sword. A little higher the river Wentsbeck falls into the
sea. It runs by Mitford, which was burnt down by King John and his Rutars, when
they so miserably wasted this country, that age called those foreign
auxiliaries and freebooters Rutars, who were brought out of the low countries,
and other places, to King John's assistance, by Falques de Brent and Walter
Buc; which Rutarii or Ruptarii are not only mentioned by our Historians in the
reign of King John, but before his time also in the reign of Henry II. and
after it under Henry III. By all the accounts which we have of them, it appears
they were mercenary German troops. Now, in the High Dutch, Rot (whence our
English Rout) is a company of soldiers; Rotten or Rottiren to muster. That from
hence we are to fetch the true original of the word, we are sufficiently taught
by Will. Newbrigensis, who lived and wrote his History in the times of these
Rutars. This was formerly the barony of William Bertram, whose line soon failed
in Roger his grandson; the three coheirs being married to Norman Darcy, I.
Penbury, and William de Elmeley.

Gibson's Camden.
The next year, probably whilst the castle remained in the King's custody, it
was besieged by Alexander King of Scotland, as is mentioned in Leland's
Collectanea, from a chronicle called Historia Aurea. Whether it was taken or
not, is not mentioned.

The barony of Mitford was given by the Crown to Philip de Ulcotes; but upon
the King's demise, Bertram found means to make his peace with King Henry III.
and for a fine of 100l. obtained a restitution of his lands, and afterward
grew into so much esteem with him, that he granted, on the payment of 10 marks,
that his annual fair at Mitford should last eight days instead of four.

His successor, Roger Bertram, was one of the insurgents at Northampton, in the
reign of King Henry III. where he was taken prisoner, and his honor and castle
of Mitford, with all his other lands, were seized for the King's use. The
castle was given by King Edward I. to Eleanor Stanour, the wife of Robert de
Stoteville.

In the year 1316, There be ruins of a Castle longing to the Lord Borow, at
Mydford, on the sowth side of Wansbeke, iiii miles above Morpeth. It was beten
down by the King. For one Ser Gilbert Midleton robby'd a Cardinal cominge
out of Scotland, and fled to his Castle of Midford.

Lel. Itin. v. 7. p. 76. Anno D. 1317. Duo Cardinales Gaucelinus sanctorum
Marcellini and Petri Presbyter Cardinalis and Lucus de Ilisco S. Mariae in via
lata, Diaconis Cardinalis, dum cum Ludovico, ut ejus creationi interessent,
versis Dunelmum procederent, inter Fery and Wottoun per Gillertum de Midleton
et ejus accomplices depraedati sunt. Ludovicus electus Episcopus Dunelmensis, and
Henricus frater suus ad Castrum de Metforde adducti. Mitforde Castellum non
fuit id temporis (ut quidem volunt) drutum.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 335. Alexander King of Scotts, son to King Willliam, did
enter ynto England, and did much despite to King John. He assegid the Castle
of Mitteford and Norham, and took homages of diverse nobil men of Northumberland
and the count of York; wherefore King John after destroyed much of their lands,
and bet down Morpeth Castle.

Ibd. vol. 1. p. 535.
this castle was in the possession of one Gilbert Middleton, a Freebooter, who
(says Stowe) after many injuries done to the priory of Tynemouth and other
places, was taken here by Ralph Lord Greystock He was soon after poisoned at
Gateshead by some of Middleton's confederates.
and others, and carried to London, and there executed. In the year 1318, it
was taken by Alexander King of Scotland, who dismantled it, and spoiled most of
its fortifications.

The entire barony of Mitford was then the property of Adomer de Valence, Earl
of Pembroke. By the escheats of the 17th King Edward II. it appears this castle
was in ruins, having been destroyed by the Scots.

This Earl seemed to have a divine interdict impending over him, and the
immediate vindictive hand of Providence to be upon him and his posterity, for
his atrocious deeds. He was a tool to his Prince, and servilely submitted to
the mandates of the Crown, contrary to the dictates of humanity, honor, and
justice. He sat in judgment on Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and impiously
acquiesced in his sentence. He was a chief instrument in apprehending the
famous Scotch patriot, Wallace of Craiggy, in 1305, accomplishing his capture
by corrupting his bosom friends, and by the treachery of his most intimate
associates, and those in whom he placed his utmost confidence, Sir John
Monteith and others of infamous memory. Adomer on his bridal day was slain at a
tournament, held in honor of his nuptials, and left a wife, at once a maiden,
bride, and widow. She was so affected by the loss of her husband, that she
resigned herself entirely to a religious and contemplative life, and bestowed
most of her fortune in acts of piety and charity, raising her faithful friends
above want and indigence, and erecting noble structures in honor of religion
and learning with liberal endowments. Denney Priory, in Cambridgeshire, for
Nuns of the order of St Clare, being of her foundation, endowed with the manor
of Stroud, in Kent, and other lands; also Pembroke Hall, in Cambridge, mostly
finished about the year 1347, and endowed with lands for a warden and fellows,
some of whom she lived to see preferred to the highest dignities in England, in
the course of 40 years or upwards. She died 15th March, 51st of King Edward
III. and was interred in her own Priory of Denney, under a marble monument,
between the two choirs of the Nuns and Seculars. She survived her husband 61
years.

Wallis.
It is said, that for several generations of this family, a father never was
happy enough to see his son; the proscribed parent being snatched off by the
hand of Death, before the birth of his issue. Holling Chron. From Adomer unto
John de Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, 1390.


The unfortunate Lady of Adomer de Valence, was in her own right Baroness of
Veisser and Montenact.

This barony afterward came to the Earl of Athol, Inquisition taken at
Newcastle upon Tyne the 20th of March, in the first year of the reign of Edward
II.
by Johanna his wife, of the Pembroke family, from whom, by female heirs, it
passed to the Percys; Inquisition taken at Newcastle upon Tyne 10th October,
eleventh King Henry VI.
by two coheiresses it came to the families of Brough and Gray; and from Leland
it appears, that in the reign of King Henry VIII. this castle and manor were in
the possession of Lord Brough. In the 4th year of Queen Mary, Lord Brough
granted these possessions to Cuthbert Mitford and Robert his son for ever, a
collateral branch of the ancient owner before the conquest, reserving the site
of the castle and the royalties; which coming afterward to the Crown, were
granted to the abovementioned Robert Mitford, Robert Mitford married Jane
daughter of John Metford, of Seghill. Had issue three sons and four daughters.

Cuthbert married Mary daughter of Chapter Wharton, of Offerton. They both died on
one day at Mitford. Robert married Philadelphia daughter of Humphrey Wharton,
of Gillingwood, Yorkshire. Humphry married Frances daughter of Sir George Vane,
of Longnewton, Durham. Robert High Sheriff of Northumberland. 9 King William
III. A. D. 1697. Robert High Sheriff, 9 King George III. Bertram the present
proprietor.

in the reign of King Charles II.

The church of Mitford, with the impropriation and advowson, were granted by
King Edward I. to Lanercost Priory, in Cumberland. In this church is a tomb
with a rude effigy of one of the Bertrams, the inscription dated 7th October,
1622.

There was an Hospital at Mitford, dedicated to St. Leonard, founded by Sir
William Bertram, (who granted lands for founding Brinkburn Priory) and endowed
with lands for the maintenance of a Chaplain. By an inquisition taken in the
reign of King Edward III. it appeared that the Abbot of Newminster had
possessed himself of these lands; but King Richard II. obliged him to restore
them, and nominated John de Wenhings Chaplain. There was an ancient bridge over
the Wansbeck, between the church and castle, called Fouse Brig, or Fees Brig;
for the guarding of which on the eve and day of the Ascension, Walter de
Swinhoe held 40 acres of land in the manor of Mitford, as appears by the
escheats of the 51st of King Edward III.

On the banks of Wansbeck, was seated

THE ABBEY OF NEWMINSTER,
now destroyed to its foundations, and nothing left to denote its site, but a
part of one of the gateways leading into the abbey yard.

It was founded by Ralph de Merlay, Baron of Morpeth, and Julian his wife,
daughter of Cospatric Earl of Northumberland, in the reign of King Stephen,
1138, Eodem anno, id est, 1138, quidem vir potens in Northumbria cepit in sua
possessione apud castrum, quod dicitur Morpeth, monachus de Fontibus VIII No.
Januar. qui construxerunt caenobium, S. novum monasterium vocatum. Quibus hoc
ipso anno circa Epiphaniae diem Galfridus Episcop. Dunelmi, benedixit abbatem
Rodbertum, fanctum virum. Quos libenter fovit praedictus vir, scilicet
Ranulphus de Merley.

Lel. Col. vol. II. p. 362.
for Cisterfian Monks, Anno quinto a fundatione matris nostrae vir nobilis
Ranulphus de Merley fontes nostros visurus accessit, and postea in patrimonio
suo novum monasterium construit. Hic primus palms quem vinea nostra expandit.

Ib. vol. III. p. 106.
translated from Fountains, in Normandy, and was dedicated to the blessed
Virgin. Its endowments and revenues were very ample. The founder endowed it
with The Lordship of Ritton, and part of the woods of Witton, and all the vale
between Morpeth and Hebre, by the brook of Fullbeck to its fall into
Cottingburn, and by Cottingburn to its fall into Wansbeck.

Its several benefactors were Margery the Lady of the second Roger de Merley,
She gave three fisheries in the river Tyne. William Bertram, Baron of Mitford,
The fine vale between the Minster and Mitford. Peter son of John Vicar of
Mitford, Aldworth Grange. Everard de Ros, Baron of Wark, Sturton Grange. Robert
Bertram, Baron of Bothall, The estate called Forum. Sir Gilbert de Humfreville,
Baron of Prudhow, The moors of Chiviot, the granges of Felton, and Tollard, and
Turfhill pasture. Sir Walter Baron of Bolham, Newton Grange. Hugh Baron of
Bolbeck, and Theophania his wife, The villa of Rotheley. Robert de Greystock,
The manor and royalties of Kestern and Werehill, the demesnes of which they
bought of John de Kestern. Roger Baron of Warkworth, A salt work at Warkworth.
Henry Cemers, and Eda his wife, Scarplane Grange and an estate at Clifton. They
held Tritlington of the manor of Wark upon Tweed. Sir Richard Gubion, 20s.
yearly out of his mill of Shilvington. Sir Roger de Merley -- the like at
Stanton. Sir Robert de Fenwick, Two parts of his villa of Irdington, in
Cumberland. Allan Whitehead, Vicar of Tynemouth, and William Kell, Lands in
Stannington. John de Plesses, Mills of Stannington, and Lands thereto
appertaining. John de Mitford, Lands in Echwick. John Lord Greystock Restored
to them Common right at Stobbiford, given by their founder, and again taken
away by his heir. Sir Roger de Somerville, Impropriation and advowson of
Stannington; they also had the impropriation and advowson of Kirkwhelpington.


Roger de Thornson, Ralph Lord Greystock, John Lord Greystock, and Sir Ra.
Nevil, gave sundry sums to adorn the church.




The Abbot was summoned to the parliament at Carlisle by King Edward I. 1307.

The revenues of this abbey at the dissolution, were valued by Dugdale at 100l.
1s. 1d. and by Speed at 140l. 10s. 4d. The religious body at that time
consisted of 15. A qwartar of a mile out of the town, on the hithere side of
Wanspeke, was New Minster Abbay of White Monks; plesaunt watar and very fair
wood about it.

Lel. Itin. vol. 7. p. 75.


The site was granted by King James I. to the Brandling family, and it is now
the possession of Mr Ord of Fenham. Ranulph de Merlay and Julian his wife (who
was daughter of Cospatric Earl of Northumberland) built here, A. D. 1138, an
Abbey of Cistertian Monks from Fountains, to the honor of the blessed Virgin
Mary. It had at the surpression about 15 religious, and possessions of the
yearly value of 100l. 1s. 1d. Dugd. 140l. 10s. 4d. Speed. The site was granted
7 King James I. to Robert Brandling.

Vide in Mon. Angl. Tom. 800. annotatiunculas quasdam historicas deprima
fundatione ex Lel. Col. vol. 2. et Cod. ms. de origin fontanensis coenobii.
Cartas R. Hen. I. Ranulpho de Merlay, Ranulpi de Merlay Monachis, et Will. de
Merlai. Cart. 39. Hen. III. m. 3. confirm donationes Rogeri Bertram, Roberti de
Graystok, et Gilberti de Umfranville de Mereden divisa inter baronias de
Midford et Morpeth etc.

Ibid Tom. ii. p. 916, 917, 918, quaedam de fundatore et praecipius
benefactoribus abbatiae de Newminster ex Martyrologio ejusdem domus.

In Leland's Collect. v. 3. p. 106. notulam de fundatione.

In Bourn's History of Newcastle, p. 142. of six houses in Newcastle.

Registrum hujus Abbatiae ms. penes dom. Will. Howard de Naworth. Martyrologium
Abbatiae de Newminster quondam inter mss Cecilianos nunc in bibl. ducis Cantiae.

Collectanea ex registro et Martyrologio per Franc. Thynn ms penes Io. Anstis
arm.

Fin. div. com. 8 Joan n. 47. de commun. pastur. in foresta de Rouberi. Cart.
28. Hen. 3. m. 1. Cart. 36. Hen. 3. m. 12. Cart. 55 Hen. 3. m. 5 et 6. Cart.
18. Ed. 1. n. 63. de lib. war. in Horton, Filton, Newton, West et est Ritton,
Kestern, Ulgham, et Rothely. (Northumberland) Plac. apud Westminster. 20. Ed. 1. rot.
117 de cclvii acris etc. in Rocheby. Plac. in com. Northumb. 21. Ed. 1. assis.
rot. 6. dorso, de ten. in Bolum. Rot. 13. et 18 dorso. quo. war. rot. 3. dorso.
Cart. 35. Ed. 1. n. 34.

Pat. 8. Ed. 2. p. m. 5. Pat. 10. Edw. 2. p. 1. m. 7. vel. 8. de limittibus
terrarum dominicalium abbatiae. Pat. 4. Ed. 3. p. 2. m. Cart. 4. Edw. 3. n. 85.
Claus. 4. Ed. 3. m. 37. pro advoc. eccl. de Stainington. Pat. 8. Ed. 3. p. 2.
m. 18 pro eccl. de Whelpinton. Pat. 22. Ed. 3. p. 3. m. 22 vel 23. Pat. 38. Ed.
3. p. 2. m. 20 vel 21.

Pat. 16. Ric. 2. p. 8. m. 1.

Tanner.


The vale of Wansbeck, from Mitford to Morpeth, is narrow and deep, but the
winding banks of the stream are woody and beautiful.

Not far distant from Mitford, stands

MOLLESTON,
formerly the possession of a collateral branch of Mitfords, who afterward
regained the baronial inheritance of Mitford. It was granted, in the reign of
King Edward III. by Strabolgy Earl of Athol, to Sir John de Mitford, a lineal
descendant of Matthew de Mitford, younger brother of Sir John de Mitford, whose
daughter Sibille married Sir Richard Bertram. Sir John De Mitford. Matthew Sir
John 43 King Edward III. William High Sheriff of Northumberland 5 and 6 King
Henry V. died 1st King Henry VI. John A benefactor to the Abbey of Newminster,
died 35 King Henry VI. John Bertram Gawen Cuthbert One of the Commissioners for
Division of the Middle Marches 6th King Edward VI. Robert
Wallis.


We approached

MORPETH,
which we made our common resting place, after several little excursions into
the adjoining country. It is a pleasant well built town, seated on the northern
banks of the river Wansbeck, in a warm and sheltered vale, surrounded with a
rich cultivated country; and though without any considerable degree of trade,
wears the countenance of opulence. Morpet, a market town, is XII long miles
from New Castle. Wansbeke, a praty ryver, rynnithe thrwghe the side of the
town. On the hither side of the river is the principal church of the town.
On the same side is the fair castle stondinge upon a hill, longinge with the
town to the Lord Dacres of Gilsland. The town is long and metely well
builded with low howsys, the streets pavyd. It is far fayrar town then
Alnwicke.

Lel. Itin. vol. VII. p. 53.
It is a prescriptive borough, governed by two Bailiffs and seven Burgesses,
annually elected out of the free burgesses being inhabitants and paying scot
and lot. In the first year of the reign of Queen Mary, 1553, it began to send
members to parliament, who are now elected by the free burgesses, and are
returned by the Bailiffs. The town's arms are argent, barry of six, azure and
gules, over all a castle tripple crowned within a bordure azure seem de
Martlets.

Brown Willis. This Borough did not send Members to Parliament till the first
year of Queen Mary, 1553.

Annis. Mary Parliament. 1553 John Watson, Gent. William Ward, Gent. 1 p. at
Westminster. 1554 Thomas Beats, -- William Ward, 1 p. at Oxford. Ph. and
Mary, 1554 Henry Percy, Gent. Robert Ward, 1 and 2 p. at Westminster. 1555
Cuthbert Horsley -- Thomas Bates 2 and 3 p. at Westminster. 1557 Robert Whetely
-- Thomas Bates 4 and 5 p. at Westminster. Elizabeth. 1558 Thomas Bates, Gent.
1 p. at Westminster. 1562 William Ward, -- Arthur Welshe, Gent. 5 p. at
Westminster. 1571 Francis Gaudy, Esquire Nicholas Mynn, Esquire 13 p. at Westminster.
1572 George Bows, Knight. Richard Wroth, Gent. 14 p. at Westminster. George
Bows Knighted at Leith by Edward Seimore, E. Hertford. 1585 William Carey, Esquire
George Gifford, Esquire 27 p. at Westminster. 1586 Robert Carey, Esquire Anthony
Felton, Esquire 28 p. at Westminster. 1588 Robert Carew, Esquire Hen. Nowell, Esquire 31 p.
at Westminster. 1592 Edm. Boyer, Esquire Francis Tindal, Gent. 31 p. at
Westminster. 1597 Robert Printell, Esquire Thomas Carleton, Esquire 39 p. at
Westminster. 1601 George Savil, Esquire John Brown, Esquire 43 p. at Westminster.
James I. 1603 Chapter Perkins, Knight. John Hare, Esquire 1 p. at Westminster. 1614 Chapter
Perkins, Knight 12 p. at Westminster. 1620 Robert Brandling, Esquire John Robson,
de Morpeth, Clerk 18 p. at Westminster. A New Writ was ordered to elect in
Robson's place, because he was a Clergyman. 1623 William Carnaby, Knight.
Thomas Reynell, Esquire 21 p. at Westminster. William Carnaby of Halton Tower.
Charles I. 1625 Anthony Herbert, Knight. Thomas Reynell, Esquire 1 p. at
Westminster. 1625 Thomas Reynell, Knight. John Banks, Esquire 1 p. at Westminster.
1628 Thomas Reynell, Knight. John Banks, Esquire 3 p. at Westminster. 1640 Phil.
Mainwaring, Knight. Thomas Witherings, Esquire 15 p. at Westminster. 1640 John
Fenwick, Esquire William Carnaby, Knight 16 p. at Westminster.

Carnaby expelled, 26th August, 1642.

John Fiennes, Esquire George Fenwick, Esquire

Fenwick died 15th March, 1656.

N. B. These latter members came in the rooms of the first elected Burgesses,
on their deaths or being displaced, between 1640 and 1653.

Oliver Cromwell. 1653 1st p. at Westminster, 5th July, 1653. This parliament,
called the "Little Parliament," was convened by the Usurper, but no
Representatives for Cities or Boroughs, except London, were summoned to it.
1654 2d p. at Westminster, 3d September, 1654. No Burgesses returned for
Morpeth. 1656 3d p. at Westmister, 17th September, 1656. No Burgesses returned
for Morpeth. Richard Cromwell. 1658 Robert Delaval, Esquire Robert Mitford, Esquire p.
at Westminster. 27th Jan. 1658. The Convention Parliament, 25th April, 1660.
1660 Edward Lord Morpeth. George Downing, Knight p. at Westminster. Charles II.
1661 Edward Lord Morpeth. George Downing, Knight 13 p. at Westminster. 1678
Edward Lord Morpeth. E. Carlisle, 24 Feb. 1584.
George Downing, Bart. 31 p. at Westminster. 1679 George Downing, Bart. Dan.
Collingwood, Esquire 32 p. at Oxford. James II. 1685 Will. Pickering, Knight. John
Oglethorp 1 p. at Westminster. The Convention Parliament, 22d Jan. 1688. 1689
Roger Fenwick, Esquire Charles Lord Morpeth. p. at Westminster. William and Mary.
1689 Roger Fenwick, Esquire Charles Lord Morpeth E. of Carlisle, 23d April, 1692.
2 p. at Westminster. William III. 1695 Sir Hen. Bellasis, Knight. George
Newland p. at Westminster. Resolved, 9th March, 1695, that the right of
Election is only in the Bailiffs and Free Burgesses. School Sir Hen. Bellasis,
Knight. Hon. Phil. Howard 10 p. at Westminster. 1700 Sir John Delaval. Eman.
How 12 p. at Westminster. 1701 Sir John Delaval. Eman. How 13 p. at
Westminster. Anne. 1702 1st p. at Westminster. 1705 Sir Richard Sandford, Bart.
Of Houghill Castle, in the county of Westmoreland, Warden of the Mint.
Edm. Maine, Esquire 4 p. at Westminster. 1708 Sir Richard Sandford, Bart. Sir John
Bennet, Knight Sergeant at Law.
7 p. at Westminster. 1710 Sir Richard Sandford. Chapter Visc. Castlecomer 9 p. at
Westminster. 1713 Sir John Germanic, Bart. Of Drayton, Northamptonshire.
Oley Douglas, Esquire 12 p. at Westminster. George I. 1714 Charles Visc. Castle
Comber. Oley Douglas, Esquire was a petitioner with Thomas Renda, Esquire in the 1st p.
of King George I. but he withdrawing his petition, Lord Visc. Castlecomber made
his election for Rippon, and a new writ ordered March 26, 1717. George
Carpenter, Esquire a Colonel in the Guards was elected. George Carpenter, Esquire Henry
Lord Morpeth 1 p. at Westminster. Robert Fenwick, Esquire was a petitioner. 1722
George Carpenter, Esquire Henry Lord Morpeth 7 p. at Westminster. George II. 1727
George Carpenter, Esquire Carpenter, Lord Carpenter by death of his father, 10th
Feb. 1731, of Homme in the county of Hereford. Sir Thomas Robinson, Bart. of
Rookby, in the county of York, in his place, a Cornet in Wade's regiment.
Henry Lord Morpeth 1 p. at Westminster. Sir Thomas Robinson, Bart. 1734 Sir
Henry Liddell, Bart. Henry Lord Morpeth Earl of Carlisle by the death of his
father, 1st May, 1738.
7 p. at Westminster. A new writ ordered 9th May, 1738. Hen. Furnesse, of
Gunnersby-house, elected. Hen. Furnesse, Esquire. 1741 Sir Hen. Liddell, Bart.
Robert Ord, Esquire Of Petersham, in Surry, R. R. S.
14 p. at Westminster. Sir Hen. Liddell was created Baron of Ravensworth, 29th
June 1747, and was one of the Committee chosed by ballot to enquire into the
conduct of Robert E. of Orford, for 10 years past. 1747 James Visc. Limerick.
Robert Ord, Esquire 21 p. at Westminster. 1754 Thomas Duncomb, Esquire Duncomb, of
Duncomb Park, in the county of York, married Diana, sister to the Earl of
Carlisle.
Robert Ord, Esquire Ord succeeded Baron Idle as Chief Baron of the Exchequer of
Scotland, about 4th Oct. 1755.
30 p. at Westminster. George III. 1761 Thomas Duncomb, Esquire John Stewart Visc.
Gairlies 1 p. at Westminster. The Poll of Free Burgesses in No. 51, 28 March,
1761. Thomas Duncomb, Esquire 31 Lord Gairlies 26 John Ord 25 Major Midford 20
1768 Peter Beckford, Esquire Nephew of Will. Beckford, Esquire Alderman of London.
Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. Of Blagdon, county of Northumberland.
8 p. at Westminster. The Poll of Burgesses, 21 March, 1768. Peter Beckford,
Esquire 51 Sir M. W. Ridley, Bart 29 Francis Air, Esquire 26
F. Air had 12 mandamus votes. He petitioned against Sir M. W. Ridley. 23d
Feb. 1769. Sir M. W. Ridley was by the house voted duly elected, by a majority
of 122 against 26. 1774 Francis Air, Esquire Peter Delme, Esquire p. at Westminster.
The Poll of Burgesses, 14th October, 1774. Francis Air 162 Peter Delme 150
Hon. William Byron 140 Thomas Charles Big, of Little Benton 132


Hon. William Byron, petitioner, voted duly elected, 26th Jan. 1775, in the
room of Francis Air.


A weekly market is held on Wednesday, when there is exposed a profusion of
excellent provisions. It has the privilege of two yearly fairs, held on Holy
Thursday and Magdalen-day. King Edward I. by grant enlarged this Fair to three
days, on the eve, and on the festival of St Mary Magdalen, and the day
following. 9th May 13 Edw. I.
The marketplace is conveniently situated, near the center of the town, though
narrow enough for the great resort to it. An elegant Townhouse was built by
the Carlisle family in 1714, in which their manorial court is held, and also
the quarter sessions for the county of Northumberland. The structure is of
hewn-stone, with a piazza ornamented with rustic work, the superstructure
decorated with turrets, in a very good taste. The market cross is commodious,
built in 1699. by the Hon. P. Howard and Sir H. Bellasis. As the church is
distant about a quarter of a mile from the town, a tower is built near the
marketplace, containing a good ring of bells. Near the bridge is the county
gaol, a modern structure. King Edward VI. founded a Grammar School here, and
endowed it with the revenues of two dissolved chantries in Morpeth, and one at
Nether Witton. The school-house, with a neat chapel lately erected, stand on
the brink of the river, near the bridge, which leads to Newcastle: Extract from
the Antiquarian Repository, No. IX.
The Chantry founded at Morpeth, was situated on the north east of the bridge,
as you enter the town, very near the side of the river Wansbeck, in a beautiful
vale of wood and water, as most of the religious houses in the north are. It
was partly pulled down at the dissolution of the Monasteries, and remained in
that situation till the 6th year of King Edward VI. when a Grammar School was
founded here, and endowed with the whole estates, as appears by the Grant
annexed. The middle area to the west is entire, enlarging the windows, and
breaking convenient doors, for the original entrance to the west, is built up
with a window in the Belfrey. The north area is almost demolished, and many
houses built out of the materials on the ground; in a yard behind these houses
the ground plan may be traced with the greatest ease, which has been cruciform.
A very handsome modern-built Chapel, for the use of the town, was built some
years ago on the south, and the Grammar School is kept in the west part, which
is entire. I am well informed that some of the estates and revenues mentioned
in the Grant of King Edward VI. have been alienated from the good purposes of
the founder, are fallen at last into private property, and are so held to this
day.

Abstract of the Grant.
Edward the VIth, by the grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland
King, Defender of the Faith, and over the church of England and Ireland supreme
head: To all to whom these our present letters shall come greeting, Know ye,
that we, as well upon the humble petition of William Lord Dacre, Greystock, and
Gilsland, as of the Bailiffs and Burgesses of the town of Morpeth, in our
county of Northumberland, and many other of our subjects of the whole county
there adjoining, for founding and erecting a Grammar School there for the
instruction and education of youth, do of our special favor, etc. grant and
ordain, that from henceforth there shall be one Grammar School in the said town
of Morpeth, which shall be called the Free Grammar School of King Edward VI. to
be continued for ever. And we do by these Presents declare, that the said
School shall have one Master and Assistant. Know ye, that of our special favor
we have granted, of our free will and pleasure, to the Bailiffs and Burgesses
of the said town of Morpeth, in the county of Northumberland, all those two
late Chantries in Morpeth, in the said county, and all that late Chantry of St
Egidius, founded in the chapel of Witton, in the parish of Hartburn, in the
said county, with all their rights, etc. And all and singular our messuages,
lands, tenements, cottages, gardens, meadows, pastures, feedings, rents,
reversions, services, and hereditaments whatsoever, situate and being in
Morpeth and Nether Witton, and elsewhere in the said county, to the said late
Chantries belonging, which had been formerly granted or appointed for the
support of any of the Presbyters or Ministers formerly ministering in the said
late Chantries, or any of them; and also all and singular our messuages, lands,
etc. etc. situate and being in Morpeth aforesaid, and in Ponteland, Milburne,
Dorris Hall, High Callerton, Berwick Hill, Low Callerton and Dennington, or
elsewhere in our said county, which have been granted for the support of any
Presbyters or Ministers formerly ministering in Morpeth, for the support of the
School of Morpeth, or for the support of the Presbyter or Minister in
Ponteland, in the said county; and the reversions of all and singular the said
premises, in as ample manner to hold, as any of the Ministers of the late
Chantries, or any Master of the School in Morpeth, or any person whatever
formerly had occupied or enjoyed the same, as all and singular the said
premises have or ought to have come to our hands, by reason of any act passed
in our parliament, held at Westminster in the first year of our reign, amongst
other things made and provided concerning the dissolution and determination of
diverse Chantries, Colleges, Free Chapels, Gilds, and Fraternities, or ought to
remain in our hands, which messuages, lands, etc. etc. are only computed at the
clear yearly value of 20l. 10s. 8d. To hold the said messuages, lands, etc.
etc. to the said Bailiffs and Burgesses of Morpeth for ever, to hold of us our
heirs and successors, as of our manor of Estegrenewicke, in our county of Kent,
by fealty only of free soccage, yielding and paying to us, our heirs and
successors, yearly and every year, the sum of 10s. 8d. of lawful money of Great
Britain, to be paid at the feast of St Michael the Archangel, for all rents and
services and demands whatever. And we also give to the said Bailiffs and
Burgesses, the profits growing out of the same, from the feast of the
annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary last past, to the date hereof, without
fine or gift to us or our heirs and successors for the same. And further we
grant to our said Bailiffs and Burgesses, and the major part thereof, power
with the then Bishop of Durham to appoint Masters when necessary, to make
statutes and laws in writing for the government of the same, the salary, the
direction and management of the rents, etc. for the support of the said School
for ever. And we further empower our Bailiffs and Burgesses to take and receive
to them and their successors, or of any other person, manors, messuages, lands,
tenements, rectories, tithes, and other hereditaments whatsoever within the
kingdom of Great Britain, or elsewhere, within our dominions, so as they do not
exceed the yearly value of 20l. as well to support the said School as for the
support of the Bridge, or other necessary buildings in Morpeth, besides the
said messuages, lands, etc. etc. to the said Bailiffs and Burgesses, and their
successors aforesaid granted, the statute of Mortmain concerning lands and
hereditaments, or any other statute, act, or ordnance, had or provided to the
contrary. And it is our will and pleasure, that the said Bailiffs and Burgesses
have our letters patent duly made out and sealed, under our great seal of
England, without any fee or fine, great or small, to be made, paid, or given
for the same, in our Hanaper office or elsewhere.

In witness whereof we have caused these our letters to be made patent, at
Westminster, the 12th day of March, in the 6th year of our reign.

Signed Nel. Beaumont. E. Shawfeld.

Enrolled in the office of Richard Hochenson, Auditor of our Lord the King, in
the said county of Northumberland, 26th day of March, in the 6th year of our
Reign.

Statutes and Ordinances for this School were made by the Bailiffs and
Burgesses, and confirmed by the Right Reverend Father in God, William Lord
Bishop of Durham, the 7th day January, A. D. 1725, amongst which the following
are particularly worthy notice.

10 -- The Master shall be of the degree of Master of Arts.

11 -- The Usher shall be Bachelor of Arts.

13 -- They shall teach all Freemen and Brothers Children gratis.

14 -- That the Sons of all Tenants and Farmers, who have not a freehold estate
above the value of 20l. per annum, shall be taught for 20s. per annum; and the
Master and Usher shall ask no more.

Which Statutes and Ordinances were thus ratified.

I do hereby consent and approve of the abovesaid Statutes and Orders for the
Free Grammar School at Morpeth, containing in number 45, and do as much as in
me lies (as Visitor of the said School) ratify and confirm the same. Witness my
Hand and Episcopal Seal, this 12th day of February, Anno Dom. 1725. W. (LS)
Duresme. L.
Common Seal of the Corporation of Morpeth.


The Master's salary is near 100l. a year, the Usher's about 60l. a year.

The Sons of Freemen and Brothers of Morpeth are only entitled to be taught
gratis.

John Maxwell -- Ludi Mag. not. lic. oc. 1577. Nych. Rydley, sub. ipo
didascalus. not. lic. 1577. Bryan Henshaw, A. M. lic. Oct. 10. 1618. Oc. 28th
Nov. 1627. El. P. Balivos Burgeuses and Aldermanos. Steph. Jackson, A. B. lic.
(f. Usher) Aug. 18. 1683. -- Grover, A. M. Mordecai Carry, A. M. Scholar of
Trin. Col. Came. appointed Bishop of Clonfert in Ireland, Mar. 22. 1731. aft.
Bishop of Killala and Achonry, Dec. 20, 1735. Humph. Holden, M. A. 1732, by
promotion of Carry. Ob. Mar. 20. 1771. at Morpeth. John Loddington, B. A. Ush.
oc. 1740. res. 1751. for a Col. Live. in Norfolk, bred up at Eaton School. Fell.
of King's Col. Camb. presented to the R. of Hadescoe, co. of Norfolk by King's
Col. and to the R. of Toft, two small discharged Rectories. Thomas Barker, M.
A. Elec. Ush. June 21, 1752. -- Garthwaite. oc. Ush. Aug. 2. 1758. Thomas
Vaughan, M. A. oc. Ush. Aug. 12, 1762. William Sanderson, B. A. Ush. oc. Aug.
9. 1766. The Poll of the Voters in No. 138, Sep. 20, 1771, at the Town Hall.
William Holden, M. A. Curate of Morpeth 95 William Sanderson, M. A. Usher 43
William Holden, M. A. Elec. Sep. 20th, 1771, on the death of H. Holden his
father. Never licensed by the Bishop. Meanly learned. The Poll of the Voters in
No. 211, Apr. 24. 1772. William Sanderson. M. A. Ush. supported by Lord
Carlisle's int. 108 W. Walter, M A. Under Master of Newcastle School 103
William Sanderson Elect.
Several freemen brought from London to vote on this occasion.

Randal's Manuscripts.
the parochial church Antonius de Bek manerium de Aukeland cum capella and
Cameris suptuosissime construxit, capellanis in Capella in perpetuum servituris
ecclesiam de Morpath approprians. Sed eo mortuo Radulphus filius Gulielmi
dominus de Graistok patronatum illius ecclesiae per litem acquisivit, and sic
Capella indotata remansit.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 334.
is on the southern side of the river; a plain structure, containing nothing
remarkable but one inscription. In Obitum Henrici Graii nuper de
Novo Monasterio Armig. qui obiit ultimo
Die Martii Anno Domini 1597. Posuit
Thomas Gray, filius Primogenitus
Pietatis ergo.
Underneath are the Arms of the Greys of Chillingham, with their motto,
De bon Valoir.
Below are these Stanzas.

Conditus hic Jaceo quartus genitore Radulpho
Filius ex Graio milite fic jaceo.
Nupta fuit mihi Woddringt^nia chara Maria
Militis ac clari nata Johannis ea
Una dies partus nos, ut Baptismata Una
Junxit sic Una lex hymenea toro.
Annos bis Septem sociale federe juncti
Ruperunt tetrici vincula nostra Deae
Bis binos pueros mihi, tresque Lucina Puellos
Praebuit extincti pignora chara mei.

Opposite to the church is the Rectory-house, a handsome new building. W.
Turner, born at Morpeth, bred in Cambridge, was a general scholar, and very
zealous in the protestant religion, writing much in the defense thereof, and
much molested for the same by Bishop Gardener and others. After long
imprisonment he escaped and fled beyond the seas. At Ferrara in Italy he
commenced Doctor in Physic: he wrote an Herbal and a book of Physic for the
English gentry, besides several other Treatises. He died in Germany, in the
reign of Queen Mary, whose cotemporary and fellow confessor,

Thomas Gibson, born at Morpeth, wrote a book of Herbs, as also a Treatise,
entitled The Treasons of the Prelates since the Conquest.

England's Worthies. The great Antiquary J. Horsley, author of the Roman Antiq.
of Britain, ob. 1732, Pastor of a dissenting Congregation at Morpeth.

Randal's Manuscripts.
There was a chantry in this church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, but by whom
founded, or how endowed, is not known. John Anderson was Chaplain May 10th, 8th
of King Henry VII.

The baronial castle Morpeth castle stondy the by Morpith town, it is set on a
high hille, and about the hill is much wood. Town and castle belongs to
the Lord Dacres. It is well mayntayned.

Lel. Itin. vol. 7. p. 53. Bytwixte New Castle and Morpethe little wood ground.
Bytwyxt Morpethe and Alnewick good plenty of wood in certain places, and many
parks.

Ibid. p. 54.
is in ruins, little remaining thereof but an old gateway tower and part of the
outward wall which enclosed the area and interior buildings. It is placed on a
lofty eminence, unassisted by art; the southern side is very steep, and washed
by the river Wansbeck; the northern secured by a deep valley. The tower has
formerly had angular turrets at the north-east and south-east corners, with a
communication by an open gallery which was supported by projecting corbles:
there is no portcullis. In the center of the arched roof of the gateway is a
square aperture, calculated to annoy assailants who should gain the outward
gate. It commands a fine prospect, overlooking the town of Morpeth, and the
banks of Wansbeck, where large tracts of woodlands are beautifully disposed.
Near this tower, toward the north-east, and on the other side of the deep dell
or valley, before described, is a round mound of earth, on a natural mount
whose height is greatly increased by art. It appears to have been raised rather
by assailants than as an outwork or defense to the castle; for from thence, by
engines, stones and missile weapons might be thrown into the interior parts of
the fortress, to annoy the garrison: and agreeable to the modes practiced in
early times, perhaps this was cast up for an opposing fort and malvoisin on
some blockade. No record come to my knowledge proves who was the first founder
of this castle; early in the time of the Normans, the baronial seat of the
Merleys was here, and probably they had a stronghold upon the very eminence
where the present remains stand -- the tower was the work of William Lord
Greystock, who lived in the time of King Edward III. as appears by the escheats
of that reign. Iste Willielmus victoriosus et in omnibus hostitudiis gloriosus
erat valde; et cum aedificasset castellum de Graistock, et Turrem de Morpath,
et multa alia dignitatis opera, obiit apud Brampspeth, et apud Graistock
sepultus est.

Escheat 33 Edw. III. The barony of Morpeth consisted not only of the castle
and lordship of the town, but has many villages members of it, as Grimwest,
Ulweham, Hebscot, Schillington, Twisel, Salwick, Two Duddens, Clisten,
Cladwell, Stannington, Shorton, Blakedon, north and south, Wideslad,
Killingwith, Benton, and Waver.

Bourne's Hist. Newcastle.
Surnames were derived from places, and that of Merley, probably from their
fortress here. By the rolls of Henry V. the barony is called the barony of
Marlay: which shows that Merlay and Morpeth were places originally distinct
from each other, the one denoting the hill and the other the valley; at length
the distinctions subsided in the general appellation of Morpeth.

We do not find in history any thing singular of Morpeth in the times of the
Saxons; it was the ancient barony of the Merleys, but when it was so created,
or whether the Merleys were in possession before the conquest, there is no
satisfactory evidence. By the Testa de Nevill it appears, that the third Roger
de Merley held the barony of Morpeth by the service of four Knights fees. "Et
omnes antecessores sui tenerunt per iundem servicium post conquestium Angliae."
King Henry I. gave Julian the daughter of Gospatrick Earl of Dunbar in
marriage, with a rich dowery, to Roger de Merley, Baron of Morpeth. Camden has
this remarkable relation of Morpeth. That in the year 1215 it was set on fire
by the inhabitants themselves to prejudice King John, who would have rested
there in his infamous excursion.
This Roger founded Newminster, and as appears by the Autographo, was interred
therein, with his Lady and Osbert their son. Ranulphus de Merlay, una cum
Juliana uxor ejus, and Osberto filio ejus, sepulti sunt in boreali part domus
capituli Novi Monasterii quod Condidit.

Ex Autographo Perantiquo.


There was an hospital founded in Morpeth by this family, to which William de
Merley gave a carucate of land. Willielmus de Merley Omnibus, etc. Me et meos
Homines dedisse and Concessisse in perpetua elemofina, unum carucatam terrae
domni infirmorum de Morpathe, etc.

Monast. Angl. vol. 1.


Roger de Merley obtained of King John, 1199, a market for his borough, and an
annual fair on Magdalen-day, in consideration of a fine of 20 marks and two
palfreys. He was also interred at Newminster. Cum Rogerus de Merley primus haec
et alia consilia complevisset, obdormivet in Domino, et in domo Capituli Novi
Monasterii cum patre suo sepultus est. Et successit ei Rogerus filius, qui
dicitur Rogerus de Merley secundus.

Ex Autographo.


His successor Roger ornamented the borough of Morpeth, and founded an Hospital
at Catchburn. He was also interred at Newminster. Rogerus de Merley secundus,
Burgam de Morpath decoravit, et multa alia opera caritativa, et post obitum
suum sepultus est in Claustro ad introitum domus Capituli Novi Monasterii,
Hospitali de Catchburn tunc per ipsum promoto.

Ex Autographo.


Roger the third granted to his burgesses a freedom from all taxes, subsidies,
or contributions, except those to the King for public safety, the marriage
honors of the Lord's heir or eldest daughter, or the Lord's redemption from
captivity. He granted several other liberties and immunities. The charter is so
valuable and singular a piece of antiquity, that it highly merits a place here.

Omnibus hanc cartam visuris vel audituris Rogerus de Merlay tertius salutem.
Noveritis me audisse carta Rogeri patris mei in hac verba. Omnibus hominibus
has literas visuris, vel audituris, Rogerus de Merlay salutem. Sciatis quod ego
Rogerus de Merlay dedi et concessi, et hac praesenti carta mea confirmavisse,
meis liberis burgensibus de Morpeth, illis et haeredibus suis, tenend. et
habend. in perpetuum de me et haeredibus meis, omnes libertates, et omnes
liberas consuetudines, honorabiliter, et libere, et integre, sicuti carta
domini Regis purportat, quam ego habio de dono suo. His testibus, Willielmo de
Merlay, Richardo de Plesses, etc. etc. Quare volo, concedo et confirmo, pro me
et haeredibus meis, praedictis burgensibus, et haeredibus suis, quod habeant
omnes libertates praedictas, sicut carta Rogeri de Merlay patris mei purportat
et testatur. Et praeterea concessi pro me et haeredibus meis quod praefati
burgenses nec haeredes eorum tallientur nisi quando dominus Rex talliabit
burgenses suos et ad promogenitum meum milit. faciend. et ad primogenitum
filiam meam maritandum, et ad corpus meum de prisona redimendum. Item concessi
eisdem quod si ego vel haeredes mei, prizas ferimus per servientes nostros de
pane vel de cervisia vel de aliqua alia de re in dicta villa de Morpath, illae
prizae solvantur creditori infra quadraginta dies; creditor autem cui non
solutum fuerit infra quadraginta de prizis ab eis factis maneat quietus ab omni
priza post illas quadraginta dies quousque ei solutum fuerit. Ita tamen quod
been licebit mihi et haeredibus meis alias prizas facere, infra terminum
illarum quadraginta dierum. Et sciendum quod priza mea cervisiae erit in toto
anno tres gallones pro uno denario. Concessi etiam eisdem burgensibus et
haeredibus solitas communas pasturae et aisiamenta consueta cum libero exitu et
introitu ad eandem villam de Morpath pertin. Exceptis bladis and pratis.
Concessi etiam superdictis burgensibus et haeredibus eorum communam in stipulis
meis, ejusdem manerii mei de Morpath; scilicet de Wenherlawe versus occidentem
usque ad divisas abbatis novi monasterii, et usque ad fossatum parci
occidentalis. Ita tamen quod herbagium earundem stipularum reservetur ad opus
meum et haeredum meorum per quindecem dies postquam bladum meum fuerit
cariatum. Et concessi eisdem burgensibus et haeredibus eorum, quod quando eis
turbarias vendere voluero in turbariis meis de Morpath, et quantum eis vendere
voluero, singulas cariatas turbarii pro singulis denariis. Et si contingat quod
averia eorundem burgensium capiantur in defensis meis, pro quolibet averio
debant unum obulum, et pro quolibet equo unum obulum, et pro quinque ovibus
unum obulum per tres vices tam extra quam infra, et ad quartem vicem pro
singulis eorum averiorum captis infra boscum dabunt octo denarios, et extra
boscum quatuor denarios, et postea iterum incipiendo pro singulis averiorum
obulum per tres vices, ut praedictum est. Et si averia eorum capiantur in
bladis vel in pratis, faciant emendas secundum tempus anni. Concessi insuper,
et confirmavi praefatis burgensibus et eorum haeredibus illam placeam quietam
ubi forum eorum esse solebat (excepto tamen Tofto Aliciae Hudde, et pristina
ejusdem villae, et excepta quadam fabrica, quam Philippus tenuit. In qua placea
volo quod stalla eorum construnantur ubi carnes et pisces vendant usque in
horam nonam. Et prohibeo super plenam forisfacturam mei et heredum meorum ne
quis presumat vendere carnes nec pisces ante horam nonam, quoniam servicii
dict. stall. nisi in grosso. Et sciendum quod been licebit mihi et haeredibus
meis facere aedificia nostra ubicunque voluerimus in culturis nostris, in
quibus eis concessimus communia sine impedimento vel contradictione dictorum
burgensium, vel haeredum eorum in perpetuum. Et sciendum quod dicti burgenses
et haeredes eorum sequentur molendina mea de Morpath ad tertium decimum vas
multurae, sicut prius sequi consueverunt. Et ego Rogerus de Merlay et haeredes
mei universa praenominata et concessa dictis burgensibus et eorum haeredibus
contra omnes gentes in perpetuum warrantizabimus. Et in hujus rei testimonium
unam partem hujus cartae chirographatae quam dicti burgences habent penes eos
et haeredes eorum sigillo meo roberavi; et aliam partem habeo penes me et
haeredes meos communi sigillo dictorum burgensium signatum. His testibus Hugone
Gubion, Willielmo de Merlay, Johanne de Plesses, Willielmo de Conyers, Ada
Barret, Willielmo de Horsley, Willielmo filio Radulphi, Richardo de Saltwick,
Richardo de Sancto Petro, Willielmo Spurnelow, Radulpho Grom. Thoraldo, Rogero
Palmer, Waltero de Witton clerico et aliis.

Roger the third was also interred at Newminster, leaving two daughters, Mary
and Johanna, his coheiresses. He died 1265: an inquisition was soon after taken
of his possessions, when it was found he had the following revenue, etc.

Burgenses, Burgi pro firma burgi XI. Pro Piscario Salmonum in aqua de Wanspeck
Cum felon. et stallag. XLVIs. VIIId. Cottingwood XLVIs. VIIId. per annum. East
Park VII. XIIIs. IVd. per annum. West Park in Manu domini.



Mary the eldest daughter married William Lord Greystock, to whose issue the
whole barony of Morpeth descended. Johanna married Robert de Somerville, by
whom she had five sons, who all died without issue male.

John his heir was a great benefactor to Tynemouth and Newminster. Having no
issue, he settled this barony on his kinsman Ralph Fitz William, who assumed
the name and title of Ralph Lord Greystock. He founded a chantry in the church
of Tynmouth, and lived to a great age. Ob. 1316, and was interred at Newsham.

By an inquisition taken at his death, he appears to have died possessed of the
following estates.

L s. d. The manor of Morpeth 84 5 0 of Ulgham 48 13 4 Villa of Hepescotes 20 0
0 Mediety of the Hamlet of Tramwell 14 9 Part of the villa of Horsley 10 16 6
Mediety of the villa of Stannington 9 0 0 -- of Benton and the rents of
Killingworth 18 13 8 Held by the service of two Knights fees, now paying only
10l. money payment, quod jacent Vastae. A Mediety of the manors of Stiford and
Heddon on the Wall, Adgerton, Dodington, with their hamlets, of the barony of
Bolbeck, held by two Knights fees, of the yearly value of 80 0 0 Sed nunc nihil
reddunt, quod jacent vastae.

And by another inquisition taken before the same Escheats it appears, that

The Coheiresses of Ade Barret held the manor of Walker of the manor of Morpeth
in Capite, by the service of one Knight's fee, and service at the court of
Morpeth, etc. and the mills of Benton ad XIII. vas. and that the aforesaid
manor of Walker used to pay yearly X Marks. That Eliz. Conyers held the manor
of Clyfton of the manor of Morpeth in Capite, by the service of one Knight's
fee and suit of court, and paid L s. d. 10 0 0 The heirs of Hugh Gibon held
the manor of Shilvington, etc. etc. 20 0 0 Edward de Duddon, the manor of
Duddon, etc. etc. 10 0 0 Hugo Cocus of Stannington, lands there, etc. etc. 10 0
0 Adam de Benton, lands at Hyrmyngfield 0 1 1 William de Camera, lands at
Kyllyngworth 0 0 8 William Prudholme, do. do. with suit of court at Benton 0 15
3 Thomas Dryng, do. do. and suit at the Lord's mill 1 10 7 Robert of the church
of Morpeth, lands at Morpeth 0 8 0 John de Rukeby, ditto 0 12 6 Rogerus de
Horsley, lands at Whythcome, a pound of Cumin The advowson of the church of
Morpeth of the yearly value of 10 0 0 The advowson of the church of Horsley,
ditto 20 0 0

Ralph Lord Greystock, a younger son succeeded him, but died the year
following, 1317, and was interred at Butterwick.

Ralph Lord Greystock died by poison at Gateshead, A. D. 1324, by the
contrivance of the accomplices of Sir Gilbert de Middleton, in revenge for his
being a chief instrument in apprehending him at Mitford castle. He was interred
at Newcastle.

William Lord Greystock. He first married a daughter of Lord Lucy, and
afterward a daughter of Henry Fitz Hugh, Lord Ravenswath. He died A. D. 1358,
and was interred at Graystock.

Ralph Lord Greystock. A great benefactor to Brinkburn and New Minster. He died
A. D. 1417.

He was summoned to the parliament at Westminster 1st King Richard II. 1st and
7th King Henry IV. and to the parliament at Leicester 2d King Henry V. Die
vemente proxime post festum Navitatis sancti Johannis Baptistae anno Richardi
secundo quarto, apud Horsridge in Glendale, dictus baro, cum Willielmo de Aton,
et aliis militibus, et multis validis, infeliciter captus est per Georgiam
comitem de Dunbar; ob quod Willielmus frater ejusdem baronis missus in hostagio
pro eo apud Dunbar, tactus Morbo pestilentiali mortuus est, et sepultus ibidem;
sed post duos annos completos corpus ejus integra carne et pelle translatum
est, et eoram summo altari in Novo Monasterio juxta Margeriam Dominam de Ulgham
sepultum est. Et nihilominus dictis baro mediante malicia Johannis ducis
Lancastriae, redemptus est pro MMM marcarum ad quam redemptioned Johanna Matter
ejus fecit levari de Burgensibus de Morpath per manus Johanni de passenham,
receptoris sui VIII. XIIIs. Xd.

John Lord Greystock married Elizabeth, one of the daughters and coheiresses of
Robert Lord Wemme. He died 14th King Henry VI. and was succeeded by

Ralph Lord Greystock, married Elizabeth daughter of William Fitz Hugh Lord
Ravenswath. He died ad King Henry VII. He had one son, who died in his father's
life time, leaving one daughter by Elizabeth daughter of Edmund Gray Duke of
Kent.

Elizabeth Baroness Greystock and Wemme. She married Thomas Lord Dacre, of
Gilsland. He died 17th King Henry VIII. and was succeeded by his son,

William Lord Dacre. He died 6th Queen Elizabeth, and was succeeded by his son,

Thomas Lord Dacre. He died 9th Queen Elizabeth, and was succeeded by his son,

George Lord Dacre, who dying under age, his honors and estates descended to
his two sisters Ann and Elizabeth.

Ann married Philip Earl of Arundel, eldest son of the Duke of Norfolk.

Elizabeth married Willliam Howard, of Naworth Castle, Cumberland, third son of
Thomas Duke of Norfolk. He was formidable to the Moss troopers, who in derision
called him Bald Willy.

His grandson Charles was created Lord Dacre of Gilsland, Viscount Morpeth, and
Earl of Carlisle. He died A. D. 1684, and was succeeded by his son,

Edward Earl of Carlisle. He was succeeded by his son,

Charles Earl of Carlisle. He was succeeded by his son,

Henry Earl of Carlisle. He died. A. D. 1758, and was succeeded by his son,

Frederick Earl of Carlisle.


In the Autographo, he is termed Vir strenuus et corpulentus. He died in the
year 1307.

On extinction of the male line of Fitz William, who on the death of John Lord
Greystock assumed the name and title of Greystock, Morpeth passed by marriage
of the heiress, to Lord William Dacre of Gilsland, in Cumberland; and by
marriage of the heiress of the Dacre family, to Lord William Howard, third son
of the Duke of Norfolk, from whom they descended to the present Lord Carlisle.

We made an excursion from Morpeth, to visit

BOTHALL,
the baronial inheritance of the family of Ogles, distant from Morpeth about
four miles. This ride is extremely beautiful, lying within a little distance of
the river Wansbeck, the banks of which to the south are lofty, and clothed
with fine hanging woods, through which here and there you see a bold promontory
or rocky precipice. All the environs of the river to Bothal are romantic and
beautiful. The castle, though placed on a considerable eminence, yet stands in
a very deep vale; hanging woods forming an amphitheatre at the distance of
about half a mile. Its present remains chiefly consist of the great gateway,
flanked on the north side by two polygonal towers, 53 feet high; and on the
south-west angle by a square turret, whose height measures 60 feet. From the
towers of this gate the outward wall extends along the brink of the eminence,
in a circular form, enclosing the area and interior buildings of the castle.
This enclosure contains about half an acre, in which are some scattered
fragments of the inner buildings, now affording no degree of certainty what
were their original form and use. To the north-west of the gateway, was
formerly another tower, pulled down within the memory of persons living, which
bore the denomination of Ogle's Tower. The site of this castle to the south is
very lofty, on the brink of a rock, whose foot is washed by the river: the east
and west sides of the eminence have been defended by a moat. Mr Gross, to his
second plate of this castle, which chiefly represents the gateway tower, says,
the wood scene in the back ground slopes to the water's edge, here and there
skirted by picturesque rocks; and in many places the trees overhang the stream,
which here runs briskly, breaking against the huge stones plentifully scattered
throughout its channel; at once captivating the eye, and by its gentle murmurs
sweetly soothing the ear. Indeed the banks of the Wansbeck, between this place
and Morpeth, afford a variety of sylvan scenes, equal in beauty to any in the
kingdom.

I must descend to more minute descriptions of the gateway with its towers;
This gate-way is of the same model as the gate of Alnwick castle, and by its
architecture and ornaments appears to be nearly of the same date.
they bear a certain appearance of being the most modern parts of this castle;
the architecture is excellent, and the edifice built of a durable stone, well
dressed, and in good preservation: the ascent from the town is easy and gradual.
The outward gate was defended by a portcullis; in the arching of the roof of
the gateway, are three square apertures, from whence the garrison could annoy
the assailants, when they had gained the first gate; a door on each hand leads
to the flanking towers. On the right hand, is a passage and staircase in the
southwest tower; at the foot of the stairs is a door into the prison, which is
not so horrible an enclosure as most of those seen in baronial castles: it is
above ground, and closely arched, having narrow apertures, like loopholes, to
admit light and air from the gateway passage. Opposite to these stairs, on the
other side of the gateway, is a large hall. Passing the winding stairs, we
entered the state-room, above the gateway: this apartment is lighted by four
windows, none of them of any considerable size; the principal one is to the
north, in the center: by means of the thickness of the wall, the recess formed
for the window is benched with stone at the sides, with seats for six persons
at least. From this window you view the town, the church, and a narrow vale,
through which the river flows. On each side of this window, is a door leading
to the chambers of the flanking towers. The fireplace, of a very spacious
range, is to the east, on the left side of which is another window with a
recess, benched like that before described. A third window like the two former,
is to the right of the door as you enter, looking into the area of the castle;
a large window to the west commands the wider part of the vale, and the fine
hanging woods by which it is is bounded. Three large stones cover the apertures
in the floor, which open upon the passage of the gateway. The upper rooms being
more ruinous, are not so easy to describe, or their form capable of being
ascertained. I walked these apartments with a veneration, proceeding from the
tenderest obligations; an alliance with a lineal descendant of those
illustrious families, who for ages possessed this inheritance.



In the front of the gateway, are several shields of arms arranged in the
following order; which I apprehend, like those at Alnwick, perfectly point out
to us the time when this part of the castle was built. In the center, in a
large shield, are the arms of England and France quarterly. It is observable
that England takes the first quarter, a thing I have never observed an instance
of before. On the dexter side, a shield with the arms of England, three lions
passant gardant; on the sinister, a shield with the arms of the Grays, barry of
six argent and azure, three torteauxes in chief. This denotes that the
erection was made in the time of Edward IV. whose consort was a Gray, mother of
Thomas Gray, who in the 15th year of that reign was created Marquis of Dorset.
Beneath, in the center, the arms of Bertram, Or, an orl, azure. On the dexter
and sinister sides of this, are three shields, which denote the alliances of
the Bertram family.

The first, on the dexter side, the arms of Percy

The second of Dacre

The third of Vesey, Or, a cross, sable.

The first, on the sinister side, of Darcy

The second of Hastings

The third, two lions passant gardant in a tressure; but to what family this
coat armor appertains, I cannot form any probable assertion.

On the tower on the right hand of the gateway, are four shields, the chief of
which is of the Ogles; but as they are greatly defaced by time, and on my view
did not seem to have any material relation to the date or history of this
erection, I passed them without particular attention: but on considering the
matter, I am induced to believe that John Ogle, the grandson of the heiress of
Bertram, and who assumed the name of Bertram, erected this gateway. In the
family of Ogles afterward mentioned, he is particularly noticed.

In the center, on the battlement, is the figure of a man, in stone, in the
attitude of sounding a horn; on the right hand tower is another figure, holding
a ball between his hands: these figures are greatly injured by the weather. The
following curious survey of this castle was published in the Antiquarian
Repertory.

The following extract is copied from a survey called the book of Bothool
Baronrye, in Northumberland, most beautifully written, and in high
preservation, the property of his Grace the Duke of Portland, to whom that
barony now belongs. It was taken the 20th day of June; 1576, by Cuthbert
Carnable, Robert Maddison, and John Lawson, tenants to that manor, by virtue of
a commission granted by Cuthbert Lord Ogle, and directed to the aforementioned
Cuthbert Carnabie, Robert Maddison, Jacob Ogle, Esqrs Anthony Ratcliff and John
Lawson, Gents. the whole 5, or any 4, 3, or 2 of them. Dated at Bothole the 6th
day of May in the said year.

To this manor of Bothoole belongs ane Castle in circumference cccclxxxx
foot, wharto belongs ane Castle, great chaulmer, parler, vij bed chaulmers,
one galare, butterie, pantrie, lardenor, kitchinge, backhouse, brewhouse, a
stable, an court called the yethouse, wharin their is a prison, a porter loge,
and diverse fair chaulmering, an common stable, and a tower called Blanke
Tower, a gardine, ane nurice, chapel, and an tower called Ogle's Tower and
Pastrie, with many other prittie beauldings here not specified, fair gardinges
and orchetts, wharin grows all kind of herbs and flowers, and fine appiles,
plumbes of all kind, peers, damfellis, nuttes, wardens, cherries, to the black
and reed, wallnutes, and also licores very fine, worth by the year XXL.




The site of Bothal appears very like a Roman station: Camden says, that he
had thought for some time, that the Roman Glanoventa stood on the banks of
Wansbeck, garrisoned by the first cohort of the Morini; for it is seated in the
range of the wall, where the Notitia places it: the river's name is Wants-beck,
and Glanoventa, in the British tongue, signifies THE SHORE OR BANKS OF VENTA.
Mr Gross has the following remarks on the Bertrams, the original possessors of
this castle. Richard Bertram, who lived about the time of King Henry II. gave
two sheaves, or two third parts of the tithes of this barony to the Monks of
Tinmouth. (In Bourne's History of Newcastle, it is said, being a devout man, he
gave two shares, i. e. two third parts of the titles of it, to the Monks.) His
son Robert obtained of King Richard I. that his manor with its dependencies
should be raised to a barony; and it is mentioned as such, in that ancient
record, remaining with the King's Remembrancer in the Exchequer, called Testa
de Nevil, from its being compiled by Jollan de Nevil, who was a Justice
Itinerant in the 18th and 24th years of King Henry III. It contains the King's
fees through the greatest part of England, with inquisitions of lands escheated
and serjeantries.

This barony was held by Robert of the King in capite, by the service of three
Knights fees, as his ancestors had formerly held it; the said lands being de
veteri feofmento, and paying yearly for the castle guard at Newcastle upon Tyne
for cornage 5l. 15s. 4d.

Robert was succeeded by his son Roger, who procured a charter for free warren,
for all his demesne lands here and at Heburn in this county. His heirs enjoyed
the barony for some successions, without making any additions to its grandeur;
but Robert Bertram being in the reign of King Edward III. constituted Sheriff
of Northumberland and Governor of Newcastle upon Tyne, obtained a license of
that King to make a castle of his manor house at Bothal.

Robert having no issue male, his daughter and heiress, Helen, marrying Sir
Robert Ogle, of Ogle, Knight, transferred this barony to his family. Robert
their son, after the death of his mother, settled the same upon his youngest
son John; his paternal estate he bequeathed to his eldest son Robert, who
suffered his brother to enjoy the barony of Bothal for a short time only, for
soon after his father's death, with 200 armed men, he took forcible possession
of the castle, under pretense of its being his birthright: but on complaint to
parliament, a writ was issued to the Sheriff of Northumberland, directing him
to reinstate the complainant, and commanding Robert to appear at Westminster on
a certain day, to answer for this misdemeanor. Pateat universis etc me Robtm
Ogle militem constituiffe etc Wm Bertram Rob^tm Reymes Robt^m Mitford Armig^es
and Wm Lawson Attornat ad intrand. etc in toto Manerio de North Midleton etc in
Com. Northumb^ cum oi^bis Terris etc qe nuper fuerunt Rob^ti de Ogle patris mei
in praedicta villa ad deliberand. pro me et noi^e meo Johanni Ogle Fratri meo
plenam and pacificam seisin. etc habend. sibi et assignatis suis secundum
Cartam feoffamenti eidem Johi inde fact. date est sicut dat. presentu. etc

dat. 11o. Sep. 33. Hen. 6. In the Collection of W. H.




This John, who took the name of Bertram, was afterward knighted, and was
several times Sheriff of Northumberland in the reign of King Henry VI. Henricus
Comes Northumbrie and Dn^s Honoris de Cockermouth oib^s ad quos, etc. Sciatis,
me bro bono and fideli servitio quoth dilectus serviter me^ Johanes Ogle Armiger
nobis ante hec Tempora impendit and imposterum impendit dedisse, etc.
Confirmasse eidem Jo^ni totum Dominum ac Manerium nr^m de Foxdon in Com
Northmb. Hebendm^, etc. sibi absq. aliquo redditu sive forina, etc. ad Term^nm
vitae suae in Cugus rei, etc. Datte apud Petteworth, 12 Octb. 28 King Henry VI.


The family of Ogle was of great antiquity in the county of Northumberland,
where they were possessed of an extensive property, antecedent to their
intermarriage with the heiress of Bertram. Humphrey Ogle, Esquire lived at Ogle
Castle at the time of the conquest. William the Conqueror, by his deed without
date, confirmed to Humphrey all the liberties and royalties of his manor of
Ogle, in as ample a manner as any of his ancestors had enjoyed the same before
the time of the Normans.
This family held the manor of Unthank, with lands in Gilcroft and Raleigh, for
several generations. Sir Robert Ogle, by marriage with Helen the daughter and
heiress of Sir Robert Bertram, in the reign of King Edward III. became
possessed of the barony of Bothall. Sir Robert Bertram's Lady survived him, and
married John De Hatfield.

Mr Wallis mentions the following personages, which are unnoticed in a pedigree
of the family in the author's possession, made out at the herald's office.

Sir Robert de Ogle, who married Johanna the youngest daughter and coheiress of
Sir Alan de Heton, of Edlingham, as by an inquisition taken 21 King Richard II.

Sir Robert de Ogle, High Sheriff of Northumberland 16 King Henry VI.

The title of the first Lord Ogle, he says, was Baron Ogle, of Ogle.




There was issue of this marriage, Sir Robert Ogle, who married Matilda the
daughter of Sir Thomas Gray of Wark, by Alice daughter of Ralph Nevil, Earl of
Westmoreland.

He was succeeded by Sir Robert, who was created by King Henry VI. Baron of
Bothall and the 1st Lord Ogle, He had a brother John, who settled in
Lancashire, and had great possession. This line is also now reduced to female
representation.
an ardent adherent in the conflicts between the houses of York and Lancaster.
He married Isabella daughter and heiress of Sir Alexander de Kirby, by Johann
daughter to Sir Thomas Tunstall.

Owen Lord Ogle their son married Eleanor daughter of Sir William Hilton, and
had issue,

Ralph the 3d Lord Ogle, He was at the battle of Branxton.
who married Margaret the daughter of Sir William Gascoin, and had issue,

Robert the 4th Lord Ogle, who married Ann the daughter of Thomas Lord Lumley,
by Elizabeth Plantagenet, daughter of King Edward IV. by the Lady Lucy, and had
issue,

Robert the 5th Lord Ogle, who died in the battle at Hallydon-rigg, in
Scotland. He was twice married; first to Dorothy daughter of Sir Henry
Widdrington; his second wife was Johann, daughter of Sir Cuthbert Radcliff, by
both of whom he had issue. By Dorothy he had

Robert the 6th Lord Ogle, who married Jane the daughter of Sir Thomas
Maleverer, but died without issue. By the second wife Johann, the 5th Lord Ogle
had issue,

Cuthbert the 7th and last Lord Ogle, who married Catharine the daughter and
heiress of Sir Reginald Carnaby, and had issue two daughters, Johanna and
Catharine.

Johanna married to Edward Talbot, Esquire younger son to the Earl of Shrewsbury.

Catharine married to Charles Cavendish of Wellbeck, in Nottinghamshire,
Knight. She was created Baroness Ogle. Her son, Sir William Cavendish, was made
Knight of the Bath, A. D. 1610, 6th of King James I. Baron Ogle of Ogle, and
Viscount Mansfield, in the 18th year of that reign; Baron Bertram and Belsover,
and Earl of Newcastle, 3d King Charles I. Marquis of Newcastle, the 19th year
of the same reign; Earl of Ogle and Duke of Newcastle, 16th King Charles II.
1664. In the civil depiction of tomb wars having espoused the royal cause, He
repaired and put into a defensible state Newcastle and the castle and haven of
Tynmouth; raised a regiment of 1000 men at his own charge; he had a chief
command at the battle of Bradford, where the forces of Fairfax were routed, he
took 22 pieces of cannon, and many standards; at the battle of Marston Moor he
was at the head of his regiment, where, disdaining to ask quarter, the
Northumbrians sold their lives dear to the parliamentary troops.
and being obliged to fly for refuge to foreign parts, his estates were put
under sequestration, and some of them sold: he with six others were excepted
from the general pardon. At the restoration, he was reinstated in his
possessions; and having an only daughter, she married John Hollis, Duke of
Newcastle, who in her right became possessed of the castle of Bothall. He died
by a fall from his horse, A. D. 1711, leaving an only daughter, who married
Edward Earl of Oxford and Mortimer. These possessions devolved on their only
daughter and heiress, Lady Margaret Cavendish Herley, who married his Grace
William the late Duke of Portland, whose eldest son, now Duke of Portland, is
the present proprietor.

The parochial church stands at a little distance from the castle: in tablets
on the wall, in the old black letter, are painted the genealogy of the Ogles.
Of whom there were seven Lords and thirty Knights. This Genealogical Table
begins with Humphrey Ogle, of Ogle Castle, at the time of the Conquest.
There is a fine marble tomb of one of the Ogles and his Lady, with their
effigies recumbent. I presume the personages there represented are Sir Robert
Ogle and his wife, the Baroness Bertram. His effigy is clothed in a coat of
mail, the hands elevated, about his neck a chain, with a cross pendant on his
bosom, his hair cut over his forehead and round by his ears, his head supported
on his crest a bull's head, his feet rested against a curled water dog. Her
effigy is dressed in a long robe, which conceals her feet; over her head and
shoulders a mantle flowing back, her hands elevated, her head supported by a
cushion tasselled at the corners, kept by two Esquires in their proper
habiliments, each holding a tassel; on the lap of her robe a small Italian
greyhound. A sword sheathed lies between these effigies. At the head of the
tomb, in niches ornamented with tabernacle-work, are four Ecclesiastics, their
crowns shaven, and with hands elevated; at a corner, an inclining shield,
supported on the dexter side by a lion collared and chained, and on the
sinister side, by a monkey chained by the waste. The shield of arms is so
singular, that I have caused it to be engraved with the effigies.

On the banks of Wansbeck, near to Bothall, are the ruins of an ancient chapel
or oratory, said to be dedicated to the blessed Virgin. The situation is
admirably calculated for meditation, being in a shady solitude. By the arms on
the wall, it appears to have been built by the family of Ogles. The erection is
all of well-wrought free stone; its dimensions within, eight yards in length,
and four in breadth; the roof, now gone to decay, was arched with stone, after
a curious form, as appears by its remains. It is now grown over with trees,
which have struck their roots into the joints and chasms of the building.

In passing to Ashington, the family seat of the Crows, we had a view of

SHIPWASH,
where the Rectory-house stands appertaining to the parish of Bothall, lately
honored by the residence of the most excellent Prelate, his Grace the Hon. and
Right Rev. Dr. Drummond, late Lord Archbishop of York. He was the second son of
the Right Hon. George Hay, Earl of Kinnoul, and brother to the present, whose
illustrious ancestors are recorded for their virtues and military
achievements, in the annals of their country. He was a man of deep erudition,
an excellent pastor, a steady loyalist, and a statesman of unbiassed integrity.
He mixed affability with dignity, and at the same time he commanded reverence
he was courteous. In his archiepiscopal character, he was rigid, yet easy of
access; and as he was benevolent, so was he slow of condemnation. He constantly
avoided the bustle of greatness, and in his country retreat, putting off the
dignity of his office, he was distinguished as a generous friend, an inimitable
parent, and a gracious neighbor. He was a student in Christ Church College,
Oxford, and had the degree of Doctor in Divinity 27th June, 1745. He took the
name and arms of Drummond, as heir intail to his great grandfather, William
Drummond, Viscount Strathallan. He married Henrietta daughter of Peter Auriol,
Esquire Merchant, of the city of London, by whom he had issue three sons and two
daughters. He became Chaplain to King George II. in August, 1727; was installed
Prebendary of Westminster 29th April, 1743; and consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph
24th April, 1748: he was afterward translated to Sarum, and made Archbishop of
York in 1761; in the same year he was made Lord High Almoner to the King, and
one of his Majesty's Most Hon. Privy Council.

The mother church, it is said, formerly stood here. At a little distance lies
the port of

CAMBOIS,
at the mouth of the river Wansbeck, a haven with two quays on the north shore
for small vessels, about 30 tons burden, employed in the export of corn and
grindstones, and in importing timber. The principal proprietors are Sir Thomas
Clavering, Bart. and Matthew Ridley, Esquire.
Many lime boats from the adjacent coasts resort to this place. The cliffs by
the sea, called the Hawk's Hugh, are rude and majestic. There is a cavern
toward the north end, well known to smugglers. The situation of

ASHINGTON,
and the prospect from thence, are delightful: the banks of Wansbeck are finely
wooded, and on every hand you look upon a rich cultivated country. The objects
disposed on these scenes are various and beautiful: the nearer are woodlands,
rocks, and cultivated eminences, scattered over with hamlets; the streams of
Wansbeck, enlivened by people employed in the Salmon Fishery, and graced with
the bridge of Shipwash and the fishing vessels: the more distant are Bebside
and the port of Cambois, Seaton Delaval, and the sea. Ashington was one of the
dependent manors of the barony of Bothall. Near this place is a spring called
St Margaret's well, but without any medicinal qualities. Its name derived from
days of superstition, when, for every trifle, places and things were beatified
by the churchmen.


Approaching the sea coast, we viewed

NEWBIGGIN,
a fine bay for shipping, secured from the stormy quarters by high rocky
promontories, and capable of receiving vessels of 60 tons burden. The town is
small, and chiefly inhabited by fishermen. There are several granaries for corn
here. This whole coast is enlivened by trade, and opulence is dispensed on
every side by the hand of industry. Human nature is capable of vast works; the
capacity of man is infinite, the further it is exerted, the more is discovered
for the advancement of its occupation. The more our faculties are employed, the
nearer we approach to a similarity of the divine being, in whose image man was
created in the beginning. To let our time elapse whilst our rational powers
sleep in indolence, is highly criminal; it is a prodigality of all others the
worst; denying birth to those good works we owe to ourselves, and to mankind at
large. In the bay ships ride in six or seven fathom of water.

The church stands on the north side of the haven, on a point of land which
projects a considerable way into the sea; and it is said there are the remains
of a pier there. This church was formerly a much more considerable edifice, now
the middle aile and steeple with a spire only remaining: which circumstances
give rise to an idea, that Newbiggin and its haven were in some former age of
more considerable importance. The spire is a mark to Seamen, of great use to
ships coming from the North and Baltic Seas, as a direction for their southward
course. The ornament of the altar seems to have been a devoted gift by some
Seaman who had escaped the perils of the ocean, being the King's arms carved in
wood for the stern-piece of a ship.

We passed the house of

CRESWELL,
one of the ancient members of the barony of Bywell, the family seat of
Creswells from the time of King John. Robert de Cresswell King John Simon King
Henry III. Roger 21 King Edward I. Robert King Edward II. Alexander 43 King
Edward III. and Alexander 2d King Richard II. John 10th King Richard II. John
King Henry V. George King Henry VII. Robert King Henry VII. Oswin Queen
Elizabeth. John Queen Elizabeth. John King James I. John William William John
the present poffessor
Wallis.
Like most of the old Northumbrian mansions, this was defended by a tower, part
of which remains. The village of Creswell lies at a little distance, chiefly
inhabited by fishermen.

WIDDRINGTON CASTLE,
the possession of Sir George Warren, Knight of the Bath, in the next place
engaged our attention, seated on an eminence commanding a view of Coquet Island
and the sea. Since the Author's tour this fine mansion was destroyed by fire,
said to be occasioned by the negligence of workmen.


This was the ancient seat of the Widdringtons, and by the attainder of William
Lord Widdrington in 1715, came to the Crown. Royal mercy being extended to him,
he did not suffer death with Lord Derwent water and his associates, but was
divested of his honors and estates.

We find by ancient records, that Gerard de Widdrington Gerard de Widdrington
1st King Edward I. Sir Roger 36th. King Edward III. High Sheriff of
Northumberland. Sir John 22 King Richard II. High Sheriff 11th King Henry IV.
and 4th and 8th of King Henry VI. Sir Roger 10th, 14th, and 21st King Henry VI.
High Sheriff. Gerard 5th King Edward IV. High Sheriff. John 12th, 13th, 14th
King Edward IV. High Sheriff. Sir John 32d King Henry VIII. 6th King Edward VI.
and 1st Queen Elizabeth, High Sheriff. Sir Henry 21st Queen Elizabeth, and 3d
King James I. High Sheriff. One of the Representatives of the county in
Parliament 1st, 12th, and 18th King James I. Sir William 12th King Charles I.
High Sheriff. A Representative in Parliament for this county 15th, 16th, and
17th of same reign; one of the 56 who voted to save Earl Strafford; was
committed to the Tower for introducing candles into the house without a
previous order. He was expelled the house A. D. 1642, for refusing to attend,
and raising forces for the King; was created Baron Widdrington 1643. After the
battle of Marston Moor, he fled. On the King's march to Worcester, he staid at
Wigan, in Lancashire, with Earl Derby and about 200 horse, where they were
surprised by the Parliament forces at day break, when he disdained to be a
prisoner or take quarter. William Lord Widdrington his son, was one of the
Council of State on the restoration. William Lord Widdrington his son. On his
attainder, his effects were computed at 100,000l. Henry his son. His seat at
Stella on Tyne.
Wallis.
was settled here in the reign of King Edward I. and his descendants continued
in possession till the degradation of the family at the abovementioned period.

We advanced westward to

CAWSEY PARK,
a member of the barony of Bothall, and the inheritance of a younger branch of
the noble family of Ogle, now the seat of Bernard Shaw, Esquire by his marrying the
widow of William Ogle, Esquire This was the mansion of John Ogle, who appears to
have erected it, as the old tower still retains the initial letters of his
name. The date thereon 1589.

His wife was interred in Bothall church, and her tomb has the following
inscription: Here lies Catharine the wife of John Ogle,
of Cawsey Park Esqr. daughter of
Robert Woodrington Esqr. by
Margaret his wife, which Margaret was sister to
Robert the 6th and Cothbert the 7th Lord Ogle.
She died May 23d, 1609.


James their son was interred in the church of St. Andrew, in Newcastle upon
Tyne; the following inscription on his tomb:

Hic jacet Jacobus Ogle de Causey Park in Comitatu Northumbr. Armiger.
Antiquitate Domus, utpote et praenobili Baronia Ogle de Ogle, stirpe recta
linea oriundus, vere clarus. Sed invicta in, perduelles, grassantibus nuperis
civilibus Bellis, animi magnitudine, constantia in regem, etiam in tristissimo
authoritatis deliquio fidelitate, in superiores observantia, in pares comitate,
in inferiores benignitate, quae omnia justissimo titulo sua vocare poterat,
multo illustrior. Obiit Dec. 4 die, annoque Dom. 1664.


There were many collateral branches of the noble family of Ogle, whose
pedigrees would not be esteemed sufficiently pertinent to hold a place in this
work.

Henry Ogle, brother of the late William Ogle, founded a School here for 30
children, and endowed it with a small piece of ground and 300l. in money, for a
stipend for the master.

Humphrey of this line of the family of Ogles, was Dean of Hereford and one of
the Society of Brazen Nose College, Oxford, where he founded two Scholarships
in favor of the heirs of his brother Roger.

The house has no great beauty of situation, it is surrounded with a cultivated
country, and has pleasant gardens, fish ponds, and other artificial ornaments,
which greatly contribute to make it a pleasant retirement.

LONGHORSLEY.
This manor was given by Gospatrick Earl of Dunbar to Sir Ralph Merley Baron of
Morpeth, as part of the dowery of Julian his daughter. Roger de Merley granted
part of these possessions to Adam de Plesis; and the heirs of his body, in the
reign of King Henry III. The family of Horsleys held lands within this manor
from distant ages. John de Horsley 1 King Edward III. Richard 37, 43, 44, 45
King Edward III. High Sheriff. John King Henry VI. Sir John 1 King Edward VI.
knighted after the victory at Musselburgh. Cuthbert 1 Queen Mary.
Representative in Parliament for Northumberland, and for the borough of
Morpeth, 2d and 3d same reign. Edward Horsley Widdrington, whose only daughter
and heir married Thomas Riddell, Esquire of Swinburn Castle.
Wallis.
The church stands at a distance from the town, and belonged to the priory of
Brinkburn. Mr Wallis says, that the Lord of this manor compelled all the
tenants within the manor to keep the ways and ditches round their grounds in
good order, on pain of being whipped the day after his court was held. As his
authority for this strange penalty, he quotes the Autographo Perantiquo, Et
iste est Rogerus, qui subditos suos in Horsley ad vias et fossatas circa Campos
de Horsley been conservandas et diligenter sustentandas, tractare statuit. Et
quod quicunque convictus fuerit de aliquo fragmento in fossatis vel viis
praedictis in Campo suo tenetur ibidem in crastino inventionis sanctae crucis,
et crastino sancti Martini in hieme, et reddet domino suo pro quolibet delicto
suo duas Virgas serveas quoties inde convictus fuerit. I conceive Mr Wallis has
mistranscribed the word serveas; how he renders the sentence to make it imply
such a penalty as he has stated, even allowing the word serveas to be right, I
know not. The Virga serrea was a royal standard measure kept in the Exchequer;
and it is most probable the penalty inflicted on the tenants of Horsley was a
forfeiture, meeted by the Virga ferrea.


In our return to Morpeth, our resting place from these little, excursions, we
viewed

COCKLE PARK TOWER,
which stands about four miles north from Morpeth. In the time of King Edward
I. it was the mansion house of a branch, of the family of Bertrams, built
according to the fashion of most of the ancient capital dwellings in this
county, as a stronghold not only for the family, but a place of security for
the tenants with their flocks and herds, at the times of incursions of the
Scots, or ravages by the banditti called the Moss Troopers.

From Morpeth, our next tour was by Whalton to Ogle Castle.

WHALTON
was the barony of Walter Fitz William, who came into England with the
Conqueror. It was afterward the possession of Robert de Crammaville, whom King
John divested, and afterward gave his estates, together with Warkworth, to
Roger Fitz Roger, an ancester of the noble family of Clavering. It afterward
came to the family of Scroops, of Masham, Sir Henry le Scrope 20 King Edward
III. Sir Stephen King Richard II. Sir Henry 8 King Henry IV. Sir John King
Henry V. Sir Thomas 25 King Henry VI.
Wallis.
in the reign of King Edward III. and continued therein till the reign of King
Henry VI.

OGLE CASTLE
was the manor and seat of the family of Ogles before the conquest, as I have
mentioned before: it is now part of the possessions of his Grace the Duke of
Portland, having attained the barony of Bothall in the descent from Cuthbert
the 7th Lord Ogle. The situation is good, on an eminence on the south banks of
Blyth. There are very little remains of the old castle; part of a circular
tower adjoins to the east of the present farm house, which stands on the site
of the castle: the windows of this tower are very small, topped with pointed
arches, the whole remains carrying a countenance of very remote antiquity. The
ground wherein the chief part of the castle has stood is square, guarded by a
double moat, divided by a breastwork of mason-work. The walls are quite
levelled with the ground, and the moat almost grown up.

Mr Wallis says, that it appears by an ancient pedigree at Bothall Castle,
transcribed by Robert Treswell, Somerset Herald, A. D. 1598, by permission of
Cuthbert Lord Ogle, that Walter Fitz William came into England with the
Conqueror, to whom the King gave the barony of Whalton; and that Walter, by
deed, granted to Humphrey de Ogle all such lands and liberties, as he or any of
his predecessors had before the coming of the Normans, notwithstanding the
royal grant of Whalton, and any claims he might make there under.

In the reign of King Henry III. and King Edward I. Thomas de Ogle was
possessed of Ogle Castle, as appears by several escheats. Sir Robert Ogle in
the time of King Edward III. resided here, before his marriage with the heiress
of the Bertram family. By patent he held the bailiwick of the dominion of
Tynedale. He had license from the Crown to rebuild the Castle of Ogle. In 1327,
he attended the King in the camp of Stanhope Park; in 1346, he was at the
battle of Nevil's Cross; in 1355, he was Governor of the castle of Berwick
during the siege, in which his brother Alexander was slain. From Ogle Castle
you command a pretty view of Belsey Castle.


We passed by

KIRKLEY,
a dependent manor on the ancient barony of Mitford; for some ages past the
seat of a branch of the noble family of Ogle, now the possession of Dr. Newton
Ogle, Prebendary of Durham, and nephew to Admiral Ogle. The mansion house makes
a handsome appearance, being a square building, with flanks or wings consisting
of offices. The south front commands no remarkable prospect, the country
irregular, and not in the highest cultivation, without any picturesque scene,
or ornamental object; but this is amply compensated by the view to the east,
which is extensive, and affords a landscape equal to any in this part of the
county.

Kirkley was anciently the seat of the Eures or Evers, who held great
possessions in the county of Durham, and had their castle at Witton. They held
this manor by the service of presenting a barbed arrow on St. John Baptist's
day, at the court of the castle of Mitford. John de Eure -- aiding the Scots
against King Edward II. His lands after his death, then in possession of Sir
John his son, were seized to the use of the crown. Sir John -- does not appear
to have had restitution of his inheritance. Sir Ralph -- 5 King Richard II.
member of parliament for Northumberland. In him the estates appear to be
restored. Sir William -- 15th King Henry VI. High Sheriff of Northumberland.
Sir Ralph -- 19th King Henry VII. High Sheriff. 28th King Henry VIII. he was
Lord Warden of the East Marches, and kept the borders in profound peace. He,
with his friends, tenants, and servants, maintained the castle of Scarborough
for six weeks against the northern rebels; the garrison living for 20 days on
bread and water -- a duty performed through affection and not office. 36 King
Henry VIII. he joined the royal army in Scotland with 5000 light horse, and
rendered singular services -- 37th of the same reign he was slain at Halidon
Rigg, with Lord Ogle. Sir William -- Was raised to the peerage in the same
reign, was Deputy Warden of the East Marches 6th King Edward VI. was a General
of the army against Scotland commanded by Earl Sussex 12th Queen Elizabeth.
William Lord Eure -- sometime Governor of the Middle Marches.
Wallis.


PONTELAND
is in a very low situation on the banks of the river Pont, from which it
derives its name: it was part of the ancient possessions of the Barons of
Mitford, and by an inquisition taken at Newcastle, 14th September, 10th King
Edward II. is noted as part of the property of Adomar de Valence, Earl of
Pembroke. This place is mentioned in history for the congress held in 1244, the
28th King Henry III. when peace was settled between England and Scotland
through the negotiations of the Prior of Tynemouth. The church is in the form
of a cross, and was formerly collegiate. A. D. 1291 in the Lincoln Taxation is
the following estimate of this Collegiate Church.

Ponteland Rectoria XXX l. XII d. Prebanda dom. Carol de Bellamont XXII l.
Prebenda Philipi de Wyleby XX l. X s.

Gilbert, Parson of Esland, was a witness, with others, to the first charter of
St. Mary's Hospital in Newcastle, about the year 1190.

At the west end of the church is a gallery, on the front of which is the
following inscription in gold letters: Mr Richard Coats died January 3d, 1719,

And left his whole effects, at or about 70l. per annum, to the parish of Pont
Island for a Charity School; the Rev. Mr Byne, Vicar of Pont Island; the Rev.
Mr Forster, of St John's, in Newcastle, and Mr Charles Clarke, Attorney in
Newcastle, being with their successors left Trustees for ever to see it justly
applied.

On the south end of the gallery is another inscription in black letters:

Mrs Barbara Coats built the school-house and erected this gallery at her own
charge, after her husband's decease. N. B. 27l. per annum is only applied to
the use of this School.

Randal's Manuscripts.


Camden Pons Elii in libro Notitiae statio est Tribuni Cohortis Cornoviorum
Etiam hodie depravata voce Pont Eleand dicitur, tanquam Pons Elianus atq. ultra
Elij Hadriani vallum, est in Otodinis, ad fluviolum de suo nomine hodie Pont
appellatum.

Baxti. Gloss. ad. v. 6.
from the name of this place was induced to believe it was the Roman Pons
Aelii, by more modern Antiquaries fixed at Newcastle.

WOLSINGTON
lies at some little distance, lately the property of the family of Jenisons:
it was a manor and part of the possessions of the priory of Tynemouth, is in a
delightful situation, now the seat of Matthew Bell, Esquire

The prospect over this part of the county, at the turnpike bar, is so
extraordinary, that I cannot forbear pointing it out to future ramblers.
Ponteland is seated in the depth of the vale, shrouded with a pretty grove;
Esland Hall crowns the right hand eminence, beyond which the elegant house of
Gosforth, surrounded by rising plantations, fills the more distant landscape;
the neat house at Beanridge to the left, contrasted by Berwick town, of Scotch
aspect, whose black thatched cottages stretch along the neighboring hill. One
of the wings of Dr. Ogle's house at Kirkley is seen through the trees, the
white front, and deep colored shade of the plantations, forming an agreeable
mixture. The town of Ogle stands on an eminence in front, over which Whalton is
seen, and the whole back ground is formed by the rugged rocks of Rothbury,
which give a rude and distant horizon.

We passed over the great north road to

GOSFORTH,
an elegant new building, of Pain's architecture, the seat of Charles
Brandling, Esquire This family possessed Felling, in the county of Durham.

Memorand. quod anno Dni Millimo sexcentemo. quarto die Mensis Aprilis XXIIIo,
Robertus Brandling de felling in Com. Dunelm. Ar. fecit homagiu et fidelitatem
Mro Willimo James theologiae professori Decano et Captlo Dunelm Cathis Eccliae
Xpi et btae Mariae Virginis and Manerio de Felling prdict. suis otinen quod
tenetur de Decano and Captlo Dunelm per servitium Militare et coem sectam ad
liberam Curiam eorund. Decani et Captlo dequindena in quindenam et reddendo pro
scutagio qu^ndo ponitur per patriam iiijs. quando scutagiu currit ad xls. et
plus et redd. ad Scaccariu Decani et Captlo. pd per annum xxvis. viijd. act. in
magna Camera infra Aedes. Decanatus Dunelm. in putia mei Thomae King Notarii
pubci. Dcoru Decani et Captlo Regraij, pntibus etiam tunc et ibm.

Sic subscript.
Anthony Disney James Temple John Horssie Thomas Caldwall Robert Massam
Deo Roberto Brandling flexis genibus sic dicente.

I do become yours and the Chapters man from this day forward for life, and
member, and for earthly honor, and to you shall be faithful and loyal and
shall bear faith to you for the lands which I do claim to hold of you, saving
the faith I owe to our Sovereign Lord the King, and to such other Lords as I
hold of.


surrounded with rising plantations. No place in the county of Northumberland
better ascertains the improvements of which the northern lands are capable:
Minister Acres was shut in on every side by a desert, which within a few years
has been converted into beautiful plantations; but the great advancement which
has taken place here is almost incredible, and the noble works which now fill a
tract of land that was covered with heath, and had all the dreary aspect of
barrenness and waste, are astonishing. No man is more valuable to the
commonwealth, than he who applies his opulence in the improvements of
agriculture: the produce of our lands is a staple of which we cannot be robbed
by foreign enemies; a treasure which no change in the balance of Europe can
waste; an intestine wealth, which will give power without the jeopardies
attending common merchandise; the increase will ever find an efflux to states
which cannot support their numbers by the produce of their own land, and will
ever secure an influx of wealth. Our lands afford a perpetual supply of trade;
the goods derived from manual occupations, are the objects of fluctuating
taste; and when Birmingham and Wolverhampton shall no longer bear the laborious
anvil, our wool, our corn and cattle will remain a lasting source of wealth.
Manual occupations are transferrable, and in future ages may and will be moved
from their present seats, and take place in other kingdoms and distant quarters
of the earth; but the produce of lands, as they are local, so are they
universally necessary; those of our climate in particular: others produce the
luxuries we seek, but ours the necessaries every climate requires. To Mr
Brandling every lover of his country must return thanks for the example he has
given, to spur on emulation for improvement, by proving the certainty of the
effect. Gosforth was formerly part of the possessions of the family of Surtees,
Surtees were possessed of Gosforth from the time of King Henry I.

Richard Surtees King Henry III. Ralph 1 King Edward I. Thomas 47 King Edward
III. High Sheriff, also 2 King Richard II. Thomas 8 and 9 King Henry V. High
Sheriff.
Wallis.
held of the Crown by the service of half a Knight's fee: it came to the
predecessors of the present owner some little time before the reign of King
Edward VI. Sir Robert Brandling 1 King Edward VI. created a Knight banneret
after the defeat of the Scots near Musselburg. A representative in parliament
for Newcastle on Tyne in the year 1547, and also in the 1st, 2d, and 3d years
of Queen Mary, and 5 Queen Elizabeth. Sir Robert 15th James I. High Sheriff. A
representative in parliament for Morpeth the 18th of the same reign. Sir
Francis 21 King James I. A representative in parliament for the county of
Northumberland 21st King James, and 1st King Charles I. and High Sheriff 6th of
the same reign.
Wallis.


We passed by

BLAGDON,
the seat of Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. a handsome square building, in the
mode of architecture, and with such ornaments as prevailed in the close of the
last century. It is covered with fine plantations.

This was anciently one of the manors of the barony of Morpeth, held by John de
Plesses, as appears by the escheats of King Edward I. Plesses was a benefactor
to Newminster. A fee for cornage, of 1s. 1d. yearly, on the feast of St.
Cuthbert, was anciently paid out of this manor.

At the distance of two miles, we passed

STANNINGTON,
another dependent manor of the barony of Morpeth, anciently called Cooks Land.
It was chargeable with a cornage rent, payable on the day of St. Cuthbert. The
church stands on the north side of the village. One of the Merleys, Baron of
Morpeth, founded a chantry here, with several endowments. This Chantry was
dedicated to the blessed Virgin, for one Chaplain, to be nominated by the
Archdeacon of Northumberland for the time being.

A Crossed on the south side of the church, with pasture for 4 cows and 30 ewes,
with their followers of one year old.

10 acres of Land, and half a Ploughland in Clifton, and 20 acres in Coldwell,
to be held of the Priory of Hexham, at 1s. 6d. rent.

3 Oxgangs of Land in Coldwell, with Common of Pasture in Clifton and Coldwell,
to hold of Gilbert Coniers and his heirs at 1s. rent.

A Silver Chalice, gilt, of the value of 23s. also vestments for the Chaplain.

The Grant of the Lands is witnessed by Hugone de Bolbeck, Eustachio de la
Vale, Rogero Bertram de Bethall, Johanne de Plesses, Adam Barret, Johanne filio
Simonis, Thoma de Ogle, Willielmo de Horsley, Richardo de Saltwick, Willielme
filio Radulphi, Adam de Plesses, Nicholas de Beckrig, Walter de Witton, and
aliis, and concludes thus, "Ista charta et Chirograffata in quatuor parts.
Unam partem habeo penes me et haeredes meos cum sigillo Archidiaconi
Northumbriae. Aliam partem habet capellanus penes se sigillo meo signatum.
Tertia pars apud Tynemouth, est in Custodia prioris et Conventus. Et quarta
pars est in Custodia prioris et Conventus Dunelmiae Ecclesiae."


The advowson of the church of Stannington was given by Roger de Somerville to
the priory of Newminster.

Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. in the summer 1772, decorated the chancel
windows, which are of the true old Gothic taste, with some curious painted
glass, finely colored, of various scriptural designs and arms of religious
houses, supposed to be 500 years old.

We took our next departure from Morpeth, to visit Tynemouth. In this rout we
passed through

BEDLINGTON,
part of the territories called the patrimony of St. Cuthbert, and a manor
belonging to the Sea of Durham, which, as an exclusive liberty, obtained the
appellation of the shire of Bedlington. It is bounded by the rivers Blyth on
the south, and Wansbeck on the north. In all matters of law and civil
jurisdiction, it is a member of the county palatine, and (as I mentioned before
when speaking of Norham) anciently had courts and officers of justice within
its own limits, appointed under commission from the Bishop of Durham, as well
Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators, as Coroners, and all other officers of justice.
The statute made in the 27th year of King Henry VIII. divested the palatine of
those royal franchises, and resumed the same to the Crown. Copyhold Books H.
Page 227. Fox. 1498.

Cur. ap. Bedlington xviijo. Apr. Ao. Transl. Rici. quarto and Ao. R. H. 7.
xiijo. cora. R. Danby Senesc.

Jur. Regal. pertin Dn^o Ep^o infa. Dniu^m istud.

Vered^em.

It. Iur. dic. sup. sacru. sem quoth. le ankarage and le wreyk maris, ac oi^a al.
regalia infa. Dn^iu^. istud accident. solu^modo pertinent dn^o Ep^o ut de jure
regali Ecc^lie sue and nulli alteri and semp. suerunt a tempe qo. non memoria
Hoiu^. contrariu^. exista^t, nisi in temp^e. Johis Spittell nup. Ballivi p.
favorem sustine^bat Johem^ Gosten and Johem Raw tenent commit Westml^d per sex
annos occupare ea Tamen id Joh^es Spittell his persens in Cur fatetur se
ocupasse and recepisse ead regalia ad usu et oficium dc^i dn^i Ep. sitit Ric^us
Taillor and Joh. Forster deputati sui occupaverunt eadem.

Randal's Manuscripts.
An ancient offering to the Hospital of St. Giles, in Durham, of a thrave of
corn out of every plough land for the relief of Pilgrims, about the time of
King Richard II. was granted by the land owners, payable on the feast of St.
Michael. It was afterward compounded for a money payment.

The town of Bedlington is in a low but pleasant situation; it consists of one
long street. The church is an ancient structure, but has no monuments of note.

In the year 1659, when the lands belonging to the Sea of Durham were put up to
sale by the Parliament, this manor, with Choppington farm, were purchased by
Robert Fenwick, Esquire for 1296l. 5d. It is said, at the restoration, the
purchasers of church lands offered the King the round sum of 500,000l. to
confirm their right for 99 years, on payment of the old rents to the Bishops
and Clergy, which offer his Majesty was so far from complying with, that he
granted a commission of inquiry touching such estates.


Near this place is a considerable iron foundery.

BEBSIDE,
which was in our view from the road, was a manor appertaining to the priory of
Tynemouth.

NEWSHAM and SOUTH BLYTH
lay to our left, the property of a younger branch of the Cramlingtons in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth; Thomas Cramlington 10 Queen Elizabeth. Robert King
Charles I.
His estate was sequestered by parliament 1652.


afterward purchased by Colonel Thomas Radcliff; it is chiefly the possession
of Sir Matthew White Ridley. Blyth is a pretty village, situate on the south
side of the river Blyth, with a commodious port for small craft.

The navigable river and port of Blyth were of consequence to the Bishops of
Durham in ancient times, and are named in their records with the Tyne, Wear,
and Tees, as being subject to their jurisdiction, where they enjoyed all royal
rights. Anno 1. Thomas Hatfield Episc. anno 19 Edward III. 1346. Per Compotum
solut Episc. pro Anchoragis navium in Aqua d'Blyth in Bedlingtonshire 4d. pro
qualibet nave, toto iijs. iiijd.
The Bishops of Durham still continue to lease out the anchorage, beaconage,
plankage, wharfage, ballast key, and wastes between the high and low water
marks of Blyth, and all the wrecks of the sea on that coast. Anno 31 Eliz. Cop.
Halmot Rob. Lambton, anno 43 Eliz. Cop. Toby Matthew Episc. -- Bows.


CRAMLINGTON
lay on our right, a member of the barony of Guagy, the ancient possession and
residence of the family of Cramlingtons. John de Cramlington King Edward II.
Richard 33 King Edward III. William 16 King Richard II.
Wallis.
Male issue failing in William de Cramlington, during the reign of King Henry
V. these estates came to his two daughters as coheiresses; one of whom married
William Lawson, William Lawson 10 Queen Elizabeth. Robert Lawson 7 Queen Ann,
High Sheriff of Northumberland 1708.
Wallis.
through which they soon after centered in that family.

The appearance of

SEATON DELAVAL
now engaged the eye; the spreading plantations extended over the plain
afforded an agreeable scene, which was beautifully improved by the distant
prospect of the ocean.

Seaton Delaval is the chief seat of Sir John Hussy Delaval, Bart. in the
principal manor of the barony of Seaton Delaval. There is in the Herald's
office a very particular pedigree of this Gentleman's ancestors, entered in Sir
William Dugdale's Visitation of Northumberland, which commences at the time of
the Norman conquest: Sir Henrick Delaval, second son of Guido Lord of Delaval,
carried one of the head banners, when his cousin William Duke of Normandy
conquered England; Robertus Comes de Moreton, vel de Mortaign, frater uterinus
Willielmi Conquestoris habuit unicum filium Willielmum, qui ei successit, capt.
apud Tenerichley anno 6to. Hen. I. Idem Robertus habuit tres filias; una
(Agnes) duxit Andr. de Vitre; secunda (Dionisia) Guido, de Delavale; tertia
(Ernia) comitem Tholosenum, expeditione Hierosolomitana occisum, et ex ea
habuit filiam Nuptam Willielmo comiti Pictaviensi et Aquitaniae duci ex qua
Willielmus filius qui successit, pater fuit Elianorae reginae Angliae.

Ex Vel. M. S. remanente inter Archiva Terri. Londinensi. Guy Delaval married
Dionesia the second daughter of Robert Earl of Morton, brother by the mother's
side to King William I.

Hugh Delaval is mentioned in Dugdale's Baronage thus, "Of this name I find
mention in 5 King Stephen, William Maltravers then paying 1000 marks of silver,
and C. L. to be disposed of as the King should think fit, for the widow of Hugh
Delaval, with her lands, for the term of 15 years, and after that time for her
marriage and dowery.

Guy Delaval is next mentioned by Dugdale 13 King Henry II. who then possessed
Navesby, in Com. Northamp. and held 20 Knights fees, as it seems; for in 14
Henry II. upon collection of the aid for marrying the King's daughter, it
appears that he paid 20 marks, viz. 13s. 4d. for each. In 2 Richard I. upon
levying the scutage of Wales, he paid 10l. for his fees in Yorkshire, and upon
the aid for the King's redemption in 6 Richard I. answered 20l. in the same
county, 33s. 4d. in Com. Linc. and 10s. in Com. Oxon. the capital seat of his
barony being in Com. Ebor. This Guy married the daughter of Maurice de Creon,
and died 1 John, whereupon Roger de Lasci, Constable of Chester, gave 500
marks, 10 palfreys, and 10 laisse of greyhounds, for the possession of his
lands, which he claimed as his own right.

Gilbert Delaval was one of the 25 Barons sworn to see the Charters of Magna
Charta and Charta de Foresta, granted by King John at Running Mead, confirmed
by the Roman Pontiff. After this I find mention of Gilbert Delaval, which
Gilbert in 17 Joh. was in arms against that King. All that I have further seen
of him is, that he held Calverdon in Com. Northumb. of the King in capite, by
barony, performing the service of two Knights, as his ancestors had done from
the time of the conquest.

Dugd. Baron.


Eustace Delaval is thus mentioned by Dugdale, etc. At this time also Eustace
Delaval held another barony in Com. Northum. consisting of these Lordships
(scil) Blackaliddon, Seton, with its members, viz. Reusum and Discington, for
two Knights fees de verteri Feoffamento. This Eustace in 42 Hen. III. had
summons, with other of the northern Barons, to fit himself with horse and arms,
and to march into Scotland, for rescuing the King of the realm out of the hands
of his rebellious subjects, who at that time held him in restraint; he being
then in minority, and having married the daughter of King Henry

Hugh Delaval married Maud the daughter of Hugh de Bolbec, and died without
issue. Dugdale says, I come to Hugh Delaval, who in 2 Ed. I. had to wife Maud,
one of the cousins and coheirs of Richard de Montfichet, daughter and heir of
Hugh de Bulbec: which Hugh de Bulbec also wedded Margerie, one of the sisters
and heirs to the said Richard. In 22 Ed. I. this Hugh Delaval (with other of
the great men of that time) had summons to fit himself with horse and arms, and
be at Portsmouth on the 1st day of September, thence to attend the King into
France: but further I cannot say of him.

Eustace Delaval was heir and successor of Hugh, but how near in blood my
author does not point out.

Robert Delaval married Margaret daughter of William Lord Greystock.

William Delaval -- 48 King Edward III. High Sheriff of Northumberland. He
married Christian the daughter of Robert de Eslington.

Sir Robert Delaval -- 2d King Richard II.

Sir Henry Delaval -- He died without issue, and his barony descended to his
sister

Alice -- Who married John de Witchester 18 King Richard II. William de
Witchester, the son of this marriage dying without issue, a third part of the
barony descended to his sister Elizabeth, wife of John de Rouchester, 11 King
Henry VI. on whose death that portion came to

William Delaval, in whom it is said the remainder was vested; but in what
right, or of what line this William was, my author does not point out.

Sir John Delaval was High Sheriff of Northumberland 34 King Henry VIII. 1 King
Edward VI. 1 Philip and Mary, 1 and 13 Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Ralph Delaval was High Sheriff, 17, 25, and 34 Queen Elizabeth, 2 and 19
King James I.

Sir Robert Delaval.

Sir Ralph Delaval, 2 King Charles II. representative in parliament for the
county of Northumberland, was created a Baronet 29 June, 1660.

Sir John Delaval leaving only one daughter, the Baronet's title was extinct.
The estate of Seaton Delaval descended to his nephew

George Delaval, of the North Diffington family, an Admiral in the royal navy,
who dying without issue, it descended to his nephew

Francis Blake Delaval, grandson to Sir Francis Blake of Ford Castle. He was
representative in parliament 4 King George I. for this county, and had several
sons.

Sir Francis Blake Delaval succeeded his father. He was created Knight of the
Bath at the coronation of King George III. and dying without issue was
succeeded by

Sir John Hussy Delaval, Bart. his brother, the present proprietor.


and SEATON DELAVAL North Front
depiction of Seaton Delaval it is very remarkable that the present possessor
of this fine place derived his descent from the Dukes of Normandy on his
mother's side also, who was a grand daughter of Sir Thomas Hussy of
Doddington, in the county of Lincoln, which noble house and estate belong to
him.

In the north front This princely mansion is built after Sir John Vanburgh's
plan.
of this magnificent structure, consisting of five stories, the whole of which
is built of beautiful stone, and of the most excellent masonry, there is a
flight of 16 steps on each side of the uppermost landing; there are three
superb doric columns, which by their bold projectures give an extraordinary
effect to their richly embellished entablatures; immediately over these are
placed handsome vases on pedestals: here the attic story rises, having a grand
pediment, with a triangular tympanum (in which the arms of the family and
various trophies are carved, and so relieved that all their parts are perfectly
seen free from its entablature). This facade is rendered extremely beautiful by
the breaks and fine proportions of its parts, and by the excellent sculpture
with which it is dressed; and the whole is crowned with a ballustrade and
proper pedestals on which urns are placed: at each end hereof are seen the
upper external parts of the grand staircases, rising nearly to the height of
the apex of the central pediment, which afford a very graceful effect, being
ornamented with a series of round ballusters terminated by pedestals, out of
which arise, in form of urns, the tops of chimneys. The perron to the portal
has two landing places, the upper of which is of the height of the basement
story, constructed boldly in bossage-work, serving as a basis for the edifice,
and giving an appearance of great strength to it. On each side hereof a
corridor unites to the house two noble wings, adorned with beautiful arcades,
extending along the whole length of the fronts. These as well as the body of
the house are all covered with lead; their perfect unity therewith, their
SEATON DELAVAL South Front
depiction of Seaton Delaval graceful projections, niches, and pediments, form
a most grand and pleasing court, being terminated with two beautiful pavilions,
connected also by a corridor. The first room which you enter is a most stately
hall, 44 feet long and 44 feet high; here all the ornaments strike by simple
but grand uniformity. Numerous arches, recesses, and niches please the informed
observer, more with the harmony of their proportions than with the splendor of
their decorations. The floor is of a black and white marble, and the
chimney-piece finely adapted to the great style of the room; the figures which
support it are exquisitely executed, as are the basso relievos, and all the
decorations: opposite to the door is a grand music gallery, faced with elegant
iron ballustrades upon a fine entablature, and supported by beautiful consoles:
in the uppermost niches are statues as large as the life, admirably executed by
the best Italian Artists, with their attitudes and symbols representing Music,
Painting, Geography, Sculpture, Architecture, and Astronomy; and in the
interstitial solids are the pictures at full length of Sir John and Lady Hussy
Delaval, and their children. The ceiling is extremely elegant to the right and
left passages, paved with marble, leading through lofty arches to handsome
rooms, wainscotted with mahogany, in which are the pictures of Admiral Delaval,
and others of Sir John's ancestors, by Sir Godfrey Kneller, and other good
portrait painters; and also to the two grand winding geometrical stone
staircases, 17 feet in diameter, reaching from the bottom to the top of the
house, of a structure which has been greatly admired by all who have seen them,
having iron ballusters of a very light and elegant form. The hall leads to a
splendid saloon, fronting the pleasure grounds, 75 feet long, and from the door
at which you enter it to the folding glass doors on the opposite side thereof
it is 30 feet wide: these open into a most magnificent portico, of the Ionic
order, tetrastite, of which the columns are three feet diameter. In this room
there are eight majestic fluted Corinthian columns of the most beautiful stone,
and the same number of pilasters, which divide it into three spaces; the
ceiling was executed by the famous Italian artist Vercelli, and is exquisitely
modelled, and admirably colored: here are several finely painted whole length
pictures of this family. At the east end is a small antichamber, which leads
into a spacious drawing room, and also into a lesser drawing room contiguous to
an an elegant eating-room beautifully ornamented with festoons of fruit and
flowers, formed of a most durable composition, and so admirably painted as
perfectly to resemble nature. Collateral to these stately apartments are others
for retirement and waiting-rooms, connected with a stone winding staircase of
fine workmanship, being ten feet three inches in diameter, and communicating
with the great staircase at every landing-place, through either of which you
may ascend to a grand gallery on the next floor, on each side whereof are
several large and finely proportioned bed-chambers, and from whence you may
pass into 14 new rooms lately built by Sir John, among which are several
stately bed-chambers and dressing-rooms; and he has also highly ornamented the
greatest part of this fine mansion with new and rich furniture. Most of the
best rooms have marble chimney-pieces of admirable workmanship. All the offices
in the base story, which are very numerous, are arched with hewed stone, from
whence you may go on the same level to the east and west wings; in the former
thereof are the noble stables, the chief of which is 62 feet long and 41 wide,
and 24 feet 8 inches high, the roof being supported by three superb arches 21
feet 4 inches high: the divisions of all the stalls and the niches for the hay
are of stone. In this wing there is a gallery extending the whole length of its
front, and several commodious rooms. The other wing contains a spacious and
lofty kitchen and offices of all kinds on the ground floor; and in the second
floor several good apartments, and a gallery also reaching along the whole
length of it. This splendid seat stands in part of the pleasure grounds,
surrounded by a ha-ha, having a wall of hewn stone nine feet high, and
considerably more than a mile in circumference, which is not seen from the
house. Here are several walks disposed with great taste, some of which are
shaded as well by lofty old trees as plantations, through which various vistas
are cut, some of them being terminated by elegant stone buildings, and others
opening delightful prospects to the sea toward the east, greatly heightened by
ships which are frequently sailing in sight of the windows: to the south there
is a fine view over a verdant lawn to another bay of the sea, where frequently
150 sail of colliers may be seen, and enriched with the fine ruin of Tynemouth
Priory, a grand obelisk, and several villages and hamlets interspersed, forming
a very beautiful landscape: to the west there is an avenue of a mile and quarter
long, and to the north a view of a great part of Northumberland, extending over
a space of 60 miles, terminated by the august mountains of Cheviot. This house
stands within a few yards of the place where Delaval Castle, the ancient
baronial seat of the family, formerly stood. Near the house is the family
chapel, In this chapel are two tombs with recumbent effigies, the one a Knight
in armor, who had made the crusade, the other a Lady: but there is no
inscription to denote the personages they represent.
of Saxon antiquity, HARTLEY HAVEN
depiction of Hartley Haven MAUSOLEUM at Seaton Delaval
depiction of mausoleum where divine service is constantly performed: not far
from thence there is an elegant Mausoleum, which has lately been built by Sir
John and Lady Hussy Delaval to the memory of their late son, who was the
delight not only of his parents, but of all who knew him; his endowments were
so pleasing, and his manners so captivating, that the most able panegyrist
would want words to give an adequate idea of this most admirable young man. No
expense has been spared in this pious edifice, which has been justly admired by
every one who has seen it; the perron to the entrance being of the height of
the zocle of the building, serves as a continual pedestal to it; the portico is
of the doric order tetrastite, the columns of which are each formed of one
single stone, weighing several tons, bearing a handsome pediment with a
triangular tympanum: the dressing of the whole is elegant and simple; a cupola
covered with lead, rising majestically in the center, produces a very solemn
appearance: the inside is of the form of a chapel, having a nave in the middle,
with an altar or communion table, above which a solemn dome is supported by
semicircular arches, opening to an aile on each side, in which are several
arches and niches for the reception of tablets, inscriptions, and monuments;
underneath are catacombs strongly arched, and of most durable workmanship: they
are all founded, as is the whole of this structure, upon a rock; and as all the
stones of which it is composed are large, and set so close together as not to
admit of any wall falling, it is calculated to last as long as the work of man
can do: it is enclosed by a ha-ha wall of 11 feet high and 5 feet thick, so
wrought and put together as to have a rocky appearance, giving the idea of long
duration; and by forming from its rudeness a strong contrast to the building,
which is all polished as well as stone can be, produces an admirable effect.

A delightful shady walk, of a mile long, leads to Sir John's port of Hartley,
In a periodical publication, printed for Snagg, in Fleet Street, I find the
following account: Cullicoats, a place otherwise of no great distinction, but
worthy remembrance in this respect, that it is a very commodious little port,
of artificial construction, or as the common people style it, an harbor made
by hand. It is dry at low water and difficult at the entrance; but it serves
for coals and salt belonging to the works of particular persons, at whose
expense it was constructed. Seaton Sluice was originally of the same kind. Sir
Ralph Delaval was continually contriving new improvements, in the exercise of
which he never hesitated at expense; and amongst the rest made this port, on
his own plan, and entirely at his own charge, for the benefit of his tenants
and himself immediately, but without excluding others who chose to use it. In
the construction of this small harbor he found enough to exercise his skill
and patience; the stone pier which covered it from the north east wind, being
carried away by the sea more than once; and when he had overcome this
difficulty by using timber as well as stone, he felt a new inconvenience by his
port's filling up with mud and sand, though a pretty sharp rill ran through it,
which had so hollowed the rock as to produce the very basin which Sir Ralph
would convert into a haven. In order to remove this mischief, he placed a new
strong sluice, with floodgates upon his brook, and these being shut by the
coming in of the Tide, the back water collected itself into a body, and forcing
a passage at the ebb, carried all before it; and twice in 24 hours scoured the
bed of the haven clean. King Charles II. who had a great taste for matters of
this kind, made him collector and surveyor of his own port.
whence his coals, well known in London by that name, are shipped. There are
also large salt works and copperas works, and likewise very considerable glass
works, which were built by Thomas Delaval, Esquire and purchased of him by Sir
John, who has cut through a solid and hard rock a new entrance into his
harbor, which is 52 feet deep 30 feet broad, and 900 feet long: this great
work he did at his own private expense, which no person has any share or
concern in but himself: no ships come hither except for his coals, salt, glass,
and copperas; the three last-mentioned works are carried on here for the sake
of consuming the small coals of his colliery, which would without them be of no
value. Before this new entrance was effected, the opportunity for exportation
here was very confined, as the ships, for want of a sufficient depth of water
in the old entrance, were obliged to be loaded with keels, whereas they can now
sail out with their full loadings. These works produce to the public a revenue
of above 20,000 l. a year, and afford Sir John the means of constantly
supporting several hundred people who live upon his estate in honest industry,
in which he and Lady Hussy Delaval take great delight.

Sir John has also made a little harbor of refuge in St. Mary's Island, for
the safety of the Fishermen upon this coast, by which many have been saved who
could not possibly, in certain winds, have reached any other harbor.

Conceiving it might prove most agreeable to the reader to find a particular
description of

FORD CASTLE,
which Sir John Hussy Delaval considers as his sporting seat, immediately
succeeding that of the princely mansion of Seaton Delaval, I reserved it for
this place.

From Yevering Bell, and the eminences beyond Wooler, it has a noble
appearance, arising from a fine cultivated plain. This Castle was re-edified by
Sir John, the antique style being well preserved in the design; two towers, one
on the east flank, and one on the west, being the only remains of the old
castle which are retained in this edifice. The work was begun in the year 1761,
and completed in two or three years. The front is to the south, the center of
which is formed by a semihexagonal projection, and its terminations are square
turrets; from whence, on each hand, a regular wing is advanced. On the west
side of the area in front, is an old square tower of singular form, it being
composed of two turrets, one arising above another; the upper one being so much
less than that which supports it, as to afford a spacious battlement. The area
is enclosed by a wall embrazured and garnished with turrets, the entrance to
which is by a spacious gateway: the wall is defended by corner towers.

This castle is seated on the east banks of the river Till: It appears by
Madox's Exch. p. 647, that Sir William Heron built it in the 12th year of the
reign of King Henry III. A. D. 1227, the estate having come to his family by an
intermarriage with the heiress of Ford, who derived her descent from Odonel de
Ford, as is mentioned in the preceding page 19, and who was seized thereof in
the time of King Henry I.

The castle commands a fine prospect up the valley as far as Wooler bounded by
lofty eminences, which rising swiftly, are broken in the most agreeable and
romantic manner. To the westward, at about the distance of a mile and a half,
you view Flodden Hill, marked to the eye by a rising plantation of firs, Made
by Sir John Hussy Delaval.
which crowns the eminence, and gives a beautiful object upon the landscape. In
great floods the Till overflows several hundreds of acres of flat ground; the
extensive sheet of water makes a grand appearance from the castle: when it
subsides, the plain is left covered with a most fertilizing mud, by which the
soil is greatly enriched.

From the happy taste her Ladyship possesses for a rural life, Sir John has
advanced the more rapidly in those works of improvement which mark the adjacent
country. The fair example becomes illustrious, by the contrast which is seen in
the lives of persons of equal rank and opulence. The works which are spread
around Ford and Seaton Delaval, whilst they dispense felicity to innumerable
laborious families, contribute greatly to the general opulence of the state. No
panegyric can pay due praise to those who thus employ their abundant wealth:
the effect is not contracted within the circle of Sir John's possessions, the
example influences as it carries with it conviction, and many are thereby
induced to cultivate and improve the adjacent estates, recovering from a
prepossession of ages of ignorance, that the nature of the soil and climate
would frustrate their attempts. A vast tract of land, on which you look from
Ford, was within 20 years last past, one continued sheep-walk; now intersected
and enclosed with excellent quick-wood fences; the eminences adorned with fine
plantations; the large and open farms which heretofore gave the country the
aspect of poverty and desolation, are now subdivided, and let out into smaller
allotments from 60l. to 200l. a year each, by which the country has become well
peopled, and the lands, which for pasturage did not yield above one shilling
per acre, now let for twenty-five shillings. The vice of enlarging farms,
destroying villages, and thereby depopulating a country, was advanced to such
enormity in the reigns of King Henry VII. and King Henry VIII. that it called
for a parliamentary inquiry and restriction. No language can more strongly
express the error, than the preamble of the statute of the 25th of King Henry
VIII. cha. 14. For as much as diverse and sundry persons of the King's subjects
of this realm, to whom God of his goodness has disposed great plenty and
abundance of moveable substance, now of late within few years have daily
studied, practiced, and invented ways and means how they might accumulate and
gather together into few hands as well great multitude of farms as great plenty
of cattle, and in especial sheep, putting such lands as they can get to
pasture, and not to tillage, whereby they have not only pulled down churches
and towns, and enhanced the old rates of the rents of the possessions of this
realm, or else brought it to such excessive fines, that no poor man is able to
meddle with it, but also have raised and enhanced the prices of corn, cattle,
wool, pigs, geese, hens, chickens, eggs, and such other, almost double above
the prices which have been accustomed; by reason whereof a marvelous multitude
and number of the people of this realm be not able to provide meat, drink, and
clothes necessary for themselves, their wives and children; but be so
discouraged with The FORGE near FORD CASTLE
depiction of forge misery and poverty, that they fall daily to theft, robbery,
and other inconveniences, or pitifully die for hunger and cold. And as it is
thought by the King's most humble and loving subjects, that one of the greatest
occasions that moves and provokes those greedy and covetous people, so to
accumulate and keep in their hands such great portions and parts of the grounds
and lands of this realm from the occupying of the poor husbandmen, and so to
use it in pasture and not in tillage, is only the great profit that comes of
sheep, which now be come to a few persons hands of this realm, in respect of
the whole number of the King's subjects, that some have 24,000, some 20,000,
some 10,000, some 6000, some 5000, and some more and some less; by the which a
good sheep for victual, that was accustomed to be sold for 2s. 4d. or 3s. at
the most, now sold for 6s. or 5s. or 4s. at the least; and a stone of clothing
wool, that in some shires of this realm was accustomed to be sold for 18d. or
20d. now sold for 4s. or 3s. 4d. at the least; and in some counties where it
has been sold for 2s. 4d. or 2s. 8d. or 3s. at the most, is now sold for 5s.
or 4s. 8d. at the least, and so are raised in every part of this realm: Which
things, thus used, be principally to the high displeasure of Almighty God, to
the decay of the hospitality of this realm, to the diminishing of the King's
people, and to the let of the cloth-making, whereby many poor people have been
accustomed to be set on work; and in conclusion, if remedy be not found, it may
turn to the utter destruction and desolation of this realm, which God defend.
-- By this law, which is still subsisting, no farmer, under a penalty to be
levied by Justices of the Peace, should hold more than two farms, and they to
be in one parish, where he should reside; and no farmer to have above 2000
sheep.

Not only the pleasure her Ladyship takes in promoting Sir John's attention to
the improvements of the adjacent lands, she also, I am informed, was a chief
cause of the Iron Manufactory carried on near Ford, being brought to its
present significance. About a mile down the river, a Plating-Forge was erected
in 1769, where a large quantity of shovels, spades, and other plate-iron works
are made, as well for home consumption, as for exportation at the ports of
Berwick, Newcastle, etc. The scheme, when carried to its intended extent, will
be of great consequence to this part of the country. The situation of the Forge
is romantic, and the whole scene picturesque. The water to supply the wheels is
collected by a dam, and forms a fine canal, from whence it breaks over the wear
in a beautiful cascade; and being intercepted in its lower course by rocks and
hillocks, divides itself into several streams. The buildings for the forge, as
you look up the river, lay to the left; on the opposite side is a
water-corn-mill: the vale seen above the canal consists of cultivated and
enclosed grounds, which are highly contrasted by the lofty eminences which
bound the prospect, finely broken and irregular, through which the light
streams, and gives a singular beauty to the offscape: these at the extreme
point of view are overlooked by Cheviot, awfully supreme and majestic, on whose
brow heavy vapors are generally seen suspended.

The family of Delaval had considerable possessions in

ECHEWICK:
Hubert Delaval and Richolda his mother gave a moiety of that manor to the
priory of Hexham. The priory held lands there of the gift of others; one parcel
the donation of Thomas de Echewick, and another of Peter de Fawdon. The abbey
of Newminster also had lands in Echewick, by the gift of John de Mitford, 3
King Henry VI.

Roger Fenwick, Esquire of Bitchfield, second son of Sir John Fenwick of
Wallington, by Margery the daughter and heiress of John Harbottle, Esquire married
Ursilla daughter of Sir John Heron of Chipchase, Knt. and purchased of the
Crown Echewick Hall with diverse lands, to be held by fealty only, as of the
manor of East Greenwich, subject to a certain fee-farm rent. In the year 1589,
he settled the same on Anthony his second son, whose issue in the male line
becoming extinct, the estate, about the year 1670, came to Ralph Scourfield,
Esquire of Newcastle upon Tyne, in right of his mother, who was the daughter of
Geo. Fenwick of Newcastle, Merchant Adventurer, younger son of Anthony Fenwick.
Ralph Scourfield of Echewick, Esquire his only son, was High Sheriff for the county
of Northumberland A. D. 1684: he died Sept. 1728, and lies buried within the
rails of the communion table in the church of St. John, Newcastle. On his
decease the estate descended to Edward Bell, Esquire whose eldest daughter and
coheiress, the present proprietor, in the year 1748, married George Spearman,
Esquire

This family of Spearmans derives descent from Le Sire D'Asperemont, son of the
Count D'Asperemont, who accompanied King William the Conqueror to England. The
corruption of the name has been attributed by some of the family to an
achievement in the holy wars under Prince Edward, afterward King Edward I.
The ancestors of George Spearman, Esquire were settled at Preston, in the parish of
Tynemouth, for some centuries. John of that family, in the beginning of this
century, left by will a chalice for the communion, and a yearly stipend for a
Schoolmaster in the parish of Tynemouth.

But to return from this digression: -- From the mausoleum at Seaton Delaval,
the walk is extended to

HARTLEY,
which place was the possession of Adam de Jesmont, as appears by the escheats
of the reign of King John: but in that age it was inconsiderable, when compared
to its present state.

The river anciently made its course due east, until it was within a little way
of the sea, and then suddenly made a turn, and discharged itself in a course
due north. The sea banks at this point form an angle, one side facing to the
north, and the other almost full east. At the point of this angle, Sir Ralph
Delaval erected his works, to secure his little haven at the mouth of the
river, as mentioned in the foregoing note: but Sir John, in an age much
advanced in mechanic knowledge, brought his haven into its present state, by
cutting through the rock, from the point where the river anciently turned
toward the north, to the sea on the east side of the angle, so that the
current now discharges itself into the sea in a straight direction, almost due
east, and forms a harbor accessible with every wind, and a moorage secure
against every storm.

Over the cut, a drawbridge is cast for the passage of the inhabitants.

A little to the west lays

SEGHILL,
mistaken by Camden for the Roman Segedunum, now the possession of Sir Lancelot
Allgood: formerly the seat and manor of a branch of the Mitford family, who
built the tower, the remains of which still appear. John Mitford -- 6 King
Edward VI. John -- 10 Queen Elizabeth. Robert -- Queen Elizabeth. Robert -- 25
King Charles II. Michael -- Queen Ann.
Wallis.


We passed by the Monks stone, about two miles north-west of Tynemouth. The
best account which has yet been given of it, is by Mr Gross, which I shall take
the liberty to transcribe. It appears to me to be the ancient boundary mark of
the priory district: many obelisks of this kind being fixed on the boundaries
of church lands in the northern counties.

A gentleman in the neighborhood remembers it standing, though in a tottering
condition, and much out of the perpendicular: he thinks it was then near ten
feet high: it has lately been thrown down and broken; two pieces of it are now
remaining, one of which, measuring three feet and a half, has been set up, the
other, of about three feet, is the part represented (in Mr Grose's plate) lying
on the ground; on the pedestal is the inscription, O horror, to kill a man for
a pigges head: the characters seem more modern than the obelisk. This monument
is of a whin stone; its plan, what is called an oblong square: it is injured by
time, and besides which, the country people have punched it so full of round
holes, and otherwise so defaced it, as not only to render its ornaments
unintelligible, but also to make it doubtful, whether all its sides, or only
the two broadest were ornamented. The following traditionary story, relative to
this monument, is also given by Mr Gross. A Monk of this monastery, strolling
abroad, came to the house of Mr Delaval, an ancestor of the ancient family of
that name, who was then absent on an hunting party, but was expected back to
dinner: among the many dishes preparing in the kitchen, was a pig ordered
purposely for Mr Delaval's own eating: this alone suiting the liquorish palate
of the Monk, and though admonished and informed for whom it was intended, he
cut off the head, reckoned by epicures the most delicious part of the animal,
and putting it into a bag, made the best of his way toward the monastery.
Delaval, at his return, being informed of the transaction, which he looked upon
as a personal insult, and TYNMOUTH
depiction of Tynmouth Abbey being young and fiery, remounted his horse, and
set out in search of the offender; when overtaking him, about a mile east of
Preston, he so belabored him with his staff, called a hunting gad, that he was
hardly able to crawl to his cell. The Monk dying within a year and a day,
although as the story goes the beating was not the cause of his death, his
brethren made it a handle to charge Delaval with his murder; who before he
could get absolved, was obliged to make over to the monastery, as an expiation
of this deed, the manor of Elsig, in the neighborhood of Newcastle, with
several other valuable estates; and by way of amend honorable, to set up an
obelisk, on the spot where he properly corrected the Monk. Elsig was afterward
made the summer retreat of the Priors of Tynmouth. This story, like many others
of the like kind, is very defective in several parts; no date is affixed, and
the abovementioned monument is shown in support of it; it seems difficult to
account for this Monk being so far from his monastery, especially alone, which
was strictly prohibited by their rules: and this not being of the Mendicant
order, he could not be going on the quest. The only method of reconciling it,
is to suppose that this personage was a lay-brother, and servant to the house.
It however shows how dangerous it was to injure the meanest retainer to a
religious house: a peril very ludicriously, though justly expressed in the
following old English adage, which I have somewhere met with: " If perchance
one offend a Freeres Dog, straight clameth the whole brotherhood, an heresy!
an heresy!"

The town of

TYNEMOUTH
is well built, being a place of great resort in the bathing season. The Inns
are good, and there is every accommodation to render the situation agreeable.

The present church stands a mile west from the town, and was consecrated by
Bishop Cosins, 20 King Charles II. A. D. 1668.

THE PRIORY
lies to the east end of the town, on a peninsula formed of stupendous rocks,
on the north side of the mouth of the river Tyne, against which heavy seas
break with great vehemence and tumult. The approach to the priory in its
present state is from the west, by a gateway tower of a square form, having a
circular exploratory turret on each corner: from this gateway, on each hand, a
strong double wall has extended to the rocks on the sea shore, which from their
great height have been esteemed in former times inaccessible. The gate with its
walls was fortified by a deep outward ditch, over which there was a drawbridge,
defended by moles on each side. The tower comprehends an outward and interior
gateway, the outward gateway having two gates at the distance of about six feet
from each other, the inner of which is defended by a portcullis and an open
gallery: the interior gateway is in like manner strengthened by a double gate.
The space between the gateways, being a square of about six paces, is open
above, to allow those on the top of the tower and battlements to annoy
assailants who had gained the first gate. By different accounts it appears,
that there was a place of considerable strength here in very remote antiquity:
Camden says, there are some apprehend that the rampire, not the (Roman) wall,
went as far as to the very mouth of Tyne, and affirm it was called
Pen-bal-crag, that is, the head of the rampire on the rock. I dare avouch, this
was in the time of the Romans Tunnocellum, expressing the promontory of Tunn or
Tyne, where lay the first cohort Aela Classica, enrolled (probably from the
name) by Aelius Hadrianus, the Emperor, and in pay for sea services: for the
Romans had certain light pinnaces, termed Luforiae, upon the rivers. -- What it
was in the time of the Saxons, as a fortification, we have little or no
evidence to be depended upon. The situation on the ostium of so important a
river, and so well calculated for the command of this shore, induced William
the Conqueror to order it should be converted into a fortress: the religious
inhabitants were ill suited to this plan, and the first degradation of this
monastery was by WALTHEOF Earl and Governor of Northumberland, at the command
of his Sovereign, who it is known had very little veneration for religious
institutions. At this period it was fortified with the wall and tower before
described. Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland, made choice of it for his
stronghold, when he rebelled against King William Rufus. But as it usually
happens with rebels, he had ill success: being closely besieged, he withdrew
himself into the monastery, and claimed the benefit of sanctuary, a protection
presumed to be inviolable in those days. Notwithstanding which, he was dragged
forth by the conquerors, carried to Windsor, and held in close durance there
for a long time before he was put to death. Camden.
On its being converted into a fortress, it took The North West View of
TYNMOUTH.
depiction of Tynmouth Abbey the name of Tynemouth Castle; it belonged to the
Earls of Northumberland from the time of Waltheof for several generations. In
Peck's Desiderata Curiosa, Tynemouth Castle is mentioned in the list of
castles, bulwarks, and fortresses garrisoned in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
whereby it appears here was a master gunner and six inferior gunners. In
Camden's time it was in good repair: he says, it is now called Tynemouth
Castle, and glories in a stately and strong castle. It was besieged by the
Scots in 1644, when the garrison were obliged to surrender to the arms of the
Parliament, and submit to their instructions. On this occasion there was
delivered up 38 pieces of cannon, a great stand of arms, with stores of
ammunition and provision of very consisiderable amount. Several of the
garrison, (it is said during a violent storm) escaped by the privies. A large
sum was appropriated by Parliament to restore the injury this fortress
sustained in the siege, and Colonel Henry Lilburn was made Governor: but he
deserting his party, the garrison soon after revolted. Sir Arthur Hezelrig, who
lay at Newcastle, marched immediately to reduce them, and took the place by
storm: the men scaling the walls in the most intrepid manner, at the mouths of
the cannon, entered by the embrazures and port-holes; and after a short
engagement with the garrison within the fortifications, soon became masters of
it. In the conflict Lilburn was slain.

On passing the gateway, the scene is strikingly noble and venerable; the whole
enclosed area may contain about six acres; the walls seem as well calculated
for defense as the gateway tower; the view is crowded with august ruins; many
fine arches of the priory are standing; the most beautiful part of these
remains is the eastern limb of the church, of elegant workmanship. The ruins
are so disunited, that it would be very difficult to determine to what
particular offices each belonged. On the south side, adjoining the wall which
stands on the brink of the cliff, are several spacious vaulted chambers, one of
which I conceived was the kitchen, from the large extended fireplace; another
the prison, with an aperture in the top of the vault, by which the miserable
captive descended to his horrid dungeon. On the north and east sides, the
cliffs appear to be about 10 perpendicular fathoms in height, at the feet of
which, on a broken rocky shore, the sea beats impetuously. From the walls on
the south side, you have a view of the batteries which command the mouth of
Tyne, with the barracks for the garrison. On the north side, is a house built
by Colonel Henry Villiers, once Governor of this fortress, together with a
light-house, for the benefit of shipping passing this dangerous coast. These
erections being made by license from government, Villiers was authorized to
receive one shilling for every British vessel, and sixpence for each foreign
vessel anchoring in Shields harbor, which produced a revenue of about 80l. per
annum: a trifling gratuity for so beneficial a work. His Monument in the
priory-yard has the following Epitaph: Hic fitae sunt mortales Reliquiae
Henrici Villiers Armigeri
Stirpe antiqua prognati
Unici
Honoratissimi Comitis de Jersey
Fratris
Nec non hujus presidii
Circiter Viginti annos
Fidelis et perquam dilectus
Praefectus
Vixit annos 49 Obiit 18 Aug.
Anno Dom. MDCCVII.



The ruins which present themselves in front, on entering the gateway, appear
to be the remains of the cloister, to which you have access by a gateway of
circular arches, comprehending several members inclining inwards, and arising
from pilasters. After passing this gate, in the area many modern tombs appear,
the ground being still used for sepulture. The west gate entering into the
abbey is still entire, of the same architecture as that leading to the
cloister. The ground from the cloister to the south wall is almost covered with
foundations of buildings, which I presume are the remains of the priory. Two
walls of the east end of the church are standing; the end wall to the east
contains three long windows; the center window, the loftiest, is near 20 feet
high, richly ornamented with mouldings; some of rose-work, and others of the
dancette, as the figure is termed in heraldry, or zig-zag, a decoration common
to old Saxon architecture. The divisions or pillars between the windows are
enriched with pilasters of five members, with highly finished foliated capitals
and cornices. Above the center window, is an oval one with like mouldings, and
the openings of a gallery on each side. Part of the south side wall of the
choir is also standing, illuminated with four windows of like form as those to
the east, and equally ornamented, though not of the same height; for above them
are an equal number of small windows: the divisions or pillars between the
larger windows are decorated with pilasters, of the same kind as those at the
east end; in the divisions or pillars between the smaller windows, spring the
groins of the arches which formed the roof, by their remains showing they were
ornamented with rich mouldings. The arches of the windows in this part are
circular; the blank arches which are thrown upon the wall beneath the windows
are pointed. The architecture through the whole of this part of the building is
singularly light and beautiful; the erection consists of a red freestone, which
endures the weather well, in this stormy situation.

Beneath the center window at the east end, is a doorway, of like excellent
workmanship, conducting to a small but elegant apartment, which I conceive has
contained the shrine and tomb of St. Oswine. On each side of the door, is a
human head, cut in a style much superior to that of the general taste of the
age in which they are supposed to have been executed. The apartment within is
18 feet in length, and nine feet in breadth and height. On the south side is an
entrance from the open yard with two windows, on the north side three windows,
and a circular window to the east, so elevated as to give place for an altar
beneath: there are two niches for statues at the east end, a closet for the
vessels for sacred offices, and a basin for holy water: on each side of the
window is the figure of a Monk kneeling, and two of the emblematical animals
commonly depicted with the Evangelists: the side walls are ornamented with
pilasters, from whence spring the groins and arches of stone, which in various
intersections form the roof; the joinings of which are enriched with circles of
carved work, and the interstices of the roof are arched and constructed with
thin bricks. The circles contain sculptures of the divine Personages with the
Apostles, of workmanship far from being despicable, and all the figures are in
good preservation. Round each sculpture is a circular belt with a sentence in
the old English character, well raised, viz. Sanct. Petrus ora P. nobis, etc.
each varied by the name of the personage to whom it is inscribed. The center
row consists of four circles; in one is the effigies of John the Baptist, with
the like sentence; in a second, toward the west, the effigies of our Savior,
with a Monk kneeling; in a third, to the east, the effigies of the Supreme,
with the Lamb bearing an ensign; and in the fourth, a representation of the
last judgment, with this sentence: In die judicii liberare nos. Above the door
is the effigies of our Savior with a globe in his hand, with morit P. nobis,
subscribed; on each side of the door, an emblematical figure, as to the east.
There are two escutcheons, the dexter one charged with bearings of Vesey, a
cross sable; the sinister, the bearings of Brabant and Lucy quarterly. In P.
Monier's celebrated History of Painting, etc. we have the following remarkable
passages touching the original use of Paintings and Sculptures in the christian
churches.

One would have thought that the excellence of designing ought to have been
kept up at Rome, by reason that from the beginning of the Christian Religion
the Christians made use of painting and sculpture, to represent the histories
of the Old and New Testament, to adorn their churches and tombs.

St Gregory In an oration which he made at Constantinople, mentioned in the
second Nicene Council Ac. 4. Vidi saepius inscriptionis imaginem, and sine
larrymis transire non potui, cum tam efficaciter eb oculos poneret Historiam.
of Nice assures us, he could not refrain from tears at the sight of a picture
wherein Abraham was represented about to sacrifice his son: In his oration of
St Theodore Pictor artis suae f^res in imaginibus exprimens, res Martyris
praeclare gefias, Labores, Cruciatus, immanes Tyrannorum espectus, impetas,
ardentem iliam and flammas evomentem fer^atem, beatissimum Atcletam, Christiq.
certamini praesidentis, ac prae^ doctis, tama^e fermant imaginis: Haec inquam
voiis tanquam in libro loquente, artisciose describens, Martyris cert^i^a
sapi^er expes^it. Novit e^im etiam Pictara tacens, in perietibus l^qui, and
utilitatis plurimum afferre.
he describes the greatness and magnificence of a temple consecrated to that
Saint. He takes notice that his martyrdom was extraordinarily well done, and
that the characters of the grief and constancy of this martyr, of the
fierceness and cruelty of the tyrant, and the assistance of our blessed Lord to
crown this happy saint, were as legible in this piece as in a book; insomuch,
that the Pictures on the walls were like a lively and useful sermon.

Saint Basil confirms the same thing, and says, that painters do as much by
their figures as orators by theirs, and that both equally serve to persuade and
raise the contemplators to virtue. -- There were some excellent painters among
the Greeks in the year 800; for there was nothing more surprising, nor of
greater usefulness, than a piece of the day of judgment done by Methodius,
which so sensibly affected Bogoris, Curtpal. Ce^en. Z^ar. related by Mr H. D.
Icon^ol.

This Methodius was a Monk and Painter. Bogoris employed him to paint a palace
he had built. He orderd him in general to draw representations of terror;
taking chiefly delight in pictures that represented the combats of hunters with
boars, lions, bears, and tigers. Methodius finding nothing more terrible than
the day of judgment, he painted it admirably well, with all its most horrible
and amazing circumstances; and above all, the reprobates on the left hand of
the judge, and delivered over by his sentence to devils to be dragged into
hell. Bogoris was so touched at the representation of this picture, that he
immediately resolved, without further delay, to turn christian.


King of the Bulgarians, that it converted that prince, and afterward all his
subjects to christianity.

Images in the christian religion began from the time of Jesus Christ: the
first that was made was by a lady, whereof there is made mention in St Luke,
cha. 8. v. 46. This holy woman, as an acknowledgement of her cure, erected in
the city of Caesarea a statue of I. C. It was of brass, and at his feet was the
statue of this woman, in a supplicant posture. She was so acceptable to God,
that he gave a miraculous virtue to a plant that grew at the foot of this
statue, and when it was grown high enough to touch the fringe of this image, it
healed all sorts of diseases. Ni^e Council 2d Act. 4. S. Greg. a Espist. to
Germ. Bp of Constant.
Several historians record this truth, particularly Eusebius of Caesarea,
Eusebius Lib c. 7. Chap. 14. This history is also related by Antipater
Bestrensis, and also by Nicephorus, Casseterat and Metaph^s. There is also a
large narrative of all these ancient images in the book of Subterranean Rome.
who was an ocular witness of the truth of it; and Sozomen reports that Julian
the apostate, by reason of the hatred he bore to I. C. caused this famous
statue to be taken away, and ordered his own to be set up in its place: but he
was immediately punished for this sacrilege, for lightning falling thereon
consumed it to ashes.

There are other authors who write, that from the time of the apostles there
were images of the painting of I. C. Historiae quoq. ( says Damascene) proditum
est. Cum Abagarus Edesse Rex eo nomine pictorem misisset, ut Domini imaginem
exprimeret, neq. id Pictor ob splendorem ex ipsius vultu manantem, consequi
potuisset; Dominam ipsum divinae suae ac vivificae faciei pallium admovisse;
Sicq. illud ad Abagarum, ut ipsius cupiditati satisfaceret, misisse. 5. Jo.
Damasc. de orthod. Fid. 1. 4. Chap. 17. Baron. Ann. Tom. 1. an. 31.
and that our blessed Savior was the inventor of them, at the solicitation of
Abagarus King of Edessa, who having heard of the miracles of C. I. sent a
painter to draw his picture; but when he could not lay down the design of it,
by reason of the shining rays that issued from his divine looks, our Lord, to
satisfy the request of the King of Edessa, covered his face with a linen vail,
whereon he imprinted his divine image, and sent it to that prince, by virtue
whereof he was healed of a disease otherwise incurable. In the time of the
apostles were also to be seen images of the blessed virgin; for St Luke made
several of them: this is witnessed by St Gregory the patriarch, of
Constantinople, St Gregory the 2. writing to Leo Isaurus relates the same
history, and that they came out of all the East to worship this image. Cum
Hyerosolymis ageret Christus, Abagarus qui tum temporis dominabatur, and Rex
erat urbis Edessenorum cum christi miracula audivisset, Epistolam scripsit ad
Christum qui manus suae responsum, and sacram glories amq. faciem suam ad eum
misit. Itaq. ad illam non manufactam imaginem mitte ac vide. Congregantur illic
orientis turbae and orant, etc.
in what he writes to the Emperor Leo Isaurianus.

Theodorus Theodoris in his oration against Leo Isaurus Annal. T. 9. Annal.
814. and in the 2d Council of Nice: The same relation is confirmed by Leo,
Lecturer of the church at Constantinople, who witnesses the honor that was
paid in his time to that image. These are his words, Leo Religiosissimus Lector
magnae and egretiae Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae dixit, and ego indignus
vester famulus cum descendissem cum regis Apocrisariis in Syriam Edessem
petivi, and venerandam Imaginem, non factam hominum manu adorati and honorari
apopula vide, etc.
further shows, that the Empress Eudoxia sent one of these images, painted by
St Luke, to Pulcheria Augusta; Lucas vero, qui sacrum composuit Evangelium, cum
Domini pinxisset imaginem pulcherimam and pluris faciendam posteris reliquit.
St Theodor. Orat. in Leo Arm.

Teod. Lect. Collet. L. 1.
there is also one to be seen at this day at Rome, made by the same saint,
which is carefully kept by the religious of Saint Sylvester.

Although the history of the portrait of C. I. sent to Abagarus, and that of
the portrait of the Holy Virgin, painted by St Luke, are scrupled and contested
about by some, notwithstanding I thought fit to relate them here to show the
antiquity of images after the example of the second Nicene Council. Those of
the Apostles, St Greogory II. in his epistle to Leo Isaurus, says, of the first
christians who painted our Savior, Qui Dominum cum viderent, prout viderant
venientes Hierosolymam spectandum ipsum proponentes depinxerunt. Cum Stephanum
Protomartyrem vidissent, prout viderant spectandum ipsum proponentes
depinxerunt. Et uno verbo dicam, cum facies martyrum qui sanguinem pro Christo
fuderunt, vidissent depinxerunt.
Confessors, and Martyrs have been also painted and engraven in the infancy of
the church. The same St Gregory tells us the same thing, as Pope Adrian I.
relates in what he writ to Constantine and Irenaeus. He assures us that there
were kept in the Basilicum and in the Vatican, the portraitures Had. 1. Epist.
to Constable. and Irenaeus Baron. Annal. to 3. An. 324. and to 3. An. 785.
of St Peter and St Paul, which are those which St Sylvester showed to the
Emperor Constantine Constantine, to adorn his new city, set up on all the
gates, the image of the Holy Virgin, and upon that of his palace the image of
our Savior, which Leo Isaurianus caused to be taken away. He also caused to be
raised in the middle of his palaces, fine statutes of our Savior, in the form
of the good Shepherd, and that of the prophet Daniel in the lion's den. H. of
the Iconocl. of Maimbourg.
the Great after he was converted.


Many little ornaments are cut on the inferior roses on the arched work; as
croslets, crescents, winged crosses, the old Saxon (...), as the emblem of
sacred masonry, and the usual characters disposed over religious buildings Ihc,
Jesus hominis conservator. On the outside of this erection, at the east end,
are two coats armor, supported by cherubs; the one charged with a cross, the
arms of the monastery of St. Albans, the other, with three crowns; which latter
was the proper arms of the monastery Tanner.
of Tynemouth.

The time when this monastery was first founded, as well as the founder, are
both uncertain. By a passage in Leland's Collectanea, vol. 3. p. 42. it
appears, that Edwin King of Northumberland, who began his reign about the year
617, and died in 633, built a chapel of wood at Tynemouth, wherein his daughter
Rosetta took the veil; and that this chapel was afterward rebuilt by St.
Oswald with stone. Chronicon autore monacho Albanensi, sed incerto nomine.
Edwinus Rex Northumbrorum, facellum erexit Tinemutae ex ligno, in quo Rosetta,
ejus filia, postea velum sacrum accepit. S. Oswaldus monasteriolum de Tinemuthe
ex ligneo lapideum fecit.

Oswinus Rex and Martyr sepultus Tinemuthae.

Edredus Rex Deirorum ibidem sepultus.

Henricus heremita Coketensis insulae, ibidem sepultus.

Malcolinus Scotorum Rex apud Alnovicum occisus a Moubreio Comite, sepultus est
ibidem in Capitulo.

Monasterium de Tinemuthe bis destructum, semel per Augarum and Hubonem,
iterumque per Danos tempore Athelstani Regis.

Dani Tinemutha utebantui pro propugnaculo atque adeo receptaculo cum
transfretarent ex Dania and Norwegia in Angliam.

In Cocheta Insula caenobiolum est monachorum Tinemutensium.

E Regione Tinemuthae fuit urbs vastata a Danis Urfa nomine, ubi natus erat
Oswinus Rex.

Locus ubi nunc Caenobium Tinemuthense est, antiquitus a Saxonibus dicebatur
Penbalcrag, i. e. caput valli in rupe. Nam circa hunc locum finis erat valli
Severiani.

Lel. Col. vol. 3. p. 42.
Tanner, in his account of this house, says, Among the monasteries and churches
founded by St. Oswald, the first christian King of Northumberland, this is
reckoned to be one, though others ascribe its foundation to King Egfrid.

Although the exact era of its foundation cannot be ascertained, there are
nevertheless sufficient proofs of its great antiquity: insomuch, that according
to the learned author last cited, it is evident that St. Herebald, the
companion of St. John of Beverley, was Monk and Abbot here in the beginning of
the 8th century. Before the end of the 8th century this monastery was plundered
by the Danes, as it was again by them under Hunguar and Hubba in the next
century, and by the same Pagans a third time in the reign of King Athelstan.
The old church was dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and seems to have lain
desolate till the finding of King Oswin's relics here a little before the
conquest, when to the honor of St. Mary and that King, Tosti Earl of
Northumberland repaired and endowed this house. Upon the banishment of Tosti,
this country was given by the Conqueror to Robert de Moubray, who thereupon
became Earl, and placed in the church here (which had been given by Waltheof
Earl of Northumberland to the Monks of Yarrow, and by Earl Arlbry to Durham)
Black Monks from St. Albans in Hertfordshire, to which abbey this priory was
subordinate; though 26 Henry 8, it was found to have a separate yearly revenue of
397l 10s. 5d. ob. Dugd. 511l. 4s. 1d. ob. Speed.

Tanner, 390. Vide in Mon. Angl. tom. 1. p. 42. donationem eccl. S. Mariae de
Timmuth monachis apud Girve factam a Waltheoso com. Northumbr. P. 45. de
revocatione istius donationis ex munimentis Dunelm. Ibid. p. 333. Ex Leland
Collect. v. 3. p. 177. de vita S. Oswini, ejusq. translatione. P. 335. Cartas
Will. Conq. unam Hen. 1. duas Davidis regis Scottorum; unam Hen. 2. unam
Joannis regis; unam Richardi Bertram de Garbis in Bothal. Cart. 2. Edw. 3. n.
3. de Libertat. Matthew. Paris Vitas Abbatum S. Albani. Math. Westmonast.
Historiam in anno. 1090

In Madoxii Hist. scace. p. 279. pro libertat. confirmandis (bis) vide etiam,
p. 414.

Year Books XVIII. 20.

De ecclesiis collatis prioratui de Tinmouth, MS. in Bibl. Cotton.

Excerpta ex antiquo registro prioratus de Tinmouth remanente apud comitem
Northumbriae MSS in bibl. Cotton.

Registria Abbatiae S. Albani.

Cart. Antiq. G. 21.

Cart. 5. Joan. m. 12. n. 99. Claus. 6 Joan. m. 5. quod monachi sint quieti de
cornagio.

Plac. de Banco. 10. Hen. 3. Hill. Rot. 18. pro manner. de Cherinton. Cart. 53.
Hen. 3. m. 2. pro market. apud Bewyke. Cart. 55. Hen 3. m. 4 and 7, de
libertatibus.

Pat. 21. E. 1. m. Plac. in Com. Northumb. 21. Ed. 1. assis rot. 2. dorso. rot.
8. 9. dorso; rot. 21, 22, 24 dorso; Et 26 27 de manner de Westcherton. Cart. 27.
Ed. 1. n. 31. Cart. 32. Ed. 1. n. 14. pro feria apud Tinmouth. pat. 35. Ed. 1.
m.

Pat. 6. Ed. 2 p. 1. m. 10. dorso pro return. brev. Cart. 9. Ed. 2. n. 39. Pat.
19. Ed. 2. p. 1. m. 35. pro mess. et terris in Bokeworth, Moreton, Whitley et
Milneton; et p. 2. m. 4. pro mess. in Novo Castro.

Cart. 2. Ed. 3. n. 75. Claus. 2. Ed. 3. m. 35. Pat. 2. Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 35 pro
ten in Woodham et Seton. Pat. 9. Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 7. Pat. 13. Ed. 3. p. 1. m.
Pat. 19. Edw. 3. p. 3. m. 4. Pat. 22. Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 28. Pat. 28. Ed. 3. p. 1.
m. 2. pro ten. in West Morton, East Backworth, West Backworth, Preston, etc.
Pat. 34. Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 18. pro ten. in Wolsington Morton et Middle Chirton.

Pat. 3. Ri. 2. p. 2. m. 13. Pat. 4. Ri. 2. p. 2. m. 3. Pro ten. in Seton
Monachorum, Est Chirton, Eglingham, Denton, etc. Pat. 5. Ric. 2. p. 2. m. 1.
Pat. 8. Ric. 2. p. 1. m. 2. pro Eccl. de Hawtwyssel in Tynedale approprianda.
Pat. 15. Ric. 2. p. 1. m. 7. Pro Mess. in Novo Castro. Ibid m. 12. pro. aliis
messuagiis ibidem. Ibid. p. 2. m. 6. Pat. 16. Ric. 2. p. 1. m. 6. pro ten. in
Elstwick, Newbigging, Wodrington, Cuppon, etc.

Cart. 2. Hen. 4. p. 1. n. 4. Pat. 6. Hen. 4. p. 1. m. 35. pro manner. de
Whitley.

Pat. 3. Ed. 4. p. 3. m. 12.

Rec. in. Scac. 11. Hen. 8. Pasch. rot. 24.


The personages who were interred here point out its consequence in those days.

It suffered three several depredations from the Danes: the first about the
conclusion of the 8th century; A. D. 800. Ecclesiae de Herteness and de
Tinemuth spoliatae sunt a Danis.

Lel. Col. v. p. 388.
the second under Hunguar and Hubba, in the reign of King Ethelred; and the
third in the reign of Athelstan. The desire of plunder urged those heathenish
tribes of robbers against the sacred places: on the second descent of those
invaders, the Monks fled to their church for safety, and there suffered
together with the hallowed pile; the Barbarians reducing the whole, with its
religious assembly, to ashes. If we were allowed to trust, that vindictive
Providence sometimes wields an immediate scourge over the wicked, we should
conceive the divine interposition was manifested on those inhuman murderers,
who were pursued by Ethelred King of the Northumbrians, and Offa King of
Mercia, with a dreadful slaughter, and forced in great precipitation to their
ships, when a succeeding storm strewed the shores, which had been conscious of
their crimes, with their miserable carcasses and the wreck of their fleet.

After the horrid massacre of the Monks, the monastery lay in ashes till the
reign of Edward the Confessor, when Tostin Earl of Northumberland rebuilt and
endowed it; but what order of religious were placed here, I have found no
positive evidence. It was not till Mowbray's time Black Canons were settled
here from St. Albans. Tostius Co. Eboraci frater Heraldi primus fundator per
alios. Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 103.

Oswine was killed at Gillingham, and was buried at Tynemuth. Osred was buried
at Tinemuth.

Ibid. p. 515 -- 516. Corpus Oswini ab eis, qui truncaverant, delatum est ad
Ostium Tinae flu. ibique in oratorio S. Mariae sepulturae traditum, in quo loco
virorum illustrium mag. multitudo congregata erat, qui sub ordine regulari
divino cultui serviebant, qui quidem in tantam excreverat honoris eminentiam,
ut si quis per infra jacentem provint. in fata concessisset, ad eundum locum
pro reverent. and honor religiosae gentis tumulandus deferretur.

Hynguar and Hubba hoc monaster. destruxerunt monachi metu persecut. fugerunt
ad quandam ecclesiolam in fundo suo, quam S. Cuthbertus dedicaverat. Quo
comperto Dani ipsam eccl. and omnes qui in ea erant, igni succenderunt, and
omne loci nobilis aedificium in campi planitiem redegerunt.

Jacuit pene neglectum corpus Oswini regis, usque ad tempora Tostii comitis,
and Egelwini episcopi.

Oswinus Martyr apparuit in somnis (Eadmundo) aedituo veteris eccl. S. Mariae
de Tinemuth.

Juditha uxor Tostii comitis, persuasit Egelwino, ut quaeriret Oswini Corpus.

Inventio corpuris S. Oswini Martyris anno ab ejus passione 414. A. D. 1065,
quinto Id. Martii.

Corpus Oswini translatum in novum monasterium de Tinemuth A. D. 1110. 13 Call.
Sept.

Ibid. vol. 3. p. 114 and 115. Grant of King William Rufus.

Willielmus Rex Angl. T. Archiepiscopo and W. Dunelmensi Episcopo and omnibus
Baronibus sus Francis and Anglis salutem. sciatis me dedisse and concessisse
Deo and S. Albano Ecclesiam de Tinemotha and omnia quae ad eam pertinent in
terris et Decimis et consuetudinibus and nort de Tyne and in suth de Tyne and
in Anglia cum omnibus quae Robertus Comes Northumberland and sui homines
dederant sancto Oswino antiquam mihi forisfactus esset. Et volo and praecipio
ut S. Albanus habeat praedictam Ecclesiam cum omnibus ad eam pertinentibus cum
pace and honor and omni jure perpetuo Testibus Eudone, Dapifew and P. de
Valonis, apud Novum Castrum.

Dated at Canterbury, 4th Nov. in the 1st year of Richard I.

Richardus Rex, etc. Notum facimus vobis nos concessisse, etc. Deo and sancto
Albano Ecclesiae suae sancti Oswini de Tynemuth cellae sancti Albani and
Monachis ibidem deo seventibus omnes terras suas and omnes homines suos, cum
sacha soca over strond et streme, on wode et field, toll them and grithburge,
hamfocne, murdrum and forestall, danegeld, infangenethof and utfangenethef,
fleminefrenieth, blodwit, wreck, etc.

Exposition of terms.
Sacha. Hoc est placitum and emenda de transgressionibus hominum in curia
vestra. Soca. Hoc est secta de hominibus in curia vestra secundum consuetudinem
Regni. Over strond et streme, etc. In Littore in fluvio, in sylva and campo.
Them. Theme est quod habeatis totam generationem villanorum vestrorum cum eorum
sectis and catallis ubicunque inventi fuerunt, etc. Grithburge. Power of
punishing breaches of the peace. Hamsocne. Now called burglary. Murdrum.
Anciently defined, Homicidium quod nullo praesente, nullo audiente, nullo
vidente clam perpetratur. Dane geld. A land tax of 12d. upon every hide of land
imposed by the Danes. Infangenethef and utfangenethef. Power of apprehending
and punishing thiefs, as well taken within the liberty as without.
Fleminefrenieth. The relief of fugitives. Blodwit. Pains of bloodshed. Wrecke.
Wrecks of the sea.



Tostin did not make this foundation from religious principles; he was prompted
to it by ambition or other sinister views: his life was marked with savage
barbarities, which drew upon him the wrath of his Prince, who banished him for
his complicated and atrocious crimes. Thenceforth he attached himself to the
King of Norway, who was ravaging Scotland, and induced him to attempt deposing
his own brother, Harold II. for which purpose he projected a descent at the
haven of Tynemouth, from whence they pillaged all the country on the banks of
Tyne. Putting again to sea, they entered the Humber, where they committed the
most horrid cruelties, burning and laying waste the whole country, and imbruing
their hands in a flood of innocent blood. In a little time they were opposed by
a body of forces under the command of Edwin and Morchar; but in the conflict
the Danes were victorious. Harold with an army of 60,000 men, soon afterward
engaged the invaders, who were nearly equal in number, at Stanford Bridge, near
York. The battle began at seven in the morning, and did not cease till three in
the afternoon, when after a great slaughter of the Danes, Tostin and the Danish
King being among the slain, victory declared for Harold: and such were the
bloody honors of the day, that out of 500 ships, with which the invaders
entered Tynemouth haven, twenty, and those too by permission of the Conqueror,
carried the young Prince with his remaining followers to Denmark. Adam Bemensis
says, "That in the spoil of the invaders there was as much gold taken, as
twelve young men with difficulty bore on their shoulders."


This monastery was reduced to the title of a cell to Gynwin, afterward became
a cell to Durham, and at last a cell to St. Albans. Waltheof Earl of
Northumberland, A. D. 1073, gave to the Monks of Durham the Church of our Lady
at Tynemouth, with the body of St Oswin, King and Martyr, there interred, and
died 1075.

Mon. Aug. v. 1. p. 42.
From the great disagreement in authors on these facts, it is difficult to
determine by whom these several changes were made; but from the best
authorities, I am led to conceive the first degradation of this monastery was
by Waltheof Earl of Northumberland, at the command of his King. To show some
color or pretext for so flagrant an invasion of the rights of the church, he
pretended it was an unfit situation for devotion (horridus and incultus). Mr
Wallis's ideas are excellent on this subject: I will take them literatim, as he
gives them in his work.

It is so far from being an unfit place for devotion, that few can exceed it,
for presenting the mind with a variety of solemn objects, capable of raising it
to an adoration and awful reverence of the Deity. The very precipice it stands
on, lofty and almost perpendicular, whose semicircular base withstands the fury
of the waves, must have inspired the religious with a firm reliance on him who
is the rock of ages: the calms -- the storms -- the ships, must all by turns
have furnished them with occasions to praise him, whose wonders are seen in the
great deep.

The monastery was dismembered from Gyrwin, and made a cell to Durham, Albrius
Comes Northumb. donationem de Tinemuth confirmavit ecclesiae S. Cuthberti.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 332.
by Albric Earl and Governor of Northumberland, (Mr Gross says, by Agelwinas in
1065, who was Bishop of Durham, but quotes no authority) as an act of devotion
to the memory of St. Cuthbert. Mowbray, when Earl of Northumberland, severed it
from the church of Durham, and gave it to St. Albans, in or about the year
1090, Robertus de Mulbraio circa annum D. 1090, restauravit Eccl. S. Oswini
martyr: apud Tynemuthe, and eam tanquam cellam monaster. S. Albani designavit.
Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 418.

Robertus Mowbray comes Northum. abstulit Tinemuth monachis Dunelmensibus, and
dedit Paulo abbati and monachis S. Albani. Offensum Gul. Mag. timens Tinemuthe
loco castelli occupat, postea tamen ibidem Captus.

Ibid. p. 332. Ossa S. Oswini translata a Tinemuth ad Girwi permissione
Walthevi Comitis.

Ibid. p. 383. Fr. Clem. Westmynster Monachi de Tynmouthe Ord Pb^ri. 20 Dec.
1533. Fr. Rob. London Monachi de Tynmouthe Ord Pb^ri. 20 Dec. 1533. Fr. Will.
Facetus Monachi de Tynmouthe Ord Pb^ri. 20 Dec. 1533. Reg. Tustal. p. 16. Prima
Tonsura, i. e. Shavelings. Tho. Duresme, Rob. Charity Monachi Mon. de
Tynmouthe, 18 Dec. 1533. Geo. Faith, Edw. Hope Monachi Mon. de Tynmouthe, 18
Dec. 1533.
Ibid. p. 23. Cuth. Baleye Dun. Dioc. ad Tit^lm mon. de Tynm. Pb^r tunc.

Randal's Manuscripts.
he having repaired the church and offices, and placed therein Black Canons
from that abbey. This was said to be done in resentment (as appears by Dugdale)
for some affront he conceived he had received from the Bishop of Durham. It is
remarkable, that the very altar which he thus presumed to profane, he sought to
lay hold of as his sanctuary, when his unsuccessful plots brought upon him the
wrath of his Sovereign. It is said by his treason he forfeited 280 Fiefs, so
princely were his possessions.

The Prior had the privilege of a market on Sunday, and the priory had many
wealthy endowments, which were confirmed by the patents of many of our Kings,
from King Henry I. to King Edward IV. These possessions are thus mentioned by
Mr Wallis and Mr Gross.

The Priors and Canons of Tynmouth had 27 villas in Northumberland belonging to
them, with their royalties, viz. Tynemouth, Miluton, Shields, East Chirton,
East Preston, Monckton, Whitley, Murton, Ersden, Backworth, Seghill,
Wolsington, Dissington, Elswick, Wylam, Hertford, Cowpon, Bebsed, Welden,
Hauxley, Ambell, Eglingham, Bewick, Lilburn, Flatworth, Middle Chirton, West
Chirton. Within these Lordships they returned the King's writs, and were exempt
from cornage.

They had also the lands of Royeley and Denum.

They had the Tyths of Corbridge, Ovington, Wylam, Newburn, Dissington,
Callerton, Elswick, Bothall, Warkworth, Ambell, Rothbury, and Wooler in
Northumberland. Also the Tithes of Hertness, in the Bishopric of Durham, and
of Middleton upon Tees.

They had the impropriations and advowsons of Tynmouth, Woodhorn, Whalton,
Bolham, Bewick, Eglingham, Hartfurn, Shilbottle, and Haltwesel, in
Northumberland, and Conscliff, in the Bishopric of Durham.

They had 17 messuages, and a close called Warden's close, in Newcastle upon
Tyne.

They had a weekly market at their town of Berwick, and an annual fair at
Tynemouth. Also a harbor, called the Priors Harbor.

Ralph Lord Greystock founded a Chantry in 1315, and John Lord Greystock and
Sir Robert Somerville made several donations to the Priory, with several others.

Wallis. Gross. The Priors harbor is now the public bathing place.

King Henry I. confirmed all that had been given to this monastery by Mowbray,
viz. Tyths of Corbridge, Ovington, Wylam, Newburn, Dissington, Calverdon,
Elstroye, Bothall, Werkworth, Anebell, Roubyr, and Wullour.

David King of Scots, by his charter A. D. 1138, granted to this church his
peace for ever, the peace of his son, and that of all his servants, threatening
all those who should act otherwise with the loss of his favor for ever; on
condition the religious of this monastery prayed for the souls of his father
and mother, and of King Alex. his brother, and the soul of Matilda Queen of
England, his sister, and for the souls of all his ancestors and successors.

King Henry II. gave thereto Egleringham, Bewick, and Dilleburn.

King John confirmed all their possessions, viz.

Tynmouth, Seaton, Preston, Chirton, Churton, Millington, Whitley, Edeston
Backwell, Backwell, Seghal, Morton, Bebeside, Disslington, Dissington,
Wulsington, Bewick, Egelingham, Lilleburn, Anibel, Hovekslaw, Estwick, Wylum,
Weltedane, and half of Copun, Carleberry and Morton in Haliwerkstock, and the
land of Royeley and Demuni; also the churches of Tinmouth, Wodeburn, Whalton,
Bolum, Bewick, Egelingham, Kertburh and Cunestine; likewise Hereford upon
Blyth, and the tithe of Hyrenes, Middleton upon Theyse, Corbrigg, Rouber,
Werkewuriel, Wollour and Newburn, with all the mills.

Richard Bertram gave the tyths of Bothal.

King Edward III. confirmed all the possessions, immunities, etc.

Ra^son of William Fitz Ralph, Lord of Grimethorp, in the county of York,
founded a Chantry at Tynemouth for the soul of John Lord Graystock, who died in
the 34th year of King Edward I. his kinsman, and all his ancestors, and died an
aged man about the feast of All Saints A. D. 1316, 9th King Edward II. and was
buried at Nesham, in the county palatine of Durham.




The badness of the situation, as alleged by Waltheof, was amply compensated
by an advantage arising from thence: the Monks knew well how to avail
themselves of it; the exalted rock on which this monastery stood, rendered it
visible at a great distance at sea, in every direction; whence it presented
itself as if reminding and exhorting Seamen in danger, to make their vows, and
promise masses and gifts to the Virgin Mary and St. Oswin for their
deliverance. Vows of this kind were common among the ancients, and are to this
day, it is said, made in some catholic states, where the walls of churches are
covered with the paintings of ships, boats, and other votive memorials.
Erasmus, in his piece entitled the Shipwreck, has very humourously described
and ridiculed this custom of bribing heaven in case of sudden emergency. In
Germany, below almost every dangerous fall or passage of the Rhine, there is a
hermitage, whose Hermit, or his Agent, waits on the passenger in the boat, as
soon as it has passed over, requesting alms as a reward for his prayers, to the
efficacy of which it is intimated he owes his safety. Something like this
perhaps might be practiced by the Monks, from which they would receive many
emoluments, both in goods and money, for the celebration of masses; especially
as the entrance into Shields harbor is at certain times both difficult and
dangerous.

Many great personages lay interred here, E Libello de locis quibus S. in Angl.
requiescunt.

Apud Tinemutham S. Oswinus rex and martyr and S. Herebaldus Abbas ejufdem Loci.

Lel. Col. v. 2. p. 408.
and there have been of this house many learned men.

Malcolm King of Scots, and his son Edward, slain near Alnwick 1094, 7th King
William II. are interred here.

King Edward I. after his victory over the Scots, visited the shrine of St.
Mary and St. Oswin; and in 1303, his Queen resided here, when he was on his
last march to Scotland.

John Wethamstad, Abbot of St. Albans, was a Canon here. He was an Historian of
great note. On his preferment, he presented to the altar of Tynemouth a chalice
of gold.

John de Tynmouth, an eminent sacred Biographer, was born here. He flourished
about the year 1366.

The following list of Priors is given by Brown Willis: Remegius 1092; William
de Bedford 1124; Thomas More 1340; John Langton 1451; Thomas Gardener 1528;
Robert Blaceney was Prior at the dissolution, at which time he, with fifteen
Prebendaries and three Novices, surrendered this house, 12th January, 1539,
30th King Henry VIII. and had a pension of 80l. per annum assigned him. In the
year 1553, here remained in charge 37l. 12s. in annuities, and these pensions,
viz. Thomas Castle 6l. 13s. 4d. Henry Woodal and Robert Bolland 61. each,
Robert Gateshead and Robert Foreman 5l. 6d. 8d. William Carlisle, Stephen
Hayman, Anthony Gardener, George Jasper, Clement Westminster, and Robert London
4l. Thomas Durham, Robert Charity, and George Faith 2l. each.

The annual revenues of this monastery, unconnected with St. Albans, were at
the dissolution valued by Dugdale at 396l. 10s. 5d. by Speed 511l. 4s. 1d.

The site of the priory, in the 5th year of King Edward VI. was granted to
John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, but on his attainder reverted to the
Crown, and remained ungranted until the 10th year of Queen Elizabeth, as is set
forth in Tanner's Notitia.

The manor of Tynemouth is now part of the possessions of his Grace the Duke of
Northumberland.

Much of the remains of the priory were pulled down by Mr Villars, for erecting
the barracks, light-house, his own house near it, and other edifices: he
likewise stripped off the lead which till then had covered the church. Gross.


The first day of our abode here was employed in drawing views of the august
remains. The next morning being remarkably serene, awaked me early to revisit
the same scene, and enjoy the sea breeze. I walked toward the cliffs -- the
sun cast a ruddy gleam over a calm ocean -- the breeze scarce ruffled the
leaping surge -- the horizon glowed with clouds tinged with gold and crimson;
above which the feint blue of the verge gradually deepened into azure, as the
eye advanced toward the zenith -- the sea appeared of a pale green, stripped
with silver, as the rays of light fell upon the tracks which were becalmed --
the scene was enlivened by a fleet of vessels, 44 in number, of various degrees
of burden, which then passed in view -- over the foreground of this prospect,
the solemn ruins were disposed in melancholy arrangement, wearing a countenance
more awful and majestic, from the shadows which the eastern sun occasioned to
be cast on them -- on the right hand and left, the landscape presented itself
full of life and business; and to add to the effects this view had on the mind,
the morning drum was heard from the garrison, the hum of the distant voices of
busy men, and the sounding of the hollow shore, beat by an advancing tide.

Leaving Tynemouth, we passed within sight of the barracks and batteries to

NORTH SHIELDS,
which is not improperly compared to Wapping: the streets, lanes, and alleys
are narrow, dirty, populace, and noisy. It is astonishing what business is
incessantly going on here: we were told there lay in harbor, even at that
season of the year, above 400 sail of ships of considerable burden. The crews
of such a number of vessels, the carpenpenters, ropers, victuallers, and men
concerned in the merchandising of such a fleet, must necessarily occasion a
mighty concourse and bustle: to which being added the family of sailors
residing here, makes the place resemble a hive of bees.

Shields has advanced to its present state of populousness, trade, and riches,
from a very low estate, within the space of two centuries: the church was begun
to be built in the year 1659: in the beginning of the reign of King Edward I.
it consisted only of six fishermen's hovels. By the arguments in a cause
depending between the King and his Burgesses of Newcastle and the Prior of
Tynemouth, in the 20th year of that reign, it appears, that the Prior had built
a town upon the bank of the water of Tyne on one side, and the Prior of Durham
another on the other side, where no towns ought to be, only lodges for
fishermen; and that the fishermen had there sold their fishes, which ought to
have been sold at Newcastle: and that both the said Priors had caused to be
made breweries and fisheries, having great ships, whereas they ought to have
had but boats; and had caused bread to be baked there, which ought to have been
baked at Newcastle. It was decreed, that neither at Tynemouth or Shields there
be any sale of things saleable, as in meats, drinks, etc. and that ships should
not be laden or unladen there. This will serve to show what was the state of
this place in the 13th century.

We took a boat to examine this busy scene upon the water: the sight of so many
vessels, and such a concourse of people, is very pleasing: it consequently
brings to one's mind, reflections on the powers of human faculties. The genius
of man is infinite; if we could be taught for 1000 years, we should discover at
that period, from the learning we had acquired, that we had an infinity of
subjects yet to learn: for the more knowledge man attains, the wider circle of
objects unattained opens upon him. As the scale of numerical calculation is
without end; as the variations of musical tones are infinite; so is man's
genius. By the use of letters we have accumulated the learning of ages; yet
after the conclusion of a few centuries, all our acquisitions will perhaps
appear to posterity, as but minute members of the science of mankind. Before
the use of letters, with the fall of empires, the accumulated knowledge of ages
expired with them; but henceforth it will not be so.

How wonderfully perfect is all maritime science now, to what it was in the
most flourishing period of the Egyptian and Phoenician states! We are told the
timber for building the temple at Jerusalem was floated in rafts: This shows
the force of the shipping then employed. The mariners of antiquity seldom
trusted themselves from the sight of the coast. The Grecian and Roman fleets
were composed of insignificant vessels, compared with a British navy. The
discovery of the magnet has given infinite powers to the Mariner; our
geometrical principles have fitted our vessels for swift sailing and the
carriage of great burdens. The ark of Noah was little better than a huge cask
rolling on the face of the deep; whose preservation was miraculous, and not
mechanical, amidst the perils of an universal ocean. The vessels of the
Phoenicians were little superior to our lime-boats; their rigging and devices
for sailing greatly inferior: and the most excellent of the Roman galleys
comparable only to the gilded barges of a Lord Mayor's show. The most superb
vessel we read of in antiquity was constructed by Archimedes: it was a whole
year in building -- had twenty benches of oars; the enormous pile was fastened
together on all sides with huge nails of copper, that weighed each ten pounds
and upwards: the inside had in it three galleries or corridors; the lowest of
which led to the hold by a descent of stairs; the second to apartments, and the
first to soldiers lodgings.

On the right and left side of the middle gallery, there were to the number of
thirty apartments; in each of which were four beds for men. The apartment for
the officers and seamen had 15 beds, and three great rooms for eating; the last
of which that was at the poop served for a kitchen. All the floors of these
apartments were laid with small stories in different colors, taken from the
Iliad of Homer. The ceilings, windows, and all the other parts were finished
with wonderful art, and embellished with all kinds of ornaments.

In the uppermost gallery there was a gymnasium or place of exercise, and walks
proportionate to the magnitude of the ship. In them were gardens and plants of
all kinds, disposed in wonderful order. Pipes, some of hardened clay and others
of lead, conveyed water all round to refresh them. There was also arbours of
ivy and vines, that had their roots in great vessels filled with earth. These
vessels were watered in the same manner with the gardens. The arbours served to
shade the walks.

After these came the apartments of Venus with three beds. This was floored
with agates and other precious stones, the finest that could be found in the
island. The walls and roof were of Cyprus wood. The windows were adorned with
ivory, paintings, and small statues. In another apartment there was a library,
at the top of which, on the outside, was fixed a sun-dial.

There was also an apartment with three beds for a bath, in which were three
great coppers, and a bathing vessel made of a single stone of various colors.
This vessel contained 250 quarts. At the ship's head was a great reservoir of
water, which held an hundred thousand quarts. All round the ship, on the
outside, were atlasses of six cubits or nine feet in height, which supported
the sides of the ship: these atlasses were at equal distance from each other.
The ship was adorned on all sides with paintings, and had eight towers,
proportioned to its bigness; two at the head, two at the stern, and four in the
middle, of equal dimensions. Upon these towers were parapets, from which stones
might be discharged upon the ships of an enemy that should approach too near.
Each tower was guarded by four young men completely armed and two archers; the
inside of them was filled with stones and arrows.

Upon the side of the vessel, well strengthened with planks, was a a kind of
rampart, on which was an engine to discharge stones, made by Archimedes: it
threw a stone of 300 weight and an arrow of 12 cubits the distance of a stadium
or 125 paces. The ship had three masts, at each of which were two machines to
discharge stones. There also were the hooks and great lumps of lead to throw
upon such as approached. The whole ship was surrounded with a rampart of iron
to keep off those who should attempt to board it. All round were iron graplings
disposed, which being thrown by the machines, might catch hold on the enemy's
vessel, and draw them close to the ship, from whence it was easy to destroy
them. On each of the sides were 60 young men completely armed: there were as
many about the masts and at the engines for throwing stones.

Though the hold of this ship was exceeding deep, a single man could clear it of
all water with a machine made in the nature of a screw, invented by Archimedes.

Hiero having found there was no port in Sicily capable of containing this
vessel, except where it could not lay without Danger, resolved to make a
present of it to King Ptolemy, and sent it to Alexandria. This is supposed to
be Ptolemaeus Philadelphus.


This was a more unwieldy and ungovernable mass than Noah's ark: the comparison
made between them and our shipping, excites no small degree of wonder how they
could ever perform the navigation for which they were respectively designed.

What luxury, what ease and splendor does Britain enjoy, from the labor of
her Mariners! things which we have rendered the common necessaries of our
lives, are furnished from the distant quarters of the earth! even the very
lower classes mix the produce of the East and West Indies for their common
meal; our dwellings are decorated from all the regions of the world, and our
tables are furnished with the dainties of every climate -- the ancient eastern
empires did not enjoy one half of our splendor or our luxury.

When I compare this scene of man to the Shepherds haunts on the skirts of
Cheviot mountains, I am astonished on each hand: at the wasted life and
faculties of the Shepherd, and at the extended powers of the busy race before
me.

We passed by Howden Pans, where a large ropery and smithery are carried on.

WALL's END
lay in our way, formerly belonging to the Monks of Durham, given to them by
William De Carilepho, Bishop of that See, in the year 1082; a pretty village,
the name evidently derived from its situation on the extremity of the Picts
wall. At the east end of the village is the school-house, given by the sister
of James Moncaster, Esquire Wallis.
At a little distance lies

CARR VILLE,
once the seat of the Cosens's, named by Mr William Carr, who rebuilt it not
many years ago. Near it is the extreme Roman station on the wall. By most
Antiquaries it is admitted to be the Segedunum of the Romans, a name derived
from its situation, and being a magazine for corn, for the supply of the Roman
stations. From the Manuscripts of the late Roger Gale, Esquire Extract of a letter
from Chris. Hunter. M. D. to Roger Gale, Esquire
SIR, Durham, 17th May, 1735.
Give me leave to attempt the recovery of one of the Roman stations in this
country, both requisite for the security of navigation in the northern seas,
and the protection of their frontiers beyond the river Tyne, thereby saving the
great expense and trouble of building the wall as far as the sea at Tynemouth,
no less than three miles at least; I mean that near South Shields, at the
entrance of the said river into the ocean, and which cannot but have flourished
till the Danish invasions, as Mr Leland has it in his Collectanea, vol. iv. p.
43. E Regione Tinmuthae fuit urbs vastata a Danis, Urfa nomine ubi natus erat
Oswinus Rex.

The communication it had with Binchester is visible in several places, as is
the angle where the paved way goes off from the military way leading to
Lanchester, about three miles to the north of Binchester, and passes to the
north-east through Brancepeth Park, thence a little to the south of Brandon,
and is lost in the cultivated grounds, but appearing upon Durham Moor in the
same direction again, passing by Haghouse and below upon Harbrass Moor is very
visible tending past Lumley Castle in a direct line toward South Shields,
passing about a mile to the east of Chester in the Street, without any signs of
communication therewith. Two elevated pavements in the river Tyne, the one at
the west end of South Shields, the other on the north side of the river, near
the end of the Roman wall, proper for their safe landing at different times of
the flowing and ebbing tide, fully shows its necessary correspondence with
Segedunum, the first station upon the wall: but another military way called
Wreken Dyke passing from this station to the west, has hitherto frustrated the
enquiries of our late Antiquaries; Mr Horsley himself pointing out its ductus
very justly over Gateside Fell, where it passed the public road, and a little
to the west the Roman way going to the south from Newcastle to Chester in the
Street, and afterward running through Lamesley and Kibblesworth Fields,
advances to the southwest over Blackburn Moor, and through the township of
Hedley; it comes next to Causey, a village which owes its name to it, and from
thence ascends a high hill, and terminates at a square fortification upon the
top thereof at Stanley, the seat of the Hon. Sir Nicholas Tempest, Bart. who I
am told possesses several Roman coins found therein.

This place, though not above three miles from Chester in the Street, and four
from Lanshester, seems to have had no immediate communication with either of
them, no vestigia of any paved way appearing upon the adjoining moors, and
being situated as Chester itself, at the termination of a military way, gives
me convincing reason to believe the use of each has been the same, namely, to
guard herds of cattle at grass, for the subsistence of the two garrisons of
South Shields and Pons Aelii, and for victualling ships resorting to the first
place; whereas had its elevated situation been intended to form a castrum
exploratorium, then must the advantage of paved ways to the next stations have
been necessary, for the speedy conveyance of intelligence. Though this last
military way bears the name of Wreken Dyke, I am apt to believe that name is
rather due to the way leading from Binchester to South Shields, especially from
the authority of Ranulph Higden, who says the Wreken Dyke or Reken Dyke passed
from the west of England and ended at Tinemouth. I dare not fix a Roman name to
this our station without the authority of inscriptions.

I am, Sir, etc. CHRIS. HUNTER.



It lay conveniently for the small vessels employed by the Romans on the coast,
to scour the seas of piratical rovers. From the ruins, it seems to have had a
quay for the convenience of merchandise; or perhaps was decorated with some
pleasure buildings on the shore. It was the station of the first cohort of the
Lergi. In the walls of Mr Cousins's seat, before it was rebuilt, Mr Horsley
observed several Roman inscriptions, which are preserved in his work. Severus's
wall has very manifestly terminated in a square fort or station, above a
furlong to the east of the mansion called Cousins's House. The ruins of a Roman
station and town at this place are very discernible, though it has all been
ploughed, and is now a very rich meadow. The stones and rubbish of the
buildings are levelled, and covered with earth and grass, but yet the ramparts
of the fort may be distinctly traced out, both they and the ditch being
visible, almost quite round.

In Mr Warburton's Vallum Romanum, and Mr Horsley's Brit. Romans are the
following particulars, which I will transcribe, as at the time I visited this
station I could not traverse the ground without injuring the crops growing.
There are very evident remains of two turrets at the western and eastern
entries to the station, and of another at the southwest corner. The west entry
has been close to the wall, and the eastern one directly opposite to it. The
fort has been about 140 yards, or perhaps six chains square, and so the
contents of it above three acres and an half. About 60 yards of the western and
eastern sides lie without, or to the north of the line of the wall, and eighty
within it; so that the wall falls upon the sides of the station, not far from
the middle of them. The south rampart of this fort is about three quarters of a
furlong from the river side, and runs along the brow of the hill, or at the
head of a considerable descent from thence to the river. There have been ruins
of buildings on this part and to the south-west of the fort; but they are now
so levelled and covered, that little evidence appears above ground; yet the
stones and remains of rubbish are easily discovered, when the surface is any
where removed: and some of these inequalities in the surface, which usually
arise from ruins, yet remain, and may easily be perceived to be hillocks of
stones or rubbish. Mr Horsley gives the following inscriptions as belonging to
this place:

I. Cohortis primae centuria Fiari posuit.

This stone with the five next (as also a piece of an altar and part of a
pedestal) are all placed in niches in the outside of the wall belonging to
Cousins House, where they have stood unobserved and neglected for many years,
and being exposed to the winds and weather, have suffered very much by that
means. I cannot find that the least notice has been taken of them before; the
four first are plainly centurial, such as were generally placed in the face of
the wall, and are rarely found in any other station. Hence we have one
argument, that this station was built at the same time with the wall, in the
reign of Severus. The cohorts mentioned in these inscriptions were certainly
legionary. The mark for the century is very clear and distinct in all of them,
and the names of the centurions, as in most others of the same kind, are in the
genitive. For which reason, I think, that the mark is not to be read centurio,
but centuria, (as it is frequently read in Gruter) and that posuit is to be
supplied or understood at the end; so that cohortis primae centuria fiari, is
much the same as to say, such a Captain's company of such a regiment. Indeed
centurio cohortis, or the centurion of a cohort, does often occur in
inscriptions, but does not necessarily imply, that the whole command of the
cohort was in a single centurion; for we have also centurio legionis and miles
legionis, which can signify no more than such a person was a centurion or a
soldier in such a legion.

III -- COH X. -- Erected by the century of Justinus Secundus in the tenth
cohort. IVSTINI -- Erected by the century of Justinus Secundus in the tenth
cohort. SECVNDI -- Erected by the century of Justinus Secundus in the tenth
cohort.


IV -- Cohortis decimae centuria Siinsi Prisci posuit.

This has sustained more damage than the former, by being exposed to the
weather; for the number of the cohort is effaced. The mark for the century is
also faint, and one of the centurion's names very obscure, but the other name
Priscus is plain and clear, the letters being gross, though short, and cut very
deep in the stone. The former name Siinsus sounds somewhat oddly, but there are
many as uncouth in Gruter.

VI. Jovi Optimo Maximo.

A small altar, no other inscription appearing.


Mr Gordon supposes, that the wall itself forms almost a right angle, and then
is continued down to the side of the river: but it is the western rampart of
the station which makes that angle with the wall: nor does this rampart reach
the river, though it is likely the town or buildings without the fort may have
extended so far. On the north side of the station there are some crooked
risings and setlings of the ground, which at first view appeared to me not
unlike a round fort or tower, projecting from the station with a triple rampart
and ditch. The two closes in which the Roman town and station have stood, are
called Wall Laws. If the name Laws be owing to the rising ground only, the
termination Laws or Lowes, which signifies hills, so far corresponds to the
Roman name Segedunum. But as there were two distinct Tumuli observed by Mr
Warburton remaining near a place he calls the Beehouses, and not far from these
closes, he apprehends that from them they have borrowed this name; a Law or
Low being one of those names by which Tumuli are frequently expressed. There
was an altar and some centurial inscriptions at Cousins's House, in Mr Horsleys
time.

The wall having left this station, passes on westward, and at a little
distance the remains of a castellum are visible. It is 60 feet square, like
those mentioned in the most western parts of this county, it is built close to
the wall, and wholly within it, on the south side. From hence the wall passes
by Walker or Wallkier or Byker Hill, and thence descends to Ewesburn, where are
some ruinous heaps, which may probably have been the remains of some of the
smaller exploratory turrets that have been placed all the way upon the wall.
Hence the wall seems to have passed through the house at Red Barns, and enters
Newcastle at Pandon Gate.

Mr Horsley and other authors seem very doubtful of the vestiges of the
military way, from the wall's end to Newcastle. Near the Red Barns, and upon
the descent from Byker Hill to Ewesburn, they conceived the track where it had
gone might in some places be traced, but the appearance was so very faint and
obscure, they would not insist upon it.

As for Hadrian's vallum, Mr Warburton says he could no where in all this space
discern the least track of it; nor did he ever hear of any traditionary account
of its having been there. -- Mr Pennant Tour in Scotland, vol. II. p. 289.
says, it was supposed to have reached no further than Pons Aelii, or
Newcastle, on the east. But by an account he had recently received from Mr
Robert Harrison of that town, he found it extended on this side as far as the
wall of Severus. A broken stone has lately been discovered at Wall's End with
this inscription: HADR --
MVR. COND --
HOC. MARM --
POS. COSS D --


The distance from the station at the end of the wall to St. Nicholas's church
in Newcastle, is exactly three measured miles and five furlongs, and in this
space there are three castella all visible: that which should have been next in
course, is lost in the station at Newcastle.

LITTLE BENTON and LONG BENTON
were in our view as we passed. Little Benton, one of the manors of the barony
of Heron, of which it was held by Eustace de Benton in the reign of King Henry
III. now the residence of the family of Big. William Big, Esquire High Sheriff
of Northumberland 1751.

Thomas Charles Big, Esquire High Sheriff 1771.

Wallis.
In the 11th year of King Edward II. it belonged to Jeffrey de Scroop, of
Masham, in Yorkshire; afterward it came to Ralph Lord Greystock; and in the
reign of King Henry VI. it was the possession of William Fitz Hugh, and by him
given to his son Henry.

Long Benton, a dependant manor of the barony of Morpeth. The church stands at
a little distance from the village, which with some lands in the parish were
given by Sir Philip Somerville to Baliol College, Oxford, for the perpetual
maintenance of six Scholars.

HEATON
lay to our right, anciently held of the barony of Gaugy, now the possession of
Sir Matthew White Ridley, Bart. an elegant mansion, ornamented with plantations
in a good taste. The following account of this place and its possessors, I have
extracted from the notes of Mr Bourne's History of Newcastle, page 114:

It has been handed down by tradition to the present day, that this was a place
of retreat for King John, when he came into this country; and there are still
to be seen the ruins of an ancient building, which carries the name of King
John's palace. On the north side of this old building are the remains of a
fortification, which it is natural to conjecture was built for the safety and
security of this house, and consequently this house must have been of some
great distinction. Robert de Gaugy was a great man in the reign of King John,
and had special trust reposed in him by his Sovereign, and it is not improbable
when the King came to these parts he lodged at this house.

The present house was built in the year 1713, and is so situated, that on the
west it overlooks the Town Moor, Fenham, and part of the lands of the Prior of
Tinmouth; on the east it faces the Shields road; on the north it has a most
agreeable prospect to the windings of the Ouse burn, of its woods and banks,
and of the villages situated on it; on the south it faces the river Tyne.

Hardriding, near Haltwhistle, is the ancient seat of the Ridley family: above
one of the old doors there a date earlier than the conquest appears, and the
initial letters of the builder N. R. This was a younger branch of the Ridleys
of Willimoteswicke: of which branch was John Ridley, a Major in the service of
King Charles I. in the Duke of Newcastle's army.

Bishop Nicholas Ridley was of this branch, and was born here (Mr Bourn says) I
presume he means at Hardriding. He was educated in grammar at Newcastle on
Tyne. He suffered in 1555, near Baliol College, in Oxford.

"Dr. Thomas Ridley was also of this family. He died in 1628."

To our left lay

BYKER,
great part of which is the property of Sir Henry Lawson, Bart. It belonged
anciently to the Bikers, who we find possessed thereof in the reign of King
Henry III. Nicholas de Biker Temp. King Henry III. Robert King Edward I. John
13 King Edward III. Roger 19 King Edward III.
Wallis.
and from that time to the 19th of King Edward III. In the reign of King Henry
VI. it was part of the possessions of the Percys. In the 2d of King Edward IV.
being in the Crown, was granted to the Duke of Clarence, the King's brother.
The first possession of the Lawsons Sir Ralph Lawson, Knt. 10 Queen Elizabeth.
Henry Lawson, Esquire Same reign. Roger Ibid.

is noted in the escheats of the 10th of Queen Elizabeth. The manor was
anciently held in grand serjeancy, by carrying the King's writ between the
rivers Tyne and Coquet, and making distresses of goods for the King's debts.

We approached Newcastle by Pampeden Gate. It is not my purpose to attempt a
particular history or description of this place; the subject is too complicated
and extensive to be treated at large, consistent with the plan I have hitherto
pursued: a general account is all I shall attempt. A worthy friend is
compiling, with great labor and industry, and at vast expense, a general
history and minute description of New Castle: to his labors I must refer the
curious, who I doubt not will find therein infinite pleasure and satisfaction.

NEWCASTLE,
though greatly increased in size, wealth, trade, and number of inhabitants
since Camden's time, then merited the following description: It makes a
glorious appearance, as the very eye of all the towns in this part of the
kingdom; ennobled by a fine haven, where ships of great burden lay in
security. It is situate on the uneven risings of a hill, north of the river
Tyne, over which is a fair bridge: on the left hand thereof stands the castle,
and on the right the Marketplace, and principal part of the city, in regard to
the elegance of its buildings. From thence the ascent is very steep to the
upper town, which is of much greater extent than the lower, graced with four
churches, and fortified with strong walls, having eight gates, with several
towers. This description given by Camden, compared with the present state of
the town, will clearly point out the great improvements made therein since his
time.

It is admitted by all Antiquaries that this place is of Roman origin, From the
Manuscripts of Roger Gale, Esquire Extract of a letter from Chr. Hunter, Esquire M. D.
to Roger Gale, Esquire
7th May, 1735.
Pliny is the only author we can gather any thing from remarkable concerning
the Varduli, and that so very concise, I think deserves a place here. In
conventum Cluniensem Varduli ducunt populos XIV ex qutbus Albanenses tantum
nominare libeat. Not. Hist. Lib. III. Ca. 3. Sect. 4. of the last Paris
edition; and in Lib. IV. Ca. 20. Sect. 34, he enumerates the Verduloruin,
Oppida, Morosgi Menosca, Vesperies, Amanum Portus ubi nunc Flaviobriga Colonia,
where Mr Hardauin recites the modern names; and as Gruter's almost infinite
collection affords no inscription wherein the Varduli are named, I presume the
Roman economy under the Emperor Trajan, by descent a Spaniard, if not sooner,
had abolished the old distinctions of separate governments, and reduced the
whole province under one general name Hispania, which afterward the Notitia
Imperii Occidentalis divides into three consular provinces, under the direction
of Presidents, and places no garrison of the Varduli in any fortress in the
eastern or western empire.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. CHRIS. HUNTER.


Answer to the preceding letter by Mr Gale.
London, 7th June, 1735.
As to the two inscriptions you sent me, I will venture to give you my thoughts
on them, not doubting but you will excuse me where I differ from you, since
what I offer proceeds only from a love of truth, and no spirit of altercation.

The first of them is very curious, as it gives us the name of a Legatus
Augustalis and Propraetor, hitherto unknown in Britain, and which ought, as I
think, to be read as follows.

Numini Augusti et Genio Cohortis secundae Vardullorum Equitatae Miliariae sub
Antistio Advento Legato Augusti propraetore F. Tiranus Tribunus dat dedicatque
Rite.

To read G R in the 4th line Gregulium is not a little doubtful; it cannot well
be supposed that the tribune of the cohort would dedicate an alter to the deity
of the Emperor, and at the same time to the genius of the common soldiers,
exclusive of the genius of the officers, of which he himself was one; and how
to read it otherwise is as uncertain, if the letters are G R as in your copy:
but if they are C R, as on the altar given us by Mr Horsley, Durham, No. 26, in
his Brit. Romans and which you say has C very apparent instead of G, they may
denote Civium Romanorum, and these Varduli a people of Spain, admitted to the
freedom of the city of Rome for some extraordinary merit, or by some Emperor's
favor, perhaps their countryman Trajans: this was a privilege frequently
conferred on foreigners, even whole towns and nations, and at last communicated
by Antoninus Pius omnibus Vide Span^. Exercit. de Civ. Romans apud Graevii These.
Tom. XI. p. 64. S. C.
in commune subjectis, by which it seems as if this altar had been erected
before this general grant of that Emperor, for it is no great honor or
advantage for these Varduli to value themselves upon, if they had enjoyed it
only in common with all the rest of the world. Monsieur Spanheim observes
Exercit. 1ma. ad Constitution. Imp. Antonini de Civ. Romans Quod sub M. Antonino
Imp. Civitate donati essent, quicunq. in Romani orbis provinciis aut oppidis
delecti essent Milites ut Praesidiarii in Imperii limitibus constituerentur:
this seems contradictory to the first mentioned grant, since it only confers
the freedom of the city upon the soldiers in garrison on the frontiers of the
empire, and the other gives it to all the subjects of the Roman empire without
exception: perhaps the soldiers had this advantage given them at first, and
upon finding the encouragement it gave them to defend the countries where they
were quartered, it was thought advisable to admit all the subjects of the
empire to the same privilege, to interest them the more in preserving the whole
from the attacks of the Barbarians; but there has been no small uncertainty
among the learned to which of the Antonini this constitution is owing; some
attributing it to Antoninus Pius, others to Marcus Aurelius, and Mr Spanheim,
with great reason, to Antoninus Caracalla, from Dion Cassius chiefly, who tells
us this privilege was granted by him Omnibus qui in Orb Romano erant, not so
much for the honor and advantage of it to the people, as for the filling his
treasury, since it made them liable to the payment of several taxes from which
they were before exempted; so that the soldiers had this benefit conferred on
them for their services, and the rest of the people afterward most likely to
drain their purses.

In Gruter's Thesaur. p. CCCCLV. 6. is mentioned T. Antistius Praefectus Alae
Sulpiciae C. R. i. e. Civium Romanorum, and in page CCCCLIX. 8. L. Praesentius
Praefectus Coh. I. Afr. C. R. E. which is read Praefectus Cohortis Primae
Afrorum Civium Romanorum Equitatae Vide Urfatus C. R.
just the same as that at Lanchester, only changing Afrorum into Vardulorum. A
Cohors Equitata was composed partly of horse, partly of foot, as Vegetius Lib.
11. C. 2.
informs us. Prima Cohors habet mill centum et quinque: Equites Loricator
centum triginta duos et appellatur Milliaria. I must own the Cohors in this
inscription is called Secunda Vardulorum, but that is only in respect to the
Cohors prima Vardulorum, of which an inscription was found at Riechester in
Northumberland. This second Cohors of the Varduli might however be the prima
auxiliaria of some legion, perhaps the VI. and in more esteem for some eminent
service or fortunate accident than the first, not dignified with the honorable
title and privileges Civium Romanorum, and perhaps also independent of any
legion; and after all, the sole reason why one of these Cohorts was called the
first and the other the second, might have been from the priority of time when
they were first raised.

This Antistius Adventus seems also to have been Legatus Augusti and Propaetor
in Belgium, from an altar found near Utrecht upon which he is called Caius
Antistius.

Jovi Opt. Maximo summano Exsuperantissimo soli invicto Opollini, Lunae,
Dianae, Fortunae, Marti Victoria Paci Colus Antisius Adventus Legatus Augusti
Propraetore Dat. and this justifies my reading of his titles here, Legatas
Augusti Propraetore Dat. and not Legionis Augustae Propraetore, there being no
mention of a military body in the Belgic inscription; besides, we never meet
with a legion styled Augusta singly, without some other adjunctive distinction
as the Legio II. VI. or Antoniniana Augusta, nor could there be any such
officer as a Praetor or Propaetore Legionis, that magistrate being entirely
civil.

Sir, Yours, etc. R. GALE.



but of what importance or magnitude the Roman station was which occupied a
part of this ground, no evidence appears. Camden adopts the name of
Gabrosentum, which he thinks might be derived from its vicinity to the steeps
on the opposite shore of Tyne, as being the haunt of herds of goats. These
etymologies are sometimes so constrained, that they rather bewilder than
instruct. It is as probable the name of Gabrosentum might from the same cause
extend to the cliffs and hills on both sides of the river. The Notitia places
Gabrosentum within the wall, and makes it the station of the second cohort of
Thracians. Other Antiquaries Dr Hunter, Mr Horsley, Mr Pennant.
insist upon its name of Pons Aelii, where the Romans had a bridge to the
southern shore, and that it was garrisoned by the Cohors Cornoviorum: this they
attempt to confirm, from the traces of a military road discovered in a lineal
direction from the bridge to Chester-le-street. Dr. Stukeley conjectures that
this was the station Admurum of Richard of Cirencester, Dr Stukely, p. 48.
in his Map of Britania Romana. No altars or inscriptions have been discovered
to ascertain the name. If there was once a Roman station here, every vestigia
thereof must long since have been destroyed, by the works of a large populous
and ancient town. The remains of the Roman wall, or wall of Severus, have
frequently been discovered by workmen, in digging the foundations of buildings
in those parts of the town through which it lay. It passed from the west
through the Vicarage gardens, the Groat Market, the north part of St.
Nicholas's church, and from thence to Pandon Gate. This gate bears singular
marks of antiquity; the superstructure is of different workmanship and model
from any others on the town wall; the arches are circular, and there appears
that natural decay on the whole structure, which might happen in such a number
of years. Camden says, at Pandon Gate there remains, it is presumed, one of the
turrets of the Roman wall, differing in form and workmanship from the others on
the walls of the town. By the dimensions which I took of this gateway, I find
it nearly-corresponds with the other ports or gates in the Roman wall. It is
said the Carpenters Tower is also of Roman original. The reputed antiquity of
Pandon Gate is denoted in a proverb of common acceptance: "As old as Pandon
Yates."

We have no authorities to fix the certain era when or by whom this place was
first inhabited from the evacuation of the Romans, or how long it remained
deserted after their departure: like other strongholds within the defense of
the Roman wall, it is reasonable to conceive it was very early resorted to by
the distressed Britons, and was kept up by them as a place of security against
the northern rovers. The first name we find it distinguished by in history was
Monkchester, which shows that it was noted for being the habitation of
religious men. Pennant.
What society of religious (and whether Saxons or not) took up their residence
here, at what time they first possessessed the place, or when they were
expelled, are circumstances unknown: all the evidence remaining is the name
only. Bid in his Ecclesiastical History and Life of St. Cuthbert is totally
silent relative to them; and as his residence was at Jarrow, situated within a
few miles, and he died in 735, the name of Monkchester and the residence of
those religious must have succeeded his death. Mr Pennant says, their
destruction must have been early, for the venerable Bede takes no notice of the
place. The ruin therefore of this place cannot be attributed to the Danes,
whose first invasion did not take place till after the death of that Historian.
It appears to me the argument holds the other way; for had it been the
residence of any religious society who suffered persecution, before or in the
time of Bid, he would have noticed it. Fifty-nine years elapsed between the
time of Bede's death and the first descent of the Danes on Northumberland: in
this period of time the increase of religious houses was very rapid, and it is
reasonable to conceive such examples as Landisfarn and Jarrow had produced,
would greatly promote like institutions in their neighborhood. From
Hollinshead's authority we are induced to believe, that on the visitation of
Aldwin, Alfrin, and Remfrid, in 1074, there was not a monastery remaining in
this part of Northumberland, and scarce a church was left standing.

This was a desirable situation for the Danes, when they entered the Tyne: and
to that era I am inclined to fix the destruction of the religious society
which had settled here, and from whose residence the name of Monkchester was
derived.

In 1080, when Robert Courthose, the son of William the Conqueror, returned
from his Scotch expedition, he halted here to refresh his army; and finding the
situation proper for a fortress to command the turbulent Borderers, and the
river well adapted for the reception of succors by sea, as well as trade,
built a castle here, to which he gave the name of Newcastle, in
contradistinction (it is said) to a small circular tower Bourne.
which the Monks held, or to the Roman turrets on the wall.

From this period we may date the growing importance of the place: the
protection of a fortress on the banks of so fine a river, would draw thither a
great number of setlers, and trade would soon begin to flourish under such
propitious circumstances. There was so rapid a progress in its improvements,
that before the death of King David I. of Scotland, who held it as a member of
his earldom of Northumberland, it was become a place of great importance, David
having founded here two monasteries. Tanner, 391. Keith.
Tanner says a nunnery was founded here as early as the conquest.

Newcastle was defended by a strong wall, and an outward ditch of great depth,
now much gone to decay. From Leland's account it appears, that this
fortification was begun in the reign of King Edward I. and completed in the
reign of King Edward III. A rich citizen having been taken prisoner in the
middle of the town, by the hasty irruption of a hardy band of Scots, who would
not set him at liberty without a considerable sum for his ransom, on his return
he set about to secure his native place by a wall; his fellow-citizens
promoting so important a work for the protection of their merchandise and
riches. In the 19th year of the reign of King Edward I. the royal license for
fortification was obtained. But it is the opinion of some that the northern
wall was built in the reign of King John, and that the remaining part of this
fortification began from the above event in the reign of Edward I. Grey's
Chorograph.
The circuit of the wall rather exceeds two miles: Two miles and 176 yards.
it is defended by towers, the chief of which are of a cemicircular figure;
machicolated towers are intermixed, but not regularly, which project a little
over the wall; and there are also many guerrets. They were decorated with the
effigies of men cut in stone placed on the tops of them as though they were
watching. They had square holes over the walls to throw stones down.


There were seven ancient gates, A gate at the Bridge End.

Then turning on the right hand to the Key, a chapel of the town with a
macsun dieu.

Then a certain houses, with a Watar Gate and a sqware haull place for the
town, and a chapelle there, as I remembar.

Then a main strong wall on the haven side to Sandgate to Tynemouthe way.

Then 3 towers to Pandon Gate.

There hard by does -- Deene water dryve a mill, and passithe threwghe the
-- on this water there by is a little archid bridge.

And about this quartar stood the house of the Friars Ordinis S. Trinitatis.

From Pandon Gate to Pilgrim Gate 15 towers.

Thens to Newgate 8.

The observant Friars house stood by Pandon Gate. It was a very fair thing.

And lower in the same street, but on the contrary side a little with a lane,
was the house of the Augustine Freires.

From Newgate to Westgate a mighty strong thing of 4 wards and an iron gate
13 towers.

The fair place of Blake Freres stood bytwixt Newgate and Westgate.

The Nuns Dene having 2 bridges refortithe toward Pilgrim Gate, and so
down ward to Tine.

The watar of boothe the denes cummithe from the cole pitts at Cowhill or
Cowmore, half a mile out of Newcastelle.

There is a park waullid and a lodge witheout the Blak Freres and the town
waulle.

From Westgate to Tineside 16, part almost round, part sqware. There I saw
the hospital of S --, and then the White Freres, whose garth came almost to
Tinefyde.

There be 3 hedds of condutes for fresch watar to the town.

Lol. Itin. v. 8. p. 40, 41.
the names of which, together with those of the towers, point out the many
contributors to so considerable a work. To these gates two were added in more
modern times; Bridge Gate, which guarded the pass of the bridge, and Sand Gate,
which opens upon the river's banks. The wall formerly extended between Bridge
Gate and Sand Gate, which part some few years ago was taken down to open the
quay: an alteration greatly for the convenience of trade. The form of the wall
there proved it to be of the most modern date of any part of the
fortifications, there being therein many small gates to give access to the
quays. Sand Gate had no tower above it as the other gates.

THE GATE OF WALK-KNOWLE is said by some to be of Roman architecture, The wall
upon the Knoul cannot be understood of any other than the Roman wall, because
it had this name from very ancient times, long before the building of the town
wall.

Bourne.
and part of Severus's work; its present superstructure, is modern, being the
hall of the Carpenters company. This was one of the Roman towers, as was very
visible before the taking down the upper part of it, for it was of the same
size, model, and stone with the tower of Rutchester in Northumberland.

Ibid.


PAMPEDON is the next gate, formerly opening upon an ancient town of that name,
which was united with Newcastle by the grant of King Henry III. A. D. 1299,
whereby it was ordained, Et quod praedicta villa Novi castri et terrae and
tenemen, predict. in Pampedon unica villa etcet. sunt, et unus Burgus, ad
uniend. et concludend. dictam vallam Novi castri in emendationem et
augmentationem ejus villae, etc. It is said that in Pampedon was a palace of
the Saxon Kings of Northumberland. Pennant, Bourne.
This gateway was defended by folding gates of iron: Wallis.
the present ascent to the top of the wall is by stairs two yards wide. From
the remains of the superstructure it is not, at this time, possible to gain any
certain idea of the form or capaciousness of the Roman turrets.

The part of the wall which extends from Sand Gate to Pampedon, and from thence
to the Austin Friars Tower, is pointed out by Mr Wallis, as being the work of
the Burgher, who was surprised by the Scots. King Edward III. granted to the
Corporation the duties and customs of the town for the term of seven years, to
enable them to complete the fortification; but finding them negligent of a work
of such importance, he revoked the grant, and constituted Henry de Percy, Ralph
de Nevil, John de Fenwick, John de Creyk, and Robert de Fenwick, then Sheriff
of Northumberland, Commissioners for keeping the town; after which the
franchises were not restored to the Burgesses 'till they consented to perfect
the work at their own costs. Wallis.
In the reign of King Henry VIII. this place is said to have exceeded in the
strength and magnificence of its works, all the cities of England, and most
places in Europe. Leland's Itin.


A small tower called Corner Tower.

Austin Tower succeeds next in course, said to be built by the Friars of the
order of St Austin for defense of their monastery, which stood near to it. It
is now the hall of the Ropers Company, who repaired it A. D. School.

Carliol Tower is next, deriving its name, as it is conjectured, from one of
the family of Carliols, who were ancient burgesses here. Nicholas carliol was
mayor in the second year of the reign of King Edward II. during whose mayoralty
perhaps this tower was erected. It was repaired A. D. 1682, and fitted up as a
hall for the Company of Weavers.

The next in succession on the wall is Pilgrim-street Gate, being the great
passage of Pilgrims to the shrine of the Virgin Mary at Jesmond, or Jesus
Mount: as being one of the principal approaches from the north, this is a very
strong edifice, flat roofed with embrazures, a port cullis and iron gates. A.
D. 1716 it was repaired and made the hall of the Company of Joiners.

Ficket Tower is next, of which nothing remarkable is noted by Bourne and
others.

Bertam Mon Coucher tower is next. A person of this name was High Sheriff of
the county of Northumberland in the 40th year of of King Edward the Third's
reign, and for three successive years in the reign of King Richard II. but in
what manner he was a contributor to these fortifications, or how this tower
happened to take his name is not known.

New Gate is next, the common prison, for which use its works are constructed
of superior strength. The original gate was supposed to be one of the most
ancient parts of this fortification, the Roman towers excepted. The present
edifice is modern, the north front being ornamented with a statue of King
Charles II. two wings were added within this century, one A. D. 1702, the other
A. D. 1706, to enlarge and render the prison more commodious.

Andrew Tower seems to derive its name from its vicinity to the church of St
Andrews.

Eure Tower, said to be built by the Eures, Lords of Kirkley and Barons of
Witton in the county of Durham. The Colliers, Waggoners, and Paviors now use it
as their hall.

Morden Tower, repaired A. D. 1700 for the hall of the Plumbers, Glaziers, etc.
who were incorporated in the year 1536.

Black Friars Gate, built under authority of the royal License of Edward I.
Wallis.
Evardus dei gratiae rex Angliae, dominus Hiberniae Dux Aquitaniae, omnibus ad
quos presents Literae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod de nostra gratia
speciali concessimus dilectibus nostris fratribus praedicatoribus de novo
castro super Tynam, quod per medium novum murum circumagentem villam
praedictam, quem per medium gardini praedictorum fratrum fieri oportebit, ut
dicti facere possint, quandam strictam portam ad ingressum in Gardinum suum
habend. portam sust. sibi et successoribus suis, tenere in perpetuum. Dum tamen
porta illa ad voluntatem Nostram, vice comitis Northumbriae ad constabuli
Nostri ibid. qui pro tempore fuerit, obstruatur. In cujus rei testimonium lias
Literas nostras fieri Patentes; test meipso apud Dunelm. decimo octavo die
Septembris, anno regni nostri octavo.

Heber Tower is now the hall of the Company of Armourers, Curriers, etc. who
were incorporated in the 36th year of King Henry the Eighth's reign.

Durham Tower is next in place, of which there is nothing remarkable.

West Gate is a considerable edifice, excellently constructed, and very strong:
it is defended by a port cullis and iron grated gates. This building is
attributed to Roger Thornton, Esquire At the West Gate came Thornton in,
With a Hap and a Halfpenny and a Lambskin.
Bourne.
whose memory in the annals of this place ought to be greatly distinguished for
his munificence and liberal spirit. The Company of House Carpenters lately
repaired and fitted up the tower for their hall.

Pink Tower is next in succession, and in the next place a Postern opens upon
the Firth.

Gunner Tower and Stank Tower next succeed, of which nothing remarkable is
observed. The next

West Spital Tower, or Saint Mary's, it is said was built by the master and
brethren of St Mary's Hospital.

The building of Nevil Tower is attributed to one of the great Nevils, Earls of
Westmoreland: their family mansion stood near it. This Tower was repaired A. D.
1711, for the Masons, Bricklayers, and Plaisterers hall.

In the next place is a Postern, called White Friar Gate: a convenient passage
for the Carmelites or White Friars to and from their monastery.

Not far from thence is the White Friar Tower, built on the summit of a vast
eminence above the street called the Close: its form is circular: it is flagged
on the top and embrazured; from thence you have the most extensive prospect any
part of these fortifications commands: you view the whole of the upper town and
great part of the lower, a vast tract of country down the river, and a
landscape as beautiful and extensive toward the west and north as any in this
part of Northumberland. This building is attributed to the House of Carmelites,
which stood immediately opposite: its eminence is such, that from the Close
Gate you ascend to it by 140 steps. The inner part of the tower contains the
Masons hall.

The Close Gate is near the present extremity of the wall, on the banks of
Tyne. I am inclined to conceive the ancient fortification of this town did not
consist of an entire circumvallation, but that the walls terminated in two
points as they approached the river near to Close Gate and Sand Gate. The town
after the completing of the walls was divided into 24 wards, according to the
number of the gates and round towers in the wall, which towers and gates were
wont to be defended in times of hostility with the Scots by the particular
wards appropriated to them.

Bourne.


Having described the walls, I must in the next place consider the interior
fortress.

The Castle, all authors agree, was built by Robert Carthouse, son of William
the Conqueror, in the year 1080, on his return from his Scotch expedition: he
perceived the great consequence of such a fortress on the frontiers, commanding
so fine a river, and in a situation excellently calculated for assembling the
northern levies on any disturbance on the borders. The tower built by Robert
was of great strength, square, and surrounded by two walls: the height of the
tower is 82 feet, the square on the outside 62 feet by 54, the walls 13 feet
thick, with galleries gained out of them: there was a chapel within the tower.
Pennant.
The outward fortifications are now defaced, and their site crowded with
buildings. The tower still remains entire, the corners projecting from the
plane of the square, a mode much practiced in the Norman structures. It is
situate on a lofty eminence, commanding the whole town: the principal entrance
is on the south. What number of gates were in the outward wall we cannot now
determine, but from Bourne's account of it, which I shall quote in its proper
place: the area enclosed by this wall contained three acres and one rood. The
Castle belongs to the county of Northumberland, and makes no part of the
liberties of Newcastle, or its Sheriffdom: the government of it, 21st
September, 1st of King Henry VII. was granted to William Close, Esquire for life as
Constable; and in the 9th year of the same reign it was granted to Roger
Fenwick, Esquire with 20l. per annum salary; since which time I do not find that
any Constable has been appointed, but the Sheriffs of Northumberland had
custody of the Castle. It now serves for the county prison, and in the great
hall the Judges of assize hold the gaol delivery.

Soon after the building of this castle, it is said by Bourne that Robert de
Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, when in rebellion against King William Rufus,
was besieged therein, and this fortress after suffering much damage was taken:
but I confess I do not find sufficient authorities to support this assertion of
my author, and think it is much to be doubted. The Scots by treachery A. D.
1135, in the 1st year of the reign of King Stephen, gained possession of the
castle and town, which they held to the year 1156, when Malcolm IV. ceded the
northern counties to King Henry II. In the 3 year of Henry the 2. the King of
Scotts had the Erledom of Lancastre in his hands, the cite of Cairluel,
Bamburgh Castle and Newcastel.

Lel. Col. v. 1. p. 471.


The castle having suffered much by neglect in that and the succeeding reign,
King John restored it, and added a ditch to the fortifications, in doing which
he was obliged to destroy several houses: as a compensation to the owners of
these tenements he ordered 110s. 6d. rents in escheats to be paid yearly, as is
set forth in his charter to the town. The records have of late years been
strictly kept, and much interest must be used to have access to the archieves:
to me, whose intention was chiefly to make a descriptive view, such
applications were not of such moment as they are to the learned compiler from
whom we may in a little time hope to receive a complete History of Newcastle.
This castle was considered of such consequence, that most of the neighboring
Baronies paid considerable sums toward its support, under the articles of
Castleward and Cornage: the several sums are mentioned in Bourne's history. The
Barony of Herons. -- Dilston. -- Walton. -- Bolbeck. -- Bolam. -- Gaugye. --
Marley. -- Bothal. -- Delaval -- Rosse. -- Bywell. And -- Copun.

Besides the larger payments several small ones issued from sundry houses and
lands in the town.

Bourne says, In the 9th of King Edward III. an inquisition was taken at this
town, whereby it was found that at the time of the battle of Bannockburn, which
was in the year 1313, when John de Kenont, Knight, was High Sheriff of
Northumberland, the Castle and all its edifices about it were in good repair:
that after that time Nicholas Scot, Adam de Swinburn, William Riddel, Johannes
de Fenwick, Cuthbert de Broughdon, Johannes de Fenwick, Johannes de Woodhorn,
Johannes de Lilleburn, Willielmus de Tynedale, Roger Mauduit, and Robertus
Darreius, were High Sheriffs of Northumberland, during which time the great
tower, and also the lesser ones of the said Castle, the great hall, with the
King's chamber adjoining to it, together with diverse other chambers below in
the Queen's mantle, and the buttery cellar and pantry: the King's chapel within
the castle, a certain house beyond the gate which is called the chequer house,
with the bridges within and without the gate, with three gates and one postern,
were 300l. worse than before. They also say that there are in the custody of
Roger Mauduit, late High Sheriff, 420 fother of lead: they say also, that it
was thought highly necessary that the Baron Heron of Huddeston, the Baron of
Walton, Lord Robert Clifford of the New Place, Chief Lord of the Barony of
Gaugie, the Lords of the Barony of -- and Devilston, that the Lord of Werk upon
Tweed, the Lord of the Barony of Bolbeck alias Bywell, the Baron of Bothal, and
lastly the Baron of Delaval, should build each of them a house within the
liberties of the castle for the defense of it.

There were two great strong walls which surrounded the castle: the interior
wall was of no great distance from the castle itself, as may be still seen in
several places. The exterior wall surrounds the verge of the castle borders.
From this outer wall were four gates, the great gate and three posterns. The
north side of the castle is the main gate, called now the Black Gate; it had
two port culicesses, one without the gate, as may be still seen, and another
within it, at a little distance from it, the ruins of which were to be seen a
few years ago. There still remains a piece of the old wall, which shows its
situation to have been where that house is, which was lately purchased by Mr
Jasper Harrison. The shop belonging to this house was dug (as I am informed)
out of the wall just now mentioned. On the east side of the castle there was a
postern, which led down to the street called the Side, which is still to be
seen: it was once called (but many years after it was in decay) the Waist of
Laurentius Acton. On the south side of the castle is another gate, which leads
down the Castle Stairs to the street called the Close: this was the south
postern. There is a building upon it, which was the county Goaler's house. On
the west side was the postern facing Bailiff Gate; now the dwelling house of
James Lidster.

There is an house in the yard, which they say was the chapel of of the
garrison, which is called the chapel house to this day: it stands north-east
from the chapel; its common name now is the Three Bulls-heads.

By an inquisition taken in the reign of King James I. it appears this castle
was then much out of repair; and in the 18th of the same reign another having
been taken, complaint was made that a great dunghill, heaped up against the
wall on the west side of the castle, had done damage to the amount of 120l. it
was under the same inquisition complained, that the great square tower was full
of chinks and crannies, and that one-third of it was almost taken away; that
all the lead and coverings which it had of old, were embezzled and carried off,
insomuch, that the prisoners of the county of Northumberland were most
miserably lodged, by reason of the showers of rain falling on them. The
computation made for repairs was 809l. 15s. In 1644, the dunghill was taken
away by Sir John Morley, and it is said was used to make a rampart on the town
walls against the Scots: he also repaired the round tower under the Moothall,
now called the Half Moon. Wallis


It has been (continues Bourne) a building of great strength, and no little
beauty; the vast thickness of the walls speaks the one, and the ruins of some
curious workmanship the other. The grand entrance into the castle was at the
gate facing the south, which leads up a pair of stairs (which still shows the
magnificence of the builder) to a very stately door of curious masonry. The
room this leads into, has its floor broken down close to the castle wall, as
indeed all the other floors are, to the top of the castle; so that excepting
the floor above the county gaol, there is not one left, though there have been
five divisions or stories of the castle, besides this. This floored room, which
I was told was lately flagged by the order of William Ellison, Esquire when he was
Mayor in 1722, seems to me, without any doubt, to have been the common hall of
the castle, because on the north side of the same room, there is an entrance by
a descent of some steps into a room, where is the largest fire place I saw in
the castle, which plainly speaks it to have been the kitchen. At the end of
this there are several stairs, which lead into a place under the kitchen, which
I think goes down as low as the bottom of the castle: this I take to have been
a cellar, as I do also that little dark place on the right hand coming up
again, to have been a sort of pantry. The door I mentioned just now on the east
of the castle, which leads to the first broken down floor, is because of its
grandeur and beauty, an argument that this room has been the most stately one
in the whole castle: another reason for its being so is, because of the windows
which gave light into it; those of them that face the east are the most
beautiful of the whole castle beside. On the south of this room there is an
entrance into a sort of a parlour or withdrawing room, which has a fire place
in it, and has been a piece of curious workmanship, as is visible to this day;
and this place has no communication with any part of the castle but this room.
On the north side of this room, is a door leading into an apartment where
stands a well of considerable depth; it was 18 yards before we touched the
surface of the water; which seems to have been placed there on purpose for the
more immediate service of this room. There are some little basins on the top of
the well, with pipes leading from them, which conveyed water to different
apartments of the castle: this is plain from what may be observed in the county
gaol, at the bottom of the castle; the round stone pillar in it having an
hollow in the middle, of a foot wide, with a lead spout in the side of it.

In the inquisition made in the 9th of King Edward III. above mentioned, among
other things that were complained of for being neglected, one was, Capella
Domini Regis infra castrum. This chapel, I have been told, stood on that part
of the castle yard where the Moothall is; but upon searching, I found it in the
castle itself, according to the account of it just now mentioned. The door of
it is at the bottom of the south wall of the castle, adjoining to the stairs
which lead into the state chamber. It has been a work of great beauty and
ornament, and is still, in the midst of dust and darkness, by far the most
beautiful place in the whole building; the inside of it being curiously adorned
with arches and pillars. It is easy to observe the different parts of it, the
entrance, the body of it, and the chancel: on the left side of the entrance you
go into a dark little room, which undoubtedly was the vestry; the full length
of it was 15 yards, the breadth six yards and a half; it had three or four
windows toward the east, which are now all filled up; nor is there any light
but what comes in at a little cranny in the wall. Nicholas de Byker tenet
terras suas, ut faciat districtiones ad Ward. novi castri super Tynam faciend.
et pro deb. Domini regis inter Tynam et Coquet, etc. and then my authority goes
on to say, that the manor of Byker was Sir Ralph Lawson's, Knt. deceased, after
of Henry Lawson, Esquire his son, and now of his eldest son, who without all
question is Bailiff by inheritance of the said castle, and is to levy these
castle wards, cornages, etc. and other rents, issues, fines, and amerciaments
belonging to the said castle.

In the 17th of King James I. 1619, a grant was made of the site and demesnes
of the castle to Alexander Stevenson, Esquire who was succeeded by one Patrick
Black, who died and left it in the possession of his wife. After that one James
Langton claimed Patrick Black's right, but by virtue of what is not known.

The liberties and privileges of the castle extend northwards to the river of
Tweed, and southward to the river of Tees.

In the year 1737, 10 King George II. the site and demesnes of the castle were
granted to George Liddell, Esquire for 50 years, from 2 July, 1736: rent 100
chaldron of coals for Greenwich Hospital.

The next subjects of antiquity to be attended to are the Religious
Foundations. The most ancient that I can point out was a Nunnery, cotemporary
with the conquest, Tanner 391. Pennant, vol. 2. p. 306.
to which Agas, mother of Margaret Queen of Scotland, and Christian her sister
retired, after the death of Malcolm at Alnwick. Near the time of the
dissolution, there were ten Nuns of the Benedictine order here, whose revenues
amounted to 36l. per annum. Mr Wallis says this house was founded by King Henry
I. but gives no authority for the assertion, though I presume it is Bourne's
History of Newcastle. Monasterium Monialium S. Barptolemaei in Novo Castro
super Tinam Flu, Henricus Rex, confirmavit Donat.

Testes Gul. de Mandevilla; Reginald de Curtenay; Gul. Stutevilla; Thomas
Bardolf; Richar. Giffard.

Hospitale S. Mariae de praedicto Castello in usus Monialium datum.

Lel. Col. vol. I. p. 41. Agas mother to Margaret Queen of Scotland, and
Christian her sister, becam Nuns at Newcastel upon Tyne; after that King
Malcolm was killed at Alnewick.

Ibid, vol. I. p. 531. 36 King Henry VIII. it was granted to William Barantyne
and others.

Vide in Madoxii Formul. Angl. p. 50. Cartam Hugonis Episc. Dunelm. de terra in
Burgo Dunelm. p. 132. Priorissae et conventus dimissionem XX acrarum terrae in
Haliwell. p. 271. Concessionem omnium terrarum Hospitalis S. Edmundi de
Gateshend priorissae and conventus de Newcastle. P. 69. Roberti Episc. Dunelm.
confirm. dictae concess. P. 287. Priorissae and conventus dimissionem Terrae in
Gateshend. P. 375. relaxationem priorissae et conventui de uno Messuagio cum
pertinentiis in Novo Castro.

Tanner's Notitia. Prioresies. Dna Cristiana oc. ad pentec. 1233 -- Sibil
Gategang 1331. Dna Alice Davill 9 May, 1355 -- Amisia de Belford 10 Jun. 1367
-- Katerina 21 Sep. 1403 (Rot Skirlaw Bp No. 93). -- Margaret Hawkeswell, 1
May, 1446 (Madox form. p. 271.) -- Agnes Danby, 9 Oct. 1471. -- Johanna Baxter,
20 Aug. 1486. Dame Joan Pr. granted a lease 4 King Hen. VII. A. D. 1486.
Johanna. She resigned for a pension of 1l. 10s. per ann. -- Agnes Lawson last
Prioress. She surrendered this Convent 3 Jan. 1540, 31 King Hen. VIII. before
Ric. Layton, one, etc. and had a pension of 6l. per ann. assigned her, which
she enjoyed in 1553, in which year remained in charge the following pensions.
-- Johanna Prioress 1l. 10l. Johanna Brodrigge 1l. 6s. 8d. Johanna Younger 1l.
6s. 8d. Eliz. Cranmer 1l. 6s. 8d. and to Cecily Middleton 1l. 6s. 8d.

Randal's Manuscripts. He notes a Charter of confirmation of one of the Henrys,
which he presumes was Henry Second. The witnesses show it to be the same as
remarked by Leland.


The site of the nunnery is within the limits of the present Newgate-street; a
back gate leading to it, and an adjoining close still retain the name of Saint
Bartholomew's. Among their possessions, of which we have evidence, was the
village of Stella, on the southern banks of Tyne, as appears by a deed noted by
Mr Wallis, wherein it is described, Nuper parcello possessionum domus sive
monasterii S. Bartholomei infra villam Novi Castri super Tynam dissoluti. Some
authors allege a religious house in Gateshead, now called Gateshead House, was
a cell to St. Bartholomew's, and paid yearly thereto 2s. St. Mary's Hospital,
in Westgate-street, is also said to have been dependant thereon. They
surrendered the 3d January, 1540, and the revenue was estimated at 36l. 10s. as
set forth by Dugdale, and 37l. 4s. 2d. by Speed. Agnes Lawson the Abbess was
allowed a pension of 6l. a year for life. The house became the resort of
pedlars and vagabonds, and growing into a public nuisance, it was pulled down,
and the ground levelled.

The Franciscans or Gray Friars had a house here, founded by the Carliols (who
were wealthy Merchants) in the time of King Henry III. it was situate near
Pilgrim-street Gate. By Pandon Gate stood the Gray Friars house, a very fair
thing, of the Caerluells foundation, before the year 1300. After the
dissolution it was granted 36 King Hen. 8. to the Earl of Essex and James
Rockby, etc.

Tanner's Not. The Friars Minors of this Monastery were Conventual, for St
Francis divided them into Conventual Observantines and Capuchins; but King Hen.
7. made them Observants: he was a great lover and patron of that order. King
Hen. 8. A. D. 1536, made them Conventuals again.

Fr. Tho. Baxter ord. fri. minor ord Pbr Mar. 23. 1497.

Fr. Joh. Cook, Joh. Esby Fr. Will. Hudson ord Subdiac, Mar. 23. 1497.

Fres. Joh. de Machlina Ord fri. Minor, de Observanc. Accoliti.

Fra^ de Machlina Ord fri. Minor, de Observanc. Accoliti.

Fox. Reg. p. 15.

Randal's Manuscripts. The Gray Freres in Newcastel of the Cairluelles
foundation, originally Merchants of the same town, and after men of land. The
Thirgilles of the would of Yorkshir have now by heir Generalles Cairluelles
lands.

Lel. Itin. v. 6. p. 46.
Mr Pennant says, part of it is still remaining, several additional buildings
having been made, it was used as the townhouse of the late Sir Walter
Blackett. This religious house consisted of a Warden, eight Friars, and two
Novices, and surrendered the 9th of January, 30 King Henry VIII. On the
dissolution no valuation is recorded, for the Franciscans had nothing in
propriety nor in common, but being Mendicants, begged all their subsistence
from the charity of others. It is said King Charles I. was confined here, after
he had entrusted himself to the hands of his Scotch subjects. The famous Duns
Scotus, mentioned in a preceding part of this work, the Doctor Subtilis, was of
this house. The conventual seal was impressed with the figure of St. Francis
bearing a cross in his hand.

The Preaching or Black Friars, Dominicans, had a monastery here. Mr Gross, in
his celebrated work, gives the following account of this house, drawn from
Bourne's History of Newcastle and other authorities. It was granted 35 King
Hen. 8. to the Mayor and Burgesses of this town.

Pat. 48 Hen. 3. n. 35. -- Pat. 8. Edw. 1. m. -- Pat. 5 Edw. 2. p. 2. m. 5. --
Pat. 11 Edw. 11. p. 2. m. 30. -- Pat. 15 Edw. 2. p. 3. m. 3. vel. 4. -- Pat. 3.
Edw. p. 1. m. Pat. 15 Edw. 3. p. 3. m. 3. vel. 4.

Tanner's Not. It was dependant upon Tinemouth.

Priors. -- Frater Joh. Rokesburgh oc. Prior, 13 July, 1476, v. Madoxs form.
Angl. p. 127. -- Friar Rich. Marshall: he with Friars Dav. Simpson and Joh.
Sowrby signed a Grant 28 King Henry 8. A. D. 1537. -- This Prior resigned and
went into Scotland 1551. Richard Harding the last Prior 1538 by res. Marshall.
-- This Pr. or Gardianus Domus fratru. Praedicatoru. with 12 brethren
surrendered 10 Jan. 30 King Hen. 8. Their annual revenue was then 2l. 19s. 6d.

Randal's Mannuscripts.


This monastery was founded by Sir Peter Scott, The Blake Freres of the
foundation of Sir Peter and Sir Nicholas Scotts, father and sun, Knights
boothe. But the site of the house was gyven by 3 sisters.

The lands of Scotte of Newcastelle came by daughters to Heron of Ford, to
Denton, etc. The beginning of these Scotts was merchaundice.

Lel. Itin. v. 6. p. 46.
who was the first Mayor of Newcastle A.D. 1251, and Sir Nicholas Scott his
son, who was one of the four Bailiffs of the town A. D. 1254 and 1257, and
capital Bailiff 1269; but the site of it was given by three sisters, whose
names have long since been ungratefully buried in oblivion.

When was the particular time of its building, I have met with no account; but
it is not difficult to give a probable guess. The order itself, of the
Dominicans or Black Friars, came into England in the year 1221; consequently it
must have been founded after that time: and that it must have been founded some
years before the year 1280, is plain to a demonstration; for in that year,
which was the 8th of King Henry I. the Black Friars had license from the King,
to break a door through this new or town wall into their garden; which proves
them a regular settled body at that time; and therefore that their priory was
built some years before that license.

We are told that this monastery was in old time called the Gray Friars, which,
in my opinion, is a thing highly improbable; for the Gray Friars or Franciscans
came not into England till about the year 1224; and if, as I have proved above,
the Black Friars were a settled body some years before 1280, how is it
possible, to have been called of old time, the Gray Friars? This is therefore a
mistake: and besides, the Dominicans came into England before the Franciscans
or Gray Friars, and therefore more probably were sooner in this place.

It has been a very stately building, as appears by the present remains of it.
The area or grass plot is about 87 feet in length, and as many in breadth. On
the east side of it was the chapel, which is now the hall of the company of
Smiths in this town. On the west side of it, is a curious old well, which
served the monastery with water, called our Lady's Well. On the south may still
be seen, the ruins of a curious front, on which side is the hall of the
Cordwainers; in which I saw a pair of winding stairs, which they told me
(before they were walled up) led by a vault as far as the nunnery of St.
Bartholomew. On the north of it were their gardens, a part of which was the
Warden's Close, before the building of that part of the town wall. This appears
by the charter granted to the monastery in the reign of Edward I. about the
breaking out that narrow gate in the wall between Westgate and Newgate; in
which grant it is said, that the wall went through the middle of their garden.
The monastery was dependant on the priory of Tynemouth.

In the reign of Edward II. the brethren of this monastery had license granted
them for the building of a draw bridge beyond the new ditch of the castle.

Who were the Priors of this monastery; what eminent men belonged to them; or
what things were transacted by them from their beginning till their
dissolution; were things undoubtedly preserved among themselves whilst they
were a body; but after their surrender, were either destroyed, or have not yet
come to light.

One of the Priors of this monastery was one Richard Marshall. I take this
gentleman to have been the last Prior of this monastery; for in the 28th of
King Henry VIII. a grant of a tenement near the White Cross (signed by Friar
Richard Marshall, Doctor and Prior; and Friar David Simpson, and Friar John
Sourby) was given to Anthony Godsalve, upon his paying to the said priory or
monastery 9s. per annum. This grant is now in the possession of Mr Thomas
Marshall of Newcastle, Joiner, who purchased this tenement, and has lately
rebuilt it. He pays the same rent to the town of Newcastle, which the tenement
paid to the monastery. About two years after the signing of this deed, in
January, the 30th of this reign, this monastery surrendered. It consisted of a
Prior and 12 Friars.

What became of the brethren of this friary, after their surrender; what they
had allowed them annually for a maintenance; or whether they had any thing
allowed at all does not appear. Some account indeed I met with afterward of
the Prior himself, but none of the Friars. It is this which follows.

Richard Marshall, Prior of the Black Friars in Newcastle about the year 1551,
went into Scotland and preached at St. Andrew's, that the Paternoster should
be addressed to God and not to the Saints. Some Doctors of the university being
disgusted at this assertion, prevailed with one Tofts, a Gray Friar, to
undertake to prove that the Paternoster might be said to the Saints; whose
ignorance in doing the same was so manifest, that he became the common jest,
and quitted the town.

After the surrender of this monastery, the Black Friars was granted to the
town of Newcastle, in consideration of 53l. 7s. 6d. The annual value of it was
2l. 19s. 6d.

The King says in his grant, that he gives to the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle, the whole house and site lately a priory, or house of brethren,
called vulgarly the Black Friars, in Newcastle upon Tyne; the chapel-houses,
edifices, gardens, etc. the hall, two chambers, a chamber called the Cross
Chamber; and two gardens with their appurtenances; and the whole close within
the Westgate, and another close near the site of the said priory, on the
north; and a close containing three acres, and a house in the same close,
without the walls of the said town; and a house called the Gatehouse situated
near the said street. It also appears from the first grant, that the King
reserved to himself and successors the bells and lead that was upon the church
belonging to this friary, and the other buildings of it; the lead in the
gutters, together with the stones and iron of the church, etc.

The Nine Crafts of this town had their meeting houses or halls in it, and
still have except two of them, the Tailors and the Cordwainers, who have
bestowed these upon some poor widows, and got themselves others in their
places. These halls are of great service to this ancient building, in
preserving it from entire ruin. Such is the hall of the Smiths, which was
repaired by them in the year 1709: the hall of the Dyers; the hall of the
Bakers and Brewers, which was repaired by them in the year 1711: these halls
are on the east side of the friary. Such also are those on the west side of it,
viz. the hall of the Sadlers, which was repaired by them in the year 1729, and
the hall of the Skinners and Glovers, which was repaired by them in the year
1721. Such are those also on the south side of it, viz. the Cordwainers hall,
which was turned into apartments for three widows in the year 1729: the hall of
the Butchers and the hall of the Tanners were repaired in the year 1717.

By the means of these halls, there is still some visage of the friary
remaining, which had otherwise been entirely in dust. It Is a pity that those
people, who are permitted by the companies to reside in some of those rooms,
are not threatened into more cleanliness; This still remains a matter of
complaint, for it is abominably filthy; and the curious pass through it amidst
those unseemly annoyance of which some animals are peculiarly delicate in their
concealment.
and that the companies themselves are not at the expense of repairing the
area. Were these things done, it would be a beautiful piece of antiquity, and
the entertainment of the curious, from whence soever they come.

Brown Willis, in his History of Abbeys, says, Roland Harding was the last
Prior of the Newcastle Dominicans; and that he with 12 Monks surrendered their
convent 10th January, 1539, 30th Henry VIII. This was the only Dominican
monastery in Newcastle.

The monastery of St. Augustine was founded by William Lord Ross, Baron of
Werk: The Augustines foundid by the Lord Rose. In this house be 3 or 4 fair
toures.

Lel. Itin. v. 6. p. 46.
it was situate in the Manor Chair, was a handsome edifice, with cloisters and
a noble chapel: Lower in the street not far from Pandon Gate, a little within a
lane, was the Austin Friars, founded by the Lord Ross; which house, after the
dissolution, was granted to John Duke of Northumb. 5 Edw. 6.

Pat. 19. Ed. I. m. 7. vel 8. Pat. 34 Ed. I. m. -- Pat. 11. Edw. II. p. 1. m.
23. de terra in Cowgate concessa fratribus S. Augustini per Will Roos de
Hamelake. -- Pat. 12 Ed. II. p. 1. m. 4 vel 5. -- Pat. 16. Edw. II. p. 2. m. 15
promanso elargandon. -- Pat. 3. Edw. III. p. 1. m. Pat. 4 Edw. 3. p. 2. m. 43.
vel 44. Tanner's Notitia.

V. Pilkington's Reg. p. 75 at the end.

Cuthb. Jordayne Fres Ordinis S. Augusti ord Pbr 23 Dec. 1501 (Epo Cuthberto.)
Joh. Ruther Fres Ordinis S. Augusti ord Pbr 23 Dec. 1501 (Epo Cuthberto.)
Andr. Kelle Pr. or Warden Domus Convent. fru Augustine. surrendered 9 Jan.
1539, 30 King Hen. 8. Randal's Manuscripts.


the Kings of England in their Scotch expeditions frequently took up their
residence there. It surrendered 9th January, 30 King Henry VIII. and was used
for some time by government as a magazine for warlike stores: from whence it
acquired the name of the Artillery Ground. King James I. gave it to a Scotch
attendant, who for the sake of the lead and materials dismantled it. Out of the
ruins have arose a workhouse for the poor, a house of correction, a
charity-school for the parish of All Saints, and a house for the master. The
Surgeons hall and two hospitals stand within the limits of this monastery.

A monastery of Carmelites or White Friars was Between Westgate and the side of
the river Tyne was the house of the White Friars, founded by King Edw. I. as
Speed, but as others by Roger Thornton, Merchant. It was granted 37 King Henry
VIII. to Sir Richard Gresham and Rich. Billingford.

Pat. 35 Ed. I. m. 4 vel 5. -- Pat. 4 Ed. II. p. 2. m. 18 vel 19. -- Pat. 10
Edw. III. p. 2. m.

Tanner's Notitia. The Carmelites were first brought into England by Ra.
Freeborne, and placed at Huln near Alnwick as beforementioned under that head.

Edw. Dinely Carmelita apud N. Castru. egregius cocionator, socius Nic, Kentaru
ordinis Provincialis claruit 1450. v. Tanner's Bilioth p. 228. Fr. Rob. Benton
ord fru Carmelitar ord Phr 23 Mar. 1497, e Regro Fox. p. 15.

Gerald Spore last Pr. or Gardianus dumus Conventual frum Carmelitaru. with
seven Friars two Novices surrendered. It was valued at 9l. 11s. 4d. at the
suppression.

Part of the ground on which this house stood was purchased by Adam Askew, M.
D. a gent. very eminent in his profession, and a native of Kendale in
Westmoreland, who in 1740 built an elegant house on the spot. Randal's
Manuscripts.

The White Freres of the foundation of Thornton, first a marchante and then a
landid man. The lands of Thorton be descendid to the Lord Lumley, so that
almost all the fair lands that Lomeley came by this Thorton. Witton in
Northumberland, and the isle in the Bishopric, and also Lulworth were Thortons.

The advancement of Lumeley to be Lord was by marriage of a bastard daughter of
King Edwards 4.

Thomas Lumeley, after Lord Lumeley, slew in the diche of Windsor Castelle
Giles Thornton, bastard to rich Thornton. Lel. Itin. v. 6. p. 46.


founded by King Edward I. in honor of the blessed Virgin. On their surrender,
30 King Henry VIII. they consisted of a Prior, seven Brethren, and two
Noviciates, and their revenue was valued at 9l. 11s. 4d. It was situate near
the Foot of Westgate, not far distant from White Friar Tower before described.

In the close of this house was a fraternity, styled the Brethren of the
Penance of Jesus Christ, or the Brethren of the Sack; to whom King Henry III.
gave the place called Calgarth, at the instance of Robert Bruce. Here was Temp.
Hen. 3. a Friery of Brethren de Penetentia Jesu Christi, situated in a place
called the Constable Gerth.

Pat. 51 Hen. 3. m. pro place sua elarganda. Tanner's Notitia.




The Carmelites had another monastery in this town, situate in the Walk Knowle,
of which Laurentius de Acton was the founder, according to Leland. The Crosie
Freres, alias Walknolle, of the foundation of Laurence Acton sum time Mayre of
Newcastelle.

The Actons lands came joyntely with the Thorntons to Lomeley.

Thornton Mayre of Newcastell, borne in Wytton. He purchasid 800 mark land,
and died wonderful rich. Some say by prices of sylver owre taken on the se.

Lel. Itin. vol. 6. p. 46.
Dugdale says it was founded by Roger de Thornton, but that is confuted by
Bourne. Bourne, p. 169.
It was dedicated to St. Michael, and being on a lofty situation, Fox p. 12 --
Steph. Sheraton and Cuth. Young. ad. titim domus Sci Mich. de Walk-knowl ord
Pbri 11 Mar. 1496.

Rob. Wales, etc. Ord Pbri 23 Sep. 1497. Randal's Manuscripts.


had the name of St. Michael's Mount. After the dissolution, King Henry VIII.
gave it with its rights and revenues to Sir John Gresham, then an Alderman of
the city of London, and Richard Billingford.

By Tanner's Notitia it appears, that King David I. of Scotland, who was
possessed of Newcastle as Earl of Northumberland, founded here two monasteries
and a nunnery: but whether any of the before mentioned own their rise to him,
no evidence remains. He died A. D. 1153.

Patents were made out for founding two other religious houses; one 37 King
Edward III. in honor of the nativity and resurrection of our Lord, which was
repealed; and another, 5 King Henry IV. in honor of St. John Baptist and St.
John Evangelist, which latter was also repealed or otherwise proved abortive.
Wall 211.


Besides these religious foundations, there were several on a more meritorious
plan -- hospitals for the benevolent purpose of relieving the miseries of human
life. When that dreadful distemper the leprosy raged here, the great and
opulent, from true principles of religion and piety, erected those places of
consolation and relief for miserable mortals, who were expelled from society on
account of this horrible visitation. King Henry I. founded an hospital here for
the reception of lepers, called the Hospital of St. Mary Magdalen, situated
near Barras Bridge, without Pilgrim-street Gate, and therein fixed a Master,
Brethren, and Sisters. After that malady abated, or was subdued, it was
appropriated for the reception of poor persons, when the town was visited with
a pestilence -- a dreadful scourge, which the Almighty has now withheld from
this land for a considerable time. On such occasions, 14 within the house were
allowed each a room, 8s. per month, and coals: 15 without the house had
different allowances, according to the state of their wants; some 8s. per
month, some 5s. others 2s. 6d. In the reign of King Edward III. Laurentius
Acton had the first fruits, amounting annually to 200 marks; one John Bland was
then Master, and was a considerable patron to this foundation, having built the
consistory, and ornamented the chapel. He died A. D. 1374, and was interred in
his own chapel, near the high altar, after having presided over the hospital
five years. It was a donative in the patronage of the Corporation, and stood
without Pilgrim-street Gate, near the Barras Bridge. Adjoining to it was a
chapel dedicated to St. James, supposed to have been a chapel of ease to the
parish of St. Andrew's. There was a Priory or Hospital (without the walls of
the town in the suburbs of Pilgrim-street) of a Master and Brethren, dedicated
to St. Mary Magdalen, and founded as Speed says by King Hen. I. It was valued,
26 King Hen. VIII, at 9l. 11s. 4d. per ann. as Speed; and though granted away
in the time of Queen Elizabeth, yet was re-established in the 9th year of King
James I. when the chapel of St Thomas on the bridge over the Tyne was annexed to
it. It consists now of a Master and three poor Brethren, Burgesses of
Newcastle, who have each of them 3l. 6s. 8d. per ann. It is under the patronage
and government of the Mayor and Burgesses of the Corporation.

Pat. 19 Ed. I. m. 3. vel 4. Tanner's Notitia. Pat. 5 Ric. II. p. 2. m. 35 pro
advocatione Ejusdem. Tanner's Notitia. At the Surpression val. at 9l. 11s. 4d.
Proc. Ep. 3s. 4d.
Masters. -- John de Bland 1374. 15 Feb. 1569, the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle granted the next presentation of St M. Magdalen, called the
Maidlenes, to Hen Anderson, Rob. Mitford, and Chr. Mitford. -- Edm. Wyseman,
inst. 5 Oct. 1564. This took no effect. -- Rob. Mydforde 1586. Randal's MSS.




The hospital of St. Mary, commonly styled St. Mary the Virgin, was situated in
Westgate-street, had several patrons, but it is not certain who was the
original founder. There is some confusion in our authorities touching this
hospital, as will appear by the notes. Walter de Bolbeck was a benefactor to
the first foundation, which Bourne thinks took date in the reign of King Henry
I. One Aselack, of Killinghow, was the second founder, in the time of King
Richard I. as appears by his charter: Ego Aselack, etc. fundavi hospitale
Sanctae Mariae Virginis, etc. and ibi posui duos fratres regulares and unum
capellanum ad ferv. etc. Eustacius, Parson of Benton, one of the witnesses, was
incumbent about 1190. The third foundation was by the Corporation, or as Bourne
says, by the inhabitants of Newcastle, for a Master and Chaplain to say divine
service for six Bedes folks in the almshouse, etc. its revenue was 33l. 15s.
per annum. It was besides instituted as an asylum for the helpless stranger and
indigent traveller, a receptacle to the sick and needy, and to give sepulture
to such as died there. It had an annual allowance of nine chaldron of coals.
King Edward III. gave thereto 100s. as a compensation for the damage it
sustained in the Scotch incursions. Mr Wallis gives the following list of
ornaments belonging to the chapel.

"In the mayoralty of Wm Harding 1444, the following list was taken of the
plate, sacred vestments, and other things belonging to it.

Three chalices gilt with gold, one entire vestment of bloody velvit woven
about with golden fringe, with one cap, one casule, three albs for the
principal festivals.


8th of January, 1335, Richard de Bury, Bishop (...)

The hospital of the Holy Trinity was founded by William de Acton, 37 King
Edward III. A. D. 1363; according to Randal 1360, and was confirmed by Bishop
Thomas Hatfield 2 Oct. 1361: it stood on the Walk Knowl. Some authors assert,
that Anthony Beck, Bishop of Durham, presented the first Master; but Randal,
whose accuracy was singular, says, Will de Wackefeld pater ord. Scae Trin. was
appointed Master, by a solemn act transfer their right of nominating a new
Master to Tho. (Langley) Bp of Durham, on Oct. 26, 1412, by Rob. de Berall Not.
Publ. in the presence of Sir John Palman Priest, Robt Middylham and Joh.
Walghes Clerks of D. dioc. Witnesses. The Bp, authorized by the said act or
instrument, collated a Master. (Langley's Reg. p. 91.) Will Cartell frater ord.
regular. S. Augustini in Hosp, B. M. and S. Joh. Evang. vulgarit nucupat.
West-spittle. col. 1. Oct. 1413, p. m. Fris Burneham. Pr. Tho. Bp Dun. h. v. --
Whether Cartell was frightened by the Bp's proceedings, or on what other account
I know not, he soon after resigned the custody or mastership of the hospital on
20 Feb. 1416, before the Bp, in the presenceof Sir Robt Umfraville, Knt. and
Messrs John Howingham, Archd. of D. and Tho. Rome, Monk of D. in S. Theologia
Magro. Ric. Holme and Tho. Leyes, Rrs of churches pochial within the dice. of
York and Linc. and Will. Brown Rector of St Dennis's church in the city of
York and others. -- Magr Joh. Fitz Henry Carr, of the Priory of Newburgh ord.
S. Augustini Ebor Dioc. Col. 28 Oct. 1417, p. res. fris Carlell. -- Tho. Ep.
Dun. h. v. -- On the 5th Jan. 1424, the same Bishop, in order to preserve the
goods of the hospital, issued a sentence of excommunication against every
person stealing the goods belonging to it, viz. Libros Calices aliaq. Jocalia
and ornamenta. -- Magr Johes Bird in legib. B. Custos 1501. Roland Swinborne,
A. M. 1528, p. m. ult. Inc. Pr. Edw. Swinborne Major et Communitas Villae Novi
Castri. He resigned 29 Aug. 1531, exchanging with Robert Davill for a Prebend
in Norton church in the county of Durham. -- Robt Davell, Cl. pres. 29 Aug.
1531, p. res. Swinborne. Pr. Gilb. Middleton Arm. Major, etc. -- Joh. Raymers,
A. M. inst. 25 Apr. 1558, p. mort. Davell -- Rich. Master, M. D. Regiae
Majestatis in aula serviens, was pres. by Q. Eliz. 1564. -- Anth. Garforth, Cl.
inst. 9 Oct. 1579, p. depr. Raymes. -- Hen. Dethicke, A. M. and L. L. B. inst.
30 June, 1580, p. mort. Garforthe. Pr. Rog. Raw, Mayor, etc. -- Ra. Pattenson,
A. M. inst. 9 May, 1583, p. res. Dethicke. Pr. Will. Riddell, Mayor, etc. --
Hen. Ewbanke, A. M. inst. 15 Mar. 1585, p. res. Pattenson. He resigned 18 Oct.
1615.

The Grammar School was founded in St Nicholas churchyard by Thomas Horsley,
who was Mayor of Newcastle in the years 1525 and 1533. It was removed to the
West Spittle 1559.

Queen Eliz the 2d foundress. The Mayor and Burgesses patrons.

Burras resigned the Free School in St Nicholas churchyard 1559.

Sir Geo. Selby, Mayor, turned the chapel of this hospital into a school-house,
and vestry into an election house.

Master's salary 50l. per ann. Usher's salary 35l. per ann. Paid by the Town. A
second Usher's salary, and 32l. 10s. Writing Master's, paid by the Town. 35l.

Rob. Fowberry, A. M. 1615. -- Edw. Wigham, A.M. 1623. -- Fra. Gray, Cl. 1629.
-- Amor Oxley, A. M. -- Nich. Hall, S. T. B. 1649. -- Geo. Ritschell. -- John
Bewick 1669. -- Rich.Garthwaite, A. M. 1671. -- John Cotterel, A. M. 1690 --
Tho. Rudd, A. M. 1699. -- Jam. Jurin, A. M. Fell. of Trin. Col. Camb. and
afterward Doctor of Physic 1709. -- Edm. Lodge, Cl. by res. Jurin. -- Rich.
Dawes, A. M. 1739. He resigned and had an annuity of 80l. a year for life given
him by the Corporation. -- Hugh Moises, A.M. 1750.


Custos by the founder. It surrendered 10th of January, 30th King Henry VIII.
10 Jan. A. D. 1539. Tho. Wayde Magister sive custos Cellae sive Domus de
Walleknowle infra villam de Novo Castro, etc. ordinis sanctae Trinitatis,
surrendered this religious house.


St. Catherine's or Thornton's Hospital, on the south side of Sandhill, called
by some authors Maison Dieu, was founded in the reign of King Henry IV. by
Roger Thornton the elder. Here was a Chaplain, nine poor men, and four women.
The Corporation, 34 King Henry VI. by leave of the founder, had the use of the
hall and kitchen, for the wedding entertainments of young people, there to
receive the offerings and gifts of their friends. It was a custom in the North,
for the bride to have a purse at her girdle, in which she received the bridal
presents of her friends. It seems as if there had been a custom in Newcastle,
for poor Burgesses to have a bridal feast at the expense of the Corporation;
but of this I have not any authority, but the article which refers to this note.

The revenue of this hospital was valued, 26 King Henry 8. at 12l. 3s. 10d. in
the whole, and 8l. 0s. 1d. clear.

Vide in Mon. Angl. tom 11. p. 474, 475. licentiam regis pro fundatione ex Pat.
13. Hen. 4. p. 2. m. 14. Pat. 4. Hen. 4. p. 2. m. 38. pro pecia terrae concess
pauperibus Domus Dei per Rog. Thornton edificatae. Pat. 2. Hen. 6. p. 3. m. 8.
vel. 9. Tanner's Not.

Bourne says the foundation was for a Chaplain to pray for the founder's soul,
and the souls of his father and mother, and of Agnes his late wife. In the
notes is given at length the license noted by Tanner.

Martinus Hallymane Master of Masendew oc. 14 Feb. 1582. Bishop Barnes's
visitation.

Randal's Manuscripts. In a grant of the next presentation set forth in
Randal's Manuscripts, from J. Lumley Mil. Dns de Lumley, etc. patronus libe
Cap. S. Kath. this place is thus described: Super montem fabulum infra V. Novi
Castri.




Brigham's and Ward's Almshouses may also claim a place here: but to introduce
the particular donations and constitutions of these, would in no wise entertain
the reader, and would increase this work too much. Brigham's Almshouse stood
near the monastery of Franciscans, and Ward's in the Manor Chair.

In Randal's Manuscripts, I find the name of St. Laurence's, without any
particulars relative to it. Bourne says, as to St. Laurence's, it is said to
have been built by one of the Earls of Northumberland. It was dependent upon
the priory of St. John of Jerusalem, and was granted to the town in the 3d year
of Edward VI. In 1558, its revenues amounted to 11l. 8s. 8d.

The ancient palaces were,

Pampedon Hall, a royal mansion, in the time of the Saxon heptarchy.

Lumley Place, in the Side, an ancient appendage to the castle; the temporary
residence and palace of the Kings of England, on their northern expeditions: it
became afterward the house of the Lords Lumley, of Lumley Castle, from whom it
had its more modern name.

The Earl's Place, belonging to the Earls of Northumberland, in Newgate-street:
it is sometimes called the Scotch Inn, being the temporary residence of the
Kings and Nobles of Scotland, when in Newcastle on a truce.

Northumberland House, in the Close; the residence of the Earls of
Northumberland.

Westmoreland Place, in Westgate-street; the palace of the Nevils, Earls of
Westmoreland.

To these we may add the Pilgrims House, in Pilgrim-street; the place of
resort, stay, and refreshment of devotees, in their way to the holy shrine at
Jesmont.

This large and populous town consists of four parishes; St. Nicholas,
All Saints, St. Andrew's, and St. John's.

St. Nicholas's is a vicarage, having three dependent chapels, viz. Gosforth,
St. Thomas's, and Cramlington. The Bishop of Carlisle is impropriator and
patron: it was given to the Church and Canons of St. Mary's, Carlisle, by King
Henry I. in or about the year 1120. Richarnus de Aurea Valle was Parson of this
and Newburn church, and also a third not named in that reign. Carlisle
monasterium canonicorum dedicat. B. Mariae.

Walterus Presbyter Normannus, quem Rex W Rufus praefecerat urbi Carleolensi,
caepit inchoare monasterium in honorem B. Mariae, quo in ipso principio
sublato. Hen. I. Rex praedictum monasterium prefecit, canonicosque regulares
introduxit, deditque monasterio 6. Ecclesias, viz. Newcastle, Newburne,
Warkeware, Robern, Wichingham, and Corbridge, secitque Adelwaldum confessorum
suum primum priorem.

Lel. Col. vol. 1. p. 121.


The several churches of All Saints, St. Andrew's, and St. John's, are
dependent upon this vicarage, though they are distinct parishes; and the Vicar
receives dues from them all.

The church of St. Nicholas, St. Nicholas, to whom this church is dedicated,
was Bishop of Myra, a city in Lycia, a province in Asia Minor; he lived about
the beginning of the 4th century, and during the persecution of Licinius the
Roman Emperor was sent into banishment: But after the death of that tyrant, he
revisited his diocese, and threw out all the idols which he found in it. He is
said to have assisted at the general council of Nice, where he strenuously
opposed the Arians: he is commemorated 6th December. Randal's Manuscripts.
by most authors, is said to have its foundation in the year 1091, though some
attribute it to David I. King of Scotland. In the grant to St. Mary's in
Carlisle, the stipend of the Minister is not stipulated, the expression being a
suitable maintenance to be given to the Minister. This was afterward fixed in
the reign of King Stephen, 24th January, 1194, by Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of
Durham, with the approbation of the Prior and Convent of Carlisle, when all the
fruits, fees, annual profits, oblations, and obventions were assigned thereto
(the great tithes excepted). A state of the Lectureships from the Manuscripts
of Dr. Chapter Hunter.

It appears, that Pearson, Lecturer of St. Nicholas about 1606, was paid
quarterly a salary out of the town of Newcastle, and likewise for several years
after during his continuance.

It appears, that Shaw was about 1614 Lecturer of St. John's, and had a salary
quarterly paid him out of the town, and the like for several years after during
his continuance.

Fran. Gray, about 1622, was Lecturer of St. Andrew's, and had also a salary
quarterly paid him out of the town, and the like for several years after during
his continuance.

There were Lecturers of All saints about the same time, as Dr. Jennison and
others, who had also a salary paid them out of the town, and continued in the
like manner till the late civil wars.

The salaries were not one and the same, but added and increased as the town
thought fit. Upon this first settlement they had those salaries out of the town
for preaching in the forenoon, and the parishes contributed for their preaching
in the afternoons. Some time after the town of Newcastle made an addition to
the former salaries, and gave them an allowance for preaching both forenoon and
afternoon: after which augmentation the parishes gave no further contribution.
In this state have the Lectureships continued ever since, with an alteration
still of salaries, more or less, as there was occasion, and at the will and
pleasure of the patrons: and when any vacancy happened in any of the said
churches, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of Newcastle, have from time
to time chosen another in such room and stead, and the Bishop of Durham for the
time being did always hitherto allow and approve of, by his license, such
person so chosen, being duly qualified. -- Note the Lecturers of St. Nicholas
and All Saints have this further advantage in it, which makes it the more
valuable, that this preferment does no ways disqualify or incapacitate them
from holding other livings with the cure of souls

Randal's Manuscripts.
The church is a stately building, placed on a fine elevated situation, near
the center of the town; 240 feet in length, 75 feet in breadth, and of a
proportionable height. The tower or steeple is 194 feet in height, highly
ornamented; four images of no mean sculpture decorate the lower part of the
tower: the top of the tower is very elegant, it is ornamented with fine
pinnacles of tabernacle-work, from the corner spring intersecting bows or
arches, supporting in the middle a light and open lanthorn, graced with
pinnacles of extraordinary beauty: the whole has the most uncommon and pleasing
appearance, not unlike a magnificent imperial crown. It is justly allowed by
all travelers to be the finest piece of masonry of the kind in Europe. This
tower, most authors agree, was built in the time of King Henry VI. by one
Robert Rhodes. On the bottom of the bellfry is this inscription: Orate pro
anima Roberti Rhodes; Great disputes have arose who this Robert Rhodes was:
Gray says he was Prior of Tynemouth in the time of King Henry VI. Others
suggest he was one of the Justices of the Bishop of Durham, and quote a
register at Durham to prove Robert Rhodes and Agnes his wife lived about the
year 1486: but Bourne with great propriety fixes on an eminent Merchant in
Newcastle, and gives powerful arguments for his determination.

Bourne tells the following remarkable Story: That when the Scots besieged the
town in the civil wars, and made ineffectual efforts to reduce it, they sent a
message threatening to destroy this fine steeple: in consequence of which, the
Mayor ordered it to be filled with Scotch prisoners then in the town, which
being made known to the besiegers, they forbore to shed the blood of their
countrymen, and the elegant edifice was saved.


from thence it is conjectured by several that this was the name of the
founder. Pennant, vol. 2. p. 308.
The church is well illuminated; the east or altar window was anciently adorned
with paintings on the glass, representing the twelve Apostles, and the seven
The chief of which were, the building of Westgate; the Town House and Exchange;
St. Catharine's Hospital; Monastery of Carmelites at Walk Knowle; a Chantry in
the church of All Saints, value 6l. per annum, dedicated to St. Peter; and
another in the same church, dedicated to St. Catharine, value 5l. 3s. 8d. and
this Window.
acts of charitable munificence of Roger Thornton, who built the window; in
which was the following inscription: Orate pro anima Rogeri de Thornton, et pro
animabus filiorum and filiarum. Wallis. -- Gray's Chorographia inter Collectan.
Oxfordiana.


The church has eight musical bells, and a good double organ. On the north side
of the organ is St. George's Porch: According to Bourne, it was ornamented with
carvings and painted windows: the portraiture of St. Lawrence remains in the
east window. It is supposed to be an ancient chantry, founded by one of the
English Monarchs.

There were nine chantries to this church, dedicated (1) to St. John the
Baptist and St. John the Evangelist, two to St. Catharine, (4) St. Peter and
St. Paul, (5) St. Thomas, (6) the Virgin Mary, (7) St. Margaret, (8) St.
Cuthbert, (9) St. Lyra. The chantry of St. John the Baptist and St. John the
Evangelist stood on the north side of the church: its original foundation was
by Lawrence Prior of Durham, 14th King Stephen, 1149. It was refounded 6 King
Edward III. by Richard de Emeldon, for three Chaplains. By an injunction of
Richard Bishop of Durham, in the third year of his consecration, 1335: they
were obliged to distribute after divine service, on the eve of the anniversary
of his death, the sum of 6s. 8d. to 160 poor people. It was founded again in
the reign of King Hen. 6. by Robert de Rhodes and his wife Agnes, for one
Chaplain: the annual value 7l. 7s. 10d. besides a house given by the
corporation for the Chaplain to live in.

One of the Chantries of St Catherine was founded by Allan de Durham. It was
refounded in the reign of King Edward 3. by William Johnson and his wife
Isabell, for one Chaplain: the annual value 6l. 15s.

The other Chantry of St Catherine by Nicholas and John Elliker: the annual
value 3l. 14s. 8d.

The Chantry of St Peter and St Paul was founded by Adam de Fenrother and Alan
Hilton, in the reign of King Hen. 4. the annual value 4l. 13s. 4d.

The Chantry of St Thomas was founded by John Thape cape, in the reign of King
Edw. 3. the annual value 4l. 12s. 6d.

The Chantry of the blessed Virgin claims as high a foundation as the reign of
King Edw. 1. but how much earlier and by whom is unknown, the deed of
foundation being lost. It stood on the south side of the church, being a large
porch; the annual value 5l. 16s. Nicholas de Carliol, capital Bailiff of the
corporation 1328, and Peter Graper, mayor, 1305, paid each 2s. per annum to it.

The Chantry of St Margaret was founded by Stephen Whitgray and his wife Mary
17 King Rich. 2. 1394. The annual value 10 marks.

The Chantry of St Cuthbert was founded by Tho. de Errington and Wm Redmarshal,
in the reign of King Rich. 2. The annual value 7l. 3s. 2d.

The Chantry of St Lyra was founded by Robert Castle in the reign of King
Edward 3. The annual value 4l. 10s.

Bourne, Wallis, etc.


Above the vestry is a library, to which Dr. Tomlinson, a late Vicar, at his
death, made a great addition, by a donation of his valuable books: but of what
utility (comparatively speaking) was this library, until the late munificent
Sir Walter Blackett (over whose name every worthy burgess will for one age at
least drop a tear, whilst his experienced benevolence gives the estimate of his
loss; and on whose immortal character future ages will contemplate with
veneration and Joy) the great modern patron of Newcastle, gave an annual
stipend of 25l. for ever for a Librarian.

Besides the benefice, the Vicar receives an annual gift of 90l. from the
Corporation, by way of augmentation. The first Curate's stipend is 4l. from the
Vicar, 6l. 16s. 8d. from the Crown, and 40l. gift from the Corporation. The
Lecturer has 120l. a year from the Corporation.

At the north door of the church there is a large flag for the first step,
sculptured in waves, as in commemoration of the dedicatory Saint's peculiar
protection to seafaring men.

The Vicarage-house stands in Westgate-street.

Many very elegant monuments are placed within the ailes, but their description
cannot be set out in this work.

The chapel of St. Thomas stands at the end of the Bridge: the founder not
known, or the time of its being erected.

There were two chantries founded in it, dedicated to St. Ann and St. Mary the
Virgin. St Ann's was founded by Wm Heron: the annual value 4l. 17s.

St Mary's, the founder unknown: the annual value of the endowment 4l. 3s. 6d.

Another Chantry was founded in honor of St Mary, by George Carr, Merchant,
but never licensed: annual value of the endowment 5l. 6s. 8d.

There are three cellars under the chapel. Gilbert de Mitford, a burgess of
Newcastle, paid annually for the middle one 14s. at the feast of St Martin in
winter. It was confirmed to him 21st King Edw. 3. 1347, by charter from William
Spyn, then Chaplain, and Guardian of the alms for the support of Tyne Bridge,
with the consent of the Corporation: sealed with their seal, and signed by
Peter Graper, Mayor, William de Acton, Hugh de Augerton, Hugh de Carliol, and
John de Emeldon, Bailiffs.

Bourne, Wallis, etc.
It was made a Chapel of Ease to St. Nicholas 10th September, A. D. 1732, and
was repaired by the Corporation, who gave a handsome stipend to a morning and
afternoon Lecturer.

All Saints church is at the foot of Pilgrim-street: it was built before the
year 1286. This is said to be one of the largest cures in the kingdom. Gray is
of opinion that it was dedicated to All Hallows, or All Saints, from the
ancient name of that part of the town Pampedon, which he says was so called
from (...), imagining, I suppose, that it was so called of the Romans after the
temple of Rome, the Pantheon, which was dedicated to all the Gods.

The church is 55 yards 1 foot long, and 25 yards 2 feet broad: a square tower:
the bells were founded in 1696, of the metal of the statue of King James II.
removed from Sandhill. The name of Robert Rhodes is on this steeple also.

The chancel stands on a vault supported by a center pillar and eight groin
arches.

The Rood was an image of our Savior upon the cross, made generally of wood,
and placed on a loft erected for that purpose, just over the passage out of the
church into the chancel; out of this mystery it is said, that the church
represents the church militant, and the chancel the church triumphant; and who
will pass out of the former into the latter, must go under the Rood loft, that
is, they must go under the cross and suffer affliction. This image was wont to
have the Virgin Mary on one side, and St John on the other. Savely's Church
Hist. p. 199.

Bourne.
Seven chantries were founded in this church, and dedicated (1) to St. Thomas,
(2) St. Mary the Virgin, (3) St John the Evangelist, (4) St. Peter, (5) St.
John Baptist, (6) St. Catharine, (7) St. Lyra. St Thomas's was founded by John
Puthore Clerk: the annual value 4l. 8s. 4d.

St Mary's, founder unknown: the annual value 4l. 5s. 10d.

St John the Evangelist's was founded by Rich. Willisby and Rich. Fishlake: the
annual value 4l. 15s. 4d.

St Peter's was founded by Roger de Thornton, the royal license granted 13 King
Henry IV. the annual value 6l. It was situate opposite to the founder's
sepulchral monument.

St Catherine's had the same pious founder, the annual value 5l. 3s. 8d.

St John the Baptist's was founded by John Ward: the annual value 7l. 15s. 8d.

St Lyra's was founded in the reign of King Edw. III. by Richard Pickering: the
annual value 3l. 8s. 4d.

Wallis.


The Minister of this church is paid 4l. per annum by the Vicar, and 5l. per
annum by the Crown; the remaining income arises from fees. There are two
Lecturers appointed by the Corporation, with each a salary of 100l. per annum.

This church has a dependent chapel, St. Ann's, Sandgate: after the
reformation it was neglected and fell to decay, but was repaired in 1682. It
has lately been rebuilt by the Corporation on a beautiful plan: they appoint
two Lecturers thereto, the one with a salary of 50l. the other 40l. per annum.

Another chapel anciently stood in these suburbs, dedicated to St. Lawrence,
said to be founded by one of the Earls of Northumberland: it was dependent upon
the priory of St. John of Jerusalem. King Edward VI. granted it to the
Corporation, in consideration of 144l. 13s. 4d. The bottle-houses now fill the
ground where this chapel stood.

St. Andrew's church stands near Newgate. From the style of the architecture,
and it being erected on the site of the old Monk Chesters, it claims a title
to greater antiquity than the other churches. It is supposed to have been built
by King David of Scotland.

Three chantries were founded in this church, dedicated to St. Mary the Virgin,
the Holy Trinity, and St. Thomas. St Mary's founder unknown: the annual value
6l. 12s. 10d.

The Holy Trinity, is said to have been founded by Sir Adam de Atholl, Knight,
whose remains are interred in it: the annual value 4l. 2s. 10d.

St Thomas's, founder unknown, and the annual value uncertain.

Ibid.


The Minister's stipend from the Vicar is 3l. from the Crown 5l. 2s. 6d. and
from the Corporation as Lecturer 100l. per annum.

St. John's church, in Westgate, built before the year 1287. Robert Percival, a
Pinmaker, gave it many ornaments, and a house of 20l. yearly value. It has six
musical bells and a good organ. The name and arms of Robert Rhodes are on the
steeple.

There is a thing at the top of the quire, which though little known is yet of
great certainty, and that is, the funnel or wood box in the form of a spout,
which hangs from the top of this quire. This was a conveyance for an artificial
dove on the day of Pentecost, to represent the descent of the Holy Ghost. That
there were such things in churches, though in none that I know of in this town
but this, is matter of fact. For thus we are told, that on Whitsunday they
began to play a new interlude, then sent down a dove out of an owls nest
devised in the roof of the church; but first they cast out rosin and gunpowder,
with wildfire, and that must needs be the Holy Ghost which comes with thunder
and lightning.

Bourne. In the church yard on a elegant tombstone.
Here lie the Remains of
John Cunningham
Of his Excellence
As a Pastoral Poet
His Works will remain a Monument
For Ages
After this tempory Tribute of Esteem
is in Dust forgotten.
He died in Newcastle 18 Sep. 1774.
Aged 44.



Three chantries were founded in this church, dedicated to St. Thomas the
Martyr, St. Mary the Virgin, and the Holy Trinity. St Thomas's was founded in
the reign of King Edward II. by Adam de Durham, a burgess of this town: the
annual value 4l. 3s.

St Mary's was founded in the reign of King Edward III. by Edward Scot: the
annual value 4l. 4s. 4d.

The Holy Trinity was founded by John Dalton, Wm Akinshawe, and Andrew Acliffe,
Clerks: the annual value 5l. 13s. 4d.




The income of the Minister consists of 3l. from the Vicar, 5l. from the Crown,
and from the Corporation as Lecturer 90l. per annum.

There are also many meeting houses of Dissenters here.

Besides the grammar school before mentioned, there are four parochial charity
schools.

The grammar school was founded by Thomas Horsley, Mayor of Newcastle, A. D.
1525: he endowed it with lands of a considerable yearly value. Queen Elizabeth
confirmed this foundation, or rather refounded it by charter. The great tithes
of the parish of Bolham appertain to it, and the Mastership of St. Mary's
Hospital is generally annexed. The Master of the school has a convenient
dwelling house belonging to it.

The charity school of the parish of St. Nicholas was opened in 1709, for the
teaching and clothing of 40 boys and 20 girls, of this parish and the chapelry
of St John's. The boys are placed out to business, and have on such their going
out a gift of certain religious books and 40s. in money. The girls are placed
out to service, and have a like gift of books and 20s. in money. The
Schoolmaster's salary is 25l. and 20s. for coals yearly. The Mistress has 10l.
and 10s. for coals.

This school was originally founded by Mrs Eleanor Allan, a widow of Newcastle,
and endowed with lands of 60l. a year value. Mrs Crishold, the widow of the
Rev. Mr Crishold of Wooler, added a donation of 500l. By a parochial
subscription the children are clothed on the 1st day of May yearly.

The charity school belonging to the parish of All Saints is supported by
subscription, which was begun A. D. 1709. It receives 41 boys and 17 girls, and
is conducted as the school of St. Nicholas.

The charity school of the parish of St. Andrew was founded by Sir William
Blackett, Baronet, for 30 boys, and was opened A. D. 1707: the Schoolmaster's
salary 20l. a year.

The charity school of the parish of St. John was founded in the year 1705, by
John Ord, Esquire for 44 boys. He endowed it with lands near Pilgrim-street Gate.
Mrs Margaret Allgood gave thereto 100l. The boys are clothed annually on
Midsummer-day, by subscription. The Schoolmaster's salary is 24l. a year, and
40s. for teaching them to sing; with an additional allowance of 16s. a year for
pens, ink, and paper.

Besides the principal edifices before mentioned, there are several public
buildings here.

The Town House and Exchange, on the Sandhill, originally founded by Roger de
Thornton. In the year 1658, this public edifice was rebuilt by the Corporation
on the present plan; The Exchange contains a variety of apartments, and also
the Courts of justice for the town. Is of the architecture of the period of
James I. The builder Robert Trollop is buried opposite to it in the churchyard
of Gateshead. His statue pointing toward the Exchange, stood formerly over his
grave, with these lines under his feet.

Here lies Robert Trollop
Who made you stones roll-up
When death took his soul-up
His body filled this hole-up. Pennant.
The story of the statue is believed to be fabulous: an anonymous writer has
said lately in his strictures on the above publication, that the Epitaph has
always been said to be made by Daniel De Foe, whilst at Gateshead, on some
occasion; and adds, At present there is neither inscription nor statue, nor do
I believe there ever was on Trollop's monument. Whether Mr Pennant's known
veracity will go further than the splenetick froth of a man who dares not
subscribe his name to his belief, the reader must determine.


the front toward the river being ornamented with two series of columns. The
expense amounted to 11,200l. 10,000l. of which was advanced by the Corporation,
and 1200l. a donation from Alderman Weimouth, completed the work. The area in
front was ornamented with an equestrian statue, in copper, of King James II.
the horse in a vaulting attitude, supported by a pedestal of white marble. This
statue was by an outrageous mob pulled down A.D. 1688, and appropriated to
furnish bells for the church of All-hallows or All Saints. The statue was said
to be of excellent workmanship, and cost 1700l. An elegant plate was published
of it in 1742.

The Trinity House at the Head of the Broad Chair: In it are apartments for 14
persons, to whom 8s. per month with coals and clothing are given: it also
contains a spacious hall and a neat chapel. Dalton's Place stood upon this
ground. It is not known when or by whom the monastery of the Trinity was
founded. The original institution of the order of the Holy Trinity was in 1198,
in the time of Pope Innocent III. and was for the redemption of captives from
slavery. The Trinity House we are now speaking of appertains to the fraternity
of Mariners, who have received three several royal charters; one in the 3d year
of King James I. the second by King Charles II. 1664, and the third by King
James II. 1687. Randal.


The Mansion House, in the Close; the temporary place of residence of the
Mayor. It is an elegant modern building, with a spacious area on the banks of
Tyne.

The Freemen's Hospital, in the Manors, founded by the Corporation in 1681, for
a Master and 39 poor Freemen, or their widows. The Master's annual allowance
6l. each of the Brethren 4l. The building is handsome, three stories in height,
ornamented with a piazza 60 yards in length: an open area with a fountain in
front.

Davison's Hospital, for six widows of Clergymen or Merchants. The building was
erected at the expense of the Corporation, and the endowment was made by Mrs
Ann Davison, the relict of a Merchant of this town. The allowance to each is
40s. quarterly.

The Barber Surgeons Hall.

The Maidens Hospital, built by the Corporation in 1753, and endowed by a
donation of 1200l. from Thomas Davison, Esquire of Ferry-hill, in the county of
Durham, and his sisters; and the like sum of 1200l. from the munificent Sir
Walter Blackett -- for the reception of six maiden women and six poor men.

The Keelmen's Hospital, a square building with cloisters, near Sandgate, built
in 1701, by a contribution of 1d. each tide from every Keelman plying upon the
Tyne, within the liberties of Newcastle. It contains upwards of 50 chambers,
but is said to be neglected, and without endowment. It is wonderful this
laborious and useful race of men, whose toils help to contribute such immense
wealth to Newcastle, should not have claimed the attention of the Corporation,
from whose revenue more donations issue in charitable and religious
appropriations, than any other Corporation in the North of England can boast.

The Infirmary stands in an airy elevated situation behind Westgate, and near
the public walk called the Forth: It was founded by subscription, for the
relief of the sick and lame of Newcastle and the counties of Durham and
Northumberland. To this excellent foundation Sir Walter Blackett gave 1000l.
out of the interest money arising from which donation, he appointed 10l. a year
should be given to a Clergyman to do duty there. So happy a relief has this
charitable institution proved, that from the time of its commencement to April
1778, 17,331 patients have been discharged cured.

To these may be added the Hospital for Lunatics, and the Hospital for Married
Women lying-in: as also the fund raised for the support of those who lie-in at
their own houses.

An elegant Hall has lately been erected in High Friar Chair, by the society of
Free and Accepted Masons of the Lodge of St. John: it is richly ornamented, and
has an excellent organ for their solemn rites. It was dedicated in the year
1777; to attend which ceremony, there was the most respectable and numerous
convention of that order that ever appeared in the northern parts of this
kingdom. The music was performed by an excellent band, the vocal parts of which
were done by the best voices from the quire of Durham cathedral. A pathetic
exhortation was delivered by Mr Huntley, and an elegant oration, displaying the
antiquity, progress, and excellence of the order, by the Rev. Dr Scott of
Simonburn. The festival was held in the new assembly room, when at three tables
near 400 of the brethren dined together; at which time that regularity, order
and harmony were maintained, for which this society, above all others in the
world, is remarkable: where men of all ranks, political opinions, and religious
persuasions meet, without envy or contention; and preserve a unanimity and
brotherly love, in despite of the frailties and fickleness of the human heart.

The history of this place is very dark, antecedent to the time of Robert
Carthouse, and the building of the castle, from whence it is presumed the name
of Newcastle was derived. The advantages of a fine navigable river, with a
situation defended by so strong a fortress, would soon induce Merchants and
others to fix there; yet we find no record of any royal charter, liberty, or
franchise granted to the settlers, till the reign of King Henry II. when they
obtained a royal charter, which is said to have comprehended great privileges;
Gardener, chapter 2. p. 7.
but of what nature these were, our author is silent. King John, in the 3d year
of his reign, confirmed the above charter, on payment of 100 marks and two
palfreys. Madox Firma Burgi, p. 54.
In the 14th year of his reign he greatly enlarged those liberties and powers,
and expressly in consideration of the loyalty and faithful services of his
burgesses there, he granted them several exclusive privileges; among which are,
an exemption from the power of the Sheriff of the county at large, and that
they should be amenable to the Courts only within their own jurisdiction,
except in matters relative to the rights of the Crown. The government of the
borough was then under four Bailiffs only.

King Henry III. by charter, appointed a Mayor to preside in the government of
this borough, together with four Bailiffs. From this Prince the Burgesses
derived two most excellent bounties, viz. the Castle Demesnes, containing 850
acres, for free pasturage, with liberty of winning coal and stone; as also a
plot of ground called the Forth, containing about 11 acres. Here the Infirmary
stands: a portion of the ground is enclosed, and converted into a public walk.
One thing very singular in this royal charter, is the prohibition against Jews
residing within the borough.

This was one of the boroughs that received the first summons to send
Representatives to sit in a House of Commons, in the 10th year of the reign of
King Edward I. A. D. 1282. Burgesses returned to Parliament for Newcastle.
Anno Regni. King Edward I. Parliament. 26 -- John Scot Peter Graper at York 30
-- Nich. Carliol Tho. de Frisma London 35 -- Nich. le Scot Carlisle King Edward
II. 1 -- Gilbert de Fleming Peter Fisher Northampton 2 -- Johannes filius
Henrici Gilb. Hawkins Westminster 4 -- Rich. de Emeldon John de Carliol ditto 5
-- Rich. de Emeldon Nich. de Carliol London Anno 6. Ed. 2. -- A writ issued to
the Sheriff of Northumberland, in usual form, Ad eligendum pro communitate
comitat. ill. duos Milites and qualibet Civitate duos Cives, and quolibet Burgo
duos Burgenses. -- He made this return on the dorse thereof: Willus de Tindale
vic Northumb. sic respondit. Quid hominestam Com. Northumb. quam villae Novi
Castri super Tynam, multum timent, quod pax inter regna Angliae and Scotiae per
quosdam Scotiae infringeretur, propter quod ipsi se elongare ad presens commode
non potuerant; Ideo praedicti nullos Milites seu Burgenses pro instanti
parliamento curant mittere.
6 -- Gilbert Fleming John de Keteringham Westminster In the 8th year of Edw. 2.
the King issued forth another writ to the Sheriff of Northumberland, to elect
two Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, for the commonalty of the county, and of
every city and borough within it, on which the Sheriff indorsed this return:
Istud Breve ostensum fuit in pleno Comitatu: ubi responsum fuit mihi. Quod
omnes Milites de Balliva mea non sufficient ad defensionem Marchiae. Et
mandatum fuit Ballivis Libertatis villae Novi Castri super Tinam, qui sic
responderunt, quod omnes Burgenses villiae predictae vix sufficient ad
defensionem villae ejusdem; Et ideo quo ad executionem istius Brevis, nihil
actum est.

Prynne Br. Parl. rediviva 165. The above table of Burgesses not agreeing with
the several returns, implies that a peremptory writ had compelled an election.


8 -- Nich. le Scotts Rich. de Emeldon York 15 -- Michael Scott Rob. Angerton
Westminster 19 -- Rich. de Emeldon Adam Graper ditto King Edward III. Anno 1.
Ed. 3. -- A writ to elect two Knights for this county of Northumberland, and
two Citizens and Burgesses, was directed to the Sheriff, who returned this
answer to it.

Communitas Com. Northumb. sic respondet. Quod ipsi per inimicos. Scotiae adeo
sunt destructi, quod non habent unde solvere expensae duobus Militibus
proficissuris ad tractatum and consilium apud Linc. tenend.

Ballivi libertatis Novi Castri super Tinam, sic respondent. Quod ipsi tam
oncrantur circa salvam custodiam villae praedict. quod nominem possunt de dicta
villa carere, Ideo executio istius brevis ad praesens fieri non potest.

Prynne, p. 165.
1 -- Richard de Emeldon Tho. Daulin York 2 -- Rich. Emelden Adam Graper
Northampton 4 -- Will. Barnton Gilb. Haukin Westminster 6 -- Rich. Emelden John
Denton ditto 7 -- John Denton Hugo de Necham York 8 -- John de Denton Hugo de
Necham ditto 9 -- John de Emeldon Rich. Heite Westminster 12 -- Peter de
Angerton Tho. Holiwell ditto 13 -- Rob. de Haliwell Tho. de Haliwell ditto 14
-- John Denton Rich. Galloway ditto 14 -- Nich. Scott John Scott ditto 15 --
Will. de Emeldon Nich. de Sadlingstaves ditto 17 -- Rich. de Emeldon Gilbert
Hawkin ditto 20 -- Will. de Atton Rich. Angerton ditto 21 -- Rob. Angerton Rob.
de Peturick ditto 22 -- Peter Graper Will. Ditton ditto 22 -- Thomas Worship
John Reynald ditto 24 -- John de Chaumbre Nich. Radun ditto 25 -- John de
Chaumbre Nich. de Rodun ditto 32 -- Will. del Strothe Nich. de Rodun ditto 33
-- Philip Graper Tho. Frismarisco ditto 34 -- Will. de Strechre John de Stanhop
ditto 35 -- John oath Chaumbre John de Stanhop ditto 36 -- John de la Chaumbre
Rob. de Duxfield ditto 39 -- Will. Acton Hugo Hawkins ditto 45 -- Rich. Dacton
Rob. de Angerton ditto 46 -- Rob. de Hangerton Laurence de Acton ditto 47 --
Henry Scot Roger Lelilax ditto 50 -- Nich. de Sabram Laurence de Acton ditto 51
-- Tho. Del Chaumbre John Howel ditto King Richard II. 1 -- John de Bulkham
Rich. de Stanhop ditto 3 -- Nich. Sabram John Howell ditto 7 -- John Howell
Sampson Harding ditto 8 -- John Howell Sampson Harding ditto 9 -- Steph.
Whitgray Sampson Harding ditto 10 -- Laurence de Atton Phil. Howell ditto 11 --
Sampson Harding Will. Bishopdale ditto 13 -- Will. Bishopdale Steph. Whitgray
ditto 15 -- Will. de Bishopdale Laurence de Acton ditto 16 -- John de Moreton
Rich. de Langeston ditto 17 -- Henry de Kersell Tho. Dirindon ditto 20 --
Sampson Harding Will. Redmarshull ditto King Henry IV. 1 -- Laurence Acton
Roger Thornton Westminster 3 -- Rich. Bennet Robert Darcy ditto 12 -- Roger
Thornton Roger de Both ditto King Henry V. 1 -- Will. Johnson Rob. Whelpington
ditto 1 -- Rich. de Dalton Rob. Whelpington ditto 2 -- Will. de Middleton Roll.
Swineburne Leicester 3 -- Roger del Both Tho. de Hibburne Westminster 5 --
Roger Thornton John de Strother ditto 7 -- John Paulin Rob. Hibburne Gloucester
8 -- John de Wall Roger del Both Westminster 9 -- Will. Ellerby Roger del Both
ditto King Henry VI. 1 -- Rob. Whelpington Emeric Herring ditto 2 -- Rob.
Whelpington Roger del Both ditto 3 -- Will. Madecroft Andomar Herring ditto 6
-- Will. Madecroft Rob. Rodes ditto 7 -- Rob. Rodes Tho. Papeday ditto 11 --
Will. Harding Rob. Rodes ditto 13 -- Edw. Bartram Rob. Rodes ditto 20 -- Rob.
Rodes Rob. Heworth ditto 25 This return was made by the Sheriff of Newcastle by
indenture, being the first on record after the appointment of that officer.

Vide Prynne, p. 282.
-- Will. Harding Tho. Morrislaw Cambridge 27 -- Will. Harding John Dalton
Westminster 28 -- Rob. Heworth Rob. Baxter ditto 29 -- John Ward Rich. Welden
ditto 38 -- Tho. Weltden Rob. Man's ditto King Edward IV. 7 -- John Wood Rich.
Westden ditto 12 -- Will. Blackston Rob. Folbery ditto 17 -- ditto

The writs, returns, and indentures from 17 King Edward IV. to 33 King Edward
VIII. are all lost.

B. Willis. King Henry VIII. 33 -- Westminster King Edward IV. 1 -- Rob.
Brandling, Knt. ditto 7 -- Rob. Lewen, Mayor Bertram Anderson ditto Queen Mary.
1 -- Rob. Brandling, Knt. Edw. Hall ditto 1 -- Bertram Anderson Cuthbert
Horsley ditto Philip and Mary. 1 and 2 -- Bertram Anderson Joh. Watson, Esquire
Westminster 2 and 3 -- Rob. Brandling, Knt. Cuth. Blont ditto 4 and 5 --
Bertram Anderson Rob. Lewen ditto Queen Elizabeth. 1 -- Cuth. Blount Rob. Lewen
ditto 5 -- Rob. Brandling, Knt. Barth. Anderson ditto 13 -- Will. Cart Will.
Jennison ditto 14 -- Will. Selby Will. Jennison ditto 27 -- Henry Anderson
Will. Jennison, Alderman ditto 28 -- Hen. Anderson Edw. Lewen, Aldermen ditto
31 -- Hen. Anderson Hen. Mitford, Aldermen ditto 35 -- Hen. Anderson Edw.
Lewen, Aldermen ditto 39 -- Henry Mitford ditto 43 -- Will. Jennison Geo.
Selby, Aldermen ditto King James I. 1 -- Geo. Selby Henry Chipenham, Esquire ditto
12 -- Hen. Anderson, Knt. ditto 18 -- Fra. Anderson, Knt. Tho. Riddell, Knt.
ditto 21 -- Hen. Anderson, Knt. Pet. Liddel, Knt. ditto King Charles I. 1 --
Hen. Anderson, Knt. Tho. Liddel, Knt. ditto 1 -- Hen. Anderson, Knt. Peter
Liddel, Knt. ditto 3 -- Tho. Riddel, Knt. Peter Riddel, Knt. ditto 15 -- Peter
Liddel, Knt. Tho. Liddel, Esquire ditto 16 -- Hen. Anderson, Knt. Anderson expelled
for non-attendance. Rob. Ellison of Hebburne, Esquire in the place of Warmouth, Esquire
not permitted to fit.

Hollis's Memoirs.
John Blackston, Esquire Signed the warrant to behead the King
ditto

Oliver Cromwell, Usurper, Convened a Parliament called the Little Parliament,
1653, but no representatives for any cities or boroughs, except London, were
returned.

3 Sep. 1654 -- Arthur Hasilrig, Bart. 17 Sep. 1656 -- Walter Strickland, Esquire
Richard Cromwell, Usurper. 27 Jan. 1658 -- Mark Shaftoe. Tho. Lilburne, Esquire The
Convention Parliament. 25 Apr. 1660 -- Franc. Anderson, Knt. -- Rob. Ellison,
Knt. -- (Qry J. Marley.) King Charles II. 13 -- Franc. Anderson, Knt. -- J.
Marley, Knt. Qry -- Wm Blackett, Knt. Westminster 31 -- Fran. Anderson, Knt.
Will. Blackett, Knt. and Bart. ditto 31 -- Ra. Carr, Knt. Nath. Johnson, Esquire or
Sir W. Blackett, Bart. ditto 32 -- Ra. Carr, Knt. Nath. Johnson, Knt. Oxon King
James II. 1 -- Nath. Johnson, Knt. Will. Blackett, Bart. Westminster The
Convention Parliament. 22 Jan. 1688 -- Ra. Carr, Knt. Will. Blackett, Bart.
ditto William and Mary. 2 -- Ra. Carr, Knt. Will. Carr, Esquire ditto King William
III. 7 -- Will. Blackett, Bart. Will. Carr, Esquire ditto 10 -- Will. Blackett,
Bart. Will. Carr, Esquire ditto 12 -- Hen. Liddell, Bart. Will. Carr, Esquire ditto 13
-- Hen. Liddell, Bart. Will. Carr, Esquire ditto Queen Anne. 1 -- Hen. Liddel,
Bart. Will. Carr, Esquire ditto 4 -- Will. Blackett, Bart. Will. Carr, Esquire ditto
Hen. Liddel, Bart. in the room of Blackett, who died 29 Dec. 1705. 7 -- Hen.
Liddel, Bart. Will. Carr, Esquire ditto 9 -- Will. Blackett, Bart. Will. Wrightson,
Esquire ditto 12 -- Will. Blackett, Bart. Will. Wrightson, Esquire ditto King George I.
1 -- Will. Blackett, Bart. Will. Wrightson, Esquire ditto James Clavering, Esquire
petitioner. 7 -- Will. Blackett, Bart. ditto King George II. 1 -- Will.
Blackett, Bart. Nich. Fenwick, Esquire ditto William Carr, Esquire petitioner. 1727
William Carr, Esquire lodged his petition in time, but nothing was done therein
till after Sir William Blackett's death, 29 Sept. 1728, and then the petition
being depending, Carr was heard upon his petition, and having disqualified
above 600 of Sir William's votes for bribery, was voted to be duly elected, no
opposition being made against him.
7 -- Walter Calverly Blackett, Esquire Nich. Fenwick, Esquire ditto 14 -- Walter
Calverly Blackett, Esquire Nich. Fenwick, Esquire ditto

Poll. May 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, and 19, 1741.
Candidates. No. of voters. Walter Calverly Blackett, Esquire 1453 Nicholas
Fenwick, Esquire 1231 Matthew Ridley, Esquire 1131 William Carr, Esquire 683
Mr Ridley and Mr Carr petitioned, but Mr Carr died 16 May, 1742. Mr Ridley
renewed his petition in the second session.

20 -- Walter Calverly Blackett, Esquire Matthew Ridley, Esquire Westminster 28 --
Walter Calverly Blackett, Bart. Matthew Ridley, Esquire ditto King George III. 1 --
Walter Calverly Blackett, Bart. Matthew Ridley, Esquire Westminster 8 -- Walter
Calverly Blackett, Bart. Matthew Ridley, Esquire ditto -- Walter Calverly Blackett,
Bart. Matthew White Ridley, Bart. ditto

Elected on Wednesday 19th Oct. 1774 Poll eight days.
Candidates. No. of voters. Walter Calverly Blackett, Bart. 1432 Matthew White
Ridley, Bart. 1411 Constantine John Phipps, Esquire 795 Thomas Delaval, Esquire 677
About 2662 voters, being 233 less than in 1741.

On the death of Sir Walter Calverly Blackett, Bart. 1777.
Candidates. No. of voters. Sir John Trevelyan, Bart. 1163 Andrew Robinson
Bows, Esquire 1068
About 2231 voters.




Pampedon was by royal grant annexed to Newcastle in this reign.

Upon an inquisition taken, 4 King Edward I. touching the ancient customs which
prevailed within the borough, it was returned, that by the custom established
within the borough, the real estates of freemen within the borough had always
been considered in the nature of chattels, and as such were disposed by will:
which special custom was accordingly confirmed.

King Edward III. confirmed all its franchises and privileges, and added
thereto an exemption from the jurisdiction of the Constablery, Marshalsea, and
Admiralty of England, within the port and limits of the borough. He gave the
Town Moor to the Burgesses in perpetuity; he also gave license to the Burgesses
to purchase lands; he confirmed many bylaws made by them for well-governing
the borough; directed the mode of electing Mayors, Magistrates, and Officers;
he settled the measure to be used in the sale of coals, and made the Burgesses
toll-free for their merchandise throughout his dominions.

King Richard II. in the first year of his reign, A. D. 1378, confirmed the
charters before granted to the Burgesses; he afterward granted them ground for
roads and a bridge. This was to enlarge and render more commodious the access
to the bridge.
In 1390, he gave license for a sword of state to be borne before the Mayor.

It was not till the reign of King Henry IV. that Newcastle received the most
distinguishing marks of royal favor: on the accession of this Prince, the
borough received a confirmation of all ancient liberties and immunities;
besides which he also granted, that this borough should for ever thereafter be
independent of the county of Northumberland; that it should have a Sheriff, as
being a county of itself, a district not above 10 miles in circuit; which
Sheriff should supply the duty of the Bailiffs, whose office was from
thenceforth revoked and annulled; that the Sheriff should hold his county
within the liberties of the borough, on Wednesday from month to month, that he
should have the return of writs, and account unto his Majesty's Exchequer; A
correct table of the Mayors and Sheriffs is given in Bourne's work: I will only
add the succession since the time of that publication.

The last named by the above author.
Mayors. Sheriffs. 1735 -- Walter Blackett John Wilkinson 1736 -- Nicholas
Fenwick Matthew Bell 1737 -- William Carre Jonathan Sorsbie 1738 -- Nathaniel
Clayton William Greenwell 1739 -- Cuthbert Fenwick Cuthbert Collingwood 1741 --
Edward Collingwood Ra. Sowerbye 1741 -- Robert Sorsbie John Ord 1742 -- John
Simpson William Peareth 1743 -- Ra. Sowerbye George Colepitts 1744 -- John Ord;
in his room Matthew Ridley Aubone Surtees 1745 -- Cuthbert Smith Henry Partis
1746 -- Nicholas Fenwick Henry Eden 1747 -- Nicholas Fenwick re-elected Wiliam
Watson 1748 -- Walter Blackett John Vanholt 1749 -- Robert Sorsbie Robert Heron
1750 -- Ralph Sowerbye William Clayton 1751 -- Matthew Ridley Matthew Scaife
1752 -- Henry Partis Francis Rudston 1753 -- Henry Eden John Harrison 1754 --
Cuthbert Smith William Rowell 1755 -- William Clayton William Harbottle 1756 --
Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. John Erasmus Blackett 1757 -- Matthew Bell John
Scurfield 1758 -- Ra. Sowerbye Edward Mosley 1759 -- Matthew Ridley Matthew
Stephenson 1760 -- Henry Partis John Baker 1761 -- Aubone Surtees Fletcher
Partis 1762 -- Cuthbert Smith Hugh Hornby 1763 -- William Clayton Francis
Forster 1764 -- Sir Walter Blackett, Bart. Thomas Blackett 1765 -- John Erasmus
Blackett Charles Atkinson 1766 -- Matthew Scaife John Hedley 1767 -- Edward
Mosley Richard Lacy 1768 -- John Baker William Coulson 1769 -- Francis Forster
William Reed 1770 -- Aubone Surtees James Liddell 1771 -- Sir W. Calverly
Blackett, Bart. Christ. Wilkinson 1772 -- John Erasmus Blackettt James Rudman
1773 -- Matthew Scaife Obt. 16 Jan. 1774, Edw. Mosley elected. Wm Yielder 1774
-- Sir M. White Ridley, Bart. Francis Johnson 1775 -- Charles Atkinson William
Cramlington 1776 -- John Baker James Tho. Lorrain 1777 -- John Hedley Robert
Clayton


that six Aldermen should be elected out of the Burgesses, as associates in the
civil Magistracy with the Mayor, with power to act as Justices of the Peace
within the precincts of the borough; that the Burgesses should hold the
Conservatorship of the river Tyne, from Sparrow Hawk to Hedwin Streams, with
the royalties thereof, a space of 14 miles; within which limits no ship should
load or unload any sort of goods but at the quays of Newcastle. The present
quays are esteemed equal to any in England, being upwards 700 yards in length.
King Edward II. granted the Conservatorship of the river Tyne to John Earl of
Hampstead; but the same was soon revoked, on its being represented an
infringement on the rights of Newcastle.

King Edward VI. on the dissolution of the Bishopric of Durham by act of
parliament, A. D. 1552, granted to Newcastle the town and liberties of
Gateshead: he also proposed to have erected a Bishopric at Newcastle, out of
part of the revenues of the dissolved See; The preamble of the act sets forth
"That this Bishopric being then void of a Prelate, the gift thereof was in the
King's pleasure, and the compass of it being so large as to extend itself into
several shires far distant, it could not be sufficiently served by one Bishop;
and since the King by his godly disposition was desirous to have God's holy
word preached in those parts, which were wild and barbarous for lack of good
preaching and good searching; therefore he intends to have two good
Bishoprics for that diocese; the one at Durham, which should have 2000 marks
yearly revenue, and another at Newcastle with 1000; and also found a cathedral
church at the latter place, with a Deanery and Chapter, out of the revenues of
the said Bishopric; therefore the Bishopric of Durham is utterly extinguished
and dissolved, and authority given for letters patents to erect the two new
Bishoprics, together with a Deanery and Chapter at Newcastle, with a proviso
that the rights of the Deanery, Chapter, and Cathedral of Durham should suffer
nothing by this act."
but these purposes were defeated by the death of the King; and on the
accession of Queen Mary, 1554, the Bishopric of Durham was restored. The
preamble sets forth, "That certain ambitious persons taking advantage of the
late King's minority, made an interest, by sinister practice, to procure the
dissolution of the Bishopric; that it was done out of mercenary views, to
enrich themselves and their friends, by seizing the lands of the Sea, rather
than upon just occasion or godly zeal; that Tunstall Bishop of Durham was
deprived upon unjust furmises and false accusations, and that the process
against him was foul and illegal; that upon a full examination of the matter by
the Queen's commissioners, the sentence of deprivation was declared void, as
may be seen at large by an authentic instrument; that the Queen had new founded
the Bishopric by her letters patents, and restored all the lands in her
possession. But that neither the sentence of deprivation, nor the Queen's
letters patents were of sufficient force to recover the honors, lands, etc. to
the Sea of Durham; therefore to restore the Bishopric to its former interest,
privileges, and revenues, the two dissolution statutes of the last reign are
hereby repealed."


Queen Elizabeth confirmed to the Burgesses all the liberties and immunities
granted by her predecessors, and added thereto many privileges by her charter
dated, as Mr Wallis says, on the 22d March, in the 42d year of her reign; but
as it appears by a note to Bourne's History, in the 31st year of that reign. It
was then declared to be a free town, with power to the corporate body to
purchase lands to them and their successors in fee and perpetuity, and to grant
and demise the same; and that they should have a common seal: that they should
exercise an Admiralty Jurisdiction within their own liberties, exclusive of any
authority of the Lord High Admiral.

The Corporation is now governed by a Mayor, Sheriff, and 12 Aldermen; the
Borough sends two Members to Parliament, elected by the Free Burgesses, who are
about 2400 in number.

The Mayor holds a Court of Record, wherein all actions of debt upon the case,
trespass, etc. are tried, which arise within, the jurisdiction: In a note,
Bourne says by several records it appears, that it has been customary to levy
fines in this court, p. 192.

Recorders of Newcastle.
Sir Thomas Tempest, Knt. 1536 John Savil, Esquire Baron of the Exchequer 1599
named in the charter. Thomas Riddel, Knt. 1639 v. Rushworth. Robert Shaftoe,
Knt. 1660 John Cuthbert, Esquire Sergeant at Law 1709 William Davison of Beamish,
Esquire Pro Tempore. resigned. John Isaacson, Esquire 1725 Edward Collingwood, Esquire 1737
resigned 1739. William Cuthbert, Esquire 1739 Christopher Fawcett, Esquire 1746
removed. Edward Collingwood, Esquire 1753 resigned on account of health.
Christopher Fawcett, Esquire re-elected 6 Dec. 1769


no Attorneys are allowed to practice but those who are Free Burgesses, and
duly sworn there at their admission. Six Sergeants at Mace appertain to this
Court.

It is superior to the Sheriff's Court, from whence causes are removeable.

The Sheriff holds a court of his county monthly.

A Court of Conscience is also established here, by virtue of an act of
parliament -- an excellent relief in so populous a place, where the difficulty
of proving sale and delivery of small articles, by witnesses, would often
deprive the honest trader and mechanic of his just dues. It is an equitable
enlargement of the privilege of inferior courts, worthy the attention of the
Legislature, and would be greatly beneficial to the community, if it was
admitted at the Sheriffs Courts and in Courts Baron, touching debts of an
inferior value.

The Court of Common Council is a court held by force of the charters, by the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commoners, wherein regulations and bylaws are made, for
the protection of trade and the government of the incorporate body.

In the Wardmote Court, Officers, etc. of each ward are chosen.

The Mayor holds a Court of Pyepowder at the times of fairs: On the 1st of
August, a fair granted by King John, and on St. Luke's day, a fair granted by
King Henry VII. The proclamation used on these occasions is as follows:

"The Right Worshipful * * * Mayor of the town and county of Newcastle upon
Tyne, and his Worshipful Brethren; the Aldermen of this Corporation, straightly
charge and command, on behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, that all manner
of persons, of whatsoever estate, degree, or condition they be, having recourse
to this fair, keep the peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King.

That no manner of persons make any congregations, conventicles, or affrays, by
which the said peace may be broken or disturbed, upon pain of imprisonment, and
fine to be made, after the discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen.

Also, that all manner of sellers of wine or beer sell by measure sealed, as by
gallon, pottle, quart, pint, etc. upon pain that will fail thereof.

And that no person sell any bread, but if it keep the assize, and that it be
good and wholesome for man's body, upon pain that will fail thereof.

And that no manner of Cook, Pye-baker, nor Huckster, sell or put to sale, any
manner of victual, but it may be good and wholesome for man's body, upon pain
that will fail thereof.

And that no manner of persons buy or sell, but with true weights and measures,
sealed according to the statute in that behalf made, upon pain that will fail
thereof.

And that no manner of person or persons take upon him or them, within this
fair, to make any manner of arrest, attachment, summons, or execution, but if
it be done by the officers of this corporation thereunto assigned, upon pain
that will fail thereof.

And that no manner of person or persons whatsoever, within the limits and
bounds of this fair, presume to break the Lord's day, in selling, showing, or
offering to sale, or in buying, or offering to buy, any commodities whatsoever;
or in fitting tippling or drinking in any Tavern, Inn, or Alehouse,
Tipling-house, or Cook's-house, or in doing any other thing that may tend to
the breach thereof, upon the pains and penalties contained in several acts of
parliament, which will be severely inflicted upon the breakers thereof.

And finally, that what persons soever find themselves grieved, injured, or
wronged, by any manner of person in this fair, that they come with their
plaints before the Stewards in this fair, assigned to hear and determine pleas,
and they will administer to all parties justice, according to the laws of this
land, and the customs of this corporation." Wallis.




The Mayor holds three Guilds of Trade annually, at which are transacted all
business between masters and apprentices; the inrolling of apprentices, and
giving those who have served their time, or otherwise are by patrimony
entitled, their freedom. The oath administered on taking up a freedom is as
follows:

Ye shall swear that ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord King
George the Third, and to the heirs of our Sovereign Lord the King, obeisant and
obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and Ministers of the Corporation, the
franchises and customs thereof ye shall maintain, and this town keep harmless
in that that you is.

Ye shall be contributary to all manner of charges within this town, as
summons, watches, contributions, taxes, tallages, lot and scot, and to all
other charges bearing your part as a freeman ought to do.

Ye shall color no foreign goods under or in your name, whereby the King or
this town might or may lose their customs or advantages.

Ye shall know no foreigner to buy or sell any merchandise with any other
foreigner within this corporation or franchise thereof, but ye shall warn the
Mayor thereof, or some ministering under him.

Ye shall implead or sue no freeman out of this town, whilst you may have right
and law within the same town.

Ye shall take no apprentice but if he be free born, that is to say, no
bondman's son, nor the child of an alien, and for no less term than for seven
years, without fraud or deceit, and within the first year ye shall cause him to
be enrolled, or else pay such fine as shall reasonably be imposed upon you for
omitting the same: and after his term's end, within convenient time, (being
required) ye shall make him free of the corporation, if he have well and truly
served you. Ye shall also keep the King's peace in your own person.

Ye shall know no gatherings, conventicles, nor conspiracies against the King's
peace, but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to your power.

All these points and articles ye shall well and truly keep, according to the
laws and customs of this corporation, to your power. So God you help. Wallis.




Two ancient punishments, inflicted on the disturbers of the peace here, are
worthy notice.

A common Drunkard was led through the streets as a spectacle of contempt,
covered with a large barrel, called a Newcastle cloak* one end being out, and
the other having a hole made through it, sufficient for the offender to pass
his head through; by which means the vessel was rested on his shoulders.

The Scold wore an iron engine, called the branks, in the form of a crown; it
covered the head, but left the face exposed; and having a tongue of iron which
went into the mouth, constrained silence from the most violent brawler.

The trade of this place is very great: to enter upon an exact detail, would
exceed the limits of my work: the exports chiefly consist of coals, wrought
iron, lead, glass, salt, bacon, corn, salmon, butter, tallow, and grindstones:
its situation is such, as necessarily renders it the place of supply for an
extensive country, in articles of imported merchandise. In the summary I have
given of the trade of the county in the succeeding pages, the importance of
this place will appear. In Mr Pennant's work it is stated, that in the year
1771, the shipping mentioned in the following table were entered here with
imports.

810 ships, carrying 77,880 tons, from foreign parts. 140 ships, carrying
18,650 tons, coasting trade. Total 950 96,530 tons.

Here are 16 glass-houses, three sugar-houses, several soap-boileries, a
considerable manufactory of steel and iron, also a manufactory of broad and
narrow woollen clothes carried on with great success. Seldom less than 30,000
firkins of butter, and 40,000 hundreds of tallow, are annually exported from
hence.

The chief article of export is coal: Great disputes have arose touching the
time when coals were first used in this island.

Our Antiquaries have conjectured that the Romans knew how to win them and
their use; yet in the discovery of their hippocausts, and of the vaults where
the remains of sacrifice have been found, it is not asserted by any that the
remains of any coal fires have been discovered.

Matthew Paris mentions Carbo Marinus.

In the 1st year of the reign of King Edward I. mention is made de Carbonibus
Maritimis, and their measure.

In the 31st year of that reign, a complaint was made of the public nuisance
the burning of coal was in the city and suburbs of London, by corrupting the
air by the stink and smoke, and a proclamation was issued to prohibit its use;
and afterward a Commission of Oyer to punish those who used it, in defiance of
the proclamation.

Pryn's Animadvers. Coke's Institutes, p. 182. By a charter of 23 King Henry
III. A. D. 1239, license was given to win coal in the Castle Field and Forth.

In the 9th of King Henry V. 1421, a duty of twopence a chaldron being paid to
the King, the burden of keels was limited by statute to 20 chaldron, and the
keels were directed to be sealed by the King's officers, to prevent frauds in
the duty. St. 9 K. Hen. 5. cha. 10.

In a charter of the 8th of King Henry IV. De privilegijs and Libert. Epi Dun.
A charter of the 7th of King Richard III. is recited De Carbonib. and aliis
Merchandizis vendendis.

Queen Elizabeth granted a charter to the Fraternity called Free Hostmen for
the vending of Coals, reserving a duty of 12d a chaldron.

By the stat. 30. King Charles II. Commissioners are appointed for regulating
the duties on coals, etc.

The quantity of a Ten of coals is uncertain, and not always the same, but
commonly 16 Newcastle chaldrons make a ten. Two keels also make a ten, and 11
wagons a keel. Each wagon contains 19 bolls and upwards, at 36 gallons to a
boll, and 9 bolls or thereabouts go to a fother, and three fothers and a
quarter make a chaldron; 21 corves to a score, and 55 fother make a ten.

A square yard of solid coal contains eight bolls.

An acre of ground contains 4840 square yards of solid coal, which is near
equal to 68 tens, at 16 chaldrons to a ten, which is near equal to 1088
chaldrons of coals.

Three square yards and a quarter go to a chalder.

Wagon ways were first used in this neighborhood soon after the revolution,
by Mr Allan of Flatts, in the county of Durham, and on the Tyne by Charles
Montague, Esquire at Stella.


ships of great burden take in their lading at Shields, the coals being
carried thither in large unwieldy lighters, called keels, limited by government
to the burden of 20 chaldrons, being nearly circular in form, and very flat
bottomed; sometimes navigated by a square sail, at other times managed with the
advantage of the tide, by one oar plied at the side and another at the stern,
which serves as a sculler and rudder. Near 500 of these vessels find constant
employ on this river. No vessels exceeding 400 tons come up to the Quay.

The collieries which supply this exportation, about 24 in number, lie at
considerable distances from the river. From the mines, the coals are sent to
the places of lading in large unwieldy carriages or wagons, of the form of a
common mill-hopper, carried on four wheels of iron, the fellies or rims of
which are hollow, so as to run upon strings of wood adapted thereto, with which
the roads are laid. By this means, these carriages on an easy descent run
without horses, and sometimes with that rapidity, that a piece of wood, called
a tiller, is obliged to be applied to one wheel, and pressed thereon by the
weight of the attendant who sits on it, to retard the motion: by the friction
of which frequently the tiller and sometimes the carriage is set on fire.

In the course of the year 1775, 697, 608 chaldrons of coals were imported in
the port of London from Newcastle, and Sunderland on the the river Wear, in the
county of Durham; which is 37,237 chaldrons more than the year 1773, and 77,237
chaldrons more than in the year 1774. In the year 1776, 600,000 chaldrons were
imported at London. A manuscript note in the margin of Bourne's History of
Newcastle, in Fisher's Circulating Library, p. 159.


In 1775, 4773 ships were cleared at the Custom-house of Newcastle; of which
4343 were coastways, and 430 for foreign parts; being upon the whole 270 less
than in the year 1774. The great export of this place is coal, for which it has
been noted for some centuries. It is not exactly known at what time that
species of fuel was first dug. It is probable that it was not very early in
general use. That the Romans sometimes made use of it appears in our former
volume, p. 55: but since wood was the fuel of their own country, and Britain
was overrun with forests, it was not likely that they would pierce into the
bowels of the earth for a less grateful kind. But it was exported to foreign
parts long before it was in use in London; for London likewise had its
neighboring forests. We find that in 1234, King Henry III. confirms to the
good people of Newcastle, the charter of his father King John, granting them
the privilege of digging coals in the Castle Moor, and converting them to their
own profit, in aid of their fee-farm rent of one hundred a year; which moor was
afterward granted to them in property by Edward III. The time of the first
exportation of coals to London does not appear. In 1307, the 35th year of
Edward I. they were considered in the capital as a nuisance; for on the
repeated complaints of Prelates, Nobles, Commons of Parliament, and Inhabitants
of London, against the stench and smoke of coals used by Brewers, Dyers, and
other Artificers, the King issued out his proclamation against the use of them:
which being disregarded, a commission of Oyer and Terminer was issued, to
punish the disobedient with fines for the first offense, and for the second, by
the destruction of their furnaces. In 1379, we find that their use was not only
tolerated, but their consumption made beneficial to the state; for in that year
a duty of sixpence per ten each quarter of a year was imposed on ships coming
from Newcastle. In 1421, the trade became so important as to engage the
regulations of government, and orders were given about the lengths of the
keels, so that the quantity of coal might be ascertained. From that period the
commerce advanced continually. Pennant, vol. II. p. 310.

Ships. Tons. Chapter Coals. Cwt. Lead. 1772. 3585 689,090 330,200 123,370 Coast
Trade. 363 49,124 21,690 30,064 Foreign Parts. 3948 738,214 351,890 153,434


The customs for coal exported on an average amount to 40,000l. or thereabouts
annually, exclusive of 1s. a chaldron paid to the Duke of Richmond for coals
sent coastways, which brings in a yearly income of 15,000l. or more.

The revenue of the Corporation, which they possess in their own right, is said
to exceed 8000l. a year. The allowance to the Mayor during his year is very
ample, The exact amount of the revenue and allowance to the Mayor is not easily
gained by a traveller; it must be got by particular confidence.
a mansion house furnished and servants, a state coach, with the expenses of
entertaining the Judges of Assize on the circuit. The Sheriff has also an
allowance for his public entertainments. The receipts of the Corporation in the
year 1774, were 20,360l. 9s. 8d. and their disbursements 19,445l. Pennant.
The inhabitants of Newcastle and Gateshead are computed to exceed 30,000.

We find here a remarkable provincial dialect and a guttural pronunciation, in
which words containing the letter R are articulated with difficulty. This seems
to be derived from the Danes. In a degree, the same guttural pronunciation
takes place through all Northumberland.

Newcastle was the seat of many remarkable occurrences and events. On the
incursion made by David I. King of Scotland, A. D. 1135. in the reign of King
Stephen, he took Newcastle, and obliged the inhabitants to swear allegiance to
the Empress Maude as their Queen. David having made this place his head
quarters, remained there till a truce was entered into with King Stephen, who
lay with his army at Durham.

On the restitution of Newcastle to the Crown of England, King Henry II.
confirmed to the burgesses and inhabitants their estates, and granted them an
exemption from tolls and duties.

King John and William the Lion King of Scotland, about the year 1209, met at
Newcastle, and held a conference. The Scotch King lay ill here for a
considerable time.

In 1235 or 1236, the King of England and Alexander King of Scotland had a
conference at Newcastle, on the demand made by the Scotch King for restitution
of Northumberland, Westmoreland, and Cumberland. The Queen of Scotland also was
present. -- Chron. Mailross.

In the year 1244, King Henry III. assembled a great army and marched to
Newcastle, whilst the King of Scotland marched to Ponteland. There were 5000
horse among the English troops finely armed. In the Scotch army were 1000 horse
with armor of iron or network, to which were added 100,000 foot; but no
engagement ensued, as Alexander, who before had denied King Henry's supremacy,
now submitted to acknowledge Henry as his liege Lord, and agreed to bind
himself not to enter into any league with any of the enemies of the King of
England.

In the year 1251, Newcastle had its first Mayor, Petrus Scott, Knt.

In 1276, on the eve of St. Nicholas, great earthquakes were felt here,
accompanied with dreadful lightnings and thunders, the appearance of a fiery
dragon in the heavens, and a blazing star.

In the year 1292, after the Regency of Scotland was dissolved, Baliol swore
fealty to King Edward I. in the castle of Norham, in the presence of many of
the Nobility of both nations. The next day the royal commission was issued,
directing John St. John to place Baliol in the royal chair at Scone, according
to the ancient mode of inauguration of the Kings of Scotland: in which duty St.
John represented Duncan Earl of Fife, then a minor, whose hereditary office it
was gained by his ancestors for their distinguished services. This ceremony was
soon after performed on St. Andrew's day; after which Baliol passing into
England, did homage to King Edward on Christmas day at Newcastle, in the hall
of the castle.

In the year 1296, an open rupture taking place between the two kingdoms, the
Scots professing to throw off the English yoke, King Edward appointed the 1st
day of March for his rendezvous at Newcastle, and was there on that day,
accompanied by his Nobles and an army of 30,000 foot and 4000 heavy armed
horsemen, besides the small army belonging to the Bishop of Durham, consisting
of 1000 foot and 500 horse.

In the year 1298, the English army was ordered to muster at Newcastle, to
proceed against the Scotch, when there assembled 2000 heavy armed horsemen,
1200 light horse, and above 100,000 foot.

In the beginning of May 1312, King Edward II. being at Newcastle with his
favorite Gaveston; Lancaster, the Lords H. Percy and Robert Clifford, in
association with many other Nobles, accompanied by numerous attendants, came by
surprise upon them, intending to take the devoted Minion even from the embraces
of the Sovereign; but they made their escape to Tynemouth, and from thence by
sea to Scarbrough, where Gaveston being left by the King as in a place of the
utmost security, he was besieged by Lord Pembroke and others, and obliged to
surrender upon stipulated terms: but Lancaster, Hereford, and Arundel, the
heads of the junto, not approving of the submission Lord Pembroke had accepted,
they seized Gaveston, and put him to death as a traitor. In Gaveston's baggage
left behind him in his precipitate retreat were found many jewels, which
belonged to the Crown, and of which an exact inventory was taken. They were
restored to the King after Gaveston was beheaded. Rapin.




The whole militia of England, by advice of a parliament held at Lincoln, were
ordered to rendezvous at Newcastle, 8 King Edward II. 1315, in order to proceed
on a Scotch expedition: every village in the kingdom sent one stout man with
armor and traveling money, as also wages at 4d. per day, during the service.

Bourne, in a note to the year 1317, says, there was a grievous famine and
mortality, insomuch that the quick could hardly bury the dead; and a great
corruption of cattle and grass. Some eat the flesh of their own children; and
thieves in prison devoured those that were newly brought in, and greedily eat
them half alive.

In the year 1319, King Edward having sustained the most disgraceful defeats
and disappointments in Scotland, a congress of Commissioners was agreed to be
held at Newcastle on the 6th of December, when a truce for two years was
concluded. Four Conservators were appointed for Northumberland.


A congress was held here at Candlemas 1320, in order to establish the terms of
reconciliation between the nations. Besides the conservators of the truce for
England and Scotland, there were present, as aids and mediators, two Envoys
from Philip King of France, and two Nuncios from the Holy See: but each party
insisting on rigorous articles, the congress broke up without effecting any
thing.

In October 1322, King Edward II. was at Newcastle, where he rendezvoused a
great army, and therewith marched from thence to relieve Norham Castle, that
was then besieged by the forces of King Robert Bruce: but the country being
naked, and the Scotch having driven their cattle and flocks into the mountains
and strongholds, King Edward in his progress into Scotland lost many men by
famine. Walsingham.


A peace was concluded upon here between England and Scotland in the year 1323,
by the Commissioners of King Edward II. and King David Bruce for 13 years.
Among the English Commissioners were Adomar Earl of Pembroke, and Hugh de
Spencer, Lord High Chamberlain. Among those from Scotland, the Bishop of St.
Andrew's, and the Earl of Murray.

In 1327, Nov. 20th, the Commissioners of both nations met at Newcastle, and
concluding a truce, such preliminaries for a settled peace were agreed upon, as
were deemed worthy a parliamentary consideration; and accordingly a parliament
was summoned to assemble at York at Candlemas following, in which was given the
memorable recognition of the right of Robert Bruce and his heirs to the Crown
of Scotland, and the renunciation of all claim and right to the dominion or
sovereignty of the kingdom by King Edward III. and his successors Kings of
England, and that the said kingdom should be held for ever divided and distinct
from the kingdom of England, and in all respects indepent of it; and to that
end, all writings and evidences to the contrary should be deemed null and void:
and on the part of King Robert Bruce, 20,000l. was stipulated to be paid by
Scotland, in three yearly payments, to King Edward's officers at Tweedmouth.

In 1328, King Edward III. remitted to the Burgesses of Newcastle all debts and
arrears due to him or his progenitors. Mador Firm. Burg.


King Edward III. having placed Edward Baliol on the throne of Scotland, kept
his Whitsuntide, A. D. 1334, at Newcastle, with great splendor and
magnificence. In the month of June, in quality of Sovereign Lord of Scotland,
he received there, in a public and solemn manner, the fealty and homage of the
Scotch King: at the same time Baliol ceded to him large Scotch territories, in
satisfaction of the expenses sustained in restoring the Crown to him, as its
hereditary claimant. By the following passage in Lel. Col. vol. I. p. 469, it
appears that greater cessions were made by Baliol: And this Edward Baillol
condescendid with Eduarde King of England, after that he had done the
accustomid services, that if he died without heirs, the realm of Scotland
should remain to King Edward of England and his heirs for ever. And this
pact was made at Newcastle upon Tyne.

Through the interposition of the King of France, Edward consented to a truce
with David Bruce's party, who had opposed Edward Baliol; on the expiration of
which, about Midsummer 1335, both Kings held their rendezvous at Newcastle with
a powerful army, preparatory to their entry into Scotland.

In the year 1336, King Edward met the Scotch Delegates at Newcastle, when he
acceded to proposals made by the Pope's Nuncio, for a further time of truce.

In 1341, it was granted, that no goods be sold until a plank be laid to the
ship, on forfeiture of the goods.

In 1342, David King of Scots having committed horrid ravages on his march
through Northumberland, came before Newcastle with a powerful army, amounting
in numbers, as some authors insist, to 60,000 foot and 3000 horse. John Lord
Nevil, who commanded in the castle, made a sally with 200 chosen lancemen, who
entering the Scotch camp, surprised the Earl of Murray, one of the chief in
command, in bed, and dragged him forth naked, returning to the castle with
their prisoner and much booty, not having lost one man. The Scotch enraged at
the disgrace, began a fierce but irregular attack, and were repulsed with great
slaughter. The bravery of the garrison induced David to raise the siege and
march toward Durham, which city he took by storm, and with the most savage
barbarity put the inhabitants to the sword, without distinction of age, sex, or
condition. Barns's Hist. King Edward III.


In 1346, Newcastle furnished 17 ships and 314 mariners for the siege of
Calais: a force superior to that provided by any northern port in England but
Yarmouth; which shows the power and consequence of this place in so early an
era. In King Edward the Second's time there was an order of the King and
Council for a staple here. Hakluyt's Eng. Voyages, vol. I. p. 119.


In 1353, Commissioners met at Newcastle for the deliverance of David King of
Scotland on Ransom. The Delegates for England were the Bishop of Durham,
William de Bohun Earl of Northampton and Constable of England, Gilbert de
Umfreyvill, Earl of Angus, the Lords de Percy and de Nevill, William Baron of
Greystock, and Henry le Scroop. For Scotland, the Bishop of St. Andrew's and
Brechin, Patric of Dunbar Earl of the March of Scotland, the Abbot of
Dumfermelin, and Walter de Moffet Archdeacon of Leonesse. Brady's Continuation,
p. 253.


In 1353, King Edward III. in his rout to Scotland kept his Christmas at
Newcastle.

In 1363, there happened a frost which continued from the middle of September
to the month of April.

In 1390, license was granted to the Mayor and his successors to have a sword
borne before them.

Froisard speaks of a remarkable rencounter near Newcastle, in the 11th year of
the reign of King Richard II. The Scots having invaded England, and being come
into the Bishopric of Durham, the Earl of Northumberland sent his two sons,
viz. Sir Henry and Sir Ralph, to Newcastle, to which place the county were
appointed to come: whereupon ensued several light skirmishes betwixt the
English and them, and many proper feats of arms done. Amongst others there
fought hand to hand the Earl Douglas and Sir Henry Percy; and by force of arms
the Earl won Sir Henry's penon. Whereupon Sir Henry and all the English were
sore displeased; the Earl saying to him, Sir, I shall bear this token of your
prowess into Scotland, and shall set it on high on my castle of Alquest, that
it may be seen afar off: which so provoked the Percys, that after diverse bold
adventures against the Scotch forces, at length they obtained the victory, and
slew the Earl James Douglas; but Sir Ralph Percy was therein wounded and taken
prisoner by a Scotch Knight. Scotti posuerunt castra prope Novum Castellum. In
qua Villa Henricus Percy junior and Radulphus frater ejus milites erant.
Henricus Percy opp. egressus captus est a Scottis, sed edita ante ingenti
Scottorum caede. Lel. Col. vol. I. p. 253.


And after this, in another encounter, this Sir Henry Percy, fighting valiantly
with the Lord Mountcumber, a stout Knight of Scotland, was by him taken
prisoner.

In 1415, the head of Sir Thomas Gray of Werk was placed on one of the gates of
Newcastle; he was a conspirator against the life of the King, with the Earl of
Cambridge and Lord Scroop.

In the year 1451, Plenipotentiaries from King Henry VI. and King James II. of
Scotland, met at Newcastle and concluded a truce for three years. They put
their seals to the instrument in the church of St. Nicholas. The time of truce
was enlarged A. D. 1459, by Commissioners who met at Newcastle for that
purpose: and in the reign of King Edward IV. 1465, the time was again enlarged,
and through a friendly intercourse which took place between the English King
and the Scotch Regency, a peace was soon afterward established.

1st May, 1460, James Butler Earl of Wilts and Ormond, taken prisoner by
Richard Salkeld, Esquire after Towton battle, a firm Lancastrian, was beheaded at
Newcastle. Irish Compend. p. 126.


In the year 1544, Edw. Seymore Earl of Hertford, sent by King Henry VIII. to
execute his vengeance on the Scotch, embarked 10,000 men from this port in 200
ships, and sailed into the Firth. In this expedition the city of Edinburgh,
with Leith and Dunbar, and many other considerable places, were pillaged and
burnt.

The army under the command of the Duke of Somerset, mustered at Newcastle in
the year 1547, in order to their advancing against Scotland.

By an act of parliament passed in the 7th year of King Edward VI. 1553, it was
enacted, that in Newcastle there should be no greater number than four taverns
or wine sellers to sell or utter wine by retail.

In Strype's Annals, vol. 4. p. 306, No. CCXXIII, is the following article.

Matthew Archbishop of York and the rest of the Council in the north to Lord
Treasurer Burleigh.

The Justices of Assizes have adjourned the assizes and jayl delivery for the
counties of Duresme and Northumberland, in regard of the great infection of the
plague in those counties, especially in and about Duresme and Newcastle. For
which respect likewise we have adjourned all causes depending before this
Council, between such parties as are inhabiting within those counties, until
the sitting after Michaelmas, before which time we hope the sickness will stay.
And so beseeching God to bless your Lordship with his manifold graces, we
humbly take our leaves. At York this 6th day of July 1597. Signed by the
Archbishop Charles Hales and Jo. Fuerne.

King James I. on the 9th of April 1603, entered Newcastle in his progress to
the capital, and remained three days there. He granted the Burgesses a
confirmatory charter by letters patent dated 31 March, 1604.

In the time of King Charles I. A. D. 1643, Newcastle sustained a siege, the
Scotch advancing against it under the command of Lesley, who dividing the
forces, attacked it vigorously on two sides at once. The Marquis of Newcastle,
then Governor for the King, maintained the place, though the enemy gained part
of the outworks; and some unfortunate sallies were made. In the succeeding year
the Scots took it by storm. Sir John Merlay then Mayor retired to the castle
with about 500 men, which he held till terms of capitulation were obtained. The
inhabitants saved the town from being plundered by payment of a large sum of
money. The Parliament disfranchised the body corporate, and ordered the Mayor
to be tried by a court martial. Sir Henry Anderson, one of the Representatives
in Parliament, was expelled the House for joining the royal army. The town at
the time of these calamities, was also visited by the plague.

In the year 1646, the King came from Lumley Castle, in the county of Durham,
and put himself under the protection of the Scotch General Leven. A sermon was
preached before him by the Scotch Metropolitan, who was so little touched with
the presence of suffering Majesty, and had so little a portion of the grace of
modesty, that after his discourse was ended he called for the 52d psalm, which
begins, "Why do thou, tyrant, boast thyself, thy wicked works to praise." His
Majesty that moment stood up and called for the 56th psalm, which begins, "Have
mercy, Lord, on me, I pray, for men would me devour. The congregation sung his
Majesty's. Clarendon.


Whilst they remained at Newcastle they raised a subsidy from the adjoining
country, amounting to 8000l. a month before the King's arrival, and 9000l. a
month after: which was obtained under the threats of military execution in case
of default.

These men from whom the King sought protection, sold him for a trifling sum,
though it was the price of their eternal infamy.

Many instances not mentioned here, occur in history, which show the importance
of Newcastle; as a place for convention, the rendezvous of large armies, and
the resort of the Monarchs of both nations, their Envoys and Plenipotentiaries,
when treaties were held between the two kingdoms.

In the reign of King Henry III. A. D. 1249, the town suffered greatly by fire.
It sustained a great loss, by a sudden inundation of the river Tyne, in the
reign of King Edward III. when 120 persons were drowned. In the year 1771, it
again suffered by an inundation; when four of the arches of the bridge were
destroyed, with 22 houses, and six of the inhabitants. The Statue of King
Charles II. which stood over the magazine gate, was taken down, when the tower
was removed to render the entrance into the town more open. The statue was
re-exalted on the side of the Exchange facing the Fish-market. This
circumstance so greatly irritated some inveterate enemy to the Stewart race,
and fiery zealot to the house of Brunswick, that the following illnatured
pasquinade was found posted upon a door immediately under the statue.

Sacred to the memory
Of CHARLES STUART,
Of a justly detested race, and a most detestable rascal
That ever disgraced the British throne;
Ungrateful to his friends,
Treacherous to his country,
To humanity a stranger;
He prostituted the best gifts of nature
(A strong bodily constitution,
And stronger mental parts)
To the most abominable lewdness and the worst of vices.
Though a barren wife
Left him no legitimate succeeding issue,
* * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * *
Curious spectator, whoever thou art,
Thankfully acknowledge thy obligations
To the Right Worshipful the M -- r and M -- tes
Of this once truly loyal,
But now, alas! licentious town;
That they have gratified the curious eye,
By placing this exquisite piece of art
In a more elevated and conspicuous situation,
In the front of their Hall of Justice.
If happily thou retainest in thy generous breast
The seeds of loyalty and affection
To the unfortunate Royal House of Stuart.
Reflect with gratitude
On the blessings thou enjoyest
From the happy and glorious restoration
Of Charles the Second.
If unhappily thy principles or thy passions
Torment thee with indignant rage
Receive instruction and profit
From the wretch whose memory thou abhorrest:
Or learn to moderate thy resentment or party zeal,
By the humiliating reflection,
That the heaviest oppressions,
The most cruel persecutions,
The vilest debaucheries
And most destructive vices,
May reign and spread with triumphant havoc,
Under the mild connivance, mistaken confidence, and unmerited favor
Of a most gracious and virtuous sovereign;
As under the avowed auspices, the lewd example, and open encouragement
Of the most dissolute and abandoned tyrant.
Randal's Manuscripts.
One of the houses remained for some time, suspended in an amazing manner, over
a dreadful chasm, sustained by the compactness of its materials and its timber;
and clinging by a small part of its foundation, on one of the piers, from which
the arch was broken down. From thence the miserable inhabitants looked on the
raging waters and the horrid ruins with distraction, and sent forth cries of
despair to multitudes of spectators, who could not lend them aid. At length the
fatal moment arrived that closed the tremendous spectacle; the house with its
inhabitants sunk, and were swallowed up in the destructive torrent.

The ancient bridge was of wood and in the 33d year of the reign of King Henry
III. was destroyed by fire. The late bridge was constructed of stone, and
consisted of 12 arches; three of which on the north were closed up and used as
cellars. It was built about 500 years ago, Walter Kirkham, He came to the Sea
1249.
Bishop of Durham, being a great contributor thereto. The original
superstructure of this bridge was probably of wood, like that over the Danube,
and continued made with the same material for several centuries. Notice is
taken of it in the reign of King Richard I. when Philip Poictiers, Bishop of
Durham, gave license to the Burgesses of Gateshead to give wood to whomsoever
they pleased to be spent about the river Tyne; which is supposed to mean in the
repairs of the bridge and quay on the part belonging to Durham; for one third
belongs to the Bishop, and two to the town; so that after it was destroyed in
1248 by a furious fire, the Bishop and the town united in the expense of
building the stone bridge, of which this calamity was the origin. The Prelate
(Walter Kirkham) had the advantage in this; for, armed with spiritual powers,
he issued out indulgences from all penances to every one that would assist,
either with money or labor. The town also applied to other Bishops for their
assistance in promoting so good a work, and they in consequence granted their
indulgences; but then the Clergy of the North were directed by their
Archdeacon, to prefer the indulgences; of their own Prelate to any other. In
the end both parties succeeded, and the money raised was given to Laurentius,
Master of the Bridge. Pennant, vol. 2. p. 315.


It was crowded with buildings. Near the middle was a tower with an iron gate,
which the Corporation used as a town prison. This tower was of considerable
service some years ago, in preventing the further communication of a fire which
consumed many houses adjoining it. At the south end was formerly another tower
and a drawbridge. A blue stone near the middle of the bridge denoted the
boundary of the town's liberty, the southern end of the bridge appertaining to
the Sea of Durham. In the year 1416, a claim of the Corporation to the whole
bridge occasioned a suit, in which the right of the Bishop of Durham to the
southern part was established. Thomas Ruthal, Bishop of Durham in the reign of
King Henry VII. repaired the southern part. This part of the bridge was
repaired by Thomas Ruthal, Bishop of Durham, famous in the reigns of King Henry
VII. and VIII. not only for being the richest subject then in Britain, but for
the unfortunate mistake he made in delivering the book of his own private
affairs to the aspiring Cardinal Wolsey, instead of one he had wrote on the
state of the kingdom by the desire of his Sovereign, whereby the Cardinal
effected his ruin and stepped into his Bishopric. Wallis.




A strong building crossed the bridge, which was used as a magazine for the
town. On the south front was an elegant statue of King Cha. II. with this
motto, Adventus Regis, Solamen Gregis. There was an opening in the battlements
of the bridge railed with iron, for the convenience of passengers to look upon
the river and shipping: Mr Bourne relates a story, that from thence one
Anderson, an Alderman, dropped his signet ring into the river; that some time
afterward his own servant having bought a salmon for his table, in opening the
fish the ring was found in its intrails, and was in his days in the custody of
a descendant of Mr Anderson. Herodotus gives an account of a similar
circumstance happening to Polycrates King of Samos, who was called the
favorite of Fortune.

On the 20th of June 1770, the workmen began to pull down the west end of St.
Thomas's chapel, in order to open the passage to the bridge.

In the inundation 11th Nov. 1771, the water was supposed to be at its height
about seven in the morning, and to have risen upwards of 12 feet above high
water mark in spring tides. From Tyne Head, in Aldston Moor, to Shields, was a
continued scene of horror and devastation.

An act of parliament passed 3d June 1772, to enable the Bishop of Durham and
his successors to raise a competent sum of money, to be applied for the
repairing, improving, or rebuilding such part of Tyne Bridge as belongs to the Sea of Durham.

On the 10th June 1772, one Stephenson contracted to build a temporary bridge
over the Tyne in four months time, under a great penalty; which was performed.

On Tuesday 25th April 1775, the first stone of the south pier of the new
bridge, within the boundaries of this Corporation, was laid by Sir Matthew
White Ridley, Mayor.

From the evidence of the ancient name of Pons Aelii and the Roman road from
Chester leading thereto, it is conjectured that the Romans had a bridge here.

Mr Pennant is of opinion, that part of the Roman bridge remained till the late
inundation; for from the observation of workmen upon the old piers, those as
well as the piers of the bridge at Bywell, seem originally to have been formed
without any springs for arches. This was a manner of building used by the
Romans, witness the bridge built over the Danube by Trajan at Severin, whose
piers (he believes) still exist. Adrian was probably the founder of the bridge
at Newcastle, which was called after his family name Pons Aelii, in the same
manner as Jerusalem was styled Elia Capitolina, and the games he instituted at
Pincum in Maesia, Aeliana Pincensia. The coins discovered on pulling down some
of the piers in 1774, confirm my opinion. Several were discovered, but only
three or four rescued from the hands of the workmen. All of them are coins
posterior to the time of Adrian, probably deposited there in some later
repairs. One of them is a beautiful Faustina the Elder after her deification.
Her forehead is bound with a small tiara; her hair full, twisted and dressed a
la modern; round is inscribed Diva Faustina. On the reverse is Ceres, with a
torch in one hand and ears of corn in the other. The inscription Augusta S. C.

The next has the laureated head of Antoninus Pius. On the reverse Apollo, with
a patera in one hand and a plectrum in the other; the legend so much defaced as
to be illegible.

The third is Lucius Verus (like that of Faustina after consecration). On the
reverse is a magnificent funeral pile, and the word Consecratio. S. C.

Within a little distance from Newcastle lies

JESMOND, A corruption of Jesus-Mount.

an ancient Hospital, with a chapel appertaining to it, dedicated to the Virgin
Mary. King Edward VI. granted this place to the Corporation of Newcastle, who
sold it to Sir Robert Brandling. The hospital is now used as a dwelling house,
and the chapel is converted into a stable.

There was a well at Jesmond, greatly resorted to by persons laboring under
infirmities, for its salutary qualities. It had as many steps down to it as
there are articles in the Creed. Many pilgrimages were made to Jesmond, to
visit the shrine of the Virgin, and to partake of the miraculous virtues of the
sanctified spring. The superstition of paying reverence to salubrious springs,
seems to be derived from the Romans.

In the first year of the reign of King Henry VIII. a mob headed by several of
the Aldermen and principal inhabitants of Newcastle, assembled here with intent
to slay the Prior of Tinemouth. The cause of this outrage my author does not
mention. Bourne, notes, p. 82.


From the same authority it appears, that soon after Jesmond became the
property of Mr Coulson, he enclosed the well, and converted it into a bath; but
in a short time the water forsook the well, which alarmed the superstitious
much. But whilst the cry against this profanation was warmest, the waters
returned, and the miracle was washed away.

ELSWICK
is about a mile west from Newcastle, the seat of John Hodgson, Esquire formerly
part of the possessions of the manastery of Tynemouth. Soon after the
dissolution it came by purchase to the family of Jennisons, whose property it
was for some generations. It is an old house, but has an excellent situation,
commanding a fine prospect to the east and south. The eastern prospect
comprehends, among other objects, Newcastle and Gateshead: the southern, the
rich borders of Tyne, the vales of Lamesley, and the castles of Ravensworth and
Lumley, in the county of Durham.

On the right hand of the road leading to Benwell is

FENHAM,
the seat of William Ord, Esquire a handsome modern structure, commanding a distant
view of Tyne below Newcastle, with all the beauties of its navigation, the
scene being crowded with shipping mixing with villages and hamlets: the church
and village of Jarrow are in view, and at a greater distance on the opposite
side of the river, the village of Chirton: it is said in a clear day the ruins
of Tynemouth are the terminating objects of this noble landscape. Fenham was
anciently part of the possessions of the Knights Templars, and in the 18th of
King Edward II. A. D. 1324, was by parliament granted to the Hospitallers of
St. John of Jerusalem. On the dissolution in the 31st of King Henry VIII. A. D.
1540, the Prior died of grief. The Prior Sir William Weston died of grief. The
Priory lands were annexed to the crown, except 600 marks per annum, given to
four Knights and two Gentlemen for their valor; 100 marks to each, with a
dwelling house for ever. Their names were Sir John Dudley, Sir Thomas Seimour,
Sir Thomas Poinings, Sir Geo. Carew, Anthony Kingston, and Richard Cromwell.

Wallis.
It was for some time the estate of the Riddels of Swinburn Castle.

We advanced to

BENWELL,
one of the most delightful situations in the north of England, the estate of
Andrew Robinson Stoney Bows, Esquire It was the possession of the Shaftoes Robert
Shaftoe of Little Barrington 10 Queen Elizabeth. Mark Shaftoe of Benwell,
Member of Parliament for Newcastle, A. D. 1659.

Robert, High Sheriff of Northumberland 8 King William III. 1696. Robert, High
Sheriff 4 King George I. 1718. Robert, High Sheriff 27 King George II. 1754.
Wallis.
of the Bavington family Little Bavington.
for several generations, and anciently a member of the barony of Bolbeck. The
present mansion house is united with the ancient tower, and retains the name of
Benwell Tower. The pleasure grounds are not extensive, but disposed in a good
taste; commanding a view of the Tyne and its rich borders, with the island
called the King's Meadows: the more distant prospect is graced with Axwell
Park, the elegant mansion of Sir Thomas Clavering (of Payne's architecture) and
the hanging woods of Gibside, where, towering above every other object, an
obelisk is seen, on which stands a fine figure of liberty. Besides the
Antiquities found here, mentioned by Mr Horsley, the following are worthy
notice.

A Roman Sudatory was discovered a few years ago, in a field east of the house,
the pavement was not in chequer work or Mosaic, but in unequal irregular
figures, red and white; a composition of Caluviva and brick, resembling a
pebble marble. Of the true Musive or Mosaic, I have not heard of any yet being
discovered in the Roman structures of this or the other stations with us;
though I make no question but the Romans of quality had them here, as well as
in the more southern stations of Britain. They are of great antiquity, invented
by the luxurious Asiatics, the builders of Babylon, of Palmyra, of Persaepolis,
of the famous Piramids of Memphis, the just wonders of the world. At Susa they
had a royal banquet on a Lythostraton, composed of rich and curious stones.
Esther Chapter I. At Jerusalem our Savior had his sentence passed on him by
Pilate, from a throne in a place called by way of eminence the Pavement. From
Asia these Lythostrata passed into Greece, from Greece to Rome. The first made
at Rome was in the temple of Fortune, laid by Sylla 170 years before the
christian era. From Rome they came to Britain, into the palaces of Princes,
the state rooms and tents of Generals, the sacred temples, magnificent thermae,
and other places of elegance and pleasure. The Balnaeum and Lithostraton,
according to Varro, made a complete and elegant villa. Baths and shady piazzas
were first introduced here by Agricola.

Two millstones were found here, one of ragstone, the other factitious of
potters work. A small golosum fictile, or drinking cup, of Roman pottery, and
the neck and handle of a cruise of brown pottery unglazed. Wallis.




Benwell was the Condercum of the Romans: In Mr Horsley's works the following
Roman Antiquities found at this station are mentioned:

No. VII. Jovi Optimo Maximo Dolicheno, et Numinibus Augusti prosalute
Imperatoris Caesaris Titi Aelii Hadriani Augusti Pii patris patriae et legionis
secundae Augustae Marcus Liburnius Fronto Centurio Legionis ejusdem votum
solvit libens merito.

Between Cousins House and Benwell I could not meet with any Roman inscriptions
or sculptures. I never heard of any found at Newcastle; nor is this much to be
wondered at, considering how large a town it has long been, and how easy it is
to suppose that all that was Roman has been lost some ages ago amongst such
numerous buildings: I therefore proceed to the inscriptions at Benwell. There
are three belonging to this fort, of which this and the next have been
published only (I think) by Mr Gordon: That part of the two first lines, which
is lost in the break of the stone, is so supplied by Mr Gordon, as if the whole
had been Jovi Optimo Maximo et numinibus, etc. and as if the words Optimo
Maximo had been wrote at large so as to fill up the whole vacancy: but these
words are seldom found at length upon an altar, and will by no means consist
with the letters HENO, which are very plain and distinct. The reading I have
given seems to answer as to the letters, and to fill up the space with the
greatest exactness; and it will be hard to find another word into which the
letters HENO will enter, nor is there any occasion to search for any other,
since Jupiter Dolichenus had not only several altars dedicated to him in other
places, but one or two likewise in Britain. Caesar, in the short Natural
History he gives of Britain, tells us, "The inland countries afford tin, and
the maritime iron, though no great plenty of it." This passage of Caesar may give
us some light into the reason of these altars being dedicated to Jupiter
Dolichenus, when compared with another inscription to the same deity, published
by Reinesius, and referred to in Camden: The inscription is this, Jovi Optimo
Maximo Dolycheno ubi Ferrum nacitur, Sempronius Rectus Cent. Frumentarius, D.
D. Reinesius thinks Jupiter had this name given him from (...), a town of
Epirus or Macedonia, which country Strabo represents as rugged and mountainous,
and productive of metals, among which Reinesius supposes there was iron. If
this was the case, though Strabo I think does not mention iron, the words ubi
serrum nascitur may seem to intimate that Jupiter Dolichenus had some
particular concern in iron mines, and so might well be applied to for
assistance and conduct by those who entertained hopes of making beneficial
discoveries in that way; now Benwell is not many miles from the sea, and this
country abounds with mines of coal that bring yearly a very large sum of money
into it; and the Romans, from Caesar's account and other circumstances, might
expect to find iron mines in these parts, and upon that occasion pay their
devotion to Jupiter Dolichenus. Montsaucon has given us one image of this
deity, found at Marseilles, clad in armor, and standing upon a bull, which
seems to agree very well with this account; but another image represents him in
a rustic habit, with an ox under him; and Stephanus, who calls him (...),
derives his name from Dolochene, a city of Cammagene, in Asia, which Strabo
describes as a fruitful country, well planted with trees and vines; it is not
unlikely therefore he might be worshipped at both these places, and that the
words in Reinesius's inscription ubi Ferrum nascitur might be designed as
descriptive of the Grecian Deity: it may not be improper to remark, that there
is a coalry not far from Benwell, a part of which is judged by those that are
best skilled in such affairs to have been wrought by the Romans. The Legio
Secunda Augusta, for whose preservation, together with that of the Emperor,
this altar was erected, must at this time have been upon the wall in
Northumberland, which very probably (if Pausanius's account be true) might be
after they had defeated the Brigantes, and taken from them a great part of
their land.

The words which I read Centurio Legionis ejusdem, are by Mr Gordon read
legatus ejusdem, which mistake he seems to have been led into by not observing
the centurial mark; so that here is no foundation to suppose a new Propraetor
or Lieutenant, M. Liburnius Front, from this inscription: this curious altar
has on one side the sacrificing knife and ax, on the other side both the Patera
and Praeferi^ulum. This and the following were in the collection of Robert
Shaft^, Esquire

No. VIII. Centurio Legionis vicestmae valentis victricis, votum solvil libens
merito.

This is an imperfect inscription, upon the lower part of a broken altar, found
in the same place with the preceding; and as that was erected by a centurion of
the second Legion called Augusta, so this by another such officer of the
twentieth Legion called Valens Victri^: the mark for the Centurion is very
plain and distinct upon the stone, though omitted by Mr Gordon; nor do I
remember an instance in Britain of an altar erected by a whole Legion, though
it was frequently done by a Cohort. My reason for reading Valens Victrix and
not Valeria or Valeriana I have given before.

No. IX. Victoria August^r^^ Nostrorum secit Nepot Softi Senecionis consulis
Felix alae primae Asterum Praefectus.

I first discovered this inscription on the side wall of a house at East
Denton, which village stands upon the wall, about a quarter of a mile west from
Benw^ll Fort. The house was afterward demolished, and this stone thrown among
the dirt and rubbish: but being again recovered, by a curious gentleman of my
acquaintance, is now in my possession. Though the word secit, as synonimous with
p^sant, is frequently applied to an altar or monument, and therefore does not
certainly prove that the legion was at this time employed in building the wall,
or the valla^; yet as no person is named in the inscription, to whose honor
this monement was erected, the word fecit may possibly refer to some other work
than purely setting up such a stone, and to none more likely than building that
part of the wall; but this I have considered in its proper place. It is
somewhat rare and curious, to have the name of the legion and the number of the
cohort set down both together, so distinctly as here. There are some other
parallel instances of legionary cohorts in Britain, but not very many. In a
memorandum left by the late Dr W^^dward ^f Cre^^a^n^e, this stone is s^^d to
have been found on the Roman Wall near Newcastle upon Tire and to have been
sent to him by Dr Ca. of that town. The monument correspondents so exact* to
the description I had from an eyewitness of one found at Benwell Fo^t, and
preferred for some ^^re at Benwell ^^^se, that there can remain no doubt but it
must be the very ^^me. I am told it was first presented by the present Mr
Shasto's grandmother, during the mi^or^y of the late Mr Shafto at Benwell, to
the late Dr Ca^, a learned and curious Physician of Newcastle, by whom it was
transmitted to London since the death of Dr Woodwa^^, and the ^^^posal of h^s
co^^es^in^ in which I saw it, it is now in the possession of Mr West. The
distinct mention ma^e (...) th^s monument of the Ala prima Astorum renders it
highly curious and valuable, as it c^nfr^^^ the Roman town and fort upon the
wall at Benwell^^^ to be the ancient Cond^rcu^, the third station per ^^neam
Val^i, where according to the Notitia this Ala was in garrison. I was agreeably
surprised at the sight of it, because it is a further confirmation of the
scheme I had advanced concerning these stations: I was also pleased to discover
the small o at the end of the last line, which is sufficiently distinct and
certain, and proves the word to be Astorum not Asturum, in which it agrees with
the Notitia. That part of the stone which is near the M in the bordering is
imperfect and broken. I make no doubt but the letters RV have been before the
M, and that it is to be read Astorum: the PRA on the other side can be nothing
else but Praefectus: there is no appearance left of any cross strokes of the E
after Ala in the last line; but as these may have been worn out, I am of
opinion that it was at first ALAE, and that the monument was set up by Felix
the commander of this Ala: it seems plainly to have been erected Victoriae
Augustorum, for the word Victoriae is complete and distinct; the upper parts of
the two G G are yet visible; and Dr Woodward had put a V before them in his
copy, though I could not discern any vestige of it on the stone: I suppose a
stroke or two in the next letters are now effaced, and that they were
originally a double N conjoined for nostrorum; and whosoever considers the
frequent variation of letters we often meet with in the same monument, will not
think it strange that the first stroke is more oblique here than in one or two
instances of the same letter afterward the letters F E at the end of this line
must in all probability stand for the word Fecit. If my reading be allowed, the
monument must have been erected by Felix, who was the grandson of Socius
Senecio the consul, and the commander of the first wing of the Asti. Mr Ward
chooses to read the third and fourth lines thus: Numerius Sosius Senecio Nepos
Consulis Felix. The letter N put for a praenomen signifies Numerius, according
to Diomedes. Sosius was one of the consuls names, who is called G. Sosius
Senecio in the Fasti Consulares, and N for Nepos is very common upon
inscriptions: as to the situation of the words Nepos Consulis, it is usual in
inscriptions to insert such words as express any relation or other circumstance
of those who erect them, before the last name: but N S in Goltzins is made to
stand for Numerius, as well as N alone. This being admitted, we may read
Numerius Senecio Nepos Consulis Felix: but I much incline to the reading that I
have given, which occurred to me at the first: it is evident that no regard is
had in this inscription to the usual order of the words in others; there seems
rather to be an affected singularity as to this matter. Senecio, who is
mentioned in an inscription or two found at Brugh in Richmondshire, (the
originals of which are now lost was probably of the same family, though rather
too late to be the same person with him who is described in this monument, for
he (as appears from these inscriptions I have referred to) lived under the
reign of Commodus, and continued at least till the joint reign of Severus and
Caracalla, is later than a grandson of Sosius Senecio the consul can well be
supposed to have lived; for Sosius Senecio was the fourth and last time consul
in conjunction with Licinius Sura in the year 107, under the reign of Trojan,
from whence to the beginning of the joint reign of Severus and Caracalla is
little less than a century; for the same reason it is not so probable that the
two Emperors here intended are Severus and Caracalla, but rather Marcus
Aurelius and Lucius Verus, who, as well as the others, carried on a war with
success against the Britons, and Calpurnius Agricola was their Legate, whose
name we meet with in some inscriptions found near the Roman wall, and as he
began to reign jointly above thirty years before the other two, that time suits
better than the other: so that upon the whole I take this monument to have been
erected to the honor of the Emperors Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, upon
occasion of some victory they had gained over the northern Britons by
Calpurnius Agricola their Legate, in which this Felix Senecio had the command
of the first wing of the Asti. The Asti, according to Pancirollus, were the
inhabitants of the Asta, a colony in Ligu^ia. Asta is mentioned by Pliny and
others; no doubt they were distinct from the Astures, a people of Spain. The
four inscriptions which follow are on stones built up in the walls of houses in
the village of Benwell.

No. IX. Dis Manibus Aurelii clae primae Astorum.

This is a funeral monument, but imperfect, and has been much abused. I have
given the best reading of it I could: it is now built up in the front of Mrs
Lion's house near the door. There appears something like a stop after the A in
the last line; but yet I incline to read it alae primae, and most probably
Astorum, for this was the only ala primae stationed on the principal line of
the wall. This seems to be of the lower Empire, and more strongly proves this
fort to be the ancient Condercum.

No. IX. Centuria Peregtini. This of Peregrinus is now built up in the fore
wall of the house of William Gill.

No. IX. Legionus secundae Augustae cohors decima.

This is very useful and curious, though it contains only the name of the Legio
secunda Augusta, and the number of the Cohort, namely, the tenth, for this
farther confirms what I had from other reasons and inscriptions conjectured
before, that this Legion was employed on the east end of the wall, and this
Cohort of that Legion in particular: the Sea Goat and Pegasus at the top are
not uncommon, and seem to denote the maritime situation of the country on the
one hand, and the swiftness of the Roman victory on the other. There is a
branch in the upper part of the stone which was mistaken by a very learned
Antiquary for a Roman Vexillum, and we have a Roman Vexillum supported by a
Pegasus and a Sea Goat at Little Chesters on the wall. This stone is now in the
fore wall of the house of Joseph Wallis, near the door.

No. IX. Centuria Arrii.

This of Arrius is in the back wall of the house of Matthew Garret; both the
stone and letters are very coarse. Arrius is a Roman name. Horace has it once
and again.

No. IX. Centuria Herenniani.

This stone was found near the highway side by Denton, and is now in my own
possession. Herennius Herennianus occurs in a remarkable inscription found in
Spain, and published in the Transactions. The name on this stone is plainly
Herrennianus.

This station on Benwell Hill has furnished a good many inscriptions; but I
remember not to have seen or heard of any Roman coins found here, nor can I say
in the general that Roman coins are so frequent in the stations on the wall as
in some other places; but the fine urn which they now preserve in the Library
at Durham was found at this place. The cut of the letters in the inscriptions
belonging to Benwell is tolerably good, and the inscriptions themselves are not
so much perplexed with ligatures of letters, as those of later dates often are,
though these are not wholly free from them. But the most curious inscriptions
have been removed out of this county: many were carried off by Sir Robert
Cotton, several of which are yet remaining at Connington near Stilton in
Hantingdonshire; but they also are going to ruin, for the summer house where
they were carefully placed by Sir Robert being now uncovered, and in a ruinous
state, the stones and inscriptions have already suffered very much.

Mr Warburton had made the largest collection, who was at a great deal of pains
and expense to collect the most curious Roman stones he could find in this
county, but he unhappily broke many of them in order to make them more
portable, and so carried off only that part of the stone which had the
inscription; by this means it has happened that many of the stones collected by
him are only faces of altars, and in several instances the inscriptions
themselves have suffered damage by this unhappy frugality. What this gentleman
had collected together at Hexham have since been removed to the Library at
Durham.

Mr Warburton in his Vallum Romanum justifies himself against this charge in
the following manner: The editor, in vindication of himself from this unjust
accusation of a parsimonious incuriosity, denies the charge in every part; and
as a proof of the truth thereof refers himself to the draughts of the altars he
discovered, as the same are represented in the plates. That the Romans
frequently broke and defaced altars on particular occasions is evident, and is
usually observed to have been practiced on Revolutions in the Empire, or upon a
persons falling into disgrace, who is mentioned in the inscription.

Observations on the inscriptions near Walbottle.

The three following are at a place upon the wall called Walbottle.

No. X. Centuria Mucieni Posuit.

This is Centurial, and is now in the sore wall of a cow-house in this village:
it contains nothing distinct but the character and name of the Centurion.

No. XI. Cohors octava Posuit: This contains only the number of the Cohort; I
believe there never has been any thing more inscribed on it, and am apt to
think it was the eighth Cohort of the Legio secunda Augusta, the same as that
before in the inscription at East Denton.

No. XII. The inscriptions contained under this number are only some obscure
and doubtful remains of numeral letters. The two first, viz. V and IX have most
probably been 8 and 9, denoting the numbers of the Cohorts; they are in the
corner of the stone wall, through which a small brook passes, a little west
from the town; and of the same sort with these are the rest, but placed in
several parts of the inside of the wall which incloses the field. There were
two or three more of the same sort and size, with No. I upon them, and another
also with No. V, besides those which I have described.


the distinct remains of the station appear on Benwell Hill. The observations
made thereon and the course of the wall from Newcastle to Rutchester, by Mr
Horsley and Mr Warburton, are to the following effect. No appearance of either
of the Roman walls can be expected as far as the buildings of Newcastle extend;
but as soon as they are well ended, some feint vestiges of both, or of what has
belonged to them, begin to show themselves: for just at the end of Westgate, on
the south side of the highway, Hadrian's Ditch seems pretty visible; and near
the Quarry House some feint marks of the Ditch and north Agger begin to appear,
but chiefly of the latter; and this state of the Vallum extends to Benwell
Fort. As to Severus's Wall, little or nothing relating to it can be discovered
between the town and the Quarry House: some visible remains of a castellum are
discoverable just behind the Quarry House, and the line of the wall appeared to
go through the midst of the house. The castellum is conveniently placed for
prospect, and is the only one that is visible between Newcastle and the next
station: by the distance there should have been another, but it is quite
demolished. From the Quarry House to Elswick Windmill, Severus's wall is
difficult to trace; but from thence to the fort on Benwell Hill, the appearance
of the ditch is frequently very distinct, and the track of wall (which keeps
much upon the high road) pretty certain.

From the station at Newcastle (which is placed by these Antiquaries near the
castle) to Benwell Hill, is near two miles and a furlong, and no inscriptions
have been discovered in this space; at least none now remain, nor even the
remembrance of any.

The situation of the station on Benwell Hill is high, and the prospect
considerable: the ramparts are large and distinct, but the ditch scarce to be
discerned. Hadrian's vallum seems to have fallen in with the south side of it,
and Severus's wall strikes upon the east and west sides, so as to leave three
chains to the north and six to the south; but there is no appearance of the
wall and its ditch being continued through the fort, though Mr Gordon has so
represented it. There are stones in the road that now crosses this fort, but
these seem only to have been taken out of the ruins to repair the highway. This
station falls in course to be Condercum, the name given in the Notitia to be
the third in the series, where the Ala Prima Astorum was quartered.

From the station at Benwell Hill, Severus's wall and ditch, in going down to
Denton, continue much in the same state as before; but Hadrian's work on this
side begins to appear more conspicuous; both the walls pass to the north of the
hill and village of Benwell; from Denton to the Chapel Houses, both the walls
and their ditches are almost all the way visible and distinct: over against
West Denton Hall there seemed to be the visible remains of a castellum, and
somewhat like the ruins of a Turret not very far from it.

Near the Chapel Houses, about a furlong south from Severus's wall, and less
from Hadrian's, are somewhat like the ruins of a rampart: it is called the
Castle Steads, the name usually given to those castella that are regularly
placed along Severus's wall; but this (besides its being at some distance from
the wall, which the others never are) appears to have been of a quite different
form and dimensions; for it is about four chains long, with an interval in the
middle, that looks like a gate, and so makes it appear very like the south
rampart of a small fort: but if there have been ramparts on the other sides, no
traces of them appear at present. The prospect here, especially to the south,
is very considerable; perhaps it has been an exploratory tower belonging to
Hadrian's work, and prior to Severus's, and so neglected in his time. The usual
castellum belonging to Severus's wall, is about a furlong west from the Chapel
Houses, and visible there; so that the other can neither be one of these, nor
intended to supply the place of one. From the name Chapel Houses, one would
expect to find some ruinous chapel there; and I should have suspected somewhat
of these ruins to have been of that nature, if the name Castle Steads had not
determined against it.

From Chapel Houses to Wallbottle both walls and ditches are pretty visible,
and continue so to Newburn Dean: but on the descent from the Chapel Houses to
Wallbottle, Hadrian's north Agger becomes very conspicuous, and holds so for
the most part to Newburn Dean. Between Wallbottle and this Dean is a castellum
still very visible; and from the Dean to Throcklow, Hadrian's vallum and ditch
are discernible, but not very large, and Severus's wall not quite so plain.

Over Against Throcklow, in a convenient high place, there seems to be the
ruins of another castellum; but near the village the vallum is very obscure.
From Throcklow to Heddon on the Wall, Severus's wall and ditch are very
conspicuous, and Hadrian's vallum and ditch near as visible. The north Agger is
also discernible for part of the way, and near Heddon it is very considerable.
Before we come to Heddon, there is on the north side of the wall, another place
of the same nature with that at Chapel Houses, and called likewise Castle
Steads. The remains are very confused, and as it is altogether on the north of
the wall, and detached a little from it, it seems to be a castellum erected
prior to the wall, and neglected after the building of it. The prospect from
this place is very good, which makes it the more likely to have been of the
exploratory kind. However there seems to have been an usual castellum in
Severus's wall, very near to these ruins; which is a further proof, that the
other has not been used after the wall was erected. It seems to have been twice
as large as one of Severus's castella, and yet not large enough for a station.
Three sides, the north, east, and west, may be traced out, but the other is
entirely levelled.

HEDDON,
commonly called Heddon on the Wall, was part of the barony of Hugh de Bolbeck,
who gave the appropriation and advowson of the church here to the Abbey of
Blanchland.

In Nov. 1752, the workmen employed in making the military road which leads
from Carlisle, found a great number of curious Roman coins and medals in the
ruins of the Roman wall here. They had been deposited in wood boxes, which were
almost decayed: several of the medals were fresh and fair, as if but newly
struck: some of them are of silver, but most part of copper and mixed metal.
They are thought to be as valuable a collection as has been discovered for some
centuries past.

Near Heddon on the Wall somewhat appears like Severus's military way, pretty
near to his wall; but it is rather probable this appearance is nothing but the
stones and ruins of the wall, and that the military ways have here coincided,
because the north Agger is so large, though in a ploughed field: not far from
this place there have been some remarkable Tumuli. The village Heddon Laws,
which stands upon a hill, has no doubt had its name from such Tumuli. There is
yet remaining one very great heap of stones, besides other Tumuli, and a
remarkable one farther to the east, called Dewly Law, with a smaller one near
it. The whole hill is like the ruins of a quarry, but curious and worth the
seeing. If regard be had to the distance of 12 miles from the sea, Heddon on
the Wall would seem to be Bede's VILLA AD MURUM, and not either Wall's End or
Wall Town.

From Heddon to Rutchester, both the walls and their ditches are distinct; and
a little before we come to Rutchester, Hadrian's north Agger is distinct. Here
is another castellum, the remains of which are very visible, and an oval fort,
(though it seems not to be Roman) near it. The whole distance between the
station at Benwell Hill and this at Rutchester, is six measured miles and three
quarters; in this space there are six visible castella, in a series without
interruption, and the constant exact measure between them is, six furlongs and
three quarters; and the whole distance between the two stations, six measured
miles and three quarters: the two castella that have been next the fort at
Benwell Hill, have no visible remains.

We passed in view of Denton Hall, a seat of the ancient family of Montagues, to

NEWBURN,
a borough given by King John to Robert son of Roger de Clavering, Baron of
Warkworth. John the last Lord Clavering having granted the reversion of it to
the Crown, in the 6th year of the reign of King Edward I. it was given to Henry
Lord Percy by King Edward III in the second year of his reign, and is now part
of the possessions of his Grace the Duke of Northumberland. The village is
chiefly inhabited by Miners. The impropriation and advowson of the church of
Newburn was given by King Henry I. together with St. Nicholas in Newcastle, to
the Church and Canons of St. Mary in Carlisle. The church is in the form of a
cross, having a tower. Here is a tomb of the Delaval family. Sir John Delaval,
of North Dissington, Knt. Ob. 12th Aug. 1652. Robert his son and heir Ob. 6th
Feb 1666. He gave 5l. to the poor of this parish yearly, issuing out of
Diffington. Willam Delaval Ob. 20th Aug. 1684. George Ob. 18th March, 1694.
Mary wife of Edward Delaval and daughter of Sir Ob. 7th Dec. 1711. AE 17.
Francis Blake, of Ford Castle Ob. 7th Dec. 1711. AE 17. Edward, above named Ob.
3d Aug. 1744. AE 80.
The income of this parish being represented to Dr Smith, Bishop of Carlisle,
after the Restoration, as an insufficient maintenance for a minister, his
Lordship, among his other excellent charities, augmented it 25l. per ann.

Wallis. Here lies Sir John Delaval, of North Diffington, Knt. who died the
12th of August, 1652; also Robert Delaval, Esquire his son and heir, who died the
6th of Feb. 1666, and gave to the poor of this parish 5l. to be paid by the
lands of North Diffington the Thursday before Easter yearly, for ever; also
William Delaval, buried August the 20th, 1684; George Delaval, buried March the
18th, 1694; Mary wife of Edward Delaval, Esquire daughter of Sir Francis Blake, of
Ford Castle, buried Dec. 7th, 1711, aged 17. The aforesaid Edward, eldest son
of George Delaval, Esquire's son, died Aug. 3d, 1744, aged 80 years, and left
50l. to be distributed amongst the poor inhabitants of the four following
parishes: To Newburn 20l. to Heddon on the Wall 10l. to Stamfordham 10l. and to
Ponteland 10l.




Newburn was a place of consequence and note preceding the conquest. Copsi who
was created Earl of Northumberland by King William, was put to death here.
Osulf the preceding Governor, expelled by the Conqueror to give place to Copsi,
being forced into the woods and deserts, lay concealed till he had collected a
few hardy troops; with these he besieged Copsi, and at length obliged him to
take refuge in the church. Osulf disregarding all veneration for things sacred,
when put in competition with his desperate fortune and revenge, set fire to the
holy pile; and as Copsi endeavored to shun the flames, he was seized, and his
head severed on the spot.

At this village, on the 28th of August, 16 King Charles I. A. D. 1640, Lord
Conway with an army of 3000 foot and 1500 horse, opposed the passage of the
Scots over the river Tyne, led by Lesley. In Rushworth's Historical
Collections, there is a very particular relation of this affair, p. 1236.

On the twenty seventh of Aug. (1640) in the forenoon, his Majesty received
intelligence from the Lord Conway, that the Scots would that night be near
Newcastle with their army, craving his Majesty's pleasure and directions about
the disposing of his army to the interruption of the march of the Scots.

The King immediately called the Gentry of Yorkshire, then at York, together,
to wait upon his Majesty, to whom the Earl of Strafford made a speech,
presently after he prepared a packet to be sent post to the Lord Conway, then
understanding the Scots were come near Newcastle; and the author of these
Collections being newly come post from London to York, and hearing a packet
was about to be sent to Newcastle, took the opportunity to bear the messenger
company therewith: but when the author and the messenger with the packet came
to Newcastle upon the 28th of August in the morning, they were informed, that
the Lord Conway was gone to the army near Newburn, whither we went immediately,
and found the Lord Conway and the Field Officers at a Council of War at Stella,
half a mile distant from the army, and delivered the Lord Conway the packet,
which being opened, it contained special orders to prepare the army for an
engagement with the Scots. Whilst they were in debate in this matter an Herald
came in all haste from the army, to acquaint the Lord Conway and Council of
War, that the army was already engaged with the Scots; which seemed strange to
them, because orders were given not to fight but upon the defense.

On the 27th of August, The Scots pitched their tents on Heddon Law, above
Newborn, from whence there went a continued descent to the river of Tyne. In
the night time they made great fires in and round about their camp, on an open
moorish ground, (having coals plenty thereabouts) so that the camp seemed to be
of large compass and extent.

That night and the next morning they suffered any Englishman to come into
their camp, and made them welcome, with expressions of great love and
protestations of doing harm to none but those who should oppose them in
demanding justice of the King against incendiaries.

The same night part of the King's army, consisting of 3000 foot and 1500
horse, were drawn forth into a plain meadow ground, which was near a mile in
length, close on the south side of Tyne, called Newborn Haugh or Stella Haugh,
to hinder the Scots from passing the river in the night time, where were two
several sconces or breast-works, raised by the English against the two fords,
which the Scots might pass over at low water, for 'till then they could not
pass the Tyne, and into each sconce were put four hundred musketeers and four
pieces of ordinance.

The horse were drawn into squadrons in the said Haugh, at some distance from
the foot; in this posture horse and foot guarded the river all that night and
the next day, till the engagement.

The Scots all the forenoon watered their horses at one side of the river, and
the English on the other side, without affronting one another, or giving any
reproachful language.

The Scots having the advantage of the rising ground above Newborn, easily
discerned the posture and motion of the English army below in the valley, on
the south side the river; but the posture of the Scots army the English could
not discern by reason of the houses, hedges, and enclosures in and about
Newborn. The Scots brought down cannon into Newborn town, and planted some in
the church steeple, a small distance from the river Tyne: their musketeers
were placed in the church, houses, lanes, and hedges, in and about Newborn.

The skirmish began thus, (as the author of these Collections was informed,
being then upon the place) a Scottish officer, well mounted, having a black
feather in his hat, came out of one of the thatcht houses in Newborn, and
watered his horse in the river Tyne, as they had done all that day; an English
soldier perceived he fixed his eye toward the English trenches on the south
side of the river, fired at him, (whether in earnest or to fright him is not
known) but wounded the Scotchman with the shot, who fell off his horse,
whereupon the Scottish musketeers immediately fired upon the English, and so
the fight begun with small shot, but was continued with great shot as well as
small.

The Scots played with their cannon upon the English breast-works and sconce;
the King's army played with their cannon to beat the Scots out of the church
steeple; thus they continued firing on both sides, 'till it grew to be near low
water, and by that time the Scots, with their cannon, had made a breach in the
greater sconce, which Colonel Lunsford commanded, wherein many of his men were
killed and began to retire, yet the Colonel prevailed with them to stand to
their arms; but presently after a Captain, a Lieutenant, and some other
officers were slain in that work: then the soldiers took occasion to complain,
that they were put upon double duty, and had stood there all night and that day
to that time, and that no soldiers were sent from the army at Newcastle to
relieve them; but Col. Lunsford again prevailed with them not to desert their
works, but another cannon shot hitting in the works amongst the soldiers, and
killing some more of them, they threw down their arms, and would abide in the
fort no longer.

The enemy on the rising ground above Newbourne, plainly discerned the posture
of the King's army, and how the soldiers had quit the great work, and being
low water, the Scots commanded a forlorn party of 26 horse, being gentlemen of
the College of Justice Troop, to pass the river, which they did with some
swiftness; their orders were only to make discovery in what posture the
soldiers were about the uppermost work, but not to come to close engagement,
but fire at a distance and retreat.

The Scots playing at this time very hard upon the furthermost trench, forced
the English foot to retreat from that work also, which the Scots discerning on
the rising ground at Newborn, commanded by Sir Thomas Hope, and two regiments
of foot commanded by the Lord Craford, Lindsey, and Lord Lowdon, waded through
the river, and General Lesley at this instant of time played hard with nine
pieces of cannon, from a new sconce which they had raised on a hill to the
east, and so galled the King's horse, drawn up in plain meadow ground, that it
much disordered them, and sending more forces over the river, a retreat was
sounded, and Colonel Lunsford drew off the cannon. Immediately Commissary
Wilmot, son to the Lord Wilmot, Sir John Digby, a Romish Recusant, and Daniel
O'Neal, an Irishman, jointly engaged the enemy, and had a sharp encounter with
their horse, they being commanded to bring up the rear, whilst the foot
retreated up Ryton and Stella Banks; but the Scots, with their fresh supply
newly come over the river, environed these three commanders, and took them and
some others of their troops prisoners. General Lesley treated these commanders
nobly in the Scots camp, and afterward gave them their liberty freely to
return to the King's army.

In this engagement Cornet Potter, son of Endymion Potter of the Bedchamber,
was slain, and during the whole fight about 60 men more, as the Scots told us,
after the cessation of arms was agreed unto, for the Scots buried the dead; and
afterward they further told us, that most of them that were killed lay about
the works: how many of the Scots were slain we know not.

After this retreat the Lord Conway called a Council of War, and it was there
resolved, at twelve at night, that the whole army should retreat to Durham,
horse, and foot, and train of artillery, and to quit Newcastle.


The Scots with great intrepidity passed the river, breast deep, in the face of
the English army, who were drawn up on the opposite banks. Three hundred Scotch
horse were obliged to repass the river, being opposed by a body of foot covered
by a breast-work; but Lesley getting nine pieces of cannon Said to have been
concealed in some brushwood, previous to the army fording the river.
to play upon the English lines, a panic seized the whole line of infantry,
they threw down their arms and fled with the utmost precipitation, leaving the
horse under Commissary General Wilmot, accompanied by many Gentlemen of rank,
exposed to the enemy's artillery and the united force of the whole body of
Scots: till overpowered by numbers, and having sustained a loss of 300 men and
upwards, they were obliged to retreat. The foot were soon ashamed of their
flight, wishing to repair their disgrace, and revenge it on a foe, who hardly
credited their own success; but the timid General uninfluenced by the same
sense of honor, never afterward turned his face to the enemy. Clarendon.
Lord Clarendon calls this defeat, an irreparable rout. The General's conduct
was inquired into on his coming to York, where he told the story of his defeat
to the King: he was accused of cowardice and treachery, and though he used his
utmost art to put a gloss upon his conduct, yet the strongest show of conscious
guilt was discoverable in his manners, and the confusion of his language and
countenance. Whitlock's Memoirs.


I now repassed the Tyne, and entered into the Bishopric of Durham.

Having completed my view of each remarkable place within this extensive and
opulent county, I shall proceed, by way of compendium of the cursory remarks
which I made in each particular district, to show the importance of
Northumberland in a collected and clear point of view.

By a geographical table lately published, it appears that the area of
Northumberland contains 131,000 acres, and is 155 miles in circumference;
having 3 boroughs, 13 market towns, 460 parishes, 22,741 dwelling-houses,
113,705 inhabitants; sends 8 Members to Parliament, and pays in proportion to
the land tax 5. It is divided into 7 wards; has 4 chief rivers, Tyne, Tweed,
Alne, and Coquet; is within the diocese of Durham, and gives a Ducal title.
Newcastles lies in lat. 55:0, whose distance and bearing from London in
measured miles is 278 N. W.

The revenues of the church in this county, exclusive of Newcastle and
Hexhamshire, exceed 11,000l. a year.

Northumberland sends two Knights of the Shire to Parliament. Knights of the
Shire for the county of Northumberland, to the 12th year of King Edward IV.
extracted from Prynne's Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva.

Anno Regni. Knights. Parliament. King Edward I. 26 -- Dominus Henricus de
Dychend Dominus Johannes de Ogghell 30 -- Hugo Gabion Johannes de Camhou
Milites. King Edward II. 1 -- Johannes de Eure Johannes de Dudden Mil. 4 --
Wisthard de Charrous Rogerus Mandiuts Mil. 6 -- Dominus Walter de Borringdon
Dominus Rob. de Clifford Mil. Apud Windsor 6 -- Dicunt non curant mittere
Woodstock 7 -- Adam de Swinburne Rogerus Mandite 8 -- Nulli electi ratione
Belli Spalding 15 -- Rob. de Raynes Johannes de Yerdham Mil. 19 Will. Rydell
Michael de Pressen King Edward III. 1 -- Nulli electi ratione Belli These three
returns from Prynne, p. 165, set forth at length in the notes to the table of
Burgesses for Newcastle.
Stanhope 1 -- Johannes de Lilliburne Johannes de Meneville Mil. 2 -- Johannes
de Boroughdon Mich. de Preston Mil. Ebor 4 -- Rogerus Manduit Will. de Tynedale
7 -- Rogerus Maundit Rob. Darrays 9 -- Rob. Darrays Johannes de Wanton 12 --
Will. de Emeldon David de Vollores Walton 14 -- Will. de Felton Robertus de
Manners Herewyr 15 -- Henricus de Haverington Will. de Pressen Woodstock 17 --
Johannes de Yerdhill Mich. de Presson 20 -- Alanus de Heppestotes Edmundus de
Demun 21 -- Rogerus de Widrington Will. de Heppestotes 22 -- Rob. de Reymes
Rob. Wendite 24 -- Rob. Bertram Rog. de Boderington 26 -- Will. de Felton (only
one Knight by the writs) 27 -- Will. de Felton Mil. 31 -- Hen. de Haverington
Ricus de Horseley 33 -- Johannes de Cambhouwe Ricus de Horseley 34 -- Ricus de
Horseley Rob. Wenduit In 34 Edward III. the King issued a writ, dated 3 Ap.
apud West. to the Sheriff of Northumberland, to elect, De com. tuo duos milites
gladiis cinctos, etc. de discretior; and probioribus militibus and ad
loborandum potentioribus. The Sheriff, Henry de Strochre, thereupon made this
return on the back of the writ:

Non fuerunt aliqui milites in com. meo postquam breve istud michi venit
praeter quam Walterus de Tyndale qui languidus est and impotens ad loborandum.
Whereupon the names and manucaptors of two others who were elected, though they
were no Knights by order girt with swords in this manner. Manucapt. Rici de
Horsley unius electorum de com. meo plenam et sufficientem potestatem habentis
pro se and communitate dicti com.

Manucapt. Robti Wendind alterius electi dicti com. eandem potest. habentis.

Prynne's Br. Parl. Red. p. 167.
34 -- Tho. Surteys Roger Woderington 36 -- Tho. Surteys Roger de Woderington
38 -- Adomarus de Atholl Alanus 39 -- Adom. de Atholl Hen. de Haverington 46 --
Tho. Surteys Johannes de Midford 47 -- Will. de Vale Bertram Monboucher 50 --
Bertram Monboucher Johannes de Mitford King Richard II. 2 -- Johannes de
Fenwick Nich. Raymes 5 -- Adomarus D'Athol Rad. de Euyr 7 -- David Holgreve
Joh. de Mitteford 7 -- Thom. de Moderby Rob. de Esthydwinde 8 -- Joh. de
Lilburne Thom. de Moderby 10 -- Bertram Monboucher Rob. Elmering 11 -- Tho.
Umfranvill Joh. de Mitford 13 -- Tho. de Umfranvill Joh. de Mitford 15 --
Gerardus Heron Joh. de Mitford 17 -- Gerardus Heron Joh. Miteford 18 -- Will.
de Swinburn Sampson Harding 20 -- Tho. Gray Joh. de Miteford 21 -- Gerardus
Heron Rob. Lisle King Henry IV. 1 -- Tho. Gray Sampson Harding 3 -- Gerardus
Heron Johannes Musard King Henry V. 1 -- Joh. Bertram P. Indent. 2 -- John
Woderington Sampson Harding Mil. ditto 5 -- Rob. de Ogle Will. Mitford ditto 5
-- Rob. Lisle Joh. Middleton ditto 8 -- Rob. Ogle Nich. Turpin ditto 8 -- Edw.
Hastings Rob. Hirbotyll ditto 9 -- Rob. Ogle Will. Mitford ditto King Henry VI.
1 -- John Bertram Will. Elmedon Mel. gladiis cincti ditto 2 -- Thom. Haldon
Thom. Ilderton ditto 3 -- Rob. de Ogle Thom. Ilderton Miles ditto 5 -- Will.
Elmedon Chir Will. Strother ditto 7 -- Joh. Bertram Joh. Cartington ditto 13 --
Rob. Ogle Mil. Will. Bertram Arm. ditto 20 -- Rob. de Ogle Mil. Joh. Heron Arm.
ditto 25 -- Joh. Heron Arm. Joh. Cartington Arm. ditto 27 -- Radus Gray Arm.
fill and here is Rici Gray Mil. Joh. Heron de Ford ditto 28 -- Will. Bertram Mil.
Rob. Mitford ditto Qui ambo Indenturas subscripserunt ut Electores. 29 -- Will.
Bertram Joh. Ogle Miles ditto 38 -- Tho. Wiltden Rob. Manners ditto King Edw.
IV. 6 -- Georgius Lomly Rob. Folbery Mil. gladiis cincti ditto 12 -- Joh.
Middleton Miles Joh. Cartington Arm. ditto

The Writs, Returns, and Indentures from 17 King Edw. IV. to 33 King Henry
VIII. are all lost.

B. Willis. King Henry VIII. 33 King Edw. VI. 1 -- John Widdrington, Knt. P.
Indent. 7 -- John Gray Cuth. Horseley ditto Queen Mary. 1 -- Tho. Gray, Knt. of
Harton Castle Cuth. Horseley ditto 1 -- Joh. Swinborne, Knt. of Capheaton Rob.
Horseley, Knt. ditto Philip and Mary. 1 and 2 -- Joh, Gray, Knt. Cuth.
Horseley, Esquire of Long Horsley P. Indent. 2 and 3 -- Geo. Wharton, Knt. Tho.
Warren, Esquire ditto 4 and 5 -- Tho. Wharton, Knt. Rob. Elleker, Knt. ditto Queen
Elizabeth. 1 -- Tho. Wharton, Knt. ditto 5 -- Joh. Vaughan, Esquire Rob. Lawson
ditto 13 -- Hen. Piercy Will. Hilton, Knts. ditto 14 -- Fra. Russel, Knt. Tho.
Leighton; Esquire ditto 27 -- Fra. Ld Russel Edw. Talbot, Esquire Younger son of E.
Shrewsbury ditto 28 -- Tho. Gray, Knt. Edw. Talbot, Esquire ditto 31 -- Will. Carre
Rob. Widdrington, Esquire ditto 35 -- Will. Read, Knt. Rob. Widdrington, Esquire ditto
39 -- Rob. Carr, Knt. Rob. Widdrington ditto 43 -- Rob. Carre, Knt. Will.
Selbye, jun. Esquire ditto King James I. 1 -- Ra. Gray Hen. Widdrington, Knts.
ditto 12 -- Geo. Selbye Hen. Widdrington, Knts. ditto 18 -- Will. Gray, Bart.
of Wark Castle Hen. Widdrington, Knt. of Widdrington Castle ditto 21 -- Joh.
Fenwick Fra. Brandling, Knts. of North Gosforth ditto King Charles I. 1 -- Joh.
Fenwick, Knt. Fra. Brandling, Esquire ditto 12 -- Joh. Fenwick, Knt. Joh. Delaval,
Knt. ditto 13 -- John Fenwick Will. Carnaby, Knts. of Halton Tower ditto 15 --
Joh. Fenwick, Knt. and Bart. Wm Widdrington, Knt. ditto 16 -- Joh. Fenwick,
Bart. Expelled the House 22d Jan. 1640.
Hen. Percy Expelled 9 Dec. 1741.
ditto Wm Widdrington Wm Fenwick, Esqrs.

These came in the rooms of the last elected Knights, on their deceases or
expulsions, between 640 and 653.

Oliver Cromwell Usurper. He convened the Little Parliament; except London,
Returns of Representatives were only made for Counties.

1 (1653) -- Hen. Ogle Westminster 3 Sep. 1654 -- Hen. Ogle of Eglingham Wm
Fenwick of Wallington ditto -- Rob. Fenwick of Bedlington, Esquire Purchased the
Manor of Bedlington and Choppington Farm of the Parliament, 21 Jan. 1649, for
1296l. 5d.
17 Sep. 1656. -- Rob. Fenwick, Esquire Wm Fenwick, Esquire ditto -- Tho. Lord
Widdrington Richard Cromwell Usurper. 27 Jan. 1658. -- Wm Fenwick, Bart. Ra.
Delaval, Esquire ditto The Convention Parliament. 25 Apr. 1660. -- Lord Mansfield
Joh. Fenwick, Esquire Westminster King Charles II. 13 -- Lord Mansfield Joh.
Fenwick, Esquire ditto 31 -- Ra. Delaval Sir Joh. Fenwick, Bart. ditto 31 -- Ra.
Delaval Sir J. Fenwick, Bart. ditto 32 -- Ra. Delaval, Esquire Sir John Fenwick,
Bart. Oxon King James II. 1 -- Joh. Fenwick, Bart. Will. Ogle, Esquire Westminster
The Convention Parliament. 22 Jan. 1688. -- Will. Forster Phil. Bickerstaff,
Esqrs. ditto King William and Queen Mary. 2 -- Will. Forster Phil. Bickerstaff,
Esqrs. ditto King William III. 7 -- Will. Forster Phil. Bickerstaff, Esqrs.
ditto 10 -- Will. Forster, Esquire Edw. Blackett, Bart. ditto 12 -- Fra. Blake
Will. Lorraine, Esqrs. ditto 12 -- Fra. Blake, Knt. Bertram Stote, Esquire ditto
Queen Anne. 1 -- ditto 4 -- Tho. Forster, Esquire Joh. Delaval, Bart. ditto
Election 31 May, 1705.
Tho. Forster 823 Joh. Delaval 775 Fra. Blake of Ford 646
7 -- Tho. Forster, jun. Esquire Algernon Earl Hertford Made a Colonel in the army,
and new writ ordered 15 Nov. 1709, and re-elected.
ditto 9 -- Tho. Forster, jun. Esquire Algernon E. Hertford Ogle, a petitioner,
withdrew. -- Lord Hertford, eldest son of the Duke of Somerset, made Governor
of Tinmouth Fort, 17 Feb. 1711: a new writ ordered, on which he was re-elected.
ditto 12 -- Tho. Forster Algernon Earl Hertford ditto King George I. 1 --
Algernon E. Hertford. Tho. Forster, jun. Esquire Tho. Forster, expelled for being a
Rebel to Jan. 1716: a new writ.
ditto Fra. Blake Delaval of Seaton Delaval, Esquire 7 -- Algernon E. Hertford. Ob.
7 Feb. 1722.
Ra. Jennison, Esquire Election Feb. 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, and 1 Mar.
1722.
Wm Wrightson 997 Ra. Jennison 963
Wrightson having a majority of 34, was returned by R. Mitford, Esquire the
Sheriff; but the House upon scrutiny struck off near 30 of Mr Wrightson's
votes, and in the end voted him not duly elected. My authority, says (Randal's
MS) that one Wm Shippen, Esquire desired to save, etc. etc. etc. to strike off five
or six more of Wrightson's votes, as the majority, etc. etc. etc. before it was
put to the vote.
ditto Will. Middleton, Bart. King George II. 1 -- Wm Middleton, Bart. Ra.
Jennison, Esquire Westminster 7 -- Wm Middleton, Bart. Ra. Jennison, Esquire Made
Master of the King's Buck Hounds. A new writ 25 June 1737, and he was
re-elected. Election, 8 May, 1734.
Ra. Jennison of Elswick, Esquire 1189 Sir W. Middleton of Belsay Castle, Bart.
1092 Joh. Fenwick of Bywell, Esquire 1052 Joh. Bacon of Newbrough, Esquire 153

ditto 14 -- Wm Middleton, Bart. Joh. Fenwick, Esquire ditto Elected 21 May, 1741.
21 -- Wm Middleton, Bart. Joh. Fenwick, Esquire Elected 1 July, 1747. J. Fenwick
dying, a new writ ordered 11 Jan. 1748. Election Feb. 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24,
Ao. 1747.
Lancelot Algood of Hexham, Esquire 982 Cha. Lord Osulstone 971
The Sheriff Nich. Brown, Esquire disallowed 26 of Mr Algood's votes, and returned
Lord Osulstone, who on Mr Algood's petition waved his return.
ditto 28 -- Wm Middleton, Bart. Sir Wm Middleton ob. 28 Sep. 1757, and in his
room was elected Geo. Shaftoe Delaval of Bavington, Esquire.
Henry Gray of Howick, Bart. ditto Elected 18 May, 1754. King George III. 1 --
Geo. Shaftoe Delaval, Esquire Hen. Gray, Bart. ditto 8 -- Geo. Shaftoe Delaval, Esquire
Edw. Blackett, Bart. ditto -- Lord Algernon Percy Sir Wm Middleton, Bart. ditto

Elected Sat. 22 Oct. 1774.
Candidates. No. polled. Lord Algernon Percy 1235 Poll began 13 Oct. and ended
22d. Sir Wm Middleton 1099 Poll began 13 Oct. and ended 22d. Sir J. Hussy
Delaval 1083 Poll began 13 Oct. and ended 22d. Wm Fenwick, Esquire 762 Poll began
13 Oct. and ended 22d.
They polled in each Ward.
Percy Middleton Delaval Fenwick Castle Ward 145 121 150 88 Morpeth 174 170 152
117 Coquetdale 335 221 248 11 Balmbrough 58 113 45 96 Glendale 139 60 149 27
Tindale 384 414 339 323 1235 1099 1083 762

The joint Interest which appeared in this Election, will be best comprehended
from the following Table, handed to the public at the time of the contest. It
will also gratify the curious with a view of the chief landed property in the
county.

Persons. Estates per ann. L. Duke of Northumberland 40,000 Duke of Portland
8,000 Earl of Tankerville 12,000 Earl of Carlisle 10,000 Lord Ravensworth 3,000
Sir G. Warren 2,000 Sir J. H. Delaval 10,000 Sir W. C. Blackett 8,000 Sir M. W.
Ridley 5,000 Sir F. Blake 4,000 -- Reed, Esquire 2,000 104,000


The first upon record were summoned in the 26th year of the reign of King
Edward I. A Sheriff was appointed in the year of our Lord 1154, in the first
year of the reign of King Henry II. Note to page 445.

The Names of the Gentry of Northumberland, returned by the Commissioners in
the 12th year of King Henry VI. 1433.

Thomas Bishop of Durham Commissioners to take the Oaths. Ra. Earl Westmoreland
Commissioners to take the Oaths. Tho Lilborn and John Carington Knights for the
Shire Commissioners to take the Oaths. Rob. Umfravil, Knt. Ra. Gray, Knt. Rob.
Ogle, sen. Knt. Rob. Ogle, jun. Knt. John Bertram, Knt. Will. Elmeden, Knt.
Joh. Middleton, Knt. Will. Swinburn, Knt. Joh. Manners, Knt. Math. Whitfield,
Knt. Will. Carnaby Joh. Fenwick John Middleton Tho. Ilderton Rob. Rames Tho.
Haggerston Rob. Manners Laur. Acton Tho. Gray de Norton Tho. Blenkensop Row.
Thirlwall Rich. Featherstonhalgh Gilb. Rotherford Will. Muschaunce Gilb.
Eryngton Will. Clenell Joh. Heron de Netherton Tho. Reed de Redesdale Rog.
Ushere Tho. Midleton Joh. Ellerington Joh. Park Rich. Lilburne Tho. Elwicke Joh
Eryngton Nich. Heron de Meldon John Trewyk Jos. Chestre Lion Chestre John
Horseley de Horseley Jaco. Buk de Morpath.
Sheriffs of Northumberland.
King Henry II. A. D. Sheriffs. Anno Regni. 1154 Odardus 1 1155 Will. de Vescy
Mil. 2 1156 Will. de Vescy Mil. 3 1157 Will. de Vescy Mil. 4 1158 Will. de
Vescy Mil. 5 1159 Will. de Vescy Mil. 6 1160 Will. de Vescy Mil. 7 1161 Will.
de Vescy Mil. 8 1162 Will. de Vescy Mil. 9 1163 Will. de Vescy Mil. 10 1164
Will. de Vescy Mil. 11 1165 Will. de Vescy Mil. 12 1166 Will. de Vescy Mil. 13
1167 Will. de Vescy Mil. 14 1168 Will. de Vescy Mil. 15 1169 Roger Stateville
16 Will. de Vescy half the year 1170 Roger Stateville 17 1171 Roger Stateville
18 1172 Roger Stateville 19 1173 Roger Stateville 20 1174 Roger Stateville 21
1175 Roger Stateville 22 1176 Roger Stateville 23 1177 Roger Stateville 24 1178
Roger Stateville 25 1179 Roger Stateville 26 1180 Roger Stateville 27 1181
Roger Stateville 28 1182 Roger Stateville 29 1183 Roger Stateville 30 1184
Roger de Glanvill 31 Amerced 10l. for not coming to the Exchequer as summoned.
Madox, p. 695. 1185 Roger de Glanvill 32 1186 Roger de Glanvill 33 1187 34 1188
35 King Richard I. 6 June, 1189. 1189 Roger de Glaville 1 1190 Will. de
Stuteville and Regin Basset 2 1191 Null. Tit. Com. in hoc Rotulo 3 1192 4 1193 5
1194 Hugo Bardolph 6 1195 Hugo Bardolph 7 1196 Hugo Bardolph 8 1197 Hugo
Bardolph 9 1198 Hugo Bardolph, and ob. Fill. Will. 10 King John, 6 Apr. 1199.
1199 Hugo Bardolfe 1 1200 Will. Stutevill and Joh. Laleman 2 Rob. Fitz Roger
half that year. V. Dugd. 1201 Rob. fill. Rog. and Rad. de Furnell 3 1202 Rob.
fill. Rog. and Rad. de Furnell 4 1203 Rob. fill. Rog. and Rad. de Furnell 5 1204
Rob. fill. Rog. 6 1205 Rob. fill. Rog. 7 1206 Rob. fill. Rog. and Rob. de Kent 8
1207 Rob. fill. Rog. and Aug. de Corvo 9 1208 Rob. fill. Rog. and Tho. Haltem 10
1209 Rob. fill. Rog. and Will. de Blunvill 11 1210 Rob. fill. Rog. and Will. de
Blunvill 12 1211 Rob. fill. Rog. and Will. de Blunvill 13 1212 14 1213 15 Rob.
son of Roger. V. Dug. Ulcote of West Matfen. 1214 Almericus Archd. Dunelm and
Phil. Ulcote 16 1215 Phil. de Ulcote and Will. de Shatton 17 1216 18 King Henry
III. 19 Oct. 1216. 1216 Phil. de Ulcot 1 1217 Phil. de Ulcot 2 1218 Phil. de
Ulcot 3 1219 Phil. de Ulcot 4 1220 Rob. de Witchester 5 1221 Rob. de Witchester
6 1222 Will. Briervere, jun. and Rog. Langford 7 1223 Will. Briervere, jun. ut
Custos and Tho. de Titleburn 8 1224 Joh. fill. Rob. and Will. Coniers 9 1225
Joh. fill. Rob. and Will. Coniers 10 Joh. Governor of Newcastle. 1226 Joh. fill.
Rob. and Will. Coniers 11 1227 Joh. fill. Rob. half that year 12 1228 Bri. fill.
Alani and Hug. de Magneby 13 Bri. Governor of the Castle of Newcastle. 1229
Bri. fill. Alani and Hug. de Magneby 14 1230 Bri. fill. Alani and Hugh de Magneby
15 1231 Bri. fill. Alani and Joh. de Mersley 16 1232 Bri. fill. Alani and Joh. de
Mersley 17 1233 Bri. fill. Alani and Joh. de Mersley 18 1234 Bri. fill. Alani and
Joh. de Mersley 19 1235 20 1236 Hu. de Bolebet and Alan de Kirkby 21 Hu. Gov.
of the Castles of Bambro' and Newcastle. 1237 Hu. de Bolebet and Alan de Kirkby
22 1238 Hu. de Bolebet and Alan de Kirkby 23 1239 Hu. de Bolebet and Alan de
Kirkby 24 1240 Hu. de Bolebet and Alan de Kirkby 25 1241 Hu. de Bolebet and
Alan de Kirkby 26 1242 Hu. de Bolebet and Alan de Kirkby 27 1243 Hu. de Bolebet
and Rob. de Camhoe 28 of Camhoe, Knt. 1244 Hu. de Bolebech and Rob. de Camhoe
29 1245 Hu. de Bolebech and Rob. de Camhoe 30 1246 Will. Heyrun 31 Heron of
Ford Castle built the castle in 1227, 12 K. Hen. III. 1247 Will. Heyrun 32 1248
Will. Heyrun 33 1249 Will. Heyrun 34 1250 Will. Heyrun 35 1251 Will. Heyrun 36
1252 Will. Heyrun 37 1253 Will. Heyrun 38 1254 Will. Heyrun 39 1255 Will.
Heyrun 40 1256 Will. Heyrun 41 1257 Joh. de Plesset 42 1258 Joh. de Plesset 43
1259 Tho. filius Mich. 44 1260 Tho. filius Mich. 45 1261 Adam de Gesenor and
Hu. de Hereford Clicus 46 1262 Adam de Cregenor and Joh. Lidegreynes 47 1263
Adam de Cresenor and Joh. Lidegreynes 48 1264 Adam de Cresenor and Joh.
Lidegreynes 49 1265 Adam de Cresenor and Joh. Lidegreynes 50 1266 Adam de
Cresenor and Joh. Lidegreynes 51 1267 Wischardus de Charny 52 s. 1268
Wischardus de Charny 53 Amerced C for not making his profer at the Exchequer.
Madox, p. 645. 1269 Rich. de Charny 54 1270 Rich. de Charny 55 1271 Rich. de
Charny 56 King Edward I. 16 Nov. 1272. 1272 Robert de Hampton 1 1273 Rob. de
Hampton 2 1274 Rob. de Hampton 3 1275 Joh. de Lichegreynes 4 1276 Joh. de
Lichegreynes 5 1277 Joh. de Lichegreynes 6 1278 Walt. de Cannblion 7 1279 Walt.
de Cannblion 8 1280 Tho. de Dyveleston 9 1281 Tho. de Dyveleston 10 1282 Tho.
de Dyvelston 11 1283 Tho. de Dyvelston 12 1284 Tho. de Dyvelston 13 1285 Tho.
de Dyvelston 14 1286 Tho. de Dyvelston 15 1287 Tho. de Dyvelston 16 1288 Rich.
Knoul 17 1289 Rich. Knoul 18 1290 Rich. Knoul 19 1291 Rich. Knoul 20 1292 Rich.
Knoul 21 1293 Hu. Gobium 22 1294 Hu. Gobium 23 1295 Hu. Gobium 24 1296 Joh. de
Kirkby 25 1297 Rob. de Balliolo 26 1298 Rob. de Balliolo 27 1299 Rog. Mynot 28
1300 Rog. Mynot 29 1301 Joh. de Camblion 30 1302 Lucas Talboys 31 1303 Lucas
Talboys 32 1304 Joh. de Creppinge and Joh. de Sheffeld 33 1305 Joh. de
Creppinge and Joh. de Sheffeld 34 1306 Joh. de Crepping and John de Sheffeld 35
King Edward II. 7 July, 1307. 1307 Rob. de Fandon 1 1308 Guide Charro^m 2 1309
Johan. de Cannton 3 1310 Johan. de Cannton 4 1311 Will. de Felton and John de
Cannton 5 1312 Will. de Felton and Joh. de Cannton 6 1313 Will. de Felton and
Joh. de Cannton 7 1314 Will. de Ridell of Swinburn Castle, Knt. during pleasure
8 1315, 1316, 1317, 1318, 1319, 1320, 1321 1322 Dominus Joh. de Fenwyck 16 1323
Dominus Gilbertus Boroughdon 17 1324, 1325 King Edward III. 25 Jan. 1326. 1326
Joh. de Insula and Joh. de Fenwick 1 1327 Joh. de Lilleburne 2 1328 Joh. de
Lilleburne 3 1329 Joh. de Lilleburne 4 1330 Joh. de Lilleburne 5 1331 Joh. de
Lilleburne 6 1332 7 1^33 Roger Manduit 8 1334 Hob. Dardins 9 1335 Hob. Dardins
10 1336 Hob. Dardins 11 1337 Will. Felton 12 of West Matfen, Knt. 1338 Will.
Felton 13 1339 Will. Felton 14 1340 Will. Felton 15 1341 Will. Felton 16 1342
Will. Felton 17 1343 Rob. Bertram and Rob. de Fenwicke 18 1344 Rob. Bertram and
Rob. de Fenwicke 19 1345 Rob. Reymes 20 of Bolam. 1346 Rob. Reymes 21 1347 Joh.
Clifford 22 1348 Joh. Clifford 23 1349 24 1350 Joh. Coupeland 25 of Coupeland,
Knt. 1351 Joh. Coupeland 26 1352 Joh. Coupeland 27 1353 Joh. Coupeland 28 1354
Joh. Coupeland 29 1355 30 1356 Alan de Strother 31 of Kirk-Newton, in Glendale.
1357 Alan de Strother 32 1358 Hen. de Strother 33 1359 Hen. de Strother 34 1360
Joh. Heronn 35 1361 Rog. de Widrington 36 of Widrington Castle, Knt. 1362 Rich.
de Horseley 37 of Long Horseley. 1363 Hen. de Strother 38 1364 Hen. de Strother
39 1365 Hen. de Strother 40 1366 Hen. de Strother 41 1367 Hen. de Strother 42
Horsely oc. 1367. 1368 Rich. de Horseley 43 1369 Rich. de Horseley 44 1370
Rich. de Horseley 45 1371 Rob. Umfravil 46 1372 Tho. Suritis -- Will. de
Errington, query 47 Surtees of North Gosforth. 1373 Joh. Fenwicke -- Will.
Delaval, query 48 1374 Bertram Monboucher 49 1375 Tho. de Ilderton 50 of
Ilderton, Knt. 1376 Rob. Umfraville 51 King Richard II. 21 June, 1377. 1377
Bertram Monboucher 1 1378 Tho. Surtees 2 1379 Bertram Monboucher 3 1380 Bertram
Monboucher 4 1381 Adom. de Atholl 5 Dominus de Jesmond, Knt. 1382 Rob. de
Clifford 6 1383 Johan Heron 7 1384 Henry de Percy de Alnwick Com. Northumb. 8
1385 Henry de Percy 9 1386 Henry de Percy 10 1387 Henry de Percy 11 1388 Rad.
de Eure 12 1389 Rad. de Eure 13 1390 Joh. de Felton 14 1391 Henry de Percy 15
1392 Henry de Percy 16 1393, 1394, 1395 1396 Hen. de Percy 20 1397 Hen. de
Percy 21 1398 Joh. de Fenwicke de Fenwicke Tower 22 King Henry IV. 29 Sept.
1399. 1399 Henry de Percy fill. Com. Northumb. 1 1400 Gerard Heron M. and Rob.
Umfravill 2 1401 Joh. Milford M. 3 of Moleston. 1402 Joh. Clavering M. 4 of
Calleyley. 1403 5 1404 Rob. Umfravill M. 6 1405 Rob. Lisle Mil. 7 1406 Rob.
Herbotel 8 of Harbottle. 1407 Tho. Gray 9 of Herton. Knt. 1408 Rob. Tempest 10
1409 Joh. Widdrington 11 of Widdrington Castle, Knt. 1410 Joh. Bertram 12 King
Hen. V. 20 Mar. 1412. 1412 Joh. Maneres 1 of Etal. 1413 Edw. Hastings M. 2 1414
Rob. Lisle 3 of Felton, Knt. 1415 Joh. Bertram 4 1416 Rob. Ogle 5 1417 Edw.
Hastings 6 of West Matfen, Knt. 1418 Will. Elmedon 7 1419 Tho. Surtis 8 of
North Gosforth. 1420 Tho. Surtis 9 King Hen. VI. 31 Aug. 1422. 1422 Joh.
Bertram M. 1 1423 Joh. Middleton 2 1424 Joh. Bertram M. 3 1425 Joh. Widdrington
4 of Widdrington Castle, Knt. 1426 Will. Lambton 5 1427 Hen. Fenwick Arm. 6
1428 Will. Carnaby Ar. 7 of Halton Tower, Esquire 1429 Joh. Woderington 8 1430 Joh.
Bertram 9 1431 Rog. Woddrington 10 of Widderington Castle, Knt. 1432 Joh.
Midleton 11 1433 Math. Whitfield 12 of Whitfield Hall, Knt. 1434 Joh. Bertram
M. 13 1435 Rog. Woderington 14 1436 Will. Eure Mil. 15 of Kirkley, Knt. 1437
Rog. Ogle Mil. 16 of Ogle Castle, Knt. 1438 Joh. Bertram 17 1439 Rob. Herbotell
M. 18 1440 Joh. Heron 19 of Ford Castle. 1441 Joh. Heron 20 1442 Rog.
Woderington 21 1443 Joh. Heron 22 1444 Rob. Claxston 23 1445 Will. Haringe 24
1446 Tho. Wellden 25 1447 Bertram Herbotelle 26 1448 Tho. Nevill M. 27 1449 To.
de Woderington 28 1450 Rog. Thornton 29 of Nether Witton Castle, Esquire 1451 Joh.
Heron 30 1452 Rob. Mitford 31 1453 Joh. Burcester 32 1454 Rob. Manners, Ar. 33
of Etal, Esquire 1455 Rad. Gray, Mil. 34 of Heton, Knt. 1456 Joh. Heron, Mil. 35
1457 Rog. Thornton 36 1458 Will. Bertram 37 1459 Rad. Gray Mil. 38 King Edward
IV. 4 March, 1460. 1461 Joh. Middleton Mil. 1 of Belsey Castle. 1462 Geo.
Lumley Mil. 2 of Lumley Castle, Com. Dunelm. 1463 Geo. Lumley Mil. 3 Knt. 1464
Rob. Manres Mil. 4 of Etal. 1465 Geo. Woderington 5 of Widderington Castle.
1466 Will. Bows Mil. 6 of Streatlam Cast. Com. Dunelm. 1467 Joh. Nevill Mil. 7
1468 Geo. Lumley Mil. 8 1469 Geo. Lumley 9 1470 Geo. Lumley 10 1471 Geo. Lumley
11 1472 Joh. Woderington 12 of Widderington Castle. 1473 Joh. Woderington 13
1474 Joh. Woderington 14 1475 Hen. Com. North 15 1476 Hen. Com. North. 16 1477
Hen. Com. North. 17 1478 Hen. Com. North. 18 1479 Hen. Com. North. 19 1480 Hen.
Com. North. 20 1481 Hen. Com. North. 21 1482 22 King Edw. V. 9 March, 1483, and
King Rich. III. 22 July, 1483. 1483 Hen. Com. North. 1 1484 Hen. Com. North.
Rad. Hurbottle Sub. v. 2 1485 Rob. Maneret M. 3 King Hen. VII. 22 Aug. 1485.
1486 Hen. Com. North. 1 1487 Hen. Com. North. 2 1488 Hen. Com. North. 3 1489
Nullus Tit. Comitis in hoc Rotulo. 1490, 1491, 1492, 1493 1494 Rog. Fenwick 9
of Fenwick Tower. 1495, 1496 1497 Rob. Gray de Horton Cast. Knt. 12 1498 Geo.
Taylbois Mil. 13 1499, 1500, 1501 1502 Edw. Radcliff M. 17 of Cartington, Knt.
1503 18 1504 Rad. Eure Mil. 19 of Kirkley, Knt. 1505 20 1506 Tho. Ilderton Mil.
21 of Ilderton, Knt. 1507 22 1508 Nich. Ridley Arm. 23 of Willemoteswick, Knt.
1509 24 King Hen. VIII. 22 Apr. 1509. 1509 Nich. Ridley Arm. 1 1510 Nich.
Ridley 2 1511 Nich. Ridley 3 1512, 1513, 1514 1515 Rad. Fenwick Ar. 7 of
Stanton, Knt. 1516, 1517 1518 Chr. Thirkil Ar. 10 1519 Geo. Skeleton Ar. 11 1520
Chr. Dacre Mil. 12 1521 Will. Elleker Ar. 13 1522, 1523 1524 Will. Elleker Ar.
16 1525 Will. Heron Mil. 17 of Ford Castle. 1526 Will. Eure Mil. 18 of Kirkley.
1527 Cuth. Ratcliffe Ar. 19 of Cartington. 1528, 1529, 1530, 1531, 1532, 1533,
1534, 1535, 1536, 1537, 1538, 1539, Recorda Manca. 1540 John Woderington 32
1541 Leo. Carnaby M. 33 of Halton Tower. 1542 Joh. de Lavale M. 34 of Delaval
Castle, alias Seaton 1543 Tho. Hilton M. 35 Delaval. 1544 Joh. Collingwood 36
of Essington, Knt. 1545 Tho. Hilton M. 37 1546 Joh. Horseley Ar. 38 King Edward
VI. 28 Jan. 1546. 1547 Joh. de Lavale M. 1 1548 Tho. Hilton Mil. 2 1549 Joh.
Forster M. 3 This year enacted Sheriffs should be accountable in the Exchequer,
of Eslington, Knt. 1550 Joh. Gray M. 4 1551 Rob. Collingwood 5 1552 Joh.
Witherington, Q. Tho. Gray 6 Queen Mary, 6 June, 1553. 1553 Joh. de Lavale M. 1
Philip and Mary, 15 July, 1554. 1554, 1555, 1556 1557 Rob. Ellerker 4 and 5
1558 Geo. Ratcliffe 5 and 6 Queen Elizabeth, 17 Nov. 1558. 1559 Joh.
Witherington 1 1560 Alb. Featherston 2 of Featherston Castle, Knt. 1561 Rob.
Lawson Arm. 3 of Rock. 1562 Hen. Percy Mil. 4 1563 Rad. Gray Mil. 5 1564 Tho.
Forster Ar. 6 of Etherston. 1565 Tho. de Lavale Ar. 7 1566 Geo. Heron Ar. 8
1567 Cuth. Carnaby Ar. 9 of Halton Tower. 1568 Cuth. Collingwood 10 1569 Rob.
Raymes Ar. 11 of Bolam. 1570 Nich. Ridley Ar. 12 1571 Joh. de Lavale M. Geo.
Heron M. 13 Heron of Chipchace Castle. 1572 Tho. Forster Ar. 14 1573 Cuth.
Carnaby Ar. 15 1574 Tho. Gray Mil. 16 of Heaton. 1575 Rob. de Lavale M. 17 1576
Rob. Midleton 18 1577 Fra. Russel M. 19 1578 Will. Fenwick Ar. 20 of
Wallington. 1579 Hen. Witherington 21 of Widdrington Castle, Knt. 1580 Cuth.
Colingwood 22 of Eslington. 1581 Joh. Heron Ar. 23 1582 Rad. Gray Ar. 24 1583
Rob. de Lavale Ar. 25 1584 Jam. Ogle Ar. 26 1585 Rich. Radley Ar. 27 1586 Rob.
Clauding 28 Clavering of Calleley. 1587 Hen. Anderson Ar. 29 1588 Hen. Anderson
Ar. 30 1589 Will. Fenwick Ar. 31 1590 Alex. Featherston Ar. 32 of Featherston
Castle. 1591 Rad. Gray Ar. 33 1592 Rob. de Lavale Ar. 34 1593 Rad. Gray Ar. 35
1594 Tho. Bradford Ar. 36 1595 Tho. Bradford Ar. 37 1596 Geo. Muschampe Ar. 38
1597 Edw. Gray Ar. 39 1598 Edw. Gray Ar. 40 1599 Tho. Middleton Ar. 41 1600
Geo. Muschamp Ar. 42 of Barmore. 1601 Edw. Talbot Ar. 43 1602 Nich. Forster Ar.
44 of Bambrough Abbey, Knt. 1603 Will. Selby, jun. Ar. 45 King James I. 24
March, 1603. 1603 Will. Selby, jun. Ar. 1 of Bitlesdon. 1604 Rad. de Lavale Ar.
2 1605 Hen. Widdrington 3 1606 Will. Selby Mil. 4 1607 Geo. Selby Mil. 5 1608
Rad. de Lavale M. 6 1609 Edw. Talbot Ar. 7 1610 Joh. de Lavale Ar. 8 1611 Ra.
Gray Mil. 9 1612 Claudius Forster Ar. 10 of Bambrough Abbey. 1613 Rad. Selby
Mil 11 1614 Joh. Clavering M. 12 1615 Hen. Anderson M. 13 1616 Will. Selby M.
14 1617 Rob. Brandling 15 of North Gosforth, Knt. 1618 Tho. Middleton Ar. 16
1619 Joh. Fenwicke M. 17 of Wallington. 1620 Mat. Forster Ar. 18 of Etherston.
1621 Rad. de Lavale Ar. 19 1622 Will. Muschampe 20 of Barmore. 1623 Joh.
Clavering M. 21 1624 Joh. De Lavale M. 22 1625 23 King Charles I. 27 Mar. 1625.
1625 Cuth. Heron Ar. 1 of Chipchase Castle. 1626 Fra. Brandling Ar. 2 1627 3
1628 Tho. Swinburn M. 4 of Capheaton, Knt. f. Edlingham. 1629 5 1630 Rob.
Brandling Ar. 6 of North Go^forth, Knt. 1631 Nich. Townley Ar. 7 1632 Nich.
Tempest M. 8 1633 Tho. Middleton Ar. 9 1634 10 1635 Will. Carnaby M. 11 of
Halton Tower, Knt. 1636 Will. Witherington 12 of Widdrington Castle, Knt. 1637
Rob. Bewick Ar. 13 Fuller's List of Sheriffs end^. 1638, 1639, 1640, 1641,
1642, 1643, 1644 1645 Joh. Fenwick, Bar. 21 1646, 1647, 1648 King Charles II.
30th Jan. 1648. 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651, 1652 1653 Rob. Middleton, Esquire 6 of
Belsey Castle. 1654, 1655, 1656, 1657, 1958, 1659, 1660, 1661, 1662, 1663,
1664, 1665 1666 Will. Middleton, Bart. 19 of Belsey Castle. 1667, 1668, 1669,
1670, 1671, 1672 1673 Joh. Forster, Esquire 26 1674 Martin Fenwick, Esquire 27 1675,
1676, 1677, 1678 1679 Mark Milbanke 32 1680, 1681 1682 Edm. Crayster, of
Crayster, Esquire 35 1683 Edm. Crayster, Esquire 36 1684 James Howard, Esquire 37 King
James II. 6 Feb. 1684. 1684, 1685 1686 Mark Milbanke, Knt. 3 1687 Rich. Neile,
Esquire 4 1688 Rich. Neile, Esquire and Wm Blackett, Bart. 5 King William and Queen
Mary, 13 Feb. 1689. 1689 Will. Blackett, Bart. 1 of Newcastle. 1690, 1691 1692
Joh. Blackett, of Wylam Hall, Esquire 4 1693 John Bacon, of Staward Pele, Esquire 5
1694 6 1695 Rob. Bewick, of Close House, Esquire 7 1696 Rob. Shaftoe, of Benwell,
Esquire 8 1697 Rob. Mitford, of Mitford, Esquire 9 School 10 1699 Edw. Collingwood, of
Byker, Esquire 11 1700 12 1701 Joh. Gray, of Howick, Esquire 13 1702 14 Queen Anne, 8
Mar. 1702. 1702 Will. Brown, of Bolton, Esquire 1 1703 Rob. Lawson, of Cramlington,
Esquire 2 1704, 1705, 1706 1707 Hen. Ogle, of Eglingham, Esquire 6 1708 Rob. Lawson, of
Cramlington, Esquire 7 1709 1710 Geo. Fletcher, of Rothbury, Esquire 9 1711 Joh.
Middleton, of Belsey Castle, Bart. 10 1712 Hen. Rawling, Esquire 11 1713 Will.
Fenwick, of Bywell. Esquire 12 1714 Mark Strother, of Kirk Newton, Esquire 13 King
George I. 1 Aug. 1714. 1714 Mark Strother, of Kirk Newton, Esquire 1 1715 Joh.
Johnson, of Bebside, Esquire 2 1716 Joh. Rogers, of East Denton, Esquire 3 1717 Ra.
Jennison, of Wolsington, Esquire 4 1718 Rob. Shaftoe, of Benwell, Esquire 5 1719 Will.
Coatsworth 6 1720 Matthew. White, of Blagdon, Esquire 7 1721 Edw. Delaval 8 1722
Will. Mitford 9 1723 Rob. Mitford, of Mitford, Esquire 10 1724 John Coatsworth, of
the Hermitage, Esquire 11 1725 Alex. Collingwood, of Little Ryle, Esquire 12 1726 Rob.
Bewick, of Close House, Esquire 13 1727 Luke Clennell, of Clennell, Esquire 14 King
George II. 11 June, 1727. 1728 John Fenwick, of Bywell, Esquire 1 1729 Joh.
Blackett, of Wylam Hall, Esquire 2 1730 Fra. Blake Delaval, Esquire 3 1731 Tho. Watson,
jun. Esquire 4 1732 Walter Calverly Blackett, of Wallington, Esquire 5 1733 Joh. Reed,
of Chipchace, Esquire 6 1734 John Ogle. Esquire 7 1735 Hen. Ellison, Esquire 8 1736 Hen.
Gray, of Howick, Bart. 9 1737 Hen. Ogle, of Causey Park, Esquire 10 1738 James
Hargrave, of Shawdon, Esquire 11 1739 Will. Errington, of Walwick Grange, Esquire 12
1740 Geo. Shaftoe Delaval, of Little Bavington, Esquire 13 1741 Joh. Strother Kerr,
of Fowberry, Esquire 14 1742 Anth. Isaacson, of Fenton, Esquire 15 1743 Cha. Lorain, of
Stanton, Esquire 16 1744 James Carr, of Black Heddon, Esquire 17 1745 Will. Bacon, of
Staward Peele, Esquire 18 1746 Lanc. Algood, of Hexham, Esquire 19 1747 Will. Ord. of
Fenham, Esquire 20 1748 Nich. Brown, of Bolton, Esquire 21 1749 Gawen Aynsley, jun. of
Little Harle, Esquire 22 1750 Will. Carr, of Etal, Esquire 23 1751 Will. Big, of
Little Benton, Esquire 24 1752 Will. Fenwick, of Bywell, Esquire 25 1753 Rob. Fenwick,
of Lemington, Esquire 26 1754 Rob. Shaftoe, of Benwell, Esquire 27 1755 Joh. Swinburne,
of Newcastle, Esquire 28 1756 Math. White, of Blagdon, Esquire 29 created a Baronet
1756. 1757 Edw. Blackett, of West Maffen, Bart. 30 1758 Will. Wilkinson, of
Clennell, Esquire 31 1759 Abra. Dizon, of Belford Hall, Esquire 32 1760 Rob. Bewick, of
Close House, Esquire 33 Knighted by King George III. on his access. King George
III. 25 Oct. 1760. 1761 Alex. Collingwood, of Unthank, Esquire 1 1762 Ra. Bates of
Hallowell, Esquire 2 1763 Joh. Will. Bacon Forster, of Etherston, Esquire 3 1764 Chr.
Soulsby Reed, of Chipchase, Esquire 4 1765 Math. Forster, of Bolton, Esquire 5 1766
Hen. Collingwood, of Cornhill, Esquire 6 1767 Hylton Lawson, of Cramlington, Esquire 7
1768 Bryan Burrell, of Broom Park, Esquire 8 1769 Mich. Pearson, of West Matfen,
Esquire 9 1770 Joh. Simpson, of Long Horseley, Esquire 10 1771 Tho. Cha. Big. of
Little Benton, Esquire 11 1772 Fra. Blake, sen. of Crawley Park, Esquire 12 created a
Baronet in 1774. 1773 Wm Lowes, of Ridley Hall, Esquire 13 1774 Wm Loraine, of
Kirkharle, Bart. 14 1775 Walter Trevelyan, of Nether Witton, Esquire 15 1776 John
Askew, of Pallinsburn, Esquire 16 1777 Wm Ord, of Fenham, Esquire 17 1778 Tho. Carr, of
Eshot, Esquire 18 1779 Daniel Craster, of Craster, Esquire 19




The lands produce fine corn. On the banks of Tweed excellent cattle are bred,
of which some have come to the weight of 160 stone (14lb. to the stone): the
ordinary cattle in the interior parts of the country, are of a middle size and
mixed breed, between Dutch and Scotch, which are very beautiful, and yield
abundance of milk: smaller cattle, of the Highland kind, are bred in the
mountainous parts. The hills afford fine sheep walks, and the flocks are
numerous: in some parts of the county, of late years, they have been much
improved, by the introduction of Leicestershire and Lincolnshire sheep; by
which cross the fleeces are become much better, and the sheep feed to an
improved weight. Few of the large sheep are kept in this county.

Improved husbandry makes a rapid progress, and enclosures take place of the
wide extended tracts, where many Herdsmen were heretofore necessarily employed
to keep the cattle and flocks within their bounds.

For so large a tract of land, there are few considerable woods of timber
trees, and planting seems to proceed but languidly; except in the vale of
Whittingham and some other tracts, where a laudable example has been given.

The rivers abound with salmon and trout, and the coasts with cod, ling,
turbot, soles, place, whitings, haddocks, crabs, lobsters, muscles, and cockles.

The great staple of Northumberland is coal. By the following tables, the
importance of this county to the state at large will appear, in its exports and
numbers of ships. From that concise plan, the produce is immediately deduced,
in all its articles of trade. By the imports is shown how few foreign articles
are wanted to contribute to the pleasures and luxuries of life, other than
those produced within its own limits.

Exports at Berwick in the year 1776.

To foreign parts: Corn 2500 qrs. Salmon 700 barrels

In the coast trade: Wheat 13,000 qrs. Oats 19,000 qrs. Salmon 50,000 kits Eggs
5000 chests, each containing 1700. Tallow Candles 230 cwt.

ALEMOUTH Exports chiefly Corn shipped for Scotland and the London market.

CAMMAS WATER. Exports: Corn sent coastwise -- Grindstones to foreign parts
1400 chald.

BLYTH. Exports: Coals 14,000 chald. Salt 250 ton.

HARTLEY HAVEN.

Exports: Coals 18,000 chald. Bottles 70,000 doz. Salt 300 ton. Copperas 100
ton.

NEWCASTLE Exports in the Year 1776.
Countries and Islands. No. of Ships Tonnage. Species of Merchandise. Quantity
in Brit. Bottoms Foreign Bot. Africa British 1 Lead Shot 5 c. 0 qr. 50 White
Glass 18 1 Green Glass 16 0 Bar Iron 160 0 Wrought Iron 10 0 Rice 6 0 Gunpowder
900lb. Haberdashery 896 Ale 195 gall. Paper 60 reams Earthen Ware 500 pieces
Muskets 100 Gunflints 10,000 Looking-Glasses 144 Alderney British 1 Coals 40
chald. 60 Earthen Ware 300 pieces Denmark and Norway British 1383 Coals 7347
chald. 76 chald. 14,259 Grindstones 247 306 Foreign Salt -- 130 tons 50 2416
Tow 138 c. 0 qr. 309 c. 0 qr. Lead 10,167 0 1586 0 Lead Shot 143 0 50 0 White
Glass 75 0 13 1 Green Glass 96 3 549 2 Wrought Iron 270 0 4 2 Steel 7 3 7 3
Cheese -- 30 0 Worsted Stuffs 2240 lb. 4204 lb. Haberdashery 864 114 Flour
Mustard 1883 346 Indico 369 Tanned Leather -- 835 Dressed Flax -- 2412 Ale 96
gall. 57 gall. Rubstones 12 doz. 16 doz. Felt Hats -- 40 Worst. Stockings -- 10
Silk Gauze 200 yards 9 yards Velverets 200 750 Col. Wool. Cloth 1590 7755
Denmark and Norway. Linen -- 121 yards Printed Cottons -- 142 Flannel -- 280
Corduroy -- 80 Earthen Ware 12,700 pieces 17,400 pieces Tobacco Pipes -- 53
gross Bricks 1000 12,500 Flanders British 3 Coals 180 chald. 170 Grindstones 2
France British 89 Coals 6165 10,741 Grindstones 467 Lead 764 t c. 3 qr.
Litherage 6 0 Copperas 443 1 Rubstones 183 doz. Earthen Ware 300 pieces Germany
British 89 Coals 7933 chald. 36 chald. 14,209 Grindstones 139 9 Foreign 3 Salt
69 tons 69 tons 190 Lead 551 c. 2 qr. Lead Shot 88 2 White Glass 298 0 Green
Glass 41 3 Wrought Iron 1 0 Copperas 340 1 Litherage 61 2 Mustard 120 lb. Ale
100 gall. Rubstones 38 doz. Flagstones 4 Earthen Ware 4250 pieces 5300 pieces
Col. Wool. Cloth 80 yards 80 yards Sadler's Ware 60l. val. Housh. Furniture
80l. Gibraltar British 14 Coals 980 chald. 1160 Green Glass 203 c. 1 qr. Ale 68
gall. Earthen Ware 600 pieces Greenland Seas British 4 Fishing Stores, and
Provisions for six months. 1360 Guernsey British 11 Coals 624 chald. 1050
Grindstones 4 White Glass 4c. 3 qr. Green Glass 248 1 Mustard 1400 lb. Earthen
Ware 15,500 pieces Holland British 19 Coals 455 chald. 1741 Grindstones 560
Foreign 1 Lead 2202 c. 0 qr. 50 Lead Shot 17 0 White Glass 544 2 Green Glass
4284 2 Litherage 1397 2 Copperas 1366 0 Foreign Wheat 244 qrs. Flour Mustard
39lb. Earthen Ware 700 pieces Jersey British 7 Coals 320 chald. 608 Grindstones
12 Lead 5 c. 0 qr. Lead Shot 17 2 White Glass 55 0 Green Glass 213 2 Wrought
Iron 18 1 Steel 12 0 Earthen Ware 19,000 pieces Ireland British 3 409 White
Glass 1184 c. 2 qr. Green Glass 418 3 Steel 28 0 Minorca British 1 170 Coals
104 chald. N. America British 1 Coals 8 70 Biscuit Bread 32 tons 10 c. Cordage
30 c. 3 qr. Butter 20 1 Cheese 4 1 N. America Soap 5 c. 3 qr. Oakham 6 0 Wheat
Flour 75 qrs. Poland British 5 360 Coals 247 chald. 80 chald. Grindstones 12
Foreign 1 150 Col. Wool. Cloths 100 yards Velverets 60 Firestones 147 Worst.
Stockings 50 pairs Flour Mustard 120lb. Wheat Flour 6 qrs. Earthen Ware 400
pieces Portugal British 14 Coals 932 chald. 1904 Green Glass 457 c. 3 qr.
Wrought Iron 30 0 Wheat 100 qrs. Barley 365 Ale 188 gall. Prussia British 6
Coals 224 chald. 712 Grindstones 155 Rubstones 12 doz. Corn Machines 3 Russia
British 9 Coals 295 chald. 932 Grindstones 66 Lead 2382 c. 3 qr. White Glass 58
2 Green Glass 3002 3 Worsted Stuffs 114 lb. Flour Mustard 408 Indico 1560
Velverets 121 yards Corduroy 100 Col. Wool. Cloths 1310 Tobacco Pipes 30 gross
Rubstones 25 doz. Spain British 1 Wheat 1138 qrs. 120 Sweden British 16 Coals
1212 chald. 12 chald. 2140 Grindstones 15 16 Foreign 1 Lead 2012 c. 0 qr. 123
c. 3 qr. 50 White Glass 11 3 8 2 Flour Mustard 140 lb. Ale 10 gall. Earthen
Ware 500 pieces 200 pieces Velverets 500 yards 150 yards Col. Wool. Cloths 1000
900 West India Islands British 7 Coals 648 chald. 1300 Grindstones 2 Potatoes
12 tons White Glass 46 c. 0 qr. Cordage 15 2 Biscuit Bread 160 0 Hams 16 0
Flour of Mustard 56lb. Wheat Flour 448 qrs. Port Wine 146 gall. Bricks 41,000
Pantiles 25,000

NEWCASTLE IMPORTS in the Year 1776.
Quantities in Countries and Islands. No. of Ships. Tonnage. Species of
Merchandise. Brit. Bottoms Foreign Bot. Denmark and Norway. British 23 Common
Deals 668 hun. 1 qr. 763 hun. 1 qr. 2290 Battens 23 3 70 3 Foreign 42 Paling
Boards 3 1 40 1 2876 Middle Balks 6 3 26 1 Small Balks 12 2 41 1 Double Uffers
1 1 13 0 Single Uffers 10 0 22 0 Capravens -- 5 1 Small Spars 3 0 7 3 Pipe
Staves 10 0 -- Handspikes 10 2 48 3 Oars 0 2 3 1 Oak-knees for Wherries 2 2 3 0
Calf Skins in Hair -- 2 0 Axhelves 2 2 3 1 Boom Spars -- 0 2 Denmark and
Norway. Spokes for Cart Wheels -- 28 hun. 1 qr. Oak Boards -- 0 1 Oak Timber 1
load 0 ft 12 lds 15 ft Fir Timber 364 23 878 0 Middle Masts 6 104 Small Masts
87 184 Wood Trays -- 11/^^/^ Shock Wood Scoops -- 9 doz. Goats Skins in the
Hair -- 10 Bar Iron 18 t. 9 c. 1 qr. 18 tons 9 cwt. Kelp 1 19 2 Stock Fish 0 10
3 Carraway Seeds 0 4 3 Tar 51 lasts 3 bar. 26 lasts 3 bar. Small Nuts -- 14
barrels Ragstones -- 2300 France British 4 Brandy 43 tons 700 Lintseed 2694
bush. Apples 64 Prunes 45 cwt. 1 qr. Tar 4 lasts French Fland. British 1 Sail
Cloth 75 else 40 Germany British 20 Raw Dutch Linen Yarn 1417 lb. 3640 Foreign
1 Smalts 24,932 240 White Peace 252 qrs. Sail-cloth 32 else Oak Plank 201 lds 46
ft Fir Timber -- 74 loads 18 ft Beech Plank 2 35 Oak Timber 10 15 Bottles
Pyrmont Water 8 doz. Rhenish Wine 37 gall. Clap Boards 12 Barrel Boards -- 5
hun. 3 qrs. Pipe and Hogshead Staves 30 hund. 19 2 Germany Barrel Staves 22
hun. 0 qrs. 128 hun. 0 qr. Kilderkin Staves -- 17 2 Firkin Staves 30 0 10 0
Oak-knees 1 3 Great Masts 2 Horses 2 Greenland Seas British 4 Whale and Seal
Blubber 1121 243 tons 2 qrs Whale Fins 161 cwt. 3 qrs Seal Skins 538 Guernsey
British 1 French Wine 1 ton 2 qrs. 70 Holland British 12 910 Old Iron 3045 c. 2
qrs. Rough Flax 4516 2 Foreign 1 80 Madder 347 2 Clover Seed 859 1 Sach.
Saturnia 5 2 Fenugreec Seed 2 3 Broken Glass 91 0 Old Cordage 8 0 Steel Hemp 0
3 Geneva 1 ton 1 qr. Rhenish Wine 2 1 Wainscot Boards 3415 inches Lintseed 58
bush. Hempseed 13 Chestnuts 24 Ruffia Mats 100 Wood Hoops 1800 Millstones 3
Dogstones 1 last Bottles Seltzer Water 15 doz. Chest of Wood Clocks Val. 5l.
Wheat -- 109 qrs. Blue Paper 10 reams Sail-cloth 58 else Pack-thread 241 lb.
Mares 6 Jamaica British 1 Rum 15,134 gall. 160 Jersey British 2 Currants 55
cwt. 3 qrs. 110 Cider 458 gall. Wine 253 Cows 3 Poland British 2 Hogshead
Staves 9 hun. 0 qrs. 176 Barrel Staves 10 1 Common Deals 1 0 Oak Plank 165
loads 6 ft Fir Timber 11 46 Bar Iron 58 cwt. 3 qrs. Tree Nails 4530 Portugal
British 7 Port Wine 423 tons 650 Cork 2 cwt. 2 qrs. Bacon Hams 2 2 Dried Plumbs
349 lb. Onions 560 bunches Prussia British 20 Rye 2262 qrs. 4255 Barley 800
White Peace 22 Common Deals 44 hun. 3 qrs. Clap Boards 8 1 Pipe Staves 43 1
Battens 1 2 Barrel Staves 17 0 Small Spars 3 2 Oak-knees 1 0 Fir Timber 4347lds
5ft Lathwood 43 fathom Anchor Stocks 6 Great Masts 24 Middle Masts 5 Small
Masts 10 Capravens 24 Kegs Sturgeon 12 Calf Skins in Hair 4400 Rough Hemp 17
cwt. 2 qrs. Bar Iron 19 1 Tallow 22 0 Russia British 19 Bar Iron 361 t. 5 c. 2
q. 2739 Rough Hemp 575 10 2 Tow 1 11 2 Rough Flax 138 5 0 Pearl Ashes 7 13 1
Refined Tallow 1 19 0 Rope Tarr'd 0 5 3 Wainscots 1 hun. 0 qrs Clap Boards 1 0
Pipe Staves 5 0 Small Spars 1 0 Common Deals 151 1 Battens 11 0 Handspikes 1 0
Drilling 19 2 else Sail Cloth 0 2 Linen 22 2 Fir Timber 80 loads Lathwood 4
fathoms Tar 120 lasts Rye 1115 qrs. Capravens 10 Empty Mats 10,000 Spain
British 2 Wine 61 tons 2 qrs. 190 Olives 5 gall. Raisins 280 cwt. 1 qr. Sweet
Almonds 0 2 Cork 15 0 Grapes 19 jars Lemons 5000 Sweden British 10 Bar Iron 562
t. 14 cwt. 15 tons 8 cwt. 950 Tallow 4 0 Foreign 1 Common Deals 322 hun. 0 qr.
9 hun. 0 qrs. 40 Battens 6 0 Pipe Staves -- 8 1 Small Spars 0 1 Oars 0 2 Middle
Masts -- 2 Tar -- 7 lasts 9 bar. Pitch -- 0 6 Wood Tubs 10 doz.

COASTWISE 1766. Ships 4113. -- Coals 350,803 chald. -- Cinders 3716 chald. --
Lead 6250 tons.

There are upon the river Tyne, five Glass Bottle Houses, three Broad Glass
Houses, two Crown Houses, two Flint Glass Manufactories, and one Plate Glass
House.

There are between 30 and 40 working Salt Pans.

The great Crowley Iron Manufactory at Swalwell employs three Ships, about 150
tons each, throughout the year, in carrying the produce to the port of London
only, besides their great vend at other places.

BERWICK IMPORTS in the year 1776.
No. of Ships. Species of Merchandise. Quantity in British Bottoms. 49 Common
Deals 236 hund. 0 qrs. Battens 68 2 Middle Balks 29 0 Handspikes 17 0 Paling
Boards 23 0 Single Uffers 2 0 Small Balks 3 2 Firkin Staves 6 0 Fir Timber 1236
loads Oak Timber 4 Bar Iron 109 tons Rough Flax 107 cwt. Clover Seed 134
Lintseed 935 bushels Wainscot Boards 820 inches

FINIS.
ITINERARY and INDEX. ADVERTISEMENT.
WARK CASTLE Page 1 CARHAM Page 10 CORNHILL Page 11 An Account of the Battle of
Flodden Field Page 12
FORD CASTLE Page 19 A large Plate of the Castle.
PALLINSBURN Page 21 ETAL TILMOUTH Page 22 HETON TWIZEL CASTLE Page 23 NORHAM
Page 24 A small Etching of an ancient Sculpture and Inscription Page 25 A Plate
of Norham Castle Page 28
BERWICK Page 41 Heads of the ancient Border Laws, notes Page 44 Conjectures on
the Rise of Boroughs, from the Manuscripts of the late Roger Gale, Esquire notes
Page 48 Account of the Battle of Bannockburn Page 60 the Battle of Hallydown
Hill Page 69 the Entry of Margaret Queen of James the Fourth of Scotland, into
and passage through this County Page 82 Representatives in Parliament for this
Borough, notes Page 91 Original Letters of Lord Marchmont on the Union, notes
Page 102
HOLY ISLAND, anciently called Lindisfarn Page 105 A small Plate of the Castle
Page 106 A large Plate of the south-east Aspect of the Remains of the Abbey
Page 111 Succession of Bishops Page 113 A small Plate of the north Aspect of
the Remains of the Abbey Page 137
HAGGERSTON Page 152 KYLOE FENWICK AND BEAL BELFORD BAMBROUGH Page 153 EDERSTON
CASTLE OF BAMBROUGH Page 154 A large Plate of Bambrough Ancient Song of the
Laidly Worm of Spindleston Heughs, notes Page 162 An ancient Inquisition of the
Rights of Bambrough, notes Page 168
THE FARN ISLANDS Page 179 ELLINGHAM Page 185 EMBLETON Page 186 ROCK Page 187
DUNSTANBOROUGH CASTLE A small Plate of the Remains of this Castle
CRAISTER Page 192 HOWICK ALNWICK Page 193 A large Plate of A^ Castle, drawn
and given to this Work by Mr Gross. A short Account of the Percy Family Page
219 Manuscripts of Roger Gale, Esquire -- Lotter from Mr Gale to Sir John Clerk,
and the Answer thereto Page 244
HULN ABBEY Page 248 ALNWICK ABBEY Page 252 A small Plate of the Gateway Tower.
WARKWORTH Page 257 ALEMOUTH THE CASTLE OF WARKWORTH A large Plate of the
Remains of Warkworth Castle.
THE HERMITAGE near Warkworth Page 262 A small Plate of the ^^^nt of the Cells
-- of the Efigies on the Cenotaph Page 264
COQUET ISLAND Page 278 FELTON BRINKBURN PRIORY Page 280 A small Plate of the
Remains of the Abbey.
NETHER WITTON Page 283 STANTON LONG WITTON BOLHAM Page 284 Gale's Manuscripts.
-- Letter from Mr Warburton, notes.
MITFORD Page 285 A small Plate of the Remains of the Castle
THE ABBEY OF NEWMINSTER Page 289 MOLESTON Page 292 MORPETH Representatives in
Parliament for this Borough Page 293
BOTHALL Page 305 A small Plate of the Castle Page 307 Plate of the Effigies in
the Church.
SHIPWASH Page 314 CAMBOIS Page 315 ASHINGTON NEWBIGGIN CRESWELL Page 316
WIDDRINGTON CASTLE Page 317 CAUSEY PARK Page 318 LONGHORSLEY Page 319 COCKLE
PARK TOWER WHALTON Page 320 OGLE CASTLE KIRKLEY Page 321 PONTELAND WOLSINGTON
Page 323 GOSFORD BLAGDON Page 325 STANNINGTON BEDLINGTON Page 326 BEBSIDE Page
327 NEWSHAM AND SOUTH BLITHE CRAMLINGTON Page 328 BEATON DELAVAL A large Plate
of the North Front Page 329 A large Plate of the South Front Page 331 -- of the
Mausoleum Page 333 -- of Hartley Haven
FORD CASTLE described Page 334 A large Plate, a View of the Forge Page 337
EACHWICK Page 338 HARTLEY Page 339 SEGHILL TYNEMOUTH Page 341 A large Plate of
the south-west Aspect of the Remains of the Abbey -- of the north-west Aspect
Page 343
NORTH SHIELDS Page 356 WALL'S END Page 360 CARR VILLE Gale's Manuscripts. --
Letter from Christopher Hunter, Esquire M. D. to Mr. Gale. Page 361
LITTLE BENTON AND LONG BENTON Page 364 HEATON Page 365 BYKER Page 366
NEWCASTLE Gale's Manuscripts. -- Letter from Christopher Hunter, Esquire M. D. to
Mr. Gale, and Answer thereto Page 367 Representatives in Parliament for
Newcastle Page 405 Table of Mayors and Sheriffs Page 410 Recorders Page 413
JESMOND Page 430 ELSWICK Page 431 FENHAM BENWELL Page 432 HEDDON Page 439
NEWBURN Page 440 A General Review of the State of the County and its Trade Page
444 Knights of the Shire Commissioners named 12 King Henry IV. Page 450
Sheriffs Page 451

Order of the Plates.
Engraved Title Page Ford Castle to face Page 19 Lindisfarn Abbey Page 111
Bambrough Page 155 Alnwick Page 193 Warkworth Page 257 Tomb in Bothal Church
Page 313 Scaton Delaval North Front Page 329 -- South Front Page 331 Mausoleum
Page 333 Hartley Haven immediately following. The Forge at Ford Castle Page 337
Tynemouth Abbey, S. W. Aspect Page 341 -- N. W. Aspect Page 343
ANCIENT CUSTOMS Which prevail in the COUNTY of NORTHUMBERLAND, WITH
CONJECTURES THEREON.
ANCIENT CUSTOMS, etc.
MANY ancient Customs prevail in this County, the familiarity or outward
insignificance of which occasion them to pass without much attention: but as
they are the strongest traditional memorials of antiquity, I thought them worth
collecting, and present them to the Reader with some short Conjectures on their
origin, and the historical facts to which they have relation.

Mr Bryant's words are, We talk indeed of ancient times, and times of
Antiquity; but that time is most aged which has endured longest, and these are
the most ancient days in which we are ourselves conversant. We enjoy now an age
of accumulated experience, and we are to make use of the helps which have been
transmitted, to dispel the mist which has preceded. Letters have afforded the
accumulation; before their use, the dissolution of every state was the
dissipation of its science and wisdom: arts and collective knowledge were
destroyed with the empire in which they flourished, and only a few scattered
fragments and distracted ruins remained to save them from total oblivion. By
letters we possess the wisdom of all quarters of the earth; times which have
preceded their use left us chiefly traditional fragments, scattered abroad in
national customs, and provincial names and phrases.

In the course of this Collection I shall remark whatever Mr Bourne, in his
"Popular Antiquities," has noticed, with some of the illucidations and
judicious constructions given by his late Editor, the Rev. Mr John Brand.

BABBA.
The common and most tender appellation of an infant is Babba. This name Mr
Bryant, in his Analysis of ancient Mythology, says, is derived from the
exclamation made by the congregation during the ceremony of purification, by
passing infants through the fire of Molock. Fire worship was used in this
country, and in the Druidical rites such ceremony might be retained; for they
held many customs so similar to those of the Hebrews, that it strengthens the
idea greatly they were communicated by the Phoenecians, or introduced from
Germany, where the Amonians most certainly were well known. The Saxons also
introduced their customs; they were worshippers of fire, and might hold such
office of purification.

GIFTS to INFANTS.
Children when ^^^st sent abroad in the arms of the nurse to visit a neighbor,
are presented with an egg, salt, and fine bread. The egg was a sacred emblem,
and seems a gift well adapted to infancy. Mr Bryant says, An egg, containing in
it the elements of life, was thought no improper emblem of the ark, in which
were preserved the rudiments of the future world: hence in the Dionusiaca, and
in other mysteries, one part of the nocturnal ceremony consisted in the
consecration of an egg. By this, as we are informed by Porphyry, was signified
the world. It seems to have been a favorite symbol, and very ancient, and we
find it adopted among many nations. It was said by the Persians of Oromasdes,
that he formed mankind and enclosed them in an egg. Cakes and Salt were used in
religious rites by the ancients: The Jews probably adopted their appropriation
from the Egyptians; And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in
the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour, etc. Lev. ii. 4. With all
thine offerings thou shall offer salt. Ibid. 13. There was a custom in the
Romish church of making a cake in honor of the Holy Virgin's time of
childbirth, which was condemned by a canon in the Council of Trullus. Bou^^^
P^p. Antiq p. ^04, quoted Can. 80. Trul. Bal.


DOUBLING the THUMB.
Children, to avoid approaching danger, are taught to double the thumb within
the hand. This was much practiced whilst the terrors of witchcraft remained;
and even in the beginning of the present century, much of those unhappy
prejudices possessed the minds of the vulgar. It was a custom to fold the
thumbs of dead persons within the hand, to prevent the power of evil spirits
over the deceased; the thumb in that position forming the similitude of the
character in the Hebrew Alphabet, which is commonly used to denote the name of
God.

NEW YEAR's DAY.
The celebration of New Year's Day is preserved in this country as a rural
festival. Gifts are made to children, servants, and dependants, called New
Year's Gifts. Mr Bourne quotes what Stillingfleet says, That among the Saxons
of the northern nations, the feast of the New Year was observed with more than
ordinary jollity; and, from Hospinian, says, It was an ancient custom of the
Heathens, and afterward practiced by the Christians. Servants were exempt from
their labor, and partook of the feast and rural sports with their masters:
they were presented with tokens of approbation and favor. On certain
festivals, the Romans gave pieces of money to travelers and strangers who were
present at the sacrifice. On our day of festivity, mirth is excited by a rustic
masquerading and playing tricks in disguise: the hide of the ox slain for the
winter cheer, is often put on, and the person thus attired, attempts to show
the character of the devil, by every horrible device in his power. All the
winter sports seem to express a strong opinion of the ancients, that Genii of
very contrary natures prevailed on earth, that the one was constantly
concomitant to light as the other was to darkness; and this image of the devil,
which is frequently permitted to expel the inhabitants and take possession of
the house, is typical of the power of the evil genius, in the season when the
sun is longest absent from our hemisphere. This corresponds with the
lamentation used by those who held the Elusinian mysteries, and mourned for
Adonis. It is very difficult to make any probable determination to what people
we owe these customs. In the Roman Saturnalia and Sigillaria, this kind of
frolicking was practiced. Among the observations made by Mr Brand on Bourne's
XIV Chap. he remarks, that there was an ancient custom for young women to go
about with a waffail bowl, that is, "a bowl of spiced ale," on New Year's Eve,
with some sort of verses that were sung by them in going from door to door.
Waffail is derived from the Anglo Sax. (...) that is, "Be in health."

TWELFTH DAY.
The twelfth day after the day of our Savior's birth is attended with great
festivity. There are diversions used in the southern parts of England, which
have not reached this northern county. The mirth of the day here consists of
feasting and a social intercourse between neighboring families. Mr Brand makes
a happy quotation from Collier's Eccl. Hist. vol. I. p. 163, in his
observations on Bourne's Chap. XVII. In the days of King Aelfrid a law was made
with relation to the holydays, by virtue of which the 12 days after the
nativity of our Savior were made festivals. So much as these feasts have been
decried, I cannot see them in the despicable light many modern authors have
been pleased to place them. They were the occasion of gathering neighbors
together, in good humor with each other, and the means of keeping them on
terms of intimacy: friendship and benevolence were thereby increased, and good
offices multiplied: public matters at such times were discussed and amicably
determined; and those happy effects resulted which tended not only to the
advantage of the individual, but to the good of society at large. This age is
refined into insipidity: few of the old hospitable days return: sociability is
sickened into unmeaning ceremony. In ancient times the bard was brought to the
festive hall, to rehearse the Excellencies of our ancestors, to fire the breast
with emulation, to inspire noble and bounteous sentiments, and lift us, through
example, into an adoption of the character of those heroes and men of honor
from whom we were descended: then it was the genial spirit was roused, and
benevolence prevailed. The name of friendship is retained in our language, and
the real character is somewhere still found to exist; but it is chiefly in
middle life; the great and opulent in general have little experience of it:
each apparently separates himself from community, and is involved in his own
circle. The distinguishing characteristicks, which in former days purchased a
man fortune and fame, are become intrinsic trifles, with which he may amuse
himself, but purchase little patronage: the vice is contaminating, it is
creeping into the vitals of lower life, and where the insipidity will end is
beyond modern magic to divine. What would be the consequence, should adverse
ages ever bring on exigences of state? The old popular influence of the great
no longer existing! the distances between ranks of men still extending their
separation! The celebrated fable points out the politics which would prevail
with the lowest classes of men, If we are only to be regarded for servility, it
is indifferent to us to whom we are servants. There is nothing keeps this part
of the state within rule, but the fear of still worsning the condition.

BLACK MAILE PAYMENT.
This customary collection of money, corn, and cattle, was taken away in
consequence of the accession of King James I. There was a law indeed made in
the 43d year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, to restrain the Black Maile
Payment, and correct the enormities from whence it arose; but whilst the
contentions between the nations continued it had little effect. This was a levy
made within this county by the chieftains on the borders, for protections
against the depredations made by the robbers and spoil-takers, afterward
called Moss Troopers. The receivers were in league with the banditti.

HEAD PENCE PAYMENT.
This was an exaction made by the Sheriff of Northumberland, amounting to 40l.
or more, twice in seven years. It was received for an exemption from attendance
at the Sheriff's torn; and thereupon the Lords of Manors held their leet, where
the suitors, for their greater convenience, were permitted to attend and make
what in the law books is called their Suit Royal. This exaction was totally
surpressed by the Statute made in the 23d year of King Hen. VI. c. 7.

I have noticed these two obsolete customs, because not only their names, but
also some memorials of them remain on the borders, and in the mountainous parts
of the county.

CANDLEMAS DAY.
It is little noted in this county, but by name. Several religious rites were
made peculiar to it in the Romish church. In the quotation of St Gregory's
Letter, in the notes to p. 27 in the second volume of the work, a reason is
given for not abolishing the Pagan ceremonies, in countries where conversion
was taking place; but it was commanded to adapt them to christian ceremonies:
and this seems to carry with it a strong reason for the similarity there was in
many of the ceremonies of the christian church in the first ages and the Pagan
rites. Mr Brand, in his observations on Bourne's XIX chap. from Bacon's
Relics of Rome, fo. 164, makes a quotation which informs us, that the Romans,
in the service of their God Mars, and his mother Februa, made processions in
the city of Rome with lighted torches; the remains of which custom still
existing with the vulgar in the time of Pope Sergius: he commanded that it
should be converted into an holy office of the christian church, and that the
congregation on the same day made their approach to the high altar with lighted
tapers, in honor of the Holy Virgin. Those who sigh for the sanctity of the
church in such reviews of her ceremonies, must consider this was done to
conciliate the minds of those long used in such spectacles and solemn shows;
and that an austerity which should at once have abolished such acts, to which
almost every mind was prejudiced, would have greatly retarded, if not totally
prevented the progress of conversion.

St AGNES' FAST.
It is not yet pointed out when or where this had its rise. It is a fast kept
by women desirous of dreaming of their lovers, and thence to derive propitious
indications touching wedlock. It is the remains of the old superstition of
divination; but why fixed to the day of St Agnes is not to be accounted for.

VALENTINE DAY
is an anniversary day of divination by lots. It is a common saying, that birds
on this day choose their mates. It may have relation to some domestic birds,
and also rooks and pigeons. The custom now is, that the names of young people
are wrote on scrols of paper, and each draws one, confident that marriages are
made in heaven, and in full hope the lot of life will be pointed out. What
particular attention the allotted swain in former days was obliged to pay the
fair one, to whose hands his name had fallen, I have not discovered. Mr Brand,
in his observations on Bourne's XXth chap. quotes a passage in Moresin to this
purpose: That at this festival, the men used to make the women presents, as
upon another occasion the women used to do to the men; but that in Scotland on
this day presents were reciprocal. Mr Pennant speaks of this custom in
Scotland, by which young people try prognostications of their future fortunes
in the nuptial state. The first inventor of this custom must have been some
benevolent female, who studied to encourage the intercourse of the sexes; for
by such means intimacies might arise, productive of love and marriage
engagements: or otherwise the first design of those lots was, that those who
shared in the dances and diversions, might have their proper partners assigned,
without hazarding the confusion and displeasure which must necessarily arise in
the liberty of choice.

There was a religious sect of Valentinians, but I find no ceremony used by
them or tenet they embraced, which could have any relation to these customs.

SHROVE TIDE.
It is particularly observed. Shrove is derived from Shrive, confession; a
preparation enjoined in the Romish church, previous to the duties of Lent. It
was particularly prescribed, that all offenses should be mutually forgiven, and
reconciliation take place, before they entered upon the solemnities of Lent;
and this was consequently a day of mutual intercourse and amity. In several
ancient Roman Catholic families, the kitchen is opened, and every neighbor and
passenger is permitted to enter and fry a pancake, for which the necessary
provision is made ready. This seems to be derived from a custom in the
refectory of religious houses, where the table was spread on this day for all
pilgrims, travelers, and visitants. In Newcastle, Durham, and other places,
the great bell of the church is tolled, the servants have holyday, and whoever
partakes of the pancakes of the day must fry them; a circumstance which
occasions high kitchen mirth. In the keeping of the vigils of all solemn days,
the ceremony began at noon. The ringing of the great bell at noon was a signal
to clear the larder of flesh meat, from which time its use was prohibited. In
Mr Brand's Appendix to Bourne's Pop. Antiq. he says, A kind of pancake feast
preceding Lent was used in the Greek church, from whence probably we have
borrowed it. One of the chief diversions of the day is fighting of cocks.
Moresin says this was derived from the Athenians, who exhibited cock fightings
on one day in each year, an institution of Themistockley; and that those of the
Romish church derived the custom on this day from thence. The inference is
ridiculous. It was a general holyday, and this was one of the vulgar
dissipations, no otherwise peculiar to the season, than that the animal was in
good feather at this time of the year, and in condition for the greatest
exertion of powers.

ASH WEDNESDAY.
The name only remains, the peculiar customs are forgotten. Penitents expressed
their humiliation by sackcloth and ashes. Fuller in his Church Hist. p. 222,
mentions a custom Of giving ashes on Ash Wednesday, to put in remembrance every
christian man in the beginning of Lent and Penance, that he is but ashes and
earth, and thereto shall return. In the protestant church the commination or
service contains a public rehearsal of those curses which we find denounced in
the scriptures, and which, with an impious arrogance, we interlard with an
amen; (not with a petition for eversion) assuming a right of denunciation and
judgment, when humiliation, contrition, and tears would better befit the
congregation in the rehearsal of the very curses by which the most of them
probably stand condemned.

CARLING DAY.
The second Sunday preceding Easter is called Carling Sunday. The peculiar
custom is the serving up parched peace to the table. This seems to be derived
from the severities of the Romish church in the early ages, at this period in
Lent, in their abstinence and mortification using such food. This was called
Passion Sunday; and Mr Brand quotes Marshall on the Saxon Gospels, vol. I. p.
536, where it is said, Care or Carr Sunday was not unknown to the English in
his time. Mr Brand adds, It was usual to give away beans in the dole at
funerals, both with the Heathen and the people of the Romish church. They are
used as a kind of mourning dole on this day. Erasmus mentions an observation of
Pliny's, concerning Pythagoras's Interdiction of the use of Beans, "that they
contain the souls of the dead." Thence they were used in the Parentalia.
Plutarch held, that pulse was of the highest efficacy for invoking the manes.
The adoption by Christians can only be reconciled by the preceding arguments
touching Heathen rites. The modern Greeks carry in funeral processions
parboiled wheat.

PALM SUNDAY.
On this day is still retained the ancient usage of dressing windows with
ever-greens, etc. in commemoration of our Savior's entry into Jerusalem. It
was the custom of the ancient Christian church to represent, by solemn shows,
even the most tremendous occurrences in the history of our Savior -- a
procession with palms was used. In this country the buds of the saugh, which is
one of the earliest marks of vegetation the trees of the climate show, are
gathered and adopted for branches of palm. Mr Bourne says, the branch of palm
was used in the country near Jerusalem as an emblem of victory. Our adoption of
the saugh buds may arise from their being the first bloom the woods wear after
winter is subdued, and might be used also typically, from their bearing
testimony of renovation, as a sacred emblem of victory over death.

EASTER DAY
is attended with several singular customs. The people rise before the sun, in
hopes to see the great luminary ascend the horizon, dancing for joy. This has
been an innocent artifice to draw forth the vulgar to early devotion; and what
could be more powerfully typical and figurative to ignorant minds that conceive
few images of the resurrection of our Lord, than that of a glorious and
resplendent sun, rising from a gilded horizon, dispelling every gloom and
shade, and dispensing light, beauty, and joy over the face of the earth. It was
a season and a spectacle, under the immediate impressions of which, well
adapted and pathetic exhortations would take a deep root. The Druids and Saxons
both had made it a chief object of worship, and the time of sun rising the
chief season for their religious rites and adorations; of these, strong
prejudices would remain with the vulgar. Bourne says, the salutation of the
eastern church on this day was, "The Lord is risen," and the usual answer was,
"The Lord is risen indeed;" and no doubt they were peculiar to the morning.

The children have dyed and gilded eggs given them, which are called Paste
Eggs, a supposed corruption of Pasche Eggs. Eggs were held by the Egyptians as
a sacred emblem of the renovation of mankind after the deluge. The Jews adopted
it to suit the circumstances of their history, as a type of their departure
from the land of Egypt; and it was used in the Feast of the Passover as part of
the furniture of the table with the paschal lamb. The Christians have certainly
used it on this day, as retaining the elements of future life, for an emblem of
the resurrection. Mr Brand has many well chosen quotations on this subject,
among which is a prayer extracted from the ritual of Pope Paul the Vth, made
for the use of England, Ireland, and Scotland.

Bless, O Lord, we beseech thee, this thy creature of eggs, that it may become
a wholesome sustenance to thy faithful servants, eating it in thankfulness to
thee, on account of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, who with thee,
etc. etc.

He quotes from Dr Chandler's Travels in Asia Minor a passage, in which it
appears, those of the Greek church on this day presented colored eggs. In
Russia there is the like custom, which he shows in two quotations, one from the
Abbe d' Auteroche, in his Journey to Siberia, and the other from Hakluyt's
Voyage 1589. But from all the quotations no determination is drawn why the
painted Eggs were used on this day peculiarly, and especially being no part of
the day's repast. The field of conjecture is open and at large to every one. It
seems as if the Egg was thus decorated for a religious trophy after the days of
mortification and abstinence were over, and festivity had taken place; and as
an emblem of the renovation of life, certified to us by the resurrection from
the regions of death and the grave.

Mr Brand, p. 252, gives us the following note: Erasmus speaking of the
proverb, Mea est Pila, that is, I have got the ball, tells us that it signifies
I have obtained the victory, I am master of my wishes. The Romanists certainly
erected a standard on Easter Day in token of our Lord's victory; but it would
perhaps be indulging fancy too far to suppose that the Bishops and Governors of
churches, who used to condescend to play at hand ball at this time, did it in a
mystical way, and with reference to the triumphal joy of the season. Certain it
is, however, that many of their customs and superstitions are founded on still
more trivial circumstances than even this imaginary analogy.

It was an ancient custom for the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriff of Newcastle,
accompanied with great numbers of the Burgesses to go every year at the feasts
of Easter and Whitsuntide to the Forth, the little mall of the town, with the
maces, sword, and cap of maintenance carried before them. The young people of
the town still assemble there, at this season particularly, play at hand ball,
dance, etc. but are no longer countenanced in their innocent festivity by the
presence of their Governors, who no doubt in ancient times used to unbend the
brow of authority, and partake with their happy and contented people, the
puerile pleasures of the festive season.

It was also usual among the sports of the day to have foot courses, etc. the
prize being a tansey cake. It has been alleged, that the use of tansey was
adopted from the Jewish mess of bitter herbs at this season. A discussion of
this practice of the Jews would be too tedious in this place, and articles of
mortification seem not to correspond with the universal festivity of the time;
I rather conceive that the prizes were the ancient sweet bread, concerning the
use of which I shall have occasion to make some remarks in the sequel, and that
tansey was used for its flavor and salubrity only.

Mr Brand quotes Durand Lib. 6. c. 86. 9. for a very singular and unreasonable
custom, That on Easter Day wives used to beat their husbands, and on the day
following husbands their wives:" and he adds, "There is a custom still retained
at the city of Durham on these holydays, on one day the men take off the
women's shoes, which are only to be redeemed by a present, and on another day
the women take off the men's in like manner. This custom is not a peculiarity
of the city of Durham only, but extends into other parts of that county, as
well as Northumberland. As it seems to be the remains of some religious
ceremony, if peculiar to the cathedral it would probably travel with the Sea
from Lindisfarn by Chester to Durham, and its remains would be found scattered
through this passage. In Lancashire the custom of the day is to lift the
passenger from the ground: this shows of itself of what it is emblematical. But
our custom leaves us wide and indeterminate conjectures. In the cathedral of
Durham there was a custom on Good Friday for the Monks to approach the high
altar, then decorated with all the solemn emblems of that tremendous day, on
their knees, being bare footed. On Easter Day they made a solemn procession,
when all the spectators pulled off their shoes, as treading on holy ground.
King Canute approached the shrine of St. Cuthbert from Garmondsway, the
distance of five miles, with all his retinue and attendants barefooted; when
he gave great territories and donations to that church. Lel. Col. vol. I. p.
331. These are the most memorable circumstances I have been able to collect.
Preparatory to the passover, our Savior washed the feet of the Disciples;
after which he gave them this ordonance: "For I have given you an example, that
you should do as I have done to you." The Monks of Durham are said to have
washed the feet of the poor, within the cloister, in commemoration of our
Savior's act. In the ages immediately succeeding the conversion of the
Britons, an inveterate hatred and contempt was shown to all Jews, who by
shipwreck or other casualty came among them; even to a greater bitterness the
aversion was carried, than against the unconverted Heathen. The order of the
passover ceremonies, as set forth in the 12th chapter of Exodus, enjoins the
Jews to have their shoes upon their feet: perhaps in contradistinction, or in
reproach of the Jews, the shoes of passengers are pulled off.

SWEET BREAD.
I intimated in the preceding pages, an intention of remarking the Sweet Bread
used in religious rites. Small loaves of bread, peculiar in their form, being
long and sharp at both ends, are called Buns. This name takes place where old
religious ceremonies have been solemnized, derived from the consecrated sweet
bread, which was offered on high festivals. It is of the highest antiquity;
according to Mr Bryant, the offerings which people in ancient times used to
present to the Gods, were generally purchased at the entrance of the temple;
especially every species of consecrated bread, which was denominated
accordingly. One species of sacred bread which used to be offered to the Gods,
was of great antiquity, and called Boun. The Greeks who changed the Nu final
into a sigma, expressed it in the nominative (...), but in the accusative more
truly Boun, (...). Hesychius speaks of the Boun, and describes it a kind of
cake with a representation of two horns. Julius Pollux mentions it after the
same manner, a sort of cake with horns. Diogenes Laertius, speaking of the same
offering being made by Empedocles, describes the chief ingredients of which it
was composed: " He offered up one of the sacred liba, called a Boun, which was
made of fine flour and honey. It is said of Cecrops, he first offered up this
sort of sweet bread. Hence we may judge of the antiquity of the custom, from
the times to which Cecrops is referred. The prophet Jeremiah takes notice of
this kind of offering, when he is speaking of the Jewish women at Pathros in
Egypt, and of their base idolatry; in all which their husbands had encouraged
them; the women in their expostulation upon his rebuke tell him, Did we make
her cakes to worship her? etc. Jer. xliv. 18, 19. lb. vii. 18. Bryant's
Analysis, vol. I. p. 297. The sacred cakes which were offered at the Arkite
temples were styled Boun, and were presented upon every seventh day. Bryant,
vol. II. The custom of hot Cross Buns in London, on the morning of Good Friday,
seems to have relation to these ancient practices: We only retain the name and
form of the Boun; the sacred uses are no more.

HAGMANA.
The Rev. Mr Lamb, Vicar of Norham, Editor of the poem of Flodden Fight, in
his ingenious notes thereto, says, We may find in the North the traces of some
words left us by the Romans: For example; the month of of December is called
Hagmana, derived from the Greek Hagia mean, the holy moon.

ISCA.
When the Shepherds call their Dogs, it is usual with them to cry Isca, Isca;
which is evidently an abbreviation of Lycisca, the name of the Roman Shepherd
Dog. -- Multum latrante Lycisca. Virg. Ecl. 3.

HOCK-TIDE.
Hock-days THucx-daeg Dies irrisorius, a time of scorning or triumphing: a
festival of the common people held soon after Easter. The servants had liberty
of diverse sports and diversions, and in compensation for the loss of time in
their service, the masters were entitled to a gratuity. It was held in
commemoration of the day on which the Danes were massacred, A. D. 1002; and
such were the licentious enormities committed therein, the servants deeming
themselves, during this festival, under no law of subordination, that it was
prohibited by the church in the fifteenth century, under pain of
excommunication. The remains of this festival seem to be retained in our fools
day, the 1st of April, when all sorts of ridiculous tricks are practiced to
render the person you meet with a scoff and jest: it may be presumed the
persons who, from their connections and intercourse with the Danes, lamented
the horrid slaughter were thus scoffed and ridiculed; and those who were
ignorant of the event, sent on fruitless errands to their dying friends,
weltering in gore. Such was the savage barbarity of the times, and the ferocity
of our progenitors. These errands are called Sleveless Errands, which Skinner
construes Lifeless Errands.

MAY DAY.
It still retains some of its ancient sports. The young people of both sexes go
out early in the morning of the 1st day of May, to gather the flowering thorns
and the dew of the grass, which they bring home with music and acclamations;
and having dressed a poll on the town-green with garlands, dance around it. The
dew was considered as a grand cosmetick, and preserved the face from wrinkles,
blotches, and the traces of old age: the happiest gift Flora could bestow on
her votaries. It seems from these remains, that this festival was introduced by
the Romans, who observed it in honor of Flora. What particular rites
originally attended it with that people we shall not enquire: at present it is
celebrated only with mirth, innocence, and love. The Druids, who were the
priests of the God of nature, and celebrated every remarkable period in the
change of seasons, left a memorial of their religious rites on this day, very
different from those instituted in honor of the notorious divinity Flora; that
is, a Bel-tein rural sacrifice. It is to be traced in the mountainous and
uncultivated parts of Cumberland, among the Cheviots, and in many parts of
Scotland. Mr Pennant gives a particular description in his Tour in Scotland: On
the first of May, in the Highlands of Scotland, the herdsmen of every village
hold their Beltein: they cut a square trench in the ground, leaving the turf in
the middle: on that they make a fire of wood, on which they dress a large
caudle of eggs, butter, oatmeal, and milk, and bring, besides the ingredients
of the caudle, plenty of beer and whisky; for each of the company must
contribute something. The rites begin with spilling some of the caudle on the
ground, by way of libation; on that every one takes a cake of oatmeal, upon
which are raised nine square knobs, each dedicated to some particular being,
the supposed preserver of their flocks and herds, or to some particular animal,
the ^^al destroyer of them; each person then turns his face to the fire, breaks
off a knob, and flinging it over his shoulder, says, this I give to thee,
preserve thou my horses; this to thee, preserve thou my sheep, and so on. After
that they use the same ceremony to the noxious animals: this I give to thee, O
fox! spare thou my lambs: this to thee, O hooded crow! this to thee, eagle!
when the ceremony is over, they dine on the caudle, etc.

We retain something of this kind in the syllabub, prepared for the May feast,
which is made of warm milk from the cow, sweet cake, and wine; and a kind of
divination is practiced, by fishing with a ladle for a wedding ring, which is
dropped into it for the purpose of prognosticating who shall be first married.

Mr Brand, in his Observations on Bourne's XXV chap. makes several quotations
from a pamphlet, entitled, "The way to things by words, and to words by
things." He says, We gather from him that our ancestors hold an anniversary
assembly on May Day; the Column of May (whence our May Pole) was the great
standard of justice in the Ey-commons or fields of May. Here it was that
people, if they saw cause, deposed or punished their Governors, their Barons,
their Kings. The garland or crown when hung on the top of the May or Pole, was
the great signal for convening the people. This was one of the ancientest
customs, which from the remotest ages, has been by repetition from year to year
perpetuated. It was considered as the boundary day that divided the confines of
winter and summer, allusively to which, there was instituted a sportful war
between two parties; the one in defense of the continuance of winter, the other
for bringing in the summer. The youth were divided into troops, the one in
winter livery, the other in the gay habit of the spring. The mock battle was
always fought booty, the spring was sure to obtain the victory, which they
celebrated by carrying triumphally green branches with May flowers, proclaiming
and singing the song of joy, of which the burden was in these or equivalent
terms.

"We have brought the summer home."

PAROCHIAL PERAMBULATION
was a practice introduced by and adopted from the Romans, who held an annual
feast of Terminalia; they were singularly observant of the bounds of their
property, and there, as the most solemn mode of distinction, made their places
of sepulcher, and erected altars. In later ages, the companies who went on the
perambulation were attended by the parish priest, and at every boundary mark,
which was distinguished by a stone cross, a prayer was put up for a fruitful
season, and protection against the evils of pestilence and dearth. This custom
and prayer have lately been disused, since we grew afraid of appearing
religious, least we should be accused of having superstition.

MIDSUMMER.
The ceremonies of the eve and day of Midsummer were various, and worthy
attention. In all these festivals, it was the custom to keep the wake, as it
was called, or watch, 'till after midnight, and to begin the sports and
ceremonies of the day in the first hour of the morning.

The summer ^o^^tice was the grand festival and jubilee of the Druids, and all
those who retained any of the Amonian rites, of which we trace several in the
religious ceremonies of the Saxons. This day was celebrated with peculiar
magnificence and solemnity, when the adored luminary was at his greatest
altitude. It has been alleged by some, that the Elusinian rites, in
celebrating the return of Proserpine, gave part of the ceremony of this day;
and that the use of garlands is derived from the custom of the initiated in the
Elusinian mysteries, being crowned with flowers.

It is usual to raise fires on the tops of high hills and in the villages, and
sport and dance around them; this is of very remote antiquity, and the first
cause lost in the distance of time. Many reasons have been assigned in
different periods. Bourne quotes a passage of Durand to the following purport,
In ancient times the dragons, being incited to lust through the heat of the
season, did frequently as they flew through the air, spertmatize in the wells
and fountains; by this means the water became infected, and the air polluted,
so that whoever drank the waters was either tormented with a grievous
distemper, or lost his life. As soon as the physicians perceived this, they
ordered fires to be made every where about the wells and fountains, and those
things which occasioned the noisomest smell to be burnt, knowing that thereby
the dragons would be driven away: and forasmuch as this custom was observed
about the time we now celebrate St John Baptist's feast, it is therefore still
observed among some people. In this enigmatical and misterious account we
plainly trace, the fires were originally kindled for sacred rites and
sacrifice, in order to avert the horrors of pestilence, which in early ages
frequently attended the advancing heat of summer, in a country covered with
forests and swamps, whose respiration and exhalations brought on various
distempers, of which Epilepsies was one of the most general; to prevent which,
the darkness of those times had received few discoveries of medicine. In
Scotland they used to run about the mountains and higher grounds with lighted
torches, like the Sicilian women of old in scarch of Proserpine. -- The
prophetesses in Mona, at the approach of the Romans, ran about with dishevelled
hair in a frantic mode with lighted torches, performing various rites to
execrate the enemy. It was a custom not many years ago in this county, for the
villagers to run with burning firebrands round their fields, and then in a
forcible manner taking the ashes from some neighboring fire, they used to
exclaim, "We have won the flower (alias flour) of the wake." Moresin conceives
we trace the ancient Cerealia in this ceremony. It is not to be wondered, that
the Druid rites should in course of time be mixed with the Roman. Mr Borlace,
speaking of this custom in Wales, says, He takes it to be the remains of the
Druid superstition. Moresin is of opinion, the custom of leaping over the fires
is a vestige of the ordeal, and those performing these feats were showing
tokens of innocence and virtue, by being neither burnt or sullied. The act of
leaping through the flames was certainly a religious one, and was meant as a
kind of purification, and not merely a sport and display of agility. Mr Pennant
mentions another remarkable custom in Scotland, of which he was an eye witness:
they take the new baptized infant, and wave it three or four times gently over
a flame, saying thrice, "Let the fire consume thee now or never:" this seems to
be the direct act of purification in passing the fire of Molock. Like other
heathenish customs appropriated to festivals of the christian church, these are
adopted on the day of St John, or rather used on the same anniversary, and the
name of that Saint assumed to give them new sanctity. Mr Brand quotes several
passages from Gebelin's Allegories Orientales: Can one (says he) overlook here
the St John fires, kindled about midnight, on the very moment of the solstice,
by the greatest part both of ancient and modern nations? A religious ceremony,
which goes backward thus to the most remote antiquity, and which was observed
for the prosperity of States, and to dispel every kind of evil. Divinations
were also used on the vigil of this day: Men and women were accustomed to
gather together in the evening by the sea side, or in some certain houses, and
there adorn a girl, who was her parent's first begotten child, after the manner
of a bride. Then they feasted, and leaped after the manner of bacchanals, and
danced and shouted as they were wont to do on their holidays; after this they
poured into a narrow necked vessel, some of the sea water, and put also into it
certain things belonging to each of them; then, as if the devil gifted the girl
with the faculty of telling future things, they would enquire with a loud
voice, about the good or evil fortune that should attend them; upon this the
girl would take out of the vessel the first thing that came to hand, and show
it and give it to the owner, who, upon receiving it, was so foolish as to
imagine himself wiser, as to the good or evil fortune that should attend him.
Bourne, p. 226.

Another custom used on this day, is to dress out stools with a cushion of
flowers. A lair of clay is placed on the stool, and therein is stuck, with
great regularity, an arrangement of all kinds of flowers, so close as to form a
beautiful cushion: these are exhibited at the doors of houses in the villages,
and at the ends of streets and cross lanes of larger towns, where the
attendants beg money from passengers, to enable them to have an evening feast
and dancing. This custom is evidently derived from the Ludi Compitalii of the
Romans: this appellation was taken from the Compita or cross lanes, where they
were instituted and celebrated by the multitude assembled before the building
of Rome. Servius Tullius revived this festival after it had been neglected for
many years. It was the feast of the Lares or household Gods, who presided as
well over houses as streets. This mode of adorning the seat or couch of the
Lares was beautiful, and the idea of reposing them on aromatic flowers and beds
of roses was excellent. The chief port of the ceremonies and solemnities of
this feast used by the Romans, as we are told by the Poets and Historians, was
exhibiting the household Gods, crowning and adorning them with chaplets and
garlands of flowers, and offering sacrifices up and down the streets. The
British remains of the ceremony are more refined -- that of reposing them on
those delicious beds. Suetonius tells us, that Augustus ordered the Lares to be
crowned twice a year. We are not told there was any custom among the Romans, of
strangers or passengers offering gifts. Our modern usage of all these old
customs terminates in seeking to gain money for a merry night.

SHEEP-SHEARING.
The Sheep-shearing festival retains nothing singular, and is too well known to
require any animadversions.

The WAKE.
The Country Wake or Feast Day, called in some places the Hopping, is the
ancient Feast of Dedication. Vide notes, vol. II. p. 26.

MELL SUPPER.
After harvest the Heathens are said to have sacrificed to the Deity Vacina or
Vacuna, who was supposed to preside over Rest and Ease. It is now a custom on
the last day of reaping, to dress up an image of the corn, and bear it home in
triumph, which is called the Kern (properly Corn) Baby. In some places I have
seen an image apparelled in great finery, crowned with flowers, a sheaf of corn
placed under her arm, and a scycle in her hand, carried out of the village on
the morning of the conclusive reaping day, with music and much clamor of the
reapers into the field, where it stands fixed on a poll all day, and when the
reaping is done, is brought home in like manner: This they call the Harvest
Queen, and represents the Roman Ceres. The servants having performed the most
valuable part of their labor, are entertained by their masters, when all
distinction is laid aside. This feast is called the Mell-Supper, at which there
are dancing, masquing, and disguising, and all other kinds of rural mirth. The
name of this supper is derived from the rites of Ceres, when an offering of the
first fruits was made; the word Melle being a provincial word, and signifies in
this country mingled; implying that the cakes used at this festival are mingled
or made of new corn, and that it is the feast of the first mingling of flour of
the new reaped wheat. The Romans held a solemn day after harvest, dedicated to
Ceres and Ops, the accustomed victim a boar: but we cannot from any part of the
above rural feast gather the least Roman remains, save only the season and the
image of the Goddess. The rejoicing after harvest may have an origin as high in
antiquity as reaping itself: The first instance we read of is in the 4th
chapter of Genesis, ver. 3, 4.

SEMESLINS.
We have a kind of cake mixed with fruit, called Semeslins. The Romans prepared
sweet bread for their feasts held at seed time, when they invoked the Gods for
a prosperous year. In Lancashire they are called Semens. We have the old French
word still in use in heraldry, semee, descriptive of being sown or scattered.

Many Customs are retained in Winter.

ALLHALLOW MASS.
The 1st day of November seems to retain the celebration of a festival to
Pomona, when it is supposed the summer stores are opened on the approach of
winter. Divinations and consulting of omens attended all those ceremonies, in
the practice of the Heathen: Hence in the rural sacrifice of Nuts, propitious
omens are sought touching Matrimony; if the Nuts lie still and burn together,
it prognosticates a happy marriage or a hopeful love; if on the contrary they
bounce and fly asunder, the sign is impropitious. I do not doubt but the Scotch
fires kindled on this day, anciently burnt for this rural sacrifice.

MARTINMAS
has no peculiar celebration now remaining: We are told by Moresin, that the
Heathen held the festival of Bacchus at this season; and without remembering
the jolly God, the jovial service long remained in the northern counties.
Within half a century it was held as a season of great mirth and jollity.

CHRISTMAS
has still many peculiar customs: The Saltatio Armata, the Pyrrhick or Military
Dance of the Romans, is still preserved; men dressed out with ribbands perform
a Sword Dance, and gather gifts for a merry night.

Others, in the same kind of gay attire, draw about a Plough, called the Stot
Plough, and when they receive a gift, make the exclamation, Largess! but if not
requited at any house for their appearance, they draw the plough through the
pavement, and raise the ground of the front in furrows. I have seen 20 men in
the yoke of one plough.

These are perfect remains of Roman customs: Mr Brand quotes the following
passage, Aratrum inducere moris fuit Romany, cum urbem aliquam evertissent, ut
eam funditus delerent, Vocab. utriusque juris a Scot. J. C. in Verb. Aratrum.
It may have been practiced by the Romans in commemoration of the founding of
Rome, or some cities in Britain.

"Interea Aeneas urbem designat aratro."

Virgil Aeneides, lib. 5. p. 261. l. 755. Quem Cato in originibus dicat morem
fuisse condituri enim civitates, taurum in dextra, vaccam in sinistra
jungebant; et cincti ritu sabino, id est togae part capitis velati, part
succincti, tenebant stivam obliquam, ut glebae omnes intrinsecus caderent, et
ita sulco ducto loca designabant murum, aratrum suspendentes circa loca
portarum. Unde and territorium dictum est, quasi tritorium, tritum bubus et
aratro.

The Stot Plough has been conceived by some to have no other derivation, than a
mere rural triumph, the plough having ceased from its labor.

YULE CLOG.
On the eve of the Nativity, the peasants place upon the fire a large piece of
wood, called a Yule Clog; some have looked upon this as a rural sacrifice, the
beast being stalled, there is no further use for the tether clog, by which he
was prevented straying in the summer from his pasture. It has had a more
distant implication, and intended to keep up the wake, and drive away
malevolent spirits, and spirits of darkness. The Druids held a solemn festival
at this time, and fires were lighted to fill up the space between the last
night and first morning of the year, that the evil genius might not prevail.
The Elusinian mysteries were typical of the renewing year; and the howlings and
lamentations made in the hours of darkness for the loss of Adonis, were like
our solemn wake over the yule clog, which was to banish the spirits of darkness
whilst the sun was in his deepest recess. In those rites, the return of Adonis,
or the sun, was represented by the approach of a Priest with a lighted torch,
thereby dispelling the horrid darkness, in which the prevalency of the evil
genius was described by horrid noises, and all the dreadful spectacles
ingenuity could devise, to secure the superstition of the assembly. Among all
nations there has appeared a prevalent superstition touching good and evil
spirits, one superintending the hours of light, the others darkness; one the
guides of man's rectitude and virtues, the other his malevolence and vice.

On the word Yule or Gule, there have been innumerable controversies with the
learned, from whose arguments I am induced to believe it is a word derived from
the old British language, and implies a Festival; and thence that Yule Clog
expresses the festive fuel.

The Yule Baby was a sweetmeat image given to children, in commemoration of our
Savior's nativity.

The windows are dressed with evergreens, as typical of our Savior, who was
called the Branch of Righteousness, that lives for ever: also as memorials of
his promises, and our victory over death.

CHRISTMAS BOX.
Gifts to servants and mechanics, for their good services in the laboring part
of the year. The paganalia of the Romans, instituted by Servius Tullius, were
celebrated in the beginning of the year: an altar was erected in each village,
where all persons gave money. This was a mode originally devised for gaining
the number of inhabitants.

The DEAD.
Customs attending Death and Funerals are well known, and their origin of no
very distant antiquity; so that I will avoid a subject so peculiarly melancholy
and affecting, save only the Arvel Dinner.

On the decease of any person possessed of valuable effects, the friends and
neighbors of the family are invited to a dinner on the day of interment, which
is called an Arthel or Arvel Dinner. Arthel is a British word, and is
frequently more correctly written Arddelw. In Wales it is written Arddel, and
signifies, according to Dr. Davise's Dictionary, Asserere, to avouch. This
custom seems of very distant antiquity, and was a solemn festival made at the
time of publicly exposing the corpse, to exculpate the heir, and those entitled
to the possessions of the deceased, from fines and mulcts to the Lord of the
Manor, and from all accusation of having used violence; so that the persons
then convoked might avouch, that the person died fairly, and without suffering
any personal injury. The Dead were thus exhibited by ancient nations, and
perhaps the custom was introduced here by the Romans.

FINIS.

