OBSERVATIONS ON SOME OF THE PROBABLE EFFECTS OF MR. GILBERT's BILL; TO WHICH
ARE ADDED Remarks deduced from Dr. PRICE'S Account of the NATIONAL DEBT.

By the Reverend Mr. BRAND, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for J. ROBSON, and Co. NEW BOND STREET.

MDCCLXXVI.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
THE defects of our system of poor laws have lately engaged the attention of
the public; and a variety of eminent writers upon the subject have discussed
several parts of it with great ability: my object is, to add some supplemental
remarks to what they have laid down, which I think may tend to strengthen and
confirm the opinions of those who have recommended houses of industry.

The most eligible method of drawing up a general plan for the support of the
poor would possibly be, to mark off in some of the best treatises which have
been published upon the subject, such principles and practical observation as
appear most firmly founded upon political reason, or drawn from facts properly
stated; these detached materials may be reduced to their general heads, and the
vacancies in the outline easily marked in: an architect from a few vestiges and
ruined members of columns, is able with the greatest degree of certainty to
make a drawing of the building in all its original magnificence: the happiness
of a great people, is certainly worthy the same enlightened and persevering
attention, which has frequently been misapplied to restore some gothic design
of classical antiquity.

But it is by no means my intention to pursue the subject so extensively: the
only points I mean to go into are, the state of the present burden and charge
of the poors rate, the different expense of maintaining the poor in the present
mode, and in incorporated districts; and the probable amount of the advantage
of adopting Mr. Gilbert's plan, with such alterations as may be found
necessary: I shall endeavor likewise to add something to what has been said
upon the advantages of a better and more regular education for the poor, and
how far such incorporations are favorable or adverse to the spirit of the
constitution.

I shall first consider the charge of the rate, laying down first this
distinction, that by charge we are to understand the sum paid, be the value of
money what it will, by burden, the proportion of that sum to our ability to
pay it. Mr. Potter, in a very ingenious pamphlet published last year upon this
subject, states the total amount of the poor's rate at three millions, the
advance in nine years at 800,000: during that period the price of provisions
has increased in a geometrical progression, the increment of the poor rates has
at last followed the same law, ( Apendix, Note A. B.
two positions which will be demonstrated in the Appendix) the rate of the 8th
year will be 2,898,370l. and the augmentation of perpetual expense the ninth
101,630; and the value of this perpetuity, at 3 per cent. 2,903,714; the
increased charge therefore to the public, is equal to that sum added to the
funded debt at 3 per cent. This augmentation gives the annual increase of the
rate 3,506 per cent. and by the table in the Appendix, this rate of increase
appears very moderate.

Taking the surplus of the public revenue, which may in time of peace be
applied to the discharge of the debt at 900,000l. a sum it was supposed to
produce before the annual payment of 400,000 from the East India company was
withdrawn; the value of the perpetuity 2,903,714 exceeds that sum in proportion
as 3 to 1.

Hence the poor rate appears to increase the national expense three times as
fast as that surplus can diminish it, uniformly applied to the discharge of
that debt in the time of peace; supposing it to increase every year even with
the same celerity as the poor rate.

It may be worth while, in order to point out the true extent of a charge thus
increasing, to enquire what sum of money the public ought to pay down, to be
delivered from it for ever.

Divide 100 by the difference of the rate of increase, and the rate of interest
(uniformly taken at 3) the quotient will be the number of years purchase of the
original sum, which will equal the required payment. Appendix, Note D.


Case the 1st. If we suppose the rate to continue perpetually the same, or
without increase, it will be worth 28 years purchase: let the present amount be
2,500,000 only, the purchase money will be 71,250,000.

Case the 2d. Let the annual increment be 1, or about, the increase of the
price of provisions; the number of years purchase will then amount to 50, and
the sum 125 millions: very nearly equal the funded debt.

Case the 3d. The least rate of advance given in the tables, is 2,39 per cent.
and to be relieved from a charge perpetually increasing in that ratio, the
public ought to give 90,09 years purchase; or a sum exceeding 225 millions.

Case the 4th. But the increase of charge exceeds the rate of interest: if it
were barely equal, the former subtracted from the latter leaves no remainder,
and the number of years purchase becomes 100/0, or infinite.

The truth of this last conclusion may be easily proved in the following
manner; the rate at the end of the first year becomes by the supposition 103,5,
the present value of which is 100; at the end of the second year it is
increased to 107,12, the present value of which is 100: rate of the third year
110,87, the fourth 114,75, the present value of each of which is likewise 100;
so that to be discharged from the next year's rate, we must pay down a sum
equal to the present or 100l.; for the next two 200; the three first years 300,
or so many years purchase of the present value of the rate as we mean to be
discharged from: therefore to be discharged from all future expense, we must
pay down a sum equal to the present rate, multiplied by the number of years to
the end of time, or infinity.

How far the poor rate has been an increasing burden, is the next particular
which offers itself to our consideration.

As specie represents some real value in goods and commodities, the burden of
a rate must be in proportion to that real value which the specie it raises
represents; if at one time 100l. represent, or will purchase twice the real
value in goods and necessaries which it does at another, a man who pays 10l. to
a rate at the former period, has double the real value taken from him which he
would have in the latter; or the burden is double upon him: in general, the
burden is always to be estimated by the value of money and the sum conjointly,
or their product: when the value of money augments, the burden increases with
it; when it diminishes, it decreases in the same proportion.

Having the rate of increase of the charge given, to determne that of the
burden, we must endeavor to discover the annual decrement of the value of
money.

The real value of a sum of money at different periods, is proportioned to the
number of people it will maintain with the necessaries of life.

The price of wheat, and the interest of money, have been both considered as
the standard of this value: the former, being perhaps the greatest article of
necessary consumption, and much affecting the price of the rest, will have a
great effect upon it; but not one can rise or fall without influencing it in
some measure.

The rate of interest is a standard still more inadequate: this rate has
continued the same for some years last past, if particular circumstances have
not rather contributed to raise it: 100l. at the end of the year produces 3l.
10s. ten years after it produces the same sum; but will that sum at those
different periods represent or equal the same real value of the necessaries of
life? To prove 100l. of the same value at the one period as at the other, we
must make this assumption, that 3l. 10s. at the end, is equal in value, or
represents the same real value with 3l. 10s. at the beginning; the very
principle wanted to be proved.

To determine the value of money, we must find the quantity of commodities in
kind which a certain number of men consume in a year, and multiply each
separate quantity by its price in the given year, adding these together for a
total: repeat the same operation for any other year, and the two sums will be
reciprocally as the value of money at those periods: or the greater sum will
represent the value of money at the cheaper period, the less at the dearer.

But if we want to enquire into the law of increase or decrease, more of these
periods must be taken, and the hypothesis tried by the totals they exhibit.

The account of the state of the house of industry at Nacton, drawn up by order
of the House of Commons, contains all the different prices of wheat, beef,
malt, and cheese for 17 years; and the variations for every year carefully
marked: I reduced the different prices of each article in every year to a mean,
and from thence formed the four tables given in the Appendix.

This account begins with the year from Easter 1757 to 58; the average of the
first four years will give the mean price of wheat Michaelmas 59; the following
four Michaelmas 63, the succeeding five at Easter 68, and the last four
Michaelmas 72: this operation is to be repeated with the other three tables,
and we may thus obtain a correct state of the advance upon each of these
commodities for thirteen years.

To ascertain the quantities consumed in kind of each of these particulars, I
copied an account of the consumption of eight weeks, from the books of the
house of industry at Heckingham; this gives us the total consumption of 2016
persons for one week, from whence we easily deduce that of ten persons for a
year. Multiplying the quantity of every article of this result by its price in
each of the four years above mentioned, the sum of the prices of all the
articles in each year will be as the value of money that year, if those
articles had comprised all the necessaries of life.

To insert the rest, I computed from the best information I could procure, and
principally derived from the same house, the additional expense at this
present, for clothing, fireing, etc. and found it amount to 30s. a man. I then
supposed the advance upon these articles, two thirds that of the others, that I
might be sure the conclusion might be below the truth.

The result of these operations gives us the following rate of increase for the
price of provisions: Michael. 59 Michael. 63 East. 68 Michael. 72 Price of
Provisions 703..4 810..8 896..4 1018 Geometrical Progression 703 788 895..5 1018

The lower series are four terms in an interrupted geometrical progression,
where the disstance of the terms is equal the intervals of the time.

These coincide so nearly with the numbers above them, as to point out that
such a law nearly took place. Whatever the cause of this decrement of the value
of money may have been, it seems nearly uniform for the given time.

The annual decrement of the value of money during the whole period was 2,89
per cent. but in the first four years, it amounted to 3,63 per cent. The rate
of advance of the price of provision was considerably more from 59 to 63, than
from 63 to the present time; which is contrary to the general received opinion;
it appears in those four years to have been accelerated,75 annually per cent.
nearly more than its mean increase: the four years from whence the second term
is obtained, are the years 61, and those immediately following; and this
irregularity seems to form no objection to the law, but to be the effect of the
great sums of money the successes of the last war brought into the nation: a
cause which was barely beginning to operate in the first period of four years,
the average of which is therefore nearer its true level.

I have chosen to explain the principles upon which these tables are grounded
at some length, as the consequences deduced from them, upon a very important
question treated of in the Appendix, differ from what is delivered by some very
respectable writers.

From what has been here laid down, we are able to determine the ratio of
increase of the burden of the poor rate: an estate which last year paid to the
rate 100, will be by the average advance charged 103,506 for the expense of the
present; but by the rise of provisions 102,89 at the end of a year, is equal in
value to 100 at the beginning; therefore the burden of those two periods will
be in proportion of 102,89 to 103,506, or as 100 to 100,6, and the advance of
the charge is to the advance of the burden as 6 to 1 nearly.

The further observations I had to make upon this head are referred to the
Appendix; Note E.
I have there demonstrated the operations of this payment upon the price of
provisions.

The last thing remaining is to determine the probable saving to the public, by
adopting a general bill for houses of industry.

But we shall be able to give a much more certain answer to the question, by
enquiring what would probably have been the sum saved, if such a bill had taken
place at the same time Colnies and Carlton hundreds were incorporated; and
having discovered that, we shall easily determine the advantage sought.

The year ending at Easter 1753, was the middle term of the seven years, from
which their average charge was assest: I collected the rates of ten parishes
for that year and the year 74, six of them situated near the incorporated
hundred, and added to them four parishes in Norfolk: the charge in the first of
these years amounted to 806..6, etc. and in the last to 1345..5, etc. the
annual rate of advance appeared to be 2,39 per cent. Upon these grounds we find
the present value of all the payments of a district equal to the incorporated
hundreds for the last 17 years; the difference between this sum and the present
value of all the payments of the corporation, adding the balance between their
debt and stock, will give the amount of the sum saved in seventeen years past.

The annual payment of the hundreds is 1487..13, etc. which increasing in the
proportion supposed, would have become at the latter period 2506..7: from this
we obtain the probable present value of the sums which would have been expended
for maintaining the poor in the hundred, Note D.
Upon the old system 48296 Upon the new with the balance added 37053 Balance in
favor of the latter 11243 Proportion of expense nearly as 4 to 3.

To determine the value of the future advantage: suppose even the annual
increase of the expense of maintaining the poor in the old mode diminished,
this can only be true in case the price of provisions advance with no more than
the present celerity; consequently the expense of maintaining the paupers in
the house will follow the same law, Note D.
the present value of all the future payments, had there been no act of
incorporation, would be -- L. 105565 Of the incorporation 87440 Future saving
18125 Past do. 11243 Sum saved present value 29368

This amounts to 19,8 years purchase of the rate of these hundreds in 1752,
supposing an average of seven years equal the rate of the middle year.

Or 11,7 of the probable amount of the rate of 1774. And the present values of
the expense of the two different modes of supporting the poor for those
hundreds L. 153861 and 124493.

The proportion of these sums is nearly as 35 to 29, or as 5 to 41/7.

Before we proceed any further, let us apply this conclusion to Mr. Gilbert's
bill, and suppose that a third of the kingdom from local circumstances is
incapable of being incorporated, but that the remaining had been divided into
incorporated districts 17 years since; and ascertain the present value of the
sum which would in all probability have been saved by it.

The amount of the rates of of the kingdom is two millions.

Present value of the sum saved in 17 years 8,972,865 Probable future saving
14,465,280 Total advantage 23,438,145

The number of years purchase of a rate which these sums are equal to, have
been joined to the results given above; that if there should have been any
error in fixing the amount of the poors rate of the whole kingdom at three
millions, the account of the total advantage may be readily corrected.

The rate of interest in these computations has been taken 4 per cent. the rate
of advance of the charge has been taken 2,39; while the price of provisions by
the table has increased 2,89 per cent. this must be far beneath the average
increase; as the price of labor though somewhat augmented, has not increased
faster, or even equally with the price of necessaries; and the number of
paupers relieved has been generally increasing: all these circumstances
together have co-operated to lessen the account given of the value of the
charge of maintaining the poor under the present laws.

On the other hand the sum saved at Nacton has been the least of any house I
have examined; the weekly expense of a pauper exclusive of repairs, furniture,
surgeons and officers, has been at Nacton 2s. 7d. at Melton 2s. 1d. and at
Heckingham 1s. 10d. either of the two latter would have given the advantages
much more.

A method which would have brought us far nearer the truth, would have been to
have taken the mean advance of the rates exhibited in the table as the advance
of the poors rate, and compared the total expense for seventeen years upon such
a supposition, with the mean expense of a house of industry; the weekly expense
at Melton approaches nearest to such a medium.

I have declined all computation of the advantages of these foundations deduced
from the profit of Heckingham: at Midsummer next, nine years from the opening
of the house, half the original debt of 7000 will be paid off; and the rate
reduced. We cannot expect its success to be universally equaled; the care of
the directors, and the particular attention which Mr. Cooper has constantly
paid to it, have put its funds upon a very superior footing: the promoters of
these institutions must greatly regret that he has laid aside an intention he
had formed of adding a full account of the management of them, to the
dissertations upon this subject he has already given to the public.
But let us imagine the expense of the house at Nacton would have been thus
diminished in proportion of 2s. 3d. to 2s. 7d. or 27 to 31: the present value
of expense of the house for the first seventeen years would have been reduced
to 32272, and that of the future expenses to 76157.

The probable expense of the first term, if the poor had continued under the
management of the overseers, would have been 56,066; and that of the second
195,390; the comparison therefore stands as follows: Incorporation. Poor under
Overseers. Total saved. Expense to 1775 32272 56,066 Future do. 75792 195,390
108,064 251,456 143,392

The sum which should be given by any district to be free for ever from the
charge of the poor rate appears here to be upwards of sixty years purchase of
the next year's expense; the interest being taken 4 per cent. the general rate
in the country: had I taken 3, the first sum would have been diminished, but
the second increased in a far greater proportion.

But supposing the true future charges of both systems ought to be taken at a
medium from the sums stated above, and the value of the perpetuity of the
annual charges of two such equal districts, the first with a house of industry
established seventeen years since; the second with the poor continuing under
the overseers, admitting both to remain fixed at their present payments for
ever.

Continuing the interest at 4 per cent. the perpetuity of the future charge
upon the house would be 37433 l.; of the present expense of maintaining the
poor under parish officers 79378 l. and the future expense will be found by New
System. Old Do. Hyp. 1st. 75792 195,390 2d. 37433 79,378 Sum 113225 274768 Mean
56612 137384

The advantages by this corrected Hypothesis stand ultimately as follows,
Incorporation. Old System. Exence to 75 32272 56066 Future do. 56612 137384
88884 193,450

The difference then appears to be 104,566.

The probable amount of the rates of Colnies increasing every year 3,506 per
cent. would be at the end of seventeen years equal the average 1487 l.
multipied by 1,0350622; twenty-two years being past since the year when the
amount equaled the average; this difference therefore is 32,933 years purchase
of the present rate: if therefore a bill had been passed at that period to have
incorporated of the kingdom, as supposed above, the present value of the past
and future saving would at this time have been 65,866,000; or (taking interest
at 3 per cent) at its first establishment seventeen years since, 36,701,000 l.
which was the value then, of the difference of expense to the nation, between
the two modes of providing for the poor.

But the annual increase of the rates since has a little exceeded the discount
on the former sum, therefore the present value of the difference is at least
sixty-five million.

The future expense 137384 is nearly equal 54 x 2506 and therefore about
fifty-four years purchase of the present rates.

The rate of annual advance in this state per cent. 2,18 about 9/10 of the
least increase near the present period, I have been able to discover.

And the charge of the two different modes is to each other, as 88884 to
193450; or as 1 to 2 2/11 very nearly.

If we suspect a conclusion to be exaggerated which brings out the value of a
rate fifty-four years purchase, the result of the following supposition may
tend to destroy the objections we entertain against it: Admit the true value of
a rent charge to be so high as 3 per cent. and that for twenty-five years last
past, the rates of a parish have increased in the same proportion we have seen
them for a considerable period last past, and then stop forever: how many years
purchase of the first year's rate is the value of such a perpetual payment?

Here the rate of increase somewhat exceeds the rate of interest; but admitting
it to be equal, and the rates of the parish 100 l. a year: by reasoning as
before on the same case the present value of the first twenty-five years
payments at the beginning of the term will be 2500 l. or twenty-five years
purchase; the remaining perpetuity at the end of the term, will be worth the
rate of the twenty-sixth year, multiplied by 28 the number of years purchase it
is worth, if it continues without augmentation for ever: but the present value
of that rate at the beginning of the twenty-five years is equal 100 l. and the
value of the perpetuity 2850 l. or 28 years purchase of the original rate: such
a rate therefore appears to be worth 25 x 28 = 53 years purchase; the reduced
hypothesis gives it fifty-four years.

A parish which twenty-five years ago had given to redeem its poor rates, the
then present vale of all the sums it has paid since, added to the perpetuity of
the present rate, would have saved all the probable future advance upon it;
therefore 53 years purchase was less than the value of such a rate by all the
probable future advance; an hypothesis which states it at 54, must fall nearly
as far below the truth -- we see that all the reasons which might have been
then urged against its being an eligible contract, would at this instant been
refuted by the experience of the past period; and what arguments can be now
brought against it, which could not have been urged with equal or superior
probability then; they had not then to encounter and bear of the past period.

But to remove every degree of doubt about the result, I added together the
rates of all the parishes which I had taken for long periods: all of them but
one accidentally happen to give the lowest annual increase; the rate of
increase of the whole thus added was something under the general advance, being
equal to 3,4742 per cent. the rates for the term of twenty-five years were
worth at the beginning of that period 24,09, and the remainder of the
perpetuity 28,39; the whole 52,48: which deducted form 54, leaves about 1 years
purchase of the rates twenty-five years since, or about 17/26 of the value of a
rate at present, as equal to all the future advances which may happen.

That I may finish here every thing that relates to calculation, I shall add
some observations on the bills of mortality in houses of industry; on the
proportion of power to be granted to guardians and directors; and on the
probablility of these institutions being neglected in future periods.

The registers in houses of industry have usually been kept in the general
mode: But the names of the paupers who died, with their ages and distempers,
and day of admission into the house, has been generally entered into the report
book at Heckingham since March 1772: by the assistance of that entry, and such
information as the governor supplied me with concerning so recent a period, I
was able to distinguish those who died of distempers with which they were
admitted into the house, from those who died by disorders contracted after
their entry: the number of the former in this period were 70, of the latter
123; but during this term a malignant fever raged very much both in the house
and country from Christmas 73 to Midsummer 74; in periods of average health
these numbers were as 21 to 22; and therefore taking a medium between these
proportions, the corrected result comes out as 21 to 29, and the deaths 29/50
of the total exhibited by the registers: as these distinctions have not been
made in those returns to the house of commons I have seen, I thought it
necessary to insert them here, to obviate an objection which might otherwise be
very reasonably made to the mortality of the several houses.

In the time of the general illness mentioned, forty-nine died admitted ill
from the country, and an hundred and one resident in the house; this disorder,
which was of the putrid kind, was brought into the house from the country: the
state of the air seemed at that time particularly fatal to old persons, of the
latter number no less than twenty were above seventy-five; the small pox
carried off six or seven, and three were lost by inoculation; incidents which
will reduce the number nearly to its just proportion.

When we want information we are generally so happy as to discover, what would
have been the proper form to digest records, which at present are so kept as to
be of very little use; I am sensible that the scale upon which these
observations are formed, is not so extensive as it ought to be; but they are
the best grounds I could procure: I had drawn up some observations upon
registers before I knew what had been done upon that subject by Dr. Price, I
incorporated his observations afterward with my own, and have given them in the
Appendix.

It was an observation of one of the directors of this house, and confirmed by
the governor, that the children when admitted had too generally a very meagre
emaciated appearance; and that the difference between those newly entered, and
those who had been in the house some time, was very striking: in that case it
must preserve a number of useful lives to society.

The only sufficient reason for entrusting a set of men with the exercise of
any power, or the expenditure of a certain revenue, is their interest in the
application of it, or their ability or both conjointly: in considering these
particulars we shall easily determine how far the old law, which in its
operation has flung the disposition of the sums collected for the poor into the
hands of the overseers in the first instance, was political or right; we shall
be thence likewise able to form an idea, what weight their dissent to the
incorporation of a particular district ought to carry; and with what reason
they may complain of an abridgement of their powers by the late acts.

The average length of leases throughout the kingdom is difficult to ascertain;
but though we cannot assign a term of years which shall precisely equal it, we
may assume one, which we are sensible from the nature of things must greatly
exceed it: to compute the proportional interest of the landlord and tenant in
the poor rates, I have therefore supposed all the lands in the kingdom under
leases of fourteen years, and upon that supposition the interest of the owners
to that of the occupiers will be as 14 to 1: but this gives the tenant's
interest greatly above the true value; had we stated the average length of
leases at nine years, it would have fallen considerably short of half as much.

Had these two classes of men been equally raised above temptation, equally
enlightened with respect to the true political principles upon which the
extensive detail of police depends, in that case such would have been the
proportion in which authority justly would have been distributed to them: it is
true, that among the occupiers there are persons to be found respectable for
their character and information; I am not certain whether Emerson farms his own
estate: but a constant attendance upon their own affairs, and an education not
training them much to reflection, will stamp a general character upon the whole
class, which will render them improper for public duties: yet such is the order
of the the people to whom the spirit of the laws now in being commits the
expenditure of a revenue, whose present purchase appears to be equal to the
national debt: exposed to the peculation or mismanagement of every dishonest or
ignorant man to whose charge it is entrusted: experience points out what
numbers may be fairly ranged under both these heads -- an error in legislation
perhaps single in its kind.

The magistrate has by law some check upon the officer; but the instances of
possible misconduct are so numerous, that the remedy in its operation is far
from being in any degree equally extensive with the evil -- Every subsequent
check possible may be provided, but where the expenditure of a fund in the
first instance, without superior direction, is lodged in the hands of the most
improper class of people, the manner in which it will be applied will be
strongly marked with the characters of the men: a stream which takes its rise
and flows over a soil full of mineral particles will imbibe all its noxious
qualities; nor will it be greatly altered by the addition of a trifling
rivulet, which may fall into it in some part or other of its course.

But to this it may be replied, "that there will be little advantage resulting
to the public, from removing these powers out of the hands of persons who may
abuse, to place them in the hands of those who will absolutely neglect the use
of them; while the spirit which planned and formed a new institution subsists,
the attendance given by the managers is constant; but like every other kind of
enthusiasm it is strongest at its first appearance; difficulties in the
execution damp it, but the tedium of attendance wear it out entirely: the
original institutors had a kind of personal attachment to their own plan, which
engaged many others to a duty which bore the appearance of personal attention
to them; but to their successors it is only a common care in which they are
equally engaged with many; this is a second and certain source of diminution of
attendance, and what is the sum total which we obtain by the alteration of
established systems? to exchange old abuses with old names, for old abuses with
new ones.

This is an objection which has been much dwelt upon; we must measure the
effect of these causes to diminish the attendance of directors by what
experience has already pointed them out to be: the most proper instance will be
that of the oldest establishment of this kind, where they will discover
themselves most fully and clearly: and here it has happened that every one of
the causes mentioned in the objection have operated with greater force than in
any other instance which (to the best of my knowledge) can be produced: the
average numbers attending the annual meetings at Nacton from 60 to 75
inclusive, were for the first five years ten, the second 12, the third 134/5,
and in the last year 20: the book from whence I extracted this account goes
back no further than 1760.

Another branch of subject which I proposed to consider was the advantages of a
better and more regular education, which this system in a considerable degree
provides for the poor.

The elegant and fanciful Rousseau has attacked all education in general; and
made happiness to consist in every human savage, living alone in his cave,
being very dirty, wearing no clothes, and keeping his nails long enough to dig
his own pignuts; this puts him above the artificial wants contracted in
society: but a much superior philosopher of our own country has particularly
written against the education of the poor; and very clearly demonstrated that
sharpers, highwaymen, and pickpockets, were the most patriot characters: his
conclusion from this principle was very properly drawn: you must suffer your
poor to remain uneducated, otherwise they will not be quite so beneficial to
the public.

Bad principles in philosophy joined with great and useful discoveries, seem to
have the same fortune with the little qualities of great men: they have so much
false lusture flung upon them by the neighborhood they stand in, that they
almost seem to shine by their own light: it is particularly unlucky for my
present argument, that these objections against the utility of education stand
in such respectable company; that will be enough to deter me from attacking
them in detail, but not from laying down what I think may be urged on the
contrary side.

The man who writes, and the man who reads, have frequently very different
opinions of the importance of the branch of the subject under present
consideration; but the consequences which I think may be drawn from this head,
will induce me to go into it with particular attention.

Those passions whose irregular indulgencies produce the worst effects in
society, do not attain any degree of strength before the period of a common
education is passed; and the principles of sympathy and compassion implanted in
mind by nature, discover themselves there a long while previous to them: for
this reason, in the earlier stages of life, we receive and retain impressions
of virtue much easier than those of vice; on account of their nearer analogy to
that set of emotions which then reign in their full strength, while those which
afterward attain more than power enough to counterbalance them, have not yet
arrived at force or maturity. -- Impressions of this kind early made on the
mind, are long retained; and being frequently repeated, by virtue of that
repetition become so deeply and habitually infixed, as to obtain the same force
and permanent efficacy with those impressions originally stamped there by
nature: in this manner a few first principles early inculcated, and frequently
repeated, win their way into the heart, and maturer years fortify by
reflection, what habit before had rendered almost a second nature.

We cannot long personate any character but that some part of it will attach
itself to us and become our own; that warmth with which we endeavor to render
the deception complete, carries us beyond the mark designed, and converts
appearance into reality: the constant action of an internal principle produces
the external appearance of it; and by a kind of reflex operation, the assuming
the external appearance, constantly fortifies or even gives birth to the
internal principle: we have frequently seen a bare external show of religion
improve into genuine piety; while a mock defense of the desolate maxims of the
morales lubriques, or an air of libertinism worn in the gaiety of some unhappy
hour, has fixed a bias on the mind which has not with ease been shaken off:
those who have attacked the utility of all institutions for the education of
the children of the poor, have owned that they produce an external appearance
of decorum, industry, and assiduity, the tendency of these external appearances
to strike deeper root, and improve into reality, converts this concession into
a strong argument in favor of such institutions.

To live agreeably in any society, our general conduct must be such as not to
draw upon ourselves any particular degree of disesteem from it: few people I
believe were ever so absurd as to go for pleasure, or even to propose tolerable
convenience to themselves, in a road where there is an incessant multitude
continually thronging the opposite way: elbowed on one side, pushed on another,
it is hard to struggle against popular opinion: there are not many practical
principles whose operations by an inspection into the actions of mankind at
large we can discover to be so extensive, and in their effects so infallible: a
kind of external force operating upon us either prevents us from deviating from
that train of action public opinion has marked out for us, or the pain we
receive from every excentricity quickly recals us to it: if we should admit
that the efficacy of that education I am recommending extends no further than
correcting our opinions, without correcting our principles, the oblique effect
of such reformation of our sentiment must be well worth securing, and be
productive of the most advantageous consequences to the manners and morals of
society.

Let us endeavor to trace its effects from the observation I had before laid
down: a man who by a better education is improved only in his judgment of
virtue and vice, when the merits of an individual with whom he is unconnected
by relation, prejudice or favor, comes to be discoursed of, will heartily
pronounce of them according to those improved sentiments he has imbibed; far
the greater part of society stand in this very identical relation to every
individual of which it is composed; hence the public at large will appreciate
the merits of any action the better, the more generally those principales by
which it ought to be judged are diffused; that general censure on every
deviation becomes more precise, more enlightened, and more certainly passed:
the train of action marked out by public opinion being rendered more agreeable
to the laws of reason and virtue, becomes more agreeable to the public
interest, and in the path thus marked out for them, the generality of mankind
will always walk. But whatever lights the superior part of mankind may thus
enjoy, if they do not reach the class below, they will certainly fail of
producing this effect among them. If a man do not run counter to the sentiments
of that class of life in which his principal connections lay, to violate the
ideas of right or wrong entertained by those much above, or much below, can
little affect him; in this respect he may be said to live in a different
society; and from hence arises the necessity, that these grounds of judgment
should be equally diffused in every rank of life.

Nor does it form a reasonable objection to such an education, that its effects
are by no means infallible: that nature and passion will frequently triumph
over such slight obstacles as habit and education oppose to them; that their
efficacy is always found least when the most urgent necessity calls for their
support: there are some men whose violent appetites transport them with such
excess, that no education can infuse a proper counterpoise to them; other whose
passions balanced in the exactest moral equilibrium, are so harmonized as to
preclude the necessity of every degree of instruction; with the former it must
be inefficatious, with the latter superfluous. But in the scale of human
dispositions there are many intermediate degrees between these two extreme
limits, near which we find them very thinly scattered; and almost every
character occupies a space much nearer the middle point than is commonly
assigned; consequently the constant operation of habit and education (though
their power were much less than experience shows it to be) may determine on
which side they shall be found; and it would be absurd to reject any design
generally useful, because its benefit could not be extended to every uncommon
case an inventive imagination can propose. -- Education operates on the mind
with a gentle and secret influence: yet this unseen bias, though not
discoverable perhaps in one or two particular instances, will be clearly
discerned in a series of many actions, and form the predominant character of
them. It is like a slight bias given to a die; which in a large number of casts
will not fail to demonstrate itself in a degree proportioned to its strength,
with such a regulated certainty that we are able almost infallibly before hand
to determine its precise effect, though from some assignable causes, it may not
be indicated in a single experiment.

Though the general institution of houses of industry will not provide for the
education of all the children of the poor, yet the good effect which would
result from a general provision will be answered in proportion to the extent of
the partial provision proposed.

The reasoning above laid down seems in some degree confirmed by an effect
already experienced: it was an observation of the governor of one of those
houses I have visited, that the children born in the house or admitted very
young, were the most orderly and industrious: those whose relations or parents
came into the house with them, being abetted and encouraged by their friends,
were extremely irregular and idle; and that this difference in their behavior
was very perceptible. A remark which clearly points out two facts very
important to the present subject, that the training the children of the poor
receive in their cottages is of the worst kind, and that the education and
control of a house of industry provides an adequate remedy to it.

But these institutions have been attacked upon another ground: it has been
alleged that a pauper is deprived of his civil liberty by being shut up in one
of these magnificent prisons, and put under the control of a governor: nor
does the inconsistency end here, every law should have a certain analogy to the
principle upon which the government of a state is founded: where it is
inconsistent with it, it clashes with and tends to weaken that principle if it
be only local; if general, it saps its very foundation: this maxim is the
fundamental ground of the true spirit of law in every country: the principle of
this government is civil liberty, and can that principle remain unimpaired,
when a law is made, which actually reduces a great number, and subjects half a
people to a probability of personal confinement?

Before we admit this reasoning (which I think I have proposed in its full
force) it will be necessary to see how low down the idea of civil liberty can
extend in the freest government; and in what manner a disciple of Lock, the
most enlightened and zealous advocate of freedom, would take it up.

Every man, he would reply, when he enters into society, gives up a certain
proportion of his natural liberty to the magistrate, in return for the
protection he receives from him; and the remainder, after such a surrender, is
called his civil liberty. If beside protection he want maintenance, and have no
property to procure it, he then becomes a servant to some individual; which
Lock on civil government, B. II. c. 7.
commonly puts him into the family of his master, and under the ordinary
discipline thereof; and gives his master a temporary power over him, which
extends to whatever is contained in the contract and no further -- that master
and servant are names as old as history, that is, as the history of civilized
society and human happiness. If the state or a district which provides
maintenance for those who have no property to procure it, do not acquire the
same rights over the persons maintained, it must be from some difference in the
circumstances of the case. A servant goes into the family of his master and the
ordinary discipline thereof -- by an express contract into which he is obliged
to enter by the impossibility of subsisting without it; from which he cannot be
disengaged until the end of his contract, if he be able to support himself in a
manner he likes better: the service he undertakes to do in return for
maintenance and wages generally overpaying considerably the expense to his
master. -- A pauper enters into a house of industry provided by the district,
and the discipline thereof defined by written laws -- by a tacit contract into
which he is obliged to enter by the impossibility of subsisting without it --
from which he is of course discharged if he be able to support himself in a
manner he likes better -- and his service in return for maintenance and
gratuities is generally much beneath the expense to the district. The
differences then appear to be these, the servant is subject to the ordinary
discipline of his master's house, which in its nature must be somewhat
discretionary -- the pauper in a house of industry to a discipline defined by
written laws -- the servant is not disengaged from his master until the end of
his contract, although he be able to support himself in a manner he likes
better -- in that case the pauper is of course discharged -- the last
circumstance in which these states are contradistinguished, appears to be that
the services of the former are beneficial to the individual, those of the
latter do not nearly repay the expenses of the district which maintains him --
What rights can the pauper retain in the latter case, where upon the whole he
is a burden upon the public, which the servant has not a tittle to in the
former, where upon the whole his labors are beneficial to the individual would
be difficult to discover: the only reason which can make against a district
having this power is, that it reduces the poor to a worse situation than the
present, without being attended with any considerable benefit to society: the
error of the former part of this reasoning has been very ably refuted by an Mr.
Potter's observations, p. 25, 31.
impartial state of their situations under both these systems, which the
enquiries I have made upon this subject enable me to pronounce not exaggerated:
that of the latter I flatter myself to have demonstrated in the former part of
this essay.

After all, is it certain that the liberty remaining to the poor, considered as
an aggregate body, is at all abridged by these institutions? or that it does
not gain in one respect more than it loses in another? A pauper at present
cannot remove from the place of his settlement without a certificate, which the
officers may refuse to grant; the general administration of this law is nearly
as rigorous as the spirit of it: in districts under the latter acts of
incorporation, a certificate must be granted for the pauper to remove to any
place within them: the liberty of residence, by the old law circumscribed to a
single parish, is by the new one extended to large district; all the poor are
benefited by this enlargement, while but a small part of them are put under the
restraint complained of: balance these circumstances, and we shall be induced
to think, that the poor enjoy upon the whole a greater proportion of civil
liberty under the new than old law.

We may further observe, that this new system in its consequences is highly
favorable to every improvement in legislation, and the spirit of that civil
liberty to which it is held out as being so subversive: the happiness and
freedom of every state depend ultimately upon the laws by which it is governed
-- If we enquire what is the least possible restraint of law in a state? the
answer will be, it ought to be such as added to the restrant which the manners
of a people oppose to those irregularities which destroy the peace of society,
forms a sufficient counterpoize to those passions which would betray us into
them, for if it be less it is inadequate, if more unnecessary: and every
unnecessary restraint is a degree of despotism. An institution which improves
the manners of society, makes way therefore for a more moderate and improved
system of legislation: agreeably to these observations it has been found, that
those refinements in civil policy which take place in polite ages and nations,
would be of no use when endeavored to be put in practice in a hoard of
barbarians, on account of their savage ferocity of manners: as these manners
have gradually improved, laws ( Are the laws you have given the Athenians the
best systems possible? The best, replies Solon, they are capable of receiving.
An answer which every legislator ought thoroughly to understand. Montesquieu,
Esp. de loix, L. 14. c. 21.
which to be efficacious must necessarily bear a relation to them) have refined
likewise, and societies grown powerful and happy: it is thus that improvements
in manners generally diffused throughout a state, have always preceded and
served for the basis of improvements in civil policy. But these advanced
virtues must be disseminated through the greater part of society before those
successive amendments in legislation can be introduced; and here we discover in
a striking light the further utility of those institutions which tend so
eminently to reform the morals and manners of the inferior members of the
state, of which that majority is composed: every advancement toward a more
perfect system of laws, in its turn promotes the virtue of society: these
reciprocal improvements are in this manner multiplied to a degree of infinity,
like the images of an object placed between two opposite reflectors.

When we survey the manners of mankind in this state of continual and gradual
improvement, the prospect so much brightens upon us, that we are led to
imagine, that those excellent forms of government and regulations of society,
which have subsisted only in the minds of a few abstracted philosophers, will
some ages hence be actually realized. If one view the gradual advances which
have taken place in the science of legislation, we shall discover, that they
have always had a tendency to this, as that ultimate point to which nature
originally destined human society to attain and rest in, and which alone is
worthy that noble appellation, the State of Nature. I am not now to be told
that this is looked upon rather as a matter of curious speculation, the
ingenious amusement of a few men of refined imagination, than as a thing which
ever can exist: the negative of such a question ought always to be maintained,
with the same diffidence and reserve with which the affirmative is advanced:
there are certainly some institutions which now exist, and are celebrated as
masterpieces of policy, which the most penetrating politicians once censured,
as plausible in idea, but what would be found in the execution, chimerical and
impracticable: I venture to assign as an instance of this, the noble edifice of
the constitution of England; planned by the wisdom, founded by the labors,
cemented by the blood of a long illustrious line of legislators, patriots, and
heroes. That philosophical historian Tacitus has told us, Nam cunctas nationes
et urbes populus, aut primores, aut singuli regunt: delecta ex his et
constituta reipublicae forma, laudari facilius quam evenire, vel si evenit haud
diuturna esse potest. Tac. Ann. Lib. IV. c. 33.
That in every nation the government is in the hands of the people, the
nobility, or a monarch: a constitution selected and compounded of these three
rather recommends itself as specious in idea than practicable, and if put in
execution, could never exist for any time. Yet that constitution was then
forming in the woods of Germany: and De moribus Germanorum.
Tacitus himself has transmitted to us the original outline of its foundation.

APPENDIX.
ARTICLE I.
On the Burden of the Public Debt.
A Writer of the first abilities, Dr. Price, has in a late publication
represented the burden of the national debt to be so much increased, as to
threaten the subversion of public credit: as the data I have collected to point
out to what degree the burden of the poor rate is augmented, and the
principles laid down to determine it, appeared to me during my enquiries upon
this latter subject to apply equally to the former, I shall endeavor to
discover upon these grounds what has been the increase of the public burden
since the commencement of the last war, what operation it has had upon the
price of provision, and the probable period in which we may expect to be able
to discharge it.

There cannot be a subject on which an error on either side can be attended
with worse consequences; an opinion of the near danger of public bankruptcy
produces almost all the evils which could come upon us were the danger real: it
annihilates public credit, it tempts the attacks of our enemies, to which our
ill grounded fears make us oppose a very ineffectual resistance; it destroys
that public vigor, and persevering spirit of private enterprise, which form
the best treasure and happiness of a state, and even where they do not find
ability create it. -- But the danger is equal on the opposite side: When a
nation has but a few last means of safety left, if they be squandered away by a
confidence in resources which do not exist, it renders certain and precipitates
a ruin which wiser measures might have avoided.

I am sensible of the difficulty and extent of the subject; which is to be
enquired into upon the principles of a science which I never pursued to any
great length, and which I have some years entirely laid aside; and believe I
should have suppressed any observations which might have occurred to me upon
it, if the enlightened attention of the public which some late writers of great
merit have called out, had not rendered it almost impossible for any error to
pass into a general opinion.

The burden of a tax, or the total taxes of a country, must be in proportion
to that part of the subsistence of the people which it takes away: if a tax
took away 1/10 part of the subsistence of a people twenty years since, and an
equal portion at this present time, its burden is precisely equal: if it take
away more it increases, if less it diminishes: Money represents some real value
in goods and commodities, and if a tax at two different periods take away the
representative of 1/10 of our subsistence, the buthen of that tax upon a people
at those different times is equal.

In this calculation and those which follow I take the sum of our annual
charges and my data in general from Dr. Price: the amount of the taxes in 55
was 5,097,617, exclusive of the land tax at two shillings in the pound 866,666;
and the total payment 5,964,283: from which the difference of the burden in
that year, and the year 74, when the total amount of the taxes was ten million,
is easily derived: we are first to investigate what sum of money in 74 was of
equal value with the sum of the taxes in 55; this term comprehends nineteen
years, admit the value of money to have decreased at the rate of 2,16 per cent.
annually, for the whole term: the real value then of 5,964,283 in 55, was equal
to 5,964283 x 1,021619 or 8,963,800, in 74: or these sums at those periods were
equal burdens upon the people.

The taxes in 1774 amounted to ten millions; the proportion of the public
burdens in 55 and 74 was as 89638 to 100,000; or as 1 to 1, 11: but the result
would have been as 1 to 1, 67, if we had confounded the charge and the burden
as the same thing; a mode of proceeding which gives the advance of the latter
six times too great: for this reason the conclusions of Dr. Price, and those
writers who never lay down that distinction when they treat of increasing
burdens, and the measure of their effect upon the national credit, must be
erroneous.

The annual decrement of the value of money upon which this calculation and
some which follow are founded, is I think assigned with moderation: the article
in the table from which I deduced it which advanced with the greatest celerity
was corn: yet it seemed uniform through all the period observed, which points
out a permanent cause. Many might be easily instanced, that luxury introduced
by the fortunes made in the last war, over and above the immediate consequence
of an increase of wealth; a change of the manner of life in the farmers who
raise these commodities; who have in their own consumption substituted more
expensive articles, instead of the cheaper and simpler which formerly supplied
them: and the fortunes made by many in a short time, which have excited the
avidity of almost all to grow rich in haste: these if entered into at length
would be found best to correspond to the effects observed. If the former years
of the period (for which the register of prices I have used was kept) were
rather more plentiful than the latter, the exportation permitted then tended on
the other hand to raise those prices, and the restraint in the latter to
diminish them: and during those years of greater plenty the advance was found
most rapid: but that advance could not be owing to exportation only, or the
same cause at any other period would have produced the same effect: nor would
any thing but a deficiency in the productions of the earth increasing every
year, produce it, which can with no probability be supposed: it was out of the
power of an uniform deficiency to have caused it: the price must have come to
its utmost height in a short time, and there remained fixed indeed, but not
progressive. -- But that the annual decrement of the value of money might be
suspected of no exaggeration, I have supposed the value of corn to have risen
only half the sum the Nacton table points out, and from thence deduced the rate
of decrease 2,16 per cent. annually.

If we had taken the fall of money 2,89 as exhibited in the table, the burden
of the taxes would have appeared diminished 1/40, or 245,610 l. yearly: that of
the peace establishment 1/13, and that of the debt increased 1/10

The public annual charges are compounded of the interest of the debt added to
the other current expenses, which may deserve to be considered separately. The
debt at the beginning of of the last war was seventy-two millions, and
supposing the interest paid the public creditors equal in both times, such a
burden was equal to 108,2^0,000 at the end of 74. The public debt then
amounted to 137 millions, and the proportion of the national burdens in those
years was as 108 to 137, or as 1 to 1,266. To suppose the burden and actual
sum the same, would give this rate of increase as 1 to 1,903: or the difference
of burden nearly 3,4 times too much.

If we deduct the interest of the debt from 5,964,283 l. the total taxes of 55,
the remainder will be the peace establishment together with the sums applied to
the discharge of the debt: the interest amounts to 2,565,000 l. admitting it to
be proportional to that of the present debt; the difference applied to the
purposes mentioned above amount to 3,399,283 l. which equalled in value
5,108,900 in 74: the remainder of the public revenue in 74 applied to these
purposes after the discharge of the interest of the funded debt was 5,119,320,
exceeding the former sum 1/500 which gives the addition to the burden. During
the last peace we have annually paid off 916,666 l. of the debt, during the
former 750,000, the difference is 166,666 l.

The expense of the peace establishment has been loudly objected to: it appears
however from the last consideration to have been a decreasing burden, though a
much more considerable force has been kept up by sea and land than before the
commencement of the last war.

The debt in 1715 was fifty-five millions, and nearly the same it is to be
supposed at the peace of Utrecht. The national interest then was six per cent.
the present debt 137, its interest 3; and admitting both these sums to be
redeemable funded debts, the interest on each will be 3,300,000 l. and
4,795,000 l. if we calculate the value of money for 1715 from an average of ten
years of which that is the middle term, we shall find a revenue of 3,300,000 at
that period, equal in value to 4,699,000 in 1774. Our burden therefore in
those forty-nine years is augmented barely 1/50; and we may in reasoning upon
this subject suppose them perfectly equal.

It seems to follow from this conclusion, that the total of all our national
exertions since the peace of Utrecht, have been no more than equal to our
abilities; because our burdens have not been increased.

That there is no more reason to apprehend a national bankruptcy now, than
there was at that period; and the fears which were then entertained, have been
since refuted by experience.

It has been observed of late years that some of our funds have become more
productive, the advantages resulting to the nation from such a circumstance
deserve a little attention.

The proportion of the present value of the perpetuity of an increasing to a
fixed fund, is as the rate of interest, to the difference between that and the
advance -- That of a decreasing fund, as the interest to the sum of the
interest and rate of advance -- And that of an increasing to a decreasing fund,
as that sum to the difference mentioned above. An example will make this
sufficiently clear -- Let there be three funds each of 100,000, the first
increasing 1 per cent. annually, the second fixed, the third decreasing at the
same rate the first increases; let 3 be the rate of interest, the value of the
increasing fund will be to that which remains fixed as 3 the rate of interest
to 2 the difference of the advance and interest, or as 7 to 4: the real value
of the first is five millions, the second 2,857,142, and the difference
2,142,858 -- The value of the decreasing to the fixed fund will be 3 to 5, or 7
to 10, and the perpetuity of the third fund will be 2,000,000, the loss
857,142; and the difference between the increasing and decreasing fund 3+1, to
3-1, as 5 to 2.

Therefore the loss upon five funds perpetually decreasing at the rate of 1 per
cent is only equal to the gain upon two increasing funds.

And let there be seven parishes assest at an equal sum to the poors rate, let
the charges of five annually decrease at 1 per cent. and the remaining two
increase at the same rate; the decrease of the former will be balanced by the
augmentation of the latter.

After having said so much on the relative measures of burdens, the next
subject which naturally offers itself to our consideration is its absolute
measure, or what every man pays in the pound in proportion to his consumption
of commodities.

There are no data I believe to determine this question exactly, the utmost we
can do is by a probable conjecture to approach near the truth.

A land tax of 4s. in the pound according to the assessments, was some years
ago estimated to raise no more than 1s. 6d. of the rack rent: the rent of the
kingdom will thus appear to amount to 23 millions; the product taken as three
times the rent 69 millions; admit the additional value of our manufactures 2/7
of our whole production, the value of our manufactures will thus come out
27,600,000; and supposing consumed at home, that consumption amounts to
18,400,000l. and our exports to 9,200,000. For which we import foreign
commodities of which the value to the consumer will be 10,120,000, reckoning 10
per cent. only for freight and mercantile profit; I have here supposed no
balance of trade in our favor: our annual consumption therefore appears to be
97,520,000 l. add 10 millions the sum of the taxes, and the total expense of
the kingdom is 10,752,000 a year, and the absolute measure of the burden ^, or
^ of our total expense; something less than 1..10 in the pound. Mr. Massy in
1761 calculated the taxes paid by the farmer in proportion to his consumption
at 1s. 10d. in the pound; upon what ground he formed his conclusion I do not
know.

The interest of the debt being nearly half the taxes its burden will be 11 in
the pound. Mr. Hanway has endeavored to compute the annual consumption of the
kingdom upon different principles; he begins his account with a supposition
which can no ways be admitted, that the ordinary rent is twenty times the value
of a land tax at one shilling in the pound, this evidently gives the result far
too little.

That the land annually produces on a medium four rents, I have supposed but
three.

That the other articles to be added are half the produce, exceeding the
proportion assumed here as 5 to 4.

If he had supposed the rents to bear the common estimated proportion to the
land tax, the consumption of the kingdom would have come out 138 millions
annually; the total expense of taxes and consumption 148; the burden 1/15, or
more nearly 1s. 5d. in the pound.

Of the effect of public burdens on the price of provisions.
Supposing the unreduced advance of prices drawn from the tables true, it
appears that the price of provisions and the money levied in taxes, have since
the beginning of the last war advanced almost in equal degrees; it may be
proper therefore to examine upon this supposition, whether the increase of the
public expenses have not raised the prices of provision, and thus created an
apparent ability to support them, at the expense of a much heavier evil.

Let us suppose the quantity of money, of provision, and the number of people
in a state to remain the same for an indefinite term of years; the price of
necessaries will remain the same -- Imagine now by a deficiency of the
productions of the earth, or any other cause, the quantity of provision in one
single year is reduced in a certain proportion, as for instance 1/39; it is
evident the price of provisions will rise that year in some similar proportion,
not perhaps precisely equal, suppose it 5 per cent. the next year upon the
return of the old quantity they will fall again nearly to their original rate,
which they will after a certain period acquire: if this period extend to five
years (for the term is of no importance) and the decrease of price every year
be equal, or that the addition to the first price shall be in the 1st year 5,
the 2d 4, the 3d 3, the 4th 2, the 5th 1, the 6th 0, or return to its old level
-- let the quantity of provisions to be diminished again a second year, the
effect of the diminution of the first year will have left an advance of four
upon the price, the present year increases this with an additional advance of
five, so that the total advance of the second year will be nine; in like manner
for the third year, the advance from the deficiency of the first will be three,
the second four, the total seven, and generally in the

Advance from the deficiency in year the
1st 2 3 4 5 6 7 Year. 1 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 2 5 4 3 2 1 0 3 5 4 3 2 1 4 5 4 3 2 5 5
4 3 6 5 4 7 5 5 9 12 14 15 15 15

If we suppose these decrements continual proportionals instead of equal
quantities, the numbers and sums will be indexes of powers, the result the
same, and the form of demonstration: but the arithmetical progression will be
more universally understood.
Here we see that the price of provision, by withdrawing every year 1/30 of the
whole quantity, increases continually to the fifth year; but in the sixth and
seventh year, and ever after, no further increase is made; the effect is in
that year come to a maximum.

And let the price of necessaries increase during this period from any other
cause acting in conjunction with this; as for instance the augmentation of the
quantity of money, in the same number of years the effect of the annual
diminution of provision will be at its greatest height, and at all subsequent
periods, the rate of increase of price will go on in the same proportion as if
it had been effected by the quantity of money alone.

If instead of commodities in kind their representative specie had been
substituted, its effect would have been the same, if the sums taken had at the
different times assigned, represented the same real value: for no reason can be
assigned why taking away the representative should produce a greater effect
than taking away the real value represented by it.

When the proportion of necessaries thus taken or specie representing them
uniformly increases, it continually tends to increase the price of provision
which then has no maximum. The increase of the burden of the poor rate has
been 1,00616 for nine years last past; its efficacy to raise the price of
provision has possibly been to that of all the other causes operating with it
as 616 to 2,89, about of the whole.

When the burden decreases the prices of provision (if no other causes
operate) decrease with it. If we admit the decrement of the value of money
which the table gives to be true, the burden of our annual taxes since the
commencement of the last war has decreased 1/40; therefore a fortiori they have
not been the cause of any decrement in the value of money.

If we reason from the reduced hypothesis which gives the value of money 2,16,
our burden being now no more than it was at the death of Queen Anne, the
present difference of the price of provision compared with that of three or
four years after, cannot be ascribed to it: for if it had continued the same
during the whole interval, it would have produced its utmost effect in three or
four years after the peace of Utrecht; and the subsequent advances must have
been attributed to some other cause.

There is a striking difference between the operation of a debt with its annual
interest levied upon the public, and a tax of the same amount applied to the
current service: for the two annual payments of the public simply as such would
produce the same effect upon the price of provision: but if there had been no
fund to vest the capital of the debt in, a great part of the money now
composing it would have been laid out in the purchase of lands; this would have
increased their price; to reimburse himself this extraordinary expense, the new
purchaser raises his rents, and this raises the price of provision. And the
interest paid to foreigners again diminishes its efficacy, being a diminution
of the quantity of money in the kingdom.

But admitting the decrement of the value of money assigned too high, there is
another argument which I think puts this beyond a doubt: a nation which funds
instead of defraying the current expenses of war and peace by immediate
taxation, at first is eased of paying the principal, by only taking the burden
of the interest: as the debt increases this interest increases until it becomes
as much as would have equalled the average expense of war and peace if there
had been no debt; its last stage is where the interest exceeds that average.
During the first two periods the sum of all its taxes will have been much less
than in the former system, and therefore they will have produced an effect
considerably less in raising the price of provisions; we are now nearly in the
second of these periods as I shall have presently occasion to show, and
therefore provisions have hitherto been cheaper on account of our funding.

Yet I am by no means inclined to extenuate the consequences of a system, which
if not receded from in time, may still for a certain period continue to lighten
our own burdens by the ruin of posterity: but a general dispondence from views
which I conceive present our situation in too dark a point of light, may
discourage and even disable us from making use of those resources which remain
to us. Though the debt appears not to have been an increasing burden, funding
may very well be conceived to be an ineligible mode of defraying the public
expense. Let us therefore enquire into the present value of the difference of
our system of funding, and that of raising such taxes uniformly since the
beginning of last war, as would have completely discharged the sums it was then
necessary to borrow, at the end of that term of years for which we might
reasonably expect the continuance of peace. This sum added to our peace
establishment will give us the amount of our taxes in case we had no debt, and
enable us to determine the loss of the kingdom by funding according to the
present state of that debt.

The proportion of the number of years of war to those of peace since the
commencement of the present century, has been as 7 to 12: the operations of the
last war begun in the spring of 1756, and included seven years; and the
probable expectation of peace was twelve years. The debt contracted in the war
was 76 millions, and supposing the annual grants all equal, the extraordinary
expense amounted to 10,857,142l. per annum, an extraordinary revenue of
5,011,400, would have discharged that debt with its interest by the time
another war would probably have commenced: we must add to this the peace
establishment for the army, navy, civil list, and the annual debt upon these
articles amounting to 4,850,000l. and the whole revenue annually raised upon
the public would thus amount to 9,861,400l. which falls short of the present
sum raised by the taxes 139,600 l. about 1/70.

During the peace the debt has been diminished to 65 millions, but to have
discharged that sum in the same term of time, 4,286,066l. a year must have been
levied in additional taxes, or in the whole 14,016,746l.: in both these cases
we should have begun the subsequent war with the same debt upon us we did the
former, but the different sums of money to be raised upon the people to bring
us into the same situation would have been as 98 to 140, or as 7 to 10: which I
think to be the difference of the real value to the kingdom in our present
circumstances, between the system of funding and that described above.

If the debt were annihilated it does not seem that we should be able to reduce
our taxes without the probability of being obliged to create a new one; because
the interest of the debt is very nearly equal the sum we should annually pay to
prevent coming into that circumstance.

But notwithstanding, this points out the necessity of pursuing for a certain
term of years the most efficacious methods of reducing the public debt: I
therefore proceed to enquire into the means Dr. Price has recommended to effect
this.

He has supposed we may be able at least to obtain of America a fund of 300,000
a year.

The colonies are said to double their numbers in 25 years, but let us suppose
the term 35 in which the quantity of land flung into cultivation is doubled. If
a tax be laid upon the land already broken up, amounting to 300,000 per annum,
which he seems upon the authority of Lord Shelburne to consider as attainable,
and all future grants be assest at half as much again for the same quantity of
land; the rate of increase of cultivated land will be 2 1/35 or 1,219 per
hundred acres yearly; which would be the increase of the tax if the lands newly
brought into cultivation were assest at the same rate with the old; but they
are supposed to pay half as much again, or the tax to increase 1,8285 per cent
yearly, and taking the interest of money at 3 1/2, and the debt at 137 million,
it would be discharged in 70,3 years by that fund, and an annual burden of
4,880,0^0 annihilated, with a clear addition to the revenue at the end of that
term of 1,066,530 l.

There is one particular property attending such a mode of taxation, that all
frauds at the original assessment, and those which may be committed afterward,
act contrary to and will nearly destroy each others effect. A fixed sum is to
be paid; if the present possessor in his account delivered in diminish the
quantity of land he holds, such a diminution will augment the tax upon equal
quantities, and the sum will remain the same; but it will also augment the
revenue from lands afterward brought into cultivation in the proportion of 3
to 2: and if the future frauds in respect of quantity be equal to the past, the
revenue will upon the whole gain; if they exceed them in proportion of three to
two, it will not lose.

But beside the tax from the colonies, which I suppose to remain as stated
above, the following are some of the resources which he points out as remaining
to the nation for the discharge of the debt.

1. The annual surplus of the revenue 300,000l.

2. The land tax to be continued at 4s. in the pound the amount of the
additional shilling 450,000 nearly to be thus applied.

3. In 1781 there will be an addition to the annual saving of 189,863l. --
18,986,300l. principal debt falling from 4 per cent. to 3.

4. In 1782 a further addition of 22,500l. -- 4,500,000l. more being reduced
from 3 to 3 per cent.

5. In 18 years the greatest part of 224,580l. per annum annuities will be
extinguished; as these will fall into the savings gradually, let us suppose
them all to subsist together 12 years, and then at once to fall off. Then in
17^8 the fund will be further augmented 224580l.

These funds conjointly will discharge the debt in ^ years, and if we further
were to suppose the affairs of the East India Company so far retrieved, as to
be able in two or three years to pay 300,000 a year to government, the debt
will be discharged in 37 years nearly.

In determining this period I supposed the rate of interest 3 per cent. for the
following reasons; when a fund sinks below par, as for instance to 90, it may
be privately bought up; if it rise above as to 110, the creditor will submit to
a reduction of 8 per cent. rather than be paid off at 100: these particulars
have been fully pointed out by Dr. Price, I have therefore supposed their
effect equal to per cent. added to the common rate of interest.

It is impossible perhaps to form any well-grounded hypothesis of the future
annual decrement of the value of money; but upon a supposition that it will be
for the next 71 years what the following table gives it for the term it
comprehends, that our future wars shall have the same proportional length as
the former in this century, and our operations be as extensive as in the last,
our new debt will be paid off in 30,88 years, the whole in 72, and the burden
continue nearly the same during the entire term of payment. But toward the
latter end of these periods, the discharge of the debt might be perhaps too
much accelerated; and such a quantity of money be flung into the hands of the
public creditors, as must greatly and rapidly increase the price of land and
consequently of provision; the effects this might produce upon commerce and
industry merit some consideration, there is a limit which the payment of the
British creditors ought not to exceed; when it gets to that, it might perhaps
be expedient with the overplus to begin to discharge the principal due to
foreigners, which therefore it would be right to reserve 'till nearly the last;
because we might be obliged to stop in the course of payment earlier than we
otherwise should be necessitated to; nor ought even that in any period of its
discharge to exceed a certain proportion of the balance of trade in our favor,
it might otherwise deprive us of our specie.

I shall close these observations on the debt with a recapitulation of what has
been endeavored to be proved:

I. That the burden of the taxes from 56 to 74 increased 11/100.

II. That in reasoning upon this subject if we consider burden and charge as
synonimous terms, the increase resulting will be six times too much.

III. That the increase of the burden of the debt in the same period is only
266/1000, but according to the second method of estimating it, it appears to be
903/1000, or 3,4 times too great.

IV. That the peace establishment has not been an increasing burden,
notwithstanding the superior force kept up.

That the burden of the annual sum paid to the public creditors, was the same
nearly at the peace of Utrecht as at present.

The burden of paying off the debt with a given annuity at that period the
interest 6 per cent. and that of the present the interest 3 per cent. would be
found not differing in a very great proportion: but to assign this, it would be
necessary to go into a detail exceeding the limit which should be allowed to a
subject merely collateral.

That the gain by a fund which becomes annually more productive, greatly
overbalances the loss by a decreasing fund.

That the system of funding has not yet raised the price of necessaries.

That the absolute burden of the taxes is 1s. 10d in the pound, of the debt
11d: but that the difference between the present system of funding, and
imposing such taxes as might probably at the discharge the expense of one war
by the commencement of the following, is as 10 to 7.

But that all fears of public bankruptcy, grounded upon a measure of public
burdens, which does not take the decrease of the value of money into
consideration, appear for that reason ill founded.

That these conclusions may be compared and understood with more facility, I
have digested them into the form of a table.

Years Charge Decrement of money Burden Increment of burden Absolute burden
in the pound. Total Taxes 1755 5,964,283 1 0 1774 10,000,000 2,89,975 -, 025 L.
s. d. 2,16 1,11 +,11 1 10 0,00 1,67 +,67 6 times too great
Debt 1755 72,000,000 1 0 1774 137,000,000 2,89 1,108,108 2,16 1,266,266 11
0,00 1,903,903 3, 4 times too great
Peace Establishment and Surplus 1755 3,399,283 1 0 2,89,925 -,075 1774
5,119,320 2,16 1,002 + 002 11 0,00 1,506 +,506 253 times too great

ARTICLE II. Of the Advance of the Price of Provisions from the Report of the
State of Nacton House of Industry.
Years Wheat per quarter Averages Malt do. Averages s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.
1758 37 1 28 9 28 4 29 8 21 6 23 2 60 28 22 61 25 3 21 4 62 30 6 26 3 32 8 37 2
30 28 6 4 39 29 8 5 46 6 28 7 66 43 9 31 6 7 52 3 34 4 1/^ 29 1 8 51 1 43 10 29
6 9 35 23 9 70 37 3 26 4 71 55 2 31 6 2 54 8 34 34 7 3 54 53 10 37 4 51 5 36

Beef per Stone. Cheese per 100 w t. Averages Averages s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.
1758 3 3 30 9 3 3 1 15/16 26 4 27 2 10/16 60 3 25 6 1 3 1 27 62 3 27 10 3 3 3 3
4 30 6 30 9 14/16 4 3 4 32 2 5 3 4 32 9 66 3 4 32 6 7 3 10 32 68 3 9 3 8 14/10
17/20
32 5 33 2 6/16 9 3 10 34 70 3 9 35 3 71 3 10 35 6 2 4 5 4 2 1/16 38 34 3 7/16
3 4 1 32 1 4 4 3 31 6 Provisions consumed in kind in eight weeks, from the
books at Heckingham.
Persons Meal Stone Flour Second. St. Meat Beef St. Cheese Stone Beer Barrels
260 79 20 18 17 6 260 78 19, 7 18 17 6 264 73 18 18 17 6 260 66 16 17 17 5 256
66 16 17 17 5 240 66 16 17 17 5 238 68 15 16 17 5 238 68 15 16 17 5 2016 Per
Week. 564 135 137 136 44 10 Persons per Annum. 145, 5 34, 96 11, 5 That
quantity of flour and meal made into bread, etc. equalling 6, 07 quarters of
wheat at the mean price.
Wheat 6, 07 qrs. 35, 35 35, 1 2, 704

11, 5 Barrels of beer equalling in value 2, 704 quarters of malt, allowing 10
combs of malt to 29 barrels.
Malt qrs.

Increase of the Expense of maintaining Ten Men One Year from Michaelmas 1759,
to Michaelmas 1772.
Commodities Quantity Exp. Michael. 59 Michaelmas 63 Easter 68 Michaelmas 72
Wheat qrs. 6, 07 471..10 180.. 555..8 225.. 7 622..8 266..3 718... 326..9 Malt
qrs. 2,704 62..8 77.. 2 78..7 93..7 Beef Stone 35, 35 109..8 117.. 9 132..1
147..3 Cheese Stone 35, 1 119..5 135.. 2 145..8 150..5 Sundries 231..6 254..11
273..6 300.. -- Increase of Prices 703..4 810..8 896..4 1018.. -- Geometrical
Progression 703 788 895,55 1018.. --

Annual advance per cent. 2,89 for thirteen years the whole term; 3,63 for the
first four years.

This annual advance is equal the annual decrement of the value of money.

The numbers in the last article, sundries, were found in the following manner;
the present expense for 10 paupers in one year, from the best estimate of
particular articles I could obtain, amounted to 15l. the rate of increase was
then assumed equal to that of the other articles.

But there is an apparent irregularity in the advance; an acceleration in the
first period of,74 per cent. the cause of this, and its precise measure may
very probably be assigned.

We very easily discover two temporary causes of acceleration which then took
place; the increase of taxes, and the fortunes made in the last war, and
brought over from the East Indies. We will suppose the effect of the latter
that of the former: The annual average increase of the debt last war was about
11 millions, and in the middle of that period we are considering it was nearly
126 millions, and the annual increment of the burden 11/126; we found the
absolute burden when the debt was 137 millions to be 11 in the pound; at 126
it therefore was 10, and the increment in pence 112,75/126: admit with Dr.
Price that more is raised upon the public for commodities by the increase of
taxes, than the sum paid to government; the total increment of the price of
provisions will be 140,9375/126, or in the terms of a pound ^, or ^ per cent.:
the effect of the influx of money of the former amounts to ^ per cent.; and
their joint operation ^ for the acceleration of the increase of the price of
provision =,7457 per cent. but the mean advance by the table appears to be
2,89, the accelerated advance 3,63, and the effect of the accelerating cause,74
as determined above.

To this it may be objected that it has been demonstrated, that taking the
decrement 2,89 the increase of taxes has not raised the price of provisions in
19 years, but the reasons alleged above not only admit that the taxes in some
of the given years increase the prices of commodidities, but even assign the
quantity of that augmentation.

The period mentioned was during the war, the operation of a tax newly laid on
is to raise the price of necessaries, and consequently to drop the value of
money: during a war of seven years, if taxes increase in a superior proportion
to the fall of the value of money, the public burden increases; if money
continue to fall (as the table points it out) in every successive year of peace
the same tax will have less value, or become a less burden than the former;
and as there are twelve years of peace to seven years of war, the decrement of
burden in twelve years, taking the yearly rate 2, 89, will balance the
increase in seven.

The numbers therefore corrected by removing these causes of perturbation would
stand thus: Prices 703 788 896,33 1018 Geo. Prog. 703 788 895,55 1018

I must observe here, that the correction of the numbers, founded on a probable
hypothesis, is probably, but not perhaps mathematically true; there being no
demonstration of the assumption on which it is founded, it is certain however
that of the irregularity ought to be subtracted, if we allow no efficacy to the
influx of money; but whatever be allowed will abate the remaining. There is the
greatest probability that the annual decrement of the value of money has not
been over-rated after the reduction I have allowed; it is much more probable
that it falls short of the true measure.

Considerable uses might (I should be inclined to think) be derived from
accurate tables kept in this manner. -- Government has already ordered
registers to be kept of the principle articles in it; if the others were
likewise added, the business of granting relief to the poor, might be regulated
upon such fixed principles as to be always proportioned to the necessity of the
pauper applying for relief in every variation of prices: the quantities of the
different necessaries of life to be consumed in kind by a family of every
probable number, may be found with very little difficulty; then the different
expense of maintaining ten men for a year deduced as above may be given in the
first column of a table, and in a line with every different charge (which need
not exceed twelve in number) the weekly expense of a family of every different
size: such a table might be comprised in one folio page and need no alteration
for many years. The prices of many articles of provision are I believe
delivered in at the quarter sessions; a clerk might every half year draw out an
account of the charge of supporting ten men annually at the rates of the time
being; it would be completed in four or five short multiplications. The
numbers in the line opposite the nearest sum in the table, would give the
weekly expense of a family of every probable size: the the weekly earnings of
the pauper subtracted from this, will give the weekly allowance: proper
discretionary additions may be made in case of sickness.

If the relief thus proper to be granted to a family of every size (transcribed
from the general table) were published in the provincial papers at the same
times, they would form a check upon either the avarice or profuse folly of a
parish officer.

Possibly some very good consequences might be derived from general abstracts
of the accounts of the different houses of industry being yearly advertised in
the county papers, with the average expense of maintaining ten paupers for the
last year, compared with the charge of the same number formed by the prices of
that part of the country, as in the forgoing article. If such an institution by
the negligence of the directors in general should be suffered to fall into
improper hands (of which I think there is no probable danger) this comparison
would be an account of their mismanagement, the measure of it exactly defined,
and their own accusation to the public. The different expense of maintaining
that number of paupers in different houses would be easily compared, and the
cause examined into by the director of that district whose charge amounted to
the greater sum: it would be a check upon the unnecessary expense or illiberal
parsimony of either, and all such corporations be continually approaching to
the best plan of providing for their poor.

It would render this new system likewise capable of being made more general:
the probability of the abuse of such institution arises from the want of a
sufficient number of directors, but diminishing the probability you make fewer
directors necessary.

We may thus likewise approach tolerably near the solution of a political
difficulty of some consequence; to regulate the price of labor by the state;
if ever it should be found expedient to attempt such a measure.

The legislature may know at what mean price the public interest requires work
of a certain kind to be fixed, but determine that price invariably by statute,
and every labourer (let his strength or skill be ever so different, as the
quantity of neither can be defined) receives equal wages: as the value of money
falls, there will be a necessity of frequently altering the statute, or the
laborers are reduced to the most abject distress: fixing labor of different
kinds to rates which rise and fall by the prices of provisions deduced from a
table formed in the manner I have given, would take away the latter objection,
but leaves the first. To remedy that, when a servant was hired for a certain
period, the sum fixed by agreement might be considered as a rate or proportion;
and the payment should increase or decrease with the variations of the value of
money. A short annual table might be given before Michaelmas for the whole
kingdom, which would contain every variation of rate, or the justices of the
peace for the separate counties might draw up one at the preceding sessions, as
the prices of the different counties are not perfectly equal. It is easy to see
that there would never be occasion for any alteration of the rate of hireing --
That the labourer would be paid according to his abilities and the necessity of
his master for his services -- That he would always receive the real value in
proportion to the terms of his agreement, instead of a nominal sum -- Wages
always bearing nearly the same proportion to the price of provisions, equal
labor would generally procure an equal quantity at every price; which would
tend to diminish popular insurrections.

Suppose the price of labor to be now a certain number of years behind the
price of provisions as four or five; every other circumstance is easily deduced
from that point of time when fixed: but there certainly is some delicacy
requisite in fixing it.

I had occasion to consider before in the Appendix, the effect of a land tax in
a country not fully settled, but where population and settlement advanced with
great rapidity. If far the greater part or the whole of the revenue a country
draws from its colonies were by such a tax, the rate of which was made fixed
and permanent, it would give greater security to the colonist for the peaceable
enjoyment of the rest of his property, than successive taxes imposed at various
times to make up the same amount. There certainly is no injustice in subjecting
a future age to bear the same burdens, and contribute the same real value to
the parent state their predecessors did; if the absolute taxation for equal
quantities of land varied every ten years, according to the variation of the
value of money in the colony for the preceding term, deduced from a table of
this kind, the burden of an individual would at the most distant period of
time always be in proportion to his ability, and be equal upon equal property.
The money produced by it would increase in a complicate proportion of the
increase of the settlement, and the rise of provisions; this augmentation would
continue after such a settlement was fully peopled, in proportion as they
applied themselves to arts and commerce. For a people strong by sea, without
numerous land forces, large islands, but such as are not capable of supporting
above 600,000 inhabitants, seem the best settlements. If less, their people
will soon cease to increase, and the settlement be entirely cultivated; and
perhaps there is a vigor of character, and a degree of refinement attainable
in a middling society which smaller one's are not capable of: if they be
larger, it may be difficult to restrain them in the bounds of a proper
subordination, and they have this further recommendation, nature seems to have
separated them, and prevented all temptations to a dirty detail of insidious
left handed artifices, and the unpolitical errors of an unmanly policy.

ARTICLE III. On the Increase of the Charge and Burden, of Poors Rates.
HYPOTHESIS.
WHEN the price of labor remains constant, and the price of necessaries
increase, the number of poor to be supported by the public shall increase at
least in the same proportion.

It is easy to demonstrate that this supposition falls short of the truth; the
paupers who receive weekly collection in a very populous district, being lately
numbered amounted to 700; those of one single parish which pays of the rates
are in the whole far more than double that number: let us suppose that 1/6 of
the number receive collection; double the price of provision without increasing
that of labor, and of the whole number of poor could infallibly become
chargeable: but the hypothesis gives the increased number only 2/6 or.

Let N the number of poor, R the amount of the rate, P the price of provisions,
L the price of labor, then R P x N; and N P / L by the hypothesis when the
price of labor remains constant or L Po, then N P, and R P2: let us now
suppose the price of labor to increase in the same proportion with the price
of provisions, then P L, N remains constant, and R P1. And in all the
intermediate degrees of increase, of the price of labor it will be represented
by some pure power of P, as P 1/ m: for assuming a series with coefficients,
and comparing the terms with the known cases they will be found severally equal
to O. Then N P / L ^ but the rate ^ And in the years 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5 The price
of provision P. Pp. Pp2. Pp3. Pp4. Pp5 Or -- -- 1. p. p2. p3. p4. p5 And the
poor rate ^

Where the indices being in arithmetical progression, the rate shall be in
geometrical progression according to the assumption.

Of the absolute burden of the poors rate, let us suppose its present amount
2,500,000, that sum is of our taxes, the burden of the taxes is 1s. 10d. in
the pound; that of the poor rate is nearly 5d. If we compare it with the rents
of the kingdom, it will appear to be 2s. 2d. in the pound.

If we take the land tax as a standard to estimate it by, it exceeds it in
proportion of 3 to 2; or is equal a land tax and a half at 4s. in the pound, or
2 of 3.

Table of the ratio of Increases of the Charge and Burden of the Poor's Rate
in different Districts.
Years Charge Increase of charge percent. Burden, Do. Mr. Potter's numbers
general amount 9 2,200,000 3,506 +,6 1,32 3,000,000 Bristol from Dr. Woodward
20 4,000 4,688 + 1, 75 2, 47 10,000 Hundred of Fouhoe exclusive of 3 parishes
10 2030 3,885 +,97 1, 69 2972 Hundreds of Mitford and Launditch exclusive of
one parish 7 3411 4,58 + 1,64 2,36 4162 Ten Parishes 22 800 2,39 --, 486,22
1345 Decrt. of money 2,16 Decrt. 2,89

ARTICLE V. Observations on the Mode of Proceeding and data in some Political
Calculations.
LET there be two series of terms 1st a, a1 a2 a3 a4, The 2d b, b1 b2 b3 b4.
Suppose the second series to be formed from the first, by the addition or
subtraction of some indeterminate quantities; as a= b+ c, a1= b1- d, etc. yet
under this restriction, that the sum of the first (n) terms of the first
series, shall approach indefinitely near to an equality with the corresponding
(n) terms of the second. Let that sum in either series be called A, the sum of
the second n terms = B, the third C, and so on: upon a given right line from a
pt. D take the portions n, 2 n, 3 n, let these be parts of the abscissae of a
parabolic curve, erect the perpendiculars= A, B, C, to those abscissae, and
drawing a cure through their extremities, the ordinate to any abscissa x shall
be ^ Y, then if there be a second parabola described upon the same axis, the
abscissae the same, and its ordinates = a, a1, a2, a3, etc.

xp + gxp-1 hxp-2.... qx2 + rx + s Y

And to determine the celerity of increase of the ordinate, supposing x
constant ^ but the former of these two equations will require a correction.

The poors rates of a number of years being given, to determine the rate of a
given year according to the mean degree of advance.

A rate of this kind is generally upon the advance, and though it may be some
years lower than the mean rate of augmentation gives it, in others it will be
higher: when these irregularities are as equally distributed as possible, we
approach very nearly to the mean law of increase, which may be discovered by
the application of the foregoing problem -- Add the rates of ten succeeding
years together; if the district from whence they be taken be large, those
irregularities will enter into such a sum nearly in proportion of their
probability and magnitude; and the accidental excess of the rate, proceeding
from accidental scarcity, want of trade, or any other cause in one year, nearly
counterbalancing the defect in another, such a sum shall approach indefinitely
near what the mean law of increase if known would have given. Repeat the same
operation with the next period of ten years, call these totals successively A,
B, C, then shall Y be the annual payment of the year x, according to the mean
rate of increase for that term; and the next form gives the celerity of
increase, and represents in every distinct period of time, the adequate measure
of the effect of those causes which have increased it.

The same mode of proceeding will give us the decrement of the value of money,
and its acceleration: with this we may compare the causes which the history of
that time suggests, and approach as near to certainty in our researches upon
this head as the subject will give us leave. If the data deduced from history
have any tolerable degree of precision, the conclusion will be sufficiently
accurate: and at all events, if enquiry into such subjects be necessary or
useful, we should not decline the trouble of enquiring into them upon the best
grounds.

On Parish Registers.
The want of good political data has been lamented by almost every person who
has undertaken any operations of political arithmetic, the following
corrections to the present plan of our registers might be of considerable use.

A parish register of burials should contain every person buried in that parish
of whatever sect or religion; it would be most conveniently divided into
columns, the first containing the surname of the person; the second his
christian name; third, day of the month; fourth, age; fifth trade; sixth,
distemper; seventh, married man, widower or bachelor; eighth, number of
children born; ninth survivors.

By placing the surname first, it would most easily be inspected -- Inserting
the trade of the person would nearly point out the number of manufacturers of
every kind in the kingdom: but by comparing it with the following column it
would serve a very useful purpose, and determine in a few years how far
particular manufactures abridged the lives of mankind; and point out to us, if
luxury will have its gratifications even at such an expense, what foreign
manufactures it might be politic to encourage the importation of; as the money
we lose in one branch may by proper attention be retrieved in another, and the
number of our people preserved; the eighth and ninth columns, the number of
children and survivors will likewise point out the further effect of particular
trades upon population; and in conjunction with the seventh, give us the state
of matrimony; this last which I added after I had planned the rest, from Dr.
Price, will be of great use in determining the value of some kinds of
survivorships.

The register of marriage should contain the ages of the parties; this would
further enable us to judge of the state of marriage in the kingdom, for the
same reason legitimate and illegitimate children should be distinguished in
that of births.

The register of deaths in a house of industry, should contain the day of the
pauper's admission -- If of an infirm constitution -- If admitted in sickness,
and with what distemper.

On the Interest of Money as allowed in the following Computations.
The loss to an individual from a sum of money taken from him a given number of
years since, is equal to its present amount at compound interest.

The whole use and benefit to an individual of equal sums, for equal times, are
equal: and his loss by being deprived of them is equal. Let a man be supposed
to have paid a given sum (for instance 100l) ten years since to any rate or
tax; he has lost the use and benefit of 100 pounds for the term of ten years
past, and for ever after -- Let him at the same time have laid aside 100l. to
increase at compound interest to this period at four per cent. this sum will
have amounted to 148l. at the end of the term: if then this sum be taken from
him by a second rate or taxation, what is it he loses? the use and benefit of
100l. for the past term of ten years, and for ever after. But his loss in the
first case is equal to that in the second, or equal to a present loss of the
amount of the sum for the given term at compound interest.

What has been demonstrated of one individual paying a certain sum, holds true
of any aggregate body of individuals paying any sums.

And for similar reasons the loss to an individual in being obliged to pay a
given sum, at the end of a given term of years, is less than if he had been
compelled to pay it immediately.

This will be readily admitted in the cases of two kinds of people, those who
put out money at interest, because their income exceeds their expense, or who
borrow for the contrary reason; but are the intermediate class who neither
hoard nor borrow affected the same way?

If the interest of the sum taken away be small in proportion to such a man's
income, suppose 1/500 part, it may become imperceptible but is nevertheless
real: for if possible suppose the contrary, that it was absolutely nothing;
then it would be nothing if multiplied indefinitely, or fifty times for
instance: but an accumulation of such nothings as cut off 1/10 part of a man's
income who did not save before, would be found a real difference.

Some conclusions upon a question of consequence having been lately drawn from
principles contrary to these, it will not perhaps be thought unnecessary to
have given this demonstration of them at length before the following
calculations.

ARTICLE VI. CALCULATIONS.
PROBLEM I.
TO find the amount of an annual payment increasing every year in a certain
ratio, the rate of interest and time being given.

And the amount being given to determine the time.

1st Year's payment= s amount of 1l. in 1 year= r

Rate of increase 1: a number of years = t

Years 1 2 3 4 ^ ^ Payment s sa sa2 sa3 sat -- 2 sat -- 1

Amount at the end of t years interest as above srt-1 s.rt-2 a.. srt-3 a2...
srt-4 a3... srat-2 sat-1

the sum of all these terms the amount in t years ^

Let t the term of years be required.

^

Corol. 1st. Let A=1 or all the payments become equal.

^

Corol. 2d. Let a, b, c, d be several annual payments commencing severally t, t
-- b, t -- g t -- d years before the expiration of the period (t); and their
joint amount shall be at the end of that term ^ and if an increasing annuity= s
be added to them for the whole term, the amount thus augmented becomes, ^

PROBLEM II.
To find the value of the perpetuity of an annual payment increasing every year
in a certain ratio, the rate of interest being given.

Retaining the former substitutions we shall have the several annual payments,
at the end of Year 1 2 3 4 5 s, sa, sa2, sa3, sa4 Present value s / r sa / r2
sa2/r3 sa3/r4 sa4/r5 Sum=Y= ^ ^

Corol. Let R be the interest of 100l. for a year, A=advance of the same sum,
P=the perpetuity, if s remain constant, I=if it increase, d=the perpetuity if
it decrease: in the former case a=o, in the second it is affirmative, and in
the last negative, and ^ and taking R = 3 A = 1

P: I R-A: R 4: 7

P: D R+A: R 10: 7

I: D R+A: R-A 5: 2

Agreeably to what was laid down in the comparison of funds remaining fixed, or
becoming more or less productive.

1st. Let it be proposed to determine the difference of expense between
maintaining the poor in a house of industry, and providing for them in their
separate parishes.

Supposing the poor maintained at the same expense as at Nacton, and that the
increase of the rates of the parishes in the hundreds of Colnies and Carleton,
if they had not been incorporated would have been the same with that of the ten
parishes in the table (being the least discovered) we are first to find the
difference of expense of the two modes for the time past.

By problem 1st. the expense of the poor under the overseers ^. and by Cor.
1st. Prob. 1st, that of the corporation ^

The middle year of the term from which average of the hundreds was taken,
ended at Easter 53; Rates of the ten parishes 53 =16006s. in 75=26905 2
Hundreds in 53=29753 s. in 75=50013

The rate of advance appears to be 2,39 per cent.

The probable amount of the rates in the hundreds at Easter 1759, the end of
the first complete year after the admission of the paupers into the house =S=
sx a6=29753x2,396=34282 interest 4 per cent. s=29753 a=1,0239 r=1,04 t=17 then,
^

Present debt of the corporation L4300 Value of buildings, stock and Cash in
hand 2500 Balance 1800 -- 1800 Total expense of corporation 37053 Balance saved
by the act. 11243

These sums are the present value of the expenses past, the future are to be
determined upon the following supposition, that the advance of the poor rates
as taken from the same parishes will be diminished hereafter; and consequently
the expense of maintaining the paupers in the house reduced in the same
proportion.

For the charge of the poor continuing under the parish officers -- The reduced
rate of advance will be found 2,39x=1,5933; and A=1,015933: the probable amount
of the charge of maintaining the poor has been found at Easter 75 = 50013, at
Easter 76=50013x 1,015933=S=50809 then by Prob. 2d, ^. or 105,565l.

For the future Expense of the house.
Average expense of the four last years L 1646.11 exclusive of work, of the
year 60, 61, 62, 63. L 1165.10 the ratio of increase for twelve years=2,92 per
cent.; of which the future by the hypothesis will be. Therefore a=1,01947, but
the ratio of increase to that term will be 102,92; and the annual expense at
Easter 76=32931s. x 1,02933 =35902= s but ^. shillings, or 87440 L.

2d. Suppose the expense of the house had been nearly the same as that of
Melton, or reduced in proportion of 31 to 27; and the future advance of the
past.

That the annual expense of the poors rate in the hundreds without an
incorporating act would have been 3,506 per cent. for the past period, and of
that rate or 2,3372 for the future.

To determine the expense of the two modes, and the savings on the former.

The past expense of the house is found by reducing the former charge in that
period in proportion of 31 to 27.

The future Expense is thus determined.
Annual charge Michaelmas 73 found in the foregoing question=32931, reduced to
Melton 27/34x32931=28681 and the rate of advance 2,92 per cent. x2,92=1,947
expense Easter 76=SxAx a=28681x1,0292x a= 29947. ^ 1458700x a=1515840 s.=75792l.

Expense of the Poor under the Parish Officers.
The charge for seventeen years last past is thus discovered; the rate of
advance being 1,03506. = a by Hypothesis, proceeding as in the corresponding
case of the former question, we have ^

Future Expense under the Parish Officers by this Hypothesis.
The mean advance 3,506=2,3372 the reduced advance: the rate of 76=S= sxA22 x a
=29753x1,0350622 x 1,023372 = 64987s. ^

Of the Reduction of this last Hypothesis.
1st. The annual expense of the house in 75 was found in question
second=29947... interest four per cent. the perpetuity of this charge
=25x29947=748675s:=37433l.:. 15s.

2d. Annual expense of the poor in their separate parishes
sxA22=29753x1,035622= 63649s. and proceeding as before, the perpetuity will be
found=79378l.

On the Comparison of the Result of the reduced Hypothesis with the total Rates.
This Hypothesis gives the present value of the balance in favor of a house of
industry, 104,566l. when the rate of 75 in an unincorporated district of equal
size amounts to 3182l. x: dividing the former by the latter sum, it gives the
number of years purchase of the present rate which that advantage amounts to =
104,566/3182 = 32,933.... suppose so many districts capable of being
incorporated seventeen years since, as now pay 2 millions annually to the
rates, the present value of their savings is 65,886,000l. and the value at the
commencement of that term was 36,70^,000l.

Comparison of this Result with the Rates of Eleven Parishes increasing in a
Degree rather less than the mean Advance from 1750 inclusive; to Easter 75;
upon a Supposition that the annual Payment never will be augmented after the
latter Term.
Rate of ten parishes in 53=16006s. advance 2,39 per cent.

Rate of 50 = 16006/1,02393 = 14911......of 74..26905

Additional Parish...8333/23244.......25852/52757

Here the rate of advance ^ the number of years purchase of the original rate,
equal to the value of the amount of all the preceding payments at the end of
the first term ^ and for that period the number of years purchase equalling the
present value at the beginning of the term=24,09.

To find the remaining perpetuity; the last payment 52757, the present value of
the perpetuity = 52757x28,571, the value at the beginning of the term ^, the
rate of the first year 23244, and the number of years purchase it was then
worth of that rate ^.

Of the Interest of Owners and Occupiers in the Poors Rate. PROBLEM III.
To determine the different proportions in which owner and occupiers contribute
to the support of the poor, having the rate of increase of the charge given= a,
amount of 1l. in a year= r, and the average length of leases= t.

Let 10 l. be the sum a farm let out upon lease paid to the poor's rate the
year preceding the contract: and be the rent what it will, if the poor's rate
had been 2l. less, the tenant would with equal advantage to himself have been
able to have added 2l. to it; if 5l. he might and would have raised in the rent
the same sum; if that payment were instantly annihilated, it would be added to
the rent: therefore for the term of the lease the rent will be diminished 10l.
or the landlord will pay it.... And upon an equality of chance, there will be
an equal number of tenants at the present time in the 1st, 2d, 3d, and every
year of the common term of leases (t): and upon the same account there will be
no reason why the occupations of the tenants now in the first year of their
leases, should be more than those in the second, third, or any succeeding year.
The occupations of all the tenants in every term, will according to the laws of
probability be equal; as also the numbers in each class: therefore their
conjoint interest, will be to that of all the owners, as the interest of (t)
tenants occupying equal farms, one being in the first year, one in the second,
one in the third, etc. to the interest of all their respective landlords.

Let s be the poor rate of a given district.

Then the Sum of the Poors Rates in Years 0 1 2 3 4 5... t Put n=1/ r s... sa
sa2 sa3 sa4 sa5:.. sat Of which the Tenant pays ^ Then the Tenants Interest
will be the beginning of the year =Y= 1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ t. ^

^

Call the affirmative Series = W the Negative = X Then ^

^

To determine the charge of the owner = Z

The deduction from his rent for the term of the lease = s; let the rate of
interest here be 1/ p, the perpetuity of the rent charge= 100 p s; but the last
year of the lease the rate becomes s. a, therefore the deduction in the first
years rent from the succeeding tenant will be s. at; and the second diminution
(which takes place at the end of the year after the termination of the lease ^:
the perpetuity of which when the lease expires will be worth ^, the present
value of which at any term in the lease, added to the former perpetuity 100 ps,
gives the total charge upon the owner: this will be when the lease terminates
in Years ^ and the corresponding charge upon (t) landlords will be equal to the
sum of all the terms of this series; hence ^

Supposing the lands throughout the kingdom upon an average to be under
fourteen year leases, interest four per cent. rate of advance of the expense of
the poor 3,5 per cent.; to determine the proportion in which the owners and
occupiers in fact contribute to this payment.

Taking s = 10, we shall find the charge upon the ^ Owners ^ And upon the
occupiers, ^

Then the real charge upon the owners, to that upon the occupiers shall be as
5140 to 350, or as 14 to 1.

We may derive a result somewhat near this by the following method, which as it
depends only upon the principles of common arithmetic, will be more universally
understood.

The advance of rates being given at 3 as before, at the end of fourteen years
a farm which paid 10l. a year, the last year it was in the former occupier,
will be raised to L16,2. Here the advance for the term of the lease will be
L6,2, and supposing it equal every year, the annual increase of charge will be,
443l. therefore the advance upon the farmer at the end of year 1 2 3 4 5 6
7,443.., 886.. 1,329.. 1,772.. 2,215.. 2,658.. 3,101 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 3,544
3,987 4,43 4,873 5,316 5,759 6,202

The interest of a farmer in the beginning of the last year of his lease will
be equal to the sum he has to pay above the deduction from his rent, or 6,202;
and in the same manner a tenant in the last year but one will have an interest
of 5,759, added to the former sum; the interest of a tenant in the first year
will be the sum of the whole series, and the interest of a tenant in the year
of his lease

Landlord 14 6,202 + 0 6,202 10 13 5,759 + 6,202 11,961 20 12 5,316 + 11,961
17,277 30 11 4,873 + 17,277 22,150 40 10 4,43 + 22,150 26,58 50 9 3,987 + 26,58
30,567 60 8 3,544 + 30,567 34,111 70 7 3,101 + 34,111 37,202 80 6 2,658 +
37,202 39,860 90 5 2,215 + 39,860 42,075 100 4 1,772 + 42,075 43,847 110 3
1,329 + 43,847 45,176 120 2,886 + 45,176 46,062 130 1,443 + 46,062 46,505 140
14 Tenants total payments and Interest 449,575 980

The deduction from the rent in ten years is 980l. but at the expiration of the
leases (neither interest or discount are here taken notice of) the several
estates will be subject to an annual deduction from the rent 16,2, which
amounts for the whole number to 226, 8; the perpetuity of which is worth at 4
per cent 5670l. which added to the former sum 980, gives 6650 for the
proportion of charge to the landlord: which is to that of the tenant, as 6650,
to 450 nearly or as 14 to unity. The reason of the difference of the gross sum
is the neglecting all discount on both sides equally, which brings out the
proportion nearly the same.

On Revenues.
1st. To determine in what No. of years a land tax producing 300,000 a year at
this time, and increasing in the degree laid down above, will discharge the
public debt.

Put the No. of years = t, Y= the present debt; then by Problem 1 st, ^ and for
the first assumption take rt = at rt = 7,626 and ^

Put t = 71 Putg t = rt at rt -- at = 7,626 Putg t = 71 11,5016 3,6201 7,8815
+Error,2555 t = 70 11,1122 3,5551 7,5551 -Error,0689 70+ n= t

and Emer. Alg. B. 1. Prob. 80. n ^ and t = 70,3 very nearly

2d. To determine in what time a fund of 750,000l. with the addition of such a
tax from the colonies, being increased in the fifth year 189,863 l. in the next
22,500l. and in the tewlfth 224,580l. will pay off the public debt.

By Corol. 2d. Prob. 1st. we find ^

Here a = 750,000, b = 189,863, c = 22,500, d = 224580, b = 5, g = 6, d = 12, s
= 300,000, a = 1,018285, r = 1,035, X = 137,000,000 x = 5,137,500.

Taking t =42 t=41 A = 2,770,155 2,642917 + B.... 550,180 524652 + C.... 62,174
59114 + D... 453,083 428588 + E.... 2,747,970 2,648647 6,583562 6,303918 -F....
1,253218 1,230715 5,330,344 5,073,203 x = 5,137,500 5,137,500 + Error 192844
064297 -- Error t=41 + n... n = 64297/257141 =,25 t=41,25 nearly

PROBLEM IV.
Let the durations of war and peace be as t to n, the sum of money borrowed
during a war be ts, what revenue (x) continued from the beginning of a war of t
years, will discharge the whole in t+ n years, so that a nation may probably
expect to begin the next war without a debt?

Here the annual extraordinary grants in the time of war= s; the present value
of all these grants at the end of t+ n years will be, putg r=the amount of 1l.
in a year.

^

Call v the present value of an annuity of 1l. for t+ n years; then vrt+ n
shall be the amount of 1l. in t+ n years, an x x vrt+ n the amount of the
required additional revenue = A; then ^, and putting the ordinary expense=E, we
get E + x = the total revenue.

Suppose in the term of peace n years, the debt reduced to ts; the annuity
which would have discharged this in t+ n years shall be x = ^; let I the
interest of the increased debt; then the annual payment shall be E + 1 + x: if
the additional debt be proposed to be discharged at the end of the probable
term of peace.

And the proportion of expense upon these two systems shall be E + x, to E + x
+ 1.

In the present instance t = 7, n = 12, ts 76 millions; s = 10,857,142, and ^
then shall v=the present value of an annuity of 1l. for 19 years=13,71 nearly,
and ^: and adding the ordinary expenses with Dr. Price= 4,850,000 = E E + x =
9,861,400.

But eleven millions have been discharged, then ts = 65 millions; and ^; and E
= 4,850,000; therefore E + 1 + x = 14,016746.

In determining the absolute burden of the taxes, their annual amount was
taken at 18 millions; and thus it appeared equal to 1s. 10d. in the pound. The
expenses of collecting, etc. ought to have been added, which would have
increased the 10 millions to nearly 12, and the burden to 2s. 3d. It is
requisite to add, that the numbers are all copied from one of the former
editions of Dr. Price's pamphlet, and are not according to his last
alterations, which would have given results, rather more favorable still, with
respect to the different parts of the public burden here enquired into.

FINIS.

